A Practical Discourse CONCERNING The REDEEMING OF TIME.

BY Edward Pelling, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's, and Rector
of Petworth in Sussex.

Imprimatur, Aug. 7. 1694.

Carolus Alston.



LONDON: Printed for John Everingham; at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's. MDCXCV.

A Practical Discourse Concerning the Redeeming of TIME.
CHAP. I.
What is meant by the Redeeming of Time, and the Reasons for it.

ST. Paul in two several places directs us to Redeem Time, Ephesians. 5. 16. and
Col. 4. 5. And that I may not, by any needless Preface, spend that which he
thought so Precious, as to be worth all our endeavors to Redeem, I shall
immediately pitch upon the consideration of the matter, and enquire into three
necessary things.

First, What is meant by Redeeming of Time.

Secondly, How very Reasonable our Duty is as to this particular.

Thirdly, How we may order the matter so, as to Redeem our Time to good purpose.

First then; Some look upon this Phrase, The Redeeming of Time, as a Proverbial
Expression; and understand by it, the using all Prudent and Honest ways to
avoid present Danger; By putting Danger off by Delays, and by Gaining of Time,
as we are wont to speak. And in this sense the Greek Translation of the Bible
uses the Phrase, Dan. 2. 8. And Seneca has an Expression very like it to the
same purpose (Epist. 13.)

But supposing this to be the immediate Scripture sense of the Phrase, it is
not inconsistent to understand it in the more Literal Construction, and as it
commonly sounds in English, for the Application of all possible Endeavors to
make the best use of our Time we can. This Sense is proper; and considering how
Necessary the Practice of the thing is, I shall take the liberty to Discourse
of it according to the usual importance of the words, with due Submission to
the Judgment of some Learned Interpreters.

To Redeem, is to recover that which was once Lost, and when we apply it to
Time, it signifies the Recovering of those Hours, which have been misspent, and
thrown away; by Laboring hard for the Future, to employ every Minute we have
to good purpose. Time is always in the Flux; nor can we have any present
possession, but of a moment. God gives us our Time, Minute by Minute; that we
may be the better Husbands of it; especially considering that on every Moment
an Eternity of Happiness or Misery does depend; nor is it possible for us to
Recover Yesterday, so as to make that to be present again, which is actually
Elapsed. The nature of the thing will not allow it: and yet it is possible to
do it a Moral way; by making all the Compensation we can for what is gone, by
the Inticement of our Zeal, and by the multiplication of our good Actions; by
adding in weight that which is wanting as to the number of our days; by
rendering our selves doubly beneficial; as if we made one day, two, by improving
the Present in Proportion suitable and tantamount to what is gone. This is in
Gods Account, a Revocation of our time; a Redemption of it; so as to make it
our own again, by laying out an equivalent proportion of Industry and Labor,
in lieu of those Hours which have been either squandred away, or not half so
well employed, as they ought, and might have been.

And this I take to be the ground of that Rule, by which our Savior tells us,
he will proceed, The First shall be Last; and the Last, First; or, the First
shall be as the Last; and the Last as the First; Meaning, that though God is
pleased to call some to the Knowledge of the Gospel much earlier than he does
others; yet many of those who Embrace the Faith later than the rest, shall
receive an equal Reward with such as Professed it sooner. The reason is,
because these made up their Time by their Extraordinary diligence; they that go
into the Vineyard at the Last Call, may by the earnestness and vigor of their
Performances, deserve as well, and do as much Work in a little time, as those
who have born the Heat and Burden of the Day, and yet did not work so hard, tho
they went in at the First Call. Hence Christ said, Many are called, but few
chosen; that is, tho many Profess the Truth, yet few in comparison, make such
vast improvements of their Time, as by their Extraordinary Labors to render
themselves Eminent and Choice Servants of God. That extraordinary Labourer, and
most Zealous Apostle (St. Paul, I mean) was One of those few. He said indeed,
That he was the Least of the Apostles, and less than the least of all Saints,
and that he was as one born out of due time, I Cor. 15. 8. But, though to show
his great Humility, and Repentance for his Sins, he spoke so disdainfully of
himself, as if he were like an Abortive, that wanted those perfect Proportions
which a Child has, that stays the full Course of Nature; yet he filled up
his time by his unparalled Zeal and Vigor; nor does all the Scripture, I
think, give us such another Instance, as he was, to show what it is to Redeem
the Time: I Labored, (said he) more abundantly than they All, I Cor. 15. 10.
These were not Vain, Boasting Expressions, but a just acknowledgement of what
he found himself Obliged to do to make God and Man all possible Reparation. He
would not lose an Hour more; but strove to Expiate his Guilt for coming so late
into the Church, and for wasting it so before his Entrance.

By this great Example of himself, which the penitent Apostle set to his own
Advice, we may easily perceive what it is to Redeem the Time. He was ready to
be at any cost, to retrieve (what he could) those fair Opportunities of doing
the World and himself good, which upon his melancholy Reflections, he saw were
dropped out of his hands. Labor, Sufferings, Life it self; All he thought little
enough to make amends. So that to Redeem our time in St. Paul's way is, with all
possible application and Earnestness of mind to make the Best use we can of the
Present; to Increase our diligence every New day; as to employ the Remainder of
our life with such great care and husbandry, as if we were within a short space
to dye, and to go to Judgment.

And if people would but seriously consider, how valuable time is, and what the
Consequences will most certainly be, whether they Improve, or Throw it away,
one would think no other Motive would be needful, to make them Husband it well,
but this Single thought; that whatever they do, they are still dealing for an
Eternity. It is the only business we have in this world, to be evermore
Regular and constant in the course God has set us, as the Sun is in his
motions. From the womb to the Grave we have our days numbered out unto us; or
however we spend them, whether well, or ill, we may be sure it will turn to
some account: there is no medium, or Remedy, but we must be Infinitely Gainers
or Losers by it; this is evident to all who believe a Future state.

However, that notions of this kind, may make the deeper impression, 'twill be
requisite in the prosecution of this subject to consider distinctly these three
things.

1. First, how very Prejudicial to the soul we find the Loss of time to be
already.

Secondly, how Irreparable the Loss will be in another life.

And Thirdly, how dangerous it is, in relation even to our present outward
fortunes. These few things, if gravely and wisely considered, would naturally
excite men to Redeem their time, while it is yet in their Power, and while the
Price of Redemption is as yet in their hand.

CHAP II.
How very prejudicial to the Soul Men may find the loss of Time to be already.

First, HOW very prejudicial to the Soul we find the loss of Time to be
already. The Perfections of the Soul, whether they be Intellectual, or Moral,
are not wrought by any sudden instantaneous Infusion, but are acquired by
degrees; Knowledge, by Speculation and hard Studies; Virtue, by Practice, by
many repeated Acts, which improve good Dispositions into a settled habit of
Living well; now this requires Time, and therefore the Scripture expresses it,
by growing in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. because those gracious Dispositions rise and
increase gradually. Though the Principle be Supernatural, yet it is Industry and
Time that brings Fruit unto Perfection. A Musbrome may be the work of a Night
only, but substantial Virtue and Piety, being Acts of a Man's Will, governed by
Arguments from Reason and Revelation, must needs be of slow growth; especially
so as to become customary and habitual. Upon this account the loss of Time is
very sensibly prejudicial to Peoples Souls, because thereby the business of
their Salvation (in the Works whereof they should have kept equal Paces with
their Time, that great and urgent business) is put quite backward, and left
behind-hand, never to be fetched up again without double Diligence at the
least. Their Understandings are darkened or deluded, for want of that true
Information, which their Minds might have received, had they not slept or
sported away many happy Oportunities, or spent them upon secular Concernments.
Their Sense of Religion is comparatively very superficial, by their neglecting
those Hours which should have been employed about it. Their Virtues are
inconsiderable for want of Practice. Briefly, all those Improvements which
others have made, and which are necessary for all, to prepare and fit their
Souls for a blessed State hereafter, such careless People are to seek for, and
perhaps at last despair of making, when once they are thoroughly sensible of
their Neglects, and find the Inconveniences of a sick Bed, or the dullness of
old Age to come upon them. Instead of those Perfections in Grace and Goodness,
Vice gets ground apace, every day it grows more and more habitual; till in the
end it is as hard a matter to reform those who are accustomed to do Evil, as it
is to make an Ethiopian change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots, Jer. 13. 23.

We should therefore Redeem the Time, while possability and practicableness of
the thing gives us Encouragements. We commonly look back upon our Losses with a
sadness, and with many disquieting Thoughts: God knows, it is too often thus
in our ordinary Affairs, though it be natural enough, it is the ready way to
create pain in the Heart of any unprosperous Man to consider not only what
Fortunes he has actually lost, but what Advantages he has mist too; what he
might have come to, had he been diligent and wise; what he might have done;
what he might have been; how many he might have out-stript in the World; how
many ways he might have improved his Interest, had his Hands been Industrious,
and had he not let so many fair Opportunities slip out of them. If any thing
can spur up such an improvident and restiff Creature, by vigorous Courses to
Redeem the Time that is gone from him, the Sense of this must. And if Men were
as heartily concerned for Spiritual, as they are for these external, transitory
Matters, they would hardly need any other Persuasions to Redeem their Time, but
this single Consideration, What Debtors they are to their own Souls; and what
great Arrears they are in unto themselves. Since they came into the World
capable of any Impressions, and lived out the days of their Child hood in a
State of perfect Innocence, (comparatively) What Proficients, in Religion and
Virtue, might they have been, by that time they came of Age, had they not dropped
their precious Time with their Trifles and Toys? And since they had the same
equal advantage with Timothy, of knowing the Holy Scriptures from their
Childhood, they might have been wise unto Salvation betimes too, had they
spent their days in chewing over, and digesting those wholesome Doctrines,
wherein Timothy was careful to be nourished up, 1 Timothy 4. 6. Many Vices might
have been destroyed upon their first appearance, like Cockatrices crushed in the
Egg. Passion would have met with an early check. Meekness, Patience, Humility,
Charity, and a devout Temper, would not have been scorned, as Phlegmatic and
ungenerous Dispositions. Conscience, which is now prostituted to Lust, would
have have preserved in a pure and undefiled State. Vast Improvements might have
been made, had People but made a good use of their Time.

The only way therefore they have now to Redeem it, is to recover of their
Losses as much as they can; and that with all possible speed; because the
longer this Care is deferred, the greater still their Losses are; like Debts,
which every day swell by being neglected. Wicked Habits grow daily, and are
more and more confirmed by Pleasure and Custom, till the Ear becomes deaf, and
the Heart hardened. There is a Succession of Follies, as there is of Years. When
the Rattle is thrown away, Vanity is taken up; and Vice takes the next turn.
Thus the Youth commenceth a Son of Belial; and proceeds by degrees from the
Womb toward Hell; unless some surprising Judgments meet him in the way, to
give him a stop, after many Prayers and Counsels of Friends that have been used
in vain. By this course of Life, Vice is reckoned in the end one of the
Accomplishments of a Man; and when once it comes to be grave, to act with
Seriousness, Deliberation, and Designs, it is infinitely harder to be
conquered, then it was in the days of innocent Ignorance; consequently the hurt
and mischief which is done to the poor Soul by a long Trade of Wickedness, is
inexpressible; and therefore Men should Redeem their Time while they have it to
Redeem, and while the thing is practicable; for the longer it runs, the more it
will be out of their Power; their Time is still less and less, yet their Vices
increase and wax the stronger; and their Minds are every day the more stiff and
inflexible; So that when old Age comes, there is a crookedness within, which is
far worse then that in the Bones; and it is to be feared, that a Death bed
Repentance is seldom genuine and sincere, after a long Life of Impiety.

Sometimes it happens, that instead of Repenting, People are ready to despair;
believing that after so much Time quite misspent, the poor remainder is too
little, and too late for the beginning of a great Work, when ones course is now
finishing. The thought of this is like an heavy Misfortune, which a Man knows
not how to bear up against. His Heart sinks under the pressure, and he gives
over all Endeavors; because he thinks no Labor or Means will be to purpose,
especially when Attempts have been altogether ineffectual and fruitless. This
is a sad consequence of the loss of Time, when it thus terminates in Horror and
Dampness. And yet, though the thing be evil, the case is not uncommon; and
considering the Danger that is so visible before all negligent People, one
would think the very fear of what may be, should stir them up to make provision
against Futurity, by well husbanding the Present. We may be sure, the
Remembrance of so much Time Lost, must needs be very uncomfortable in that day,
when Men's Consciences are wont to speak home and plain. Suppose ones Heart be
truly Penitent, it cannot but afford him a very melancholy Prospect, to look
back upon his former Life, and to see what a long Course he has run to sad
purpose: How many fair Opportunities of doing good have been balked; how
little Religion has been minded (though it be the great thing for which we were
all brought into the World;) How many Motions of Gods Holy Spirit have been
resisted; How many Mercies have been abused; How often private Affairs have
been preferred to the Divine Service; How many hours have been trifled away,
which should have been employed at Gods House; How many Sins have been acted,
when the Works of Salvation should, and might have been looked after; in short,
how Vice and Vanity, and Idleness have divided that Time, which God had a right
to, and which the Soul might have fared happily by, had it not been in a wicked
Man's keeping. Intemperance, Lust, Pride, Quarreling, studying how to defraud,
and to do Mischief, robs away a great part of some Men's Lives; and worldly
Interest is the common Thief, till improvident Wretches see their Graves ready
to open, to receive at last so many public Nusances, and so many Burdens upon
the Earth. These must needs be very melancholy Considerations to those whose
Eyes Death is a closing; especially if their Consciences are yet awake. And
therefore People should be wise in time, because it is impossible for any of us
to know, what the issues of a Death bed will be, or what our Condition will
prove then. The Time past of our Life may suffice us to have wrought the Will
of the Gentiles, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 3. And thus every one of us should
conclude, the time past of our Life may suffice us to have followed the Works
of the Flesh, and the Vanities of the World. God knows, there are few, who have
not lost too much of this kind already; and, if instead of Recovering, Men go
on still to multiply their Losses, 'twill be a sad Account they must come to at
last, when they shall cast up their Damages, and their Acquests, and shall be
made to consider what a long Season they have fooled away, and gotten nothing
by it in the end, but a wounded Conscience, and a most terrible Prospect.

CHAP. III.
How irreparable this Loss will be in another Life.

THough this alone be a great Consideration, yet in comparison of what follows,
it is little to be valued. For whatever our Losses are now, as long as we have
some time yet left us, we may make our selves some sort of Reparation. But a
Time is coming, which we should always provide against, (the great cause of our
trifling away so many precious hours, is, because we do not think so much and
so often as we should of that Time) when, notwithstanding the intimate
Affection that is now between them, the Soul must be divorced from the Body,
and live in a separate State till the general Judgment-day. The Dust shall
return to the Earth as it was; and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it,
Eccles. 12. 7. It shall return unto God to receive its Sentence for the Works
done in the Body; and according as those Works have been, whether good or evil,
so will its State be assigned it, either of Happiness or Misery. And whatever
that State be, it will be utterly unchangeable. There can be no Reviving, till
the Resurrection; no returning upon the Earth any more; no living over our
Lives again, to rectify any one Miscarriage; no recalling a Minute, to drop a
Tear, or to cry for Pardon. There is (says Job) some bope of a Tree, if it be
cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will
not cease, though the root thereof wax old in the Earth, and the Stock thereof
dye in the Ground; yet through the scent of Water it will bud, and bring forth
boughs like a Plant. But a Man dies, and wastes away; yea, Man gives up the
Ghost, and where is he? As the Waters fail from the Sea, and the Flood decays
and dries up, so Man lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more;
They shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep, Job 14. This
Consideration then is the second Motive to quicken us all to Redeem our Time,
because the loss of it at the end of this Life will be irreparable, seeing it
is impossible for us to come out of our Graves again to order Time better then
we are supposed to have done: We are deeply concerned to double our Diligence
about it now, before it is past Redemption. As yet it it not too late; but it
will certainly be so, when once we are dead: Our Works will follow us into
another World; but it would be madness to think we may begin them there. which
way soever our Souls go, we must necessarily be Losers, by losing our Time here.

Our Savior tells us of a broad Way that leads to Destruction, Mat. 7. 13.
And such as go that way, are beyond all possibility of Redeeming their Time, or
of being Redeemed themselves, when once they arrive at the end of their sad
Journey. Hell indeed was prepared for the Punishment of the Devil and his
Angels; and revealed to Men for their Terror; that the sight of it might turn
their Desires toward Heaven, and frighten them into an eagerness of taking
Sanctuary there, whither Promises alone would hardly allure sordid and brutish
Appetites. But if after such proffers of infinite Happiness, some will be so
improvident and headstrong, as to make that their Option, which is the Devils
Curse, they can blame none but themselves for being at last without hope of
Recovery. There the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched, as our
Savior assures us thrice together, Mar. 9. 44, 46, 48. Elsewhere it is called,
Fire unquenchable, Mat. 3. 12. Fire Everlasting, Mat. 25. 41. Fire Eternal,
Jude 7. which is enough to prove the interminable duration of Hell Torments,
against those hardy Wretches, who would fain dispute them away, instead of
endeavoring to prevent them. This is to study how to throw away two things
which hang heavy upon them, their Time and their Faith too; though the loss of
either will be enough to make them miserable. Perhaps the loss of Time is the
greatest, because it goes first; Infidelity and other Wickedness being the
Results of the loss of Time, or that which is the consequent of hours
mis-imployed. There are some Creatures which believe and tremble; and those
Sons of Perdition who bear them Company in weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
Teeth, would give all the World, if they had it at command, for a few of those
days which many are so weary of, that they think of Methods, how to drive away
their. Time: some by Idleness; some by Pride; some by Quarreling; some by Lust;
some by Intemperance; most by Vanity. Those Portions of Time, how large soever
they be, which Living-men so little regard, those forlorn Souls which have
abandoned themselves to damnation, by not fore-casting what now they feel,
would think little enough to bestow upon Fastings, and Prayers, and Acts of
Charity; upon Expressions of Humility, and Selfdenial; upon the severest
Mortifications; upon Sufferings of any sorts (excepting their suffering the
loss of Time) they would be glad, though but of a few Minutes, instead of our
Years, to try if there might be any the least room for Repentance. The Soul
does not forfeit its Essential Faculties, by being parted from the Flesh. It
retains still Understanding, Memory, Will, and Affections; such I mean, as
are suitable to its State. Hope then can be none, when once it is come to the
final Possession of its Fortunes. And yet, thus much may be gathered from the
Parabolical Account our Savior gave of Abraham, and the rich Man, Luk 16, That
though the State of the Blessed, and the State of the Damned be immutably fixed
on each hand by a Chasm, or the irrevocable Decree of God, so that the damned
have not any Hope for Themselves; yet they have so much Charity, even in Hell,
as to wish that their surviving Friends may not come into a Place, where they
themselves endure such exquisite Torments. And what would not such Souls do on
their own behalf, might they have some fresh time given them to bestow upon
Moses, and the Prophets? To besure they would part with all their Torments for
one single day; and yet year after year is now wasted, I do not say, in
unprofitable, but in ungodly and wicked Courses. What Nature does not require,
to supply its wants, Vice appropriates a great share of; though the World
commonly goes away with the greatest part; and that very small Portion which is
left for Offices of Religion, is spent often after such a superficial and
careless manner, that that too may be reckoned among Men's idle Expenses, when a
Messenger of Satan comes to deprive them of all, and to shut them under an
utter impossibility of ever returning back to Redeem an Hour.

Again, the Son of God tells us of a strait Gate, and a narrow way, which
leads unto Life, Mat. 7. 14. Now though in that blessed State every faithful
Christian will be crowned for all his Labors and Travels, and Sufferings under
the Sun; yet in Heaven it self he will find some detriment by not Redeeming his
Time here with that Diligence and Vigor which he should have used. To speak in
St. Paul's Words, though he spoke them in reference to Trials and Persecutions
in this Life, 1 Cor. 3. 15. Such a Man shall suffer loss, but he himself shall
be saved. For, as there are Degrees of Torments in Hell, some beaten with
fewer, and some with many Stripes, as they have squandred away their Time here
less or more; so there are degrees of Felicities in Heaven, as Men have
employed their Opportunities in this World, well, or better. This inequality of
Happiness our Savior sufficiently intimates, by the many Mansions which he
says are in his Fathers House, Jo. 14. 2. The Words in the Prophet Daniel are
express; They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and
they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.
3. The Words of St. Paul are to the like purpose; There is one Glory of the
Sun, another Glory of the Moon, and another of the Stars; for one Star
differs from another Star in Glory: So also is the Resurrection of the Dead,
1 Cor. 15. 41, 42. The Apostles words elsewhere are beyond exception, He which
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he which sows bountifully, shall
reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. Every man shall receive his own reward according
to his own Labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8. From which places of Scripture it is clear,
that tho all Rewards at the hand of God be, not of Debt, but of pure Bounty,
yet in the distribution of them the Divine Majesty is pleased to make a
difference between one Man and another, and to reward every one according to
the Quality and Measure of their Works. And hence it follows, that even such as
Love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, will Gain or Lose in the other World,
proportionably as they bestow their precious Hours in this. They will have
indeed the same most Blessed God to Contemplate, Love and Adore; the same sorts
and kinds of happiness to enjoy; the same uninterrupted and Eternal Duration of
it; and every Soul will be Replenished with that Portion, which the undeserved
goodness of God shall dispense: But yet there will be various measures of
Bliss, tho it may be impossible for us now to express the manner of the
inequality, because Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered
into the Heart of Man to conceive the things, which God has prepared for them
that love him. 1 Cor. 2. 9. It Is very probable, that the different degrees of
Glory will be answerable to men's different Capacities; and as their Love to God
now is less or more Perfect, according as those heights of Affection are, which
we attain to here; and according as the Powers of the Soul are improved and
Exalted in this Militant State, so will they still be Raised and Perfected in
Heaven; and consequently the greater Measures of Happiness we shall be capable
of there. Hence it is, that Martyrs are believed to be the nearest unto Christ
in Heaven, and to excel other Saints in Glory, because by the more abundant
Largeness of their Hearts in this Life, they were prepared to receive more
abundant Degrees: and those Converts who came later into the Vineyard than
others did, reach unto an equal pitch with them, if, like St. Paul, they make
such vast improvments by their extraordinary Vigor and Zeal, as to overtake in
their Labors such as endured the Heat of the day. However we pretend to unfold
the Manner and Reason of the thing, it is evident that in Fact there are
several degrees of Happiness, and that every one receives according to his
Works.

This shows how infinitely we are concerned to redeem our time with all
possible industry, not only that we may be delivered from the everlasting
Pains of a Future life; but moreover, that we may not miss of those great
Hopes, or come short of those Expectations, we comfort our selves with now.
Every man finds by experience, what an affliction it is to be disappointed;
especially where the hopes were strong, and the enjoyments desired, of great
consequence. And though the faculties of the Soul will be so rectifyed in a
state of Perfection, that Heaven can be no place for dejecting and macerating
griefs; yet I cannot conceive, but the sense of former neglects must bring with
it an Abatement of those transcendent Joys, which otherwise would have been
attainable. Nay, were there any room for a Sorrowful Repentance in those
blessed Regions above, the Saints there would repent of nothing more, then of
the loss of their time here, because it is the occasion of those Faults and
Follies, which do set even Sincere Penitents in a Lower Classis, than those who
lived in an uninterrupted course of virtue and Piety.

The sum is; that we should manage our Expenses of time with all pious and
prudent Frugality; as being the most precious thing in this world, and as that
which will terminate at last in an Immutable state, where we shall certainly be
savers or losers to all eternity, as we Redeem, or not Redeem now. And would to
God people would but set aside some, though it were but a small, part of every
day to think what Eternity imports; and what it is to live without any end,
without the least Expectation, or Possibility of an end. Men would fain be
Immortal here; and act so unconcernedly, as if there were never to be an end of
their follies; of which this is one of the greatest, and the most Palpable: For
dye we must in our respective turns; and as sure as death, Judgment will
follow; and as the sentence is then, so will every ones lot hold on to Eternal
ages, without ever coming to a Period. Considering therefore how unchangeable
our state will be, whether in woe or bliss, and how our Everlasting fortunes
depend upon the use we make of our time now, we are infinitely concerned to
Redeem what is lost with a very quick hand, lest our losses prove utterly and
unexpectedly Irrecoverable; the time here is short, at the best: The Pleasures
of sin are but for a season: The world passes away gradually; people every day
go away before it, and a few feet of Earth will in a little time serve to
immure the most Insatiable and Troublesome man that is in it now. It would be a
wise thing to look forward; and to consider, in what a little space there will
be an end of a man's sins and vanities here. In a few years Posterity, to be
sure, will see a vast Alteration; there, the Haughty head laid Low; there, the
Unconscionable Oppressors cut down; there, the Luxurious thrown to nourish and
fatten worms; there, the Lustful brought to his Final Rottenness; there, the
wanton eye closed; there the mouth of the Prophanest Blasphemer is stopped; and
there, a full end put to vicious courses here; in all which time the souls of
those miserable wretches are gone off, with an Eternity of Guilt upon them, to
an Eternity of Punishment; which we should lay close to our hearts, could we
see the Passages and sufferings of spirits, as we do Bodies, when they are
carried upon men's shoulders to their graves. And yet considering, what we are
told in our Creed, as to a future state, and how Infallible Divine Revelation
is, because it comes from God, who knows all things, and cannot possibly
deceive, or be deceived; methinks nothing can quicken our endeavors to Redeem
our time so much, as this sole Reflection, what will become of us at the Last:
but that men are generally Fools, in making such unequal comparisons, as to set
contingencies against Certainties; and indeed to Prefer a few moments before an
Eternity.

CHAP. IV.
How dangerous the loss of time is, in reference to our present, outward
fortunes.

BUT besides all this, we are to consider, as the third motive, what may very
Probably befall us even before we go to our Long homes, if we be not solicitous
in time to Redeem our Lost hours. It is a Loss, that may be very dangerous in
reference to our present outward fortunes. For the illustration of this matter
we are to note, that God determines upon his time, when he will make Careless
and Incorrigible people Examples of his Justice in this world. Though it be one
of those secret things which belong unto the Lord our God, yet the holy
Scripture gives us warrant to believe, that such a fixed time there is, when he
visits Negligent peoples offenses with a Rod, and their sins with Scourges;
especially this sin, the mis-spending those days and hours, which he is pleased
to allot them for works of Piety and Righteousness. Gods purpose concerning the
old world was, that their days should be an hundred and twenty years, Genesis 6.
3. which is not to be understood so, as if he intended to contract peoples
lives by shortning the usual term of Nature, which in those ages was very long:
but that he would in six score years put an end to the world that then was, and
destroy all but eight persons by a flood, unless they did Repent of those great
wickednesses, by Reason whereof it grieved God at the heart, that he had made
man on the earth, Genesis 6. 6. It is observable, that our Blessed Savior
speaking of a terrible Judgment, that after his ascension would come upon the
unbelieving Jews; and directing his disciples to strict vigilance, for fear
they too should be surpised and destroyed with the rest, makes use of this
very instance as a powerful argument to make them watchful; Mat. 24. 37, 38,
39. As the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be:
for as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the days that Noah entered into the Ark;
and knew (or; Considered) not until the flood came and took them all away, so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be. Which shows, that the great cause
of the general deluge was, the general sin of people in squandring away their
precious time upon Pleasures, Riots and Debauchery, when God has set them
their Bounds, beyond which he resolves they should not live any longer. The
Time God pitched upon for the Destruction of the Amorites, was the Fourth
Generation from the Days of Abraham, Genesis 15. 16. That he sent to Niniveh was
forty Days, Jonab 3. 4. And by the History it appears, that the space fixed for
the Destruction of the Jews after the Lord Jesus his departure, was forty
years; the time that had been spent in bringing their Ancestors into the
Possession of the Promised Land. The intermediate space before their Overthrow,
is called Jerusalems Day, Luke 19. 42. O that thou (Jerusalem) had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy Peace!
Gods day was to be the next; a day of Horror and Vengeance, that presently came
upon Jerusalem, as soon as she had Trifled and sinned away her Own.

By these few instances it appears, that God determines upon a certain Time,
when he will Punish People Remarkably, if they do not Prevent his Judgments by
Redeeming the Time, while it is yet called, To day. Whence it follows, that
could men be so Foolish as to disbelieve a Future State, their present welfare
would require them to Redeem their Time; because the more they Procrastinate,
and the longer they defer that necessary Work, so many degrees the day of
Temporal Vengeance appraocheth; and the nearer that draws toward them, and
the more steps they take to meet it, the more imminent still is the danger of
dropping into unexpected Ruin. This was St. Paul's own Argument for the
Redeeming of Time, because (says he) The days are Evil, Ephesians. 5. 16. By Evil
days the Scripture sometimes means Old Age, and days of Infirmity: And so
Solomon speaks, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth, while the evil days come not. And indeed it is a proper Admonition for
People in that Case, to make a nimble use of their Time, to accelerate their
Course, and every day to make the quicker and quicker dispatches; like Bodies,
whose motion is the swifter and stronger, the nearer they come to their place
of Rest. But by Evil days the Apostle means, times of Peril and Danger; and
when any Juncture is threatening, it is high time for People to be on the
Redeeming hand; because God has set His Day, if they do not bestow theirs as
he would have them.

When they Act with that Zeal, Honesty, and Circumspection, which becomes those
who are certain otherwise to be quite undone, then the Rod is laid up, and the
Visitation is put off to another day; and so on still; the farther and farther
it is deferred, the more Industriously they go on, and persevere in Well-doing.
For God's Menaces are conditional; he does always reserve to himself a power of
Revocation, and still exerts it by delivering Men from danger, as they do their
part in answering the great Ends of the Sentence. When they Redeem their Time,
God Redeems Them and their Fortunes from Destruction, and then he is said to
Repent of the Evil: It Is spoken after the manner of Men, in condescension to
our Capacities; when upon our due Reformation he Removes a Judgment, which he
intended otherwise to bring upon us. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy
it; If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will
repent of the Evil, that I thought to do unto them, Jer. 18 7, 8. Upon this
Account, the Apostles Argument, taken from the Consideration of dangerous
Circumstances, is of great force; because Self-preservation is the first
Principle of Nature, and that which too often works even against Principles of
Religion; but when Religion comes to assist it, by showing People the Vengeance
of God over their Heads, it serves to set all hands at work upon the Reedeeming
of Time, to prevent a Storm, wherein otherwise they are likely to perish. Many
that are contented to run the hazards of another Life, are very unwilling to
lose the Comforts of this, because they love the Present, and their Senses are
too strong for Faith, which is the Substance of things not seen, but hoped for,
Heb. 11. 1. Therefore when present dangers are thoroughly apprehended, Endeavors
to avoid them will naturally follow. In such a case, People will no more lose
Time, then they will lie in their Beds, if they know the House is ready to be
burnt. Now, as certain as Natural Causes work, so certain it is, that Judgments
will overtake those who care not how vainly and wickedly they spend their days.
It is that which seals Men up to Destruction, as it did the Sodomites: amongst
whose Iniquities, abundance of Idleness is reckoned as one, Ezekiel. 17 49. that
which drew on a great many Wickednesses more, and at last turned the whole City
into a great Globe of Fire. Therefore when the Hand of God in the least
appears, it is an awakening Argument for us all to rise from our Security, and
to Redeem the Time, while we have as yet any Opportunities left us; For the
longer we defer this Business, the harder God will be to be entreated; till in
the end he will become utterly inexorable. This seems to be clear from the
Parallel, which the Apostle draws from the Case of Esau, Heb. 12. 17. For a
Morsel of Meat he sold his Birth right, and afterward lost his Fathers
Blessing by Hunting. Jacob made such an use of his Brothers Absence, and of his
own Time, that he gat the Blessing from him. Esau would have recovered it, but
was rejected, because he came too late. He found (says the Apostle) no Place
of Repentance, though he sought carefully with Tears; meaning that he could not
persuade his Father to Repent of what he had done, so as to alter his Mind, and
to recall the thing that had gone out of his Lips. This instance the Apostle
makes use of as a Reason, why we should take heed lest we fail of the grace of
God, or forfeit our title to his merciful Protection; which yet would be of no
force, nor indeed to the purpose, if it were not possible for us to fare as ill
as Esau did. But St. Paul's words show, that though God be a God of Patience and
long suffering, yet there is a time when he will stay no longer for those who
turn his Grace into wantonness; when he will be deaf to their cries; and will
not be prevailed with to Repent of the evil that he has pronounced against
them. I now speak of such evils as God brings upon men in this life; where
Punishments are Examplary; inflicted upon people for good; for the Correction
of improvident people themselves, and for the admonition of all. The pains of
another world are purely Vindictive; and such as are both Remediless and
Endless; and therefore God leaves room for mercy to the very Last hour of life,
when Repentance on our part is hearty and sincere: witness the acceptance that
penitent theif upon the Cross found; whose case, though it was Particular, and
not to be drawn into example so as to encourage any wretches to throw away
their time upon presumption of mercy at the Last; yet it argues plainly, that
at what hour soever a Sinner turns from his evil way he shall save his Soul
alive. But this does not always save people from Punishments here; especially
such People, as have long Abused the Patience and Goodness of God. To this
purpose, we may observe what was said of Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. that the
things which belonged unto her peace were hidden from her eyes; and the Reason
of it is given v. 44 because she knew not the time of her visitation; that is,
she did not consider her own great interest in time; she would not lay the
things belonging to her peace to Heart, notwithstanding so many calls, first
from the Prophets that had been sent to her, and at Last from the mouth of the
Son of God himself, the Lord of life and Glory. The Result of this is, that
people may quite Sin away their day of Peace; and because the more time they
lose, the greater their dangers are, they should be very diligent while they
have fair opportunities; while there is a Season, an accepted time, a day of
salvation. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, says the Prophet, Isa. 55.
6. Call upon him while he is near; intimateing clearly, that there is a
critical Juncture, when he will not be found, but keep off at a great distance,
though he be fought after. And to this purpose are these following Texts of
Scripture, Prove. 1. 24. etc. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I also will Laugh at your Calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction comes as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you:
Then shall they call upon me, but will not answer, they shall seek me early,
but shall not find me. Isa. 65. 12. Therefore will I number you to the sword,
and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter, because when I called, ye did not
answer; when I spoke, ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and did
choose that wherein I delighted not. And Isa. 7. 15, 16. I will cast you out of
my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim;
therefore pray thou not for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for
them, neither make intercession to me; for I will not hear thee.

From these several places it appears, that Gods decrees, which in the
beginning were Conditional, at length come to be Peremptory; and that sentence
to be Final and Irrevocable, which was originally designed not for men's
Destruction, but for their amendment: and because this proceeds from the
mis-spending those hours, which God numbreth out unto us all, that we may do
the world and our own Souls good, it narrowly concerns us to Redeem our time,
before it be too Late. To day if you will hear his voice; harden not your
hearts, says the Psalmist; as if the deferring of it to another day were a
ready course to harden our own spirits and to make God silent to all our cries
in the day of vengeance. This is your hour, and the power of darkness, as
Christ told those malicious wretches, Luke 22. 53. But Gods power will take its
turn, when his own time comes: and because of that day and hour knows no
man, but it is wont to steal upon Improvident people when they look not for it,
nor are aware of it, we should be every minute, watchful and Ready, by
Improving the time Present to the best advantage. Who can tell what a day will
bring forth? Or what shall be on the morrow? and considering, how uncertain
this world is, and how Cross events usually prove, whatever we Project or hope
for, we should not let any blessed opportunities slip away, nor be Loytering
about, while the main business stays for us, left sudden destruction come upon
us, as travail upon a woman with child, while we say, Peace and safety, like
those foolish people St. Paul speaks of, 1 These. 5, 3.

And would God we of this Kingdom would seriously lay this thing to heart,
while the great Goodness of God toward us does yet endure! Though we are as
apt, as any Nation, to flatter our selves with promises of Peace and safety;
especially considering how many years experience we have had of Gods merciful,
and indeed miraculous Providence over us; yet we cannot but discern what
dangers threaten the whole Kingdom at this time; and it is to be wisn't, that
that time which some trifle away in murmurings and Complaints, we would all of
us be persuaded to employ upon act; of unfeigned Repentance, that God may be
entreated for us, before his arm is stretched out to cut us off in the midst of
our security. As we have lost time, so Gods Judgments have gained ground; nor
is there any other way left us now, but to recover what we can of our Losses by
making a Quick use of the Remainder, according to the Laws of Religion, and
true Christian Prudence. Should such desolation and distress be brought upon
us, which some other Nations groan under, it will be too late to say, we did
not imagine that things would have come to this pass. We have, God knows,
little reason to think, we are better than other people. If we were not worse,
our hopes of safety might be the better grounded. But by how much Atheism and
Irreligion go beyond superstition, by so much are our provocations greater, and
our sins the more crying and importunate, to bring down that vengeance, which
we see hovering over our heads. Therefore, the wisest, and the most effectual
course, we can take to prevent our Ruin is, to lay hold on those fair
opportunities we have, before they are out of our reach, and to redeem the time
while God is yet pleased to give us Leave.

The Promises being duly and thoroughly considered, will. I hope, be able enough
to carry your thoughts on to the last great enquity; viz. How we may order the
matter, so as to Redeem our time to very good purpose?

In order hereunto these five things are necessary:

First, to Kindle and preserve in our hearts a true Christian Zeal.

Secondly, to consider what sins we have acted, and to make all possible amends
for them.

Thirdly, to do all the good we can:

Fourthly, to let no day slip away wholly, without promoting our eternal
interest in some degree and measure.

And Fifthly, to spend as much as may be of the Remainder of our time upon
Devotion; especially upon the Solemnities of Public Devotion in the house of
God.

CHAP V.
The way to Redeem our time is, first, to Kindle and preserve in our hearts a
true Christian Zeal.

1. THE First course to be taken is, to Kindle and Preserve in our hearts a
True Christian Zeal. By a true Christian Zeal I understand, a Warm and well
Governed Resolution to act according to Christ's Laws. For there are two sorts
of Zeal which are Faulty. One, is that which is not according to Knowledge, as
St. Paul tells us, Romans 10. 2. a blind Passion, or Impetus that hurries all
before it upon Presumptions and mistakes; and without a deliberate Calm
Examination of the true merits of the Cause. Such a Zeal was his Own, while he
yet breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord.
He verily thought, that he was bound to do many things contrary to the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26. 9. This was his mistaken Zeal; and therefore he
obtained mercy afterward, because, what he had done, he did Ignorantly in
unbelief, Tim. 1. 3. There is another sort of Zeal which is not according to
Sobriety; an Inordinate heat of mind, and that too mis-applyed, upon objects
that are not so proper; though the man's Judgment be right and found: when Zeal
is employed about minute matters in comparison; about the circumstantials, and
petite Appendages, rather than about the essentials of Religion: Such a Zeal
was theirs, who were strict and nice about Mint, Anis, and Cummin, but omitted
the weightier matters of the Law, Righteousness, mercy, and Faith; these things
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone, says our Savior,
Math. 23. 23. Our Zeal should be attended with Light, as well as Warmth; with
Regularity, and due Application, as well as fervency; and then it is a well
governed Zeal; a Disposition made up of a right Principle, and of due temper
and Prudence.

Now such a sober earnestness of mind is absolutely necessary in order to the
Redeeming of our time, because it is the source and spring of action; the
natural principle of all vigorous performances; without which we shall be so
far from doubling our diligence, that we shall express none at all; but indulge
our selves with the sluggard, Pro. 6. 10. A Requiem is all he minds; he makes
his life literally a Dream; yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little more
folding of the hands to sleep. A bed is an improper place to Redeem time; which
slides away there insensibly: and a spirit of slumber, and an active mind, are
as great contradictions, as Rest and work are. There must be at least, such a
principle of Zeal in this case, as there is of Industry in other cases; a
principle that stirs people up to their Business and Pleasures in their common
course of life. They that love the World, begrudge no time they lay out upon
it; but rise up early, sit up late, and eat the bread of sorrows, Psalm. 107. 2.
The reason is; because they have an inordinate and sorded Zeal for Mammon; it
is that inward Principle that makes them Restless, and takes away from them the
general comforts of mankind; though for the sake of the world they count that
stealth no manner of Robbery. The Voluptuous care not how many hours they throw
away upon the Pleasures of sin. They wait for the Twilight, Pro. 7. 9. They
tarry long at the wine, Prove. 23. 30. They rise up early in the morning, that
they may follow strong drink, and continue until night, till it inflames them,
Isa. 5. 11. In short; whatever peoples hearts are set upon, they will be sure
to follow with Industry and eagerness: and the true Reason, why they are so
sparing of their time in the business of Religion, is because they want such a
Principle of vigor as makes them profuse and Prodigal in other cases. Hence it
is, that the Bed or the Belly rob the Closet, because their minds are not
there, that sports and pastime go away with those hours, which meditation
should take up; and that such portions of the day are bestowed upon vanity and
vice, which should be expended upon Prayer. Hence it is too, that the House of
God is so neglected; that the Altar is past by, when all things are ready but
peoples Hearts; and that they think it long till the Sabbath be over, as those
Jews did, Amos 8. 5. The Reason of all this is, because they are Lovers of
other things, more then of God, or Religion, or their own eternal Happiness;
there is not that true Christian Zeal, which would render all these things a
Delight, at least would represent them as Duties, instead of counting them a
Burden. As long as men slight Religion, or are cold and Indifferent about it,
we cannot expect they should Redeem their time to any Good purpose. To quicken
and stir up all our minds for that weighty matter, we should warm our hearts
with a brisk and enlivening sense of our duty, and of the Consequents which
depend upon it; we should call to mind the vast advantages which shall be the
reward of a good Conscience, and the Present pleasures which inseparably attend
a godly, righteous, and sober life. We should often reflect upon the vain,
Empty, Perishing condition of all Wordly matters; that after all our Arts and
Labors for them, we must leave them all Behind, and can carry nothing away,
but our Consciences and works; we should daily consider, that we must all dye,
and after Death go to Judgment; and think with our selves, what terrible times
those will be; what a Precious thing an Immortal Soul is; how unchangeable its
state will be hereafter, whether it be in misery or Bliss; and what a Foolish
thing 'twill be to Lose it though it were for the Gaining of ten thousand
worlds now. We should consider with all, what cares are necessary for the
saving of a Soul; How many things we are to do, and what Little time we have to
do them all in; How our days pass away like a shadow; how very uncertain the
shortness of them is; how many accidents there are to cut us off before Nature
has spun out her work to the Full; of what dangerous consequence Delays are;
what a dismal thing it will be to be surpised on a sudden; and how Contingent
the issues of Repentance may be, though any ill man be permitted to lie long
upon his sick bed, with Friends and Prayers about him.

These and the like Religious meditations, if rightly entertained, will be apt,
to inspire us with warm Resolutions, to Redeem our time, while it is yet in our
hand; to make us Cautious of Losing a day more; and to invigorate our souls
with such an hearty principle as will render us, not only Diligent, but very
Zealous and Eager in a Christian course, which puts me in mind of the vigorous
Resolutions of that great Apostle St. Paul; whose indefatigable Industry and
Zeal to Redeem the time he had Lost, is a Noble pattern for ours, Phil. 3. 12,
13, 14. I follow after, says he, forgetting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are before; I press on toward the mark,
for the Prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. He there compared
himself to one that was running a Race, to obtain a Garland at the Mark, or
Goal, or Race-end. Those which are engaged in such an Athletick Course, are not
wont to stop and loiter away their Minutes, or to stand looking behind them to
see what lengths and distances they have ran, and how far they have out-stript
the Cumbatants that are short of them; but strive and stretch forward, each
straining every Sinew to overtake and outrun the foremost, that he may receive
the Prize first. And thus did St. Paul proceed with Constancy, Zeal, and
Earnestness in that Spiritual Course, wherein he was a Combatant (though a late
one) for a Crown that withers not, nor fades away. He was on the pursuit; he
made as much speed as was possible; strove hard, and went on vigorously from
one labor and difficulty to another; he fetched up and recovered the Time he
had misspent, by Toiling and Working, and Traveling more abundantly than the
rest; impatient Day and Night, till he had outgone, and outdone those that had
been called before him, and still pressing forward, and stretching on, for the
Prize he had in his Eye, that Eternal weight of Glory, which was laid up for
him in the Heavens.

By this instance we see, what a warm and well governed Zeal is; how powerful
in its Influence; what Life and Vigor it creates, and what wonderful Works it
can do in a little Time, when a Man is resolved to Redeem it indeed. And that
we may follow St. Paul's Example, it is necessary to set up (as he did) a
serious and obstinate Resolution, to do God Service from our Hearts, and our
selves and others all the good we can, while we have fair Opportunities before
us. Such a Christian Zeal will make Us too active and nimble in running the
Race that is set before us; 'twill carry us with Patience and Constancy through
All; so that no Pains will be begrudged; no thoughts of Difficulty will put us
to a stand; no apprehensions of Danger will make us faint; no sense of
Discouragements will cast us down; 'twill help us to go on still from Virtue to
Virtue, fearful of nothing, but of losing Time; till at last we come to that
great pitch St. Paul attained to, I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but to all them also, that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7,
8.

CHAP. VI.
A second way is, to consider what Sins we have acted, and to make all possible
amends for them.

Secondly, THis zealous Disposition being formed in our Minds, the next way to
Redeem our time is, to consider what Sins we have acted, and to make all
possible amends for them. The time that is flung away upon vice is not merely
lost, but consumed wickedly; and in this case there is as much difference
between losing and wasting, as there is between Idleness and mischief; or,
between doing nothing at all, and doing that which is Evil. Now here the way of
Redeeming ones time is, as far as it is possible, to undo that which has been
done; and to perform such acts of repentance, as are declarative of our hearty
wishes, that the things had never been done at all. For, to continue in a
wicked Course, or, not to make some Reparation for a wicked Act is a spending
of time as Ill, as at the first; because it carries with it a tacit Approbation
of mind, which is Tantamount to the Committing it again over and over. Nay,
Sins continued in, or un-repented, are more pernicious in their Consequence,
than they were in the original; because they harden the heart, and by degrees
draw such a crusty temper upon the Conscience as makes it insensate; so that
the losing of time on, is the ready means of making one incapable at last of
Redeeming it at all. This shows, that by persisting in that which is evil,
instead of recovering the hours that were wickedly spent, men misemploy them
still, and make the matter daily worse and worse. Therefore, when an ill thing
is acted, they should endeavor to obliterate it by a very speedy repentance;
and the sooner they come to it, the more time and Innocence they save, and the
quicklier they make all Right again. An instance to this purpose we read of in
the Church of Corinth, upon St. Paul's laying the Ecclesiastical Censures on
those who had committed some Scandalous Enormities, 2 Cor. 7, 9, 11. Ye were
made Sorry, says the Apostle, after a godly manner; -- And that your Sorrow,
what carefulness it wrought in you? Yea, what clearing of your selves? Yea,
what Indignation? Yea, what Fear? Yea, what vehement Desire? Yea, what Zeal?
Yea, what Revenge. That is, their speedy Repentance had such great effects upon
them, that they were very Solicitous to expiate their offenses; they purged
themselves presently of the crimes committed; they expressed their Displeasure
and vexation for the commssion of them; they were afraid of offending God any
more; they showed all readiness to give the Church Satisfaction for what had
been done among them; they declared their firm Resolutions of Reforming for the
time to come; and they used all possible severities, to inflict Punishment upon
themselves, for the wrongs they had done their own souls, and for the Reproach
they had brought upon their most holy Profession. This is a Right way for
people to Redeem their time; because it is in effect, to destroy and spoil the
works of their hands; to make the days perish wherein they did amiss; and to
begin their lives a new, as if those days had never been.

Though strictly speaking, we cannot utterly Null our works, so as to make
those things never to have been, which are actually Past; yet Moraly, and by
Interpretation we may Annihilate our actions, and Revoke what is gone, if our
Repentance be Hearty and opperative like that which those Corinthians expressed.

Now here men should examine the Quality and Condition of their crimes past,
that they may redeem their time by such Indignation for them, and such holy
revenges upon themselves as are suitable.

Some sins are Injurious to the Souls of the Actors only; such as a man
commits alone, and by himself, without any witness of them, but his own
Conscience and God. In this case the right course is, to betake ones self to
Private, but sincere humiliations; to deprecate God's wrath; to chasten the
Soul by Fasting and severe mortifications; to bestow more time than usual upon
meditation and Prayer; to break off ones sins by Righteousness, and ones
iniquities by showing mercy to the Poor; and above all, to leave the sin, or
sins, entirely off, and by the continual exercise of contrary virtues to bring
the mind to a regular frame and temper. This is to undo an Evil action, to
cancel all that Guilt which is Private, Personal, and Single, to Recover what
is past and gone, by such a moral Revocation as God will accept of, and for
Christ's sake Impute to the sincere Penitent as Amends for his former
miscarriages.

There are other sins which are of a more Public and Pestilential nature:
Sins, that besides the inward Guilt they bring upon the actors Conscience,
carry along with them outward infection, mischief and scandal, as Defamation,
Lying, Adultery, evil Suggestions, Injustice of all sorts, and whatever
wickedness else is exemplary and hurtful to other men. These crimes are much
the worse, because it is a very difficult (and sometimes impossible) matter to
make full amends and satisfaction for them, (and consequently to Redeem the
time they have lost; because the sin may spread so far, and may last so long in
its mischievous effects, as to be out of ones Reach and Power to Recall it, so
as to Null it utterly. In this case therefore the only means a man has left
him to Redeem his time is, to do what he is Able toward the Revocation of his
wickedness; and that must be, not only to cease from doing it any more, but
moreover to make all possible Reparation for what has been done already; were
it only Private, single guilt, the Conscience might be discharged of it by
those ways I mentioned just now; but considering that it is complicated and
aggravated by the Additional guilt of Injustice and Scandal, much more is
required to wipe it off. All possible means must be used to cure the
mischievous effects of such criminal actions; the Consequence of them must be
stopped, and Amends made for the hurt done before the revocation of them; because
without this the whole sin cannot be undone, but is rather avowed and Continued
in, and by construction and in effect Repeated every day; upon which account
the wretch is so far from Redeeming his time, that he Trifles it away, and sins
it on still; every hour of his life is Lost; his Prayers, all Lost; his very
Repentance, whatever it be, is lost too, because it is so short and Imperfect;
and should such a man live to a Decrepite old age, he would be as far from Gods
Pardon, as when the sin was first acted; and indeed much farther, by reason of
the Long, Repeated aggravation of his Guilt, by Persisting still in the
wickedness, and by permitting the malignity of it to run on. For the
Illustration of this matter it is necessary to put some particular cases; and
they shall be these Four. First, if a man once corrupts his neighbors wife,
or virgin, or whatever the condition of the foolish creature be, with whom the
villainy is acted; it is not enough to act it no more; there is an Injury done,
and that which may be Irreparable and eternal; whether it will not prove so, is
more than the Adulterer knows: he has done his part to damn her Reputation and
her Soul too; and therefore it is not sufficient to forbear for the future, no
more than it is for a Murderer to proceed no further, when he has already
given a mortal stabb; in this case all possible endeavors should be used for
the Saving of life; as in the other, all possible means must be applied for the
saving of a Soul. Whether it shall perish or no, it is at Gods pleasure, in
whose hand it is: But whatever the success may be, all ways of Reparation must
be Tried; otherwise the Sin is still abetted and Persisted in, till the
Adulterers own Soul be past Redemption, as well as his Time.

Again; a Good Name is better than precious ointment, says Solomon, Eccl. 7.
1. And if an enemy take it away by Libels or Lies, nay, though it be
uncharitable Truths, the wrong is manifest; nor will it suffice (though that be
more than some will do) to forbear at length to throw about the Poison of an
Asp: the Viper has already done his venomous work and whether the Defamation
does stick long or no, the Guilt of it sticks upon the slanderers Concience;
there it rests till Satisfaction be made for the calumny, and an effectual
course be taken to set the good man's Name right again, and to Restore it to its
former Savor; for as long as the stench continues, the Sin operates; the
wretch has still the Guilt, though he thinks it to be the Wisdom of the
Serpent: nor is it possible for him to wipe it off, but by his Recovering that
which he caused to be Lost; by applying some such Antidote to expel the poison,
as Naturalists say the very worst of Serpents yield. Till a Recantation gives a
check, the Calumny goes on, and consequently his Guilt; and instead of
Redeeming his time, he loses more. Thirdly; in the case of Theft, or
oppression (which is defrauding and Theeving by dint of Power) there is to be
considered, besides the sinfulness of the Act, the Injury that attends it. Now
tho it be very Right, what the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole,
steal no more; yet this is no Redeeming of time without some Compensation;
because the man is a wrongful Possessor of another Propriety, nor can
Possession ever give him a Title to that which is not founded upon Justice.
There must be therefore Restitution according to ones Power; Restitution in
kind, or Equivalence; otherwise, the sin Remains, though committed but once,
because the Injury continues; and so, both the sin and Injury will continue on,
till both be expiated and abolish't by satisfaction. 4. Lastly; if by evil
Instructions, or worse example one man leads another into Error, or Impiety,
the true way for him to Redeem his time after all is, to Cure the mischief by
an hearty retractation errors many times spread like a Gangrene, insensibly,
speedily, and mortally: and such as have been guilty of casting the venom,
must not (though they Repent) think their Consciences sufficiently discharged
by forbearing for the future: here Double diligence must be used; first to
stop, then to cure the malady, by Reclaiming those they have mis-guided; and,
being now converted themselves, to convert others also from the Error of their
way, Jam. 5. 20. Briefly, where any hurt has been done the Reputation,
Fortunes, or Souls of men, the only way one has to Redeem his time is, as far
as it is possible, to redeem his Guilt, and to recover his Innocence by making
all the Compensation he can, and by expressing his Zeal to Annihilate his
actions, by making Amends for them.

This was the Ground St. Paul himself went upon, when he Labored so Abundantly
after his Conversion. It was, to exterpate the false Principles he had
propagated before, to satisfy the Church for the wrong he had done it, and by
his extraordinary Zeal for Christianity, to prepare people for God in all parts
of the world, wherever he could go. His great design was, to recover what he
could of the time he had Lost, while he was so strict a Pharisee. And the same
thing was the reason of those severities used in the Primitive ages; when
Criminals were wont to inflict on themselves great Penances; to macerate their
bodies by hard Discipline; to give themselves to austere Fastings; to wallow on
the ground; to cover themselves with Sackcloth and Ashes; to make Public
acknowledgement of their offenses; to throw themselves at their fellow
Christians Feet, and upon their Knees to beg the Prayers of Good people at the
Church doors; as Tertullian tells us in his book of Repentance. Those acts of
mortification proceeded from a principle of Humility, and a deep sense of sin
and of time misspent; till superstition crept into the Church, and turned them
into mere Pageantry: or the most useful instructions we can gather from them is
this; that to Redeem ones time to good purpose, one right Christian way is to
make all possible amends and Reparation for evil actions, especially such evil
actions as carry along with them Injury, and Scandal, besides the Guilt which
the Conscience contracted from the Sinfulness of their Nature.

CHAP. VII.
A third way is, to do all the good one can.

Thirdly, ANother way of Redeeming ones time is, to do all the good one can.

To do Good, is to be truly Useful to others in his generation according to
the Abilities God has given him, and in that calling and Station wherein the
Providence of God has disposed of him. We all came into the World to serve
God, and to help one another; nor have we any other business here. The Savior
of the world, that lost not an hour of his life, went about doing good, Act.
10. 18. And thereby showed, how unpardonable their Negligence is, who Trisle
away their time, when they have so many objects of Charity before them, and
those whose Necessities are so great.

Before I proceed upon this subject, we must observe, that a man's own
necessities are to be regarded first. For Love to ones self being the Rule and
Standard of that Charity we owe our Neighbors, it ought to have the
Procedency, and to challenge the Principal share of our time and Pains. And
here we should consider our own wants duly. I do not mean our necessities as to
the things of the World; in which respect men's wants are often as Imaginary, as
their appetites are Insatiable: but I speak of Real necessities; those of the
Soul, which require our Constant and more Particular care, because they are of
the greatest Concernment, and the hardest to be supplied.

We must begin with the Understanding; for the Notions which lodge there are
the spring of action; and according as they are found or Rotten, so are our
lives good or bad, and so is our time well or ill employed. Great care
therefore must be taken to have a right Judgment in all points (the first thing
which the soul stands in such need of.) And to do it substantial good in this
respect, men should sedulously bestow what fair opportunities they have upon
Contemplation, Reading, and Profitable studies. For the soul Naturally is
neither a Divine, nor Philosopher, though endued with Faculties to fit it for
the Noblest speculations. It must be under Pedagogy and Pupilage; nor can the
Ripest years Manumit it from a state of Tuition. Knowledge does still increase
by the good Improvements we make of our hours; and this is the sad reason of
some men's Ignorance (especially as to matters they should know most of) because
the time they should bestow upon good books, they Dream away in sloth, or Sin
away in vice, or Fool away in sports, and many childish Vanities, which they
abusively call, Diversion; a word, which imports Business, when indeed they
will have none to be diverted from.

But a weak mind is not so bad as a wicked Temper. There are many Corruptions
in the Lower faculties of the Soul, which greatly need an helping hand to cure;
depravations of nature which are much the worse, because they make men like
unto the very Beasts that perish for want of morality as well as of
understanding. Here the way to do ones soul good indeed is, to cleanse it from
its vices; to govern its Passions; to mortify its Lusts; to rectify its
Appetites; to wean it from Sensual Pleasures; and to destroy that Malice, Envy,
Pride, Revengefulness, and Implacability of disposition, which make a man
Resemble, not so much a Brute, as the very Devil.

These vices therefore are proper and necessary things to employ ones time
upon; because they are the things which bring the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience; the things which Pollute the Conscience, and cost the
Soul its peace in this life, and its Felicity in another; nay, the things which
are not only the worst for their effects, but the most Difficult also to be
cured, because they are rooted in the Heart; they are a Part of us; and it
requires no little diligence Industry, and skill to be too Hard for Nature;
especially when it comes to be strengthened by Custom, and when evil
Inclinations are improved into a pernicious Habit.

The truth is, if people would Husband their time well, they might find a great
deal of work for themselves at Home. Yet this must not supersede the doing of
good abroad too. There are Diverse necessities which God has made us all
Subject unto, that in some respect or other, each of us might be serviceable to
his neighbors: and as various as these Necessities are, so various are the
opportunities we have of disposing our time to the best advantage, and after
the most becoming manner. Eating and Drinking, and other sensualities, are the
life of Animals, whose end is destruction. The life of a man, (especially of a
Christian) is to do good: this sets him above all other Creatures here below,
and makes him like unto the blessed God himself, whose goodness the whole earth
is full of, and whose compassions fail not. To neglect this, is to throw aside
our great business for the sake of mean employments, which will turn to no
account, but to awaken our Consciences hereafter, and to grieve us for our
Folly, in flinging away that now, which our last Deathbed sorrows will show to
have been of the highest Price.

I Know, nature must be provided for, and that there are several Recreations
which are Innocent in themselves, and in their kind, necessary to preserve us
in health and vigor, that we may serve God, and spend our serious hours the
more acceptably. But how many unlawful delights are there, which should have no
part at all of our time allowed them? How many are there, which Border upon
vice, so that little time cannot be afforded them without danger? How many that
are the occasions of sin, though not vicious in their own Nature? and how many
even of the most harmless ones, which are so inordinately pursued, that instead
of being a Relaxation, they become a kind of Trade? should an appeal be made to
the consciences of Idle and vain persons themselves, they could not but
confess, that much leisure might be well spared for Pious, and charitable
purposes, which there is no sort of necessity for them to wast other ways, but
to take off that time which hangs upon their fingers. And yet to Redeem time,
the greatest remainder of it should be bestowed upon doing of Good. There is
one place of Scripcure that directs us, to break off our Sins by Righteousness,
and our Iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan 4. 27. meaning, that men
should make reparation for what is past, by doing eminent acts of Justice and
Charity for the time to come. There is another place that tells us, He which
converteth a Sinner from the error of his way, shall save a Soul from death,
and shall bide a multitude of sins, Jerm. 5. 20. And there is a third place
that says of Charity in general, that it shall cover a multitude of Sins, 1
Pet. 4. 8. Now, though none of these Texts mean, that the doing of Good
Justifies a man, or Necessitates his pardon, by any natural Causality,
Efficiency, or virtue of the work done (for that would be injurious to the
doctrine of Gods free grace, and to our Saviors Merits and satisfaction) yet
thus much they all imply, that for Christ's sake, God is pleased of his own
great goodness, to impute to us our good and charitable performances, and to
accept them as the Condition and means of that pardon, which he freely gives
unto all who bring forth fruits meet for Repentance.

This shows, That to do all the Good we can, is the ready way to redeem our
Time effectually. Which yet is to be understood of increasing our Diligence in
doing what good we are able; so as to delight in it, and to make it the
constant and urgent Business of that part of our Life which is left us. There
is no recovering of our lost Time, without doubling at least our Labor and
Industry. For Charity is a standing Law of Christ; the great Rule we should
have all gone by, as soon as we were past the things of Children. At Twelve
Years of Age the Lord Jesus was found sitting in the midst of the Doctors, not
so much to hear, as to instruct them. It was his Father's Business, the
necessary Work of doing Good he was then about. Which noble Example of Charity,
teaches all Mankind to begin betimes to do good Offices; and it upbraids us
all with our Neglects, in losing so many fair Opportunities we have had from
our Youth. Therefore we should remember our great Omissions, when we go about
the Redeeming of our Time, because those we are to make compensation for: And
considering this cannot be done by that ordinary Zeal and Industry, which must
have been expressed, had we been useful in our Generation from the beginning,
it must needs be incumbent upon us to labor the more abundantly, to make up
those Defects, for which in Conscience we are answerable. For in this case we
are to consider, what is our standing Duty still, and what we are behind hand
in: and to fill up the measure of our Good Works, we should do as much in one
Day, as might have taken up two, had we acted regularly all along. For unless
our Diligence be doubled, however we may be supposed, after our Repentance, to
spend our Time well, we cannot be said to redeem it, because a great part of it
is yet in Arrear.

I observed before, that St. Paul compares our Christian Progress to a Race;
and that single Comparison will be enough to illustrate this matter. If the
Combatants do not start together; or, though they do, if all keep not on with
equal Paces, Time and Ground will soon be lost, though none of them come as yet
to stretching and straining for the Victory. The Sluggard, that loyters away
his Minutes; the Trifler, that is willing to be diverted by impertinent
Excursions; and the unwary Wretch, that strumble and falls by not looking to
his Steps; These ill Husbands of their Time, who might have finished their
Course laudably, by constant, treatable, and moderate striving, having fallen
much short of the rest by their own Tardiness, are now under a great Necessity
of exerting their utmost Strength and Vigor to recover their Minutes what they
can; nor have they any other way left them, but to signalize themselves by
extraordinary Pressings on, and by trying all their Abilities and Breath to the
laft: Why, thus it is in our Christian Course, in the Race that leads to
Eternal Life, or Death. Some from the beginning run the way of God's
Commandments with Patience, and Alacrity, and a constant Zeal: And happy are
they who remember their Creator from the Days of their Youth; but these
comparatively are but few. Others neglect the business of their Salvation,
minding and loving the World only, as if they were to stay in it for ever.
Others fly out into Extravagancies and Vanities, as the Devil or the Flesh
tempts them out of their way. Others fall into Apostasy from Truth and
Religion; and of all these there is none that does solid Good, nor is likely to
come to Good, till either the Sense of God's Goodness leads them, or the Fear
of his Wrath and Justice drives them to Repentance. Considering therefore what
Time they have lost, and how nearly it concerns them to Redeem it, their only
Course is, To gird up their Loins with Resolution; to set about it with Vigor;
to use their utmost Diligence; to labor the more industriously; to abound in
all manner of Good Works; and being converted themselves, to apply all possible
means to strengthen their Brethren; as our Savior told Peter in reference to
the future Recovering himself from his Apostasy, Luke 22. 32.

And here People should consider well, what sorts there are of Good Works, that
they may be the better able to Redeem their Time, by doing Good indeed. As, to
Inform and Teach the Ignorant, and put them in often remembrance of their Duty
in all things; to admonish such as do amiss; to be great Examples of Godliness,
Righteousness, and Sobriety; and by all Christian Arts to promote the True
Power, and the universal Practice of Religion; to restore the Good Name that
was unjustly taken away; to make ample Reparation for all Violence and Fraud;
and to do this readily and heartily, with the exemplary Zeal of Zachaeus,
restoring Fourfold even for False Accusations. To rid ones Hands of Mammon
gotten by Unrighteousness, and to make Satisfaction for Wrongs and Injuries; to
forgive an Enemy; to vindicate the Innocent; to relieve the Oppressed; to help
those who are in Streights and Necessity; to comfort the Afflicted; to visit
the Fatherless and Widow in their Distress; to be Eyes to the Blind, and Feet
to the Lame; to Feed the Hungry, and Cloth the Naked, and Assist the Sick; to
Pray for all; and to reach out a kind Hand to all, occording as their Wants,
and according as our Abilities and Opportunities are. This is to Do Good.

And for the Redeeming of Time well, it is necessary for those who have been
slack, or forgetful of these main Offices, to heighten their Zeal in the
Performance of them, to dispatch them with a very quick Hand, and with a
twofold Expense of Industry and Labor; because otherwise they cannot make up
that Time which has been lost, nor compensate for what they have been wanting
in. For these things they ought to have done before; they would have been
necessary Works, had they been very frugal of their Hours; because to do Good
is a Law of Religion and Nature too, which binds perpetually. Now, as the
Payment of a New Debt is no Discharge of an Old Arrear, so neither is the doing
of Good Offices at present a Defeisance of former Obligations. The answering
one's Duty at one time, is no Requital for Omissions at another, unless there
be a large Supplement of Righteousness and Charity. To use our Savior's Words
in another case, Matthew. 23. 23. These things ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone. It Is this Addition of Industry and Zeal, which makes
Men accepted with God; as was observed before from that Rule, that is to be in
the Day of Retribution; the Last shall be as the First, and the First as the
Last; that is, Every Man shall receive according to his Works: And that Peoples
Acquisitions may be the same, it is necessary there should be the same
Proportion of Good Works, either as to length of Time, or increase of Industry:
Labors in the Vineyard, if they be late, are to be double, to entitle the
Workmen to an Equality of Reward; as was showed particularly from the Instance
of St. Paul, who labored more abundantly than the rest, and thought himself
obliged to do so, because he had not been so early a Convert as others.

When therefore you set your self about this most necessary Work of Redeeming
your Time, reflect upon your Life past, and consider seriously, what Sins you
have been guilty of; what sorts of Righteousness you have been most averse to;
what Duties you have been defective in; what fair Opportunities of doing Good
you have wilfully omitted; and accordingly, apply your whole Mind, Strength and
Soul to the Exercise of all those Virtues, the Practice whereof you have
hitherto neglected; and pursue this Course with such Resolution, Constancy and
Vigor, as if you were now to retrieve your Original Innocence; and as if you
had no other Business in the World for the future, but to do all manner of Good
to the utmost of your Power. Let him that stole steal no more, says St. Paul,
Ephesians. 4. 28: But that is not all: It follows, Rather let him labor, working
with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs: You see, where Injustice has abounded, there Industry and Charity
must abound, and that much more; and so in all other Cases, wherein a Man has
been either wanting, or excessive, he must atone for it by a most lively,
operative, and earnest Zeal to do all the Good he can, that he may be full of
Good Works, though the Remainder of his Time be short.

CHAP. VIII.
IV. THE next Way of Redeeming your Time, is, Not to let any one Day slip away
wholly, without promoting your Eternal Interest in some degree and measure. The
wiser and stricter sort of Moralists among the Old Heathens, advised People to
make choice of a Scheme of Virtue for the Rule of their Lives, and to order all
their Actions according to it Day by Day. As thus; To begin their Works with
earnest Prayers to God; to honor God before all things; to have a Religious
Regard for Oaths; to reverence their Parents; to love their Friends; to delight
in good Men; to keep the Body, with all its Faculties and Desires, in
subjection; for very Shame to abstain from every thing that is Evil, both
abroad and in private; to practice Virtue with Sincerity of Heart; to look upon
Riches as a thing that perishes, and as such to slight them; to study how to
resemble God in the Dispositions of the Mind, and to make that ones Aim and
Pleasure; to be contented with ones Condition, and at all times to submit to
God's Providence, who often gives good Men these outward Matters with a sparing
Hand; to be inflexible and constant in a virtuous Course; to weigh ones Actions
well beforehand, and to consider the Nature and Consequence of them; to observe
Temperance and Moderation; to be meek, and patient, and just, and cautious in
all cases. Such Rules as these some old Moralists directed People to live by
daily. And then, every Night before they went to sleep, they directed them to
examine themselves strictly, how they had spent the Day; that, if they had
lived according to Rule, they might have for their present Reward the Pleasures
and Joys of a Good Conscience; but, if they had transgressed, that they might
repent, and thereby learn the better how to amend their Lives the Day
following. To this end, before you take your Repose, say they, ask your self,
wherein you have transgressed? What you have done? And so, look over all your
Actions the Day past two or three times, that no one thing may escape Scruteny
and Examination. This was great Advice, especially for Heathens to give: And it
brings to my remembrance, what Suetonius relates of one of the Roman Emperors,
that good natured Prince, Titus, who for the Sweetness of his Temper was
called, The Love and Delight of Mankind: Considering once, as he was at Supper,
that he had not done that Day such Acts of Kindness and Bounty as he was wont
to do, said, Diem perdidi, I have quite lost this Day. Some Greeks that speak
of this Story, render his Saying thus, (...); or, This Day I have not reigned;
I have not been a Prince: As if all his Greatness consisted in doing Good
daily, and as if he had thrown away his Authority and Power, in suffering a Day
to pass without some considerable Testimonies and Marks of his Goodness. He
remembered Pythagoras his Rule of Self-examination at Night, and of Repenting
for Failings: And however the Story be told, it comes all to one in effect: And
no less a Man than St. Jerome takes particular Notice of it, in his Comments on
the Sixth Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, and makes use of it to the
Reproof and Shame of negligent Christians. If (says he) the Emperor Titus (a
Man that was a Stranger to the Law, to the Gospel, to the Doctrine of our
Savior and the Apostles, if he) was so concerned for the loss of one Day, how
should not we be concerned for the loss of so many Days and Years too? And the
Truth is, since Jesus Christ does expect, that our Righteousness should exceed
the Righteousness even of the strictest Professors among the Jews, (the Scribes
and Pharisees) we cannot expect less than the greatest Condemnation, if at last
it comes short of the Righteousness of Philosophers and Heathens. As we are
under the Laws and Discipline of a Master, who is infinitely greater than a
Pythagoras, or than Moses himself; so is our Vigilance and Diligence to be much
greater than their Scholars was. The Covenant given us carries with it a
Prospect of far better things, than were manifestly and explicitly promised of
old to the Jews themselves: And upon that account there is a Necessity for us
to be the better Husbands of our Time, that we may obtain them.

The Great Promise God has given us, is, of Eternal Happiness with himself;
and to quicken our Endeavors after it, these two things require our serious
and daily Consideration.

1. First, What is necessary on our part in Order to Eternal Happiness.

2. Secondly, How Assiduous and Constant our Care had need be, to do that daily
which is indispensably required of us; something of it at least.

1. First then, the thing necessary on our Part, in order to Eternal Happiness,
is, a God-like Temper, and Disposition of Mind. Though our Savior has
purchased for us a Liberty to enter into that Holy and Blissful place above;
yet to Prepare us for it, such a Frame of Heart is requisite, as will make it
to us a place of Happiness indeed. Now that must needs be a Divine Frame; or a
Temper suitable to the Nature of God. For we must not think that the mere
Possession of Heaven makes the Spirits of Men Happy; nor that a quiet
Grief-less Condition is that wherein all Felicity does consist. Happiness, that
is complete and perfect, must answer all the Faculties of the Soul; especially
its Affections; and God must be the Glorious Object for us to Enjoy; that is,
to Admire, and Love, and delight in, to all Eternity. There must be therefore
an Assimilation of Temper, and a likeness of Mind; because Dissimilitude
naturally carries with it Displacency, and Averseness, which is no more
reconcilable with Happiness, than Love is with Hatred. To live happily with God
and Christ, we must be of the same Dispositions; And it was for this great
Reason, that when Christ lived with us upon Earth, he gave us so many Spiritual
and Divine Laws. They were not purely Arbitrary Commands, proceedings from
God's absolute and uncontroleable Pleasure, merely to try and exercise our
Obedience; but they were intended as Wife and Gracious Methods, to Polish our
Minds, to Perfect our Nature, and to raise it by degrees to such an high and
noble Pitch, that it might come near to the most Perfect and Blessed Nature of
his Father, for the Fruition of whom he came to fit us.

To answer therefore his great Ends, it is necessary for us to form in our
Hearts a Divine Goodness of Temper, by the help of those Precepts which he has
laid before us, with a design somewhat like to Jacob's, Genesis 30. when he laid
before the Cattle pilled Rods, to make them conceive Lambs of a suitable
Color. Those Divine Rules which are proposed to us to observe, are to make us
Partakers of the Divine Nature; to renew in us the Divine Image; to shape in
our Souls a Resemblance of God; and all this, that we may be meet for the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; because without such a Similitude, it is
impossible for us, either to please God, or to be pleased with him.

2. These things being thoroughly considered, it will manifestly appear, in the
second place, that we are strictly concerned to make diligent and daily use of
our Time, to do what is necessary toward our everlasting Happiness. For it is
a thing of no sudden dispatch; but that which requires all the time a Man can
find in his whole Life, to do it well. Those Moral Virtues which serve to
perfect us, and to make us like unto God, are not poured out all in an instant,
as those miraculous Gifts were of Old; much less can they become presently
habitual. There is required a constant Course of repeated Actions to acquire
and fix them; and this requires Assiduity of Practice: Day by Day, some part or
other of this necessary Work must be dispatched: Otherwise the Difficulties of
it will increase; in This respect like secular business, which when it comes in
upon us in abundance, grows under our hands by being neglected, though but for
a Day.

In the prosecution of this Matter, let us consider what labor the very
Beginnings call for. The first Task we are to go about is, to rectify our
Corrupt Nature; which is a thing that obliges us to continual attendance and
care over it, because it is like a sort of Soil, which is still apt of it self
to run to Weeds, even without our watering. We brought with us from the Womb
the Seminal Principles of Evil. And as these appear betimes, so they rise
quickly to a great head, and height, like Nettles and such other Trash, which
taint the Ground still the more, by casting new Seeds for their Propagation.
Here then the Work should be early, for the saving of time; to cultivate our
Nature from our Youth, with a quick hand to check those Vices, which are like
Poisonous Weeds in us; and to make all the Trumpery to Dye daily, as the Man
grows. Pride, Anger, Spightfulness, Envy, Lust, Sensuality, Inordinate
Self-Love, Roughness, and Intractability of Spirit, and whatever comes under
the notion of ill Nature; these are very Noxious things, that spring out of us,
and that stain and vitiate the whole Man more and more daily; and therefore
require constant Diligence to extirpate them what we can, while the Mind is yet
soft, tender and pliant: Because when once the Devil irrigates, and custom
confirms them, they will be the harder and harder to be Eradicated. Many a Soul
is spoiled and ruined for want of good Education in time. The Practice of Sin
brings Delight with it; Pleasure makes it Customary; Custom renders it
habitual; and when that which was a Fault, comes to be Wickedness; (studied,
acted, repeated Vice, and deeply Rooted;) the labor in clearing the Soul of
it, will be as different in proportion, as it is between drawing a little
Shrub, and grubbing up a sturdy Tree.

This confirms the Matter we are now upon, viz. that in new moulding our Hearts
to fit our selves for Eternal Felicity, we should redeem our time by doing
something every day that is considerable. For the time we Lose, or Neglect,
Vice Gains; and thereby becomes the more difficult to be subdued and mortified.
Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Then may ye also
do good, that are accustomed to do Evil, Jer. 13. 23. To break an habit,
especially on a sudden, is like the invading and forcing of Nature, which is
not to be done without a Violent hand. Whether it be in a Good, or in an Evil
course of Life, the Powers of the Soul gather strength by exercise and use; but
much more in an evil Course; because our outward Senses being thereby wont to
be gratified, fall into a confederacy with our inward Propensions; and between
both, Reason finds it a very hard matter to keep it self from being Captivated.
Upon which account it must needs require Time, to recover that Dominion which
is its Right and Prerogative. And though Grace comes in to its assistance, yet
considering that the Spirit of God works in a moral way, by exciting, moving,
and persuading, but not constraining, the Conquest cannot be present and
instantaneous. For as long as Nature is at the bottom, it will appear, and that
with Vigor, when it has the aid and help of Sense, and when custom has given
it a kind of Title to the Mastery. This shows what great Necessity there is for
a Man, to bestow pains upon himself Daily; because it is this which will give
him a gradual Victory: He is continually doing something Toward it: Here he
gains one Point, and there another, and so in time he finds certain and
kindly success, by thus taming his Nature, and bringing it to a ductile
manageable Temper by degrees.

All this while I suppose him not to have arrived to the pitch of an overgrown
Sinner, but to be come to the ordinary Age of Manhood; when ones Lusts, though
they are strong and impetuous, yet are not so Fixed, Obstinate, and Refractory,
as crooked Old Age is apt to make them. Such an Experienced Wretch, whom the
Pleasure, and perhaps the Profit likewise of so many Years has confirmed in
Wickedness, comes at last to be so hardened, that all Reasonings, Admonitions,
Counsels, and Prayers are thrown away upon him, and make as little effectual
impression upon his perverse Mind, as they would upon a Rock, or Adamant. The
danger of coming to this sad pass, is a stronger Argument still of the
Necessity there is to redeem ones time, by doing something Daily in order to
Eternity; that is, to mortify some Lust or other every day, and every day to
live more and more unto God. For when Lust has conceived it brings forth
Sin, Jam. 1. 15. and Sin is finished by degrees, by growing, and gathering
strength daily. And by this means the Devil insensibly prepares a way to that
sad State, which Divines call Final Impenitence; meaning such a Numbness,
Stupidity, and Deadness of Heart, as does utterly indispose it for a true Godly
Repentance. It Is to be feared, that Men often come to this wretched State by
the just Judgment of God upon them; for their irreligious lives, and for their
obstinately putting off the Reformation of them from Day to Day: The truth is,
it naturally follows such a wicked Course: For Use and Custom do naturally
serve to harden the Heart, as was observed before: So that when the Hoary Head
comes, it is as hard a matter to renew that old wicked Mind in it, as it is to
renew ones Age. Nature is of it self inclined to Evil; and when a long trade of
Wickedness has brought the Mind to be in love with it, to be devoted to it, to
be bent, set, and fixed upon it, it must needs be morally impossible to pluck up
those Men's Habits quite by the Roots, which have been so many Years a
contracting, and which have grown so strong and deep into the very Heart. So
that though we should suppose an old Villain to have the same means and
measures of Grace which are afforded the Vain Youth, that perhaps is guilty of
the same Sins too; yet the case of the former would be far more desperate than
the condition of the latter, were there nothing else to be considered but this,
because the one has been much more Used and Accustomed to Wickedness than the
other.

But besides this, it must be said, that the Hopes concerning both are not the
same. For the more time Men waste in an Evil Course, the less they have of
God's Spirit; and by this means also the stiffer and harder are their Hearts,
and the more they Sin away their day of Grace. Without Christ we can do
nothing, Jo. 15. 5. For it is God which works in us, both to will, and to do,
of his good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. The Strength we have, is from above; the
Power which serves to prepare and assist our Souls, and which does every way
enable us to work out our Salvation, it is freely given by the Father of
Spirits. Now though God gives freely unto all, and to every Man such a portion
of his Grace as is necessary and suitable; yet they that are negligent, and ill
Husbands of their Talents, do impair their Stock daily: By resisting the Holy
Ghost, they take a Course to grieve him; and by continuing to grieve, they
proceed at length to quench him. Where God's Grace is abused or slighted, there
he withdraws it, in Vengeance for that Wilfulness and Hardness which was
antecedent: And then is God said, to give People up unto their own Hearts
Lusts; to let them walk in their own Counsels, Psalm. 81. 12. to send them
strong Delusions, so that they believe a Lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. to give them up
to vile Affections, and to give them over to a reprobate Mind, Romans 1. 26, 28.
The Meaning of these Expressions is, That God does sometimes take away from Men
the Grace they had; that he quite leaves them to themselves, and delivers them
up to the saddest state of Mind; thereby punishing them most justly for the
long Incorrigibleness of their Temper. By this means it is possible for them to
play and sin away all the accepted Time before they are aware, and to bring
themselves under an irreversible Sentence of Damnation in this their Lifetime.
It is possible, I say; and it is to be feared many actually do so, by persisting
and going on in a Trade of Wickedness from Year to Year. I answer, it is a just
Provocation for God to deal by them, as he did by Pharaob, whom he gave utterly
over to an obdurate state for his Stubbornness and Obstinacy, especially after
the Sixth Plague. And though he did not presently cut him off, but suffered him
to live still some time longer; yet this was not in expectation of Repentance
from him, being now brought by his own Wilfulness to a deserted Condition; but
it was to this end, that he might be made at last a signal and astonising
Example of Divine Vengeance. From which Instance it is clear, that a Man may
sin away his Time, and the Grace of God, till he comes to an Incapacity of
repenting in good earnest; and that he may do this before he dies.

And this is one Reason, why the best Divines are so severe against that which
they call a Late Repentance; meaning, Remorse of Conscience, and Sorrow for
Sin, which is not begun till old Age, or Sickness comes, and the Terrors of
Death with it. For though it be granted, that God pardons every True Penitent,
whenever he turns to God with all his Heart and Soul: Yet the great Question
is, Whether a late Repentance be True, Right, and such as the Gospel requires?
that is, Whether it be indeed a True Change, and Renovation of the Mind? For
there may be a Sorrow, and often is, a real and passionate Sorrow, without such
a Change; a Sorrow that proceeds, not from an Hatred of Sin, but merely from a
Fear of Hell.

This is clear from the Practice of many Ungodly and Unrighteous Hypocrites,
who in time of sudden and dangerous Sickness sighed and groaned, have been
restless and in an Agony, sent in all haste for a Confessor, called for
Prayers, and expressed such Griefs, Vows, Promises, and Resolutions of
Amendment, as if they were as right Penitents, as that dying Thief was upon his
Cross; and yet upon the Recovery of their Health, have dropped the Memory of all
these Saint-like Professions, left all their Vows behind them in their
Chambers, taken up again their former Courses, returned like Dogs to the Vomit
they had cast up, to the same Riot, Rapine, Injustice and Malice which they
acted before. This is a Sign, that all that while the Love of Sin lay lurking
and close in their Breasts, unrenounc'd, unmolested; and that all the
Bitterness of their Souls came only from the Fear of Damnation; a Passion,
somewhat like that of Criminals, when they are going to be Hanged, and yet, if
they had Liberty, would be as dishonest as ever under the very Gibbet. Now for
Wicked Men to be in a Fright, when they think themselves a Dying, is no wonder
at all, especially if their Consciences be awake. And if Fear and Sorrow be
all, it is as good as nothing, though it be hearty and passionate: For the
Devil is a Devil still, though he believes and trembles; and perhaps those
Agitations of Mind are no better than his, wherewith wicked Men are ruffled on
their Sick Beds, especially after a long Life, a continual Course, a constant
Trade of Impiety and Unrighteousness. For how is it probable, that so many old
beloved Vices can be quite cast off on a sudden? That so many fixed Habits can
be eradicated in the twinkling of an Eye? Or that the whole Bent and Temper of
the Heart can in a Moment be changed so, as to be Diametrically opposite to
what it was just before the Physician was sent for? No; it is far more
probable, that it was only the sight of Hell that scared the Wretch, and threw
him into Pangs; and so any Man may be troubled, terrified and tormented, though
God has forsaken him; because Self-preservation is an inseparable Principle of
Nature.

The Result and Sum of this whole Argument is this; That to redeem ones Time
to very good purpose, it is an excellent way to be bettering ones Spiritual
State every Day in some respect and proportion. For the Work a Man has to do
is great and difficult, and that which requires every Day's Care and Diligence
of him; especially if Evil Customs have got the Start, and are beforehand with
him. Nature alone is hard to be rectified; and a constant Tenor of Diligence is
necessary to transform it so, as to make it represent the Divine Nature. But
when Evil Habits are to be contended and grapled with too, every Day's
Resolution and Activity is little enough to conquer them as they should be
conquered, that Faith and Virtue may carry the Day, and triumph over them.
Either they must be daily resisted, or most certainly they will get Ground of
us daily: And what Peoples Negligence will turn to at last, in Old Age, or upon
a Deathbed, God alone knows infallibly. It Is not likely a Man should be able
to destroy that at his last Hour, or in the time of Weakness, which he suffered
to gather and grow to a great Head in the Days of Health and Vigor. More
likely it is, that God will punish such Negligence with utter Dereliction and
Hardness of Heart; against which no sufficient or sure Provision can be made,
but by harkening to his Voice, while it is called to Day.

Remember therefore the Advice even of those old Philosophers I spoke of, who
would have you resolve and fix upon a good Rule of Virtue, (and none can
pretend to be so good, as what Jesus Christ has given us all) and every Day
examine your Consciences what you have omitted, and what you have done; what
Prayers you have offered up unto the Father of Lights; what Offices of
Righteousness, Mercy and Goodness you have performed to Men; what Good you have
done to your own Souls; what inordinate and irregular Desires you have
cherished; what Lusts of the Flesh you have mortified; what Passions you have
commanded and subdued; how low you have brought every lofty Imagination; how
far you have put away all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and
Evil-speaking, with all Malice; wherein ye have imitated the Life of our Lord
Jesus, who sacrificed His for you; and to what Degrees you have perfected your
Nature unto a Similitude of the adorable Perfections of the ever-blessed God,
whose great and tender Mercies are over all his Works. As true Honor does
consist, not in an empty Title, but in Generosity and Nobleness of Mind; so
does true Religion consist, not in formal Shows and Professions, but in those
Divine Endowments of Soul, which make us approach near to the Glories of our
Maker. And by taking your self thus to Account every Night, you will the better
discern what you are to implore God's Pardon and Assistance for against the Day
following; wherein you have been wanting; what Defects you are to make up; what
is to be the principal Business of the next Day; what Graces you are to
improve; what you are to practice, and what you are to avoid. In short; you
will easily know how, and be easily able in deed to redeem you lost Time;
because it will be little, if due Care and Diligence be used every Day. By this
Method you may soon take an honest Account of your Actions; your Repentance
will be renewed day by day, the Care you ought to have of your Immortal Soul
will continually abide with you, and rest upon your Mind; your Heart and Ways
will be always under your own watchful Eye as well as God's; the Assistances
and Comforts of God's Spirit you will never be without; there will be no room
for those vicious Habits, which bring others at last to a moral Impossibility
of repenting; 'twill be impossible for them ever to be sixth, or to take Root;
hardly will an Hour in any one Day be quite lost; I am sure, a long Tract of
Time Time will be saved, which is utterly dropped and forgotten by those, who
leave all to the sad After-reckonings of a Deathbed. The great Mischief then
is, that it is out of their Power to recover their Losses, though their Hearts
should earnestly desire it; so many Months and Years are impossible to be
recalled; and all this Calamity comes from the want of some Diligence every
Day; it is Men's great Negligence as to this Particular, that postpones the
whole Business of their Salvation, and hinders that affiduous Progress and
Proficiency, whereby otherwise they might have grown in Grace unto a perfect
Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ.

CHAP. IX.
V. and ANother Effectual Way of Redeem-Lastly. Aing our Time, is, To spend as
much, as may be, of the remainder of it upon Devotion, especially upon the
Solemnities of Public Devotion in the House of God. A Day in thy Courts is
better than a thousand, says the devout Psalmist, Psalm. 84. 10. It is better
spent, and will turn to better Account, than all the Years that Vice and
Vanities consume. To withdraw our selves from the World; to take away, as it
were by Reprisal, that Time which the World usually steals from us; to
Dedicate, Offer up, Appropriate that Time to God, and to bestow it upon God:
This is such a plain way to recover our lost Hours, as is obvious to all who
have a true Sense of Religion. But because there are many Duties which we own
in the Theory to be Good, and yet are wanting to in point of Practice, to
encourage our Endeavors as to this Particular, Two Things require our serious
Consideration.

I. First, That to attend diligently upon the Ordinances and Institutions of
our Religion, is an excellent way for us to do the Great Work for which the
redeeming of our best Time is prescribed and intended.

II. Secondly, That it is a ready way to keep us from losing our time for the
Future.

1. First, To attend diligently upon the Ordinances and Institutions of our
Religion, is an excellent way for us to do that great Work, for which the
Redeeming of our Lost time is prescribed and Intended.

By the Ordinances of our Religion I mean, the Listening to and Meditating upon
the Word of God; the use of the holy Sacrament; and the lifting up of our
Hearts in Prayers and Thanksgivings, and the like. And by the great Work we are
to do I understand, the preparing and fitting our Souls for a Blessed Eternity.
Now for the effectual doing of this, nothing serves as a more proper and
direct means, than diligent attendance upon those Religious Offices.

For it is by the constant use of these Ordinances, that the Spirit of God is
Ministered unto us, and works in us; that our Lusts are gradually mortified;
that our Hearts are transformed and changed as God would have them; that the
Virtues which are necessary to qualify us for an heavenly State, are confirmed
and increased in us; and that we grow in Grace, and in the saving knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. To illustrate this Matter particularly.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. 17. Whether
this Word be Preached, or Read, it is an instrument of Grace to all whose
Hearts are open to receive and obey it. Therein the most precious Promises are
exhibited, and the most terrible Threats denounced against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men; especially against such as hold the Truth in
unrighteousness. Therein all those Doctrines are contained, which are according
unto godliness; the whole Counsel of God is declared; and all those Things
revealed, which are profitable for instruction in Righteousness, that every Man
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. Therein are given
those divine Laws, which are apt to renew our Minds, and to cleanse us from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, that we may perfect Holiness in the fear of
God: Therein also we see a great cloud of Witnesses, who by their Exemplary
Lives have taught us to lay aside every weight, and the Sin that does so easily
beset us, and to run with patience the Race that is set before us. Above all,
therein we behold the Example of the Lord Jesus, whose most holy Life was
intended for a Pattern unto us, that we should follow his steps; and whose
ignominious and most painful Death was intended partly to Frighten us from Sin,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good Works. All these things we find in the Scriptures; and
by these means the Scriptures, if duly considered and meditated upon, are of
vast use to us, and serve to produce in us Faith, Hope, Charity, and all manner
of Righteousness and true Holiness. Upon which account it must needs be a very
necessary and profitable way of Redeeming our Time, to bestow as much of it as
we can upon Learning, Hearing, Reading, and inwardly digesting the good word of
God, which is thus able in all respects to save our Souls.

In like manner, the frequent Participation of Christ's Body and Blood is a
vast help toward those Spiritual improvements, which should take up the
greatest part of our time. For as that heavenly Ordinance puts us in mind of
God's adorable Perfections; especially his Wisdom, Righteousness and Mercy,
which shined so bright in the complicated Mystery of our Redemption; so it
serves to raise our Hearts into the highest Admirations of God; and stirs us up
to stand in awe of his Justice; to rely upon his Compassions; to express all
possible Gratitude for Mercies so undeserved, so stupendous; to submit with
all Humility to his Commands and Providence; to show the Sense we have of his
great Goodness by suitable returns of Affection; and to love one another,
because God has so loved us all. In short, by preparing our selves duly for
this Blessed Sacrament, and by a Reverent and Religious use of it, our Faith
becomes the stronger, our Hopes the more vigorous; our Charity the more Ardent;
our Minds the more Circumspect; our Care and Caution the more strict; and all
the ordinary Gitfs and Graces of God's Spirit are thereby the more Exercised,
Confirmed, and increased in us.

This shows what an admirable way of Redeeming our lost time this is, to attend
diligently upon the Institutions of our Religion, because the great work we are
to do, in order to a blessed Eternity, and to fit us for it, is thereby carried
on with constant Dispatch, and with the quicker Hand. But we should consider
moreover how profitably we may employ our time, and recover in some measure
what is lost, by daily setting aside some part and portion of the time we have
for the Ordinance of Prayer alone; even when we are not Communicants at the
Altar, nor hearers of the Word after the most solemn manner. Every day will I
bless thee, says the Psalmist, Ps. 145. 2. And indeed the thing is grounded
upon an eternal Law of Reason: For we stand in Need of his Goodness, and
Receive of his Goodness daily; and therefore it is necessary and equal, that we
should address our selves to him daily, with Supplications and Thanksgivings.
Now if we would do this (I mean, do it with such devout Hearts as ought to be
applied to so sublime a Duty) besides the advantage we get by attending Weekly
and Monthly upon other Ordinances, our daily attendance upon This, would be of
infinite use to us. For hereby we do not only fit and prepare our Souls for an
heavenly State, but are indeed a Doing the works of Heaven; actually fixed upon
them, already employed and Engaged in those Exercises, which are the Life of
Angels, and of the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. To admire, and adore, and
love; and praise God, is the everlasting business of the Blessed above: And
this we do here below, though not in that intense Degree, when we worship him
in Truth, and in the Beauty of Holiness; when we prostrate our selves before
him, under a profound and awful Sense of his super-excellent Majesty; when our
Minds are fixed upon him, as the Glorious and Ravishing Object of our
Contemplations; when the Faculties of our Souls are acting vigorously upon him;
when we Exalt and Magnify him in our Hearts; when our Desires stream out after
him, as the only Good we long for; when our Thoughts are full of rapturous
Idea's of his Perfections; when we celebrate and set him forth, as the
greatest, wisest, and best of all Beings; when our Hearts are inflamed with the
Love of him; and when we offer up our Prayers and Praises to him with
Affections as high as Heaven, and as large as the Universe.

And can any time be better, or so well spent, as that which is thus employed?
This is to Redeem ones Time to the best purpose; and in some Sense to live it
over again, by following the great Work of ones whole life close, and so by
living much in a little: And the design of this Consideration is, to stir you
up to the Love and Practice of Devotion; as a proper way of making your Life
up, wherein soever you may have been hitherto defective. To recover what has
been misspent, and to fit your self for God and Heaven, without frequent Acts
of Piety, is impossible: Rather it is a way to lose on, and spend amiss still,
and to make your Condition every day worse and worse. And this is one great
Reason, that there are so many Evil People in the World, because they neglect a
Course of Devotion, which, if diligently and rightly followed, could not choose
but make them better.

I do not mean, that every one is a Saint that resorts to the Church, or that
the repeating of so many good Prayers is enough to dispose and qualify People
for Eternal Happiness. No, there are some that content themselves with the bare
performance of the outward Work; and there are others that go to the Temple
rather in compliance with a Custom, or out of Compliment and Civility to the
Laws, than for Conscience sake toward God. But this is my meaning, that when
Men apply their Souls to the use of God's Ordinances, as a necessary Duty, and
seriously intend to do themselves good by the use of them, and go about it with
Sincerity of Mind, and Exercise themselves in it with attentive Zeal, and with
Humble, Fervent and Devout Spirits; when their Hearts are thus Honestly
disposed, they take such a ready Course to fit themselves for Heaven, as God
will be sure to Bless and Prosper with success, if they persevere unto the end
in so doing. They are then in God's way, and in the way of the Holy Spirit, to
enlighten their Understandings, to guide them into the Truth, to renew their
Minds, to sanctify their Affections, to direct their Wills, to improve and
perfect their Natures, and to assist and strengthen them unto every good work.
And by this means, as they obtain pardon for their past Miscarriages, so they
gradually retrieve their former Losses, and make the time past their own again,
by their extraordinary Husbandry of the remainder, and by filling up an Hiatus
with a proportionable Supplement.

2. Secondly, As the diligent attendance upon God's Ordinances helps us to
redeem the time that is Gone; so it serves to keep us from Losing more for the
Future. We may reckon that time to be Lost, which is spent either after a
Wicked, or after a Vain manner: That is, when the Conscience contracteth some
great Guilt in the spending of it, or when the Man gets no solid Benefit or
Satisfaction by it, though strictly speaking we cannot affirm, it is sinned
away; and in both these respects we shall see, that a course of Devotion
secures us from being any considerable Losers.

1. First, That time is to be accounted Lost, which is spent in Wickedness.
When Vice takes it up, so much of our Life is gone to our eternal Prejudice and
Hurt, unless the Wickedness be retracted by timely Repentance: And when it is
retracted, a Man does what he can to undo his Actions, and to unlive his former
Life; and so begins, as it were, his days again. To be sure he himself reckons
so much of his time quite thrown oway; is willing to raze it out of his own
Memory; and heartily wishes, that the just Judge of all the Earth would forget
it too, and never impute or account it unto him. Now People that are ever
mindful of their Devotions, are not in danger of losing their time This way;
because they are assured, that if they regard Iniquity in their Hearts, the
Lord will not hear them. Psalm. 66. 18. Nay, that their Sacrifice will be an
Abomination, Prove. 15. 8. Upon which account it is morally impossible for them
to Sin and Pray too, lest instead of Mercies they should draw down a
Thunderbolt, and instead of Bread should receive a Stone, or a Scorpion. They
who have a sense of God, must needs be shie of offering up such Prayers, as are
enough to put them out of Countenance, and out of Hope too; such Prayers as
they know will Recoil upon them; and not only fly in their faces, but terrify
and gall their very Consciences also. But in truth, we cannot suppose Men of
Pious Minds to spend their precious Time to such bad purposes as these; because
the Notions they have of God's Majesty, of his Omnipresence and Omniscience, of
his Justice, Holiness, and the like, are a continual check upon them, to govern
their natural Inclinations, and to restrain them from those evil Courses, into
which others run without Fear or Wit, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, as
the Prophet speaks, Jer. 8. 6. Besides, as they have not the Heart, or Face to
Sin, so neither have they those Temptations and Opportunities, which the Devil
Ministers daily to those who are such Strangers to the Throne of Grace, as if
they lived Without God in the World. Such Men are never out of the Devil's
road; and therefore it is no wonder if Vice be the trade they bestow their Time
upon; no wonder, if a Luxurious Table, or a Dalilah's Lap, or a Drunken
Society, or Profane Discourse, or the study of Mischief, or the Drudgery of
Covetousness, or the Pride of Life takes up those Hours which God has a right
to. Ungodly Principles and Contempt of things Sacred, do always betray Men to
some wickedness or other; nor cannot be but Irreligion and Vice must go
together; so that amongst other Arguments that might be heaped up to encourage
us to a life of Devotion, this is one, that it is an excellent Security and
Preservative against Sin, and keeps us out of Harms-way: Blessed is the Man,
says David, that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stands in
the way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful, Ps. 1. 1. This is
the Felicity of the devout Man in particular; whose Affections being set upon
the things above, he has not so much time to spare from Prayer and
Contemplation, as the Children of this World fling away upon their Lusts; nor
does Temptation or ill Company seduce him into the ways of Death. The Angels of
God are his guard to keep him in all his ways. Solitude, which is to some a
Snare, is to him an opportunity for Grave and Holy Meditations. This House of
God is a Sanctuary to him from his own Evil Self; a place of refuge from his
corrupt Heart; the very Thoughts whereof he there keeps in order, by minding
the several Duties of the Place, and by the reverend Apprehensions he has of
that infinite Being, who is the Searcher of Hearts, and by this means he clears
and rids his Soul of those vagrant Imaginations, which otherwise would disturb
and annoy his Heart, as Abraham drove away the Fowls, when he offered to God
His Sacrafice, Genesis 15. 11.

Thus, to attend diligently upon the Ordinances and Institutions of our
Religion, keeps us from losing more of our Time in the First respect; from
squandering it away upon that which is Evil; nay, from laying any part of it
out upon the Principles, the Occasions, the Opportunities of Evil. And the use
we should make of it is, that of that little Time God alots us in this World,
we should set what we can apart for religious Offices. The Scripture calls it,
Praying without Ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Continuing in Prayer, and watching in
the same with Thanksgiving, Col. 4. 2. Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all Perseverance,
Ephesians. 6. 18. And continuing instant in Prayer, Romans 12. 12. By which
Expressions is meant, not that we should be praying every Minute of the Day
(for other Works of Necessity and Charity are to be attended on also) but that
we should not let slip any convenient Opportunity of Devotion, nor play away
those hours which are Proper for it; but with all possible diligence and
application of Mind observe those times of Prayer which are Stated and Fixed,
either by public Authority, or by our own private, voluntary choice; so that
our whole time may turn to very good account.

2. Secondly, By this means we shall be sure not to spend our Time Vainly
neither; which is another way of losing it; that is, when a Man gets no solid
Benefit and Satisfaction by it, though strictly speaking we cannot affirm, that
he Sins it away, or lays it out upon Vice and Wickedness. Man being a
rational Creature, endued with Understanding, on purpose that he might
deliberately Act in order to Ends that befit and become the Dignity of his
Nature; all that time is to be reckoned Lost to him, which does not serve in
some measure to Answer such Ends. To gratify the Senses is the life of a
Beast; and it becomes a Beast well enough; because a Beast has no higher, or
nobler Faculties than Sense. But in Man, Reason has the Superiority; or a
faculty of distinguishing between that which is morally Good, or morally Evil;
and a power of discoursing and judging touching the Nature of his Actions; what
they Deserve, and what may be the Rewards of them. To Act like a Man therefore,
is to live according to Reason; or, as it becomes a Creature that has the
rules of Virtue and Religion before him; and as long as he Acts according to
those Rules, besides the Rewards he Entitles himself to in another World
hereafter, he does himself great good in this Life, and receives that Pleasure
and Satisfaction of mind which is an unspeakable Reward at present. Now of all
the Acts of a Rational Soul, Devotion, or the Contemplating and Worshipping of
God, brings with it the Highest Pleasure; and therefore the Time that is
bestowed upon it, must needs be of the very best account.

The truth of this is, such as Worship God with all their Hearts, find by daily
Experience the great Pleasures that go along with their Acts of Worship; the
relish and satisfaction they leave behind upon the Soul, when the Solemnity is
over; the Delights which still accompany the Mind; and the wonderful Comfort
and Complacency wherewith the Day is Concluded; these Present Rewards show,
that they have well employed and husbanded their Time. And when a Man comes at
last to cast up his Actions upon his Deathbed, and to take a true Inventory of
them, most certainly nothing then can speak greater Peace, or minister greater
Joy to his departing Soul, than if he be able to give this Testimony of
himself, that amidst all the Contingencies, Vanities, Allurements, and Fatigues
of the World, he has made his Life and Offering to his Maker.

This we should consider in Time, and while it is yet called, To Day. It
becomes Creatures endued with Reason, and enlightened with Revelation also, to
Forecast Events thoroughly, and to provide such things Beforehand, as will
stand us in good stead, and be of substantial use and comfort to us all along;
of which, this must needs be one of the greatest and most considerable; viz. A
continued Course of Piety and Religion.

And what have they to compare with this, who, though they be not Vicious, yet
are very Vain Persons, Whiffling away their hours in Pageantry and
Impertinencies; not as if they were reasonable Beings, able and obliged to
prosecute the noblest Ends; but rather little Puppets and Figures of Men,
brought into the World, just to take a few insignificant turns in it, and to
make a show? Such are those, who know not, or think not how to rid away their
time, but by formal Entertainments, by Mirth and Railery, by Ceremony and
Courtship, by idle Visits, by Finicalness in Dressing, by Sports and Gaming; in
short, by an unaccountable variety of un-man-like ways of spending and passing
away ones Life. I suppose such People not formally to Sin, but foolishly to
Trifle away their Minutes, which is the softest and most innocent Construction
that can be made of it. Now though by these mean and childish Methods no such
Guilt is contracted, as is by downright Villainy and Debaucheries; yet this is
enough to render them contemptible, that they bring a Man no solid advantage or
satisfaction, and therefore are to be reckoned so many lost Expenses. The
pleasure of them is like an Infant's Dream, which is only the present Operation
of Fancy, that gives him a Minutes Smile. The Soul is never awhit the wiser, or
better for them; but the worse rather, by being degraded from its Dignity, and
contumeliously put with all its noble Faculties, to uses that are silly and
reproachful. All that can be said of it is, that by the help of these mean and
trifling ways, so much time is gone: The Fool's Fingers are eased of it; which
will be so far from being a comfort to him, that when Sickness and Death shall
come, it will be excessive Bitterness to consider, how well so many Hours might
have been employed, by working out his Salvation in the Church, and in the
Closet.

To conclude all: The design of this whole Discourse is, to show, how much it
is our Duty, our Interest, and our Wisdom, to make a good use of our Time; and
what Course is proper for us to take, that it may turn to very good account; to
our Present, and Future advantage.

And would God we would be persuaded to consider seriously, what an Important
thing this is! the main business indeed we should be mindful of in this Life;
because it is the Measure of our Lives; and when Death comes, 'twill be equally
as impossible to recall the One, as it will be again, to live over the Other.

We use to call Time, the most Precious thing in the World; and use to Think it
such, when Matters of great Consequence require quich dispatch; in that case, a
Day, an Hour, a Minute is thought too valuable to be neglected; lest the Loss,
though but of one Moment, should at once defeat the Hopes, and spoil all the
Labors of an whole Year. So that the Improvidence of many People is
astonishing and unaccountable, that when their very Souls lie at stake, and
Hell and Damnation is before them, they should then only be most careless of
their Time, though the Case be of the Greatest Concernment, and the Hazards
they run be the most Fatal, and the Loss that follows will most certainly be
utterly Irreparable to all Eternity.

But the truth is, Time is One of those Many Blessings, which Men never so
Prize, as when they Want them. The Sad Reflections of a Deathbed; the Weeping,
Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth beyond it, do plainly argue, that nothing can be
more Worth recalling, than Time; and nothing more Worth our husbanding, than
the Present time; because when once gone, it is Never to be recalled.

That there may be no room for such Late Sorrows, I have laid before you the
most necessary, and most profitable Rules I can think of, how you may employ
that time, which is now in your Hands; and in a Moral sense redeem too what is
slipped Away; as, by Industrious Resolutions; by an active and vigorous
Repentance; by an operative and universal Charity; by caution and watchfulness
every remaining day of your Life; and more especially by devoting all the time
you can to the Service and Worship of God; which of the several Particulars
has taken up the greatest share of my Meditations, because it is the
Employment of Heaven it self, and that which justly claims all possible
Portions of our time here.

By the diligent performance of these things we may so redeem our Time, as to
make a great deal of a few Days; and do that in one Third of one's Life, which
some hardly do in their whole Age, though it be a long one; and then is a Man's
Life to good purpose. For it is not how long, but how well a Man lives, which
God considers; nor is it his Years, but his Works, that will be regarded in
God's Day. In short: He that exerts all the Faculties and Powers of his Soul in
a Course of Virtue, and to the utmost of his Abilities endeavoues to rectify
what has been amiss: He that does all the Good he can in his Generation, and
spends not a Day without setting forward in some measure his own and other
Men's Salvation; He that gives himself to God's Service, and continually makes
an Oblation of his Heart, and Incense of his Prayers; He it is that Redeems his
Time indeed; so that be it longer or shorter, as God shall see it best for him,
however he Began, he shall Einish his Course well: And as Eliphas said, Job 5.
26. He shall come to his Grave in a full Age, like as a Shock of Corn comes
in, in his season.

Morning Prayers.
O Lord, teach us so to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto
Wisdom. Amen.

O Lord, save us thy Servants, who put our whole Trust in Thee. Send us Help
from thy Holy Place, and evermore mightily defend us. Let the Enemy have no
Advantage of us, nor the Wicked approach to us. But be unto us a Strong Tower
from the Face of all our Enemies. Amen.

O Lord our Heavenly Father, Almighty and Everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the Beginning of this Day, defend us in the same with thy mighty
Power, and grant, that this Day we fall into no Sin, neither run into any kind
of Danger; but that all our Doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy Sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great Dangers,
that, by reason of the Frailty of our Nature, we cannot always stand upright;
grant to us such Strength and Protection, as may support us in all Dangers, and
carry us through all Temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who see that we have no Power of our selves to help our
selves, keep us, both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls; that
we may be defended from all Adversities which may happen to the Body, and from
all Evil Thoughts which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Cstrist our
Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have given thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for
Sin, and also an Ensample of Godly Life: Give us Grace, that we may always most
thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit, and also daily endeavor our
selves to follow the blessed Steps of his most Holy Life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, who alone can order the Unruly Wills and Affections of
sinful Men; Grant unto thy People, that they may love the things which thou
command, and desire that which thou do promise; that so, among the sundry
and manifold Changes of the World, our Hearts may surely there be fixed, where
True Joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

O God, the Protector of all them that trust in thee, without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy, increase and multiply upon us thy Mercy; that Thou
being our Ruler and Guide, we may so pass through things Tenporal, that we
finally lose not the things Eternal. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for Jesus
Christ's sake our Lord. Amen.

LOrd of all Power and Might, who art the Author and Giver of all Good Things;
graft in our Hearts the Love of thy Name; increase in us True Religion, nourish
us with all Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep us in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

UNto thy Gracious Mercy and Protection, O God, we commit our selves. The Lord
bless us, and keep us. The Lord make his Face to shine upon us, and be gracious
unto us. The Lord lift up his Countenance upon us, and give us Peace both now
and evermore. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.

Evening Prayers.
ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all Men; we acknowledge and bewail our manifold Sins and Wickedness, which we
from time to time most grievously have committed, by Thought, Word and Deed,
against thy Divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy Wrath and Indignation
against us. We do earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for these our
Misdoings; the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the Burden of them is
intolerable. Have mercy upon us, most merciful Father; for thy Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past, and grant, that we may ever
hereafter serve and please Thee in Newness of Life, to the Honor and Glory of
thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

LIghten our Darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great Mercy defend
us from all Perils and Dangers of this Night, for the Love of thy only Son, our
Savior, Jesus Christ Amen.

O Everlasting God, who have ordained and constituted the Services of Angels
and Men in a wonderful Order; mercifully grant, that as thy Aoly Angels always
do thee Service in Heaven; so by thy Appointment they may succor and defend us
on Earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

GRant, O Lord, that as we are Baptized into the Death of thy blessed Son, our
Savior, Jesus Christ. So by continual mortifying our corrupt Affections, we
may be buried with him, and that through the Grave and Gate of Death we may
pass to our joyful Resurrection for his Merits, who Died, and was Buried, and
Rose again for us, thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, who art always more ready to hear, than we to
pray, and are want to give more than either we desire or deserve; pour down
upon us the Abundance of thy Mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our
Conscience is afraid, and giving us those good things which we are not worthy
to ask, but through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord.
Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by, John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgatestreet.
A Further Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New Testament,
which contain some Difficulty in them; with a Probable Resolution of them. By
John Edwards, B. D. sometimes Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge.
Octavo.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfections of the Books of
the Old and New Testament; with a continued Illustration of several difficult
Texts of Scripture throughout the whole Work. By John Edwards, Fellow of St.
John's College in Cambridge. Octavo.

Miscellany Essays. By Monsieur St. Euremont; with a Character by a Person of
Honor here in England. Continued by Mr. Dryden. In Two Volumes. Octavo.

The True Royal English School for their Majesty's Three Kingdoms; being a
Catalogue of all the Words in the Bible. Together with a Praxis in Prose and
Verses, and Variety of Pictures, all beginning with one Syllable, and
proceeding by degrees to Eight, divided and not divided; whereby all Persons,
both Young and Old, of the meanest Abilities, may with little Help be able to
read the whole Bible over distinctly, easily, and more speedily than in any
other Method: with Directions to find out any Word. Together with an Exposition
on the Creed. By Tobias Ellis, late Minister of the Gospel. Octavo.

Letters on several Subjects. By the late Pious Dr. Henry Moore: With several
other Letters. To which is added, by the Publisher, Two Letters: One to the
Reverend Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's; and the other to the Reverend Mr.
Bentley: With other Discourses. Published by the Reverend Mr. Elys. Octavo.

An Answer to the Brief History of the Unitarians, called also Socinians. By
Will. Basset, Rector of St. Swithin. London. Octavo.

The Commonwealth's-man Unmasked: Or, a Just Rebuke to the Author of the
Account of Denmark. In Two Parts. Twelves.

A New Family Book: Or, The True Interest of Families: Being Directions to
Parents and Children, and to those who are instead of Parents; showing them
their several Duties, and how they may be happy in one another. Together with
several Prayers for Families and Children; and Graces Before and After Meat. To
which is Annexed, A Discourse about the Right Way of Improving our Time. By
James Kirkwood, Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire, with a Preface by Dr.
Horneck. The Second Edition.

Monarchia Microeosmi; The Origin, Vicissitudes and Periods of Vital Government
in Man, for a further Discovery of Diseases incident to Humane Nature. By
Everard Maynwaring, M. D. Twelves.

The Gauger and Measurer's Companion; being a Compendious Way of Gaging
Superficies and Solids; with the Reasons of most Multiplications and Divisions
used in Measurations, and all difficult Points made plain and easy; with a Way
to Gage all Quantities under a Gallon. Also a Brief Description of the
Gage-Point for Ale and Wine Gallons, with Directions to find the same; and the
Contents of a Circle in all its Parts, the exact Method of measuring Land,
Board, Glass, Pavement, Stone, be it of what Form soever; together with a Globe
and Round Timber, both Decimals and Vulgarly: With Useful Tables; a Table of
Cylinders, and a Treatise of Weights and Measures. To which is added, at the
Request of some Gentlemen, a True Method of Brewing Strong Ale in London, as
well and as good as in any Place in the Country. With Directions for Clarifying
any Ale, be it never so thick, in few Hours: with Thirty Cuts. By James
Lightbody, Philomath. Twelves.

Moral Maxims and Reflections. In Four Parts. Written in French by the Duke of
Rochefoucault, and now made English. Twelves,


