LIGHT OR DARKNESS, Displaying or Hiding it self, as it pleases, and from or
to whom it pleases: Arraigning, Judging, Condemning, both the Shame and Glory
of the Creature, in all its several breakings forth from, and appearances in,
the Creature. Held forth to public view in a SERMON, a LETTER, and several
other Inward openings.

Through ISAAC PENINGTON, ( junior) Esquire

JER. 4. ver. 23, 24, 25, 26. I beheld the Earth, and lo, it was without form
and void: and the Heavens, and they had no light.

I beheld the Mountains, and lo, they trembled; and all the hills moved lightly.

I beheld, and lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the Heavens were fled.

I beheld, and lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the Cities
thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his fierce anger.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. M. DC. L.

TO THE READER.
READER,
BEhold, (if thou have an eye to pierce into the inward state of things,) look
steadfastly, and thou shall see a strange sight: One who has been deeply
affected with Wisdom, true Wisdom, heavenly Wisdom, spiritual Wisdom, inward
Wisdom, and vehemently pursuing it from the womb; being still encouraged by
some tastes of it, and certain lively hopes of further attaining and enjoying
its sweetness; at length wholly stripped of all his riches in this kind, and
his desire after it again (though it remained strong a a good while after the
loss) quite taken from him also.

Never was I perfectly at enmity with any thing but folly. It was not simply
sin that I was at variance with, but the foolishness of sin. I knew well enough
that God and the Creature had an hand in the same act, even in every act of
sin: I could bear with it in God, because He knew how to do it wisely; but I
could not bear with it in the Creature, because it did it so foolishly. That
which made God so lovely in my eye, was chiefly His Wisdom, which to me was the
Crown of His Love, Power, Goodness, and all his other excellencies, which,
unless possessed by Wisdom, and managed by Wisdom, would, to my eye, have had
no luster in them, but deformity. That which made the Creature so unlovely
still to me, as it has always been, was its folly, which has made all the
excellencies of the Creature (wherewith it has at any time been clothed, and
whereby it shined in the eyes of others) so fulsom to me, that my spirit has
still turned as much from them, and from it in them, as from its greatest
pollutions.

But now, I have been so tossed and tumbled, melted and new* molded, that I am
changed into that which I thought it utterly impossible for me ever to be. I am
grown at peace, if not in love, with folly. I begin to prefer Folly at my very
Heart above Wisdom. I am half persuaded, that there is a more sweet, quiet, and
full enjoyment of ones self in a state of Folly, then in a state of Wisdom;
besides its being a nearer, readier, and easier passage to somewhat else. I
confess, I am not yet so far subdued and changed, as to be content to take up a
state of Folly to perpetuity, but only for a season to lie down in it, to
obtain a little ease and respite, and to have the visage and remembrance of
that Wisdom perfectly blotted out, which did formerly so ravish and enchant me.

In this state of Folly I find a new state of things springing up in me, and
representing themselves to my view; which I entertain like a Fool, not wisely
enquireing what bottom they have, or how they will endure the trial of the
fire, but letting them in or out very carelessly, not regarding either what they
are, whence they come, or whither they go. I see, I feel, I am a Fool, I know
not (nor can know in the state wherein I am) to whom they belong, I know not
how I come by them at any time; They are strangely formed in me: Let them look
to themselves if they are afraid of injury, either from me, or from any else
because of me; Let him look to them to whom they belong, if he set any value
upon them, or have any esteem of them. As for me, I have nothing to do with
them, but to let them have their course in me, and through me, which I am now
at length become very free unto; nay, indeed in the present state wherein I am,
I am altogether unable to stop them in it. I find my self powerfully forming
into somewhat, which, what ere it be, it will be no thank to me, for I did not
like it, nay, resisted as long as I could; but now I am vanquished, and so
broken all in pieces, that there is no more strength or wisdom left in me; I
begin to yield up my self somewhat freely into the Hands of this unknown
Potter, to mold me into what he himself has a mind. I am weary of, and much
weaned from, my own will and desires, even those which were most pure, most
spiritual, and now I begin to lisp to this hidden Power which I know not, yet
feel working in me. Thy Will, Thy unknown Will, thy undesired Will (by any but
thy self) be done. What ever thy Will be concerning any, let it take place in
them, and upon them, to the utmost. Bend thy felf no longer to please the
desire of the Creature in any thing, but henceforth apply thy self to please
thy self in every thing. Let not me nor any else be what we would; but what thy
Will pleases to have us; and fulfill thy whole Will and Counsel upon us,
without giving us the least account of it, until thou please. If thou will
lead us into Folly, Sin, Death, Hell, any thing, every thing, do what thou will, carry us whither thou will. Let our Will wholly dye in us, that it may
never avoid any thing more, nor choose any thing more in any kind, but as thy
Will chooses for us.

Ye cannot but be offended at this kind of voice O ye wise men, who know
groundedly, and from Principles of Light and Wisdom, how to frame your desires
and requests; yet, if ye be able, give liberty to him (who is made a Fool by
the forcible breaking of all these Principles in him) to speak according to
what he has (though very unwillingly) been made.

I have nothing to say to persuade or invite thee to cast thine eye, bestow any
pains on, or give any regard to that which follows* What thou may find here,
I hold out but as the words of a Fool, yet I will not give thee leave to judge
them so: For as I my self (feeling my self to be a Fool) do not, so I know thou
can not judge them. This is a kind of Scripture which thou art not acquainted
with, and though thou would fain be approving or condemning, yet thou can
not, until thou come to know and understand it. This Light, This Darkness (be
it what it will) is of a deeper kind then thine is, (thine must be blotted out
before this can be written) and thine eye cannot discern it. This is of a new
stamp, of a new nature, of a new edition, and lies open only to the judgment
of the new eye, which alone can discover what it is in its kind, whether true
or false, unfeigned or countefeit. The lowest in this Region can see into the
highest in thine: But the clearest eye of the highest in thy Region, cannot
discern the lowest here.

Therefore look to thy self; Take heed what thou think, or say, lest thy
Wisdom (which is now exalted, and can distinguish and judge things, to the
satisfaction of it self and others) whereby thou scornest Folly and the Fool,
come under the just sentence and condemnation of the Fool. He who made all
things, and has often prepared Folly to bring Wisdom down, may be about the
same work again in a way as uncouth, strange, unexpected, yea, impossible to
the present wise man, as those ways he formerly picked out still were to the
wisest in those Generations.

This is an angry Age, and men can hardly bear any thing, though they are
thoroughly crossed in it, for the less they can bear, the more is laid upon
them: yet methinks the wise man should be able to bear. He can gladly suffer a
fool, who knows himself to be wise. And yet who is more offended then the wise
man? None is less careful of offending then the fool, and None more capable of
offense then the wise man. So far as I have any tincture of what I formerly
was, left upon me, I am very loath to offend: But as I am a Fool, I am no whit
shy of it, but can delight to lay snares and stumbling blocks, and to see
Wisdom entangled in them, and breaking its shins upon them. Therefore have no
regard to me, but use thine own freedom in thinking, speaking, judging: It is
only in regard to thy self that I should advise thee to be sober and silent
concerning that which thou can not yet reach; which counsel, if thou can
receive, it may be for thine ease and advantage, which, when thou come to
feel what belongs to true torment and loss, thou will then know how to prize.
And when thou find what changes they will make in thee, which all the
strength of thy Reason and Religion shall not be able to withstand, (nay, they
will break both Reason and Religion at their pleasure; and the more they oppose
them, the faster will they break them;) I say, when thou find this by evident
sense and experience past all denial or gainsaying, that enmity, rage, or zeal,
which is now in thee so hot against others, will quickly abate; and thou will
grow silent concerning them, if not friends with them.

A SERMON TO All Sorts of People: Tending toward the Allaying that Bitterness
and Enmity of Spirit, which abounds every where, among all Sorts, toward such
as differ in any eminent degree from themselves.
MATTHEW. 6. 23. If the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that
Darkness?
JOEL 2. 31. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood,
before the great and the terrible Day of the Lord come.
The Preface.
O How thick has Misery enwrapped it self about the bulk of this Creation!
Where is that eye that can see through it into Happiness? That Happiness which
most have dreamed of, is already to many swallowed up in Misery: But where is
that Happiness, which can swallow up this unexpected inundation of Misery,
which drowns both Heaven and Earth? There are waters above, as well as beneath,
(though it is hard to conceive so) and when both meet, they make a dreadful
deluge. O how is Truth drowned, Light drowned, Life drowned, Purity drowned, in
the great Abyss of Confusion! Where is that that remains certain, after this
sharp vehement shaking? They perhaps may boast, who have not yet felt the
violence of the wind; But it would somewhat interrupt their exultation, if they
could but consider, that their Day is also coming; yea, it might wholly quash
it, if they knew how near it were upon them.

O what a brutish thing is man, that can never believe or be made sensible of
any thing, until he come to feel it! Though houses round about him be on fire,
and he have that within which kindles the flame, yet he makes no question but
he shall live secure. From the day that Man has been upon the face of the
Earth, still has he been blessing himself, and pleasing himself with his own
condition, magnifying it beyond others (whom he is very wise in accusing and
condemning,) in the mean while not truly knowing, either whence he came, what
he is, or whither he goes. O foolish justifier of thy self, O foolish condemner
of others, being ignorant both of thy self, and others! Thine eye is dark. The
light whereby thou see is darkness; What meanest thou to be so forward and
confident in judging either thy self or others? O God, put out this eye of Man,
put out this light of Man, cover it with an Eternal Night. Bring forth a true,
a substantial state of things, with an Eye that may behold it, an Heart that
may comprehend it, a Life that may quicken and live in it.

Awake, awake O Sons of men, How long will ye love vanity? How long will ye
seek after lies? How long will ye love shadows, and please your selves with
them, as if they were the Substance? Your condemnation is written on your
foreheads, and in the palms of your hands: Ye accuse, condemn, prosecute, for
calling Darkness Light, Error Truth; and yet which of you does otherwise? Come
forth O God, and triumph in the condemnation of all: Throw down the Great
Justifier, and lay him flat with the lowest that he has condemned. O that my
spirit might be once satisfied, in beholding that thrown down which it abhors,
and that exalted which it loves. And this is that which my Soul in its inmost
part desires, That the Tincture both of good and evil, in all its varieties
and expatiations, might be blotted out; and things reduced into, and produced
in their Originality, which comprehends both good and evil in an absolute
perfection. And then we shall see all things, no more with one kind of eye
appearing to be evil, nor with another kind of eye appearing to be good, but
as they are indeed in their inmost bottom, where alone is true Knowledge, Peace,
Rest, and Content, eternally to be found and possessed.

Perhaps, Reader, Thou may expect an account of this ensuing Discourse, which
I must profess to thee I am driven to by a kind of inward impulsion, which I
know not of what Nature it is: And I am made so weak by continual different
exercises upon my spirit (which I find powerfully destroying and blotting out
in me, what ever I have been, or have desired to be, and molding and forming me
to somewhat else, which I neither expected, nor desired; hereby I say I am
brought to so much weakness) that I am become altogether unable to resist it,
otherwise it is likely at this time I should not have troubled thee.

One word more. There was a Passage in that Book last set forth, which I hear
has administered offense to diverse. The Passage was about Pure Sporting with
Sin, which they think cannot be. I will not say that I spoke that upon a deeper
ground then Man usually speaks upon; yet this I cannot but say, It is my
interest, and I must stickle for it, though not with men, yet in mine own
spirit. Some questioned with me, whether I meant the act of Sin? I confess my
eye, or thoughts, was little upon the act, but upon the inward Nature of it,
which must not remain in perpetual enmity, but at last be owned as an excellent
Servant to him, by whom and for whom all things were made, out of whom they
came, and into whom they return, according to his own Will and Guidance. And
Sin could never have done him that service that it has, if it had not had that
Nature that it has. And Sin must have its due from the Righteous Judge, who will
as well be glorified in being just unto Sin, as in showing his Wisdom and Power
in conquering of it.

In a word; To the Creature, in the present state of the Creature, under the
present Law of the Creature, according to the Judgment of the eye of the
Creature, every thing is unlovely; and he that sees them not to be so, falls
short of the perfection of the creaturely eye. But come deeper, beyond this
state, beneath this Law; Look with a true eye, and there you shall find all
this unloveliness pass away, and an excellency appear, that the Creature could
never so much as imagine or dream of. And now come back with this eye into the
present state of all things, and behold them through the true glass, and you
shall see them all new here also, and very far differing from what you did or
could take them to be in your creaturely apprehension.

If this may tend to afford satisfaction to any concerning the further
discovery of my mind in this respect, it will be pleasing to me, who delight
not to have it hid, but would fain have it opened and presented to the view of
all, not as desiring either their approbation or condemnation, but to satisfy
the desire it self. This is all I have to express by way of Preface.

A SERMON TO All Sorts of People, FROM JOB 9. 22. This is uniform, thereupon I
speak: He destroys the perfect and the wicked.
JOb was a very excellent spirited man, and very exact in his practice; so
exact under that present Administration wherein he was set, that his life,
temper and motions were exceeding pleasing to him, who had so formed and acted
him; in so much as he was not ashamed to boast of him, even to the face of the
great Opposer, Disturber, and Destroyer of such kind of buildings.

This Job as he was perfect under that Administration, so he was in a
proportionable manner blessed with Children, Sheep, Camels, Oxen, Asses, and a
very great Family.

In a moment all these blessings are snatched away, rich Job made poor, by
being stripped of all; which he takes very patiently, retaining as sweet a
temper of spirit under his affliction and misery, as had attended him in the
time of his prosperity.

After this, (as if there had been a design to wear him out) his whole body is
smitten with disease and pain, and his mind wounded to purpose too: and yet at
first he takes this kindly also, his spirit not at all deviating out of that
path of perfection, wherein hitherto he had walked.

But at length, anguish overcoming him, it opens the very depths, and causes
that to come forth which had long layn hid in him, if not also from him.

Certain friends of his (in this state of his) come to visit him, sit silent by
him as astonished at him, not knowing what to think of him, nor what to say to
him: But at length foolishly and weakly take occasion, from some distemper in
his words, to nourish in themselves groundless jealousies concerning him, and
with all the strength of arguments they can lay hold on, to impose them upon
his belief.

Jobs state they know not, neither in the nature of things, nor in their own
experience; yet a great mind they have to say somewhat to him, with an intent
to help and relieve him; but for want of a true bottom of light, they fall to
imagining and ghessing, and feeding these their imaginations with reasonings
that flow in upon them, and take it very ill, that these dark conceptions of
theirs cannot overbear that more illuminated principle that was in Job.

They take it for granted, That sin must be the cause, or God would never have
dealt so with Job.

They urge this from the Justice of God, from the experience of all ages: and
therefore wish Job to look to himself, to acknowledge his sin, and humble
himself before God, and not to fly out into such extravagant
self-justifications or accusations of God, as his present distemper might
dispose him to.

Job here endeavors to take them off from these excursions, and draws the point
between him and them to an head. He denies the bottom whereupon they go, and
lays down his own bottom. This is uniform, This is every way true. That which
ye speak is true; It is true, That Sinners are met with, Oppressors must have a
time to be themselves oppressed, Hypocrites shall not always flourish, The
Righteous shall be blessed, etc. But this will not hold so far as ye extend it,
that every one that is thus dealt with must needs be such an one. But that
which I lay down is uniform, has no such exception, is a deeper, a fuller
Truth, Perfect and wicked he destroys. How exact soever a man be under his
administration, yet it is in the power of him, who made him and formed him into
what he is in that administration, to bring him to destruction in it at his
pleasure. He that brings both the perfect and the wicked upon the stage, may
turn either of them off from the stage, when he will. There is no more to
hinder him from destroying the perfect, then there is to hinder him from
destroying the wicked. They are both equally his, They are both at his dispose,
They are one and the same under several Representations, and he has appointed
them both to one and the same end, which is destruction. This is it I will
stand to, overthrow it if ye can, He destroys the perfect and the wicked.

Perfect and wicked. Perfect are such as are upright under that administration
under which they are set, who in their state and motions suit with the Law of
it. God has a Law for every thing he brings forth in this state of weakness: He
that suits with the Law of his administration (that administration which he is
set under) is perfect; He who deviates wholly from it, is wicked. Adam had his
Law of forbearing the forbidden fruit, The Jews theirs of Circumcision, keeping
the Passover, etc. Christians theirs likewise, of Faith, Love, Spiritual
Obedience, Spiritual Worship, a sweet, meek, humble, heavenly Conversation,
etc. Now so far as each of these did answer their peculiar Law, they came
toward that perfection, toward that righteousness, which they were appointed
to, and which was to be measured thereby: So far as they deviated, they came
toward and into a state of sin and wickedness; both which are not absolute,
but only under and by the force of the Law of the present administration.

He destroys. Destruction is putting an end to the state. When the life and
being of a person is put out, he is destroyed. When the plagues of God light on
his outward man unto the death of the body, his body is destroyed: When the
plagues of God light on his inner man, and put out the life of his Spirit, his
inner man is destroyed. We think, in every dispensation, it is only the weak,
the imperfect, the wicked, that wrath must light upon, but the righteous, the
perfect, they shall escape, they shall meet with blessedness: But Job tells
you, that they must be consumed too.

Doct. God has stored up destruction both for the perfect and the wicked, and
they shall both be sure to meet with it. God when he pleases falls either upon
the wicked or the perfect even to destruction.

This is uniform (says Job.) What ground soever ye speak on, I am certain of
this. I dare lay this as a bottom to build upon, He destroys the perfect and
the wicked.

Our God is a consuming fire, (says the Apostle.) It may be used as an
Argument to draw men on to heighten holiness in their dispensation: and yet
after it is heightened, the same Spirit may speak to them in the very same
dialect, and tell them yet further, that they must be consumed by this fire for
all that.

Reas. 1. from Gods Sovereignty. He is Lord of all, He has the dispose of all,
and his Sovereignty delights to show it self. All the Excellencies of God have
their seasons of putting themselves forth to the utmost, His Wisdom, Mercy,
Power, Love, etc. So has his Sovereignty. Now nothing does so much discover his
Sovereignty, as his falling upon the righteous, upon the perfect. Ye think to
secure your selves by his Faithfulness, his Word, his Promises, to which he
must be faithful: and will ye not have him faithful to his Sovereignty? He is
Lord of all, and has the dispose of all, and let him make never so many deeds
of gift, he cannot give away any thing from himself; but still he has the Power
of Life and Death in his own hands, and may let it out as he pleases. And this
does wonderfully set forth his Sovereignty, his exercising it upon the perfect,
that when he has tied it up, as fast as may be, by never so many Promises, yet
it should still have its scope, and be able to deal with whom it will, as it
will. By this means he that is Lord indeed, truly Lord, originally Lord,
vindicates and manifests his Lordship, when he can subject that unto his Will
which seems most exempted from it, as well as that which lies most open to him
in the way of clearest and most acknowledged Justice.

Reas. 2. Because all Dispensations are but for a season, They are not
everlasting; Therefore Eternity delights to swallow them up* Perfect and wicked
are both of the same lump, only differently clothed to act their several parts,
which when they have done, their clothes must be taken off, and they turned
back into the lump again. There is nothing durable but the eternal state of
things. Now therefore has God treasured up destructions for all dispensations,
because it is suitable to all dispensations. It is as fit for the King to be
stripped of his gorgious apparel when the Play is done, as the Begar of his
rags. This is but a momentany Righteousness or Perfection, a momentany
wickedness or imperfection, according to the Law of the present dispensation:
and the Righteousness, the wickedness, the Law of the Dispensation, the
Dispensation it self, all must pass into the dust again: When they have lived
out their transitory life, and acted their several parts, they must return to
death.

So that though there be Righteousness, and Wickedness; Righteous Persons, and
Wicked Persons; Blessings to the one, Woes to the other: Yet all this is but
under the Dispensation, for the season of the Dispensation, which when it comes
to an end, all this passes away.

Object. Against this it will be easily and readily objected, That this will
destroy all Religion toward God, and Righteousness amongst men. What need any
man care, what he thinks or does? How can any man desire to be Righteous, to be
Perfect, if his end must be the same with him who is most imperfect and wicked?

Answ. No, It will not, it cannot, if rightly understood. It will not destroy
any true Religion in any way of administration whatsoever; but only that
Corrupt Enmity, Corrupt Hope, Corrupt Desire, Corrupt Selfish-interest, which
every Administration inclines very much to breed and nourish, but Perfect Love
cannot suffer always to stand: which if it were once eaten out, every
Administration would be sweet and pleasant. If we knew our selves, and one
another, our own parts, and the parts that others are to act, we should with
more rest and satisfaction act ours our selves, and with more peace and
pleasure behold others acting theirs.

Besides, The Righteous have a double advantage: One in their present life,
Another in their ensuing death.

In their present life, they both enjoy themselves and their God, in such a way
as the wicked cannot, nor are in any wise capable of, in their state and
practice of wickedness.

And in their ensuing death they have another advantage, it being a more
immediate step to somewhat further then the death of the wicked can be, (I
speak not of the shadow of death, but of that which is death indeed, the dying
of the Spirit in and to its present state.)

Therefore there is no ground, why the Righteous should be discouraged in
pursuing Righteousness, nor why the wicked should please himself in abounding
in wickedness, though ground sufficient for both to be weary of either, and to
long after somewhat more perfect.

Use 1. Not for any to magnify themselves much above others, nor to promise to
themselves any such great blessedness beyond others, or to look upon others as
objects of such great Misery, because of some appearing-difference between them
and others. Indeed there is a difference at present in this Dispensation, but
it is no thank to them that it is so. Nor are the wicked so much to be blamed as
they think: (They have their parts to act, and they are fitted to their parts.)
This Dispensation will have its end, and then you will find no such great
difference between you and them, as you thought there was. Destruction will
make an end of their wickedness, yea and it will make an end of your
Righteousness also, and then ye will become both one lump of Clay, without
either Good or Evil.

Use 2. Not to grieve overmuch when you find Destruction seizing upon you. If
your body or spirit moulder away, If God consume your Righteousness, your
Holiness, your Perfection, by the blast of his Spirit; Grieve not beyond
measure at it: Alas it must dye, This must not last for ever. You thought to
have been made happy by this, your happiness lies in being delivered from it.
This is not the true treasure, or at least not in its true and lasting shape,
and therefore must undergo death and destruction in this its present appearance.

The Apostle James raises it higher, bids you rejoice in it, Chap. 1. 10. and
he gives a strong Reason, Verse. 11. For the Sun is no sooner risen with a
burning heat, but it withers the grass; and the flower thereof falls, and
the grace of the fashion of it perishes: So also shall the rich man fade away
in his ways. Therefore be glad at the death of that that must dye: ye have
undergone that sorrow which there was no avoiding; This is great matter of Joy.
The pain of having the sap and moisture of your spirits dried up by the
scorching heat of the Sun, if it be in any degree past, it is great matter of
Joy. Better is the Day of this Death, then the Day of this Life. There is
greater matter of Joy in parting with, in putting off this Excellency, then in
putting it on.

Now for a conclusion to all this, I intend to lay down the brief sum of the
whole matter, even of the whole course of man under every Administration,
wherein he is either lifted up or thrown down, or both lifted up and thrown
down, (first lifted up, and then thrown down,) and through which he passes to
his lasting state. Take it thus.

We were all made by him who is the great Potter or Former of all things, (what
e're we are, whether righteous or wicked, under what Administration soever:)
And this, not so much for any ends we can conceave or drive at, as for his own
pleasure; which will have its course upon us, and will toss and tumble us up
and down into several sorts of Deaths and Life's, as great and as often as it
pleases; till it has quite confounded and brought us to a perfect loss in all
our own Hopes, Desires, and Apprehensions, yea till at last it has quite
swallowed us up in it self: where when we are dead, buried, and cease to be,
know, or desire any more; that Life may at length spring up in us, which till
then we are incapable of any distinct desiring or possessing. And the passage
to this, though it be very dreadful to the flesh, being even through the Gates
of Hell, Death, and Destruction; yet it is in no small measure joyful to the
eye of that Spirit which discerns it to be but a passage, and a necessary
passage too. And what brave Royal Heart would refuse to join issue with this
request? O let all shadowy Perfections, all Perfections that come in and by
Administrations, dye and pass away, be swallowed up by a Death, by a
Destruction, more powerful then themselves; that so way may be made for the
discovery of true and complete Perfection, that it may come forth to swallow
up, both destruction, and all that it has destroyed, for ever; and to bring
forth it self and every thing again in its Primitive Glory, that they may
return to that beauty wherein they were, before they were stained by that
Vanity, Misery and Vexation, whereunto all things are at present subjected.

A LETTER Impleading A CONVERSION, (whether real or pretended is not material;)
And all such kind of Changes in the Creature, (backward or forward) by
principles, either outward or inward.
Dear Anne,
I Have seen your recantation in a Letter of yours, which does wonderfully
please me. I like well to see the creature with its waxed wings mounting up
toward Heaven, and soaring aloft beyond the reach of the sight of its fellow
creatures: But I like it much better to see the wax melted by the heat of the
Sun, and the poor foolish forward creature tumbling down into the Sea, or unto
the Earth again. What should the creature do in Heaven? The light of God should
not quit it self like it self, if it did not at least dazzle, if not wholly
extinguish the fleshly eye, and turn it back into its fleshly principle again.
So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, So let all the principles the creature
either sucks in from others, or beats out it self by its own purest searchings
and reasonings, come to naught, be so thoroughly and effectually thrown down,
that the quite contrary may easily be reared up in their stead.

But where are you now, Sweet Anne? You see the rottenness of your former
foundation, are you sure you now build upon firm ground, upon the inmost Rock?
You have seen a Light, which clearly shakes that great Light which did so
transport you while it appeared Light, but are you sure this Light is so clear,
so deep, of so inward perfect a Nature, as it shall never be shaken? What
pretty sport does Original Wisdom make with us! He tosses and tumbles us, makes
us be or not be, own or not own, what and when he pleases; and well* he may.
While he hides from us the true and original color of things, and that skill
whereby he colors things, he may cosen us as often as he pleases; He may put
what color he will upon things, and what eye he will into us. And we in
beholding the present color with the present eye, may be confident in what we
see, yea in both judging it, and other things by it, not knowing either the
root of it, or of that eye that judges it, nor considering what changes both
the color and the eye may undergo.

Let me run over your Letter a little.

I who am unworthy of the esteem of a Servant,

Do you know your self, that you call your self unworthy? I cannot bear, that
the creature should either exalt or throw down it self, for I am sure it does
it not from true knowledge, but from imagination. Though by the light in them at
present it is knowledge, and true knowledge, unto that eye that is in them; yet
to me (or, if you will, to somewhat in me, which searches, judges and condemns
both that eye, and that light) it is but imagination. Yet again, beholding how
the creature acts, I can bear with either or both, both the creatures lifting
it self up, and throwing it self down, according to the different eye, state
and principle which it has, and wherein it is and acts. So that though in one
sense I am an utter enemy to all persons, principles, things and actions, yet
in another sense I am perfectly reconciled to them all. I like none of them as
such as they take themselves to be, but I like them all as they are, and as I
know them to be.

Do make bold to declare unto you, what the Lord, through his great Love, has
done for me,

You speak here of the Lord, of his Love, his great Love, of the working of
this Love, and what it has wrought for you. Do you know the Lord, or his Love?
What if I should tell you, that both the Lord and his Love, with all the
workings of it, both upon you and others, shall pass away, and never again be
acknowledged, or known, as now they are, by yours, or any others, creaturely
apprehension? What would you say to me? You might be drawn forth to judge me
wonderful deeply and clearly by your present eye, but can you or any else
thoroughly resolve this? I tell you truly, when I can speak I will not be
silent, for fear of man's judgment and condemnation. And I will venture to add
thus much in the mean time. My God would not please me, if any creature could
measure the least part of him with that eye which they call spiritual; Their
heart must not know the least spark of his Nature, nor their tongue be able to
utter the least tittle of his Name. They may have, and shall have, while the
time lasts, a knowledge suitable to them, but not the least tittle of the true
knowledge.

In the discovering me the error of my principle.

Do, condemn it, it must come under condemnation, so must the light that judges
it. All principles have their course of springing up, growing, living
flourishing, and at length of returning into death, into condemnation. That
present principle, that present light, which lives now in the death, in the
condemnation of this, shall feed another with its death.

I made account to have gone on through your whole Letter, but I find my flesh
weary, and my spirit likewise shutting up. I shall therefore only glance at two
or three things more, and so close.

You say, that God is not all things. You speak as true as those that affirm
him to be all things. When either of you come to see indeed, ye will acknowledge
both the one and the other in a larger extent then as yet can be conceaved.
Then you will tell me the meaning of this Riddle, which man cannot but account
madness, There is every thing besides the Lord, and yet nothing but the Lord;
Every thing so filled with creatureship, as if it were quite empty of the
Creator, and yet the Creator every where so every thing in every thing, as
quite to drown the whole creatureship in all its being and motions.

You say, There is evil. So say I too, to all eyes but one: But if you will say
there is evil to that eye, you speak beyond your bounds: you know not that eye,
what it is, nor what it sees, and you venture too far if you say it sees either
good or evil. These are the colors wherein things appear to your eyes, but the
color wherein that eye sees things is not yet known, nor can be seen by any
eye but that which dies in perfection, and rises in perfection.

This is the great quarrel that I have with you and all, That ye will be
measuring all things by your own measure. And all shall lie under condemnation
in this respect, for judging things so to be in themselves, as they appear to
them. The Painter shall be justified for putting several colors on one and the
same substance, and for making several eyes and lights to see each of them by,
but all shall be condemned who justify any sort of these colors in opposition
to the rest, and so pass sentence both upon all the rest, and upon the
substance it self. And this is the whole work of man, to be picking out the
color that suits with his eye, and to be exalting it, and laying all others
flat. And as often as he changes his eye, his light, his color, still he takes
the same course, and therefore still in all his changes deserves to come under
the same condemnation.

You say, There is a Hell, into which they shall be cast who violently break
the Law of God, but do you know what this Hell is, what this Law is, or who are
the breakers of this Law? I know according to your present measure you do, and
so do others according to theirs, but do you know by the true standing measure?
Man by several measures judges righteousness and unrighteousness, but when God
comes to measure, that which man calls righteousness will be found
unrighteousness too. That which is righteousness in the scale of God is very
weighty, but that which man heaps up in treasures, thinking to be very rich,
and of great value, when it comes to the true Touchstone will prove but dross.
Who shall escape Hell, when all the unrighteous in the eye of man, when all the
unrighteous in the eye of God, are cast into it? He that can be content to
please himself in escaping Hell, where others must scorch in unutterable
torment, is he righteous? Oh how my Soul loathes all that which all men call
Righteousness! I see as much need of a proportionable fire to burn it up, as to
burn up wickedness. And oh that the everlasting flames were once universally
let loose upon the foundations of it, for it, and the misery by it, stands more
in the way of true Righteousness, and true Happiness, then wickedness, and the
misery by it, does.

Coleman-street, London, April 21. 1650.
SEVERAL Inward Openings.
I.
HEarken, O Man, and try if thine ear can let in knowledge.

There is an inwardness of all that outwardness which thou beholdest, which is
the Spirit, Strength, Life, Substance, of the outwardness. This is that which
thou call God, who is within all that appears, which are but his several
garments, wherewith he clothes and covers himself from every eye, but that
which pierces through the inmost vail.

This Life, This Strength, This Spirit, This Inward Substance, does please
himself to contract himself in, and to thrust forth shadows, which he quickens
with a shadowy life, and infuses into them an instinct of preserving that life,
that he may make himself the better sport, in hunting it up and down, and
catching it, in his snares of Death and Destruction. It is no sport to us (no
more then it is to the Birds in the air, the Beasts of the field, the Fishes in
the waters) to be hunted and caught: But it is pure sport to him, to see the
feveral subtle workings of that life to save it self ineffectual, which was
made to be taken and destroyed.

And this is his manner of proceeding herein.

First, This Life, This Original Being, thrusts forth an outward Being, which
he endues with a life suitable to its outwardness.

2. He provides food for to maintain this Life, and means to preserve it
against the danger of Death

3. He prepares a strong one to hunt, conquer, catch and kill this Outward
Being in this outward state of life.

Thus he does, and then lets the Creature loose, and his engine of Death loose,
and pleases himself in beholding the several windings and turnings of the one
and the other from first to last.

The great thing that tends to preserve the life of Man is the knowledge of God:
(The Bestial part may feed on other things, but that is not the Man.) But Man
cannot reach the inwardness of them; He is shut out from the tree of Life, that
he cannot come to eat of it, and therefore he must dye. The same Power that
quickens in him the desire of life, and chalks out unto him the way to life,
has so shut it up and fenced it, that there is no entering so much as into the
Paradise where the Tree of Life grows.

God has took great pleasure in presenting himself to the view of Man, in
making discoveries of himself unto Man; and these in several gradations, that
some go far beyond others, some even abound with the knowledge of God in respect
of others. But he has another greater pleasure, which is to strip the best of
these naked, and make them see that theirs is not knowledge neither; only
comparative knowledge, not true knowledge; It is not an understanding what God
is, but a likening of God to somewhat. And this is the great difference between
men, Some set up Idols of Wood and Stone, Others of Silver and Gold: Some have
very carnal gross imaginations and resemblances of God, Others have more
refined, and more spiritual ones.

II.
THere is no true knowing of God by the understanding of the creature. Yet it
is the pleasure of the Lord to present himself to the eye of the creature, and
to quicken in that eye a desire to see and discern him.

Every eye was made to see God with, but no eye can, therefore it sickens,
languishes, pines and dies under a curse, that through death and destruction it
might pass into a capacity of attaining that, without which it cannot enjoy it
self.

As God made all things to shadow out himself, the excellencies of the creature
in every kind, to shadow out his excellencies in their several kinds: So
particularly he made the eye of the creature to shadow out his own eye; and it
is his own eye in a shadow, has all the properties of his own eye in a shadow;
but being but a shadow, it can never in its utmost exaltation attain to the
sight of that which is Substance.

No man can live and see God; He must first dye thoroughly, and rise up again in
the Substance, before he can apprehend or comprehend the Substance at all in
truth. He may have a taste, a glimpse, of the substance in the shadow, but yet
it is but a shadowy glimpse, That which is seen (though by him that sees it, it
be accounted very substantial) is but shadow, just like the eye that sees it,
which cannot possibly reach the view of any thing beyond its sphere.

The created eye is fitted to see nothing but colors, as colors are suited to
the created eye: And though fools think they see more then colors, they see
things in their own apprehension, (this thing, and that thing, and the other
thing,) yet those that are wiser know they are mistaken, and that they do and
can see nothing but the color.

We see Good and Evil which color the whole Creation; But do we see that
Substance which is colored with these? Or do we know whence these colors
came, or what they are in their root? They indeed put several glosses upon the
Substance, representing it variously to the eye of the Creature; but do they
not hereby hide it from the Creature? Does not Truth lie hid under the color?
and is it not veiled by the color from that eye which can pierce no further
then the color, and so must either view that or nothing, judge by that or by
nothing?

O God, How art thou miscoloured! Man thinks he hugely pleases thee by putting
the finest kind of paint upon thee, not understanding how it difigures thee,
and how loathsome it is unto thee, because it makes thee lovely in his eye. But
know, O Man, O refined'st Man, God loathes to be lovely in thine eye. True
Excellency can be justified by nothing but that which is the same with it self.
Gods Excellencies were not deep enough, if man's eye could pierce into them, or
approve them, if Man could acknowledge them excellent. God likes nothing of Man,
and Man likes nothing of God. Indeed Man hugely likes the God that he frames in
his own imagination; The God that his eye sees and acknowledges, is very
excellent; He likes God as he paints him: But God as he is, God in Substance,
God throwing off all this paint, and not acknowledging himself to be any such
thing, but somewhat else which the creature never thought, nor could imagine,
nor could desire him to be, This is a dreadful God, and in no wise desirable.
The Creature may live, and see such a God as it frames, yea the more it lives
the more it sees him, and the more it sees him the more it lives; But the
true substantial sight can never enter into any, till after perfect Death.

O how poor Creatures cosen themselves! They think they love God, would fain
see God, know God, live in communion with God: And this is true in their sense,
Such a God as they have framed to themselves they love, and would fain see,
know and enjoy. But he who is indeed God, they are not able to bear in the
least in what he is. There is nothing that they so perfectly hate, there is
nothing which they so study to avoid, nay, there cannot be a greater Hell to
them, then his true presence; and how can it be otherwise? for he carries in
his Countenance the death of all that is their Life, Joy, Hope and Happiness.

O what an astonishing sight will it be at the opening of the Heart of Man,
when he shall come to plead his love to God, his delight in God, his love to
others for his sake, etc. that the contrary should be mani^ested to him! And he
shall plainly be made see and confess that he was only the Lover of an Idol,
the lover of a God he had framed to himself in his own understanding, which is
in truth nothing; it is not God, but the Creatures creature, a creature which
the understanding of the Creature has made, whether by the help of Nature or
Scriptures it comes all to one.

Is it not time for you, O sons of Men, to look about you? Ye little think how
quick and piercing the approaching Judgment will be. Ye think your selves very
able now to justify your selves, and condemn others: But the Light whereby ye
shall be judged, will be far different from that Light whereby ye now judge your
selves.

O what a strange thing is it, and utterly incredible, that Believers, Lovers
of God, Performers of Righteousness, in the highest and strictest strain,
should have so much deep intense spiritual Unbelief, Hatred of God, and all
manner of unrighteousness discovered in them, and in their purest actions and
motions, as to lay them even with, if not below, the common sort of men, whom
they themselves condemn from the glory of Gods presence, because of their
wickedness!

Woe be to thee, O holy man! O righteous man! O strict exact man! It is against
thee that true Righteousness and true Holiness has the greatest quarrel,
because thou stand most in its way. It is thy wickedness and remoteness from
Righteousness and Holiness, that is now to be discovered. Under thy skirt are
found all the abominations that thou condemnest. It is not thy Paint that will
hide thee from the eye that now searches thee, though it does hide thee from
thine own eye. Thou must come to Judgment; The High Court of Justice is chiefly
erected in reference to thee, to examine and find thee out. And woe unto thee,
for thou shall not stand in Judgment, what ever thou think of thy self; Nay,
it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for thee.

III.
ANd what if I should say, that this should be the course and progress of the
Judgment?

First, That Unrighteousness should be set before the Judgment seat in all the
sorts and degrees of it, according to the several Rules and Administrations of
it, and it condemned; and Righteousness in its several kinds and degrees
justified.

Then that Righteousness should be brought upon the stage in its several kinds
and degrees, and it condemned; and unrighteousness justified.

Then that both should be brought in again, and the justification of both be
taken off, and both be utterly condemned for ever.

(It is a Seat, a Throne of Perfect Judgment, and therefore Righteous Judgment
must be passed on every thing according to every consideration and aspect that
it has; and things must be thoroughly judged, they must be scanned and judged
under every consideration.)

And lastly, After the condemnation of Man, of all Man, of Man in all wherein
he expects and desires to be justified, that then Everlasting Righteousness,
Righteousness which shall stand for ever, Righteousness which can in no respect
be impleaded, but is every way true, full, and perfect, should break forth in
its luster, and swallow up this condemnation, and the fear of it.

It is but a weak righteousness that can justify only such as are under such
or such a Law, whether of external or spiritual faith and obedience: But that
which has the true vigor and strength of Righteousness in it, can swallow up
all unrighteousness under all Laws and Administrations for ever. That
Righteousness is universal which fills all, it is like God who leaves nothing
empty of his own Life and Being. That Righteousness is indeed Everlasting,
which will suffer no unrighteousness to last or appear after it is discovered.
Where God appears, the Creature must vanish, it cannot stand in his presence:
And where the Righteousness of God appears, both the righteousness and
unrighteousness of the Creature fly away.

O how dreadful will the day of Judgment be to the Creature, to the whole
Creature, in one part of it or other! dreadful to the unrighteous in one
respect, dreadful to the righteous in another respect; But how pleasant in
every part to the Creator! To see all things fall before him, and all his own
adjudged to him, and recovered by him. There is none shall be able in any wise
to stand this Trial, but the Son, who has learned this point of obedience, to
give up his Life, Righteousness, and all his Excellency (though by very painful
suffering) into that bosom from whence he received it, that it may never live
more in him, or in it self, but in that fountain from whence it did flow, and
whereunto it could not but return, where and where only will it suffer it self
purely and perfectly to be embraced and enjoyed.

IV.
BE silent O Flesh: yet speak while thy time lasts; Speak until I silence thee.
Open thy fleshly mouth, utter thy fleshly mind, till I stop the one, till I
confound the other. Profess that thou know the Lord, till I convince thee
that thou know him not. Say and think thou love me, and longest to be one
with me, till I show thee that thou hate nothing so much as me, and communion
with me. Worship me according to thy present light and apprehensions of me, or
thou shall feel the smart of neglecting it: And though thou do, yet will I
not spare thee, but destroy both thee and thy worship. I am come to judge thee
and thy light by my light, and thou shall not stand but fall in Judgment, thou
thy self into nothing, and thy light into utter darkness. And by how much thou
exaltest thy self above others, by so much will I lay thee beneath others. By
how much the higher thou have soared, by so much the lower shall thou fall. The
greater thy pleasure, hopes and confidence have been in thy foregoing life, The
greater shall thy torment, amazement and distress be in thy approaching Death.
My glory shall chiefly spring out of the destruction and desolations of thine.
I am now whetting my glittering Sword to pierce into, and fetch out, thy very
heart blood. I am about to say I live for ever, and when I speak it, thou shall
dye for ever, in thy purest, in thy highest enjoyments of life. My life and
thine cannot consist together, but while thou live I dye, and when I come to
live thou shall dye. Thou have hitherto sucked and enjoyed thy life out of my
death; and now is my turn and time come to gather and enjoy my life out of thy
death. Thou have appeared, and I have not been; Now will I appear, and thou
shall be no longer. Thou have been unrighteous in killing me, and detaining
mine own from me; But I will be righteous in killing thee, and recovering all
into mine own possession again.

Live then bravely O flesh, flourish as well as thou can, come off bravely at
last however. Eat and drink, for to morrow thou shall dye. Eat and drink
lustily, that thou may be fatted for the slaughter, and fitted for my Table:
for as I live, says the Lord, I will feed on thee, and devour thee, and thou
shall never be any thing any more but what thou art in me, but what I by the
power of my life, by the warmth of my stomach, convert thee into within my self.

V.
GOd who is one and the same, altogether unchangeable in his own Nature; yet is
full of various changeable appearances to the eye of the Creature, and can
only be seen by the Creature in some shape and appearance, but not at all as
he is in his own Nature. According to his design concerning the Creature, so he
fits the present state of the Creature; and according to the state of the
Creature, is his appearance to the Creature, and the Creatures sight of him.

To the Creature in its pure natural state he appears as a Lord, as a good
kind bountiful Lord, and so Adam in his state of innocence looked upon him; as
one who did lay out his Wisdom in the frame of the Creatures, and his treasures
of goodness and kindness in his tender provision and care for the Creature; as
one who loved the being of the Creature, desired to have it go well with the
Creature, and delighted himself to have communion with the Creature.

To the Creature in its fallen sunk estate, he appears as a severe dreadful
Judge, as an Enemy to the Life, Being, and Happiness of it; as a Tormentor to
it, as a Destroyer of it.

To the Creature in its servile state he appears as an harsh Lawgiver, as one
that propounds Life and Death, Misery and Happiness, upon very hard conditions,
such as it is easy to miscarry upon, but very difficult (if at all possible)
to attain the end (the Creature has in its eye) by.

To the Creature in its Son-like state he appears a tender Father, one who
communicates his own Nature, Life and Blessedness freely to the Son; who as he
has begotten, so he takes care of him, makes him his Heir, keeps his
inheritance safe for him, and him for it. And this is an excellent sight of
God, a true, a substantial sight in compare with any of the former. This is his
Image wherein he is seen: His Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Love, Justice, Mercy,
etc. which were very darkly held out in the rest, shine here in their luster.

Now all these appearances are written in the state and in the heart of every
Creature, the present kind of appearance being still suited to the present
state: so that man finds them, not so much by the hearing of the ear, seeing
of the eye, or by searching into any Books, whether of Creatures or Scriptures,
as by looking into his own heart. And man is much deceived in this, He does
not, he cannot learn so much either from men or books (as he thinks to do)
further then they occasion the opening of his own heart in him: for let man
strive never so much, he can learn no more then is written in his own heart,
and in that state wherein he is.

Let Adam look into his own heart in the state of innocence, he shall presently
read there a sweet, a good, a kind, a bountiful God.

Let fallen man look into his heart, he shall presently read there a severe
accusing condemning Judge.

Let the servant, the slave, look into his heart, and (in plain terms) he shall
presently read God a Tyrant. He may strain other thoughts of God into his
understanding, but let him look into his heart, he shall find, he thinks and
can think no otherwise of him, then as of an hard Master.

Let the Son look into his heart, and he shall read God a tender Father, one
who loves and takes care of him, as of himself.

But what is all this? All these are but several appearances of God in the
Creature, of God to the Creature. This is not the first, and this shall not be
the last. This is not God as he is in himself, but God as he appears to us. All
this, as it has a time to be sown, born, spring up, and live; so it must have
a time to dye, and pass away. None of this is the true knowledge, if you speak
properly. It is not the knowledge of God, but of the present appearance of God.
It is not the knowledge of the Substance as it is in it self, but as it lurks
and makes resemblances of it self under a Cloud. And as he often blots out one
resemblance by another resemblance, so he will at last blot out all
resemblances by discovering the Substance.

O poor Man! why art thou so puffed up with thy knowledge? It is not the
knowledge of the true God, at best it is but the knowledge of his likeness, (and
alas, how little is there of this kind too?) Nor is it true knowledge, but
only the likeness of knowledge. Both this knowledge, and the thing as thus
known, must pass away for ever.

As certainly as there was a Beginning shall there be an Ending, (All things
that have a beginning must have an end,) and nothing shall be last but that
which was first.

VI.
THere is a double condemnation lying upon all men; both upon the World, and
upon the People of God.

One is, in that they do not seek to know and worship God according to that
light of Reason or Religion that is sown in them, and would spring up and break
forth through them, did it not receive checks and quenchings from them.

The other is for idolizing that which they do in any degree know or attain,
which is or can be but a Shadow, and yet is still set up by them, and
magnified, as if it were the Substance.

Man falls short, in reaching after, and comprehending the shadow: But for all
that, how short soever he fall, though he catch hardly the shadow of the
shadow, yet he will not endure it should go for less then the Substance.

Search the course of Man throughout the whole World, Where is he who sees,
knows, worships the true God? Search all sorts of Christians, Where is he that
knows the true Christ, the true way to God through Christ? Has not every one
set up the Idols of his own heart, the stumbling block of his own iniquity
before his eyes? They think they behold God, worship God, etc. but alas, it is
but their own Idol.

Search the course of Man (Vain Man, or Religious Man) throughout the
Scriptures, how find ye him there? The Jews they can judge the Heathen as
Idolaters, and God he judges the Jews as Idolaters all along. And yet what a
continual inveterate enmity is there between these? the Heathen still striving
either to convert or root out the Jews, and the Jews still striving either to
convert or root out the Heathen. They were both so drunk in their own
Imagination, and so hid in their dark state one from another, that they sought
to destroy that in one another (or one another because of it) which was their
own Life.

And what opposition is there at this day between Turks and Papists, Papists
and Protestants, Protestants and Puritans, Episcopalians and Presbyterians,
Presbyterians and Independents, Independents and Anabaptists, Anabaptists and
Seekers? etc. and yet the same sap runs through them all, the same principle
lives in them all, and fights thus vehemently with it self, because it
knows not it self in this darkness, which has so long been spread over all.
They None of them truly know God, but every one sets up his own Idol, the
imagination of his own brain, by virtue of this one and the same Principle
according to its present tincture in them; And it is the variety of the
tincture that produces this variety, and by that means sets them at such a
wonderful distance, as if there were no similitude nor possibility of
conjunction between them, who are already one and the same both in their
principles, motions, and end. And though they judge one another very partially
and unjustly, yet they shall find when true Judgment is given, that they are
indeed one, and justly come under the same justification or condemnation. How
different soever their appearances are, yet their root, their life, their
principle, is one and the same. And the best of these, in judging the worst of
these, do but judge themselves, and in justifying themselves, they justify the
worst of these, for they are the same in the main.

O poor Man, how art thou veiled from thy self! How are all others veiled from
thee! How art thou befooled with the eye of thy wisdom! Thou can not see any
thing as it is. If thy heart could take scope to it self, and judge them quite
contrary to what thine eye sees them to be, thou would come nearer to Truth
by such a mad thought of thine heart, then by the soberest sight of thine eye.
Thou art thine own utter enemy; All that thou desire, tends to undo thee: All
that thou judge to be good, life, happiness, is far otherwise. All the
knowledge thou have of good and evil comes by thy fall, by thy darkness; and the
clearer and clearer Revelations thou have of both, are still but to this dark
eye, to thee in this dark state, to thee fallen from, and incapable of
beholding, true light in any kind. When will thou know and acknowledge thy
friend! This is the character of him, It is he who plots thy Destruction, who
hunts after thy life, who follows close the scent of thy feet, and will not
leave thee till he has overtaken thee, torn thee in pieces, and quite devoured
thee.

VII.
O How livelily is Death written upon all things! But who can read it? Who is
so skilful as to understand the Characters either of Life or Death? Thou art
weighed, O Man, in the balance, and art found too light; Thou art but as the
dust thereof, which weighs nothing, but is altogether unable to sway the
scale either one way or other. Why gaddest thou then to change thy way? Thou
shall be worried out of all the imaginations of thine Heart. Thou can be safe
no where; Destruction will find thee out where thou art, or whithersoever thou
think to remove for greater security. Thy time has long been determined,
and is now arriving at its period, and thou may not enjoy Life or Pleasure
any longer. Give account of thy Stewardship, for thou shall be no longer
Steward. The Earth is sinking under thee, Thy Elements melting in thee, Thy
whole Life and Being expiring; what will thou do? where will thou shelter thy
self? There is no escaping that Death and Judgment which is seizing on thee.
Thy Sun is setting, and that black night, which thou fear, is hastening upon
thee. I am stripping thee of all that is fweet and lovely to thee, and driving
thee out of thy present Paradise of present enjoyments and future hopes, into
the Land of Oblivion. Into the Wilderness must thou go, where thou shall be
stripped of all thine Ornaments, and dye in ignominy and torment. How will thou
bear the loss of all thy beauty, wisdom and excellency, wherewith thou have
flourished like a God above the rest of thy fellow creatures? In one moment,
which thou lookedst not for, shall Misery befall thee, and make an utter end of
thee. Though thou expectest to sit on a throne for ever, to live with and enjoy
God in perpetual embraces, yet thine own mouth shall give thee the lie: And
when I cause the power and pangs of death to fasten upon thee, thou shall know
and feel, that thou neither wast, art, nor shall be; but I alone was, am, and
will be, what thou by my disappearance have foolishly imagined thy self to be:
for I am resolved to gather back all that belongs to me, and leave thee no more
then belongs to thee, which is neither Life, Being, Sense, nor Motion, but mere
emptiness and vanity. And then live if thou can in thine own imagination,
when I have gathered all the reality of life into my self.

VIII.
TRemble, O Earth, at the presence of the Lord, and quake, O Heavens, for ye
shall be shaken also: Your Sun shall be darkened, your Moon turned into blood,
your Stars shall lose their light; The whole fabric of Heaven shall fall into,
and perish in, the bowels of the Earth. And who (or what) shall live when God
does this? Surely that alone which cannot dye. He then shall live, who gave
life to all, and has prepared a death for, and suitable to, every life: yea,
he shall live who can swallow up death, and drown it for ever in the power of
his own life. O LIVE, LIVE, LIVE, THOU ONLY, FOR THOU ALONE ART WORTHY. Thou
art the Land of the living; Thy life lives only in thine own Land, and thou
live only in thine own life. This is the true Inheritance, the true Canaan,
the true Happiness, the true enjoyment of God. This is Life Eternal, the rise
and result of all.

This is Life indeed, which can quicken death it self, and make it as living as
it self.

This is Power indeed, that can cloth the greatest weakness with its own
immortal and eternal strength.

This is Light indeed, that can make darkness shine in its own brightness,
where the darkness and the light are both alike, and where the Night shines as
the Day.

This is Purity indeed, which is every where, in every thing, and can purify
every thing in it self; A pure River, which gathers all waters into it self,
purging and cleansing them, till it has made them like it self.

This is true Happiness, that can swallow up all Misery, and make it equally
happy with it self.

This is true Spirit, which can devour all flesh, and by the strength of its
quickening virtue, turn it into Spirit.

This is a Philosophical Stone worth having, which can turn any thing it
touches into perfect gold.

But where dwells this Skill? where dwells this Life, this Spirit, this Power?
is it any where? is there any such thing? There is every one harping at it;
Sure methinks there should be such a skill somewhere, and if there be, it
cannot but delight to show it self, and will have its season so to do. Only it
may first contrive to bring forth Vanity, Misery, Weakness, Emptiness,
Darkness, Death, etc. in their perfection, that it may give a true taste of its
own virtue. When it has prepared all the Eternals and Everlastings that can be
imagined to swallow up, then will appear the efficacy and vigor of its own
Eternity and Everlastingness.

These are the Bowels out of which all things came, which are still rolling,
and will never be at rest, till they receive them in again; and nothing can
truly rest, till it returns thither again. This was the first, and this must be
the last; and after all the toilsom compasses and circuits that are now a
fetching, the circle will end where it began, and then will that saying be
indeed verified, The first shall be last, and the last first. But every thing
must be thoroughly tired out of its own motions, desires, ends, hopes,
happinesses, before it come to rest in this Center, yet this irksom and
wearisom circumference will make it more lovely, both in its beginning and in
its end.

IX.
BEfore this World, this state and Being of things (as we call it) was, Man
will confess there was nothing but the Lord.

When ever this world shall cease to be, there will be nothing but the Lord
again. It is his right to be the last, who was the first: And if he will be
true to himself, he can no more suffer any thing to be after him, then it was
before him.

And yet must nothing be lost, but every thing found; lost indeed in its own
weak, fading, perishing state, but found in a standing, enduring, eternal
state: Where when things arrive, that Vanity, Death and Mortality, which is now
written upon them all, shall be swallowed up in perfect and immortal Life and
Glory.

And what are things at present? Are they things that are, or things that are
not? Have they a real, or an appearing existence? To our eye they are real, but
is there not an eye to which they are but-Ciphers, which swallows them up in
the sight of it self; which acknowledges him that was, and him that shall be,
only to be at present also; who is so all, and so fills all, that he can leave
no room for any thing else to be where he is? There is no object his eye can
behold, but himself. Where ever he looks, his eye dispels and scatters every
thing that falls short of his own substance and perfection: yet is there
nothing to be seen, but he must see it. Nothing can escape his eye, nor nothing
can abide his eye. It is the shutting of his eye in us, that makes ours open:
But when his eye opens, ours will be shut, and there will be no eye left to
see, but the Lords, and nothing left to be seen, but the Lord himself: yea, it
is only to us that it is otherwise at present, but not to him.

O foolish Man! when will thou cease boasting of thy knowledge, and come indeed
to know the Lord? If I should tell thee never so plainly, yet thou have not an
ear to hear it; therefore I will forbear perplexing thee any further at this
time, with over-straining thee to hear, see or comprehend, beyond the compass
of thy present ear, eye or heart; and leave thee to enjoy what thou have; which
as yet thou may, with some kind of quietness, for a short season, if thou
can be content so to do without over-exalting it: otherwise know, that the
wind is too boisterous, to suffer any thing that is high and lifted up, to
remain unshaken.

FINIS.

