COLLECTIONS OF Acute Diseases.

The Second and Third Part.

The Second Part, Contains all that the Learned and Experienced Dr. Sydenham,
has Written of the Pestilential Fever, and dreadful Plague at London in the
Years 1665, 1666.

The Third Part, Collected from the same Author, Treats of the Depuratory Fever
of the Years 1661, 62, 63, 64. and of the New Fever; together with an exact
Description of that wonderful Convulsion, called Chorea Sancti Viti, and of its
Cure: And of the Cure of the Fever that afflicts Children upon breeding Teeth,
as also of the Hectic Fever that is peculiar to them.

LONDON: Printed by J. R. and are to be sold by H. Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

Advertisement.
BY reason of many Avocations, and other Impediments, the Publisher has been
much obstructed, in carrying on the Work in Hand, but is now in such a
readiness that he hopes to Publish the Fourth Part in a very short time. It
Treats of Agues, of a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Quinsey, Rheumatism, Dysentery,
Cholera Morbus, etc.

COLLECTIONS OF Acute Diseases.
The Second Part: Of the Plague, and other Pestilential Fevers.
CHAP. I.
Of the Epidemic Constitution of the Year 1665. and 1666. at London.
THE foregoing Winter being extremely cold, and the Frost This Chapter is taken
out of Dr. Sydenham's Treatise of Acute Diseases.
continuing without any Intermission till Spring, it thawed suddenly at the end
of March in the year 1665. and Peripneumonia's, Pleurisies, Quinseys, and such
like inflammatory Diseases, made great Slaughter of a sudden. At the same time
also a continual Epidemic Fever showed it self, 'twas very different from the
Genius of the continual Fevers that Reigned in the preceding Constitution, of
which scarce any used to invade at that time of the year. The Pain of the Head
was more violent, and the vomiting more severe, than in the former; and the
Diarrhaea, which was most commonly prevented in the other Fever, by taking a
Vomit, was now heighthned by the same, and yet the Vomiting did not cease. The
external parts were dry as in the Fevers of the foregoing Constitution; but
after bleeding the Patient could sweat, and the Symptoms were presently
mitigated by it; and this might be done at any time of the Disease; whereas in
the former Fever you could neither attempt it safely, nor indeed could easily
obtain your desire, before the thirteenth or fourteenth day. The Blood was like
the Blood of Pleutritics, and of those that have a Rheumatism, only it had not
so white a Jelly upon it: These were at first the Diagnostic Phoenomena of this
Disease; but in progress of the Year the Plague it self broke out, accompanied
with a great Number of Pathognomonic Symptoms, as Carbuncles, Bubo's, and the
like. It increased daily more and more, and came to its height about the
Autumnal Aequinox, at which time it destroyed about 8000 in the space of a
Week, notwithstanding that two Thirds, at least, of the Citizens betook
themselves to the Country for fear of Infection: Afterward it began to
decrease, and by reason of the cold of Winter almost ceased, only here and
there one had it all the Winter, and toward the following Spring, at the
approach of which it totally vanished; yet a Fever remained (tho not so
Epedemic) the whole following year, and even till the beginning of the Spring,
1667.

CHAP. II.
Of the Pestilential Fever and Plague of the Years 1665, 1666.
I Have heretofore hinted by the by, that some Fevers are vulgarly accounted
Malignant, whereas the extreme violence of the Symptoms, which seems to
countenance this Opinion, proceeds not from any venomous disposition of the
Disease, but from the ill Management of the Cure: For when we don't duly attend
to the solution of the Disease destined by Nature, but rashly begin some other
Method, we mightily disturb the Economy of the whole Body, and turn all things
topsie turvy: and on this Account the Disease, contrary to its wont, has a
woeful Aspect, is different from its self, and accompanied with irregular
Symptoms; so that indeed it seems of another kind: But a Fever truly malignant
does not happen every day, and wholly differs from other kinds of Fevers, that
are so called, by reason of the irregularities of the Symptoms; and is truly of
the same Species with the Plague, only it is a degree below it; wherefore I will
treat of the Rise and Cure of both in the same Chapter.

That such a disposition, or texture, happens to the Mass of Air, as occasions
various Diseases at different times, is manifest to every one that but
considers, that one and the same Disease destroys an infinite number of Men at
some certain Seasons, and at another time seizes only here and there a Man, and
goes no further; and this is very apparent in the Smallpox, especially in the
Plague, the Argument of this Chapter.

But what that disposition of the Air is, from whence this Morbific Furniture
proceeds, we know not; nor many other things about which the doting and
arrogant crowd of Philosophers trifle: Whatever it be, upon this account at
least, the clemency and goodness of Almighty God is to be reverenced, because
pestilential constitutions of the Air, producing the Plague (the greatest of
all Miseries, and most destructive to Mankind) seldomer happen, than those that
cause less deadly Diseases: So that the Plague rarely rages violently in our
Britain oftener than once in the space of thirty or forty Years. Some here and
there die of the Plague for some years after a notable Pestilence; and its wont
to go off gradually, by reason the pestilential constitution of the Air
continues still in part, and yet is not wholly changed to another more wholesome;
and therefore it ought to be accounted only as the Gleanings of the last
Harvest: And also the Fevers that reign a year or two after a dreadful Plague,
are wont to be pestilential for the same reason: And tho some have not the
Tokens of the Plague, yet are they much of the same Nature, and require the
like method of Cure, as we shall make appear hereafter.

But besides the constitution of the Air, as a more common Cause, there ought
to be also another Procatartic, to wit, the reception of the Infection, either
immediately by accompanying some plaguey Person, or mediately transmitted by a
Fomes from some other place; for else if it should happen while there is such a
disposition of the Air as we have mentioned, a dreadful Fire would presently be
kindled by a small Spark, and the whole Air through that tract of Earth would
suddenly beinfected with the Plague, by reason of the Breath of the Sick, and
Carcasses of the Dead; so that there would be no more need of a Fomes, or
personal intercourse to propagate this dreadful Disease, but the very Air,
passing in with the Breath, would be able to destroy a Man of it self, tho he
were carefully removed from the infected, if he has a Body furnished with
Humors, disposed to receive the Infection. This Disease, when it is only
sporadical, afflicts some few promiscuously, at any time, the Infection being
as it were handed from one to another. But when there is also an Epidemic
Constitution of the Air, it begins between Spring and Summer, that being a
Season most fit to produce a Disease, whose Essence chiefly consists of an
Inflammation, as we shall show hereafter. Moreover it has its times of
Increase, and Declination, like other kinds of natural things: It begins at the
time we said; as the Year increases, it spreads; and as that declines, it
decreases, till at length the Winter has changed the Air into a Diathesis,
contrary to this Disease.

For if the changes of the Seasons of the Year have no power over this Disease,
but the pestilential Seeds being untamable by any Alteration of the Air, are
transmitted from one to another in a perpetual Series, it could not be, but
that when it has once entered into any popular City, it should still increase
the Funerals more and more, till by a continued destruction no one at length
would remain to whom it might impart its Infection: But that the contrary often
happens, is clear, from the number of the dead, which increased to some
Thousands in one Week in August, but mightily decreased at the latter end of
November, and almost ceased. And yet I don't deny, but that it may be, and
which also some Authors have related, that the Plague has broke out at other
Seasons of the year, but it is rare, neither is such a Plague very raging;
besides I very much suspect, that the disposition of the Air, tho it be
pestilential, is not sufficient of it self to cause the Plague, but that being
always in some place or other, its either conveyed by a Fomes, or by the
coming of some plaguey Person from an infected place to another, and is not
epidemical there, unless also the disposition of the Air incline to it: For
otherwise, I don't understand how it comes to pass, that in the same tract of
Heaven, when some one Town is grievously afflicted with the Plague, another not
far distant, by warily prohibiting any Commerce with the infected place, should
keep clear of it; as not long a-go, when the Plague raged cruelly almost over
all Italy, it was shut out of the Confines of Tuscany, by the Care and Prudence
of the Great Duke.

Its first approach is almost always accompanied with shaking and horror, like
the Fits of intermittent Fevers, presently violent Vomitings, a pain about the
Region of the Heart as if'twere pressed, a burning Fever, with the usual
concourse of Symptoms, perpetually molest the Sick, till either Death it self,
or a happy eruption of a Bubo, or Parotis, discharges the morbific matter, and
so frees them from that deplorable condition. It does indeed now and then
happen, but seldom, that it comes without any sense of a Fever before, and
suddenly destroys Men. The Purple Spots, which are the Forerunners of present
Death, breaking out, as they are about their Business; but this sudden Death
(which is to be noted) scarce ever hapens, but at the beginning of a dreadful
Plague; and is never, when it remits, and is weakened, or in Years in which it is
not epidemical. It sometimes also happens that Tumors appear, when neither a
Fever, nor any other grievous Symptom went before; but I imagine that some
little shaking or horror, tho less perceptible, always precedes. They that are
after this manner, may safely walk about the Streets at pleasure, and do their
Business, as if they were well, not regarding any Regimen.

As to the essence of this Disease, I don't pretend to define it exquisitly, and
perchance, he would seem as impertinent to wise Men, who should ask me, what
constitutes this, or that sort of Sickness, as I should, if I should ask him
the same Question, concerning a Horse for instance, among Animals, or Betony
among Plants: For Parent Nature accomplishes the Generation of all things,
which any time she brings to Light from the Bosom of Causes, by most certain
Rules, only known to her self, and hides their Essence, Quiddities, and
constitutive Differences, in the greatest obscurity. Hence every Species of
Diseases, no less than of Animals, or Vegitables, is always allotted Affections
peculiar to it self, and univocal, flowing from its Essence: And yet
notwithstanding, that Question will not be very considerable, to wit, How we
should cure Diseases, when we are ignorant of their Causes? For as much as the
Cure of most Diseases is performed, not by the knowledge of the Causes, but by
a convenient Method, approved by Experience. But to return to the business,
because we are wont to deduce the Rise of all similar Deseases from a Fault of
the first or second Qualities (which we can only do by reason of our great
ignorance of things) it is probable, that the Plague is a peculiar Fever, of its
own kind, proceeding from an Inflammation of the most spirituous Particles of
the Blood, for as much as they seem most adequate to its most subtle Nature: If
it exert the greatest subtilty, with which it is endowed, it suddenly dissipates
the native Heat, and so kills the Patient, as is seen at the beginning, and
state of an Epidemical Constitution. The Corpse of those who are so suddenly
destroyed, by the violence of this Disease, are every where disfigured with
Purple Spots, the Fibers of the Blood being broken in pieces, by reason of the
violence of the intestine Conflict, and the frame of it wholly dissolved: And
this Tragedy may be acted by reason of the great subtilty of its Flame, even
without any febrile ebullition of the Blood, or sense before of any other
Sickness, otherwise than it most commonly happens, where the Morbific Cause is
less subtle, and the Weapon more obtuse with which it assaults Life; the
manner of the difference may be thus bluntly represented: For Instance, If a
Needle, or any other sharp thing, be put under a Pillow, and forceably pressed,
it does not lift it up, as some things of a duller point would, but perforats
it. But this kind of sudden Death seldom happens, and only, as we said before,
at the beginning, or increase of the Plague: For most commonly, as in other
Fevers, shaking and horror first invades, and heat presently succeeds, which
continues till the inflamed Particles of the Blood are banished to the
Emunctories, by the provident conduct of Nature, and there turned into Puss,
after the manner of common Phlegmons. If the Inflammation be more remiss, its
wont to produce those Fevers which are commonly called pestilential, which
often happen at the end of a pestilential Constitution; and perhaps a year or
two after, till that species of Fevers wholly disappears.

In my opinion, that Inflammation which is called an Erisypelas, is much like
the Plague; for it is accounted by the best Physicians a continual Fever,
arising from the thinner part of the Blood, from which that Nature may free her
self, she expels it to some external part of the Body, in which a Tumor, or
rather broad red spots dispersed (for a very visible Tumor does not often
appear) arise, which they call an Erysipelas; but the Fever goes off critically
by this Tumor, after it has afflicted the Sick a day or two. And moreover,
sometimes, there is wont to be Pain in the Glandules of the Arm-pit, or Groin,
as in the Plague; and it begins also almost like it, with Horror, and a febrile
heat following it: So that they who have not had this Disease before, think
they are seized with the Plague, till at length it shows its self in the Leg,
or some other part: And indeed some Authors have imagined that there was
somewhat of Malignity in this Distemper, and therefore have proceeded in the
Cure with Sudorificks, and Alexipharmacs. This Flame soon goes out of its own
accord, and does no further mischief, when by means of the ebullition, the
torrid particles of the Blood are cast out.

But the Plague far exceeds an Erysipelas; for by reason of the great tenuity
of its substance, it is fitted to pass through the innermost recesses of the
Body like Lightning, and suddenly destroys the Spirits of the Blood, and
dissolves its frame, before oppressed Nature can raise a febrile ebullition,
the wonted means by which she endeavors to remove whatever is offensive to the
Blood.

If any one be dissatisfied with my Opinion, to wit, that this Disease is
occasioned by an Inflammation, let him consider, that not only the presence of
a Fever, but also many other things, favor this Opinion. For instance, the
color of the Blood taken away, which is like that of Pleuritics, and of those
that have a Rheumatism, the adust appearance of a Carbuncle, not unlike the
impression of an actual Cautery, the Buboes, which are as much inclined to an
Inflammation as other Tumors of any other sort, and they end in abcesses, as
most inflammations are want to do; and also the Season of the year, in which an
epidemic Plague most commonly breaks out, seems to confirm the same; for at the
same time, viz. between Spring and Summer Pleurisies, Quinsies, and other
Diseases that proceed from an Inflammation of the Blood, are wont to be
epidemical; and I never knew them more frequent than they were before the Rise
of the London Plague. But it is of no importance, that that very year so
dreadful, by reason of the destruction of many thousands, was otherwise most
mild and healthy, and that all that escaped the Plague were better in health,
and also that those who recovered of it were afterward freed from Cachexies,
and other indispositions usually occasioned by the relics of former Diseases.
And moreover, that the imposthumated Carbuncles (after the inflamed particles
were carried off with the matter) were easily cured by Chirurgical means, and
those too not very exquisit.

But perhaps, some one will ask, How it comes to pass, that hot Medicines, such
as are almost all Alexipharmacs, should be used with good Success, both as to
the cure of the Plague, as also for preservation from it, if it consists of an
Inflammation? To whom I answer, That these things do good only by accident, to
wit, by the benefit of Sweat that they produce, by which the inflamed particles
of the Blood are exterminated; but if they don't cause sweat when they are
taken, as it very often happens, the flame of the Blood, increased by their
adventitious heat, soon proclaims openly the mischief of them. In a word, as to
preservation, I know, that the use of hot Antidotes is also every where
commended, but with what success is not yet proved: Indeed it is rather
probable, that Wine drunk too freely, and other strong preservatives taken
daily at set hours have cast many into this Disease, who otherwise might not
have had it.

As to the Cure of these Fevers, the Curative indications are first to be
minded, which in general, are so to be directed, that either, exactly following
the conduct of Nature, we assist her in exterminating the Disease; or not
trusting to the method she is wont to use in conquering this intestine enemy,
we substitute by Art, in the room of it, a contrary and more safe. But perhaps
some one will say, that the cure of the Plague may be well enough performed by
Alexipharmacs, great numbers of which may be found in practical Authors: but
truly it is very disputable, whether the help these Medicines afford, don't
rather proceed from their manifest qualities, by which, procuring Sweat
plentifully, they prepare a way at the same time, for the exclusion of the
Morbific matter, than from a certain occult Virtue allotted them by Nature, to
expel the Venom of the Pestilential Malignity. Neither may we only doubt of
these, but also of the Alexipharmacs of other Diseases, viz. Whether they don't
relieve the Sick, rather by stirring up some Evacuation, than by a Specific
Virtue; for instance, in the French Pox; he that objects, that Mercury and
Sarsaparilla are Alexipharmacs; for the Venom in that Disease, must produce
some examples of Cures, in which That did sometimes restore Health without
Salivation or Stools, and this without Sweat; which I believe will be very
difficult for him to do: But it seems probable to me, that the peculiar Remedy,
and proper Alexipharmac of the Plague, yet lies hid in Natures Bosom; nor can
it be taken thence, but only by a Mechanic Reason.

But that we may a little more fully consider the former intention, which
requires, that we should assist Nature after her own way and manner, in
expelling the Morbific matter: it is to be noted, that in a true Plague, Nature
performs her business by some abcess breaking out in the Emunctories, and so
the matter is cast out, when she does not err, of her own accord; nor is
violently forced out of the way; but in the Fever we call Pestilential, the
same is performed by means of Sweat, through the whole superficies of the Body.
Whence we may learn, that according to the various ways and order, which Nature
discovers in both Diseases, a different method of Cure ought to be instituted;
for if any one endeavors to expel the matter of a true Plague by Sweat, he
proceeds in a method opposite to Nature's for as much as she attempts to do it
by Imposthumes; and on the contrary, he that endeavors to eliminate the matter
of a Pestilential Fever, any other way than by Sweat, takes a course no way
agreeable to her conduct and inclination. But in the true Plague, it is not yet
known by what fit and certain kind of Remedies, the ejection of the Morbific
matter, that is, the eruption of the Imposthumes may be promoted. Perhaps some
one may imagine, that a corroborating Diet, and Cordials, may conduce to it;
but truly, I should very much doubt, lest they should increase the heat of the
Patient, that is too much already. And as to Sweats, I am fully satisfied by
experience, that they signify nothing in this case, tho I don't deny, but that
after great Sweats, continued for the space of three or four hours, and then
suddenly stopped, the tumor shows its self; but I don't think, it is at all
occasioned by the Sweat; for as much as, when it is at height, there appears no
sign of its eruption: when it is over indeed, it may follow, as it were by
accident, to wit, when the Sweat has removed part of that burden, by which
Nature was too much oppressed, and the Body violently heated by Cordials, taken
to raise it. But how fallacious and uncertain this ejection of the peccant
matter, is by imposthumes, occasioned by Sweat, the lamentable end of those
testifies, who have bin treated after this manner, of which scarce one in
three, (to speak within bounds) escape the danger of the Disease and Cure. But
on the contrary, many on whom the Tumors broke out in the right manner, even
when they were intent on their business, and without any sensible hurt of any
natural, vital, or animal faculty, recovered in a short time: except those, who
unfortunately falling into the hands of a Quack, and composing themselves to
Sweat, by his Advice, tho they were very well in Body and Mind, began from that
very time to grow worse; and their sickness increasing, they sufficiently
demonstrated the injury of this unlucky Counsel, by their own death. But the
uncertain Judgment of this Disease by Tumors, is manifest; for that sometimes a
Bubo, which comes out at first laudably, and with remission of the Symptoms,
afterward disappears of a sudden, and instead of it, Purple Spots, the certain
tokens of Death succeed. The cause of the going in of the Tumor, seems of
right to be attributed to those Sweats, which were designed to promote its
eruption; for as much as, they dissipated, other whither through the habit of
the Body, the chief part of the matter, which should have served to have kept
up the Tumor. However it be, this at least plainly appears, that by the
benignity of Almighty God, certain ways of casting out the Morbific matter, are
appointed in other Diseases: but for this Scourge of heinous Iniquity, only a
very uncertain one. And perchance, the Cause and Original of this great
destruction, may be as properly deduced from hence, as from Malignity; for in
the Gout, and other Diseases that have little suspicion of Malignity, the
striking in of the Morbific matter is full as destructive. From all which it
manifestly follows, that the Physician, who is obliged to follow exactly the
conduct and inclination of Nature, ought here to renounce her guidance; the
truth of which, because few have hitherto sufficiently understood, therefore
the number of those whom the Plague destroyed, was not a little increased.

Wherefore, seeing it is not at all safe to follow the Footsteps of Nature in
exterminating this Disease, we must consider, in the next place, by what means
we may satisfy that intention, which we call the second; namely, by
instituting a solution of this Disease, contrary to that of Nature, and this I
think, can only be done by these two ways, viz. either by Bleeding, or Sweat.
As to the first, I am very sensible, that Bleeding is much abhorred by most in
this Disease; but being little concerned at the prejudice of the Vulgar, I will
fairly discourse the Validity of the reasons in this Question. And first I
appeal to those Physicians that continued in Town when the late Plague raged,
whether they ever observed, that large Bleeding, and often repeated, before any
Tumor appeared, was the cause of any ones Death that had the Plague: But it is
no strange thing, that bleeding sparingly, or after the Tumor is come out,
should be always hurtful; for when only a moderate quantity of Blood is taken
away, the administration of Affairs is forced out of Natures hand, who
endeavored all she could to cause a Tumor; and yet in the mean while another
Method is not substituted, that is powerful enough to evacuate the morbific
matter: And bleeding used, after the Tumor appears (for as much as it draws
from the Circumference to the Center) induces a motion quite contrary to that
of Nature, which is from the Center to the Circumference; and yet nothing is
more commonly urged as a mighty Argument by those of the contrary opinion
against bleeding in general in this Disease, than the injuries of Phlebotomy,
administered after this perverse manner, as may be every where seen, in
Diemerbroek, and other Writers of Observations. As for my self, I cannot assent
to their Arguments, till I understand what they answer to the Question above
proposed: For very many Authors, and those of the best Note, have thought
bleeding proper in the Plague; the chief of whom are Ludovicus Mercatus,
Joannes Costaeus, Nicholaus Massa, Ludovicus Septalius, Trincavellius,
Forestus, Mercurialis Altomarus, Paschalius, Andernachus, Pereda, Zacutus
Lucitanus, Fonseca, and others: But there is but one that I know, who places
the whole business of the Cure in as large a bleeding as we require, to wit,
Leonardus Botallus, one of the most famous Physicians of the former Age, whom I
will quote, lest I should be thought singular in this Practice; In a word, says
he, I think there is no Plague in which this In his seventh Chapter, Of the
Cure by bleeding.
may not be better, than all other remedies, so it be used opportunely, and in
a convenient quantity, for I suppose it is found unprofitable sometimes; for
that either it is used too late, or less is taken away than ought to be, or an
error is committed in the using of it both ways. And a little afterward, he
adds, But in so great Timidity, and sparing Phlebotomy, how can it be that any
one should judge exactly how much good or hurt it may do in the Plague? for if
a Disease (for the Cure of which, the taking away of four pounds of blood was
required, and but one pound be taken away) kill a man, it does not therefore
destroy him because he was blooded, but because it was not done in a due manner
nor perchance seasonably; but slothful wicked villains always endeavor to put
the fault on that, not for that it did hurt, but because they basely desire to
have it disapproved by all: or if they don't do it wickedly they do it
ignorantly, by a perverse custom; both certainly are pernicious, but that most
of all. All which being about to confirm by experience, a little after he thus
proceeds, These things being noted, no rational man can well dispraise bleeding
in these Diseases, but rather wonderfully commend and extol it, and confidently
use it, as a Divine help, which truly I have done for these fifteen years.
Therefore in Pestilential Diseases, at the Seige of Rochel, and four years ago
at the Mountains of Hainault, and for these two years at Paris, and the last
year at Cambray, I found no remedy speedier and safer in all my Patients (which
were innumerable) than large and seasonable bleeding.

And afterward he delivers some observations, which for brevity sake I here
omit, but will relate a very rare case, and suitable to our purpose, of a
business performed in England, many years ago. When among the other Calamities
of the Civil War, that miserably afflicted this our Coun-try, the Plague also
raged in many places, it chanced to be brought from another place, to the
Castle of Dunstar in Somersetshire: and some of the Soldiers dying suddenly,
with an eruption of Spots, it seized many others, at which time a Surgeon, that
had been a great Traveller, was a common Soldier there, who humbly beseech'd
the Governor of the Castle to permit him to do all he could do for the relief
of his fellow Soldiers, that were seized with this dreadful Disease; and
having obtained leave, he took away a prodigious quantity of Blood from every
sick Person, at the first approach of the Disease, before there was any sign of
a Tumor; he bleed them till they were even like to drop down, for he bled them
all standing, and in the open Air, neither had he any porringer to measure the
blood; afterward he orderred them to lie in their Tents, and though he gave no
Medicine at all after bleeding, yet (which is very strange) of those very many,
he treated after this manner, not one died. Mr. Francis Windham gave me this
account, who was then Governor of the Castle, and is indeed a Gentleman, and
remarkably honest, and is now living, so that any one may be satisfied, that
doubts the truth of it.

I will mention what I have observed worth note, concerning this thing, when I
come to treat, of those few remarks, I made by my own experience, while the
late London Plague raged.

But though in my Judgment I approve of this practice, and have experimentally
found the utility of it long ago; yet the dissipation of the Pestilential
ferment by Sweat pleases me better upon many accounts than the evacuation of it
by bleeding: for as much as it does not weaken the patient so much, nor hazard
the Physicians reputation: but this has also its inconveniences; for first,
many, especially young Men, of a hot constitution, sweat difficultly, and in
such the more you endeavor to cause Sweat by strong Diaphoreticks, and by
heaping on a great many Clothes, so much the more are they in danger of falling
into a frenzy; or what is yet worse, after having been entertained a while
with vain hopes, the Tokens are forced out instead of it. For the chief venom
of this Disease residing in the most spirituous part of the blood (the motion
of the grosser particles being on this account somewhat more languid, than is
usual in other inflammations) that tender portion is driven into a greater
fury, by the accession of this new heat, and at length violently breaks in
pieces all the Fibers of the blood, distended beyond the bounds of their
texture; which dissolution of the sanguineous Fibers, I take to be the cause of
the Pestilential Tokens. For, first, they are intensly Red, and soon after
Livid or Black, not unlike stripes inflicted by a violent blow on some
musculous part of the Body.

And then in those bodies which are easy to sweat, if it be stopped too soon, to
wit, before the Morbific matter be wholly dissipated, the condition of the
Buboes is afterward worse, which began to come out well at the latter end of
the sweat. For that part of the matter being subtracted, which should serve to
elevate them, either they soon strike in, or at least never come to true
abcesses (as is wont to happen in the small Pox, when the sick has sweat
violently at the beginning of the Disease) but the cruel Enemy being again
taken in, a commotion is stirred up in the blood, by which means the Purple
spots, the Tokens of sudden death are often driven out: in the manner we have
described above.

But that it may be more clearly evident by what means we may obviate these and
the like difficulties, I will faithfully set down what has been done and
observed by me, so far as I was able, in this Disease, beginning from the rise
of the late Plague.

At the beginning of May, 1665. I visited a Noble Lady, about one and twenty
years of age, of a Sanguine complexion, besides the burning Fever, which began
a little before, frequent Vomitings and other Febrile symptoms molested her. I
began the Cure with Phlebotomy, and the next day to prevent a Diarrhaea, (which
as I noted at the beginning of this Treatise, was wont to come at the latter
end of the Fever, when an Emetic was omitted, which the inclination to Vomiting
at the beginning of the Disease required) I ordered a Vomit that carried off
the filth of her stomach very well: The day after, visiting her again, I
understood she had a Diarrhaea, which being very unusual for some years, did
not a little perplex me; but from thence I gathered that this was no common
Fever, (as was also apparent from the event) and therefore required another
method of Cure, different from that I deliverd in another place, which I had
used hitherto with continued success. Wherefore another elder Physician being
called in to assist me, bleeding was repeated by our joint consent; which the
age and constitution of the Patient, and the inordinate ebullition of the blood
seemed to require; and also Cordials moderately cooling were prescribed, and
Clysters were injected every other day. At the latter end of the Disease we
ordered some of the stronger Alexipharmacs, because very unusual and irregular
symptoms invaded, commonly reckoned the signs of great Malignity: but all doing
no good, she dyed about the fourteenth day. I had various thoughts for some
days after, about the odd disposition of this Fever; and at length remembering
the violent heat which continued in the foresaid patient, even after repeated
bleeding, that there was a redness in the Cheeks, and that some drops of blood
flowed from her Nostrils a little before her death, and that also the blood
when 'twas cold in the porringers was not unlike that which is taken from
Pleuritics; moreover that she had a Cough, and certain obscure pains in the
vital parts: besides that that season of the year approached, which contains
the end of Spring and beginning of Summer, and which is less disposed for the
production of continual Fevers, (for these of their own accord, at this time,
either turn to intermittents, or suddenly change to Pleurisies, or other
inflammations of the like kind); and lastly, that Pleurisies at that very time
were very Epidemical. All these things, I say, being duly weighed, I was of the
opinion that this Fever, though 'twas destitute of the Pathognomonic signs of a
Pleurisy or Peripneumonia, had the importance of a Symptom, on the account of
a certain Inflammation lurking about the vital parts, though there was no pain of
the side, nor no considerable difficulty of breathing: To be short, at length I
was persuaded that I must wholly proceed, in the 'foresaid case, with the same
method which I had often used, with excellent success, in a Pleurisy; and
indeed it afterward succeeded as well as could be wished: for being called a
little while after to a Man that was ill exactly after the same manner I began
and finished the Cure by repeated bleeding, as is commended in a Pleurisy.
About the latter end of May and the beginning of June, very many, desiring my
assistance, were recovered from this Fever (which was then very Epidemical) by
the 'foresaid method. From this time that dreadful Plague began to rage
cruelly, which at length was so very mortal, that in the space of seven days it
destroyed so many thousands in this one City.

But whether the Fever, of which we have now Discoursed, deserve the name of
the Plague, I dare not confidently affirm: but this I know experimentally, that
all that were seized with the true Plague at that time, and sometime after in
my Neighborhood, with all the Symptoms peculiar to it, had the same concourse
of Symptoms both at the first coming of the Disease, and in the whole course of
it. But when I was endangered by the near approach of the Plague to my own
House, a^ ^^ngth, by the persuasion of Friends, I accompanied the vast numbers
of those that left the City, and removed my Family some Miles from thence; yet
I returned so very soon, and when the Plague continued so violent, that it
could not be, but by reason of the scarcity of better Physicians, I should be
called into the assistance of those that had the Plague. And not long after I
visited many that had Fevers, which I perceived (not without great admiration)
were like that I managed so successfully before my departure; and therefore
confiding in my own experience, as a guide to be preferred before all idle
precepts, I did not doubt to order bleeding again. I continued this course of
bleeding plentifully (together with the use of a Ptisan and such like cooling
diet) in many Patients, with very great advantage, till at length missing my
wonted success in the management of some, by reason of the frowardness of the
standers by; who being possessed with vain prejudices, would not permit me to
take away a due quantity of blood (to the great damage of the sick, from whom a
sufficient quantity or none at all should have been taken away, seeing the
stress of the Cure depended on it) I perceived a great obstruction to my
designs, and therefore thought 'twould be of great use to find some other
method of curing this Disease besides that of bleeding. I will instance in an
injury I once did (but without guilt) not because I let blood, but for that I
was not permitted to take away so much as I desired; being sent for to a young
Man of a sanguine complexion and strong constitution, whom a violent Fever had
seized two days before, with giddy pains of the Head, violent Vomitings and
other such Symptoms, and finding upon inquiry that he had no sign of a Tumor, I
presently ordered that blood should be taken away in a large quantity, the
superficies of which, when 'twas cold, represented the corrupted blood of
Pleuritics; and I prescribed also a Ptysan with cooling Julaps and Broths; in
the afternoon he bled a second time the same quantity, and likewise the next
Morning, and toward the Evening of this day I visited him, and found him much
better; yet notwithstanding I perceived his friends violently opposed the
taking away any more blood: but I earnestly contended that it should be again
repeated, saying, he need be blooded but this time only, and then he would be
out of danger; but that if they should continue obstinate, it had been better
that no blood had been taken away, and that the Cure had been carried on by
sweat, and in a word that the patient would most certainly dye: The event
confirmed the Prognostication, for while we were disputing about the thing, we
lost the opportunity of doing it; for the next day the Purple spots broke out,
viz. the relics of the peccant matter which ought to have been wholly
evacuated (for as much as Phlebotomy so often repeated had taken away all hopes
of an Abcess) by delay perverting the whole mass of blood, and breaking the
texture of it by its great subtlety, and the Patient died in few hours. When
therefore I had frequently met with such obstacles, I earnestly endeavored to
find out (if possible) some method of Cure, that might be as effectual and not
so displeasing: And having much and long deliberated the thing in my mind, at
length I fell upon this method, which I found afterward, to be perfect in all
respects and always beneficial.

First, If the Tumor has not yet appeared, The Cure.
I bleed moderately with respect to the strength and temperament of the sick,
and afterward the sweat is easily and soon raised; (whereas otherwise it is not
only very difficultly procured in some bodies, but there is also danger lest
the inflammation should be heigthen'd by it, and so the Tokens forced out) and
the benefit of the sweat immediately following, abundantly compensates the loss
of blood, which how little soever it be would otherwise be very injurious.
After bleeding (which must be performed in bed, when all things are in a
readiness to promote sweat) without any manner of delay, I order the Patient
to be covered quite over with clothes, and that a piece of Flannel be bound to
the forepart of his Head, and indeed this covering of the Head, conduces more
to the procuring sweat than any one would easily imagine. Afterward if the
Patient does not Vomit, I give these and the like Sudorifics.

Take of Venice Treacle ii, of the Electuary of the Egg i, of compound powder
of Crabs eyes, gr. xii, of Cochinell gr. viii, of Saffron gr. iv, with a
sufficient quantity of the juice of Kermes make a Bolus, which let him take
every sixth hour, drinking after it six spoonfuls of the following Julap.

Take Cardus-water compound, Scordium-water of each iii, Treacle-water ii,
Syrup of July-flowers ii, mingle them and make a Julap.

But if the Patient be troubled with vomiting, as he is very frequently in the
Plague, and other Pestilential Fevers, I defer the giving of Sudorifics so long
as 'till he begins to sweat, by means of the covering only, excepting that
sometimes I put part of the sheet over the Face, to collect the vapors: for
(which is indeed very well worth observation) when the rays of the Morbific
matter extend themselves to the circumference of the Body, the Looseness and
Vomiting, that were occasioned by their being inwardly reflected and cast upon
the Stomac and Bowels, cease presently of their own accord. So that how great
soever the preceding subversion of the Stomac was, the Medicines that are taken
afterward are easily retained, and procure sweat as well as can be wished.

I remember, that being once called by an Apothecary to visit his Brother, that
was very ill of a Pestilential Fever, and speaking of giving him a Sudorific,
he told me that he had taken various and strong Medicines to procure Sweat, but
all in vain, for that he had Vomited them all up; to whom I answered, that he
should prepare the most loathsome and ungrateful of all, that before he had
exhibited; and that I would easily effect, that he should not Vomit it up any
more. The event confirmed what I promised, for when the Patient had Sweat a
little, only by the weight of Clothes, he swallowed and retained a large Bolus
of Venice Treacle, by which means, Sweating plentifully, he recovered.

But to return to the business, I order that the Sweat should be continued, for
the space of a natural day, by Sage Posset Drink, or Mace-beer, now and then
taken; and I strictly forbid that the Patient should be any way cleans'd;
neither indeed do I permit that the Shirt, how moist or foul soever it be,
should be changed, within the space of Twenty four hours, from the end of the
Sweat, which I would have observed with the greatest caution. But if the Sweat
be circumscribed in a narrower compass of time, the violence of the Symptoms
soon returns, and the Health of the Patient is left very uncertain, which a
longer continuance of the Sweat would have put out of danger.

And truly, I cannot sufficiently wonder at Diemerbroek and others, as often as
I consider upon how slight a pretense they are induced to break off the sweat,
to wit, that they may preserve the strength of the sick. For, first, every one
that is but very little conversant in the Cure of this Disease knows that the
Patient while he Sweats is stronger than he was before. What use and
experience have taught in this case, I will not fear to defend and declare
openly. Many that have been Sweated, by my Advice, for the space of Twenty four
hours, have been so far from complaining of their being vveakn'd thereby, that
they have professed that as much of the useless humor was carried off by the
Sweat, so much new strength they received: and toward the latter end I have
often, not without admiration, observed a Sweat break out more natural, genuine
and copious than the former, which was expressed by the force of the Medicine,
and which brought much more relief, as if it were plainly and truly critical
and eradicative of the whole Disease: moreover I don't perceive what
inconvenience there would be in refreshing the Patient, when the Sweat is at
height, with comfortable Soop and Broth; and then that Objection concerning
want of strength to bear long Sweats would signify nothing. Wherefore if any
defection be perceived, toward the latter end, I permit him to take a little
Chicken Broth, the Yolk of an Egg or the like, which with Cordials and
draughts commonly used, to keep up the Sweat, abundantly repair the strength.
But there is no need of many Arguments in a thing so obvious: for it is manifest,
that as long as the Patient Sweats he thinks himself in a good condition, and
in the opinion of the standers by the worst is over, which openly proclaims the
utility of this practice; but as soon as the Sweat is stopped, and the Body begins
to dry, he falls ill again, and there is as it were a relapse.

I admonish that cold be carefully avoided, that the Clothes dry on the Body of
their own accord, and that all Drinks are taken somewhat hot, and that the use
of Sage Posset Drink be continued for the space of Twenty four hours after the
Sweat. The next morning I give a common Purge, to wit, of the Infusion of
Tamarinds, of the Leaves of Senna, of Rhubarb, with Manna, and Syrrup of Roses
solutive. And with this method, the next year after the Plague, I recovered
very many that were feiz'd with the Pestilential Fever; so that not one died of
this Disease, that was under my Care, after I began the use of the same.

But where the tumor has been out already, I have not hitherto dared to bleed,
though in a Body ^^apt to Sweat, fearing lest the sudden Death of the Patient
should prevent the designed Sweat, by reason of the Morbific matter flowing
back to the empty Veins; yet perhaps Phlebotomy may be very safely administered,
if Sweat be procured presently after it, without any manner of delay, which
being prolonged to the space above required, may be able to dissipate and
consume by little and little the whole bulk of the humor, and with much less
danger, than when a legitimate maturation of the Imposthume, (which is very
uncertain and fallible in so very acute a Disease) is long waited for.

To conclude, if the Reader shall find that I have been any where mistaken
about the Theory, I beg pardon; but as to practice, I declare that I have
faithfully delivered all things, and that I never proposed any thing before I
had sufficiently tried it. Truly when I come to dye, I trust, I shall have a
cheerful witness in my Breast, that I have not only with the greatest diligence
and honesty endeavored the recovery of the health of all, of what condition
soever they have been, that have committed themselves to my care (of whom none
was otherwise treated by me, than I desire to be managed if I should happen to
have the same Diseases) but that also I have labored to the utmost of my
power, that the Cure of Diseaseases (if by any means it might be) may be
administered with greater certainty after I am Dead, Esteeming any progress in
this kind of Knowledge, how small so ever it be, though it teach no more than the
Cure of the Toothache, or of Corns, to be more valued than the vain pomp of
nice Speculations, which perhaps are no more useful to a Physician, in the Cure
of Diseases, than Skill in Music to a Carpenter in Building.

In the last place, I will add only this one short Note, lest perchance any one
should wrest my Opinion by a sinister Interpretation, or at least not thoroughly
understand it; to wit, that in the preceding Discourse, I often use the word
Nature, and attribute various effects to her, as if I would represent under
this Title, some one thing subsisting of it self, and diffused every where
through the whole Machin of the World, which being endowed with Reason, governs
all Bodies: such a thing as some of the Philosophers seemed to think was the
Soul of the World. But as I don't affect novelty of things, so neither of
words: and therefore I use in these Pages, the Ancient word indeed, but in a
sense (unless I am deceived) both sober, and not only understood, but also used
by the best Men. For as often as I mention Nature, I would signify a certain
complex of Natural Causes, which though they are without Reason, and destitute of
all Skill, yet are they governed by the best Counsel; whilst all of them
perform their Operations, and accomplish their effects. To wit, the supreme
Deity, by whose Power all things are produced, and on whose pleasure they
depend, has so disposed all things by his infinite Wisdom, that they betake
themselves to their appointed Functions in a certain order and method, doing
nothing that is in vain, but that which is best and fittest for the whole Fabric
of things, and their own private Natures; and so are moved, like Engines, not
by their own Skill but by that of the Artificer*

COLLECTIONS OF Acute Diseases.
The Third Part:
CHAP. I. Of the continual Fever of the Year 1661. 1662. 63. 64.
FIRST, I observe that the inordinate commotion of the Blood the Cause or
Companion of this Fever, is stirred up by Nature, either that some
Heterogenious matter contained in it and inimical to it should be excluded, or
that the Blood should be changed into some new disposition.

And in this business the word Commotion pleases me best, because it is more
large and general than either Fermentation or Ebullition, for it prevents the
occasion of a vain Dispute about Terms, that perhaps words of that kind may
seem to countenance; though they may admit of an Explication that is not
incommodious, yet are thought a little improper and harsh by some: for though the
Commotion of the Blood may be sometimes like the Fermentation, sometimes like
the Ebullition of Vegetable Liquors, yet there are some that think it very much
differs from both, and they produce one or two instances of Fermentation.
First, though Liquids fermenting are wont to obtain a vinous nature, so that
Distillation will draw a hot Spirit from them, and easily degenerate into
Vinegar, which is endowed with a notable sowerness, and by Distillation yields
an Acid Spirit; yet they say that neither of these dispositions has hitherto
been observed in the Blood.

And they take notice that in vinous Liquors the Fermentation and Depuration
are finished at the same time, and as it were keep pace together; but the
Depuration of the Blood in Fevers does not accompany but follows its
Aestuation, which they think is manifest even to sight, in a Febrile Paroxysm
carried off by Sweat.

But as to Ebullition, the Analogy seems more difficult to them, and which
experience disallows in many cases, where the fury of the Blood is not so
outrageous as that it may deserve the name of Ebullition: but however it be
(for I will by no means engage in these Controversies) seeing the terms of
Ebullition and Fermentation have very much prevailed among Modern Physicians, I
shall not refuse to use them now and then, whilst it is manifest from what has
been said, that these words serve only in this Treatise for the more clear
explication of what is to be discoursed of.

Certainly all kind of Fevers that are accompanied with Eruptions, manifest
that this Febrile commotion of the Blood, is stirred up for the Secretion of a
certain Heterogeneous matter that is contrary to nature: for that in these, by
the help of Ebullition, an Excrement of an ill quality is cast forth to the
skin that lay hid before in the Blood.

And it is not less probable in my Opinion, that the Febrile commotion of the
Blood, should often (not to say oftener) aim at no more than to be changed into
a certain new state and disposition, and that a Man whose Blood continues pure
and untainted may be seized with a Fever, as by frequent observations we find
it happens to healthy Bodies, in whom there is no Morbific furniture, either as
to a Plethora or ill habit, no unhealthy disposition of the Air, which may
administer occasion for a Fever, and yet notwithstanding by reason of some
notable alteration of the Air preceding, or change of Diet, or of the rest of
the Non-naturals as they are termed, such Men are likewise seized with a Fever;
and the reason is, because the Blood endeavors to gain a new state or
condition, such as the Air and manner of Diet require; not that the irritation
of vicious Particles lodged in the Blood, cause the Fever, though I don't at all
doubt but that the matter that is ordinarily Excreted in the Despumation of the
Blood, after the Febrile Commotion, is vicious, though the Blood before had a
laudable Diathesis, which is no more to be wondered at than that some part of
what we Eat should turn to Corruption, and stink after it has been considerably
altered in the Body and separated from the rest.

Secondly, I reckon that the true and natural indications that arise in this
Disease, show that the Commotion of the Blood must be kept to that degree which
is agreeable to Natures purpose, that it don't rise too high on the one Hand,
from whence great Symptoms flow, nor be depressed too low on the other; by
which means the Protrusion of the Morbific matter may be hindered, or the
endeavors of the Blood Affecting a new condition, frustrated; so that whether
the Fever takes its rise from some Heterogeneous matter provoking it, or from
the Blood affecting a new state; in either case the Indication is the same:
these things being premised, I institute the method of Cure after this manner.

When I am called to Patients whose Blood of it self is weak (as it is most
times in Children) or when it wants Spirits, as in old Age, and in young Men
weakened by long Diseases, I forbear Phlebotomy; for if I should bleed such,
their Blood being already too weak, it would be rendered altogether unfit to
perform the business of Despumation, and by consequence the whole mass would be
perverted, and perchance the Life of the Patient hazarded (as when the
Fermentation of Beer or any new Liquor is unseasonably stopped, it is most
commonly spoiled) for Nature can no more associate with the Particles it has
once begun to Exterminate, which though they were pure, whilst they were equally
mixed with the mass of Blood, yet now they are corrupt and apt to infect the
other Humors. Indeed I know very well that those that are injured by bleeding
are sometimes restored by proper Cordials, so that the Blood is enabled to
purify it self, but it is better to prevent than Cure a Disease.

But when I have to do with those whose Blood is of a contrary Nature, such as
is wont to be in young Men, of a Robust constitution and Sanguine complexion; I
order bleeding in the first place, which cannot be omitted here without hazard
(beside in some cases to be mentioned hereafter) for otherwise not only
Phrensies, Pleurisies, and such like Inflammations may be feared, upon the
account of too great Ebullition of the Blood, but also by reason of the
superfluity, a Stagnation of the whole mass.

As to the quantity, I only take away so much Blood as I conceive will free the
sick from those dangers, to which as we said, the immoderate Commotion of the
same is obnoxious. Furthermore, I regulate the Estuation by repeating
Phlebotomy, or omitting it, by using or forbidding the use of hot Cordials; and
lastly, by keeping the Body loose, or stoping it as I perceive that motion is
high or low.

After bleeding (if it be necessary according to the cases above mentioned) I
diligently inquire whether the Patient was inclined to vomiting, or
nauseousness, at the beginning of the Fever, and if so, I presently prescribe a
Vomit, unless the tender Age or some great Debility of the Sick forbid it.
Truly a Vomit is so necessary, when an inclination to Vomiting has preceded,
that unless that Humor be expelled, it will occasion many difficult Symptoms,
that will hinder the Physician in performing the Cure, and will very much
endanger the Patient; a Diarrhaea is the chief and most usual of these, which
most commonly follows in the declination of the Fever, as often as Emetics are
indicated and yet omitted; for in the progress of the Fever, when Nature has
somewhat subjugated the malign Humor in the Stomach, and thrust it forth to
the Guts, they are so corroded by a perpetual Flux of a sharp Humor, from this
fountain in the Stomach, that a Diarrhaea must needs follow. But I have
observed that in Inflammatory Fevers, that are commonly called Malignant, a
looseness did not necessarily follow the omission of a Vomit, as in this Fever,
though such a propensity to Vomiting preceded.

This kind of Diarrhaea is more dangerous, because the Sick being sufficiently
weakn'd before is more Enervated; besides (which is worst) it happens at the
declination of the Fever, at which time the Blood should contract it self, and
exert its faculty, for the completing its Despumation, but is hindered by this
evacuation.

But that you may not doubt that this Humor lodged in the Stomach, unless it
be ejected by Vomit, will in a short time cause a Diarrhaea; by search we
almost always find, that when a looseness accompanies this Fever, the Sick was
inclined to Vomit at the beginning of the Disease, but a Vomit was not
prescribed. Moreover you will observe, that though the inclination to vomiting
went off long ago, yet the Diarrhaea will cease for the most part upon taking a
Vomit, if the Patient be able to bear it; but I have often observed, that when
the Diarrhaea is once begun, Astringent Medicines signify little or nothing,
either inwardly taken or outwardly applied to stop it.

The Vomit I frequently use is this following,

Take of the Infusion of Crocus Metal. vi, Oxymel of Squills and compound
Syrup of Scabious of each ss. Mingle them and make a Vomit.

Which I order to be taken in the Afternoon, two Hours after a light Dinner;
and that the Vomit may succeed the better, I appoint six or eight pints of
Posset Drink to be provided, for these Medicines are dangerous, if they are not
washed off; and therefore as often as the Patient Vomits or goes to Stool, he
must presently take a draught of it, by which means the Gripes will be
prevented, and he will Vomit easier.

After a nice view of the matter ejected by Vomit, which was neither much nor
very ill, I have often wondered how it comes to pass, that the sick should be
so much reliv'd by it; for as soon as the Vomit had done Working, the cruel
Symptoms, to wit, the Nauseousness, Anxiety, Restlessness, Sighings and
Blackness of the Tongue, etc. were commonly mitigated, which before tormented
the Sick, and terrified the standers by, so that the remainder of the Disease
was very tolerable.

It Is to be noted, that if the condition of the Patient require Bleeding and
Vomiting, it is safest to bleed first, for otherwise whilst the Vessels are
distended with Blood, there is great danger lest by violent straining to Vomit,
the Vessels of the Lungs should be broken, and the Brain hurt, the Blood being
impetuously poured in and out, and so the Patient may dye Apoplectic, of which
I could produce some Examples if I thought it convenient; let it suffice that I
warn you to use great caution in this case.

If any one should ask at what time of the Fever I would give a Vomit? I say at
the very beginning, If I had my choice, for by this means the Sick may be
defended from those horrid Symptoms that take their rise from the filth of
those Humors that lurk in the Stomach and neighboring parts, and perhaps we
may crush the Disease in its beginning, which othewise would increase to the
hazard of the Patient; and prove tedious, being nourished by the foresaid
Humors, which either by reason of their substance pass into the innermost
parts of the Body, and are mingled with the Blood, or because they are too long
detained in the Body they wax worse, and put on a venomous quality which they
impart to the Blood, as it continually passes by their Neast; and of this (not
to go far) the Cholera Morbus is a clear example, for it happens sometimes,
that when the Vomiting is unseasonably stopped in that Disease, whether it be by
an Opiat, or Astringent Medicines, a worse train of Symptoms follow; for the
sharp and corrupted Humors being repelled upon this account, whose exclusion
ought to have been permitted a while till they were sufficiently evacuated,
exert their fury and force upon the Blood, and kindle a Fever; which as it is
wont to be irregular and accompanied with ill Symptoms, so it can scarce be
Cured without an Emetic, though the Patient do not then Vomit.

But if we are called in late, (as we are often) so that we cannot assist the
Patient at the beginning of the Fever by prescribing a Vomit, yet I have
thought it proper to order one at any time of the Disease, provided the Patient
has strength enough to bear the operation of it. Truly I have given an Emetic
with good success, on the 12th day of the Fever, though the Patient had left off
Vomiting before; and so I have stopped the looseness which hindered the Blood in
finishing its Despumation; and I should not doubt to prescribe one later unless
the weakness of the Patient forbid it.

The Evening after taking the Vomit, I always endeavor to quiet the tumult
raised in the Humors by the Emetic, and therefore I prescribe an Anodyne to be
taken at Bedtime. For instance,

Take of Erratic Poppy-water ii, of Aq. Mirab. ii, Syrup of white and Erratic
Poppies of each ss. Mingle them and make a draught.

But if there be no fear of raising the Ebullition for the future, either by
reason of a great loss of Blood which was taken away in order to the Cure, or
by frequent Vomiting and Stools occasioned by the Emetic, or by a present
Apurexy, or Debility of the Fever, or its declining state; then I boldly order
a large dose of Diascordium, either by it self, or mixed with some Cordial Water
instead of the Anodyne prescribed above, and it is indeed an excellent Medicine
if it be given in a due quantity.

And now before I leave off discoursing of Emetics, I must acquaint you that
it is by no means safe (at least in this Fever) to give Vomits of the infusion
of Crocus Metallorum to Children, or to any under fourteen, no not in the least
quantity; 'twere to be wished, that in the room of this we had some safer
Medicine that were as efficacious, which may eradicate the Humor, that almost
always threatens a Diarrhaea, at the Declination of the Fever, at least that we
had such a one as would so change the corrosive matter, that it could not cause
a looseness; truly I have been often puzzel'd, when I have been called to
Infants or Children in a Fever, and have beheld an indication which persuaded
the use of a Medicine that would have Cured them, and yet I did not dare to
prescribe it for fear of the ill consequence; but in grown people I have
hitherto observed no injury to proceed from the use of an Emetic, provided it
be administered with the cautions above mentioned.

The fatigue of Vomiting being over, I further consider with my self, whether
notwithstanding the preceding Evacuations, the Blood continues yet to rage so
much, that it is still necessary to restrain its Effervescence, or whether it be
so very Languid that it wants to be heigthen'd; or lastly, whether the
Fermentation being reduced to a due degree, may be left to it self without
danger to the Patient: Of each of these I shall say something.

First, Therefore if the Blood Ferments so violently that we may yet reasonably
suspect that the Patient is either obnoxious to a Frenzy, or any other
troublesome Symptom proceeding from too great an Ebullition of the Blood; the
day after taking the Vomit, I prescribe a Clyster. For instance,

Take of the common Decoction for a Clyster lbi, Syrup of Violets and brown
Suggar, of each ii. Mingle them and make a Clyster.

And I order it should be repeated upon occasion, by which it often happens
that the Blood being somewhat Ventilated and Cool, its Effervescence is
sufficiently bridled, but sometimes it is necessary to repeat bleeding once and
again, viz. in those of a very Sanguine complexion, and in the flower of their
Age, or in others who have imprinted on their Blood a certain inflammatory
disposition, by too frequent use of Wine. But for the most part there is no
need of so great a Remedy (as is repeated Phlebotomy) and excepting the cases
above mentioned, that Effervescence may be sufficiently suppressed by the help
of Clysters; wherefore if the Blood Ferment too much, I order a Clyster to be
injected every day, or every other day, as the case requires, and that it be
done to the tenth day of the Disease or thereabouts; but if much Blood has been
take away, or the Patient is Aged, I order no Clysters at that time, though the
Blood be very hot; for in these cases as there is no fear that by the omission
of Clysters the Ebullition begun should proceed so far as that there should be
eminent danger from some violent Symptom: So its most certain that by the use
of them the strength, and as I may say, though less properly, the Tone of the
Blood is so much indeed relaxed, that especially in old Men, (for Clysters are
not used with so good success in old Men as in young) Nature is obstructed in
her business; but if a Vein has been opened, and not much Blood taken away,
then as I said, I order Clysters to the tenth day more or less, and sometimes
to the twelfth, especially for those I did not dare bleed; for there are some
that are seized with continual Fevers, after Autumnal intermittents (whether
they were Tertian or Quartan) by reason they were not purged after these Agues
left them; and if you should Bleed them there would be danger lest that
Sediment, which the foregoing Fermentation put off, should be Resorb'd into the
mass of Blood, and so should occasion new Tumults; therefore in this case
instead of Bleeding I use Clysters to the twelfth day, if the Patient be young
and the Fermentation too high.

But on the contrary, whether Bleeding be used or omitted if the Effervescence
be too Languid, and wants to be stirred up to assist Nature; in this case I
suppose we must wholly abstain from the use of Clysters, even before the tenth
day, and much rather if it be past: for to what purpose should we endeavor any
further to suppress the Fermentation which is too Languid already? but if after
that time, to wit, in the declination of the Disease we should use Clysters, it
would indeed be as absurd, as if any one should give too large vent to Beer
when it is dying, for by means of this Evacuation Nature is hindered, so that
she cannot attend the separation of the Morbific matter with all her might; when
therefore by means of fit Evacuations the Patient is out of danger as to those
Symptoms which proceed from too great Ebullition, or the Disease is in its
declination; the more I bind his Body, the farther he is out of danger, to wit
the Febrile matter tending gently to its own Concoction. Wherefore if the
foregoing Evacuations have induced as it were a Laxity of the mass of Blood, or
threaten the same, or if the Patient be freed from his Fever before the due
time; or if the Fever has come to a full period, I do not only leave off the
use of Clysters, but think that Cordials are to be allowed, and presently
endeavor to stop the Belly.

But as to Cordials, for I have found by Experience that the too early use of
them has been very injurious, to wit (Bleeding having not been first used)
there is danger lest the crude matter should fall upon the Membranes of the
Brain or the like, or on the Pleura; and therefore I always take care that
Cordials be not given, when no Blood or but very little has been taken away,
and there has been no other considerable Evacuation, or when the Patient has
not passed the vigor of his Age: for I cannot see to what purpose his Blood
that is rich enough of it self, should be further Meliorated to his own ruin;
but rich and opulent enough it is, neither wants it Restoratives, as long as
considerable Evacuations have not vanquished its innate heat. Such Patients are
sufficiently furnished with Cordials within themselves, and as to those which
come from abroad, they are either needless or else are hurtful; wherefore I
would either wholly reject all, or at least admit of only the smallest. But if
the Patient be weakened by profuse Evacuations, or be Aged, I use to give
Cordials even at the beginning of the Fever, but on the twelfth day of the
Disease, things then tending to Secretion, I suppose we ought freely to indulge
the use of hotter Medicines, and indeed a little sooner, if there be no danger
of driving the Febrile matter upon the principal parts. For at this time the
more I heat, so much the more I accelerate Concoction; neither truly can I
imagine what Physicians would be at, who so often inculcate their Precepts
concerning the administering of Remedies to promote the Concoction of the
Febrile matter, which they often do, being called in at the beginning of the
Disease; and yet at the same time notwithstanding they don't doubt to prescribe
such kind of Medicines as attemperate the Fever; for indeed a Fever is Natures
Instrument, by which she separates the impure parts from the pure: by this
means utterly Imperceptible, she proceeds from the beginning to the highth of
the Disease, but performs the business more manifestly at its declination,
which may be discerned by the Urine. The Concoction of the Febrile matter
denotes no more indeed than the separation of the peccant matter from the good;
now in the hastenning of it you must not busy your self with I know not what
attemperaters, but the Effervescence of the Fever is to be let alone, so long
as the safety of the Patient will permit; but when it tends to the declination,
Secretion being manifest, then we should follow it with hotter Medicines to
finish the business sooner and safer; and this is indeed to promote the
Concoction of the Febrile matter: whereas Evacuations and Coolers cause delays
and hinder the Cure, and drive away approaching Health, as I have often
observed.

If the Fermentation proceed well, the Despumation will be finished about the
fourteenth day, but if you use any Coolers too late, and so by their means
suppress the Effervescence, it is not strange if the Fever continue till the
twenty first day, and in feeble Bodies ill managed much longer.

Moreover this is worth Observation; that it sometimes happens that the Patient
by the use of Clysters and other Catharticks unseasonably prescribed, about the
declination of the Disease, seems a little relieved, and sometimes is wholly
freed from his Fever; but after a day or two you will perceive not so much that
the old Fever has recovered strength as that a new one is broke out, viz. a
shaking and horror presently invade, which heat and a Fever presently succeed,
about to run the same course which was described above, unless perchance it
change to an Intermittent. When the case is so, the Patient is to be treated as
if he had no Fever before, and the same method is to be repeated, for
Despumation, which should follow the Ebullition now begun, will not be finished
in less than the time before mentioned, how tedious soever it would be to the
Patient, much weakn'd by the former Disease, to wait so long for health.

The Cordials I prescribe are such as these, which I will mention by and by;
those that are more moderate I use at the beginning of the Disease, when the
heat is very violent, always proceeding gradually to the use of hotter,
according to the progress of the Disease and the degrees of Ebullition; always
remembering that its lawful, if much Blood has been taken away, or if the
Patient be Aged, to administer stronger Cordials than when Bleeding has not
preceded, or when the Patient was in the flower of his Age.

Those Cordials, I call moderate, are made of distilled Waters, for instance,
of Borage, Citron, Strawberries, Treacle, compound Scordium water, mingled with
the Syrup of Baulm, of Fernelius, of Julyflowers, of the juice of Citron, etc.
but the stronger of Gascoins Powder, Bezoar, confection of Hyacinth, Venice
Treacle, etc.

These which follow are frequently used.

Take of the water of Borage, Citron, compound Scordium water, Black Cherries,
each ii, Cinnamon water with Barley i, Pearls prepared ii, Crystalline Sugar a
sufficient quantity, mingle them. Take four spoonfuls often in a day especially
in the Fits.

Take of the water of the whole Citron, of Strawberries each iii, of the cold
Cordial water of Saxony i, of Treacle water, of Syrup of Baulm, of Fernelius,
of Julyflowers, and of the juice of Citron, each ss, mingle them and make a
Julap, of which take often.

Take of Gascoins powder, of the Oriental and Occidental Bezoar-stone, of
Contrayerva, each i, one leaf of Gold, mingle them and make a very fine Powder.
Take to the quantity of twelve grains when there is occasion, in the Syrup of
the juice of Citron and Julyflowers, each ii, drinking upon it a few spoonfuls
of the Julap prescribed

Take of Treacle water iv, of the Seeds of Citron ii, beat them together and
make an Emulsion: Add to the strained liquor a sufficient quantity of Pearl
Sugar to make it grateful to the Taste. Take two spoonfuls three times a day.

I think it is needless to mention more forms, for they are innumerable or may
be so, and they are to be varied in the course of the Disease, according to the
various Seasons and Symptoms.

But if the Fermentation be neither too high nor too low, I leave it in that
state and use no Remedies, unless I am forced to do something by the
importunity of the Sick or his Friends about him, that may please them, without
obstructing my design.

And now I must tell you, that when I was called to a poor Body who was not
able to be at the charge of going through a long course of Physic, I did
nothing else after Bleeding and Purging was over, (if they were indicated) but
order them to keep their Beds, all the time of their Sickness, and to drink
Oatmeal, and Barley Broth, etc. and that they should drink small Bear warm,
moderately to quench their thirst. I took care that they should have a Clyster
of Milk and Sugar every day or every other day, till the tenth or eleventh day,
and toward the end of the Fever, separation being now begun, if it were slow,
I permitted them now and then stronger drink to help it instead of a Cordial,
and so without any more a do, except that I use to give a gentle Purge at the
end of the Disease, I cured them.

But to return to the business, if the method before mentioned be carefully
observed, I usually perceive about the fifteenth day, both from the Signs of a
laudable separation in the Urine, as also from a manifest remission of all the
Symptoms, that it is then seasonable to give a purging Potion which may carry
off the Sediment, put off here and there by the foregoing Fermentation; and
unless it is done timely there is danger lest it should return into the mass of
Blood, and so cause a relapse, or by its abode in the Natural parts upon which
it is thrown, occasion hereafter a dreadful Minera of lasting ills in the Body,
viz. Separation being now finished the gross and impure Humors sent from the
Arteries to the Blood, passing back into the Veins, easily hinder its return,
from whence various kinds of Obstructions and at length various Fermentations
do arise.

But it is to be observed that Purging is not altogether so necessary, after
Vernal Fevers as after Autumnal; and for this reason, because the Sediment put
off by Autumnals is more, and of a more Terrene and Malignant quality, and
which is also to be noted in the Small Pox, and many other Diseases raging in
the Spring, in which it is not so dangerous to omit Purging (which indeed I have
observed) as in the case before mentioned.

And truly he would not be much mistaken who should affirm that more Diseases
take their rise from hence, (to wit, from the omission of Purging after
Autumnal Diseases) than from any other cause whatever.

If the Patient be very weak, or if there be not a perfect Despumation, so that
I cannot boldly give a Purge on the fifteenth day, I defer it to the
seventeenth, at which time I give the following or the like, according to the
strength of the Patient.

Take of Tamarinds ss, of the Leaves of Sennna ii, Rubarb iss, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, to three ounces of the strained Liquor; add Syrup
of Roses, Solutive and Manna, of each one ounce; mingle them and make a potion
to be taken in the Morning.

Purging being over, I order the Patient to rise, who has been hitherto kept
abed by my prescription, and to return gradually to his accustomed diet; for
that which I have hitherto prescribed is in a manner the same with that which I
have mentioned before, as Oaten and Barley broaths, and Panado made of Bread,
and the Yolk of an Egg in water with Sugar, thin Chicken broth, small Beer;
and sometimes when the Fever is high the juice of Orange newly expressed, and a
little boyld to take off the Crudity mixed with it, etc. though Oatmeal broth is
as good as any; but to deny small Bear to be taken now and then moderately, is
a needless severity, and indeed very often hurtful.

It happens often (especially in old Men) that the Patient, though the Fever be
Cured and the Body sufficiently purged, is notwithstanding very weak, and
sometimes expectorates by Cough, and sometimes also hauks up a great quantity
of clammy Phlegm, which Symptom does not only afrighten the Patient, but also
imposes upon the Physician, especially if he be unwary, and induces him to
believe that this effect will make way for a Consumption, though I have observed
that the thing is not so very dangerous. In this case I order the Patient to
drink old Malago, or Muscadine with a Toast, which (corroborating the Crasis of
the Blood, much weakened by the foregoing Fever, and by consequence unable to
assimulate the juices of the meat lately eaten) takes off that Symptom in the
space of few days, as I have often experienced.

By this method which I have proposed, the sick will be secured from many
affects and Symptoms which are wont to be attributed to Malignity; for nothing
is more common with unskilful Physicians than to put the fault upon malignity:
When by cooling Medicines, and the unseasonable use of Clysters, they have so
relaxed the Crasis of the Blood, and so weakn'd Nature in performing the
Despumation of it, that Faintings and other Symptoms (which are indeed genuine
effects of such impediments occasioned by Art) happen. But if the Disease by
its long continuance free it self from this aspersion, then what ever
afterward obstructs the Cure, is attributed to the Scurvy; though in truth
neither the Symptoms which happened while the Disease was in its vigor, were
the effects of Malignity, nor those which happen in its declination of the
Scurvy, but both proceed from ill management, as I have often observed. Not
that I or any other person who has been but little conversant in the History of
Diseases can be ignorant, that there are Fevers which don't only consist of an
Intemperies or putrid heat, but also of a malignant quality, whose most evident
Symptoms cannot but appear in the Sick; or that I deny that sometimes the
Scurvy, and very many other Diseases may be complicated with a Fever, I say
only that these affections are many times undeservedly blamed.

If the Fermentation proceed well, there will be a perfect Despumation of the
Morbific matter within the time aforesaid; but if cooling Remedies or Clysters
have been given too late, the Fever will continue much longer, especially in
very ancient Men ill managed by the Physician. I have been sometimes called to
such, after they have labored under a Fever forty days or more, and have tried
all things to induce Despumation to the Blood, but it was so much weakened,
partly by old Age, and partly by Clysters and cooling Medicines, that I could
not attain my end either by Cordials or any other Corroborating Medicines; but
either their Fever stood its ground, or if otherwise it seemed to cease, the
Patients strength was very low and in a manner gone.

But other Remedies being unsuccessfully used, I have been often forced to take
this course, and indeed with very good success, viz. I have applied the brisk
heat of young People to the Sick. Neither is there any reason why any one
should much wonder that the Patient is so mightily strengthened, and weak
Nature relieved by this method, though it be unusual, as that it can deliver it
self from the relics of the matter to be Eliminated, seeing it is easy to
conceive a Transfusion of a great quantity of vigorous Effluvias, from the
sound and strong Body, into the withered one of the Sick, neither have I ever
found that the repeated application of hot clothes could at all do that which
the now mentioned method has performed, where both the heat applied is more
agreeable to the humane Body, and gentle, moist, equal and lasting; and though
this way of immitting Balsamic Spirits into the Body of the Patient might seem
absurd at the time when I prescribed it, yet it has been used by others with
happy success; neither truly am I ashamed to mention this remedy, though perhaps
some impertinent Men superciliously contemning all things Vulgar may ridicule
me for it. For I think the Health and Good of my Neighbor is very much to be
preferred before their vain Opinions.

He that prudently and with due consideration has observed the method hitherto
delivered, will free the Patient, if not from all, yet at least from most of
those Symptoms which are either wont to accompany the Fever or to come after
it, and which render the Physician doubtful and at a loss in the course of the
Cure, and often destroy his Patient, though the nature of the Disease does not
seem deadly. But for as much as such accidents often happen, either because the
Sick neglected to call the Physician in time, or by reason of the unskilfulness
or carelessness of the Physician. I think it not amiss to treat briefly of
their peculiar Cure, but will only confine my self to those Symptoms, which
though they might often have been prevented, if the foresaid method had been
used, yet when they happen they require a different Cure proper to themselves.

And to begin from hence, if the Sick A Frenzy.
either upon the account of taking hot Medicines unseasonably, or by being
naturally of too hot a constitution fall into a Frenzy, or (which is next to
it) if he does not sleep at all, often calls out or uses incoherent Speeches;
if he looks and talks fierce, if he takes Medicines and common Drink greedily
and as it were snatches it; and lastly has a suppression of Urine: In this case
I say I bleed more freely than before, and use Clysters and cooling Medicines
oftener, especially in the Spring; and though this Symptom do not appear in young
People, and in those whose Blood is brisk, they admit of these Remedies without
much hazard; and by the use of such Remedies I endeavor to keep up the
Patient, till the Disease has lasted a while, and then it is not very difficult
to free him at once of the Symptom and the Disease too; and this may be done by
giving some Narcotick Medicine in a large dose; for though when the Fever is at
the height those things that are of a Narcotic quality do no good, nor answer
the Physicians end, yet being given seasonably at the declination of the
Disease are very beneficial; but before they can do no good, partly because
they cannot stop the force of Fermentation, though they are given in the largest
dose; and partly, which truly is most considerable, because the Peccant matter
at that time equally mixed with the Blood, and not yet tending to separation is
restrained by such a Medicine, and so the despumation so much to be desired is
hindered; but whether this be the reason of this Phenomenon, or some other
more obstruse, let those judge who have a mind and leisure to think of such
things. But I declare that it is most certain, from a faithful and due
collection of many observations, that Laudanum or any other Narcotics in the
beginning, increase, or state of this Fever does no good for the quelling of
this Symptom, but as it often happens does harm; but in the declination of the
Disease, it is used successfully in a moderate Dose. I once used a Narcotic on
the twelfth day of the Disease not in vain, but I never knew it given sooner
with any success; but if the use of it be deferred till the fourteenth day,
'twill do the better, separation then being more perfect, neither indeed does
this delay (though this dreadful Symptom does very much afrighten the
bystanders) presently kill, for I have often observed, that it could and was
wont to bear a truce, till 'twas seasonable to use Narcotics, if care was taken
that the Intemperies begun, was not heighthen'd too much by Cordials and hot
Medicines; in which case the Patient dies suddenly. The Narcotics which I am
wont to use, are either London Laudanum, from one Grain to one Grain and a
half, or the following,

Take of Cowslip flowers Mi, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
Black-Cherry water, dissolve ss, of Diacodium, and half a spoonful of juice of
Lemons, in iii of the strained Liquor, mingle them. Or take of Black-Cherry
water iss, Epidemic water ii, Liquid Laudanum Gutt. xvi, Syrup of July flowers
i, mingle them.

I will only add this, which I think is worth observation, to wit, that if this
Symptom will grant a truce so long, and the Fever continues a long space, so
that the Patient may be safely purged before the taking of the Anodyne, 'twill
prove more effectual, wherefore I used to order ii, of the Pill Coch. major.
dissolved in Betony water ten or twelve hours before the taking of the
Narcotic, neither is there any danger from the Tumult, which that hot Pill
would otherwise occasion; for the virtue of the following Narcotic, will
appease those commotions and establish most gentle and sweet peace.

But if the watchings continue after the Fever is gone off, all the other
Symptoms being likewise ceased, I have observed that a rag dipped in Rosewater,
and applied cold to the fore part of the Head and Temples, is more beneficial
than any Narcotic whatever.

It often happens that the Sick is vexed with a Cough, through the whole course
A Cough.
of the Disease, to wit, the mass of Blood being in a commotion, and raging
violently; all things now tending to Sedition, it comes to pass that the Humors
let loose and flowing from the mass of Blood, by the vessels of the Lungs, or
also by an Apertion of them, are cast upon the inner Membrane of the Aspera
Arteria, to wit, the thinner, being of exquisite sense; and hence the Cough
arises, which is first dry, because the matter being yet thin, frustrates the
expulsive faculty, presently it grows thick, and is difficultly Expectorated,
because by degrees it is baked by the Febrile heat, and hence it comes to pass
that the Patient is discour aged by fear of choking, because he wants strength
to Cough up this viscid matter. In this case I rarely use any other Medicines
than Oil of Almonds fresh drawn, unless it happen (and sometime it is so) that
the Patient has wholly an aversion to Oil, and then we must use the common
Pectorals; but I think Oil of Almonds, if the Patient can bear it, is to be
preferred before other Pectorals, for this reason chiefly, for that it is
necessary they are given in a larger quantity if we do any thing to the
purpose; and by this means we overcharge the Stomach which was too weak before,
and inclined to be nauseous; and sometimes also we are hindered upon the same
account, so that we cannot mind those things which are to be dispatched at the
same time; neither can I understand, nor learn by experience, why we should
abstain from the use of this Oil (which we have now mentioned) in Fevers, to
wit, because it is inflamable, and therefore to be feared lest it should
increase the Fever; for suppose it naturally hot, yet certainly its heat is not
so great, but that the advantage of it upon another account may compensate for
it, for it is manifestly more Pectoral than other things, and opens and
Lubricates the passages and promotes Expectoration, by which (especially if it
happen to be large) the Blood is both freed from a troublesome Humor, now
conveniently evacuated and also somewhat cooled. And therefore I am not much
concerned when at any time I perceive this Symptom intervenes, for by it the
Patient is not a little relieved. I only admonish that it is not safe to give it
at first by whole spoonfuls, for there is danger lest it make the Stomach
nauseous and cause a looseness, and therefore it is to be given sparingly and
frequently Night and Day, by which, Expectoration being made, the Cough is not
only lessened, but also which is of some moment, the Patients strength worn
out, is somewhat renewed with a gentle nourishment.

Sometimes it happens that an Haemorrhage An Haemorrhage of the Nose.
of the Nose supervenes, either for that too hot Medicines were given at the
beginning of the Disease, or that the Ebullition was not sufficiently
restrained, when the Patient was either in the flower of his Age, or the season
of the Year furthered it: If it happen so, those things will do no great good,
that are commonly used to stop the motion of the Blood, as Bleeding, Ligatures,
Astringent and Aggluntinative Medicines, or those things that attemperate the
Acrimony of the Blood, and the like. For though these and other such things may
be used according to the prudence and advice of Physicians, yet the main
business is to bridle the Ebullition of the Blood, with some fit Medicine that
may stop the force of it rushing upon every precipice. Indeed if the Symptom be
considered apart, those things which we have mentioned before, especially
Bleeding, are proper enough; neither would I doubt to use them, but truly they
don't sufficiently answer the cause of this Symptom, at least if you except
Bleeding; and really it is as rational to endeavor with a Sword to put out
Fire, as to take off this Symptom by the things above mentioned. Therefore
having tried in vain other things in this case, I used to prescribe some such
thing as follows.

Take of Purslain and Erratic Poppy water of each iss, of Diacodium vi, Syrup
of Cowslips ss. mingle them for a draught.

I would not have these things so understood, as if I would presently stop
every Haemorrhage, for it is often rather to be permitted, for it may much
relieve the patient, partly by suppressing too great an Ebullition, and
sometimes partly also by carrying off the Disease critically; and indeed it is
to little purpose to use the foresai'd remedy, for this Symptom before it has
continued sometime, or before a Vein has been opened in the Arm. This is
carefully to be noted, that this and all other immoderate Haemorrhages have
this peculiar to themselves, that as soon as they are stopped, by what means
soever it be, the Patient is in danger of a relapse, if some lenitive Purge be
not given; and therefore we must Purge, though (with respect to the season of the
Fever) it is wont and ought to be put off somewhat longer unless this Symptom
happen.

This Symptom for the most part happens The Hickock.
to old Men, after large Evacuations, either by a Looseness, or especially by
Vomiting, it very often portends that death is near at hand. I ingenuously
confess, that I cannot satisfy my self in my search after the Cause of the
Hickocks; yet I have often observed they take their rise from a disturbance in
the Stomach or neighboring parts, raised by rough Medicines, for the quelling
and reducing of which to pristine peace when the strength of Nature is not
sufficient, there is great imminent Danger; and therefore I have thought it
reasonable to provide for it, that what Nature could not do of her self, she
should do by the assistance of Art. Therefore having given a large dose, (to
wit two Drams) of Diascordium, it has done the business, when I could do not
good with the Seeds of Dill, and other things that are cried up as Specifics.

If in the course of this Disease a looseness A Diarrhaea.
arise, which (as we have noted above) used to happen, when a Vomit was
indicated at the beginning of the Disease, and was not taken. In this case I
say a Vomit may be given at any time of the Disease, if the Strength does not
Contraindicat, though the inclination to Vomiting be long since passed. But
because I think I have Treated sufficiently of this thing in the former Pages,
I will only add this now, to wit, what is to be done if a looseness come, though a
Vomit has been given, which indeed is very rare unless in an Inflammatory
Fever, where a Vomit does not only hinder this Symptom, but sometimes occasion
it, which must be observed; therefore when things are so I have found a Clyster
of this kind more beneficial than any other Astringent whatever.

Take of the Bark of Pomegranates ss, of Red Roses Pii, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Cows Milk, dissolve ss of Diascordium in half a pound of
the strained Liquor, mingle them and make a Clyster.

I would not advise that a Clyster should be injected in a greater quantity,
for though it may be naturally Astringent, yet there is danger lest it should
weary the Intestines by its bulk, and so provoke more the flux which we
endeavor to stop.

But perhaps some one will object that it seems more proper, especially at the
declination of the Disease, that the Diarrhaea if it happen, should rather be
permitted than stopped, for as much as that Flux is sometimes critical, and
carries off the Disease: I answer, that I don't deny, but that sometimes the
Fever is carried off this way, but this so seldom happens that we may not
depend upon it, and that account (in which having spoke generally of the Cure
of all Fevers, we endeavored to prove the necessity of the stopping this Flux)
is also here much to the purpose; and now this is to be added, and in my
Opinion it is worth observing, to wit, that for a genuine Depuration of the
Blood, it is not only necessary that there be a Secretion of some parts by the
Faeces, but it is requisite also that others like Flowers be separated, which
is daily perceived in other Rich and Heterogenious Liquors; wherefore if we too
much indulge the Diarrhaea, the Depuration so much desired would be only
imperfect, and perchance that which should be cast out last would be Secreted
first. Truly I confess that separation by Flowers being made (which by the by
is performed gradually and insensibly, and more commonly by large perspiration
rather than by manifest sweat) the Diarrhaea if it should chance to happen will
not be very dangerous; but it is to be noted that then it happens upon no other
account, but because purging to carry off the Faeces was not opportunely
prescribed, which Faeces indeed by their continuance growing malignant, provoke
now the Intestines to Excretion; to say nothing that that Liquid consistence of
the Excrements, (for so they are most commonly) sufficiently indicates, that
it is not to be accounted a critical Solution of the Disease.

And perchance the Iliac Passion may be reckoned among the Symptoms that come
The Iliac Passion.
upon Fevers, because violent Vomitings, which are wont to appear at the
beginning of Fevers, sometimes occasion it.

This dreadful Disease, being hitherto almost in the opinion of all mortal,
takes its rise from the inverted, and preposterous motion of the Intestines. To
wit, the Fibers of the Intestines, which ought to be contracted from the
Superior toward the Inferior, are drawn to the Superior; and whatsoever is
contained in the Intestines, is not protruded to the Belly, but toward the
Stomach, and is violently regurgitated to the mouth; so that Clysters, how
sharp soever, become vomitive; and also Cathartics, taken by the mouth, are
suddenly cast up by Vomit: And in my opinion, the exquisit and intolerable
pain coming upon this Disease, is only occasioned by the foresaid preposterous
motion of the Intestines. For whereas those Folds which the many
circumvolutions of the Intestines make, are so formed by Nature, that they
should most fitly conduce to the carrying down of the Faeces, when they, I say,
are forced to give way to a motion contrary to their Fibers, the aforesaid pain
is occasioned from thence, which is fixed to one part, and is like the boring
of an Auger, when either the Valve, which is placed at the beginning of the
Colon, hinders the going back of the Excrements to the Ileon, or any other
Membrane belonging to the Sinus, sustains alone the force of this preposterous
Impulse.

We may assign a twofold cause of this Inverversion, from whence that pain
arises, viz. Obstruction and Irritation.

First therefore, whatever violently obstructs the Intestines, so that nothing
can pass downwards, necessarily produces this contrary motion in them. Among
these, Authors are wont to reckon the Excrements hardened, gross wind collected
in a great quantity, and tying up as it were the Intestines, the constriction
of them in a Rupture; and lastly, an Inflammation, and other great Tumors
which stop up the internal Cavity of the Intestine. In the mean time we must
not deny, that this contrary motion, owing its rise to these causes, is rather
to be accounted the motion of the things taken in, than of the Intestines:
Neither is this an inversion of the whole duct of the Intestines, but only of
those which are situated above the seat of that obstruction; wherefore I call
an Iliac Passion proceeding hence, Spurious.

Secondly, I think that in the Iliac Passion the cause of the inversion of the
peristaltic motion of the Intestines, is most commonly after this manner, viz.
Sharp and malignant humors are cast upon the Stomach, and the Guts that are
next to it, by the Blood raging on the account of the Fever begun of late, by
which the motion of the Stomach is first inverted, and forced violently to cast
up what is contained in it; at length the small guts that are joined to the
Stomach being weakened, yield to the violent motion of it, and with them at last
the greater follow by consent, the Stomach vomiting, leading as it were the
Dance. This I call the true Iliac Passion, and which is treated of now: The
Method of curing, it has been hitherto in a manner unknown, whatever some boast
of the use of Quicksilver and Bullets, which besides that they do little good,
are often very injurious. I have successfully used this method.

When it appears by Clysters cast up by the mouth, and other signs, that it is a
true Iliac Passion, I endeavor these three things: First, That the contrary
motion of the Stomach, which causes the like motion of the Guts, may be
hindered. Secondly, That the Intestines being weakened by the sharp humor, may
be corroborated. Thirdly, That the Stomach and Guts be freed from those
Humors; and that I may answer these Indications, I institute the Cure after
this manner: First, I prescribe one Scruple of Salt of Wormwood in a spoonful
of Juice of Lemons to be taken morning and evening: But at other times of the
day I order some spoonfuls of Mint-water without Sugar, or any thing else to be
taken twice in an hour, by the repeated use of which alone, the vomiting, and
the pain arising from thence will soon vanish. At the same time I order a live
Kitling to lie continually upon the naked Belly: But after the pain and
vomiting has wholly ceased for the space of two or three days, I give one Dram
of the Pill Coch. Maj. dissolved in Mintwater, which I also order to be used
very often all the time of the working of the Pills, that I may the more
certainly hinder the return of the vomiting: Neither is the Kitling to be
removed before the Patient has taken the Pills.

I have observed that it is to no purpose to give these Pills, or any other
Cathartics, how strong soever, until the Stomach is strengthened, and reduced to
its natural motion, and the Guts also to that which is proper to them: For
otherwise all Cathartics taken inwardly would prove emetic, and so do more hurt
than good; and therefore I don't use purging Medicines, until for some time I
have used those Medicines which respect the Stomach.

I prescribe a very thin Diet, for I allow only some spoonfuls of Chicken
broth to be taken twice or thrice a day; in the mean while I order the Patient
to keep his bed all the time of the Sickness, till the signs of perfect health
appear; and when he is well I appoint him to persist in the use of the foresaid
water, for a long time, and to keep his Belly warm with Flannels doubled, that
there may not be a relapse, to which this Disease is more obnoxious than any
other.

My whole method of Curing this Disease, consists of these few things, which I
trust will not be despised by any Judicious Person, by reason of its
simplicity, and want of Rhetoric, and pomp of Medicines. And these are the
Symptoms that are wont to happen in this Fever, there are some others which I
will not now mention, partly because they are of less moment, and partly
because they don't require a peculiar way of Cure, for the Fever being well
treated they go off of themselves. And so much for the continual Fever of this
Constitution and of its Symptoms.

CHAP. II. Of the New Fever.
THO my old Age, worn out almost by long Sickness, may well require on that
account a Writ of Ease, and a cessation from deep thought, the labor of the
Brain; yet I could not forbear, but I must be busi'd in the procuring the
Health of others, tho even by the loss of my own; when my acquaintance informed
me of the entrance of a new Constitution, from whence proceeded a new sort of
Fever, much unlike those that reigned of late.

We must remember that in Autumn 1677. Intermittent Fevers first advanced and
increased daily, and were Epidemic till they came to their state; afterward
they gradually decreased and so rarely appeared the last Years of this
Constitution, that they could not be 'counted Epidemical; and on this account
we must likewise take notice that the two last Years of the Constitution now
going off, had two very severe Winters, especially the last save one, viz. the
Year 1683, in which the season was so extremely cold, that no Man living ever
saw the like, as to the intense degree of cold, and the long time it held. For
the Noble River of Thames was so froze that it easily sustained, like a solid
pavement, Coaches running about upon it, and Shops well stocked, in the manner
of Streets, and great crowds of People. Tho the following Year 84, did not
equal the preceding, either as to the extremity of cold or obstinate duration
of it, yet it did not come much behind it as to either; but as soon as it
thawed in February, in the Year 8 4/5. this Fever, began that I now treat of,
which I take to be a new sort of Fever, and wholly different from that which
has prevailed for these eight Years last past.

I cannot certainly say whether the change of this Constitution is to be
attributed to the alteration of the manifest qualities of the Air, which
succeeded for those two Winters; for I have observed that alterations as to the
sensible qualities of Years how different soever, have not produced species of
Epidemic Diseases; and that a certain series of Years (tho one Year has
differed from another, as to outward appearance and temperament) have
notwithstanding all agreed in the production of the same species of stationary
Fevers; which when I had seriously considered, I was of the Opinion, as I have
mentioned in another place, that the change of a Constitution chiefly depends
on some secret and hidden alteration in the Bowels of the Earth passing through
the whole Atmosphaere, or from some influence of the Celestial Bodies. Tho
it is to be noted here, that when the Depuratory Fever heretofore went off, a
very dry and violent Frost from the beginning of Winter 64, froze up all
things, nor did it at all abate till the beginning of March, at which time,
as soon as the Frost went off, and a Pestilential Fever, soon after the Plague
began to rage. But however this be, the Fever which we now Treat of, began at
the time aforesaid, to wit in Feb. 8t. and was more spread through all the
parts of England, and more Epidemic in other places than here in London, the
Year before and this Year.

When I was first called to this Fever, I verily believed 'twas not of that
kind of Fevers which I call Stationary, but rather of the Family of
Intercurrents, which come promiscuously almost in all Years; to wit, that 'twas
nothing else than that Bastard Peripneumonia, which I have heretofore described
in my Book of Acute Diseases, only with this difference, that in this Fever the
Symptoms did not appear now and then, which were more Pathognomonic in the
Peripneumonia; such are a violent Cough, a violent Headache in Coughing,
cleaving as it were the Head, a Giddiness upon any motion, and a great
difficulty in Breathing, all which did most commonly accompany the Bastard
Peripneumonia. When therefore the Bookseller desired a new Edition of my Works
at that time, I Published my conjecture in the Postscript, in which I perceive
I was mistaken; and truly I was led into this Error by the great and manifest
agreement which was between this Fever and the foresaid Peripneumonia, which
comes now and then every Winter; but the Summer coming on, which was wont to
vanquish these Peripneumonic Fevers, and this notwithstanding continuing, I was
soon convinced of my error, and was wholly persuaded that 'twas to be reduced
to a new Constitution.

After as diligent a search as I could make, the Symptoms I observed are, and
were for the most part these, the Sick is Cold and Hot by turns, and often
complains of Pain of his Head and Limbs; the Pulse are like the Pulse of those
that are well; Blood taken away is most commonly like the Blood of Pleuritics;
the Patient for the most part is troubled with a Cough, which together with
other Symptoms accompanying a gentle Peripneumonia goes off so much the sooner,
by how much longer the Disease invades from Winter. A pain seizes the Neck and
Jaws, sometimes at the beginning of the Disease, but it is less than in a
Quinsey; tho the Fever be Continual, yet it has often violent Exacerbations
toward Evening, as if 'twere a double Tertian or Quotidian. The Patient is
much endangered by keeping his Bed continually, tho he has but very little
clothes on, for by that means the Fever being turned upon the Brain he soon
falls into a Coma or Frenzy; and to speak the truth, the inclination in this
Disease to a Frenzy is so great that it often creeps on of a sudden of its own
accord, without any such occasion. But the Frenzy does not rise with so great
a fury in this Fever, as in that with which those that have the Small Pox and
other Fevers are seized; for the Sick rather doats, muttering now and then some
odd words. Petechiae very often break out by reason of the unseasonable use of
Cordials, and too a hot Regimen; and in young People of a hot constitution,
Purple Spots the certain signs of a high Inflammation, as well in this as in
any other kind of Acute Diseases; and sometimes Eruptions which they call
Miliares, sprinkle themselves over the Superficies of the Body, and are not
much unlike the Measles, only they are Redder, and when they go off they don't
leave behind them those Branny Scales which are seen in the Measles; tho they
come sometimes of their own accord, yet most commonly they are forced out by
the heat of the Bed and Cordials. The Patients' Tongue is either moist or dry
according to the Method which has been used; when its dry it is of a Duskish
Color in the middle, which is hemmed round with a whitish Fringe; but when
it is moist it is all White, covered also with a White and filthy Skin; for if
the Patient be too much heated by the Method used, the Tongue is most commonly
Dusky and Dry, but if not it is Moist and White. The same is to be affirmed of
Sweat, which flows according to the different Method aforesaid; for if the
Patient be treated with too much Heat, it is in a manner Viscous, especially
about the Head; and tho it flow freely, and from all parts, yet the Sick has
little relief by it: so that it is manifest that such Sweats are only
Symptomatical; not Critical. Sweat forced by Art at the beginning of the
Disease, used to put off the Morbific matter, if not on the Head, at least upon
the Limbs. But when the Fever has possessed the Head, and the Frensre has once
prevailed, then no signs of the Fever remain, only the Pulse is sometimes
quicker sometimes slower: but at length, when by ill management, the Spirits
are driven into a Confusion, the Pulse is inordinate, with a Subsultus of the
Members, and Death soon follows.

As to the Cure, those Signs of the Peripneumonia which accompanied this Fever
last Year in February, in which it first began, made me believe presently after
Winter, as I said before, that it ought to be reckoned with the Family of
Peripneumonics; and therefore I presently betook my self to that Method which I
have heretofore commended in the Cure of the Bastard Peripneumonia, which
indeed was very succesful to me, in those few, I was scarce able to take care
of by reason of my Sickness, and to others who were pleased to try it upon my
commendation. What ever it was that persuaded me to use this Method, I am now
fully satisfied, having weighed the Phenomenon of the Disease, and the
Temperateness of the last Year, which followed the two cold Winters (especially
of the Winter, if it could be called so, for it brought with it no considerable
cold) I say it is manifest to me that this Fever is nothing else than a simple
Inflammation of the Blood, and that therefore the Curative Indications are
wholly to be directed to the suppressing of the said Inflammation by proper
Remedies and Methods.

Therefore I proceed after this manner, first I order ten ounces of Blood to be
taken from the Arm; and truly this Fever (how like soever the Blood be most
commonly to that of Pleuritics) does not easily bear repeated Bleeding; but if
a difficulty of Breathing, a lancing pain of the Head in Coughing and the like,
signify that this Disease tends to a Bastard Peripneumonia, then Bleeding and
Purging are to be repeated, until all the Symptoms wholly vanish, as I have
said in the Chapter of a Peripneumonia, and I desire this may be seriously
minded.

In the Evening I apply a Blister to the Pole, and next Morning give this
lenitive Portion.

Take of Tamarinds ss, leaves of Senna ii, Rubarb iss, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water to iii, in the strained Liquor, dissolve of Manna
and Syrup of Roses Solutive each i,, mingle them and make a Potion to be taken
early in the Morning.

Which I order to be repeated every other day for thrice, and this or the like
Paregoric to be taken at Bedtime after every Purge.

Take of Cowslip water ii, of Diacodium i, of juice of Lemons freshdrawn 2
spoonfuls, mingle them and make a draught.

viz. To prevent the Patients being Comatose, by reason of the confusion of the
Animal Spirits, which Purges often occasion, by the Tumult they raise in the
Blood and Humors of those that have Fevers; which Symptom is Cru'd by Hypnotic
Medicines, tho they seem to promote it; for which reason not daring to give a
Purge, in the Comatose Fever of the Year 73. I persisted in the use of
Clysters; for I knew very well that Purging Medicines, us'ed at that time,
presently occasioned a Coma, which perhaps would have happened otherwise, if I
had thought of giving a Paregonic after such a Purge. But when the Patient does
not Purge, we must not give an Anodyne at bedtime, lest it hinder the
operation of the Cathartic, which is to be taken the next day (which is usual,
tho it be taken late) but if it don't wholly stop it, it will render it less
efficacious. It Is a Rule with me, in this and other Epidemic Fevers, not to
Purge either in the beginning or state of the Disease, unless Bleeding has
first been used: which indeed by being either neglected or violated has
occasioned the Death of many, especially of Children, as I have in another
place admonished by way of caution.

But we must take notice, that tho for the most part the 'foresaid Evacuations
ought to be used in the Cure of this Fever, yet often the Sick, especially if
he be a young Man or Infant, presently recovers after Bleeding and being once
Purged: and there is no occasion for more, the Fever being vanquished by the
first; but on the contrary it is sometimes necessary that Purges should be used
oftener than we said before. For it sometimes happens, tho rarely, that the
Patient being freed by this Method, relapses in a few days after by reason of
the Febrile matter growing Crude again; but it is presently Eliminated by the
Purge repeated the fourth time, tho this Fever seldom happens under this
Method, unless it be occasioned by Aphthae, coming at the latter end of the
preceding Fever, and now being at their height, recall it; which Fever is
indeed only Symptomatical, and the Hickocks returning by intervals often follow
it, which also remain for some days after the Fever is gone off; but at length
vanish of their own accord, as the Patient gets strength, which is diligently
to be noted; for as much as there is no danger from the Hickocks coming at the
latter end of this Fever, unless many Medicines are over officiously and
unprofitably crammed in, and then Death is instead of the Physician; but both
the Aphthae and Hickocks, or either of them, if they don't go off of their own
accord, but continue a long while, may be easily Cured by the Peruvian Bark,
viz. an ounce with a sufficient quantity of Erratic Poppies, either in the form
of an Electuary, or Pills taken after the manner I set down heretofore in my
Epistle to Dr. Brady, drinking upon it a draught of Posset Drink. Which Remedy
I have found by experience in this case more certain than any other whatever,
if its virtue be not spoiled (as commonly it is) by the Patient keeping his Bed
continually.

I sometimes prescribe the following or the like, on the days the Purges are
not taken.

Take of the Conserve of Wood Sorrel, of Cynosbal. aa i, Conserve of Barberies
ss, Cream of Tartar i, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Lemons, make an
Electuary, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg thrice aday, drinking upon it
four spoonfuls of the following Julap.

Take of the water of Purslain, Lettice and Cowslips aa iii, of Syrup of Lemons
iss, of Syrup of Violets i, mingle them and make a Julap.

Or take of Fountain waters lbi, of Rose water, of the juice of Lemons, of
White Sugar aa iv, boil them over a gentle fire, till all the scum be risen,
take iii at pleasure.

But in all these things I forbear the use of Spirit of Vitriol, tho it be very
refrigerating, because it is not proper in any Diseases that are Cured by
Purging, by reason it is so very Styptick, not to mention now the Mineral nature
of this Spirit.

It often happens, especially toward the end of this Fever, that the Sick when
he is managed after this manner, Sweats now and then of his own accord in the
Night, by which all the Symptoms of the Disease are very much mitigated; but
notwithstanding seeing we cannot trust in such Sweats, we must by no means
intermit the 'foresaid method, because if the Sick should indulge those Sweats
for a longer time, the Fever which the preceding Purges had in some sort
subjugated would again revive; for if the Sweat be protracted beyond that time,
in which the Febrile particles repaired by due coction are wholly carried off,
the Sweats that follow do nothing else but kindle the flame afresh; wherefore
tho those Sweats which flowed Spontaneously were perchance critical, with
respect to the casting out of the Febrile matter, which is fit for Expulsion,
yet the others that follow them may be only Symptomatical, and so do more hurt
than good. In a word, the gentle heat of the Bed at Nights opportunely favors
such Sweats as flow of their own accord in the Night; wherefore the Sick should
have no more nor thicker clothes on, than he use to have when he was well, nor
should any hot Medicines be given. Let him only keep his Bed a little longer
than he is wont, in the Morning following, and afterward let him persist in
the method of Cure above prescribed.

His diet is to be Oatmeal and Barley broaths, and now and then a roasted Apple,
and after the second Purge Chicken broth. I order small Beer cold for his
ordinary drink, and the white Decoction made of one ounce of Hartshorn
calcind, and boiled in three pints of common water, and afterward sweetened
with white Sugar.

It Is not necessary, as I have mentioned in another place, after the taking of
two Purges, to forbid the Eating of Chickens, and the like of easy concoction;
for this way of Cure by Purging indulges the same, which could not be allowed
if we proceeded in another way; moreover after the last Purge, if the Fever has
a little spent it self, and is not yet turned to an Ague, three or four
spoonfuls of Canary Wine may be taken Night and Morning, and after Dinner for
some Days, by which the Strength may be the sooner restored and the Febrile
fits averted.

But for as much as this kind of Fever is more prone, than any other I ever yet
saw, to assault the Head, neither can it be removed from thence without great
difficulty: I seriously admonish my Patients that they lie a Bed naked only a
Nights, but if they are so very much weakened that they cannot sit upright, I
permit that they should lie upon the Bed or Couch with their clothes on, with
their Heads a little elevated; neither do I allow that they should have any
more fire in their Chambers than when they were well.

And as this Regimen is to be observed from the beginning, in all that are
seized with this Fever, (excepting Women taken on the first days of Childbed)
so is it necessarily enjoined, when the Physician is called to a Patient, who
by reason of too hot a Regimen, has been seized with a Frenzy, Petechiae or
Purple spots, or any other signs of a violent inflammation; for in this case
tho Blood be taken away, tho the Body be lightly covered, and whatever cooling
Liquors are drunk, yet the Fever will not cease till the Patient keeps from bed
adays, for as much as the heat of the Ambient Air, kept in by the coverings,
too much exagitates the Blood, and the lying posture of the Body forces the
same with violence on the Head; but when the Frenzy has once prevailed, by
reason of an ill Method, it cannot presently be tamed, neither is it safe to
endeavor the Cure by repeating Bleeding and purging beyond the limits
prescribed; but at length 'twill go off at its own time and of its own accord,
by the help of the Method aforesaid. But nothing so much conduces to the
removal of it as shaving the Head, and therefore I always order it without
applying a Plaster, only a Cap so thick as may compensate the loss of the
Hair, or at least defend the Head from external cold; by this means the Brain
is very much cooled and refreshed, so that by degrees it may be able to
overcome the hot impressions that occasion the Frenzy.

And what has been said of a Frenzy may likewise be affirmed of the Coma that
comes upon this Fever, in which and in the said Frenzy the Febrile matter is
carried up to the Head, and so if you except the whiteness of the Tongue there
are no signs of a Fever; for the Patient seems to be wholly freed from it. In
this Sympton as in the other, Cathartics, Sudorifics, Blisters, and the like,
are not used only unsuccessfully, but do a great deal of hurt; for such
Evacuation procure death, sooner than the Cure of this Symptom: wherefore after
general Evacuations, by Bleeding and Purging, the business is to be committed
to Nature and time, tho this Symptom terrify the bystanders; for tho the Sick
be stupid for a long time, yet he will recover his Health after many days, if
he be not continually kept a Bed; but is taken out of it a days and laid upon a
Couch, or on the Bed with his Clothes on; in the mean time his Head may be
shaved, and at the latter end of this Symptom three or four spoonfuls of Canary
Wine may be given twice a day. But I have Treated largely of this in the fifth
Section, and second Chapter, of my Book of Acute Diseases, where I discoursed
of a certain notable Coma that accompanied that Constitution.

But as to the Fever the Physician is not to be deterred, from making the
'foresaid Evacuations, if upon feeling the Pulse, he should perceive a
twitching of the Members or a Convulsive motion of the Body; for as much as in
some kind of Diseases of the Nerves, both Bleeding and Purging don't only not
do hurt but are necessarily prescribed; of which I will produce an experiment I
made in a certain kind of Convulsion, which is commonly called Chorea Sancti
Viti, of which Disease I have seen and Cured no less than Five by Bleeding and
Purging prescribed by intervals; of which sort of Disease I will speak somewhat
seeing it occurs opportunely, and clearly confirms the truth of what I now
assert. Chorea Sancti Viti, is a sort of Convulsion which chiefly invades Boys
and Girls from ten Years of age to Puberity: First it shows it self by a
certain Lameness, or rather instability of one of the Legs, which the Patient
drags after him like a Fool, afterward it is perceived in the Hand of the same
side, which he that has this Disease can in no wise keep in the same posture
for a moment, if it be brought to the Breast or any other part, but 'twill be
distorted to another position or place by a certain Convulsion, do the Patient
what he can: if a cup of Drink be put in his Hand he represents a thousand
gestures, like Juglers, before he brings it to his Mouth; for whereas he cannot
carry it to his Mouth in a right line, his Hand being drawn hither and thither
by the Convulsion, he turns it often about for some time, till at length
happily reaching his Lips he flings it suddenly into his Mouth, and drinks it
greedily as if the poor wretch designed only to make sport. For as much as this
Disease seems to me to proceed from some Humor rushing in upon the Nerves,
which provokes such preternatural motions; I think the Curative indications are
first to be directed to the lessening those Humors by Bleeding and Purging,
and then to the strengthening the genus nervosum, in order to which I use this
Method: I take seven ounces of Blood from the Arm, more or less according to
the age of the Patient; the next day I prescribe half or something more
(according to the age, or the more or less disposition of the Body to bear
Purging) of the common Purging Potion above described, of Tamarinds, and Senna,
etc. in the Evening I give the following draught.

Take of Black-Cherry water i, of Langius's Epileptic water iii, of old Venice
Treacle i, of liquid Laudanum Gutt. viii, make a draught.

I order the Purging Potion to be repeated thrice, once every other day, and a
Paregoric draught the same nights; afterward I prescribe Bleeding and Purging
as before, and so Alternately I Bleed and Purge till the Patient has Bled three
or four times, and after every Bleeding Purge so often as his strength will
bear; only it must be diligently observed that there must be so much space
between the Evacuations that the Patient receives no damage from thence; if the
days Purging is not used, I prescribe as follows.

Take of Conserve of Roman Wormwood, of the Yellow rind of Orranges aa i,
Conserve of Rosemary Flowers ss, of old Venice Treacle and Nutmegs Candid aa
iii, of Ginger Candid i, Syrup of the juice of Citrons a sufficient quantity,
make an Electuary, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg in the Morning, and
at five of the Clock in the Evening; drinking upon it five spoonfuls of the
following Wine.

Take of the Roots of Paeony, Elicampane, Masterwort, Angelica aa i, of the
Leaves of Rue, Sage, Betony, Germander, white Whore-Hound, and the tops of the
lesser Centaury aa Mi, of Juniper Berries vi, the rinds of two Oranges; let
them be cut and infused cold, in six pints of Canary wine; strain it as you use
it.

Take of Rue water iv, of Langius's Epileptic water, and compound Briony water
aa i, Syrup of Paeony vi, mingle them and make a Julap, take four spoonfuls at
bedtime, with eight drops of Spirit of Hartshorn. Let a Blaister of Gum
Caranna be applied to the Soles of the Feet.

The more the Patient recovers, the less he drags his Foot, and the Hand is
steddier, so that he can bring the cup to his Mouth more directly; which are
certain signs how much better he is: but tho to perfect the Cure, I would not
advise that he should be Bled more than three or four times, yet Cathartic, and
Alterative Medicines are to be used till he is quite well. And because he that
has once this Disease may easily relapse, I think it expedient that he be
Blooded and Purged for some days the next year about the same time, or a little
before the Disease first invaded. And truly I suppose that the Epilepsie of the
adult, may go nigh to be Cured by this Method, if the Remedies prescribed were
well proportioned to their Age, tho by reason I have seldom met with this
Disease, I have not yet tried it; but this by the by.

It sometimes happens in Women subject to Hysteric fits, that when the Cure has
been managed by the 'foresaid Evacuations, the Fever continues after Bleeding
and Purging, tho repeated; in this case the Fever that now prevails is plainly
continued by the commotion of the Spirits occasioned by the Evacuations; and
therefore all other things being omitted, the Curative indications are only to
be directed to the appeasing the fury of the Spirits, if there be no signs of a
Peripneumonia, or Inflammation about the vital parts. In order to which a
Paregoric, that is sufficient to cause sleep, ought to be prescribed every
night; and also Hysteric Medicines properly so called, twice or thrice a day,
such are Pills made of Galbanum, Assafetida, Castor and the like, and Julaps of
the same nature, described in my Treatise of Hysteric Fits. Moreover that meat
and drink which is most agreeable to the appetite of the Patient ought to be
allowed to recover the strength, and to suppress the vapors, as they call them.

We have said already, that this Fever had both the last year, and especially
this, a certain Exacerbation daily about night, not much unlike the fit of an
intermittent Fever. Wherefore those Physicians that had found by experience
that all those Fevers which did any whit intermit (and often those that did not
intermit at all) through that series of years from 77 to the beginning of 85,
were certainly Cured by the Peruvian Bark, treated this Fever with the same
Remedy: but tho 'twas rational, yet most commonly 'twas not so successful as in
the former years. For upon a diligent search I found that tho a great quantity
of the Bark was given, yet it rarely Cured the Patient, and so very rarely,
that I rather imputed the recovery of the Sick to some lucky event of the
Disease, than to the virtue of the Bark, so that it wholly lost that Sanative
virtue and certainty it had in the 'foresaid years. I mean the Fever we Treat
of now, which is something like a Quotidian; but when there is the type of a
genuine Tertian, or of one invading every other day, the Bark is as prevalent
now as ever; so that it is very manifest that this Fever was quite different
from that of the former Constitution, for as much as the use of the Bark does
now no good, and this is heighthen'd by Wine, Cordials, and other hot things;
all which well enough agreed with the use of the Bark and also with that Fever.

Moreover we must take notice that this Fever raging all the Summer, especially
that of this year, the Disease did often show it self, not so much by the
Pathognomonic signs of a Fever, to wit by restlessness and inquietude, as by
Gripes sometimes dry and sometimes loose, yet notwithstanding the Fever of this
season lurked under this disguise, in which the inflammatory exhalations of the
Blood were not as is usual protruded to the habit of the Body, but put off
inwardly by the Mesenteric Arteries, upon the Viscera of the lower Belly, and
sometimes upon the Stomach by the branches of the Coeliac Arteries, which
exhalations are wont to provoke Vomiting, especially presently after taking
Drink or any more solid nourishment: yet tho this Fever lurked under the form
of the 'foresaid Symptoms, yet 'twas to be Cured by the genuine Method we
delivered above, in the same manner as if it had appeared in its own Colors;
to wit, by Bleeding and repeated Cathartics; only it is to be noted, that when
the Fever does so much molest the Stomach, that it cannot retain a Potion, then
the Pill Coch. Major (of which 2 Scruples prescribed do always pass through the
Body) may be substituted in the room of a gentle purging Potion; but the Pills
must be taken at four in the Morning, that the Patient may sleep after them,
and then an Hypnotic in a large dose is to be allowed; to wit, a Grain and a
half of Solid London Laudanum, with the like quantity of Mastic made into two
Pills, to be taken the same Night; or eighteen or twenty drops of Liquid
Laudanum in an Ounce of Cinnamon water hordeated or any other generous Vehicle,
by which means the Stomach being both Corroborated, and not Irritated by the
small quantity, may not cast up the Medicine: But if the Purging Potion and
Diacodium can possibly be retained in the Stomach, they are wholly to be
preferred before the 'foresaid Pills and Laudanum, for they perform their
business without heating the Body so much as the Pills.

But seeing I have made mention of the Gripes, I will admonish my acqaintance
with how much danger, as I have frequently observed, Mineral waters are wont to
be prescribed in any Gripes whatever, or Looseness, or Vomiting, or any other
Disease whatever, that takes its rise from a Fever, for as much as in so
subtle and spiritual kind of Disease, as it is manifest a Fever is, Mineral
Medicines do so confound all things, that instead of the Symptoms which were
wont to accompany a Fever, they introduce accidents altogether irregular, yet
in the mean while don't at all assist toward the extirpation of the Fever,
which I have long and often observed.

But this must be seriously minded, for as much as it may serve to deliver many
from the Jaws of Death; to wit, that notwithstanding what we have said before,
when the 'foresaid Gripes rise to a confirmed Dissentery, in which besides the
Gripes some Mucous matter together with Blood is excreted by Stool; it is
manifestly very dangerous to treat the Disease with that tedious Method which
orders evacuations first, and afterward those things that attemperate the
sharp Humors (to say nothing of Astringent Medicines of various kinds and
forms, taken inwardly, and Clysters sometimes Astringent, sometimes
Consolidating now and then injected) for I have found by experience that a
Dysentery is most certainly and most speedily Cured, if without any more ado
the Flux be stopped presently with Laudanum; for this Disease is so very violent
and fierce, that if you persist in Purging, when the Dysentery is confirmed,
there is great danger, lest it being heigthen'd by this means should by reason
of its incredible Ferment torment the Patient the ionger, do afterward what
you can, or perhaps kill him. Therefore being called, I presently give about
twenty two drops of Liquid Laudanum in Epidemic water, or in aq. Mirab. or the
like, to be repeated twice in the space of twenty four hours, or oftener at set
times, if the Dose prescribed to be used only Morning and Evening, be not
sufficient to quell the Gripes and the Bloody Stools; the Excrements being a
little thickened, or of a better consistence (which is the first sign of
recovery) and the Symptoms being subdued, I suppose its safest for the Patient
to continue a while in the use of the 'foresaid remedy Morning and Evening,
taking some drops daily till there be no farther occasion. But it is to be noted
that I order the Patient to keep his Bed longer after the use of a Paregoric,
for any Erect posture soon disturbs the Head unless the Patient sleep long
enough after it. As to Diet, if the Patient has been accustomed before to Wine,
I allow him Canary, but well diluted with water, in which a crust of Bread has
been boyld, which I order to be kept cold for this use in a stone bottle, that
it may be in readiness when the Wine is to be attemperated; also the white
decoction of burnt Hartshorn in Fountain water, drank freely is good; Barley or
Chicken-broth, or a poach'd Egg, or any thing else of easy digestion may
suffice for food on the first days; but afterward we must rise by degrees to
more generous liquors, and to a more plentiful and solid nourishment, lest too
great a vacuity should produce again the same Disease the Patient recovered of,
or some other Symptoms that are occasioned by emptiness. But we must note this,
that though Laudanum alone did subjugate Dysentries of this constitution, yet in
those years in which they are epedimic, and exceed other Diseases, 'twill not
be improper to use those evacuations first, which I have heretofore described
in the Chapter of a Dysentery.

And as in that confirmed Dysentery now spoke of, so in this case that follows,
it cannot be that the Cure should be presently expedited by that method which is
proper for the Fever, from whence it first took its rise. For instance,
sometimes it is so that the Patient being seized with a horror and rigor (heat
and cold succeeding one another by turns, which are the certain signs of an
imminent Fever) is of a sudden miserably afflicted with the Gripes, by reason
of an eruption of the febrile matter; and whereas he ought to be purged and
blooded as directed above: Presently he betakes himself to hot Medicines taken
inwardly, and outwardly applied, to the intent he may expel the Wind, which he
supposes is the cause of his Misery, till at length the pain increasing, and
being as it were impacted into the Bowels by long continuance, the peristaltic
motion (by which according to the Law of Nature, all things should be conveyed
downwards) begins to be inverted, and all things tend upwards, and the Patient
is grievously tormented, and provoked to vomit, the Disease now ending in an
Iliac Passion. In this case the Physician can proceed no further in the method
of Cure, which the Fever, the antecedent cause of this Symptom, required, than
to order bleeding in the Arm for once: For how many, and whatsoever Catharties
you prescribe, will presently become emetic, and so the more promote the
inverted motion of the Bowels; for as much as the strongest purging Medicines,
or indeed the least part of them, can scarce pass the Guts, and cause a Stool.
In this case I think it is most advisable, first to bleed in the Arm, and an
hour or two after to inject a strong Clyster. I account the smoke of Tobacco,
strongly blown up through a large Bladder into the Intestines by a Pipe
inverted, to be the best and most efficacious Clyster I know, which may be
repeated a little while after, unless the former, by giving a Stool, open the
passages downwards. But this Symptom being not wholly conquered by this Remedy,
it is necessary that a Cathartic, somewhat stronger, be used, how difficult
soever it be to make way.

Take of the Pill ex Duobus gr. XXXV. Mercurius Dulc. one Scruple, make four
Pills with a sufficient quantity of Balsom of Peru, take them in a Spoonful of
Syrup of Violets.

Drink no Liquor upon them, lest they should not be retained; but if the
Patient should vomit this Remedy, we must proceed in this manner: Let him take
presently 25 drops of Liquid Laudanum in half an ounce of strong
Cinnamon Water, and after a few hours let it be repeated; but when the vomiting
and pain of the Belly are abated by the use of these, then the foresaid
Cathartic may be repeated again; for at this time 'twill be retained under the
protection of the Laudanum, and will at length perform its business; but if the
vomiting and pain should again return, by reason the virtue of the Anodyne is
wholly decayed, and the Purge should stop in the Body, in this case, all hopes
from Stools being at present laid aside, we must return to the use of the
Paregoric before described, which must be repeated every fourth or sixth hour,
till the Guts be wholly quiet, and the natural motion downwards be restored, at
which time the Cathartic, which has hitherto been stopped in the Body, by reason
of the contrary motion of the Guts, will now operate by Stool; though because of
the Narcotic so often repeated, a quite contrary effect might seem to follow,
which I have just now experienced in a Gentlewoman tormented with a very severe
Iliac Passion, who had afterward Aphthae by reason of too long retension of
the humors that occasioned the Disease, and of sharp Purges; but they were
easily cured by the use of the Peruvian Bark above described, and by washing
the mouth often with the following Gargarism.

Take of Verjuice lb ss. Syrup of Rasberr'ies i, make a Gargarism.

But when these passages are open again as much as they should be, the Patient
may forbear purging for some days, till the Tumult raised of late in the Bowels
be wholly ceased, which space of time may conveniently enough be allowed for
diluting and attemperating the heat and acrimony of the humors, which being
done, he must purge every other day as before, if the least footsteps of the
Fever remain: But enough of this.

If a Child has this Fever, two Leaches must be applied behind each Ear, and a
Blister to the Neck, and it must be purged with Beer, wherein Rubarb has been
infused; if after purging the Fever seem to remit, then the Julap must be given
of the Cortex Peru, set down for Infants in the Chapter of an intermitting
Fever.

Moreover it is to be noted, that Children are equally obnoxious to this kind of
Fever with the Adult, and that therefore they are to be cured by the same
method, only the quantity of Blood to be taken away, ought to be lessened, with
respect to their Age, and purging ought to be accomodated to it, and perchance
not so often to be used; for the Diseases of Infants, and young People will be
often tamed by the first or second Purge: Yet we must seriously consider,
whether the Fever treated after this manner, certainly belong to this
Constitution, or to another kind, which ought seriously to be minded in those
Fevers that seize infants in all constitutions of years; for it is commonly
known, that Children are often seized with Fevers, arising from their breeding
Teeth, which are not easily distinguished from Fevers of another kind. I have
been in great doubt a long time about the Cure of these, neither could I be
certainly persuaded but of late, that any committed to my Care, were recovered
so much by Art as by chance; till at length, being frequently admonished of the
happy success of a Medicine, that is not very famous, yea indeed very
contemptible, upon the account of the common use of it; I had also prescribed
it, which answered my desire better than any I know; it is three or four drops
of Spirit of Hartshorn, given in a spoonful or two of Black cherry-water, or of
any other proper Julap, four or six times, once every fourth hour

There is another Symptom that very much infests Infants, which is very
different from the Fevers, of various constitutions of the years, and from that
last mentioned: It Is a sort of Hectic, that afflicts Children a long time, and
those that are troubled with it, languish without any considerable heat, with a
loss of Appetite, and a wasting every where, both of the Members and Trunk of
the Body. I use this simple Method following. Take of choice Rubarb flic'd ii,
let it be put into a glass Bottle, containing a Quart of Small Beer, well
stopped, or any other Liquor the Child usually drinks of, which medicated Beer I
order to be taken both in the day and night, and at meals; which being drank
up, I order a quart more to be put upon the same Rubarb, which also being drunk
off, a quart more is to be put upon it as before, after which the Rubarb
commonly loses its virtue, and the Child recovers; but lest the Beer first put
on should be too much impregnated with the cathartic quality of the Rubarb, and
so purge too much, 'twill be better to add another pint presently after the
first is drunk; but afterward fresh Beer must not be added, till the whole
Bottle be taken.

But to return to the Fever we now treat of, to wit, of the present
Constitution; We must diligently observe, that in this sort of Fever (as in a
Rheumatism, and many other Diseases, whose Cure is performed only by
evacuations) if we obstinately insist on the foresaid evacuations, till all the
Symptoms wholly cease, the Sick will often be destroyed; for it is not very
unusual that some slight Symptoms, as it were the relics of the feeble Fever,
remain a while after the Disease is gone off; yet there is no fear of a relapse
from thence, they retiring gradually, as health returns; for these Symptoms are
commonly nothing else but the true Progeny of those evacuations, by which the
Physician endeavored to cure the Disease: If this at least be added, as partly
the Cause, to wit, the emptiness, that the abstinence of the Sick from his
wonted Meals and Drink has occasioned: all which, when they fall upon Bodies
weakened, and almost worn out by the Disease, raise Vapors, as they say, as in
Women; and for the same reason, on the account of the weakened, disjected, and
broken System of the Animal Spirits: Wherefore having made these evacuations,
that are sufficient for taking off the Disease, it is the Duty of a prudent
Physician to forbear the unseasonable administration of them, and to wait a
while on Time, often the best and most successful Physician, for the taking off
those light Symptoms, which indeed, as I have often observed, go off at the
latter end of such a Disease, without any more a-do, by a Paregorick taken at
Bedtime two or three nights.

The method now delivered much excells all I have tried in the cure of this
Fever; and if at any time it does not take it off, yet it forces it to
intermit, and then it is always cured by the Peruvian Bark: But whereas purging,
ordered for the cure of this Fever, may perchance seem injurious to some, I
affirm, that upon trial, nothing so certainly and so powerfully cools the
Patient, as purging prescribed after bleeding, which must be always used first:
For though a purging does for the present raise a greater tumult in the Blood,
and other humors on the day it is taken, and in the operation, than was before,
yet that injury will be sufficiently made up by the advantage that presently
follows; for it is found by experience, that purging after bleeding quells a
Fever sooner and better than any other Remedy whatever, both as it expels that
filthy humor from the Body, by which, as the antecedent Cause, the Fever was
occasioned; and if they were not peccant before, yet at length being heated,
concocted, and thickened by the Fever, do much to render it more lasting: And
also, as it makes way for an Anodyne, which performs its business safer, and
much sooner, than if the peccant humors, which might otherwise hinder the
force of the Paregoric, were not eliminated by purging.

But on the contrary, as that method which is busied in eliminating the febrile
matter through the pores of the skin be less certain, so is it more troublesome
and tedious; for by it the Disease is very often protracted many Weeks, and the
Patient is brought by this means to the brink of the Grave; and if he chance at
length to escape Death, he is plagued with a crowd of Medicines all the long
course of the Disease, to take off those Symptoms, which the ill management of
the Disease brought on, when the Cure of it is attempted by the hottest method
and medicines, which according to its own Genius wholly requires the coldest of
both; and so while brainsick men inslave themselves to Rules of Art, falsely so
called, and despise the judgment of their very Senses, informing them better,
they learnedly convert a Disease, of its own nature short and easy, into a
lasting and difficult one, confounding all things through tumult and fear, and
raising, as they say, Waves in a Cup; upon which account there is no more need
of them, than of a Pilate, who when he may sail in the open Sea, steers the
Ship among Rocks and Shelves; from whence, though he may gain an opportunity of
acquiring Fame by his great skill in preserving the Vessel in so great danger,
yet certainly he will be reckoned an imprudent man.

And for these Reasons I can, I trust, affirm upon good grounds, that the
'foresaid method of Cure, by bleeding and purging, is more powerful than any
other, for the subduing of Fevers of most kinds; for tho'sweating, to speak
properly, is natures own method, by which she casts out the febrile matter, and
is more genuine and commodious than the rest, when Nature left to it self,
first digests the 'foresaid matter, and then when it is well concocted, gently
expells it through the habit of the Body; which happy event of Nature, of
curing Fevers by sweating, when practical Physicians had often observed, the
Dogmatical took occasion from hence of making this Rule, That all Fevers may,
and ought to be cured by this method alone, and no other: But if we should
grant this, yet Art, how much soever it may seem to imitate Nature, yet it
cannot arrogate to it self this privilege, that it is able to Cure Fevers
certainly by Sweating. For first Art knows not by what means the peccant matter
should be fitly prepared to undergo Expulsion, and if it should know this, yet
it has no certain signs by which it may be admonished of the due preparation of
it: so that also it is unavoidably ignorant of the fit time of provoking Sweat:
and I suppose no one if he be not very obstinate, will deny that it is very
dangerous to raise Sweat rashly, before a due Concoction, for by forcing the
crude matter upon the Brain, it adds Oil to the Flame; and as I have hinted in
another place, that that wholesome advice of Hippocrates (to wit, that things
Concocted, not Crude, are to be Medicated) does not seem to respect so much
Purging, as Sweat forced by Art. For no one that is but indifferently
acquainted with the practice of Physic can be ignorant, how many are
dangerously injured by old Women and Quacks, by this preposterous use of
Sudorifics, for it is customary with these, if any one complains of Shivering,
and a Pain of the Head and Bones, which are most commonly the forerunners of a
Fever; presently to put them to Bed, and do all they can to force them to
sweat: by which unseasonable endeavors they are so far from preventing the
Fever, which perchance would go off of its own accord, or by taking away some
Blood; that on the contrary its the more heigthen'd, and becomes a confirmed
and radicated Disease. This is moreover to be noted, to say no more of old
Women, that as those Sweats that come at the beginning of the Fever are wholly
Symptomatical not Critical, so those that are forced at the beginning of the
Fever by Diaphoretics, most commonly conduce no more to the Cure of it than the
other Symptomatical Sweats that flow so early of their own accord are wont to
do, that is, most commonly not all; and then as Art is ignorant of the due time
for promoting Sweat, so likewise knows not how long it should persevere in
forcing them: for if Sweats are continued beyond the due time by which, to wit,
the matter occasioning the Disease is wholly expelled, a Consumption of those
humid Particles, with which the Blood should be diluted and attemperated, will
make the Fever continue longer and heighten it. It Is manifest therefore how
uncertain this method is, whereas on the contrary it is in the Physicians power
to moderate the other as he please, in which the Febrile matter is Eliminated
by Bleeding and Purging. Moreover this is to be preferred before the other for
this reason; to wit, that if the Physician should miss his aim in Curing the
Patient, yet he will not injure him, which is otherwise in the use of
Diaphoretics, unless he recover; for the heat of one that is kept continually
in Bed, to which he has addicted himself for some time, contrary to his custom
(to say nothing of Cordials which are always used in this way of Cure)
confounds the Economy of Nature, and occasions Convulsions of the Members, and
other irregular Symptoms, which cannot therefore be described, because they
don't belong to the History of the Disease, (which is common in many Symptoms
respecting all Diseases) but take their rise from the Confusion and Tumult that
are unnecessarily occasioned; by which Nature is often oppressed when we carry
on the Cure of the Disease by this Method; all which are commonly wont to be
imputed to I know not what Malignity.

The invention of which Opinion concerning malignity, either as to the Nameor
Notion of it, has been much more destructive to mankind than even that of
Gunpowder: for as much as those Fevers are chiefly said to be Malignant, in
which the inflammation is higher than in others; and therefore Physicians have
betook themselves to Cordials and Alexipharmacs, to the end they may expel
through the Pores of the Skin the Poison they dream of, (for so it must be
called, unless they had rather trifle about words, than propose seriously that
which may be understood) upon which account they have prescribed the hottest
Medicines and Method for those Diseases, which required above others the
coldest Remedies and Regimen, which is manifest enough both in the Small Pox,
(which is one of the hottest Diseases in Nature) and in the Cure of other
Fevers: into which Error perchance they were led, by beholding the Petechiae
and purple spots, and other Phenomenon of the same kind, all which owe their
rise in most Subjects to an Inflammation superinduced upon the Blood of the
Patient, too much fired by the Fever already; for as much as they rarely
happen, except at the beginning of the Plague, and of those Flux-Small Pox that
participate of the highest Inflammation: for in this kind of Disease the Livid
Spots appear in various parts of the Body, together with the Pustules, when
they first come out, and the Patient will be troubled with an Excretion of
Blood, either by the Urinary passages, or by the Lungs, with a Cough, when the
Blood rages with such a violent motion and fury occasioned by the Inflammation,
that having broke through all, it rushes into the Cavities of the Body. And tho
the Purple Spots in this Fever don't take their rise from such an intense heat
of the Blood, as that is which causes such Haemorrhages, yet notwithstanding
they are produced by the same Inflammation, tho in a less degree; and when
there is not that Execretion of Blood they are easily taken off by a cooling
Regimen. But if they conjecture there is Malignity in the case, not only from
the Purple Spots, but also because they have observed that the Symptoms of the
Fever have been sometimes milder than may seem to agree with the Nature of it,
and yet that the Patient was more weakened than could be expected in the time
he has been ill: I answer, that all these things proceed only from hence, viz.
for that Nature being as it were oppressed and conquered by the first assault
of the Disease, is not able to raise regular Symptoms, and such as are
agreeable to the greatness of the Disease, but all the Phenomenon are wholly
irregular; for the Animal Economy being disturbed, and as it were dejected, the
Fever on that account is depressed, which according to the genuine course of
Nature used to be high. Of which, I remember, I saw a notable experiment many
years ago, in a young Man to whom I was called; for tho he seemed almost dying,
yet the heat in the external parts of the Body felt so temperate upon touching,
that the standers by would not believe me when I affirmed that he had a Fever,
which by reason of the oppression of the Blood (by whose bulk it was kept in
and as it were choked) could not extricate and show it self openly: but that
if they let him Blood they should presently perceive the Fever high enough, a
Vein being opened and a pretty deal of Blood taken away, the Fever broke out,
which was as violent as I ever saw any, and did not go off till bleeding had
been used three or four times.

But if the A rguments I have brought are not so considerable as to prove the
thing certainly to be, as I say, yet if I find by experience that this Fever
does not go off easily by Evacuations, made by Sweat, I have what I seek for:
For no Man can tell by arguing, but by experience, what kind of Fever can and
ought to be Cured by Sweats, and what by other Evacuations. And truly no wise
Man, who has sufficiently weighed the nature of Men and things, can implicitly
believe the Opinion of any Man, how great soever he be, concerning those things
that are mere Speculations, and cannot be determined by any certain Experiment;
for he ought to consider that the moments of reason are so very various and
subtle, that when any one has proposed a Speculation, so established by firm
Reasons, that he forces the assent of all that are near him; presently another
succeeds him, endowed perchance with better Parts, who confutes that Opinion
which was so fairly settled, and clearly proves by a stronger force of
Argument, that that was nothing but a fiction of the Brain, for as much as not
the least Footsteps of it are to be found in Nature; and in the room of it
substitutes a certain new Hypothesis more probable than the former and more
neatly contrived, yet this latter Fiction undergoes the same fate with the
former, when some third person opposes, who as much exceeds the second in
Ingenuity as he did the first; and so there will be no end till at length we
come to him that is arrived at the top of humane Ingenuity; and how difficult
it is to find this Man, and to know him from others, any one will presently
perceive who is not so very mad as to arrogate this praise to himself. For as
we may conjecture that there are almost infinite Natures in the illustrious
Orbs, here and there scattered throug the Firmament of the Universe, endowed
with far more excellent Intellects than weak Man; so we don't certainly know
whether mankinds Brain, the Shop of the Thoughts, be not so formed by Nature,
that they cannot find so well what is absolutely true, as what is most
convenient and suitable to their Natures. And so much may suffice to be spoken
to those, who in Physic trust more to vain Speculations than to Experience,
built upon the solid testimony of the Senses.

But if any one should here object, and say, don't we see de facto that this
Fever is very often Cured by a method quite contrary to this you deliver? I
Answer, That the Cure of the Disease, which only the recovery of a Patient now
and then witnesses for, wholly differs from the Cure of the same, by that
Method of Practice which is confirmed by more frequent recoveries of the Sick,
and all other Practical Phanomena that happen in the Cure of it. For instance
in the Small Pox, many who have been tormented with the cruel use of a hot
Regimen, and Medicines have yet recovered; and on the contrary they have done
very well, whose Cure has been performed by a Method quite contrary. Now how
shall we end this strife, which Method is to be preferred? Why truly by this
means we shall certainly judge: namely, if I have found in the former Method,
that the more I have heated the Patient, the more I have raised and promoted
the Fever, restlessness, the Delirium, and other Symptoms: and on the contrary,
if it appears, that when he has been moderately cooled, his temperament is so
much the more Sedate, and he is the less vexed with the Fever and other
Symptoms. Moreover that by keeping that due temper of the Muscular parts, which
best suits with the increase and maturation of the Pistules, they are bigger
and more filled than if the Patient were suffocated with too much heat. The
case being thus put, I suppose it is manifest enough which Method of Practice we
ought rather to follow. In like manner if I find in the Fever I now Treat of,
that the more the Patient is heated, the more he is inclined not only to a
Frenzy, Purple Spots, Petechiae and the like; but that it is moreover on that
account encompassed with irregular and anomalous Symptoms of all sorts; and on
the other Hand, if I observe another Patient treated by the Method we now
propose, wholly freed from these Symptoms, Reason dictates that the latter
Method of Practice, is much to be preferred before the other, tho both Patients
recover by such different means; but if more escape Death by this way than the
other, the intricasie of the Controversy is so much the easier found out; but
I must not judge of this, lest I should favor too much my own Opinion.

The CONTENTS of the Second Part.
CHAP. I. A Continual Epidemic Fever, of a new kind, began to rage together
with other Inflammatory Diseases, Page 1, 2. It Is Diagnostic signs, ibid. The
Looseness which; as we said, was Cured in the former Fever by a Vomit was
highthen'd by the same in this, ibid. The Plague raged violently, the various
seasons of it, ibid. CHAP. II. The Symptoms of some Fevers which are Vulgarly
accounted Malignant, are not so in their own Natures, but proceed from the ill
management of the Cure, page 3. A Fever truly Malignant is of the same species
of the Plague and only differs in degree, ib. The small Pox and the Plague show
that Epidemic Diseases proceed from the various Crasis of the Air, p. 3. 4. But
what that is we know not, ib. The Plague seldom happens in England oftener than
once in about forty years, ibid. Fevers that rage a year or two after a
dreadful Plague are Pestilential, and require the same Method of Cure, ibid.
Besides the disposition of the Air there is required a Fomes of the Venom to
occasion the Plague, transmitted either mediately or immediately from some
Plaguey Body, p. 4. and 5. It Is propagated by the infected Air, ib. When it is
Epidemical it begins between Spring and Summer, ibid. And seldom at any other
time, the the disposition of the Air be Pestilential, yet it it is not sufficient
of it self to cause the Plague, p. 6. neither will the Plague be Epidemical
unless there be a suitable disposition of the Air, ibid. The manner of it is
invasion is described, ibid. Sudden Death seldom happens unless at the
beginning of a sweeping Plague, p. 7. They that have Tumors without a Fever or
any great Symptom have no need of a Method of Cure, ibid. The Essence of
Diseases, even as of Animals and Vegetables is altogether unknown to us, ibid.
The Cure of most Diseases is not accomplished by the knowledge of their Causes,
but by a Method approved by experience, page 8. The Plague is a Fever of it is
own kind taking it is rise from an Inflammation of the Spiritous particles of
the Blood, ibid. Pestilential Fevers proceed from a more remiss Inflammation,
p. 9. An Erisipilas is like the Plague, ibid. That the Plague arises from an
Inflammation may be proved by many arguments, p. 10. Alexipharmacs and other
hot Medicines do only good by accident (viz.) as they are Diaphoretics, p. 11.
It Is probable that Wine drank too freely, and hot Antidotes have brought the
Plague upon many, ibid. In the Cure of the Plague we either succor Nature by
following her conduct, or by substituting another more safe that is contrary to
here is, p. 12. Alexipharmac's in this and other Diseases seem to do good, rather
by causing some Evacuation than by any specific virtue, ibid. The Plague
according to Natures custom seems chiefly to be carried off by Abcesses in the
Emunctories, a Pestilential Fever by Sweat, p. 13. Therefore there must be a
different Method in these Diseases, ibid. Sweats raised in the Plague are
sometimes deadly, p. 14. They often hinder the Irruption of the Bubo by
dissipating the matter otherwhere, ibid. The Phisician is obliged to follow
Natures guidance in other Diseases, but to renounce it in the Plague, p. 15. It
seems the Plague must be conquered either by Bleeding or Sweat, ibid. Large
Bleeding repeated was never mortal to any before the Tumor broke out, p. 16.
The reason why sparing Phlebotomy, or when the Tumour's out should be always
hurtful, ibid. That Bleeding is safer than all other Remedies in the Plague, is
clearly proved by Botallus in a multitude of instances, p. 17. This is
confirmed by a wonderful Observation amongst us, p. 18. For what reason the
Dissipation of the Pestilential ferment by Sweat, is to be preferred before
Bleeding, p. 19. What difficulties it is accompanied with, ibid. Plaguey Tokens
seem to arise from a Dissolution of the Sanguineous Fibers not unlike stripes
inflicted by a violent blow, ibid. Sweat being broke off too soon, either the
Buboes coming out go back or never attain to legitimate abcesses, page 20.
Continual Fevers about the end of Spring and the beginning of Summer, readily
turn either to Agues or Plurisies, or other Diseases of the Inflammatory kind,
p. 21. For what reason the Author was forced to contrive another Method for
this new Fever different from that which hitherto he had used with good
success, p. 23. The Author Cured the Pestilential Fever by Bleeding repeated,
ibid. Blood is to be taken away in a sufficient quantity or not at all, p. 24.
What Method the Author substituted in the room of the former, p. 25. Bleeding
before Sweating expedites it and makes it more safe, ibid. The covering of the
head conduces much to the raising of Sweat, ibid. As soon as the rays of the
Morbific matter tend toward the surface of the Body, the Looseness and Vomiting
occasioned by them stop of their own accord, p. 26. The Sweat must be continued
by the space of a Natural day, ibid. You must take great care the Patient be
not cleansed nor that the Shirt be changed till twenty four hours after the end
of the Sweat, p. 26. 27. If the Sweat is broke off too soon, the fury of the
Symptoms will presently return, ibid. Diemerbrookes objection against long
Sweats is answered, ibid. It Is mad appear that the Patient is not weakened, but
rather strengthened thereby, ibid. When the Sweat is at hight the Patient may
be refreshed with comfortable Broths, p. 28. A Purge must be given the next
day, ibid. The wonderful success of this Method in the Pestilential Fever,
ibid. The Author did not dare to Bleed when the Tumor was out, ibid. By what
means it seems it may be safely tried, p. 29.
The CONTENTS of the Third Part.
CHAP. I. THE Febrile commotion of the Blood is intended for the Secretion of
some Heterogeneous matter, or for changing the disposition of the Blood, Page
31. In both cases it is chiefly indicated, that the Blood be contained within
the bounds that are agreeable to Natures purposs, p. 34. To whom Bleeding is
hurtful, ib. For whom it is useful, p. 35. Who ought to take a Vomit, who ought
not, ibid. If it be omitted when it is indicated a Looseness follows, p. 36. But
not always in Malignant Fevers, ibid. Why this Looseness is so dangerous, ibid.
It Is presently stopped by a Vomit not by Astringent Medicines, p. 36. 37.
Antimonial Vomits are dangerous unless they are well washed off, ibid. Where
Bleeding and Vomiting are both required, Bleeding is to precede, ibid. After
the Vomit an Anodine must be given at bed time, p. 39. It Is not safe to give a
Vomit of Crocus Metallorum to any under fourteen, p. 40. The heat of the Blood
is sometimes to be bridled by Bleeding, sometimes by Clysters injected every
other day, p. 41. For whom Cordials are proper, and at what time of the
Disease, p. 43. 44. Cooling Medicines given after the fourteenth day do hurt,
ibid. Moderate Cordials are to be given at the beginning, and hotter according
to the progress of the Disease, p. 45. Forms of Cordials, p. 46. Purging Potion
is to be given on the fifteenth day, p. 48. The omission of Purging after
Autumnal Diseases has occasioned many others, ibid. Sometimes the Purge is to
be put off till the seventeenth day, p. 49. The Diet and Regimen of those that
are recovering, ibid. Old Malago or the like is proper for old People at the
end of the Disease, to Expectorate the viscous Phlegm, p. 50. Cooling Medicines
and Clysters given too late, especially in old People, retarde the Despumation
of the Morbific matters, p. 51. How a Frenzy and Watchings are to be managed,
p. 53. Anodynes are not proper when the Fever is at height, but are used
successfully at the latter end of the Disease, ibid. If it can be, the Patient
should be purged before he use the Anodyne, p. 55. Oil of Almonds is best in
the Cough, p. 56. An Haemorrhage of the Nose is sometimes to be permitted, p.
58. The Patient must be Purged after an immoderate Haemorrhage, ibid. A large
dose of Diascordium is better for stoping the Hickocks than any Specific
whatever, p. 59. If a Looseness come, tho a Vomit has been given, an astringent
Clyster must be injected, ibid. The cause of the Iliac passion, p. 62. The use
of Quicksilver and Bullets do little good in the Iliac Passion, and often hurt,
p. 63. The Cure of it, ibid. CHAP. II. The new Fever began in February, 84/5.
'twas more Epidemic in other places than in London, page 66. 67. The Symptoms
of this Fever, ibid. The Inclination in this Fever to a Frenzy is very great,
p. 68. Petechiae very often break out by reason of the unseasonable use of
Cordials and too hot a Regimen, ibid. Sweat forced by art at the beginning of
the Disease used to put off the Morbific matter either on the Head or Limbs, p.
69. The Method of Cure, p. 70, 71, 72, 73. Spirit of Vitriol is not proper in
any Diseases that are Cured by Purging, ibid. The gentle heat of the bed a
nights opportunely savours such Sweats as flow of their own accord in the
night, p. 74. The Diet, ibid. It Is not necessary to forbid the eating of
Chickens and the like of easy Concoction after the taking of two Purges, p.
74, 75. Three or four spoonfuls of Canary Wine may be taken night and morning,
and after dinner for some days after the last Purge if the Fever has a little
spent it self and is not yet turned to an Ague, ibid. The Patient must lie a
bed only a nights, ibid. Of the Coma that comes upon this Fever, p. 76. If
there be Convulsive motions of the Body the Physician must not be deterred from
making the 'foresaid evacuations, p. 77. Of the Convulsion called Chorea Sancti
Viti, ibid. The Cure of it, p. 78. How Hysterical Women that have this Fever
are to be treated, p. 80. This Fever had an Exacerbation daily about night, not
much unlike the fit of an Ague, p. 81. The Fever lurked under the form of the
Gripes, p. 82. The Method of Cure in this case, ibid. Mineral Waters are not
proper in any Disease that takes its rise from a Fever, p. 83. How the Patient
must be managed if the Gripes turn to a Dysentery, p. 83, 84. How the Patient
is to be managed when the Gripes turn to an Iliac Passion, p. 85, 86, 87. The
Cure of the Aphthae, ibid. How Infants are to be managed in this Fever, ibid.
The Cure of the Fever arising from breeding of Teeth, p. 88, 89. Of the Cure of
the Hectic peculiar to Children, ibid. The slight Symptoms that remain after
the Disease is gone off will be Cured by time, p. 90.
FINIS.

