Vox vere ANGLORVM: OR ENGLANDS LOUD CRY FOR THEIR KING.

Written by a hearty Well-willer to the Commonweal, and the flourishing of
our NATIONS.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

Vox vere ANGLICORVM. OR, Englands Loud Cry for their King.
WHat is there more regarded, or prevalent, amongst Christians (next to Divine
oracle) Then the, extrema vox, the last language (as to Counsel and
Instruction) of Gasping and dying brethren and friends? And who sees not the
fainting, and now utterly exspiring condition, of this so long flourishing
nation, (and glorious even to envy) of England, and its Dominions, and
Territories? That twenty years ago, it was such, and is at this present, thus;
one penful of ink need not be spent to manifest, and illustrate the same: And
seeing there is no right remedy will be looked after, or so much as thought on,
by the present pretending Physicians, and Chirurgions, who take upon them the
Cure; But such potions, and plasters in preparation to be applied, as clearly,
and without all queston, will rather hasten its utter destruction, then assuage
the least pain: What then has this poor hacknied, over-ridden, spurred, and
spurgall'd people to do, but before their exspiring Spirits be utterly spent,
to recollect them with their utmost vigor, and cheerfully to advance their own
Sovereign cure; from this desperate malady, in such a way, as (seeing the wily
arts, and cunning of deluding men so fail with their false, vain, empty, and
pretended helps.) The great preserver of men, who loves and delights in just
and righteous things, may yet Bow down his ear, and hear, hearken and be
propitious to us, in this our deep Calamity and Distress.

How we came into this misery it will be needless to enquire? Res ipsa
loquitur: Such dreadful beginnings, which none can forget, could not in the
judgment of all sober and serious persons, but be the production of such horrid
conclusions: Our case therefore must be taken as it is; and since so many sorts
of cures has been attempted, so many Empericks have tried their skill and
cunning; so much Phlebotimy and Scarrification has been used, and all to no
purpose, but rather to increase the dolor, and heighten the danger; why, may
we not be permitted to call for, and use this Sovereign cure, and medicine of
our own? It is surely a degree, above the height of madness, and an instance,
beyond all instance; That when so plainly manifest, and certain a remedy, is
with such facility to be had, that an utter perishing should rather be chosen,
and endured, and that under the hands of such pretenders to cure, who as (we
know) They (or their like) were the first makers of the malady, so it is
continued upon us, with all kind of torments, for no other end or cause, but
merely the private profit and ambition of some particular persons our fellow
Leigmen, who flinging off all thoughts of subjection, cannot (or at least
hitherto will not) endure any the least sound or whisper, toward reverting to
that Station where God has placed them by their Birthright, nor be satisfied
neither, with any elevation less, then the absolute power and Dominion over the
Bodies, Lives, and Fortunes of their Brethren and fellow Subjects. And although
that art has been used by them, that Diabolical charming art, of several
qualities and effects, dreadful to our memories, to stupifie our senses, and
draw us by degrees, into that Lethargy, which so long and so visibly we have
labored under, whilst these cunning operators, have tried all kind of
experiments, which enter their own wild Fancies, according to the length of
that Mad Worm, which crawls in their heads, and whirls them about to such
actings, as daily we see, in Propatulo, produced to us, pretending to supple
Tar, and medicine our soars; But really and indeed, for no other end, save,
which of them should be the chiefest shearers, to clip and fleece us, and set
what mark upon us, and what Dogs to hunt us they please; Yet coming now to
Excotiation, and tearing off from us our very skins, which (whatever fawning,
stroking, and soothing is at present used, to make us lie still, till our bonds
and shackles, be fast on, and tied close, yet) all Instruments are at work for,
and in a near readiness for the action.

Shall we Sheepishly still bleat out our miseries in a wretched Tone, and
silently suffer this prepared rending us to destruction? shall not rather the
Terror and apprehension of our eminent danger and distress, rouse up your
drouzy numness; And before the knife comes to our throats make use often hem to
utter this vocem extremam, and call out for our certain and undoubted remedy.

Which as it is tacitly in the hearts, and whispers of all true English men,
why should it be kept close between the teeth, and concealed from those, who at
present pretend to be our rulers, there being none more fit to know the general
votes and desires of the people, then they who in any kind represent them, or
have pretense thereunto; and who (at least some of them) may for ought we yet
know to the contrary, be as ready and willing to hearken unto this general
voice, and to advance this way of our remedy, cure, and deliverance, as our
selves; why may we not then with open, loud, and extended voice, utter this
most earnest vote and desire of our very hearts and Souls. Let the Heir of the
Crown be speedily admitted, to his just rights, with all Honor, Freedom, and
Safety.

And that this voice only, may do it, This now general voice, and indeed loud
cry, and clamor of all true hearted English, such as are free from all corrupt
and sinister ends, and respects whatsoever, may be listened to and take its
wished, and long looked for effect, and so other means prevented, which else
(it is to be feared) will undoubtedly be laid hold on: Let what ensues be
taken into serious and timely consideration.

And in the first place, least it be objected, that what is here asserted, is
not the general voice, and desire of the people; Let the opposers, put it upon
what way of trial they dare: Although ('it is true) there has been almost these
twenty years, such labor and pains taken, such art and skill used, by all the
ways and means, which could enter the corrupt heart of man to invent, for the
infecting and poisoning the loyalty and obedience due from all sorts, to his
now Glorious father, and to him, h s undoubted Heir. Yet it is a most notorious
and unquestionable truth, that upon what way or manner soever, Division can be
made, in general, Eight parts, at the least, of Ten, throughout these whole
Dominions, even of all sorts, conditions and qualities, from the highest, to
the lowest, learned and unlearned, nay even of such, who formerly were seduced
to engage against his cause, are now as high and earnest in this vote and
desire, as any his first and chiefest adherents; And were there full freedom
and liberty given by such as have usurped the present power, for all persons to
use, and take their free choice therein, for every single person of the
opposers, there would be found at least a thousand contraveners; and of the
Nobility, Gentry, and chief Burgers, in all places, the odds would be found far
greater: If this be deemed but word only, and fiction, let there be but
license given for public votes, or subscriptions, throughout the three
Nations, with freedom and safety, (and as affairs stand, why should this be
denied,) and if this truth does not so manifestly appear, that there shall be
no room for the least doubt, then let an eternal silence and suffering be
imposed on those who are marked out for h s chief adherents, and it is verily
believed, there is not a man of them, but will readily assent unto it; and if
this be true in fact, and certainly nothing can be more assuredly true, why
should it not be openly known and published, that (besides what other effect it
may work with all whom it concerns) we may (however) with fear and amazement
consider, what strange Fate hangs over this people, and three Nations, that the
whole Bulk and Body of them should suffer terror and subjugation, by so
inconsiderable a party, of the number, who it is true (as matters are ordered)
appear indeed like Alcibiades curtain, which was outwardly imbroidered with
Eagles and Lions: But on the other side was nothing but mere Apes and Owls: If
we be a free people (as it is said we are) and the supremacy forfeited for
breach of trust, by the late King, and reverted to us, as some vainly prate and
scrible, why should we then (in such case,) be denied that, wherein only this
Freedom chiefly consists, which is, that since this forfeiture, and the
Seizure of the Supremacy into our hands, we may enjoy the free choice of our
Government and Governors, and that in such a fair free and open way, That all
who are to be obliged to subjection, may manifest their consents unto it: Must
we be told we are a free people, and yet must this be denied us? Nay, when the
worst and basest kind of slavery, that ever was in any age since Adam, imposed
on any sort of men, is violently thrust upon us, which is, to have an
incompetent and inconsiderable number of seeming Legislators, picked out for us,
some of them out of Corners and Goales, where they lay drenched in debt by
luxury, and Riot, and brought into play, (for indeed it seems no other, then a
mere Pageantry) and that upon an old cracked title of election, almost twenty
years standing, and long before the pretended forfeiture, and seizure (if any
such were or could be,) and since that likewise, nulled, forfeited, surrendered,
cassed and voided, almost twenty several ways, as (if it were Tonti, so do it)
may by undeniable arguments be evidently made appear. These men, or, what
appellation can fitly be given them? for they come at the call of the the
Soldiers, and make themselves their slaves; And the Soldiers are, or should
be servants to the people, from whom they receive their wages, yet the people
must be made slaves, to these their Servants slaves; here is such a problem of
policy, and Delphick mystery of iniquity, that it has scarce any parallel,
unless we call to mind, how the late Kings own power, was made use of, to seize
away from him, his own treasure, revenues, Ships, Castles, etc. and by virtue
of that his own Power, armed men were raised to fight against his own person;
nay, the King in one Army, was made to fight against himself in the contrary
Army; Even so, this parcel of Pageantry, this ninth part of Ten (for more there
scarce is not of the usual number of such an Assembly, and that only of but
one of the three Estates neither) act here their parts of Sitting, Voting, (and
dropping Laws, like the Brood of Trochylus, Eggs and Birds in a moment,) and
seemingly Domineering and Vaunting over us, their underslaves, themselves the
while, being under the iron whip also, and not daring to attempt any thing
contrary to the sense of their Masters at Wallingford-house, or wheresoever
else assembled, if otherwise Foris Abite, Out you go Sirs, to your Cells and
Goayles again: Behold the freedom, and free State we have purchased so dearly,
which has been so long and now afresh noised in our ears, and comes in a new
shape and dress, and under a new name, The good old cause forsooth, which
indeed is no other, then as the Badge or Tessara, which is used amongst Canting
Gypsies, to understand one another minds, whilst they in the mean time delude
us, and pick our pockets. And most assuredly, whatsoever some fond people
dream, of freedom, and a free state, and such empty vain whimsies, as long as
their inchanters have prevalency over their weak brains, yet This, and such
like as this, is all the Freedom, and Free State, they are ever likely to see
or enjoy; Nor is it any way imaginable to be otherwise, in the judgment of
sober and discerning persons, who will seriously consider the nature and
disposition of the generality of the people of these Nations, and the most
excellent frame of Government, so long continued amongst us, and by time
refined, and perfected, and all sorts, bred up, fitted and adapted to it; It
being so rarely Tempered, and Molded, that it retains the good, and rejects
the ill, of all the known Governments exercised amongst Nations; That to tell
us of Venice, and Holland, and such like, The case upon due examination will be
found as different (considering all circumstances, in a just frame of
Government, not to be omitted) as Heaven, is different from Hell, or Order from
Confusion; And that busy, yet empty head, who now fancieth to reduce these
Nations, into such a frame, or any thing like it, generally satisfactory, may
as well, and with the like discretion, endeavor to make a rope of sand, build a
Castle in the air, or empty the Sea with his fist; No, here is such a Capital
piece of that Government, which (and which only) is proper, and natural to us,
out of joint; that salve the dis-jointure, as well as we can, Anoint, Dress,
and Bath it, Plaster, Swathe, and Bind it up, with all the art and cunning,
can possibly be Devised and and Invented; the patient can never be out of most
dolorous pain, till it be right set, and in just joint again: And how that is
to be effected, the now General Voice tells us, Let the Heir of the Crown, etc.

In the next place, it is to be considered, whether any obligation be of
greater force then an Oath to the Lord: And who is it, even of those likewise,
which are the chiefest opposers of such his admittance, but has solemnly
plighted and sworn faith and true alleigeance to this Heir; and upon such an
Oath, acknowledged him likewise in all Causes, and over all Persons in his
Dominions, supreme Head and Governor: For is not faith plighted and alleigeance
sworn to the Heir in express words, as well as to the Ancestor? And is not that
Heir in the instant of his Ancestors expiration, by our Laws immediately, and
unquestionably King, and so the acknowledged upon oath supreme Head and
Governor? etc. Nor is this more neither, then what their duty before obliged
them to, had they not sworn it, being his Native and Liege People and Subjects;
And God himself by so many clear and iterated precepts in his sacred word, most
strictly calling on them, and enjoining the effect of it; The Government of our
Nation Monarchy, being the sole Government appointed by God, and Kings, and
Kingdoms, his alone institution and planting, as is clear by the whole current
of Scripture, from Adam even till the Primitive Church after Christ; And
Republiques, States, and such like, a mere depraved institution of man, for
corrupt and sinister ends. This Nation ever since its first being, even for
thousands of years, owning Monarchy for its Government in all Ages and
Vicissitudes; and so was it always owned and esteemed throughout the world,
and our Monarchs of such high Honor and Repute abroad, as often made Umpires
in the great and public affairs of Christendom, and this title and
sovereignty most clearly descended to, and vested in, this Prince, whose
Ancestors indulgence and favors, had rendered it the best of Governments to the
people, as was any where extant in the world; yet clearly an undoubted Monarchy
still, and so ever exercised by the Sovereigns, deemed, styled, and
acknowledged, by our forefathers, in all times, and by all our Laws, Judges,
and Lawyers, both ancient and modern, and never so unhappy as to suffer the
least of question in that particular till, etc. Nor is this title so much to be
drawn from the Conquest of William, the Norman Duke, neither, (as most
generally is mistakenly alleged) as from Edgar Atheling, the then apparent
and right Heir of the Crown, from whom a descent of title to this Prince is as
manifestly deducible, as from that William, which all men conversant in true
History cannot but know; And therefore all those silly and most absurd
distinctions of the Sovereigns coordinate estate, here amongst us, his virtual
and personal presence in the sense used. The singulis major, sed universis
minor; His forfeiture for breach of trust, and a world of such trash, publicly
vented, and plausibly scribled on, when time was, only to maze the poor people,
and lead them from their duty and obedience, will be found a very pitiful
plea, at the great Tribunal for their so horrid a Perjury and Rebellion.

Let this be seriously thought on, by some Grandees, now in power, and with
all, the blood and treasure, thereupon spilt and spent, and the distracting
terrors, and rending confusions, thereby raised, and sent raging into all our
parts (foreseen indeed by all sober and loyal persons, and vigorously opposed,
till treachery prevayled) and in what a torn, tottering, and disjoynted
condition, our Government has ever since remained; And the poor people of all
sorts how perpetually affrighted, terrified, and picked even to the very bones.
And if new and contrary Oaths, Engagements, and Covenants, by what name or
title soever called, for store of them, there has been indeed, and all kept
alike; if these, or any of these be objected; There is no Orthodox Divine; but
will tell them this truth (I am sure true Divinity it self will) that they
being all unlawfully compacted, they are ipso facto, void, and so far from
binding the conscience, that like the vow made by the Conspirators against St.
Paul, they ought to be repented of, and detested, as the grand crime, for which
these direful confusions have befallen us; there not being, or in possibility
to be, any oath lawful against the first, nor can any subsequent act, or
engagement made (though by all the people in general) be of force to quit, or
absolve from that first lawful oath, or from our native duty and alleigeance,
which we are bound to, although the oath were never taken; And to teach
otherwise (as too many have done, for their own wicked and corrupt ends) is as
high a blasphemy against God, and his Sacred Word, as almost can possibly be
committed, and that Caitiffe (who ever he be) who for sinister purposes, dares
yet continue to insinuate the contrary, let him tremble to think of that horror
and confusion, which will one day seize him, for advancing so desperate,
cursed, and diabolical a Doctrine; May hearty and timely repentance rather be
his punishment; and in testimony thereof join with all good people, in this
their now loud general voice, Let the Heir of the Crown, etc.

Let the sad and most deplorable condition of the once flourishing Church of
these Nations, have its share likewise in our consideration: She who has thus
long laid widdowed in dust and ruin, bedewing her lean cheeks, and tearing her
comely hair, her once full paps streaming with solid sustenance, and now
shrivelled up into an empty dry parched skin, and hiding her once lovely head
in corners and clossets, as trembling at the attempt, nay force offered to her
pure chastity, and fearful to breath in the air of those wild and dismal
doctrines, every where now vented and prevalent amongst the several Sects and
Factions of the times, who have no settled rules, but rather profess the
contrary; and that every Ignis fatuus, which they call new light, must be their
rule and guide: Let this sad case be thought upon, with more then seriousness;
and the horrid and dismal things, which must needs be hence produced, amongst
all conditions of men, if timely remedy be not applied. The late deplorable
State of Germany, and by whom, and what sort of people that tragedy was begun,
and continued, which was so long there in action, and brought forth such cruel
and unheard of slaughters and desolations, should me thinks be a warning and
example to us, and tell us the danger of some parties, especially if the sword
be put into their hands, as public report says, is now the next intended
design; zeal being an excellent guide, where it sees the way it goes in, but a
most dangerous companion in the dark: But perhaps the decree is gone out, and
we are this way destined for utter destruction; Besides, what regrets,
animosities, emulations, boylings for revenge, by persons of seeming fiery and
high flaming zeal; supplanting and tripping up one another, in their various,
greedy, and ambitious designs, are almost every where conspicuous? And which
cannot, but at one time or another, break out into most dangerous and bloody
conflicts, to the hazard of enflaming all; the frequent noise also, and rumors
of new plots, firings, and conspiracies, be they real or pretended, yet the
very terror and apprehension of them is to some quiet people a kind of agonish
deadness, before death it self and destruction comes; Nor is there the least
hope of amending this, but an assurance rather, that it will have a never
ending continuance, unless this general voice be lystened to: Let the Heir, etc.

As there be these rents and gals, frights and terrors at home, so can we not
but have perpetual fears and troubles from abroad also. There being many made
desperate by exile, others having made themselves so, as loathing to live
amongst such variety of wild humors, and frantic confusions; and being of
known and active parts and abilities, and such as will not forget, Dulce natale
solum, foelixque paterna haereditas, but labor without all defatigation, to
recover both the one, and the other. Let Historians remember, and think of the
exiles of Naples and Millan, especially the last, what hot work they made, and
how terrible they grew at last, even to all sorts, in the often revolution, in
few years, of that Government; And can we think their chief Head and Sovereign
(the Prince by general vote here so desired) is or will be ever so asleep; But
as his interest is of the highest concernment, so will his designs, and
endevors be probably every way answerable; and if he were extinct, another
steps into his place, and title, perchance more active and better befriended
then himself; and after him, another, and another, to the end of two numerous
and apparent Stems; Besides the fourteen titles the Jesuit found out, to the
Crown here, in the days of Queen Elizabeth. And which of them was made to have
the first Sovereign title, is legible enough. It is certainly little less then
miraculous, to see some men blinded, by interest (profit or ambition, or both
having seized their faculties) with what confidence, they seem to assure
themselves of the impossibilty of the appearing of any cloud, (especially from
Sea-ward) to eclipse their Sun shine; But fancy that all things must needs go
on, as their bribed suggesters dictate to them: Surely were these men but as
conversant in the History of other Times, and Nations, as they are in the
mystery of their own iniquities, they would soon depose and quit this
confidence: All men of sober, solid, and unbyassed reason and judgments, when
they consider the various and dangerous factions, and parties at home; the
murmurs, discontents, envies, and emulations every where abounding amongst us,
what a vast multitude there is of men, and humors stirring, and heaving in all
places, and some probable enough, even there and amongst those, where the best
and greatest security is thought and expected; when there are such persons of
interest, and active operation abroad, headed and assisted by such a number of
illustrious and heroic Princes, whose high interest, both here, and abroad,
will never want Agents, Emissaries, and Instruments, both there and here, even
in places, and amongst persons, where they are least thought on, or imagined.
And this (whatsoever may be vainly surmised to the contrary) no way by the wit
and policy of man (as our case stands) to be prevented, the generality of the
people likewise, so fixed to, and longing for their Native Sovereign. I say,
any sober man who considers this, may (without the help of historical examples
(of which there are store enough in far more doubtful and desperate cases) very
reasonably, and with confidence enough too, conclude, that our Eutopian free
State, or Commonwealth, of which there has been such a deal of noise and
rumor, made such shifting, heaving, and shoving to get up, will quickly totter,
fall, and lie flat upon its face, or its no face rather; and by that time,
those, who are now uppermost, have acted their part, and made their sale (for
every power must have its pilladge) will there ('it is believed) be timber enough
left, in all our Forests, and Chases, to make so much as a Tool toward its
Re-erection, or the least shore, or prop for its sustentation. Let us not cozen
and deceive one another, nor our selves neither, our case is such, if duly
considered, and weighed in the balance of right reason; this flatuous empty
bubble, and conceit of a free State, (being the ultimum refugium of those many
Jesuitical designs which have been so long practiced upon us, and if it take
effect in any sort, their very master piece for our division, and destruction,
as is fully by several pens manifested to us, and such who will not see it,
must needs be wilfully blind) cannot but render us and our Island (that which
long with eagerness has been gaped after) a public and open prey to our
inveterate and popish enemies, and utterly overwhelm and bury us in own ruins
and desolation; nor can there be any remedy to relieve us, but a speedy
harkening to, and approving this now general voice; Let the Heir of the Crown,
etc.

Nor is the Birth, Person, and Parts of this Royal Prince to be omitted in our
consideration, being such as would put the whole Christian world, upon some
difficulty, to find his Parallel, or equal in all respects: His birth and
extraction is so transcendently illustrious, that what Prince is there upon
earth, who can challenge a greater, or more noble, and Kingly, and of longer
continuance, for centuries of years? His Person so lovely and amiable, that (if
public report be at all to be credited) it strikes a kind of wonder, and
amazement to all beholders, and every where generates a noble clemency, even
from the chiefest enemies of his Ancestors, and of our Nation and Dominions:
His parts and endowments such, as were we free from all subjection to him by
all Laws, and to make search, through all people and Nations, for a complete
and well accomplished personage to rule over us, common fame and report could
not but send us to him; so meek, gentle, and sweet of behavior; so firm,
constant, and obliging in his friendships; so modest, and patient in his
afflictions and sufferings; yet upon just occasion so full of Princely courage
and magnanimity; so knowing, and discerning in his reason, and judgment, and
by his retirement so fitted, and adopted for moderate Government; But above
all, so firmly and irremoveably fixed to the profession of the true Protestant
Religion, testified many ways against the cunning arts, and subtle attempts,
and allurements of the most inveterate enemies thereof; That it is an infamy
never to be washed off from this Nation (unless this general vote and desire be
hearkened to, and take effect in such manner as may in some sort purge the same)
that such a Prince as he, so quallified in all respects, and so innocent
likewise, as to the first cause of difference; and ever since also, saving his
desire and pursuance of his just and undoubted Birthright; a thing which the
meanest of us, would be condemned by all, even by our very selves, should we
omit or be negligent of, were it but for a poor Cottage: I say, that such a
Prince as he, together with his heroic and high born Brethren, (all of them,
even in this their eclipsed obscurity, the very Crown and Glory of our Nations)
should be chased from such an ample and splendid fortune, and patrimony, and
that by his own Native Subjects, and Liege people, and suffered to wander, nay
by their means, hunted from place to place, from one Nation to another People,
and forced to live upon the alms, and charity, as it were, of those, who are
not without (but have had a long time) their grand designs, upon him, us, and
all his Dominions, as (it may be feared) time will too soon manifest; Besides
the subjecting him, and that whole Royal Race, by this means, to the
enticements and allurements, and to the stratagems, nets, and entanglements, of
those Romish rooking Gamesters, who are ranging in all parts for their prey,
and will be sure to leave no stone unmoved to work their wicked ends, where
such a Quarry of Royal Game is to be flown at, and with such advantage (as the
case stands with them) to be attempted, that the very contemplation of it,
cannot me thinks, but draw tears from the eyes, and almost blood from the
hearts of all pious, loyal, Protestant Christians, who have any sense, and
feeling, as they ought, of that deep dishonor, and reproach, which by this
very means, must needs redound to the Professors of the true Protestant
Religion, in all parts, and places whatsoever, and no less sport and pastime,
to the great Vicar general of Rome, and his Court and Conclave: But as in the
ground where Gold grows, nothing ('it is said) will thrive but Gold; so God has
hitherto preserved, this virtuous Prince, most firm, sound, and entire, in the
true Orthodox Faith, and no doubt but will so continue him, and make him not
only in title, but really and indeed a Magnanimous Defender thereof, against
all its Adversaries; And certainly, were it not too true, that Romish cunning
designs, and subtle Jesuited infusions are too prevalent; It is impossible
there should be the least deafness to, but a ready and cheerful compliance with
this voice, this now general voice: Let the Heir, etc.

And whereas the most perplexed and knotty trouble, of this great business,
seems to be the satisfaction and content, which may be expected from this
Prince, to all those descenting parties, and Brethren of the Reformation, who
are possessed of, and enjoy several persuasions, in the matter and manner of
their Religion, and the exercise and practice thereof: Let such in the first
place, but consider this truth, which is so visible, and has so often in our
late revolutions, been experimented, that they have an indulgence indeed
allowed them, by the several, at present, uppermost Powers; But why? Can they
possibly be so blind, as not to see; It is only and merely for their own ends
and aims? For as by soothing and fawning on them, they aspire by their help,
and upon their backs, to get to their several high stations; so by that means,
they have hope always so to continue, especially (which has been the great
art of our late Grandees) if they can but divide them into Parties, Sects, and
Factions enough: Divide and Impera, being always the Usurpers Motto, for by
the strong breath of such divisions, they soar, and hover aloft over all,
feeding all Parties with empty hopes, but really intending only the
suppertation of their own Grandieur; and this, this only it is, which makes so
many great men in power, public Preachers, and prayers, amongst the poor
deluded common people, who look upon them, as so many Saints, and Angels of
light sent from Heaven, when he that sits in Heaven, and sees into the heart,
knows, they are thereby only advancing their own deeds of darkness, profit, and
Ambition. And it has been notorious enough, that when some of this sort, have
climed, and got highest, by the means of such stalking horses, and scaling
ladders, they have presently docked them, and broken them to pieces; and can
these people, or any sort of them, assure themselves of other usage, from any
of our new Ambi^ntes, be their fawnings, flatterings, soothings, and
indulgences to them, what they will or can be? Surely they cannot, for that
which this day is the interest, of this, or that great man in power and esteem;
to morrow perchance he sees cause, it should be quite contrary, and then are
all his smoke-fed Clients, to seek for a new Patron: Nay, though some sort of
these poor deluded persons, have been so long led on, with hopes that they have
even seemed to reach the top and height of their wishes, on a sudden, they are
tumbled down again into the very depth of despair: And what then is the mode
and guise now in fashion, and use, for this particular? Why a public
humiliation, or two, will do it, and a short story told of seeming sensibleness
for backsliding, and then all they think is well, and whole again, and the
Grandees may go afresh to work, upon a new score and interest, and (if their
old ones will not serve their turn) troal about for new Clients, for in these
changing and disjoynted times, there is store enough (they know) to be had any
where; Although it may very well be remembered, and is not easily to be
forgotten; how that for far less crimes, then what they are pleased to call but
backsliding in themselves: Nay, for that indeed, which was so far from a crime,
that it was a duty, a strict duty enjoined by all the Laws of God, Nature, and
the Land: How many thousands have been by them fiercely prosecuted, as the
worst of Rebels and Traitors, and many hundreds of them torn quite in pieces,
and utterly ruined and destroyed; the whole public affairs, whether of Church,
State, or Commonwealth, ever since the first revolt, and dismal disjoynture,
have been droven on, by such several shifted Charioteers, and with such
aufracts, windings, and vicissitudes, and so likely never to be otherwise; that
there neither is, nor can be, the least hope of settled assurance of any matter,
or thing whatsoever; it all, indeed being nohting else, but, as it were, a mere
Maze, from which, there is no way to come out, but at the same place we began
to enter in. Now if these several persuaded Parties in matters of Religion, and
its exercise and practice, would but duly consider, and thoroughly understand
their own true interest, there would be nothing more detestable to them, then
to depend upon such variable, and transitory uncertanties, or to have further
traffic, or dealing with any such kind of Merchants in Religion, who Broker
like, as they serve an old cloak, can dress it, trigge, and turn it, as they
list, and when they please disguise it with a new cape or facing. For where or
from whom can they possibly expect or hope for a more certain and settled
assurance of enjoying a free exercise of the Reformed Religion, and that
according to their persuasions, being modest and peaceable (which is all they
seem to desire and aim at) then under him, and his protection, who is so firmly
fixed to it, and for whose sake he has so long and so largely tasted the
bitterest cup of affliction, that since that blessed Reformation first made,
ever happened to the lot of any Prince, that professed it: Besides, he is their
Father, their common Father, and Sovereign, and (without great want of charity)
cannot be imagined (especially after such his own manifold sufferings) but to
be most tender bowelled to his Children, and Subjects, in whatsoever can with
any modesty or reason, be desired from him. There is surely no patronage,
protection, or indulgence, can be comparable to his; freed from all plots,
labors, and contrivances for its obtaining, and continuing; Nor no such
certainty of enjoyment thereof, and of all other just liberty whatsoever, as is
to be had by, and under him, whose chief Interest is the public peace and
quiet of his Dominions, and the contenting and satisfying of all parties, who
are now purposely, and by art, and cunning, kept in discontent, odds, and
difference, for the ends of others, their several patrons, who are thereby
sustained in Repute and Esteem, according to the number of their Clients, and
Proselytes; And who can in a moment (as things happen) vary their Interest and
Clients too, and leave them in the lurch, for a new cheat and dressing. This
his Interest also, is ever one and the same, and subject to no variation in
that particular; and his transcendent quality such, that it would be far
beneath his honor and dignity, to put the lest delusion upon any sort of
Subjects whatsoever. His undoubted Title to the Sovereignty, and to this
protection, such likewise, that public Assemblies (if need be) for
conferences, and debates between dissenting Parties, and Brethren, may freely
and fully be had, and differences perhaps thereby well quieted and settled, to
the content and satisfaction of all, which our Grandees must not, nor cannot
endure, for fear divisions in that kind should cease, and so their Empire and
Dominion by that means determine. There might much more be said as to this
particular, concerning these differing parties, and that to their more ample
and full content and satisfaction: But brevity befits this Paper, and if
permitted, it may be done as seasonably hereafter, this little may give them a
hint, that none more then they have reason to advance this general voice, Let
the Heir, etc.

Besides all this, an appeal may surely enough be interposed, even to the
secret conscience bar, of his present chief opposers; let them be but single
hearted, and fling from them all those by clogs of ambition, and avarice, fear,
and prejudice, Romish whispers, and insinuations; and on these terms, let them
but consult their own inward true dictates, as in the fight and presence of the
great (...), the true heart searcher; and if so, they cannot but undoubtedly
persuade themselves, (for they are masters of reason too, though much bribed
and corrupted) that this Nation and People can never be settled and happy, till
this general (...), for his admittance, takes full effect, it is indeed
impossible (what ever (...), or make show of) it should be otherwise. There are
many reasons to be (...) might somewhat demonstrate, that this belief and
persuasion must needs be (...) express them would swell this small Piece to
little purpose, nor is it needful to make that more manifest, which their own
souls and consciences cannot but daily prompt to them. The great Remora, and
obstacle, ('it is known) is their security upon such a change, of which more
hereafter; but in the interim, why should their few fears and doubts (which
they also may safely depose if they please) continue upon three Famous Nations,
and the numerous people thereof, these vast expenses, frights, terrors, wasting
divisions, and confusions, which we daily feel and suffer, and which themselves
know, upon a full persuasion, can never be ended, but by this means? To give
but a small hint concerning one particular, which (as instar omnium) may
illustrate to us the same reason in all others, and that is the particular of
the purse, and the vast sums, which are so frequently and violently exacted,
and torn from all sorts, and some (and those most) who want it for bread, to
feed their Families; especially now the deadness of trade, and all other
cheerful and usual ways to advance livelihood, and support, being such, that
every man's heart is become quite sunk toward them, each honest man looking
like his souls coffin; no life, no cheerfulness, no encouragement, to ought
that is either good or advantageous, to himself or others of inseriour rank,
who might else have help and support from him, and the cause of this every one
has in his mouth: Why, the times are such, and so unsettled, etc. Nor can it
possibly be imagined to be otherwise, with the Body, and Members, whilst the
Head continues in the case it is; set that right, in its place, and all
persons, and things else are instantly settled with it. Faci' e res redit ad
suam naturam, is a rule, as true, as old, perchance, some one general large
contribution may be needful, and what pious and peaceable soul is there, who
would not most willingly and cheerfully purchase such a lasting peace, and
settlement, at such a rate, which indeed will be but small, and inconsiderable,
to those vast sums which are now so frequently exhausted. The total whereof,
since the People of these Nations became their fellow subjects sponges; it
would puzzle Arithmatick it self, to cast up, and although the sums collected
have been so vast, and ample, almost to infinity, yet the Soldier unpaid, the
Navy unpaid, and the Public (as it is said) millions in debt, and so has it
been for the most part all along, since the first direful revolt, and so will
it ever be: No thoughts, no hopes are admissible to the contrary, whilst this
Chymera of settling a Free State, here, floats in the brains of such in power,
who tells us, in print, that it will be a brass wall against the claim of the
Heir, etc. But it may with more piety and policy also be told them, who vainly
so imagine; that the best brass wall is a good conscience, Murus Aeneas sana
Conscientia, and that if they keep not that brass wall, they speak of,
perpetually lined with silver, and gold too, and that in such quantity, as will
not long be to be had, or found in their imaginary Free State, the least pelt
of a pot gun will lay it in the dust, to which condition themselves, and all of
us, must one day be reduced; and how near that day is, none knows, but he that
knows all things; therefore it were surely far better, and safer to look to our
state in the other world, and not trouble, and busy our selves to erect new
States here, in this; which if the great disposer of all things, would put into
the heart of those now in power (who ever they be) to do, (and doubtless he
would, if they would but truly and rightly seek him) how quiet and happy would
all our States be presently here, and our eternal state more certainly blessed
hereafter: In so doing, this great Remora, and obstacle, their despair of
security, would also vanish, which having no ground to support it, but what is
usual in such case, Guilt and Crime, if they be recanted and purged by such a
testimony, as may now be given, what should hinder, but that the greatest
security in the world may Hincinde, be both given and taken; and respect and
favor had to, as the case may well deserve; if Foreign History be consulted,
it is not altogether barren of examples even to all particulars, nor here at
home neither, one particular excepted: And for that particular, Id nefandum
quidem, it is believed, there is but one or two Persons, now left in the
Nation, that in probability may be charged with the real guilt thereof: And it
is not impossible neither, but that those very Persons also may be left to the
great and high Tribunal: And as God is a most merciful God, so we are on all
hands assured, we may (if we will) have a most clement and merciful Vicegerent
of his over us, and in such a way and manner, as may yet render us all of all
sorts and persuasions, Parties and Factions, the most felicitous of all Nations
whatsoever; whereas, if this fair opportunity be overslipped, and foreign
force, and power be necessitated to be made use of, (and assuredly that cannot
always be wanting to such a Person and Title, and how soon it may be offered,
nay pressed upon him, may without much difficulty be guessed at) what pen is
able to express the misery and calamity, which may in all probability befall us
all in general; but especially those, whose obdurate stiffness is such, that
although they may yet easily prevent this, yet will not, but clearly manifest,
they care not though all be on fire rather, for so perhaps they think they may
warm their hands at, and slip away by the light of it: For mine own part, I do
here publicly profess, that this particular of foreign force never enters my
thoughts, knowing by the help of History, what dismal use has been made of it,
in many places abroad, and even here at home with us also: But such spectacles
of horror are represented to me, that I may in a manner truly utter the Poets
Language of another, Obstupui, steteruntque comae. Nay, at this present me
thinks my Pen drops blood, fearing the iniquities of this Nation are so far
from being chastised enough, that our sinful account is now in many respects
become larger then ever, and perceiving such stiff wilfulness in some, and
such security in others, and vain confidence in carrying on, and effecting what
their delusions prompt them to, that my very soul melts within me, and poures
it self out before the Lord, that he may yet (if possible) be entreated, there
may not be one drop of blood more spilt in this difference; there has been too
much, too too much already of all sorts, from the highest to the lowest, that
when inquisition comes to be made for blood (and that time will most assuredly
come,) who almost is it, that can truly plead otherwise then guilty, before
that Great, and All-seeing, and All-searching Visitor? And therefore that issue
of all others should be stopped, and the issue now in general vote (none better,
nor more happy for all parties) laid hold on, and take effect, which (if the
Lord have yet any mercy for us) may be speedily, and cheerfully accomplished,
and so a lasting, and firm peace indeed be had and obtained, with safety enough
on all sides, and to the joy of all hearts, save such, whose minds and
affections are totally given up, and devoted to mischief, blood, and ruin, and
care not though all perish, and sink, so they may but keep themselves aloft,
and swimming: But I will yet hope better things of such as are (or pretend to
be) in Place, and Power: Be that Power in Chief where it will, either at
Westminster, or Wallingford House. And to those Gentlemen now sitting at
Westminster, although whatsoever is expressed in the premises, as touching
their tenuous assembly in general, and their usurped authority by it, or may
reflect upon any person of them in particular, it is even now become almost the
general language of all men, and that in the very open streets, and (as it is
said) even in the Villages also: And therefore Ingenuity obliges them not to
be offended with such, who by this means (for no other is possible to be had,
nor this neither without danger) tell them that of themselves, which otherwise
(as their case stands) they would probably be ignorant of, being chiefly
conversant amongst themselves only, and vainly nurturing, and cherishing up up
one another, in their own (seeming to them weighty, but really and indeed)
empty and frivolous conceits and imaginations. The generality of the people in
all places being fixedly set against them, which, upon any trial whatsoever,
they will be sure to find true, and none almost (especially of sober rank and
quality) speaking of them, but with grief, contempt, and disdain for such their
high presumption to come, sit and act upon those Terms, and in that manner, as
they seem to undertake, to the perpetual dishonor, and infamy of those great,
high, and honorable conventions, and the peoples just right of election
thereto: Nor any at all owning them, but either a thin herd of known brainsick
zelots, and those of very little, or no repute, and of far less interest in
the Nation; or else such, as to gratify their own revenge and malice, or for
some sinister end or other, take the present opportunity, to lay hold on any
power weatsoever, to serve their own turns. Though at the very same time they
disdain it in their hearts; and the next day, would upon any occasion, be as
ready to fly into the face of it, to its ruin, as this day, they are to
solicit it for their own ends: And to know this, and be certainly informed of
it, is, or should be, as considerable to them in the Station they stand in, and
as kindly taken too, may well be thought, as ought else whatsoever, which is
desirable to them, which, and which only, together with the premised reasons,
why themselves should now join, and close with the hearty, and most general
votes of the people, is the end and aim of this Paper: However this be so, yet
for mine own part I cannot but look upon, and consider them, or indeed, any
other Assembly of men, be they what they will, whose power, interest, and
influence is such, as to be able to do, either very much good, or much more
harm; I say, I cannot but look upon them, with such respect and due regard, as
becomes our present case condition: And tell them also this Truth, that it is
a kind of honor (be it happened to them by Providence, or what else they
please to call it) to have it in their hands (if their Power be such as they
pretend to) to obliege most firmly to them the hearts, lives, and fortunes of
far the most inconsiderable part of the three Nations, and indeed of all in
general, who cannot but be included in that happiness, which in this
conjuncture of time with so much renown and security to themselves, and
triumphant rejoicing of all peaceable minds, and loyal hearts, they may now
with such facility obtain for them; and such a Ray of Honor as (if slighted)
will very probably never dawn, or in the least glympse thereof appear again to
them: And this upon good grounds may further be said likewise, That if the
great God of Peace, shall in his mercy be pleased to incline their hearts to
this way of Peace so much desired and longed for, it may with full confidence
be assuredly relied on by them, that the least hair of any of their heads shall
be so far from perishing thereby, that such of them who shall appear most
forward and instrumental therein, may have what security they please to bear
what share or place they please in this our such restored happiness, which with
any candor or modesty can be expected or desired by them; nor would it be
grudged them by any person whatsoever, whom they imagine therein their chiefest
malevolents and regrettors; for who can think them honored too much, or
preferred too high, who (as the case stands) and after so long and tedious a
storm, can or shall without blood, restore to three Nations that calm and
happiness of peace and settlement, which otherwise may perhaps cost thousands
of precious lives, besides the necessitated ruin, terror and astonishment
which in all probability must prevent and go before it: I am sure it may with
certainty be averred of some, and upon very good grounds the same also may be
asserted of many: And doubtless there be thousands, even many thousands of the
same pious mind likewise, who are so far from aspiring and revenging thoughts
thereby, that to see that gladsome day of our Sovereigns return to his just
rights with honor and safety, that thereby a sure and lasting Peace may be
settled amongst us, and so derived to our posterities, would most readily
sacrifice their own present fortunes, (and most of them no contemptible ones
neither) yea, and their very lives too, and cheerfully chant out their last
Nunc dimittis, etc. And for those Gentlemen of the Sword, who are as highly
concerned in this particular as any persons else whatsoever, it is so clearly
their interest to effect what is thus generally desired, that if Cimmerian
darkness be not before their eyes, nothing under heaven can be more apparent
and manifest to them; for they cannot surely but see the uncertain condition
they now stand in, under what general disdain and odium to their Country they
live; how often they are put to act the part of Italian Bravades, and Turkish
Janissaries, for some vile and corrupt interest or other; how unfixed and
unstable their stations are, what designs are perpetually upon all or some
chief of them: To say nothing of the present design, now generally in talk and
apprehension, Where and in whose hands the Militia of the Nations is to be
placed, and what the intended effect and purpose thereby is; how frequently
they are made instruments of destruction to their fellow Brethren and Subjects,
and often to trip up, and sometimes to destroy one another: And to add to all
this, and ten times more which may be said, their Pay, which always is
collected from the People long before it is due, many times is subducted from
them, and drawn into other channels, perhaps into private purses, and that to
such as are their chief capital enemies: This and much worse is their present
state and condition; whereas, if they be instrumental to advance this general
vote and desire of the people, that it might thereby take effect; they would
render themselves the very Darlings of the People, and those general hearts
which now have them in most odium and disdain, will be so open and united to
them, that they would even quite empty themselves for a just remuneration for
them, nothing can any way stick upon them of former sully, but this way would
be clearly and absolutely wiped off, and their fame and renown for so just and
loyal an action to their native Sovereign, lovely sound, not only through this
Island, but through the whole Christian world, and merit even trophies of
honor to be erected to them, that their just praise and exaltation may never
endingly continue. There would in this case of such return to their loyalty,
and giving such undoubted testimony of it, be certainty of Permanency for them,
certainty of due Pay, certainty of Honor, and from the highest to the lowest
of them, certainty of just and full content and satisfaction, for preferment
and otherwise, which their own hearts and desires can with any modesty wish and
suggest to them: Nothing of which can be had, or so much as in the least kind
hoped for (what ever vain and empty Chymera's are insinuated to them by those
whose ends they serve) in that frail and fluctuating condition they now stand
in, and in which, the way they are in, they cannot but look ever to continue.
Nor is all this mere words and fiction neither, but will be really and
undoubtedly made good; nay, (if need be) secured for by such ways and means as
shall be subject to no just exception whatsoever, unless they will degenerate
from that noble confidence which is or ought always to be refulgent in men of
honor, and the Military Tribe, especially when they have to deal with a person
of such high honor and extraction, and he their own native Sovereign, and who
is not in condition to deceive them, nor need they indeed be deceived, but have
(if they please) their remedy in their own hands and power: Upon which grounds
it is with great reason hoped that they will not be out at, but upon due
consideration of the premises will above all others advance this now general
voice, Let the Heir, etc.

I intended far more brevity, and fear I have been too tedious, yet are there
many things as much, and some perhaps more considerable than what is premised,
inviting all people of all sorts and conditions, who may seem in any way to be
opponent to it, unanimously to join in advancing this firm and sure settling
way of a lasting peace, and happiness in our Nations, especially those who now
in Assembly take upon them to be representatives, and if so, certainly no duty
can be more incumbent upon such, then to listen to, and accomplish the general
vote and desire of those, whose persons they so take upon them to represent;
this certainly, is a main and chief part of their errand, upon which they were
first sent, and entrusted by them; And for which, they can pretend to any
Assemblies, or meetings upon the score of the people: The peoples general votes
and desires, they hereby know, and may have further, full, ample, and assured
satisfaction that it is so; if they will (and that as speedily as they please)
freely permit that particular to be put into any unquestionable way, or order,
for such their more full and plenary satisfaction and assurance. Nor can they
upon any account whatsoever, before God, Angels, and Men, (even by their own
ways and grounds they go on (be they just or unjust) and according to their
own insinuations of freedom to them) deny the people this their most
reasonable request, that as they take upon them to be their Representatives, so
they would give them free leave, and that without any awe, or dread whatsover
to be upon them, freely to express their minds and desires, what they would
have such their Representers do: If this be denied, slighted, or omitted, what
case the people stand in, will surely then be most clear and manifest, and how
can it then be otherwise deemed by all (even such who at present may perhaps
have some good thoughts of them) but that their own consciences fully dictate
to them the real truth of whatsoever is herein before asserted. To which
consciences of theirs, it is herein likewise appealed in manner as is before
expressed, the sincere dictates of which (freed from, and unbribed by corrupt
and sinister ends) if they will neither follow, nor yet hearken to these loud
and general cries and clamors of the people, whom they would be thought thus to
represent, but keep them still in terrors, bonds, and chains, to be lead
captive, as they list, and whether they list at their own few wills and
pleasures; then Hear you O Heavens, and hearken O Earth, and Thou the great God
and framer of them both, manifest thine own power and might, and cause thou
both Heaven and Earth, and all thy whole creation amongst us, in their courses
speedily to assist and help us, and thy own appointed Vicegerent over us, to
this just way of peace, and firm settlement so much and so long thirsted after
by us. Pity, O pity thou our despised Church, distracted State, and even
gasping Commonweal, and let thine own outstretched arm, by such thine own
means, as thou know best, speedily in this thine own ordained way, Heal up
these our wounds, and wasting divisions, which (in such case) none indeed but
thine own hands can close. Pluck us out from this Romish and Jesuitical deep
Pit, which is thus digging and preparing for us. And open the eyes of all
seduced and deluded persons, who cannot see, and melt the hearrs of the most
obstinate and perverse, who will not see, this their common, open, and apparent
danger; and be merciful O Lord, yet be merciful unto them, and let not their
transcendent crimes appear against them, at that great and dreadful day of
account; Nor This Paper (if slighted) neither to their utter and everlasting
astonishment and confusion.

FINIS.

