Englands MONARCHY Asserted, and Proved TO BE The FREEST STATE, AND The BEST
COMMONWEALTH Throughout the World. WITH A WORD to the Present Authority, AND
His EXCELLENCY GENERAL MONCK.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

Englands Monarchy Asserted and proved to be the Freest State and Best
Commonwealth throughout the World.
With a Word to the present Authority, and his Excellency Genesis MONCK.
HOw does the Press labor (in this Scribbling age) under the burden which is
put upon it, by every wild and brainsick fancy of our Republican Candidates;
each of them, according to the length of that Worm which is crawling in his
head, flinging in his Paper myte, though of never so base and counterfeit
stuff, toward the erection of that, which is supposed in his opinion, but to
look like matter of Defense, for this Utopian thing, of a Commonwealth, so
much noysed and talked on amongst us, Though to sober and judicious persons, It
cannot but be known, that the least blast proceeding from unbyassed, solid, and
impartial truth, and prudence, scatters (as to us of this Nation) all those
empty Nothings which seem to make such a fine and Gaudy show, into mere air and
bubble: For, let the pyth and substance of all, even the best of that matter
(for some there is so frothy and full of filth that the very reading of it
nauseates) that has been said or writ on this subject be picked out, and but
narrowly surveyed and considered, and what does it all amount to, more, than
what (as it relates to us) the applying of one short Distinction, takes off the
edge of all in it, which looks like any thing of Logic or Sense. It may surely
be acknowledged, That, It is possible, a People may live happily enough, under
any of the three chief forms mentioned in Story, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, or
Democracy, so they have good Laws, and good Magistrates. The form in that case,
does not perhaps much add, or diminish; But to prefer any of the two last,
before the first, is to deny that faith and experience which all good History
has taught us; And, as the case stands in this Nation, where Monarchy is more
ancient than History it self, and so venerable and acceptable to the spirit and
genius of the whole body of the People, of all sorts, our Laws (the absolutely
best in the Christian world) being graffed into that stock, and having their
birth and breeding under that happy Government, To attempt, or any way affect,
the Desired alteration, were naught else but to Renounce and bid Defiance to
our reason and understanding. Were we a people newly Dropped from the Clouds, and
now to begin the settling of a frame of Government for our selves, The best
Directions, we could gather from all that has hitherto been said, or indeed
possibly can be excogitated, by the wit and invention of man, to recommend us
to that, which some persons for their vile and ugly interest and ends so much
hanker after, has their whole fabric built upon such suppositions as no
rational or prudent man can possibly suppose all arguments for it; Taking for
granted, That, which never was, is, or indeed can be sound, amongst men clothed
with corrupt Mortality: But when we are already under such a constitution as is
premised, and which is the chief matter of the subsequent Discourse, To ravel
all our Laws, Dig up such ancient Foundations, and unsettle that firm Bottom,
which has for so many ages rendered us an opulent, famous and flourishing
people: It would be such a piece of folly and madness, That any Potent
neighbor Prince, may surely have just cause to think that by the Law of
Nations he may invade and possess our properties, upon the Title, score, and
account of Idiotism, Lunacy, or Frenzy.

It is possible, That some (otherwise very eminent and worthy persons) may by
the subtilties and insinuations of others, be so far mislead, as to think very
gloriously of that which is so much talked on, and so little understood, A Free
State, or Commonwealth; and that the true and real essentials thereof cannot
be had, and enjoyed, but in, and under such a popular frame and constitution as
they fancy. These subtle men know well enough, that there is no easier way to
cheat us out of our best condition, than by the hopes of enjoying it in a
better manner, and under a fuller freedom: And some of them know also, as well
as the best sort of their bribed Penmen, That there is a great and vast
difference between the form of a thing, and the essence of it; The confounding
and not distinguishing whereof, in our considerations upon that subject: But
being so presented, as if the one were not to be had without the other, is
that, which gives them such advantage to insinuate their corrupt and crafty
beguilings to such upon whose capacities and understandings they have hope to
impose and prevail: And although their own sinister and vicious ends therein,
is so manifest and notorious, every body knowing well their inclination,
temper, and disposition, and what it is, they hereby aim at, viz. Not to be in
the least hazard or fear of punishment, or restitution, for whatsoever acted or
rapin'd by them, during the late shakings and convulsions of the Times; for
though they are or may be undoubtedly assured, of an obsolute and certain
indemnity, and a full and free enjoying of what they are so fearful to be
deprived of, yet (oh the fright and terror of a guilty Soul!) That will not
serve the turn, They cannot rest in quier, nor in joy any calm thoughts; unless
they tare up all by the roots, and utterly demolish all footsteps of that
Government and those Laws, which may in any sort continue the least of fear,
hazard, or danger upon them: And whatever other fair and specious pretenses are
made, of a Free State, and Commonwealth, and other glorious and glossy things,
to delude and captivate vulgar apprehensions; Yet their own consciences cannot
but tell them, That from this corrupt stem and root alone, springs all these
fine, Gaudy and Republican leaves and blossoms; For this is openly manifest,
That whilst some Grandees of this sort sat tat he stern, although their
discords in all other things were almost infinite, yet they still agreed in
this, to destroy our fundamentals in order to complete their designs, and
secure there own empty and pannick fears and jelousies; which engaged all sober
and judicious persons, to detest their way and courses, and more firmly unite
themselves, to the true loyal interest, at abhorring those violent confusions,
and destracting alterations, amongst us, which they saw this Free state or
Republic must of necessity introduce: Now, that this their fallacies, of thus
contunding the formalities, and essentials, of a Commonwealth together; And
insinuating the non-possibility, as it were, of the one to be without the
other, may the more clearly and fully appear: Let us reflect a while upon the
Government here amongst us, as it stood twenty years ago; which though truly
Monarchical, yet did it by a frequent Refining of it self upon several
occasions (rejecting the evil, and retaining the good of all the known best
Governments in the world) raise it self to such a mirror of perfection, That
it became the envy of Monarchies, and shame of all Commonwealths, who therein
might behold themselves so ecclipsed and silenced in all the pretentions to
Liberty and Freedom; That it might be truly asserted of us, That with the most
Choice and signal ornaments of the Noblest Kingdoms, we enjoyed all the
Immunities and Privileges, of A Free State, and Common wealth. And although
All nations have their several and peculiar Rights and Freedoms, yet none so
truly free as the people of England, can they be but so happy, as to keep
their fundamental Laws inviolate and unshaken.

The Excellency of these our Rights and Freedoms, confist principally in these
Particulars following, 1. That we cannot be disseized or charged in our
Freeholds, Franchises, or Goods, but by Law, or our own consent; and that in a
Free and lawful Parliament, and for the public good only. 2. There is such
care taken of the Liberty and Freedom of our Persons, That none ought to be
straightened or imprisoned but by a lawful Magistrate. The cause of the
imprisonment is to be expressed in the warrant, and prosecution within a fit
time to be made, or the party to be delivered by a Habeas Corpus, which the
Judge cannot deny; and if anundue or illegal commitment be made, it is
actionable at Law, against the Officers who are instrumental therein. 3. That
no Law has force to bind, but such as by our own allowance, has been or shall
be established, by the sovereign of the Nation, or else has beenreceived ab
antiquo by the constant usage of the People. 4. No Judgment concludes us but
such as is passed be ore Magistrates, of our own nation, who ought to be
ordinarily called, duly authorized, and legally sworn to do us justice
according to the known Laws of the Land. 5. All our proceedings and Trials at
Law ought to he public, to our greatest ease, viz. in the open view of the
County, Hundred, Society, or Corporation, where the cause of action is supposed
to be given. 6. Every particular person in matter of Crime or interest is
Triable only per pares, his equals, fellows, or Neighbors, who make the said
Trial upon their corporal oath, from which form of Trial, (in point of right)
the Sovereign himself cannot plead exemption. 7. That Justice according to Law,
and that form of Trial, cannot be sold, delayed, or denied to any person
whatsoever.


These are the chief heads of the Rights, Freedoms, and Liberties of the People
of this Nation firmly settled and established, under Monarchy, which together
with other particulars, collectable out of that above thirty times confirmed
Magna charta, and the Petition of Right, and what were granted by the late
King, in his last and never to be forgotten Parliament, sure such a stock of
Immunity and Freedom for a people, that all the Free-states, and
Commonwealths, that are, or ever were, extant, in any place throughout the
whole universe, may be justly challenged to show if they can, the like Liberty
and Freedom for their Citizens and Subjects: We may truly say, that the Peoples
Liberty walks with equal pace at least, and stands upon as firm if not firmer
ground, than the Sovereigns Prerogative, nor are they esteemed less tender and
sacred; For upon the least infringement, or violation of what belongs to the
people, in point of Liberty and Immunity, far more loud alarms have been
always given to the whole Nation, Then have been taken by Soveraigntive, when
the very bowels of Prerogative have been deeply gashed, and in a manner quite
torn out.

Some experience, we have of late years had, of a Commonwealth (as it was
called) here amongst us, viz. from 1648, to 1653, and strange unknown Guardians
it had set over it, and as strange and unheard of acts of violence, and
arbitrary exorbitancy; It was most freequently guilty of, such as have cause
enough to be by all remembered, and surely cannot easily be forgotten; And so,
though in a very faint and staggering condition, it continued acting its
illegal cruelties, upon all occasions, and that with all severity, until that
fate befell it; which happens to most of that sort, and kind, though of far
better frame and constitution than can possibly be ever expected amongst us,
which is, that unless it can Truckle under some potent Neighbor Prince, shall
be sure to be invaded by Usurpation, debauched by Oligarchy, or confounded by
Anarchy: And this, how often since, it has in this short time been our own
case, it may with sadness enough be remembered by us; For how is it probable, or
indeed possibly to be expected, that any Government erected and established by
inequality and force (as ours must needs be, if we desert our old foundation)
can ever subsist and fasten, without an exorbicant and all-devouring power, and
force to uphold and maintain it; And on whose shoulders the burden of that
must needs lie, (the grand and standing Treasury and Revenue being exhausted,
and squandred into private hands, and all public Moneys (or rather indeed
Rapines) passing through the pitchy claws of such State harpies as we have
already had experience of, and such or their like as cannot but be expected
hereafter) it is easy enough to be conjectured; In which, and manifold other
respects, It is impossible to be imagined otherwise in reason, but that the
little fingers of our upstart Lords and Staes-men, of such an empty new-rising
State (be the Rota, or whymsical wheel terning or standing still) cannot
possibly but prove more heavy and weighty to a tame and tired people, then the
whole loins of a Free born Heir, and of an ancient Monarchy settled as this is,
whose Reputation, Title, and Self-sufficiency, will be supersedeas enough to
the peoples discharge, of whatsoever may but look like oppression to them: And
should we after all our expense, Toil, Torments of faction, and such emptying
of our selves, fix and settle at length, into such a degree of possible
permanency, as that we may but seem to stand a high-lone, though with the prop
of an army (For that in no case must be left out) what Alarms and excitements
should we presently give to all our neighbors, by our new upstart and strange
shape? What State soloescisme should we be guilty of, and very probable
provocations to all our best Allies? And their being several Dormant accounts,
in the memorials of Princes abroad, who watch but for their opportunity and
advantage, can it in reason or prudence be otherwise imagined, but that in the
conclusion, we must be forced to admit of theirs, or at best our own Sovereigns
conquest upon us: Besides, how will our State-crastsmen sodder up the business,
about those two ancient Monarchies of Scotland and Ireland: And whether they
will be long contented (if at all) to Truckle under such a half, (or rather no)
headed Bedsted as ours is like to be, and that without either Curtains or
Valence to it, when they may have a rich and royal Canopy, and Cloth of State
of their own, That would surely do well to be enquired into, and to have us
assured of.

By what is premised, we may somewhat guess at the cheat which would be put
upon us, by those partially Biased, and self-interessed men, who make this
noise and stir by themselves and their hired Advocates, of all sorts, subtle,
and silly, about this business of a Commonwealth, which will be more
illustrated upon farther contemplation of that happiness which we and our
Ancestors have so long enjoyed, under that Celestial form of Government
(Monarchy) our Lives, Liberties and Estates being under it, so well and amply
secured by our Laws, that what people was there under Heaven, that might with
truth and sincerity, boast of a more flourishing and happy condition than we
were in, till Ambition and Faction entered amongst us, and rent and tore in
pieces, all the Gards and Seams, which linkt and bound us together, and which
adorned and filled us with such beauty, health, vigor and prosperity, that we
were become the envy and wonder of the whole Christian world. And that which
has been by those rotten, and self-interessed men, so often imputed to
Monarchy, and King ship, (Tyranny) so fast and strongly tied and chained up by
our Laws, from doing hurt or prejudice to us, in our best and dearest
concerns, that we were become, even dainty, nice and wanton in our felicities;
such a Cornu Copia, or Catholicon, of welfare, and happiness, our Prince and
Sovereigns gentle power was to us, that whilst it enjoyed its justs Rights, we
received thence all the benefits of plenty, ease, and quiet, that possibly
could be imagined. It was our curb to Tumults, our Moderator to Factions, our
Sanctuary for Remedies of all sorts, our assured preventer of Mischiefs, it
topp'd Usurpation, administered Justice, afforded Equity, and indulged Clemency
and Mercy: It was the very joy of our Hearts, and the breath of our Nostrils,
and what is it but a kind of black, hideous, and mischeivous Envy (had I said
Blasphemy, there is good warrant for it in Holy Writ) to despise, reject, and
kick against it, and so against Heaven it self. Monarchy being the sole and
only Government ordained by God, and Kings and Kingdoms, his alone
institution and planting, as is clear by the whole current of Sacred Scripture,
from Adam even till the Primitive Church after Christ; and Republiques, States,
and such like, a mere depraved Institution of M^n, for corrupt and sinister
ends; and as it was, and is established here amongst us, so bounded by Law, and
exempt from Tyranny, that it could not so much as oppress a poor harmless
Orphan. No Sheriff, Constable, or Bailiffe, but was more terrible, powerful,
and petulant, in their several and distinct ways and powers, than the
Sovereign himself, and less subject to the curb, rule, and guidance of Law, in
most of their actions and administrations: He neither made Laws in his
personal capacity, neither did he execute or interpret them. No Judge stood in
awe of his single command, to justify the least trespass. Nothing was more
true than that great and general Maxim, That the King could do no wrong; for
in the cose of any wrong done, the presumption of Law was, That he did it not,
but his Officers or Agents were accomptable, and responsal to the Law for it;
his Power was so limited by his Justice, that his displeasure could streighten
no man's liberty, but the Law would relieve him by a Habeas Corpus, which the
Judge durst not deny. And yet this ends, Innocuous, meek and gentle Authority,
for the vile, base, and corrupt ends, of some bloody, covetous, and ambitious
persons, must be branded with the odious name of Tyranny, and all the filth
that can be cast up from their Rankerous Lungs must be flung upon it.

It Is true, a Negative voice the Sovereign had in the passing of Laws, but
what (upon due consideration) did it signify, but a mere weapon of defense, to
shield the Goverument from being prostituted to alteration, at the will and
pleasure of inferiority. And does not late times tell us, there was a just
necessity for it? and was there not such an equivalent awe and power in the
People for this Negative voice, that as they could pass no Law without him, so
could not he without them? besides, was not the public purse in their hands,
and dispose, to engage him to pass what they had a mind to? Were not all the
Officers, and Ministers of State, and others, appointed by him, accomptable to
Parliaments, and to the Laws? or was it in his power to save any of them, or
yield him the least skreen, shelter or protection, in case they stood
obnoxious. The Militia and Nations Sword he wore indeed, for decency sake only,
but could not draw it for the oppression of the People, but by their own
consents, he having no mercenary Redcoats at his command; but the Arms of the
Nation were in the hands of men of Estate and interest, the Officers being
Gentlemen commonly of the better sort and quality, and the Soldier a Yeomen or
Farmer at least. All of them such, as cannot in reason be conceived to join
against Law, with the Lust and Ambition (could such a thing possibly be) of any
single person of what quality soever, to abridge and destroy any just Freedom,
they enjoyed as their Birthright.

This was the state and condition of the Militia, and Arms and Force of the
Nation, in those happy days of exercised Monarchy amongst us, which right or
wrong, be the truth what it will, and never so manifest and notoriously known
to be so, yet must, and shall by some, be still called Tyrannical; whereas ever
since these blessed Halcion times, how have we found the case to be altered in
that, and all other particulars, since this Rumble of a Free State, and
Commonwealth has brolled in our heads, especially when Fanatic Saintship and
profession came in to bear sway amongst us? And the Good old Cause-mongers
brought in their Canting Tones, and Phrases, which, like Gypsies, they used to
know one another minds by, whilst they munged the peoples Noses, and
publicly picked their pockets. What strange and unheard of violences, and
outrages have our eyes beheld committed by those, who under such bare our
Arms, and were paid for it by us, and in stead of protection and defense to
us, as in the days of our Monarchy duly exercised? what awe, dread and terror,
did such keep the whole Nation under, from the highest to the lowest, of all
sorts and qualities?

But why is that mentioned, which is in a manner the least of perversions, and
a kind of a Peccadillo, to those many other grand and piacular Crimes and
Offenses, Rapines, Murders, hideous and unparalled oppressions of all all
sorts and kinds, which have been our lot and portion ever since we were made so
unhappy, as to be deprived of our old Government, and Royal Race of Governors,
and became slaves and bondmen to a generation of such State Empericks,
pretending cure and healing to those wounds, which themselves (for cursed
ambitious ends) had made; As that certainly none then we, have more rightly
imitated the Dog in the fable, That have lost the substance of an opulent
flourishing and happy Free State and Comm-wealth, which really and indeed we
enjoyed in all its essentials, and perfections, and caught, and embraced only,
an empty shadow, and sound of one in our ears (which (whatever may be
pretended) is all we are ever like to enjoy, under any Government but our old
one) when our Estates, Liberties, Bodies, Lives; nay, our very Souls have been,
Torn, Herassed, Oppressed, Buchered, and Tortured, under the several
vicissitudes, of all the most Tyrannical insolent and boundless powers of
unlimited arbitrary usurpation, that ever showed themselves in any age or
place, amongst the Sons of Christian men: And which are yet by these men (who
and what sort and principles they are of, is manifest enough) labored and
endeavored to be continued amongst us, under the same spetious Title, Name, and
Show of a Free Stare and Commonwealth, whose shadow must still upon all
occasions be freshly assumed, though the substance, Themselves know we have
already in the best manner and most absolute perfection, anciently and firmly
settled and established amongst us, by onr Laws: But should they as formerly be
in any sort returning upon us, in what shape soever (for let the outside be
what it will, it is very well known what lies within, and what fruits and
effects must needs be thence produced) It is hoped almighty God will so unite
and animate the Nation with such a noble public spirit, That our ancient and
known sundamental Laws, and in them, the peace, quiet weifate, and happiness of
our Country, may (next our duty to him) find the chiefest place in our hearts
and minds, and arm us with a constant refolution and und aunted zeal and
courage, to use all just and lawful means, that this Divine Providence shall
hold forth and season to our hands, for theirs and in them our self
preservation, that we may show, we have derived from our progenitors a true
English Gallantry, defying all Hazards and Dangers in discharge of our Duties
to God, our Laws, and our Country: Nor can any man be justly esteemed worthy,
the inheritance of his fathers Honors, Immunities, and Freedoms, who dures not
convey them through all Difficulties and Dangers, to succeeding generations.

And that this resolution may be firmly-fixed upon the spirits of those now in
place and power. It is also hoped, that it will not by them be deemed naught
and unseasonable to hint to them this Memorandum, or Quere, whether from the
first beginning of that great contest, which happened between the late King and
his Opposers; There was not any thing more chiefly and principally all along
insisted upon, by both parties, than the upholding and maintaining the ancient
known and fundamental laws of the Land? Was not the pretended violation and
infringement of them, urged against those two great Zanzummines of Church and
State, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Strafford; And urges so
far, as that their lives were laid down and sacrificed, for those laws,
maintenance, and preservation; and has not the swerving and deviating from
those Laws, let in all those floods and torrents of Rapine, Misery, and
Calamity, with which such an inundation have so long overspread the the face of
this our Isle, and its dominions, and every where filled the same with horror
and confusion; And is not this so clearly manifest, and notoriously known, that
the light it self that daily shines amongst us, may by mortal power be sooner
totally extinguished, than that undoubted truth; Nay, has not this truth been
often hinted and remembered by themselves, as may be seen in their printed
publishments by way of vindication of themselves, concerning their seclesion
from the place and authority they are now in, with a cry and clamor to those
then in power, to heal the sores and wasting divisions of the Nation, by a
Reinduction of the known ancient and fundamental Laws thereof; and are not
these things, and much more to this purpose, which may be truly asserted, but
of yesterday, as it were, and very fresh and recent in the minds and memories
of all men? how then may or can it any way be answered to God, our Savior, and
the world, by those now in authority, if after all this, and so sad and
lamentable an experience made, and the care of all our dolesul maladies, so
clearly apparent, to be obtained by no other, or better remedy, than by a
continuance of the firm establishing of those Laws; And that remedy be plain
and easy to be laid hold on, should they at such a time as this, be
terrified, or upon any pretense whatsoever, be so far seduced, as to delay and
neglect the same, or to put any bars or shackles upon the freedom, liberties,
and birthrights of the people, so, or in that manner, as the same may be any
way hindered or impeded; Nay, themselves also being cried out too, and
clamoured on, for this, by the general and universal vote, and earnest desire*
of the whole body of the Nations, of all sorts, conditions and qualities; And
whatsoever the Interest be which seems to oppose it, as it is sinister,
corrupt, and vicious, in its first being and origination, so is it odious and
sacrilegious to God, and vile and contemptible, even in the eyes of the world,
which it so much looks upon and respects; and however some of that Interest
(for there are two sorts of them, one far more moderate, peaceful, and modest,
than the other) would have the same thought to be of that bulk and magnitude,
as thence to raise a consideration, in its favor, that may keep the wound
still open, and the gederal peace either altogether unsettled, or done
Republicanly, and so slightly infirmly, and not lastingly, so as that there may
be still hopes left for them, of new booty and prey to be further obtained, and
added to their former heap of spoils and devourings; Yet upon due search made,
It will undoubtedly be found, that such of that Interest, who are thus minded,
and so far intoxicated with its poison, as to desire a new foundation, for our
Laws to settle on, and so labor and endeavor the abolishing of the old, and
introducing a novel frame, and constitution amongst us, are so thin and
tentious, and so contemptibly inconsiderable a number, and most or all of them
likewise, having such deep stains upon them (to say no more) that it cannot but
be thought the most deplorable of all miseries, and calamities, that can befall
a people and nation, nay three nations, and the numerous people thereof, And a
strange kind of infatuation of that Authority over them, that any such care and
provision should be had and taken, for such a sort, and such an Interest, That
the consideration thereof, should any way obstruct and hinder, that firm and
lasting settlement, which concerns so many millions of persons, of all sorts,
sexes, qualities, and conditions, and which is so woven into, and concentered
in our Laws, and the very vital part of them, and of all our liberties,
freedoms, and happiness, which began likewise with the first natives of this
Island the Britains, and continued amongst us, for so many centuries of years,
and recieved its approbation, by so many Ages and Generations of our
Forefathers, and Ancestors, and rendered us a famous and flourishing People and
Nation throughout the whole Christian World.

Nor need either of these sort of men be at all doubtful neither (what ver vain
and empty jealousies and fears they have to the contrary) But upon such a just
and righteous settlement, of a firm and lasting peace, the wisdom of the Nation
may, and no doubt but will, find out a way and means, That not a man of-them
shall be a penny damnified in their purchases and acquisitions of any sort or
kind whatsoever: And yet both Crown and Church have a fitting and full
patrimony too; which (when it comes to that) may with as much ease be
demolished to any capable understanding, as this expression thereof is here set
down to be read and perused: And if this be so, as to them, which clearly and
without all controversy may (and that without much difficulty) be done, and no
man's property intrencht upon, nor the public body of the nation at all
prejudiced or damnified; And the Church controversies by a national and legal
Synod convened in due form, appeased, quieted and settled, so as no truly tender
Christian conscience, may at all be imposed upon: But have that due evangelical
liberty, which may in any kind, by the most sacred holy Writ be allowed, (And
further, it is supposed no sober Christian will desire) what should hinder if
the work were once strenuously, faithfully, and impartially set upon: But that
yet we might hope for so much mercy from Heaven, as that after all these
tempestuous stormy violences, rending wasting and consuming divisions, doleful
and deplorable miseries and calamities, which have so long, and so fiercely
raved, and raged amongst us. The Almighties hand may close up all our breaches,
and we enjoy the blessed and happy benefit, of a well established firm and
lasting peace; It is likewise hoped, that there is nothing premised in this
paper, which may in any kind give offense to any now in place and power, either
as to matters civil, or to that worthy and noble military General, by whose
power and prudence much of our miseries have bin already released, and in whom
it is by most believed there is such a generous and public Air, and Spirit
for the good and welfare of the Church and Nation; that however the minds of
some pious, sober, and judicious persons, are much flatted and dejected by
several particulars, which have passed and become public; yet he being
extricated and quitted, from the poisonous intoxications, of some very viperous
Spirits, and the subtle and crafty insinuations of others, who, though not
altogether so bad, yet much corrupted and misled by selfeish Interest and
Faction: He will, upon due deliberation, seriously set his heart and thoughts
upon the furtherance and advanceing that, and that only, which may best
conduce to the firm and lasting settlement of the peace, and quiet of a torn,
tattered, and tired people, whom he found plunged, and weltring in their own
wretched and deplorable miseries and calamities. And as he has had the honor
to serve faithfully, the conjunct interest of his Sovereign, and the Nation in
his former employments, so he will not be now induced to sever them upon any
cause, specious show, or pretense whatsoever: For be it what it will be, that
is insisted upon, to move him to affect such a partition and separation (come
it clothed in what shape or color soever it will or can come) he may rest
assuredly certain, that it comes not without its special design upon
himself, which, (if not avoided) in the end will be his undoubted utter ruin
and destruction; let him bring it, Ad lydium lapidem, to the true Touchstone,
either of Religion, Law, Justice, Equity or Policy, and try it by either of
these, or all these together, and see, how empty, light, vain, false, and
counterfeit it will prove, in all its shows and pretenses. It is known well
enough, that there are some persons (and perhaps from too many of them he has
no few corrupt whispers) who are so fixed and rivited to a desire of
accomplishing their own covetous and ambitious ends, though by means never so
vile and ruinous to others: And are by selfe-guilt, so filled with rankour,
envy and malice, against that person, which by all Law of God, Nature, and the
Land, should be sacred to them; That it is verily believed, that if an Angel or
Seraphin from Heaven should appear, to persuade them to their duty in that
particular, they like their seat and footing so well upon earth, and are so
taken with the rule and domination, which they fancy they have floating in
their own empty brains, and have so set up their heart, hopes, and faith upon
it, that even such a message from Heaven it self, should not prevail upon
them. These men, let him please to avoid and shun (as to their whispers and
Councels) as he would some noisome and hideous poison, and hearken to the sober
deliberations of the solid, judicious, and truly (not hypocritically) pious and
moderate. And indeed (next to Almighty God, and his Sacred Word) consult but
his own Soul and Conscience, which he has professed, stands clear, and
impartial to all Interests and Factions, in this great business of the Nation;
And let not the Public Genius and Inclination, nay, the hearty and earnest
declared desire and longing for, of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of all
sorts, and from all parts and places thereof, be despicable to him, or slighted
by him; but as he professes his endeavors, for the public settlement, so let
him (declining all private junctoes) be directed therein, by public
advertisement. It is the whole People and Nations that must be obliged, let the
whole People and Nations therefore freely be heard: should they desire in point
of Government, (were it now in their choice) that which were not fit for them,
if they be not hearkened to, they cannot be engaged: For as no man has wrong,
with his consent, so certainly none in such case can be obliged against it. The
general and public desires of the whole Nation in this particular, is known
very well, nor is it doubted, but he will make good what he has professed, and
serve their public true interest, and not the private corrupt interest and
ends of some few. Many Millions there be on the one side, and some petty
inconsiderable number, not worth naming on the other. General Peace, and a
firm and lasting settlement, and happiness on the one side; War, and
distracting confusions, and in the end, general ruin and destruction on the
other. Many other particulars may be hinted to him, but as he is noble and
prudent, so it is verily expected, and earnestly hoped, we shall find
answerable effects thereof every way from him, and such as shall crown him with
Riches and honor in this life, and eternal joy and happiness in that which
is to come.

FINIS.

