NEW Anatomical Experiments OF JOHN PECQUET of DEIP.

By which the hitherto unknown Receptacle of the Chyle, and the Transmission
from thence to the Subclavial Veins by the now discovered Lacteal Channels of
the Thorax, is plainly made appear in Brutes.

As also an Anatomical Dissertation of the Motion of Blood and Chyle.

Together with the further Description of the same Lacteal Channels newly
discovered in the Body of Man as well as Brutes.

Being an Anatomical History, Publicly proposed by Thomas Bartoline, Dr. and
Reg. Professor both in Physic and Anatomy, To Michael Lysere, Answering.

London, Printed by T. W. for Octavian Pulleyn, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Sign of the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

TO THE READER.
NOT to insist upon that general way of Commendation, the universal and ready
reception this late and true discovery of our Author, Pecquet, has had, may
clearly appear in this, That no Man in all that Crowd of Anatomists (of whom
some are only ambitious of being Contradictory, as more desiring Controversy
than Evidence of the Truth) not any but has rather confessed its Verity, than
that they would in the least seem ignorant of being able to trace those
Vessels, so difficult to be found, that the Inventor himself durst, out of
justness to his good fortune, call it Chance. How this may yet be made clearer,
let those that have seen what has followed, be but indifferent Judges. So many
able Physicians Congratulating his Discovery, and as willing to appear Admirers
as Justifiers of this Truth: One, an approved Doctor both of Physic and
Philosophy, undertakes to make out the benefit and use of this Discovery, from
hence concluding those grand Absurdities that the Masters in Physic and
Surgery have so many ages labored under to be only cleared and made out by
this so admired Experiment.

Another undertakes, with admiration of himself, to make it his own, without
taking notice of our Author, in hope to produce (at least upon some) a
Confession how much they owe to him for this Discovery.

A Third, an approved Master both in Physic and Surgery, after in his
opinion the finishing of all that could concern the body of Anatomy, is, as I
may so say, compelled to set Pen to Paper, and by the discovery of that in
Humane, which our Author has done in Brutes, to heap up to himself a Fame as
lasting as the Subject (I mean, Man) can be.

From hence it was I was so willing to get this so great and new a Masterpiece
of Anatomy made public in our own Language, my Observation being this, That
there was no Theater, nay scarce any private house of such as called themselves
but pretenders to Anatomy, in which the disquisition after this Truth was not
laboriously prosecuted; and having been very well satisfied in the Roughness at
least, if not Crabbidness of the style, for a Public Good, I could do no less
than to add what lay in my power to help those weaker persons, whose Hands are
better than their Latin, to a Verity so demonstrable, so desired. I undertake
to teach none, Translation being only my Design; and if any thing may be
thought fit to make it perfect, I will not be wanting in the least, so far as I
am able, to contribute.

I confess it were to be wished that some among us of those most accurate
Observers of Natures most secret Passages, would be pleased to offer something
out of their many Observations, to the completing of so beneficial a Truth as
this, no Nation, I am confident, having taken more industrious Trouble, or
greater Charge, in Discoveries and Prosecutions of Anatomical Experiments than
this our own, Witness that great Master of Circulation and Generation, Dr.
Harvey.

The new Anatomick Experiments of the Learned John Pecquet of Diep.
CHAP. I. Both Asellius who was the first discoverer of the Milkie Veins in the
Mesentery, and the rest of the Anatomists were ignorant of the place of their
meeting. The Receptacle of the Chyle above the Loins, and the passage from it,
not to the Liver, but to the true source of blood, the Heart, is discovered.
THE enrichment of the Anatomical Commonwealth by the Milkie Veins was the
finding, not feigning, of the famous Asellius: But that he believes, with the
Ancients, that the Liver is the source of blood, and that the Milkie Veins have
their confluence to it, This is [O Reader, if thou can behold with thy eyes]
his error. Nevertheless beware in the least thou stain not the fame of so
gallant a man; It Is not a Little thou owe him, who first searched out the
unknown turnings of the Chyle, and by whose favor thou needs not to walk in
darkness. Asellius opened it, it is enough. The discovery is not to be despised,
though never so mean. The Besieged discover by the lightest repercuss of a Drum
the Ambushes of the Enemies Mines; And Star-gazers gather their Wonders by
Shadows.

This was the cause (except I mistake my self) of Asellius his error, That
beholding all the Milkie Veins to meet together in that Glandule placed in the
middle of the Mesentery [which he calls the Pancreas] and from it to be
stretched upward and downward, he verily believed that those branches (which
were sometimes double, sometimes more, and not seeing them concentrate in any
place) ascended to the very fissure or cleft of the Liver.

Neither since that time have any of those [that I know] who in the Anatomick
Theater exercised themselves (often, and with great praise in living Brutes)
endeavored to trace into any other parts the Milkie liquor of those veins,
which even they themselves did discover.

And indeed the learned Wallaeus in his Epistles to Th. Bartoline says, By
these Milkie Veins the Chyle goes upward: but by what means it does so, is a
matter more intricat. This seems to me to be most likely, which I have taken
notice of in great and lean Hounds, That some of the Milkie Veins with one and
a continued passage have entered into the Mesenterick-Branch, some into the very
Vena porta, some into the hollowness of the Liver, and a very small number
sometimes into the Vena cava near the Emulgents.

So conclude the most skilful Physicians, Harvey, Vesling, Conringe, Bartoline,
and many other; Neither does Riolane himself think better (which is marvelous
in respect of the man's excellent quickness and sharpness of wit whereby he has
gone before all others in Anatomical dissection) hear his Opinion of this
matter in the XVIII Chapter of his Encheirid. This one diversity of
distribution, says he, troubles many; For in a living full and opened Beast,
those Milkie Veins are seen spread indeed in the Mesentery, and some of them
proceed to the Pancreas, some to the Liver, others are derived to the trunck of
the Vena Cava, but none of them go to the Spleen, neither do they after the
manner of the Vena porta run together in one stem.

I, by the leave of so great men, would say that not any of them by a
particular inquest have searched the Lurkings of these Lacteal Veins within the
Thorax. But I believe this is rather to be attributed to their misfortune than
negligence, because none of them knew that the Chyle was not derived to the
Liver, nor to the Vena porta, nor to the Vena cava near the Emulgents, as the
received error held forth: but, which in dissection may be seen to any man
more clear than the light, From the Guts to a certain RECEPTACLE of that
bigness, which will full up the interstitium between the Lumbar Muscles, at
least in Beasts.

Now this receptacle above the Vertebers of the Loins receives the Liquor of
the Milkie veins spread in the Mesentery, and renders it again by those Milkie
Veins, which being hid within the breast, in a continued passage run to the
Subclavial venal branches, till within the ascending stem of the Vena cava
about the External Jugulars, being mixed with the blood, and running in one and
the same Chanel, it throws its self headlong into the Whirlpool of the Heart,
there to receive its purple dye and preparation for alimentary substance; As
might be evinced by that noble Testimony the Prince of the Peripateticks has
asserted, That the Heart is the Original of the Veins, and Forge of the Blood.

CHAP. II. The Chyle being found on the Confines of the Heart and Vena cava, is
discovered to be conveyed thither by the Subclavian Branches; And the Insertion
thereof is plainly perceived at the concourse of the Axillar and Jugular Veins.
BEware (O Reader) and think not that thou owe to me the Originations of
these Milkie Veins, or the Original of this my design: No, it was the gift of
Fortune sporting with me altogether ignorant. But to use good words, and such
as become a Christian, It was the great gift of Providence, which is God,
revealing it to me imprudent. And lest by any Claim the duty of thankfulness
should be intermitted, It seems good to me for the praise of him that is Strong
and Zealous, to set down plainly the whole History of my happiness, if indeed
it be as pleasant for thee to hear, as me to rehearse it.

After I had some years ago, by Cutting up of Dead Bodies, acquired a dumb (I
may say) and cold Knowledge, I resolved to squeez forth true knowledge from the
Harmony yea of twenty Living Creatures. And because these differ from the
former almost only in Motion, which has its chief seat in the Heart, It was
my purpose, having uncloathed and cut out the Heart, to contemplate it more
manifestly.

Therefore having cloven asunder the Thorax of a Great Hound, I begun my view
of the contained parts without delay; I plucked out the Heart, having cut
asunder those Vessels wherewith it was tied to the rest of the body; The
abundance of blood, which immediately flowed, did at present stop my prying
fight; that being spent, I did wonder to see flowing in the Pipe of the Vena
cava at its connection to the right Ventricle a milkie liquor, casting it self
out by intermission.

The remaining drops of the blood had stained its color, so that I suspected
by the first view of it that it was Pus discharged from some apostumation
lurking (may be) within the breast: But when the Heart being altogether plucked
from its place, and placed on the Table, had almost with equal vehemence
contracted it self into ninety Systoles, and in as many Diastoles dilated it
self, and with a little palpitation had breathed forth its last spirits, I was
ashamed of my former thought, nor could longer think that so great a disease
could be neighbor to so grand a vigor.

Therefore having perfected my design, and perused all the remaining contained
parts which offered themselves fair and sound, as also the whole Thorax, I did
open the Vena cava from the Diaphragm unto the Throat. Immediately there
appeared a little stream of that Liquor I doubted of, not stained with any
mixture of blood.

From the Subclavian Branches unto the Pericardium within the Vein there settled
down a very white Liquor, most like the Chyle spread abroad in the Mesentery;
so that they being compared together, both their color, smell, taste and
consistence show there was no difference betwixt them.

The motion of the embowelled Beast ceasing, that also did stop its flowing;
neither did the rest suffer me to know whence or from what place that Milkie
stream had its rise: Nevertheless inflamed with the desire of the concealed
Mystery, I pressed the Thymus, I bound the neck, and I disquieted all the limbs
of the foreparts, if any where perchance the residue of that whitish substance
would distill out of its winding vessels: But from thence only came some drops
of blood, and not the least Milkie substance appeared in the Vena cava.

Therefore [that which only remained to show my industry] I go about to
demonstrate what part of this matter the Milkie Veins of the Mesentery might
have by pressing them with the weight of my finger. They yield to my persute:
for out of the Subclaval-branches such abundance of the juice I had observed
did flow, that I both knew the Milkie Veins to be the source thereof, and did
esteem it a great madness to hold this to differ from the Chyle.

Lest any thing nevertheless should be left unattempted, seeing from the upper
parts of those Branches the matter did rush down, I cleft the Veins of the
neck, and all other the fore-parts; and pressing the capacity of the belly
immediately where it swells below, and turning my sight to those opened
Channels near the Claviculars, behold to the accomplishment of my wishes, the
Chyle did flow abundantly in the upper parts of the Subclavicular-branches on
both sides.

I noted also small Valves covering those minute perforations, or rather
insertions, places most manifest to the beholders, viz. little holes gaping
with as little Valves, a little below the Cataracts or meeting together of the
Jugular and Axillar: Veins: But there also I did observe the little Valves of
the Jugular Veins, altogether to stop the easy ascent of the Chyle, which would
otherwise fall into the deep pool of the Heart. But indeed I could not
demonstrate by what way, by what passages the Chylus was conveyed thither, by
reason of the emptied Mesentery of the Beast long ago dead, the Milkie Veins
altogether vanishing with the outpressed liquor.

CHAP. III. The double way of the Milkie Veins discovered within the Breast,
from the discharge of the Chyle into the Subclavian Veins down to the fourth
Verteber of the back; beyond which insertion there is no Twig of the
Milkie-Veins stretched to the upper parts.
I Had immediately in the place of the dead dog another which unexpectedly was
offered to me by accident, but his leanness seemed to foretell the emptiness of
his Lacteal veins through his long hunger. Therefore I went about to cram this
hunger-starved Dog; when at the desire of those, whom the newness of the matter
had invited to the spectacle, I did unbowel the hungry Beast.

Then it clearly appeared, which I told those that did urge me unseasonably;
for the Stomach with the guts were so miserably empty, that not any show of the
Lacteal veins in any place, yea not in the Mesentery, did remain to be
perceived by the eyes of any of the beholders.

Immediately their haughty austerity did reproach my busy censure, and did deny
any faith to things not appearing. I, when I did see the most, I might say all
of them, to give no credit to me (by a contemptible gesture) for all I could
argue; Well [said I to my self] at last you have learned to use your eyes: But,
it is just that these same eyes, whose loathing winks I obeyed with willing
service, be punished in you hereafter with a steadfast beholding, as with an
unavoydable scourge, and iterated inspection of the intrails.

I had foretold truly to those that rashly hastened the unseasonable dissection,
that the Pipes of the Lacteal veins were most slender, and only remarkable by
the whiteness of the Liquor they convey; which juice, whether it follow the
upsucking Diastoles of the Heart, or which is more likely, it rusheth forward
by the incitement of some impulsive cause afterward to be enquired of, it
makes a very little stay in its passing. In vain is the Chanel sought, when
the fullness of the Fountain fails. Neither is Chyle procreated by fasting,
neither is meat presently after the eating thereof converted into that
nourishing substance.

Therefore, not being hindered by any man's command, I brought the ensnared Dog
under my diet; and when I had refreshed his long fasting with abundance of
meat, again about the fourth hour after his fullness, we addressed our selves to
the examining of his Entrails.

Our chief purpose was, not to observe the Lacteal veins, which we beheld with
infinite flowing rillets streaming in all places through the Mesentery, but
with all our endeavors to pry into the Thorax.

The Heart there untouched did unfold its Systoles; the rest of the Life's
Instruments which are near to the Heart, did each accomplish its own duty.
Neither as yet being resolved to offer violence to any, I turned back the
Lungs, being lifted by the steadfast hand of a servant, from the right side
toward the cavity of the left, that I might view all the secret-rooms of the
back.

I beheld the branches of the Vena cava, all were livid; no branch of the
ascending Arteries was discovered near the Milkie holes I had lately found out:
I followed the sprules of the Sixtpars, whereof these were stopped by the
opposition of the Diaphragm, other swallowed up of the lower belly. At last
turning my sight to the highest sides of the Vertebers of the Back, I know not
what whitishness, like to a pipe of Chyle, staid mine eyes, it creeping forward
a little, with crooked turnings close to the backbone; by the shape of it I
doubted whether it was a Nerve, or that Vessel which I with all care had
enquired after. Therefore tying a ligature a little below the Clavicles, I
immediately perceived that it emptied it self, and became flaccid above the
Ligature, and below a tumor not only remaining, but rather increasing by
reason of the Flux of the matter, my doubt was then satisfied.

But because Mistakes in this kind produce as erroneous consequences, I durst
not yet pass a peremptory sentence, by mine eyes which were witnesses of so
evident a matter; I enquire also into the left side, there also a
brother-conduit to the right side did stray up and down, who likewise being
bound up as the other, by the same event confessed himself to be a ducture of
the same kind; I hastened therefore to divide these Vessels, so conspicuous
through the middle of the Pleura, from the rest of their fellowparts of the
breast, with my sharp Knife: The unexhausted neighbour-head of the untoucht
Heart did overflow my work with a bloody inundation: But the Heart immediately
being pulled out, was both punished for its troubling the work, and removed all
obstacles of its further continuance.

After the Blood was spung'd away, from both the Ligatures, and the Pleura
being removed, I discovered the Milkie-Canals to the Throat. From the third
Verteber of the Back, where they had forsaken the society of their upholder the
backbone, adhering to the Oesophagus under which they windingly did creep,
hither and thither did they proceed to the Clavicles themselves; firmly leaning
on the Thymum, in a fourfold or more numerous stream they enter the Subclavian
Veins: I beheld these Veins with most covetous eyes being immediately split
asunder; when behold again through these little holes found out about the
Jugulars, the Ligatures being untyed, on both sides a Milkie rivolet did pour
forth abundantly Chyle into the Vena cava.

But then the Spectators contempt repenting at the miracle, by their
encouragement it was imposed on me to search out whether any continued Conduit
of the Chyle did go to the Head, or was derived to the Fore-limbs. But when I
had cut off the head, and dis-membred the limbs, no Milk did follow, no not by
pressing the Inferior belly. Now from that abundance of Chyle which emptied it
self into the Vena Cava, I argue, that the Chyle neither runs to the Head or
Forelimbs, but altogether flows into the Subclaval Branches.

CHAP. IV. The double way of the Lacteal Veins is cleared from the fourth
Verteber of the Back to the Center of the Diaphragm.
MY hope did grow by fortunate events, and my toil was forgiven to my
prosperous labor. The discovered Door imboldned me to search the Gallery. I
return to the Ligatures; and having bound them near the outstanding sides of
the third Verteber of the Back, now I certainly follow downward the swelling
Milkie-Veins.

About the fourth Verteber, which is the seat of the Heart, they were hid under
the gullet; I then did disingage this gullet, being tied with all the rest of
the vital parts, making my amputation near the Clavicles; Yea the Aorta also
which I had spared, thinking it would not shadow it, cutting gently the
branches which are interlaced amongst the ribs, upon that account that it was
an hindrance, was commanded to depart the Cavity of the Thorax; and having
removed all impediments of the remaining engagements, you might behold openly,
without doubting eyes, the whole course of the Milkie-streams along the highest
platform of the Backbone.

The fourth Verteber did uphold their joining together, the rest of the space
to the tenth Verteber upheld them parted in two and divided with winding
turnings like to Rivers. They did flow with like fullness, not seldom with
traverse trenches, as it were for mutual help obliquely tied together. At
length in a common Chanel, and again in divided streams by little and little
growing into embossed billows, do swell up at the Center of the Diaphragm; not
a slender token of the near fountain from whence the Chyle through the breast
flows into the Subclavian veins.

Therefore when I went about to separate the Diaphragm it self from the Lacteal
Vessels, that it might not hinder my last (which I hoped for) search, the
swelling billow of the Vessel being torn on the left side near the twelfth
Verteber of the back, whose tunicle is very thin, wondering at the abundance of
the poured-out milk there harbored, I suspected there was not a little
Receptacle of that Liquor hid there. But the unwariness of my hand stopped my
progress, and made me throw away the rest of the Carcass as useless; for the
outflowing of the Chyle altogether emptied the Lacteals, and the remaining
pellicle of the vanishing tumor, where it seemed to grow in billows, the
Ventricle (as they say) thereof being cut could promise no happy event to my
further Inquest.

CHAP. V. The Receptacle of the Chyle till this day unknown, is searched after.
It Is demonstrated that the Chyle flows not toward the Liver, neither the
Lacteal-veins tend thither. The Receptacle of the Chyle is discovered under the
Center of the Mesentery. This receives the Chyle from the confluence of
Asellius his Lacteals. Asellius his Pancreas is not always in all, nor the
same, neither one. The Milkie Veins lack not their own Valves through the
Breast.
HAving fed a Dog abundantly with fitting diet, a few hours after his repast, I
placed him on the Anatomical Theater. The first Exercise only opened his
Breast: Neither made I any stay, but stopping on both sides the entrances of
the Lacteals beneath the Clavicles by a Ligature, I prevented the Chyles
escape. Pulling away the stops of the staying parts, I hastened my progress; And
to enlarge the belly which straightened the Cavity of the Thorax, I made incision
from thence clean through the Abdomen, according to its longitude, and by this
means exposed to view the whole Cavity of the Thorax.

I had not long time to contemplate the Sisterly-Lacteal rivolets, not
differing in much from the other. My young-grown suspicion of a Receptacle
urged me by degrees into a mindful belief, that the lurking place was by all
tokens evinced to be beyond the Diaphragm, hid under the Center of the
Mesentery. Neither would I have delayed by the destruction of the resisting
Entrails to have unlocked the Entrance, except that old Error of Sanguification
now last of all had not troubled my mind, even hardly departing from her former
principles.

Until this Time, Opinion, not Truth, thrust the Chyle from the Mesentery into
the substance of the Liver, and did attribute the undeserved privilege of
Sanguification to that Entrail provided by Nature for another use. I with exact
diligence did examine all the branches going thither, each by it self, whether
the Chyle run through any of them to that place. I on every side did seek out
the Milkierillets, and found none of them to be stretched to the Liver; I cleft
the Vena-porta, I opened the Splenick-passage, neither did I spare the
Mesentery it self, except in so far as the rising tumor of the Milkieveins
appearing white through the Mesentery, seemed to allow; which my careful fear
of the evanishing Chyle did preserve, being mindful of the Receptacle. I
discovered the Center of the Vena-cava, not only where it enters the
Emulgents, but even from the Iliacks to the Diaphragm; and from all parts
nothing flowed but Blood, no spring of Chyle did in the least color this
false-believed passage.

Neither [O Reader] trust thou to mine eyes, which I used most diligently in a
matter of so great weight: There are Witnesses, no more friends to me than to
the truth, which beheld it, and whose scornful laughter I rather feared, than
hoped their pardon, if I had stuck in the matter. Thou thy self enter the
Lists, seeing long ago I have roused up and challenged thy spirit to so brave
achievements. He is a sluggard who for fear of labor has all his faith in
his ears; neither is he worthy of wisdom, who follows that error whereof he
may undeceive himself.

The truth being unshel'd by so great testimonies, viz. That the Chyle did not
flow to the Liver, nor to the Vena-porta, neither to the Vena-cava near the
Emulgents; Upon this View of the Entrai^s we were commanded by the Chyle to
seek some other place of the lowermost belly by which this discharge of Chyle
was to be protruded out into the Thorax. The fruitfulness of the Milkie-veins
did keep the Mesentery from falling; I discharged the turgid veins, and made
them fall flat by tying Ligatures about the Basis thereof. Then by piecemeal,
to be more wary, taking away the Diaphragm, you might see clearly the residue
of the Trunk of the Aorta, that lurked under the productions thereof, together
with our Lacteal-veins.

These likewise on the left side, under that part of the Aorta which sends
forth the Phrenetick-Arteries, did unfold their swelling Channels, below both
sides running into one stream, seeming to grow into a swelling lake of Chyle.
And then, my eyes allowing the touch its part, by pressing with my forefinger
I often tried on each part the escape of the enclosed liquor: There, which is
wonderful! the passage did render it self flat to the compressing finger; The
softness coming by jumps did argue a bladder not of small capacity to hold
Chyle lurking under the Center of the Mesentery.

At last, I cut with a sparing Knife all the hiding tunicles; Such a bladder I
espied, not divorced from the Aorta, but as it were received into its
protection, under the Coeliack stern and Emulgent branches, neither altogether
lurking, nor altogether appearing: So at last was laid open that most desired
storehouse of the Chyle, and that Receptacle searched out by my so much labor.

This was stretched downward from the Diaphragm upon the prominences of the
Vertebers of the Lower belly, even to the third Verteber of the Loins or
thereabouts; here and there it did adhere betwixt the Kidneys to those emulgent
Kernels or Cases, which are called Atribilar Grandules; being kept in below
with the Dams of the Lumbar muscles on both sides, it did occupy the whole
space in the middle, but with a furrow something inclining to the right side.

But whence comes so great provision of Nourishment? I say, by what Channels
does the Chylous liquor run into that Lake drained by its continual gliding
through the breast? I long ago suspected the Mesenteries diligence, and chiefly
that neighboring tumor of the Lacteal veins therein, which was believed by me
to disgorge into this Receptacle the nourishment they received from the Guts.
The dawnings of truth, which are ever unquiet, suffered me not any longer to be
tossed in these mists of Conjecture.

Therefore immediately the tunicle of the Receptacle being torn, the Chyle ran
forth; and following by the cleft of the same wound the Chyle, which I had set
free, by loosing my ties in the turgid Lacteals of the Mesentery, by its
evident springing out removed all my doubts.

The knowledge of this Receptacle evanishing altogether with the Chyle, being
mindful again of Asellius, turning over the middle of the Mesentery, I search
for that great Glandule he says is placed there; but the absence thereof did
altogether dis-appoint my labor. For, for the most part Domestic Beasts want
that Glandule, or at least you shall see it to fall into many distinct little
ones, sometimes divided into five, as Walleus has observed before me.

The Mesentery of the Beast being viewed, presented three, placed at a manifest
distance one from the other: They were adjacent to the Emulgents, one of them
to the right Emulgents, being of a more longish figure; The rest lay near the
left, with a more round body, more representing a Globe.

It is, my resolution to discover the use of these, and of Asellius his
Pancreas, wherever it is found. While the Mesentery swells with turgid Lacteals,
a part of the Chyle is poured into the hollow bosoms of these Glandules; which
is clear not only by the many Conduits of the Milkie veins encompassing them
like Spider-webs; but also their shedding of Chyle if you cut them up. Indeed
the Mesentery having unburthened the Lacteal veins, the Chyle also is then
poured out of the Glandules into the Receptacle by the lower, yet more ample
pipes: From which the flowing again back to the Mesentery [as does evidently
appear by the turgidness of the Receptacle when the Mesentery is quite taken
away] is stopped by the forbidding Valves: There remaining only in the Glandules
a remnant of serous liquor, which I esteem the spongious Glandules have only
drunk up, being superfluous to the passing aliment, as a reward of their
hospitality.

I would have sacrificed, if the double Vessels of the Lacteals straying on the
Vertebers of the Thorax, had not by their constantly whitish tumor called back
my wandering eyes to their view. The shutting of their passages with a Ligature
about the third Verteber of the back, had raised up their Channels downward;
neither did they, while the Mesenterick Lacteals emptied themselves of their
Milkie substance through the torn passage of the Receptacle, at all change into
a smaller stream, or throw out their Chyle.

Therefore when I pressed back again the full Conduits with the force of my
forefinger, the little Valves lurking in the knotty veins did dis-appoint this
my last labor, not without a most delectable testimony of their presence.

CHAP. VI. Not only a Dog, but other Domestic Beasts have their Milkie Veins
and Receptacle; and it is shown it is not lacking in man. The Testimonies of
Grave men are called to witness the truth of this Book.
THus (good Reader) you have the exact History of the Lacteal Conduits. Within
the course of three Dissections I have comprehended the continual work of
almost three years; because by the loss of so little a time, you may be
delivered from error. The cutting up of three Dogs will afford thee that which
was scarcely at length granted to me by the unbowelling of more than a hundred
living Beasts.

Neither believe thou I was only convinced of this by the evidence of prying
into the intrails of Hounds: All kind of Beasts almost vindicates also to it
self this Glory of the shown Chylous Conduit: Kine, Horse, Swine, and not a
few of other sorts being offered, did stain with their blood my incision-knife.

Nature only sports it self for a while in Sheep: In these not a double
Conduit, but one Pipe alone does carry the Chyle from the Receptacle to the
fourth Verteber of the back, and thence cleft in two ways it unburthens it
self into the Vena cava by these little Valves in the Subclavian holes, as has
been shown in a Dog. I have observed the same, but seldomer, in other Beasts:
but howsoever the Chyle desires short ways, and shuns the multitude of
passages, notwithstanding from the same starting off at the Receptacle, it
ends its course at the same mark of the Jugulars.

I spoke not of Men, because I abominate the Thoantean Sacrifices, being inured
to a more meek devotion. I did not spare Beasts who were framed by the Creator
for the use of Man. I honored the Living Creature which was more holy than
these: The remembrance of that inbred Law, which I adore, abstained from this;
his health is my scope, and not that that is to him most fearful. That Medicine
is to be shunned that Cruelty does teach, and that Wisdom to be abhorred that
Murder produces.

Nevertheless I boldly affirm, That also Men, whom the universal Parent has
endued with the same burden of intrails with Beasts, have not a different
storehouse of Chylous substance. This [lest you should scorn our opinion, as
Shipwrackt in the very Haven by our lack of Experience] besides the long
continuance of the Lacteal veins in the humane Carcass, observed by Tulpius in
Amsterdam, by Veslingius in Padua, and Folius in Venice, is proved by the
famous Testimony of that worthy Gassendus, which affirms that the Illustrious
Peireschius did behold in the Mesentery of a Thief opened a little after his
execution, the Veins turgid with Milk. Writing his Life he thus proceeds:
Wherefore Peireschius did procure, that before the sentence of death should be
pronounced against the person condemned to be hanged, he should be securely and
well fed, that there might be matter for abundance of Chyle against that time
he should search for it; and thence within an hour and a half after he was
hanged, and the body commanded to be brought unto the Anatomick Theater, it was
performed with so great diligence, that the Belly being immediately opened, the
white Veins did appear, So that from some of them, being opened, you might have
gathered a Milkie liquor, which indeed seemed very wonderful. Gassendus himself
was present at this spectacle, which he told me long ago with his own mouth,
whilst he lived in Paris.

And because that is not good which desires not to be communicated, I brought
many, not Common men, not out of the dregs of the people; but men Learned, and
much seen in Anatomical matters: That, being rather partners of my happiness,
than witnesses of my knowledge, they might at least by their authority compel
you to venture on the matter.

It pleases me by some of their pickt-out names to overthrow the obstinateness
[if yet it remain] of your mind. In the mouth of two or three Witnesses every
word is justified, says the holy Oracles. I will produce more. And amongst the
first indeed James Mentellus, a Patrician, and famous Professor of Physic in
the College of Paris, and his most worthy Grandchild unto whom the World owes
the Invention of PRINTING. Then Peter Mersennus, a Learned Doctor of the same
faculty. I will add Adrian Auzot of Roan, a man endued with all sorts of
Learning, by whose help, advice and intimate friendship, not a few things were
discovered to me. I would have wished that Ludovick Gayan, the famous
Chirurgian, whose great skill I admired while he dissected in the Public
Physick-Schools of Paris, and the noble Mentellus read the Lecture, should
either be the Condemner of my Errors, or Assertor of that Truth manifested to
me by so many Experiments. Neither would I have passed by, if Death too soon
had not envied, James Duval, a most skilful Doctor of the same faculty in
Paris, who ingenuously was long ago a Herald of this discovered verity, as the
love to the same made him a most diligent spectator of my Experiments.

I will not speak more of these men, lest by the unpolished rudeness of my
speech I prejudice them. I would likewise produce more, but the faith of the
Witnesses is suspected where a few and so famous do not suffice. Neither is the
mind of him that judges free of unbelief, if he will have, beyond the Laws
appointment, the number multiplied of the Witnesses.

The Exposition of the Figures.
The First Figure shows the Milkie Vessels found within the Breast, together
with the Receptacle of the Chyle, by themselves distinct from the cut-up Beast.

A. The Ascendent Trunk of the Vena cava opened all along upwards. BB. The
meeting together of the Jugular and Axillar Veins, where the springing out of
the Chyle into the Vena cava, or the little entrances of the Lacteal Conduits,
are marked with points. CC. The Valves of the Jugulars stopping the ascent of
the Chyle running into the Vena cava. DD. The distributions of the Milkie
Conduits at their springings into the Veins. EE. The diverse meetings of the
Lacteal Vessels at the appointment of sporting Nature. F. The Bottle or Billow
which often has appeared within the breast on the left side near the uncut
Diaphragm. G. The Chanel on the right side swelling greater. HH. The portion of
the Diaphragm which remains. I. The RECEPTACLE of the Chyle. LLL. The stems
of the Mesenterick Lacteal Veins; the greater Tunicles of these near the
Receptacle signifies there are Valves placed there to hinder the reflux of the
Chyle. MMM. Diverse Valves within the breast giving passage to the Chyle to the
Vena cava, but stopping its return to the Receptacle.
The Second Figure demonstrateth an open Dog with the Vessels expressed in the
First Figure, as each one in his proper place is situate in the Beast.

1. The Ascendent Trunk of the Vena cava. 2. The part of the Aorta remaining
betwixt the Kidneys, sticking to the Receptacle of the Chyle. 3 3. The Kidneys.
4 4. The cut-up Diaphragm. 5 5. The Muscles of the Loins, called (...).
AN Anatomical Dissertation Concerning the CIRCULATION OF THE BLOOD, AND MOTION
OF THE CHYLE.

By JOHN PECQUET.

Printed in the Year 1653.

An Anatomical Dissertation concerning the Circulation of the Blood, and Motion
of the Chyle.
The sum of the Dissertation.
The Circular motion of the Blood through the whole body of the Living Creature
is demonstrated; the cause of that motion is shown; the opinion of Attraction
is refuted by Waterworks; the pressing of the Chyle out of the Guts into the
Milkie Veins is set forth, and the Straining-office of the Liver is asserted.

THE prosperous success of the discovered paths in which the Chyle is carried,
by the former Experiments, is an encouragement stirring up the bold endeavor
of a confident mind to make inquest wither it rusheth. But because the commerce
which the Lacteals have with the Ascendent Vena cava show the Chyle is
tributary to the Blood; It Is most fitting that the Superiors motion be
considered in the most honorable place, before the Vassals course come in view.

Here then we will first conclude, That the Blood rushing into the Arteries by
the impulse of the Systoles, and returning again by the crooked small passages
of the Veins even into the bosom of the Diastoles, is circulated in the whole
body, as is proved by the tests of Experience, and so returned into the Vena
cava, as also by the reflowing motion of the Vena porta.

Next we will reason concerning the beginning of this motion, chiefly against
those who attribute the return of the Blood, shed out of the Arteries into the
Veins, and so into the Ventricles of the Heart, unto the attracting Diastole;
and the Mysteries of Pneumatical or Windworks whereby they advance Attraction
are discovered; So that by the touchstone of Experience it shall be cleared,
That the Water follows the Clack in a Pumppipe not only by the weight of the
air which compresseth the Globe of Earth-water, but likewise by the Elatere of
the Air, that is, by its Spontaneous dilatation, or extending it self of its
own accord: As also that the same Air in an Aeolipilas or Wind-gun that is
thrust hard together; and that in Bellows are heaped up, and that in Flesh does
protuberate in Cuppingglasses.

Afterward we will demonstrate a threefold incitement of the same motion in
the Blood: For [good Reader] the Systole does not only stir up the Blood;
There is also a natural quality in the greater Vessels, according to the
measure of their capacity. Add to this at least the Elastick or extended
burden of the adjacent weight either of the pressure in Respiration, or of the
Muscular Contraction.

Lastly, having by the same Arguments held forth the motion of the stream of
the Chyle, we will demonstrate with all clearness possible the Transcolatory or
straining use of the Liver, appointing with Aristotle the Gall for the
Excrements of the Blood.

CHAP. I. The motion of the Blood from the Heart by the Arteries to the
Extremities of the Body, and from the Extremities by the Veins again to the
Heart, is asserted by Experiments.
THat I might try whether the Blood flowed by the Arteries, I tied strait with
a thread the Artery sometime of the fore-foot, sometime of the hind-foot,
sometime the Carotidals, lest any thing should escape me, in a living Dog. The
Artery in a short time beyond the Ligature, viz. toward the Extremities of the
Body, falling, and rising on this side; I mean betwixt it and the Heart, by
reason of the obstructed stream, does teach that the Blood is carried from the
Heart by the Arteries unto the Extremities of the Body.

But lest (Reader) thou should accuse my inference of Lightness, the Artery
being cloven beyond the Ligature, yea to take away thy cavelling, being quite
cut off, did scarcely stain the wound with Blood; when being opened on this
side the Ligature, it burst forth in a spring of Blood.

Having examined the Arteries, I resolved to view the course of the Blood in
the Vena cava: This being freed from its Teguments, I bound it in the same
place, still reserving its Fellow-Artery free: But with a success directly
contrary to the other; for on this side the band toward the Heart it fell, and
rose beyond the Ligature toward the Extremities of the Body: Then being
wounded in that place that was flaccid, it emitted no Blood; but being opened
where it was dilated, it threw forth more Blood than the whole capacity of the
skin of the thigh and leg should contain: Therefore, say I, as the Blood from
the Heart is spread abroad by the Arteries, so being returned by the branches
of the Veins into the Vena cava, it is again gathered into the Ventricles of the
Heart it self.

But lest any should doubt that the Blood which springs out of the Veins has
not flowed into them from their Fellow-Arteries, I opened the Crural vein where
it most appeared; the Blood swiftly sprung from it: then I tied it is
Fellow-Artery, and which is wonderful! the force being abated, the Blood of the
Vein distilled by drops first, and at last quire stopped: But the freedom of
the loosed Artery renewed its stream; and the Blood issuing out of the Vein
with former vigor show what commerce the Arteries have with the Veins.

Neither [Reader] let it trouble thee, that sometimes, though seldom, Blood
springs from the Vein on this side the bandage where the Veins are then most
fallen. Believe me, not affirming but as one that has tried, that the
dispersed twigs do disburthen themselves of this Blood so discharged into the
Vena cava.

One day (as I have said) I was at work, and wounded on both sides the Ligature
of the tied Vein, behold not only beyond, but on this side the Ligature I
wondered to see unceasable springing of the Blood. I then did separate the Vena
cava from her coverings upwards, even to the division of the Iliack Branches,
and I bound all the Branches of the Veins I met with in my passage straightly,
the Blood stopped: Then indeed on this side the Ligature the Blood evanish'd,
and was exhaust from that place up to the Valve that lurketh in the Groin, its
Clack stopping altogether the descent of the Blood which pressed it, show
clearly that the Blood had no power to descend by the Veins.

Then concluded I, If the Blood be only spread by the Arteries, a member, the
Artery being tied, may be amputed without bloodshed. Sooner then I had said it
I tied the Crural Artery, leaving the Veins loose, and at the ham a little
below the bandage I cut off his leg: some drops of Blood indeed did flow from
it, viz. such as the last Valves of the cut-asunder Veins did not contain, and
with which the twigs of the Arteries dispersed up and down the skin for the
nourishment thereof were filled. But when the Cut-veins are emptied of that
Blood which is beneath the Valves, and the small Branches of the Cutaneous
Arteries are stopped, partly by the congealing occurse of Cold repressing the
Heat, partly by the contraction of the grieved parts through the wound, the
flowing of the Blood did altogether cease; neither did any more Blood spring
from any of the dispersed Vessels spread over the whole amputation, till way
was made for the Arterial Blood by untying the Crural Artery.

I tried the same in the Axillar, in the Jugular: but because it is more
troublesome in a Dog by reason of his short neck, in a Goose the Experiment did
easily succed.

And lest you should deny that in a man which is demonstrable in a brute, pray
you look upon your Arm, if leanness perchance suffer the full Veins to appear;
there if you rub downward with your finger, it then swells most, you will
wonder to see the knotting of the Shut-Valves, and from them downward to the
pressure of the finger the Canal of the Vein empty. Look to a Surgeon
ebrathing a Vein, he binding straightly a Ligature about the brawn of the Arm,
stops the flowing of the Blood from the hand to the heart: He loses a
little the Blood-band, being to hard tied, that the Artery being freed from the
straitness of the compressed Muscle of the Arm may refresh the choked Veins
with a fresh stream of Blood.

Neither imagine thou that I have but once made Trial of the Circulation of the
Blood in the greater Vessels of the Veins and Arteries. Indeed having tried
this every where, yea in the smallest Branches of both, as my sight would
serve, I found it every where the same. This was shown by Ligatures in the
hands and feet: This both the breathing and Valves of each Vein, yea those in
the finger, did demonstrate.

CHAP. II. The Vena porta does discharge it self by the Liver into the Vena
cava of the Blood it receives from the Coeliack Artery; and hence the Gallant
Harvey's Opinion is confirmed.
HAving manifested the Circulation of the Blood from the Heart by the Arteries
unto the Extremities of the body, and from thence by the Veins hither again, I
resolved to know how this holds in the Vena prrta.

Having tied the Branches of the Coeliack Arteries, where the Blood enters the
Mesentery, they fell and rose after no different manner from the rest, viz.
swelling from the Trunk to the bandage, and becoming flaccid betwixt the
Ligature and Intestines.

I oft-times tied the Meseraick-port-veins, yet nevertheless they filled
betwixt the Intestines and Ligatures, and did altogether fall betwixt the
Ligature and Liver; yea being opened on both sides the Ligature, the Blood
issued out. I tried the Veins of the Spleen with the same success; also that
Vein which is called Vas breve, betwixt the Stomach and Ligature in the middle
thereof full; but betwixt it and the Spleen it seemed to wain, notwithstanding
being opened on both sides, the Blood followed.

From these I infer [except you please to admit frequent Synanastomosies
betwixt the Branches of the Port-vein and their Fellow-Arteries] that the Blood
is either stopped by none, or at least very small Valves within the Branches of
that Vein.

The opinion of Riolan presently came into my mind, viz. That the Blood of the
Vein-port does not at all pass into the Vena cava. And the Authority of so
famous a man had altogether stopped my further search, if my eyes, which I
appointed strict Judges of the game, had not withstood it, reproaching my
laziness that failed in the midst of the course.

Therefore being more troubled, I had my recourse to the Trunk of the Vena
porta, and I bound with a Ligature the Mesenterick branch three fingers broad
from the Liver: At the same distance I bound the Splenetick; the knot indeed
was strait, but easy to be loosed. Scarce had I left off binding, when behold
the Pipe betwixt the Ligature and Liver which before rose Turgid, was now a
bloodless Chanel, and became flaccid, on the other side the Pipes of both the
Branches were filled with an indifferent stream of Blood flowing from the
Intestins and Mesentery, yea from the Stomach and Spleen also.

I filled again the emptied trunk of the Vena porta, by untying one of the
Ligatures; which being presently again tied, next the Liver, it was emptied.
The Experiment being frequently reiterated, it was evident that the Blood
flowed abundantly and swiftly out of the Vena porta into the Windings of the
Liver. And perceiving that through the Concavity of the Liver the Vena porta
did divide it self in many Branchings for the conveyance of Blood after the
manner of Arteries: Whether [say I] does not the Vena porta it self, instead of
an Artery, thrust out into the Liver, an abundance of fervid Blood for the
cherishing of the stomach and concocting faculty? The smalness of the Coeliack
Branches being altogether, as I thought, unable for so great an effect.

And rightly I thought it; for the Vena porta within the Liver is altogether an
Artery: For as the Arteries issue their Blood from out their Trunk into their
Branches, but the Veins return it from their Branches into the Trunk: So the
Vena porta from its Trunk distributeth Blood to its furthest Branches that are
within the Liver, which Blood it has gathered into its Trunk from the Branches
it has without the Concavity of the same. And as the Coats of the Arteries are
thicker than those of the Veins, so the Vena porta has a thicker skin within
the Liver than it has in its Vessels without the same.

Neither believe that I depart from ocular inspection when I say that the Coat
of the Vena porta is thicker within the Liver; for I broke in pieces at leisure
all the substance of the Liver of the Beast which I anatomized, and laid open
the form of the unclothed Vena porta: The Tunicle whereof without the Liver
retained the thinness of a Vein, but within the Liver did altogether appear to
be an Artery: So that it did undoubtedly appear which before I did suspect,
That some of the Vessels of the Blood, as the Aorta, deserve only the name of
Arteries; Others admit only the name of Veins, as the Vena cava; And to
conclude, some are appointed by Nature for both duties, such as we have found
the Vena porta to be.

But when I doubted whither so great a current of Blood flowed, and believing
it had its course unto the Vena cava, I tied [I will not say with the Ancients
the Trunk, but] the branch thereof where it enters the gibbosity of the Liver,
as far from the Liver as I could; and then the Blood rushing to the bandage
[the branch greatly rising betwixt the Ligature and Liver] showed the manifest
commerce betwixt the Vena porta and the Vena cava; and how appositly the
Learned English Physician, Will: Harvey, held the motion of the whole Blood
to be Circular.

CHAP. III. That the Blood flows out of the Right Ventricle of the Heart
through the Lungs into the Left Ventricle.
THis one thing did remain to perfect so great a Circulation, to know fully the
Passage of the Blood from the Veins through the Heart into the Arteries. The
evident diversity of Cavities and Turnings for the carrying of the Blood both
in Children in the womb, and more adult persons, did vex my troubled mind.

Indeed in persons of firm age that oval perforation, or rather communication
[which is sprinkled with Botalus the Inventor's name] or, if you will, that
Synanastomosis uses not to remain. It is that by which, in the Child in the
womb, the Blood directly from the Vena cava fills the right Ventricle of the
Heart; also by the Venal Artery enters immediately the left Ventricle.

Neither does that little Ductus remain Pervious, but degenerateth into a
Ligament, by which the Aorta of the Child in the womb receives the Blood
through the Arterial vein, the shortest way from the right Ventricle, without
any turning into the left.

Then at last, that the commerce of the Heart, with the Entrances of the Vena
cava, might be discovered, with the famousest Anatomists I considered the
structure of the substance of this Noble-intrail; and in the first place, the
three doors of the three-corner'd Valves, situate betwixt the joining of the
Vena cava to the right Ventricle of the Heart, offered themselves to view: I
was willing to take notice of their office, which was, to give easy entrance to
the Blood into the Heart, but stopped its return into the Vena cava.

The impervious solidity of the Septi, or Partition of the Heart which lies
betwixt the Ventricles, denied it altogether a passage. Therefore I inferred,
the Blood issues out of the right Ventricle into the Arterial vein: And indeed
in that place the three Sigmatoidal or S-like Valves give place to it rushing
forwards, but withstand its return.

Nevertheless having burst asunder the partition, I viewed the left Ventricle:
It differed from the right in that it was of a more oblong and narrower
hollowness: Into two Entrances of it two Canales were inserted, on this side
that which they name the Arteria Venosa, on the other side the Aorta was
placed, at the boundings of both were placed Valves: This [the Aorta or great
Artery] had, as in the Arteria Venosa, three sigmatoidal Valves, to give way to
the Blood thrust out, and to stop its return: That [the Arteria Venosa] had two
Miter-like Valves, that kept Centry, to give Entrance to the Blood into the
Heart, and to stop its flight from thence.

By reason of this fabric and fashion of the Heart, and the offices of its
Instruments, I could not any more approve their denying the flowing of the
Blood from the Heart into the Lungs by the Arterial Vein, and again its return
from the Lungs into the Heart by the Venal Artery.

And lest some perverse people should charge me only with suppositions, behold
I produce an Experiment. I bound with a Ligature both the Vessels as near the
Lungs as was possible, and then the Arterial Vein in its body was dilated
betwixt the Heart and Ligature, beyond the same Ligature toward its furthest
Branches in the Lungs it became flaccid: But the Ductresses of the Venal Artery
altogether in a contrary effect did swell and fall.

But seeing indeed our speech is fallen on the two Veins of the Lungs, the
Anatomists have with unfit terms [in my judgement] named them: For what
mattereth it, if with the subtle des Carts, I call that only an Artery
through which the right Ventricle disburthens it self into the Lungs; seeing
both the thickness of its Coat, the figure of its Valves, and the office of its
Pipe receiving Blood from the Heart, do altogether assimulate it to the rest of
the bodies of Arteries? And why, I pray you, entitle they that an Arterial Vein
through which the Lungs disgorge their purple streams into the Heart, seeing
the testimony of its Coats, Valves and Office, assert it a Vein?
Notwithstanding name them as they will, it is all one to me, so they be known:
But a demonstrative truth in this matter should not have sacrificed it self to
Hippocrates his opinion.

CHAP. IV. The Circulation of the Blood in the Child in the Womb.
THat which we have already shown concerning the Circulation of the Blood, I
would have thee [Reader] to understand it chiefly of grown persons: Not to deny
its Circulation in Children in the womb, but that in them the Circular motion
differs a little in its passages.

By the Hypogastrick Arteries the Blood is carried into the womb of the Woman
with Child; the Umbilical Vein carries that part of it which is best concoct
into the Liver of the Embryon: but that which is more serous and unconcoct
returns by the Maternal Veins unto the Heart as its Pot, whilst the thicker
grows together into the Placenta or Lump, as into the wombs Liver.

The Vena cava thrusts the Blood, received into the Embryons Liver, from
thence into the right Ventricle of the Heart, where it joins with it, and so
into the left Ventricle thereof, by the then open Oval-passages. The Blood
going out of the right Ventricle into the Arterial Vein, partly by an
interjected little Pipe, as it were by a sloping Canale, it flows freely into
the Aorta; Partly a good quantity possessing the Lungs, oppresses them with so
great weight, in respect of want of breathing for the hard passage from the
furthest branches of the Arterial Vein into the Venal Artery, that the Lungs of
the Child in the womb [if it did not breath sometimes] representing both the
color and density of the Liver, would never swim above water.

Certes, Respiration stirs up the Blood in the Venal Artery. The Bronchia
[Canales of the Windpipe] by their breathing dilatation pressing together their
fellows, on the one part the Arterial Vein, and on the other part the Venal
Artery, to press out the contained Blood so far as the Valves will suffer.

The Blood of the left Ventricle immediately penetrateth into the Aorta, and
from thence rushing to the furthest parts of the body, returns by the Veins
to the Heart, as has been shown in Adult persons.

And because the Umbilick Vein emitteth more Blood than the nourishment of the
Child requires, the Providence of Nature has branched out a pair of Branches,
the Consorts of the Umbilick Vein, either of them from the Iliack, or [which I
have most frequently observ'd] from the Hypogastriack Arteries even unto the
Placenta. They refound the Blood that is more than nourishes the Child into
the Liver of the womb, whether this be required by the celerity of the motion,
or whether the impure mass of the Mothers blood requires a better digestion by
the mixture of a warmer.

But lest I should seem to have found out this reflux by vain Arguments, put I
pray thee a straw into the Umbilick Vessels that belong to the Placenta or
Lump; then blow thou, and the Vein alone will carry the wind into the Child:
But on the contrary, if thou blow by the Reed into the Child, the Arteries will
carry the wind into the Lump, the Veins remaining altogether flaccid.

At last the Umbilical Vein by degrees becoming unprofitable, degenerateth into
a Ligament: by the same chance the Canale of the Arterial Vein, going into the
Aorta, evanisheth, and the Botalian perforation is filled: but the Umbilick
Arteries nevertheless remain. I have many times observed it in cutting up of
Adult persons, viz. the wind blown into the Hypograstriack and Iliack Arteries,
did not only show the Umbilicals near the Navil by the small tumor it did
raise, but entering their infinite Branches on every side, by them its empty
tumor declared the many branchings of the Artery in that place.

CHAP. V. That the Arterious Blood is partly by Synanastomosies poured out of
the Arteries into the Veins; partly being extravasated by the Anastomosies of
the Arteries, returns again into the Veins.
HAving demonstrated the Circulation of the Blood to and out of the Heart, it is
fitting that according to the example of those that are well deservers of the
Anatomick Commonwealth, we search out, with an inquest resembling the former,
its passages from the Arteries into the Veins.

Many are of opinion that the furthest points of the Arteries are inserted into
as small parts of the Veins; but the smalness of the points of the minute
Vessels not to be discerned by any eyes, though armed with Spectacles does not
confirm, does not confute this opinion.

They aver also, that wind blown into the roots of the Vena porta within the
Liver, does enter the conjoined Branches of the Vena cava; and that it does
insinuate it self from the Trunk of the Arterial Vein into the Lungs, and
furthest Branches of the Venal Artery.

I have many times tried it in the Liver, but the Experiment ever failed; I
doubt whether more by defect of breath in me, or error in them. In the Lungs
indeed I have found that the common passage of the Synanastomosies of the same
Pipes were open.

One day it was my business to view the Arterial Vein, being made bare of all
its Clothing. I did observe it, not with a few knots of Embracements to stick
fast to the Venal Artery. Putting a Reed into it in that place where it is
insert into the Heart, I blew; presently the spreading breath did raise the
bloodless Canals, and being rolled to the ends of the Capillar Veins, was
received into the hollowness of the Venal Artery, which is indeed an evident
token of their Synanastomosie. But though it held in the Lungs, yet
nevertheless I will not conclude it holds so in the Liver or Muscles.

Indeed I will confess, that by the intermediate openings of the
Synanastomosies, that the Blood may be turned out of one Vessel into another,
seeing the individible coherence of the Veins with the Arteries in some places,
proves this, and their not easy separation without tearing of both. But I
believe he admits absurdly this Synanastomosis where the Veins have no
coherence with the Arteries; yea rather I would believe, that a part of the
Blood by the Anastomosies without the enclosures of the Arteries, does abound
to be strained in the flesh, that that of it which is more exactly concoct may
turn to nourishment in the simular parts, But that which is not well digested,
may return into the Veins, which perchance in all places without have entrances
to their most inward places.

For if the perpetual Flux of the Blood within the Vessels casts forth no
Blood without the Vessels, whence proceeds the increase of the bodies bulk? And
if the substance of the parts of the body be in perpetual motion, from whence,
I pray you, will proceed the restorement of the tabid leanness of withered
bodies?

There is indeed some seedy substance in the Blood fit for the restoring of the
decayings of the parts, viz. That which being more concoct uses to unite it
self into a fibrous thickness: And indeed, the Blood drawn from the Limbs into
hot water, does spread its serosity and color in the water, when in the
bottom of the basin there remains a fleshy thickness of membranous dregs
composed of white fibers, and therefore more fit for the solidity of the body;
to wit, that which either remained after the satisfying of the parts, or was
melted by the washing vigor, may be, of the following Blood, or was
transvasated by the short passages of the Synanastomosies, and did hasten to be
recocted in the Pot of the Heart.

And lest any should confound the Offices of Synanastomosies and Anastomosies
by reason of the likeness of the words, I call Synanastomosies the intermediate
opennesses of the Arteries cohering to Veins for the carrying of the Blood out
of one Vessel into another; I call Anastomosies the furthest points of the
Arteries whereby the Blood is extravasated and received by the tunnels of the
Veins for the gathering together of the same.

The OBJECTIONS against the Extravasation of the Blood, answered.
BUT I hear them objecting the prerogative of the more subtle Blood in the
Artery: For if the Blood be strained in the flesh, how comes it to pass that
the Veins issue forth more gross Blood?

Deservedly indeed, and together with thee wondering would I be amazed at the
undeserved grosness of the Blood, if the Arteries should thrust into the Veins
all the serosity they contain; if the heat with the same warmness; if their
Blood unmixt with the age of the withering flesh: But no man doubts but that
the serosity of the Arteries partly goes a part into the Reins, partly is
spread in the flesh, and partly evanisheth by insensible perspiration; even as
by the thickness of the Coats of the Arteries, and neighborhood of the
Fountain, the heat is sustained: So by the coldness of the Spermatick part, and
by the distance of the forsaken heart it does by little and little grow
chiller: Add the easy passages of the pores for its expiration: For as the
flesh increases by food, so they perish by fasting: This is confirmed by the
interchange of vigorousness and languishing each day, yea by hunger and
fullness. That which now does grow into flesh, within a short time withering,
does for the most part give place to the succeeding nourishment, viz. that
which did grow together by the offense of cold, being melted by the coming of a
hot stream again, renews the journey it was stopped in, and does return to be
recocted in its former forge.

The serosity is diminished, the heat tempered, the dregs of the changed flesh
mixed with it: What wonder then that the Arterial Blood is excelled by the
Venous, in respect of the consistency of its substance?

Neither can thou more wisely object the unavoydable corruption of its
standing without the Vessels. Indeed the wandering Blood, out of the enclosures
of the Arteries, does abound through the whole bulk of the body; the increase
of the Living Creature declares this; the scarlet dye of the blushing brow
holds this forth; the red incirculing burning tumors do the like; and such
kind of passions evanishing in paleness immediately after Blood-letting.

But notwithstanding, the only narrowness of the Veins stays the Blood, if
by the again flowing of it they be strained beyond the bounds of their
capaciousness; and in its stay, if it be longer, that Blood which follows is
defiled by the mixture of the retained dregs, and does end in diverse
sicknesses, according to the diversity of hurtful humors. So while the heat
does burn more vehemently, the Blood is kindled into an inflammation, Thou shall
behold the more plentiful serosity, except exhausted in sweat, or exhaled by
transpiration, grow into a Dropsy, or sometimes spread it self into a
Rheumatism; the Phlegm ends in an Oedema; the Choler boyleth into an
Erysipelas, and Melancholy is condensed into a Schirrus.

Hence it is that the Blood it self does grow into a Plurisy, viz. when sudden
cold seizes on the inward parts, it beats back most unseasonably the more
vehement heat of breathing; and with its sudden cold binding up the Canals of
the intercostial Veins, it straitneth the Channels, now scarce sufficient for
the reflowing Blood, which by the more frequent motion of the Systoles is
gathered thither, and turns into atter the same Blood, being longer seated
there, and extravasated, wandreth in the flesh, except it be prevented by
Phlebotomy.

CHAP. VI. The beginning of the Blood's motion is inquired after; the innate
weight of the Blood, though the Arteries should pay the part of a Siphon with
the Veins, is shown not to be enough for its Circulation.
THE undiscovered cause of the discovered matter rather aggravated than abated
my grief: The motion of the Blood is discovered, but its beginning being yet
concealed, challenges me to (...) new labor, the difficulties of which,
(Reader) I will essay to make plain by these admonitions.

The Blood rusheth forward either by its own proper incitement, or it is thrust
forward by another; we acknowledge it has no proper one, except its
heaviness, whose virtue I will prove vanishing by these following reasons.

The Blood indeed, whom the innate weight may carry downward by the descendent
Arteries, and the Trunk ascendent of the Vena cava, cannot by the self-same
endeavor flow to the upper parts of the ascendent Arteries, neither by the
descendent stem of the Vena cava; except, with some famous Philosophers, you
ascribe the reason of this effect to the disposition of the Vessels: For (say
they) the Arteries so cohere with the Veins, that you may say not undeservedly
their fablick imitateth a Siphon.

They call a Siphon a reflex'd Pipe, either whose declining Legs uphold a high
Angle, or whose elevat Legs lean on a depressed Angle.

That therefore the ascending liquor may come to the high Angle of the Siphon,
it is needful that the Leg by which it should flow, be placed under a more
depress outsending Vessel, that from thence the greater weight of the liquid
heap may make the weaker water movable to follow it through the other door. So
by the ascending stem of the Vena cava, which the providence of Nature has
placed a little lower than the Entrances of the ascending Arteries, the Blood
flows down (say they) which for this ought altogether following to ascend.

And as the Liquor, rushing by its own weight into the depressed Angle of the
other Siphon, is reflected out of the bottom by its own instinct, till on both
sides, by an equal Superficies it point forth the quietness of a just balance;
and if the Pipe of reflection being more short, does hold abroad a more
declined openness than the tunnel of the other Leg, it comes to pass that for
the same heaviness, that it is poured out by its own proper stream. So the Blood
[say they] by the eared trunk of the descending Aorta throwing it self headlong
to the lower parts, of its own accord rises up again from the bottom by the
descendent Vena cava, and by the door of the same, which is a little low
situate, by a spontaneous flowing again is refunded into the pool of the Heart.
Remember, Reader, lest the doubtfulness of the name should trouble thee, that
that is called the Ascendent Vena cava which springs upward from the Heart;
but that which spreads Branches from this down to the extremities of the
parts, is called the Descendent, taking the name from its Original, not from
its office.

Truly you may say, that with the workmanship of Nature, Truth it self has
conspired to their opinion, and that injuriously I deny my assent to most
evident reasons.

But if with me you take notice, that at the same time the liquor ascends to
the high Angle of the Siphon, that it rusheth downward; and again, that it
ascends in the same moment from the depressed Angle of the overturned Siphon,
by which it is poured into it: Then it will be clear, how incongruous the
succession of continual flowing of the Siphon is with the motion of the Blood.

And indeed the Blood, while the Expression of the Systoles thrusts it in the
wide-open Arteries, at the same moment by their Extremities, penetrateth into
the Veins: But then only it breaks out of the Veins into the Heart, when the
Systole ceasing, leaves to the Diastole its own part by intercourse to be
acted. And even from this it is clear, that the Blood no ways imitateth the
liquor in a Siphon.

But because we do hardly depart from those things that please us, I demand,
that if the Channels of Blood play the part of a Siphon, and for that the Law of
Conterposure requires an equal fullness necessarily on both sides, how comes it
to pass, that in a dead Body Death does altogether empty the Arteries, whilst
the Veins remain turgid?

Yea the Experiments of Circulation will voice against the Siphon. The Jugular
Vein represents the emissary of a standing Siphon from its sublime Angle into
the Heart: When I had tied this Vein in the Neck, notwithstanding, by the
Ascendent Arteries Blood was sent upwards, yea and above the Ligature it
extended above measure the Jugular Vein.

The straightened Pipe of the Crural Vein taught the same, viz. it becoming
flaccid from the Ligature toward the Heart, cleared that it issued the Blood
thitherward: But shall I believe that any foolishly will attribute the ascent
of this into the Heart unto the heaviness of the rushing heaps of Blood into
the Aorta?

But neither that Artery it self which waters the Leg when it is tied [if it
be to be attributed to the weight of the Blood, as the motion in an inverse
Syphon] can be evacuate under the Ligature, against Experience; For the so
little remains of Blood there, will not be able to thrust upwards the whole
weight of Blood which weighteth in the Vena cava.

But when I said, the exhaust Arteries of dead Bodies, do not thou believe it is
to be attributed unto the evanishing subtilty of Arterial Blood. For this also
has its own density, neither less perchance than that grossness which is
included not only in the Vena cava, but Porta also.

Easy experience will supply my admonition. The wounds of a Living Beast at the
same time emptying the Vena cava, together with the Aorta, and, if thou please,
the Vena porta it self: Let the Blood drawn out of each place settle in its own
platter; Let none of them be dissolved into a vapor, and except that which was
drawn from the Branches of the Arteries blushed with a more clear purple, with
a moist vain trial should thou search after a difference.

Thou may in a dying Creature stop the Arterial Blood, if thou tie the Artery
in the Leg; and I my self many times having tried this, I beheld the Artery
toward the Heart to be tumid, with Blood that did not at all evanish.

Therefore, seeing neither the course of a Siphon agrees to the Circular
motion of the Blood, neither the weight thereof seems to serve for that
purpose, yea many times it is impediment thereto, as it is clear in Limbs hanging
more negligently, Laziness making the vigor of the Blood more stupid; we are
to have our recourse to the virtue of an external incitement, the innate one
failing.

CHAP. VII. The impulse of the Systole alone is not enough for the Circular
motion of the Blood. In a Diastole there is no Attraction.
THE impulsion of a Systole, Attraction of a Diastole, the rough contraction of
the Vessels, and endeavor of the adjacent parts upon every occasion, seem all
extrinsecally to affect the Blood. Let us discover by an exact Examination
which of these, and how much each of them conferreth to the motion of the Blood.

Of the Impulse of the Systole.
The Systole thrusts the Blood; and that part of it so promoted drives
before it the former part; but that which last leaves the Heart, whilst the
Arteries are emptying in dying Creatures, albeit no following part does drive
it, nevertheless hastneth into the Veins; And while we tie the Crural Artery in
a living Beast, beyond the Ligature we see it to issue out that Blood which is
enclosed toward the Extremities, becoming by little and little flaccid,
without incitement of Blood following, which is stopped by the thread.

Let us try the same in the Vein which waters the Leg, by staying the
continued flowing of the Blood with a Ligature; then swelling from the Thread
toward the Extreme parts, the Blood nevertheless hasting toward the Heart,
will demonstrate that the course of the Blood by the Arteries toward the
Extremities, is not to be attributed alone to the impulse of the Systole
urgent, neither its return thence by the Veins to the Heart.

Of the Diastole's Attraction.
We are therefore to observe the office of the Diastole. It Is the duty of it to
receive the Blood: but whether, as some think, it draws it by Attraction, or
such it, and so assisteth the impulse of the Systole, is to be inquired after.

Diastole immediately follows the Systole: Therefore when the Systole ends,
the Canals of the urging Veins swelling, the heap of the Blood prepared for
eruption beats at the gates of the Heart, and does ingurgitate its
Ventricles, the Diastole only offering the duties of obedience; so that it
undoubtedly appears how superfluous it is to appoint an Attractive, or
rather, if you will; a sucking virtue, which in the business of fluid things I
ever tolerated with tingling ears.

And indeed, whatsoever our Adversaries argue, and whatsoever Engines they apply
in assistance of Attraction, Experience, which is clearly more eloquent, does
both throw it down and refute it. It pleases me to fight with the fame Engines,
that being vanquished by their own Arms, at last they may confess those
examples they bring, of the Air in the Bellows; of the water in the
Aeolipilaes, or Pump, or Reed; And to conclude, of the Flesh in Cupping
Glasses, succeeds by no allurement of succing, but only by the violence of
External Impulsion.

That I may be more able with a more happy success to unfold this hitherto
unfolded Mystery, it is to be supposed that the Globe of Earth and Water is
compressed, not only by the weight of the Air, but likewise by the virtue of
Elateries innate in it: But because indeed that is not easily supposed which
yet is in doubt, suffer thy self, I pray thee, Reader, to be persuaded with me
by the same Arguments, and clearness of Experiments.

CHAP. VIII. It Is shown by Experiments, that there is not only a Weight in the
Air, but likewise a rarefactive Elatery.
I would treat of the Air's ponderosity, yea in its proper (as they say) place,
except it were an Argument known to all. For who does not see the Air of its
own accord to descend into the Chinks and Ditches, yea even into the lowest
Center of the Earth, if you delve so deep? Who does not know that a little
Bladder, the more turgid it is, is so much more heavy than it self being
flaccid? Who, if he weigh a Gun burdened with condensed Air [they call it a
Windgun] will not observe that its weight then is heavier than it is when it is
discharged? To conclude, to whom is it unknown that the lightness of an
Aeolipila, the Air of which is rarefied exactly by the force of heat, is not at
all to be compared with the heaviness of it being cold?

Neither indeed believe thou that I am affrighted with the opinion of that kind
of airy weight in refunding the vapors of the Athmosphere. For by the Air I
understand the Athmosphere, neither for the present does my Philosophy ascend
higher.

Feign to thy self this, as a heap of spongious, or rather woolly matter
encompassing the Earth-watrish Globe, whose superior parts therefore are
sustained by the inferior, compressing it by degrees, so that the nearer they
come to the Earth, so much the more they are compressed compactly by the weight
of the parts incumbent; And for that cause by its Spontaneous dilatation [which
I call Elater] howsoever the heaped on burden do press them down, yet the
under parts, if they have liberty, will endeavor to rarifie themselves.

Hence I infer, that the lowest of those parts, as being placed under the
whole burden, so to be most condensed of them all; And for this reason the
superfice of the Earth-watrish Orb is pressed of the same, not by its weight
alone, but also by the virtue of his Elatery, whose endeavor to rarifie is
most valid.

But because they are words, and I have given you leave to proceed from the
Ears to the Eyes, I will prevent thy desire, and I will view the misty secrets
of the Air by the search of Experience, which I at all times follow as my
Leader.

I will produce in the first place some Experiments concerning Vacuum, or
Emptiness, which I believe as yet have not been committed to the Press; no
Monuments of my own deep cunning, far be it from me to arrogate to my self the
glory of those detected Miracles which were not first discovered to me: For
whatsoever I did exquisitly elaborate with an exact endeavor more frequently
about so weighty a matter for fear of error which troubled me, it was
imitation, and not invention.

I will produce Authors, not of Books, which as yet I have not so much as heard
to be extant; but of those Experiments at least which follow, and whose
Authority is great, and Name venerable.

Experiments PHYSICO-MATHEMATICAL OF VACUITY.
The first Experiment. A little Bladder being emptied of its own accord at
falling down of Quicksilver, rarifying in the high Viol of the Pipe, declares
the Rarefactive Elatery of the Air.
RObervallius, the most famous Reader of Mathematics in Paris, in the Kings
Chair, did after this manner operate, while I was present, in favor of that
virtue whereby the Air of it self does dilate it self, indeed not without
success.

He had a Viol made of Glass, which on both ends, both on the broad Basis, and
the gaping end of the neck, A, three foot long at least, was open: By the door
of the Basis B, which was shut up closely with a strait bound thread, He put
and enclosed in C one of the little Bladders (or Swims) which uses to be found
swelling in the belly of a Carp. It was empty of air, as far as was possible;
and lest that the slipperiness of its Tunicle should hinder it to express the
Air, he wrested it a little without violence, being dried, and he excluded Air
out of the hole made in it with the same Ligature. And moreover, because the
compacted thickness of the Tunicle of a Sowes Bladder above all other stops
best the passage of Quicksilver, he covered therewith the hole of the broad
Basis, and filled up with Quicksilver even to the brim of the neck the whole
hollowness of the Glass body, A.B. He closed with his forefinger, as with a
stopple, the little door A, and holding the Viol overturned perpendicularly, he
put his finger assorted vials A B C D


together with the mouth A it stopped, into another Vessel wherein he had
poured Quicksilver in D: withdrawing his finger easily, the highest part of
the Quicksilver falling swiftly, deserted the bottle of the Viol, and after
diverse sparklings in the Pipe of the neck, the top of the remaining parts stood
in E, neither seemed to fill the Pipe above the Superficies of the Quicksilver
in the lower Vessel D, more than seven and twenty inches.

A wonderful sight appeared to the beholders; the Carp's little Bladder, which
the straitness of the narrowneck kept up into the higher bottle, did of its own
accord swell again. Indeed I had been amazed [except my mind had cured the
errors of mine eyes] at the swelling fullness of that sudden Meteor in C, in
the middle [as they say] of Vacuity. But the residue of the Air within the
secret passages of the writhed indeed, but not altogether exhausted Bladder,
taught that there was a Spontaneous Elatery in the Air, whilst free, and not
compressed by the weight of any thing lying above it.

For it is but a vain reason they bring; The Airs subtility, say they,
penetrateth the thickness of the glass, and being spread abroad in every place
of the writhed bladder, at last enters the same by its pores, and extends the
whole to his former swelling. But let them remember that which they believe,
That the Glass is on every side pervious to the entering Air, and therefore the
Air is carried in all places with the same force of its rushing rays toward
the Bladder, staying in the middle of the Bottle C; so that it should rather
compress and oppress it, than re-acting it self against it self, have a care to
raise its unprofitable dilation. Add this, that the pierced on all hands B
adder could not stay the Air, or contain it which it had received within.

Neither troubles it me, that they say that the pores pervious open to the
entering Air, forbid its return. For then the entered Air should be compelled, by
the Valves shut on all sides, to remain within; So that the little Bladder
should retain, the swelling it has once received, and should still remain
full; which is demonstrated to be most false, by the lankness of the Bladder,
either by inclining the engine a little, or by admitting therein a little
portion of the Air from abroad. And hence their opinion is ruined, which
believe the Bladder swells again by the Spirits of the Quicksilver.

By which, seeing it clearly appears, that the Air which after writhing lay
fast in the most inward places of the Bladder, did dilate the skin thereof by
its insited Elatery in the falling down of the Quicksilver. Likewise it
appears, that that Air which was pressed to the inward Superficies of the Vial
by the Metallic weight, and did stay enclosed in the outward folds of the
Vesicle, was enough by the virtue of the same Elatery to fill the whole Vial.

Neither let my Adversaries believe, that the heaviness of the Quicksilver
while it filled the Vial did quite thrust forth the Air; The contiguity of dry
things does not exclude the Air, whose outrooting is only done by glue; In
other things there is either Air, or both the Superficies adhere; so boys wet
leather, by whose force they elevat, and weigh up, and throw forth the hanging
weight of heavy stones. Neither do Liquors themselves altogether go away; beat
together the wet palms of your hands with as great force as you can,
notwithstanding the humor remaining in the inward bosom of the skin will not
evanish for any pressure; Glass by nature is smooth, nevertheless it is
polished byart; neither does the whitish silver-shining of Quicksilver argue
its most perfect smoothness. Truly the weight of the Metal bruising the sides
of the glassy porosities, the Air, as I have said, being freed by the falling
down of the Metal, does display it self by its proper Elatery in every place
within the Pipe.

May be you will infer, The Air by the iritating of the Quicksilver falling
tumultuously, does become fit for dilatation. So also would I think, except the
unmoved stability of the Glassy walls should seem to gainstand her course
downwards, and should rather roll down those sliding parts of the Quicksilver,
which are contiguous to the Glass, toward the Center, than suffer them to fall
down perpendicularly. So the brinks of the shore restrain the sides of those
streams which glide a pace in the midst of their Channels. So the capacity of
Tunnels only grants liberty of flowing to these whirling Liquors in the
middle pool only of the falling stream, and likewise to the grane in the
Milhopper, if you have taken notice of it.

I should have admired the interchangable violence of the skipping beatings
within the Pipe, except the Air which then was outwardly incumbent on the
Quicksilver of the Vessel D, and whose substance is easy to be compressed,
being compelled to give place to the heavier weight of the body rushing down
from the top of the Vial, had not made me suspect the Air it self by the
repercussion of its Elastick or dilating virtue even to reciprocate the jumps
of the Quicksilver within the Pipe it self, till at last the essays of it
enclosed within the Pipe be not overcome with the weight of the Quicksilver.

The second Experiment. The diverse falling of Quicksilver according to the
sundry heights of a Hill, proves that the lower parts of the Air by degrees
are more compact than those that lean on them.
NEither believe thou that I obscure the matter with unskilful speeches, when I
say the Earth is pressed by the Air; I have a most eminent witness, the most
subtle Pascalius the son, who first among our French did, not only with
Quicksilver, but other Liquors also, raise up the Experiment concerning
Vacuity, scarcely being well born, and almost suffocate amongst strangers; yea
with such a success of his wonderful industry he carried it up, that he did
put in all the Devotaries of true wisdom through all Europe an eager desire to
try the Experiments of Vacuity.

By his care there was lately an Experiment tried in Avernia, at the root of
the high Mountain commonly called Le puy de Domme, near the City of Claramont,
Quicksilver being poured into a Pipe four foot long, almost like that which we
have described above, it did fall down to the third half line of the twenty
seventh inch above the superfice of the Quicksilver standing in the undermost
Vessel. Ascending then the Region of the Mountain, which was about an hundred
and fifty paces higher than the roots thereof, the Cylinder of the Quicksilver
which remained in the Pipe possessed the length but of twenty five inches. At
length coming to the top of the Hill, at least five hundred paces higher than
the root, the same Cylinder of the Quicksilver found his bound of rest and
height in the second line of the twenty fourth inch; and so from the lowest
roots of the Mountain to the highest top thereof, it was shortened the length of
three inches, and half a degree, viz. the Air which encompassed the top being
lighter, by reason of less pressure, than that about the middle and root of the
Mountain, ought also to hold up a shorter Cylinder of Quicksilver, according
to the equality of the balance.

Neither wonder thou that this Experiment does not agree with those that I
tried in Paris by falling of Quicksilver: For both the difference of the foot
of measure in Avernia from ours, which it exceeds in some lines (which I
exactly observed) and the diverse distance of Places may be from the Center of
the World (even thou being Judge) may not keep equality in these Experiments.

The third Experiment. The equality of weight of the outward Air with the
internal Cylinder of the Quicksilver, is shown.
IT pleases me also, lest the stubborn opinion thou have of the Ancients
should murmr against my reasons, whereby I have asserted the equality of
weight of the external Air, and internal Quicksilver, to teach the Experiment
of Vacuity in Vacuity, first happily tried by the sagacity of the acute
Auzotius.

Take a Vial like the former in bottle and neck A B, except that near the basis
B it has a little Pipe G added to it, by whose little door, when need
requires, the Air has an open entrance into the Vial. By the open door of the
upturn'd and high Basis B, put in a apiece Vessel of equal sides C, so
that its large hollowness toward assorted vials A B C D E F G


the openness in the top of the Basis B, by its bottom covering horizontically
the Pipe of the neck A C, placed perpendicularly under it. Truly the Vessel C.
by its four Angles inwardly leaning on the Glass, shall leave a space pervious
between the sides of the Vessel and the Vial. Place in the Vessel C. a vertical
or erected Pipe of choice length likewise, made of Glass, and open at both ends
C F: then with a Sowes Bladder [wherewith likewise you shall stop the Basis and
little door G] you shall exactly bind it about in B to exclude the Air; then
you shall command your servant, by putting his finger under, to stop the mouth
of the Vial A; and let him keep it so long stopped, till with Quicksilver put
in at the added entrance F, you fill the whole Engine; which entrance also being
well bound up with a Sowes Bladder, if he shall withdraw his finger placed
under the mouth A, and drenched, as before, in the Quicksilver standing
without in the Vessel D, you shall wonder to see the equal balance
perpetually of the Quicksilver A E. with the outward Air; All the Pipe that
stands upmost shall be emptied of its abounding Quicksilver by the sides of
the enclosed Vessel C, the Pipe of the Vial A E retaining the same Quicksilver
seven and twenty inches high. And then if you bore with a very small pointed
Needle the B^adder of the door G, and give entrance to a little Air, it being
mixed with that which is spread abroad in the Vial, intends the E^atery of the
same, so that now on all sides it acts with a more strong endeavor, and
oppressing the Quicksilver in the neck A E subject to it, it depresseth it not
a little, and compressing that which stands in the inward cavity of the
Vessel C, it compels it to ascend the superior Pipe C F with a remarkable
rouling; Yea according to the quantity of the entering Air you shall see it grow
up twenty seven inches high toward F, the Quicksilver of the lower Pipe being
altogether thrust out.

The Air presses downward the Quicksilver in E A, by reason of the changed
equal weight of the outward Air and enclosed Quicksilver, proceeding from the
increase of adventitious Air entered by G: It thrusts it upwards into C F,
because the restored endeavor of the compressory virtue searches inwardly
after an equal weight.

What then, Reader, is to be concluded from these things? The outward Air
ballanceth the Cylinder of the interior Quicksilver A E, therefore the Air
even in its own sphere, as they call it, is weighty.

The parts of the Air in the Pipe and Carps Bladder are distended by their own
spontaneous dilatation; therefore the insited Elatery of the substance of the
Air to rarifie it self, does imitate the nature of a Sponge or Wool.

And so the thicker the Air is, as has been manifest in the Mountain
Experiment, and that of Vacuity in Vacuity, insomuch it acts on all sides
with a greater and stronger Elatery invading the superfice of the Earth-watrish
Globe.

The fourth Experiment. The Water only by its weight compresseth the
Earth-watry Globe; But the Air compresseth it, not only by its weight, but by
its Elatery.
I will add an invincible Argument from an easy Experiment. Let there be a
round long Pipe of Glass A B, at least three foot long, and four degrees, if
you will, in diameter; let the end thereof B be hermetically closed exactly,
that is, with the Glass it self, the other end A being open; fill the whole
Glass with Quicksilver, except the seven inches C A; fill up the residue, viz.
C A with water; then closing the Pipe with your finger turn it over, and
sustain it so long, till the water being lighter, having changed its place
assorted vials A B C D E


with the Quicksilver, at last does ascend to the other end B: Dip both the
Pipe and thy finger stopping it, into the Quicksilver which stands ready in
the Vessel D; Drawing away thy finger easily, the Metal shall so flow out of
the Pipe, that the Cylinder of Quicksilver A E which is to remain within the
Pipe, will not remain according to its custom twenty seven inches above the
standing superfice D, but it shall seem to be diminished six lines or degrees,
by reason of the heaviness of the Air incumbent, and constantly remaining in
seven inches measure. Neither is it any wonder; for such is the proportion
between Water and Quicksilver, that ha^f an inch of this does weigh above
seven inches of that.

Hence it clearly appears, that Water only by its weight, and by no endeavor
of an Elatery, as it is heavy to Quicksilver within the Pipe, so it is to the
superfice of the Earthly lump.

But the virtue of the Air is far more excelient; for if over again essaying
the Experiment, you fill up, not with Water, but Air, the remaining space of
seven inches C A, that is, if you shut up with your finger the Pipe from the
Quicksilver B C, to the mouth A, being only full of Air for the space of
seven inches C A, being afterward overturned and dipped in the Engine D, you
shall admire to see the Cylinder of Quicksilver A E to be lower by seven
inches under the twenty seventh inch. So that it clearly appears, that as the
subject Quicksilver, so the Earth-watry Globe is not so much pressed by the
weight, as by the Elatery of the Air.

I would have you note, that when I said the Cylinder of the Quicksilver
rested at the twenty seventh inch within the Pipe, I spoke then according to
the most frequent Experiments; For the place of rest changes in the Pipe
according to the diverse changes of the external Air in its rarefactions and
condensations.

CHAP. IX. The Engines drawn to the assistance of Attraction, are demolished.
HAving demonstrated by Experiments conquering all stifness, and subduing all
belief, That, more than in a wool heap, the heaping up of the intricate parts
in the Air, and the Elater innate therein for rarefaction does beat the Globe
of Water and Earth; I proceed to examine their Engines who advance Attraction.

That the Water enters into Waterworks, not for fear of Vacuity, but by
necessity of an equal weight is cleared by the period of the Waters ascent in
them, and Experiments.
And first indeed the office of the sucker in the Pump, which they esteem the
greatest, is to be considered: For they believe our opinion is overthrown, and
that we have nothing to object, when they have attributed to the Heart the
worthy name of the Vital Anilia: For as, say they, the rising Clack sucketh the
Water, and falling down beats it back; So the Heart by the gaping Diastole by
drawing the Blood suppeth it up, which in the pressure of the Systole it
compels to depart.

The mention of Anilias is so common in the Mechanics, which some call sucking
in, that none is ignorant of their office when he hears their names: But
howsoever the r^use in drawing up Liquor is frequent, not any as yet has found
out, in an instrument of so great use, the true inciter or genuine cause of its
liquid motion.

The Inventers, and all those that afterward have been occupied in
Waterworks, believed that the Water is drawn and sucked up by the rising of
the Clack, which whiles it rises raises up the Water, and accelerateth them
for fear of vacuity to rise upward against their falling nature: But I will
show by the following reasons whether they think well or no.

The Earth-watry Globe is compressed on all sides, not only by the weight of
the Air, as we have proved, but likewise by the most strong endeavor of the
Elatery innate in it: Therefore where the heaping of the Aerial parts does
equally act in the subject Waters, it shall also be right that their emulous
superficies should remain in the balance of equal hight.

But if the endeavors of the Air be unequal, it is necessary also that the
superficies of the Waters should become unequal; So that the Water should rise
higher, where the pressure of the Air is lighter; and so long it should elevate
its superfice, till the rising heap of Water, together with the Air which it
sustains, should equally balance that other Air which is of more heavy
pressure.

It Is easy for thee to be taught this in a Bucket mechanically.

Take a Cylindrick Bucket A, and fill it at least half full with A B C D E F G


Situla
Water; then place in it the dish of the covering B C D, whose middle ought to
be pervious D, to receive the Glass Pipe perpendicularly D E, and the covering
B C D being movably contiguous to the Bucket encompassing it, should stay
otherwise the eruption of the Liquor; indeed if you press down the dish with
the weights F F, the Water pressed down on every side about the hole D, will
fill the upright standing Pipe D E, till with its emulating heaviness it spring
up to the place of equal weight G.

And this is the incitement of the ascending Water in the Pump.

Before you place in the Pipe of the Pump, standing now in the Water, the
Clack, the Elastick (enforcing) weight of the Air beats no less the inward
than outward Water: Whence it comes to pass, that the Superficies of the
Water both without and within the Pipe is of the same altitude: But when the
Clack is fitted to the Pipe, and is lifted upwards, it together with it heaveth
up the Pillar of Air which is perpendicularly stayed thereon: Hence all weight
within the Pipe is taken away, and then the Water which is urged sharplier by
the perpetual pressure of the outward Air leaning thereon, rusheth into the
easy Pipe; so long ascending till it come to two and thirty foot height, and
there at last it is of equal weight with the circumfus'd Air.

Neither will the Rule of Counterposure [if we believe experience] suffer the
superfice of the Waters springing within the Pipe or Pump, though the Clack
should be elevate, to ascend higher.

You may likewise marveil at this in Quicksilver. For the Cylinder of
Quicksilver inwardly will not ascend more than twenty seven inches above the
superfice of it which stands in the Vessel, in either Pump or Pipe: For
indeed that Cylinder of Quicksilver does counterpose, a heap of water of above
two and thirty feet, in weight.

None of the Water arises above thirty two foot, none of the Quicksilver
above twenty seven inches, though the Clack be drawn up with the greatest force
of the Pipe: Therefore neither fear of Vacuity, who in the highest places of
Nature should offer it self, moves the Waters to follow: Neither the
endeavor of the Air, which is spent with so little force of Counterposure does
oppress the Earth-watry Globe with its infused Elatery.

Hence let all VVater-workers take notice, and all those Craftsmen who hope by
the benefit of eared Siphons to draw Water over the tops of intermediate Hills,
that the Hill be not above two and thirty foot high above the Spring, otherwise
they shall lose their labor. The same judgment concerning drawing, as they
call them, Pumps, is firm and stable. I omit other Pumps, and especially those
in which the Clack like a Bucket is dipped in the Water to draw it up; For the
elevate Water receives no period of ascent in their Pipes, except what is
prescribed by the force of that power that moves the Clack: Yea they have not
any business with the fear of Vacuity or of the Air.

Seeing therefore that the Water hastes into the Pump, not by the incitement
of Attraction, but by the Elastick heaviness of the spread-about Air, there is
no reason why we should spend any longer time in refelling the Arguments which
our Adversaries draw from this Engine, to prove the Attraction of the Heart.

That Bellows do not draw the Air, but only receive it thrust in them from
without.
Neither will the Heart more happily prove Sucking or Attraction, by playing
the part of Bellows. A pair of Bellows do neither suck nor draw the Air to
them, but are compelled to receive it being thrust in by external violence.

The Air liyng hid within the lurking places of the folded and closed Bellows,
is of the same Elatery (that is, Spontaneous dilatation) that the circumfus'd
external Air is of; and so the resting of the equal weight contains both
unmoved; Whiles you distend the Bellows, even then the inward Air [as was made
clear in the Bladder of a Pearch] of its own Spontaneous dilatation, which is
therefore more weaker, it would ratify, except a more strong force of an
outward Air did compel the Air next their Pipe without, and any liquid thing
that is within, to equal balance.

The force of Aerial dilatation, which it has from its proper Elatery, does
languish, but by an external cause becomes firm.
Neither let any man with more successful Eloquence persuade me of the
Attraction of Aeolipilaes and Cupping Glasses, proceeding of the effect
produced by the Fire; and that thou may more easily understand how deservedly
I oppose it, hear my opinion concerning the business of Heat.

Indeed the least Heat does dilate the Air, as no man doubts; But with this
difference from that dilatation whereby it is sometimes of it self freely
dilated, That the Spontaneous dilatation enerveth the power of the Elastick
(impulsive) faculty, as the Experiments of Vacuity in Vacuity, and the Carps
Bladder do demonstrate; But the other, which is extraneous to the Air, viz.
from the accession of heat, will make it firm, and will augment its growing,
and is found by little and little to remit in its languishing.

The Weather-Glass does demonstrate, that not only the Air, but that the Water
also is extended by the accession of Heat.
So the Hand or a Coal put upon the upward Bottle of a Weather-Glass, causes
the water therein contained to descend; A great Argument that the Air which is
dilated within does in force excel the descending water which it compels to
give it place.

Neither does the only Air produce its own ends by the incitement of Heat; Yea
the heap of water is likewise extended thereby.

This is easily tried, if you be pleased to thrust down the particle of water
C. sticking in the middle of the Weather-Glasses stalk unto the lowest seat of
the Air that upholds it; For fire being put unto the upper Bottle A does not
only compel downward the enclosed water C, but also compels it to grow
bigger, either because it drencheth the Air which it dilateth depiction of
thermostat A B C


A, in the descending water C; or because it stirs up the Aerial parts of
the descending water to Rarefaction, viz. to the third degree, which before
scarcely possessed two degrees.

I prescribe no Law to the water to be hung in C; for oft-times I have found it
by chance hanging, and not a little distant from the water in B in the under
Vessel, which by the diligence of my labor I could have brought to pass.

The Air growing cold in A, the water flows upward, for the Elastick virtue
of this, as it imitateth the increments of Heat, so likewise it observes the
changes of the deficiencies in the same.

How the Flesh and Blood is thrust into the Cupping-Glasses.
The kindled fire does thrust out of the Cupping-Glass the greatest part of the
rarefied Air; and afterward by the Cupping-Glass pressed hard to the skin, so
that no external Air can enter [because of the stopping of the motion may be of
the Fiery Spirits hindered by the Glass] it is extinguished; Therefore the Heat
does languish, which the motion of the Fiery Spirits did sustain: At last the
Air within the Cupping-Glass becomes cold, and that strength of it being
weakened, which the heat raised, being feeble it is overcome by the strength of
the outward Air. Which external Air, to conclude, compressing in all places
equally the body, except that space that is contained in the Cupping Glass,
does thrust into it the Flesh and Blood, as the Liquor into the Pumps.

Add, that those Aerial parts which possess the porous lurking places of the
body, neither do they less lie in wait for Dilation than Externals watch by
Elatery to raise the obedient Flesh and Blood into a tumor. For whiles the Air
enclosed in the Cupping-Glass begins to wax cold, and by this means its
endeavors become less, then the Air, which wandreth in the Pores of the Flesh,
being delivered of its trouble, raises the skin into a little tumor by its
Spontaneous Elatery.

But Snow, say some, or any cold thing cramb'd in the Cucurbite, hinders its
commerce with the Flesh; and on the other side a Linen Cloth a little hotter
put thereon, as Chirurgions do, stirs up the Attraction; Wherefore the
Elastick force of the Air closed within the Cupping-Glass becomes not dull
with cold.

But I know not out of what intention they object that which I have found not
once altogether contrary to Experience. For I have often put Water, yea Snow, on
a Cupping-Glass applied to the Flesh, but the inward Air was with such
swiftness condensed, that the Flesh suddenly grew into a little tumor not
without most great pain; But so soon as I had covered the Cucurbite with a very
hot Linen Cloth, presently the pain did remit, and the tumor diminish. It Is
then no wonder that the Chirurgions cast such a Linen Cloth over the
Cupping-Glasses, lest either they should stir up more vehement pain, or raise
the Flesh to too great a tumor, or draw out the Blood in too great abundance.

Neither believe thou that with this success I have applied a Cupping-Glass
only to live Bodies, yea I have applied it to Carcasses and Liquors. And
indeed put into Boiling Water a Cupping-Glass, you will admire to see a heap of
Water crept into it, the Fire being altogether extinguished, or the Heat become
Lukewarm; and if then you apply to the Cupping-Glass a Cloth dipped in any
Cold Liquor, or Snow it self, or Ice, the inward Air contracting it self, and
its Elatery being debilitated by the Cold, a greater abundance of Water shall
be thrust into the Cupping-Glass.

How Water is thrust into the hot Aeolipila.
So Aeolipilaes [Wind-balls or Globes made of Copper, with Canals going out of
them, which Glass-makers use instead of Bellowes] being placed in the midst of
a Fire, exhale most of the Air they contain; and then as the residue of the Air
within grows cold, and the force of the Elatery being weakened, the external
prevailing Air hastneth the Water into the Engine by its Tail-pipe dipped
therein; and that with no little force, as we discern by the noise of its
murmuring.

And hence likewise falls to the Ground the Prop of the Attractive Opinion
raised by Heat.

Other ways of drawing Air out of Aeolipilaes are proposed and explained.
There is another way of filling Aeolipilaes, viz. by out-sucking; a strong
argument against our impulsion, if indeed it were firm, which all have already
believed, That the Air when we suck is drawn backwards to the Throat. It
pleases me therefore to explain this Mystery.

Close the Tail of an Aeolipila in thy Mouth, so that the Air contained in both
places may become continued in the same Closet of the Mouth; Indeed so long as
the Tongue is not moved, nor the Breast enlarged, and the Air likewise in both
places [to wit, in the Mouth and Aeolipila] quiet, does persevere in the Law of
equal poisure. But where there is either Motion in Tongue or Breast, it is
needful that in both places the Air is moved: and because by one of the
Motions at least the Aeolipila is emptied, it pleases me to enquire after what
manner this is perfected.

Either use only the Lungs, or the Bellowes-like dilatation of the Breast, or
the beating only of the Sucking Tongue, as they believe, against the Palate.

By the first way indeed the whole Breast is distended, in the mean time no
breath of exterior Air entering in either by the shut-lips, neither by the
breathing holes of the nostrils either to the Mouth, or to the Aeolipila. The
distended Breast likewise prepares a more ample place for the Air, which is
contained by the den of the Mouth, contiguous to the Aeolipilary Air. The Air
having received room extends it self toward the Breast, and therefore the
Elater of it becomes more weak than that of the Aeolipilar; which when this
[to wit, closed within the Aeolipila] perceives, and that it is repressed by
the endeavors of none, it rarifies it self, and it does propagate its bounds
without the Aeolipila, as the force of the weaker will suffer it.

But by the latter manner, the whole Tongue, together with the Pipe of the
Aeolipila, does more compactly beat against the whole Palate; Then the middle
of the obsequious Tongue sinking to the door of the little Pipe, forsakes the
Palate, and by a more sharp endeavor does fold it self into a Furrow; So that
of that force the space that is obnoxious to the Aeolipilar Air, not being
empty indeed, but full with the little Air which had remained below the
cavernous Cuticles of the Tongue and Palate, sollicitateth the Elatery of the
same (I mean of the Aeolipilar) Air to dilatation, and allures and inviteth
this Spontaneous Elatery out of the Aeolipila into the Furrow of the Mouth; and
does not, as our Adversaries believe, compel it by drawing.

When so much of the Air has flowed out of the Aeolipila both ways as could,
by the pressure of the external Air which is then more thick than the internal,
the Water shall so long run into the Engine by the Tail suddenly dipped in the
Water, till a just counterpoyse shall give rest to the equal strength of both
that is without and within.

After the same manner sometimes thou suckedst; after the same manner Children
plunder the Winehogsheads by stealth, dipping therein their Drinking Reeds; yea
by the same way fill the Syihons with Liquor, viz. by the weight and endeavor
of the outward Air, stirring up the flowing of the Liquors according to the
dilatation of the Throat or Mouth.

Thus having demolished the chief Engines whereby our Adversaries establish
their Attraction, I am resolved to spend no more time in superfluous matters.

CHAP. X. The true Causes of the Blood's Motion are discovered.
HAving demonstrated what a light incitement the weight of innate gravity is to
the Motion of the Blood, and having observed by evident Experiments that the
Hearts Systole suffices not alone for this effect, and having altogether cut
off the helps of the Diastolick Attraction, it remains that we consider the
Construction of the Vessels, and that we ponder their Compression from the
Agitation of the neighboring parts.

It Is certain that the Vessels are straightened by Spontaneous Contraction, or by
Violent.

I call that Spontaneous whereby of themselves they leave their swelling
fullness.

I call that Violent which an External Cause produces.

I demonstrate the Spontaneous after this manner.

Of the Spontaneous Contraction of the Vessels.
I believe no man doubts, that the Blood is urged out of the Ventricles of
the Heart, and flows into the Arteries by a certain force or compression of
the Systolick Motion; And if at that time the force of its flowing were not
hindered by any stops, the Blood was able to return even to the Heart by the
endeavor only of Compression.

But remember [Reader] that the Blood thrust into the Arteries by reason of its
Continuity, so thrust with it the Venose Blood, so that notwithstanding nothing
flows again from the Veins into the Heart, till the action of the Systoles be
quite ended, and the Diastoles begun; And for this that not only the Arteries,
but the Veins also in the last moment of the Systoles are turned with abundance
of two sorts of Blood, viz. with the old and with the new comed.

The Tunicles of the Vessels being then more stretched by reason of the stay of
the Blood during the Systoles continuance, does stir up the innate Elatery
according to the measure of its natural capacity, that immediately so soon as
the Triglochinon Valve had finished his duty by the succeeding Diastole, should
quickly discover his power that lay at wait, and should compel the compressed
Blood to rush into the open and empty bosoms of the relaxed Heart.

Hence appears what the Spontaneous Contraction of the Vessels is: The Violent
follows.

Of the Violent Contraction of the Vessels.
This is raised up either by the sharpness of the more piercing humor; so the
sharper Bile does straiten the Intestine Membranes into wrinkles, or pricking
and solution of Continuity from whatsoever Cause: So when sometimes I opened
the Duodenum according to its length making incision, that I might observe the
Liquor flowing out of the Pancreatical Vessel of Virsungus into this Gut, the
Gut did so wrinkle it self, that it contracted the incision to the middle; and
closing up the little entrance of Virsungus his Canale, did altogether stop the
running watrish humor which flowed from thence. And the same judgment which
belongs to the Guts is to be given of the other Vessels and Membranes of the
Body.

The Contraction of Vessels after this manner may be brought to pass by the
help of Ligatures, viz. the pricking of Pain, being Companions to the
straitnesses of the Ligatures, do solicitate all the neighboring parts to the
help of the diseased; and whilst they concur to the spending of their
obsequious Blood, where the Valve does permit, the Vessels become wrinkled.
Hence the Blood in the Veins hastneth from the Ligature to the Heart; but that
in the Arteries hastneth to the Extreme Parts, the Valves admitting it, whereof
some indeed forbid regress by another way toward the stoppages.

Of the Compression of the Vessels.
But so far as belongs to the Compressary Coarctation of the Vessels, I say
the same is perfected both by the pressure of breathed Air into the Lungs, and
by the endeavor of the Muscles adjacent to the Pipes whilst they are stirred.

So a more vehement motion makes the Pulse beat swiftlier, and produces a
more frequent blowing; so the quaking tumult of the leaping parts in a dying
Creature, proceeding from the Cold falling on them, does empty the Arteries,
the Veins remaining full.

Therefore I say the Blood is Circulated by a threefold incitement, viz. by
the Impulsion of the Systoles; by the Contraction of the Vessels, whether
Violent or Voluntary; and by the Endeavor of the Adjacent Parts, by the
Compression of their Vessels: These three are so disposed toward one another,
that some of them evermore recompenseth the defect of the other, though slowly,
by the perseverance of his duty. While the Heart does beat, it does out of it
self thrust the Blood into the Veins and Arteries; The Contraction of its own
Tunicle does empty the tied Artery beyond the Ligature; The Contraction of the
Vicine Parts gives assistance to this effect; The Tumor of the tied Vein beyond
the Ligature, that is, betwixt it and the Extreme Parts, is intended by the
Continual motion of Blood which the Arteries, being free of a Ligature, issue
out; On this side the Ligature, that is, toward the Heart, the Evacuation is
perfected by the Contraction of the Tunicle, and pressure of the Vicine Parts.

And so the Blood is pressed out of the Heart into the Arteries; it is tunned
partly out of the Arteries into the Veins by the Synanastomosies, partly it is
poured out into the Flesh, and from thence gathered into the Veins, it
returns again into the Heart in a Circle so necessary for the Life, that
being never so little hindered, either Faintness, or Swouning, and not seldom
also Death follows thereon.

OF THE MOTION OF THE CHYLE.
CHAP. XI. It is demonstrated, that the Chyle is also thrust into the Lacteal
Veins, and is driven toward the Heart, and that it is not sucked.
THE Motion of the Blood being perfected, it may easily also be shown whither
the Chyle is roled.

All know that the Chyle is expressed from the Aliments that fall into the
Intestines from the Stomach which concocteth them, and that they go through the
Tunicles of the Intestins by the little Pores opened by Nature into the Pipes
of the Lacteal Veins, But whether the Pervious Intestins imitate a Sive or a
Sponge, their double Coat (which is proper to them) does not denote any one of
them, but them both. Nature has woven their outmost coat with the threads of
most small Fibers artificially, like a st^aining Sieve, unto which by her
providence with a wonderful anointing she has glewed on the inside a wrinkling
or spongeous, if you will, lining, of a most soft substance; that both the
sharpness of the Aliments may pass unhurting them; and that that juice which is
most subtle may be strained out of the Excrements into the Lacteal Veins.

The former Experiments clearly showed the passage of the Chyle; now we are to
search whether the Chyle is thrust or drawn.

That the Chyle is not drawn.
The Chyle is not drawn or sucked; for whether you bind in the Mesentery the
Lacteal Veins, or whether you put a Ligature on the same, within the Chest of
the Breast beyond the Ligature, that is, toward the Intestins swelling up,
they will suffocate the Attractory or sucking opinion.

Neither affirm thou that the Lacteals, like Blood-suckers, do draw the Chyle
by sucking: For the Blood-suckers do not draw the Blood, neither do they
otherwise draw out the same, than we, when putting a Reed into a Spring or
Hogshead, we draw out the Liquor by the distention both of Mouth and Lungs; for
the Blood-suckers do prick the Cutaneous Veins, and whiles they swell, by the
labor of the Lungs playing the part of Bellows, by their dilatation the Blood
enters into their easy Stomachs. Therefore the Chyle is not thrust forwards
into the Lacteal Veins, but it comes to be inquired of whether by the proper
action of the Intestins, or by a virtue extraneous to them.

Of the Contraction of the Intestins.
When the Chyle or Juice fried out of the meat slideth from the Stomach into
the Guts, it tumifieth them, and does extend their Fibers most obsequious-like
into an Elatery: So that their vigor being augmented by intension, returning
again of their own will to their natural estate, they straiten the Guts by
depressing the Chyle from the Stomach to the Fundament. And hence I conclude,
The Guts, like some Membranous Bodies, have their proper Contraction, but an
Extraneous dilatation.

Besides this Contraction you are to observe the dilatation and wrinklings of
the Spongeous Membrane which is within the Guts: For that Tunicle drinking up
the more fluid juice of the Chyle that slipped out of the Stomach, does swell
as a Sponge; and when it is wrinkled by either the Compression of the adjacent
parts; or some other Cause, partly it removes the Chyle inwardly, partly it
does express it into the Lacteal Veins.

Moreover, you are to take notice, That that Contraction of the Intestins, and
wrinkling of the inward Membrane, succeeds the extraneous dilatation, and
that it little or nothing avails for the thrusting of Chyle into the Lacteal
Veins, yea rather that it much stops its passage: For the Gut the more
Contracted it is, the more it stops the Pores, and therefore the open ends
of the Lacteal Veins, and gives a less pervious passage to the enclosed
Liquors. And this also is taken notice of above in the violent Contraction of
the Vessels, and easy Experience does prove, it both in other Membranes, and
most in the Bladder new pulled out of the body; For indeed it is contracted, the
piss flowing out; neither will it then being pricked up and down with a Needle,
shed any of the Urine out of the Needle holes, except by compressing it
violently you wring the Liquor out of it.

So the Peristaltick motion of the Guts, if any such be to be admitted, for it
was not any where discovered to us in Living Creatures, because it successively
draws together their Coats, closing with wrinkling the passages, is
unsufficient to thrust the Chyle into the Lacteals; Except may be you join to
it the other motion of dilatation, by which, while it does corrugate the upper
part of the Intrals together with it, it distends the inferior, which being
filled with meats, it may issue through it a greater deal of Chyle into the
Lacteals.

But seeing that dilatation, which is produced from the falling down Chyle, is
of little force, and scarce opens those little Pores wherein the Chyle is
thrust, indeed we are at last to arrive at a more vehement Compression of the
Guts.

Of the Compression of the Guts.
I find amongst the first a twofold Cause of this, viz. Respiration, and a
Contraction of the Muscles in the Belly and Breast; such an one chiefly as is
stirred up by the emptying of the Excrements out of the Guts, and unburthening
of the Bladder, and may be of evacuating the Gall. For then the Air enclosed in
the Lungs which they draw in, and the vehement endeavor of the Muscles do not
a little compress the Intrals: So that I believe by that motion the Chyle is
expressed out of the Stomach into the Guts, and that this white substance
breaks out of the Guts into the Lacteal Veins.

I pass by that Contraction and Dilatation, by whose means the Muscles of
Respiration are stirred up by a Continued motion; For they do not so Compress
the Intrals that they are able to express the Chyle out of the Guts. I forbear
the beating of the Arteries about the Guts; for the Arteries being quiet after
the tying of the Coeliack Branch, the sliding-in Chyle does no less tumifie the
Lacteal Veins. It only remains then that we fly to the vehement Contraction of
the Muscles, or to the Continual Vicissitude of Breathing outward and inward.

But because the perpetual passing of the Chyle, so long as Aliments remain,
requires likewise a Continued Cause of Compression, which in vain is sought in
that almost Momentary Contraction of the Muscles: We are in my judgment at
last to fly to the Vicissitudes of Breathings.

OF RESPIRATION. It Is declared how Respiration is wrought, and what it avails
the Motion of the Chyle. That the Lungs are not a pervious Tunicle, is known by
Experiments.
REspiration is done, as is known to all, by the Alternal Elatery of the Lungs
and Air, so as by the dilatation of the Air, which is received and rarefied by
the heat of the Lungs, the Lungs together with the Muscles of Respiration are
distended, and afterward by their Spontaneous Contraction the Air it self is
compelled to go out.

But the distention of Lungs in fetching breath, which the open wounds of the
Breast declare, is an Argument, That their Tunicle is altogether impervious.
And indeed it is more compact, neither ever will it give leave to the Air to go
through them by any force or breathing.

These things will be manifested by Experiments. If you blow with an Oat-reed
into the Bronchia [Wind-pipe] of a Living Creature, whilst you are cutting it
up: For use what means you can, the Wind will not touch the flame of the Candle
you hold to it, except in that place you have opened the Coat thereof.

Here you are to take notice, That Chirurgions oft-times err in the wounds of
the Breast; They hold near to them the flame of a Candle, and by its motion,
which is procured by the Air breathing out thereat, they foolishly infer,
That the Lungs are wounded. But if they shall reply any thing, then in Empyick
operations they may be bold to aver the rupture of the Lungs from the like
mobility of the flame.

Neither should you esteem the Tunicle of the Lungs porous by the matter of a
Pleurisy avoided by Screation or urine. For as our Riolan has exactly set down
in the third Book and fourth Chapter of his Encheiridion, There is no such
effluxion, except the Pleura be burst, and the Lungs excoriate; viz. if either
before the Pleurisy they stuck to the Ribs, or whiles the inflammation begins
to increase, the Lungs sticking to the Pleura, both by the Glue of the Viscous
humor swearing out by the Phlegmones heat, and by the smallness of the motion,
hindered by the pain and tumor, they are joined together. For the Phlegmone then
touching both the Membranes Infects both together with rottenness turning into
an Ulcer: Whence it comes to pass, that the Matter rushing into the Lungs, is
either thrown out by the Windpipe in Spittel, or is carried by the Venal Artery
into the left Ventricle of the Heart, and thence going into the Aorta it goes
through the Reins, and is avoided with the Urine.

What, say you, if there be no Contiguity of Membranes, the Pleura nevertheless
will burst, will the Atter remain in the bottom of the Breast? It will
altogether remain, even to the undoing of the party, except by the quickly
opening of the Empyema you empty it of this Purulent burden.

But I return to Respiration, in which whilst the Pulmons are dilated, they
also press the Midriff downward; and the Liver, which then plays the part of a
Pistil acting by the weight of its bulk beating by intervals, does not only
compel the Chyle to depart out of the Stomach through the Pylore into the
Guts, but also distends their little Pores, and thence thrusts into the Lacteal
Veins the most subtle substance of the Aliment. So Children gripe with their
hands an Ele-skin full of water, and through the little holes with the small
point of a Needle made therein every where, by pressing it they cause the water
to spring forth into many small streams.

But because our speech is arrived at the depression of the Diaphragm, it will
not be besides our purpose to declare all I have observed conterning its Motion.

OF THE MOTION OF THE DIAPHRAGM.
Whilst the Lungs draw in the Air, by little and little swelling at that
middle of the Diaphragm where it is tied to the back, they drive downward the
descending fibers of this middle, which in the Circumference indeed are fleshy,
but membranous in the Center, and by their palpitation compress the inferior
places of the Stomach hanging under, together with the Liver: But indeed the
other middle, where the Diaphragm is placed, under both the Breast Bone, and
Cartilages of the Bastard Ribs, and does unfold the membranous Fibers of its
Center, and lifts up obliquely its fleshy Fibers of the Circumference
together with the fore-region of the Breast; So that whilst the hinder parts of
the Diaphragm are depressed, at the same almost moment the former parts are
lifted up with a vehement striving indeed.

Neither believe thou that those Muscles in Breast and Belly, which they call
the Muscles of Respiration, do any way assist this motion; for they being quite
cut away even till the Cartilages of the Breast Bone be discovered [the
Intercostal Muscles and Diaphragm being preserv'd] and the den of the inferior
Belly being laid open, nevertheless the Creature does breath as much as if
these Muscles were not wounded at all.

And these are the Motions which I have observed in Aspiration [drawing in the
Breath] but in Expiration, both the fore-parts of the Diaphragm together with
the Breastbone, do fall, and the hinder-parts, together with Liver and Stomach,
does rise, and then the Diaphragm is drawn in wrinkles by its Fibers, both in
its membranous Center, and fleshy Circumference.

Before I finish my speech of the Diaphragm, I would have you take notice of
this one thing, That those fleshy productions of the Diaphragm above the Loins,
as it were Appendicles, do lurk under the Receptacle of the Chyle, so that they
cannot be distended, but together with them distending the Receptacle it self,
they compel it to issue out the Chyle it contains; and these are enough of the
Diaphragm. We will answer the Objections brought against our Opinion,
asserting, That Respiration is the sole inciter of the Chyle into the Lacteal
Veins.

THE OBJECTIONS AGAINST RESPIRATION Answered.
Why therefore, say thou, should not Respiration of it self blind thrust
into the Lacteals digested with undigested, with pure seculent? Except, Reader,
I were resolved of Common Opinions, only to admit that which is voyc'd by the
testimony of Experience, I would answer; Seeing the Lacteal Veins do not
immediately receive the Chyle from the Stomach, for it has no Lacteals, that
Concoction is perfected before it comes from the Stomach; and for that
whatsoever Aliment descends into the Guts most ready prepared, that Chyle
should be expressed out thereof, it cannot become raw by the mixture of any
undigested substance.

But because many times not a few things do rush down out of the Stomach
toward the Fundament, or Bladder, before the finishing of requisite
Concoction; neither is there any patent way betwixt the Stomach and Bladder,
but that of the Lacteals; I am my self compelled to confess, that many times
even Crude Aliments do descend from the Stomach.

And indeed presently after the immoderate drinking of Wine, a man in Cups
shall make water; neither does that limpider Urine which he makes receive any
taste or tincture. Hence I reason, that it has not flowed through the Mass of
Blood, from which it should have received something of either. The stay of
Urine in the Body made of Mineral waters, is most short. The Urine within a
quarter of an hour after the taking of Asparagus receives its swell and color.
Yea the Juice pressed out of the Indian Figs makes the Urine become Purple.

Therefore I, I say, believe, that before the Concoction be finished, these
Liquors have to the Bladder by the passage of the Chyle; the Pylore admitting
them either for the urging over-fulness, or for the opening force of these
Diuretic Liquors, or for some other reason.

Neither object the Vas breve, that its postern does empty these superfluities
in the Milt, and from thence spread in the Liver, are gathered again, that they
may ascend to the Heart; and afterward being thrust into the Arteries, at last
are thrown headlong by the Emulgents into the Reins; For both the shortness of
time does not agree to so great a Circuit, and they through so many errors and
mixture of humors should not only receive a tincture, but, which is against
our daily experience, should be sharpened with saltness.

But if thou should suspect unperceivable passages from the Stomach toward
the Reins, suffer thy self, Reader, not to believe such passages, till with
their grown greatness they leave of to evanish out of thy sight.

I would rather believe that these Liquors flow out of the Stomach by the
Pylorus, and that they are thrust out of the Guts through the Lacteals unto the
Receptacle of the Chyle discovered by us under the Mesentery; and from thence
partly by the Chylous passage of the Breast do flow unto the Heart, the Forge
of Blood; partly being separate from the Chyle, do flow into the Reins placed
on both sides, either by the Trunk of the Emulgent Arteries sticking firmly to
the Receptacle of the Chyle, which perchance for this use is thence from
without pervious within, and fit like a strainer to transcolate the serosity:
Or if you had rather, they have diverted by the adjacent Ministry of the
Atrabilar Cases; or by the Ministry of the Peritoneum, whose doubling is very
subject to carry the Liquors, in respect of the neighborhood of the Parts.

Truly there appears no fitter way to me for the carrying out of those things
which oft-times leave the Stomach not only without Concoction, but oft-times
not being so much as hot therein.

So, whiles the Air is most hot, immoderate drinking of cold water opens the
Belly; The same force is in Asses Milk, and Mineral Waters. The Tunicles of
Grapes, of Berries, and all the slughes of Fruits, Seeds or Pulses, though
never so long boiling in the heat of the Stomach, nevertheless they are even
then thrown out Crude: How much more shall they rush out of the stomach before
they be concocted, who are of an apertive and laxative quality? And hence it
is, that Medicines being drunk and avoided by the siege, both taste and smell
sometimes with the color remaining.

Your Object again, That the Chyle rusheth into the Lacteal Veins, even when
the spirit of the Lungs is spent, and the force of breathing altogether
extinct: So that opening the Breast of a Living Creature, and the Pulmons
becoming flaccid, nevertheless the Lacteal Veins tied in the Mesentery will
swell for a little time.

Truly it is a weighty Argument against our opinion; For answering of which, I
wish you to take notice of that, that I have often tried, That the Lacteals tied
in the Mesentery, then only swell, when the Living Creature, the Breast being
unhurt, vehemently does yet move the whole entrals of the lower Belly, together
with the Muscles of all the body: For when, the Breast being opened, the motion
of the Animal is extinguished, the Lacteals leave off altogether to swell;
except may be the Spongeous Membranes of the Guts, in respect of the Colder
Air, or pricks of grief, drawing themselves together, they express a little of
the residue of that Chyle they before had gathered, into the Lacteals.

I conclude, Therefore Respiration does thrust the Chyle into the Lacteals, the
other two, viz. Contraction and Compression, assisting it. This, by the
endeavor of the Vicine parts, stirs up the Chyle contained both in the
Guts, and likewise in the Lacteals: But the other is such an Enemy to the
fullness of the Canals, that it suffers not, after death, any footstep to remain
either of Lacteals in the Breast or Mesentery, neither of the Receptacle on the
Backs Vertebers.

And these are the things I had to publish concerning the Motion of Blood and
Chyle, and of the incitement thereto. It remains (Reader) I should take away
the Complaint thou have in behalf of the Liver, from which I took away the
office of making the Blood.

CHAP. XII. Of the Transcolatory use of the Liver.
AFter I have taken from the Liver that usurped Glory of Blood-making which
undeservedly it retained for so many ages; it is just I should assign to it that
duty for which it was made, and placed in the Forge, as they call it, of the
first Region, and that I should disclose the true office thereof.

Besides that office which it discharges, as is said before, instead of a
Pistill beating the parts placed under it in the Lower Belly by the motion of
Respiration; The Liver also does, by that great stream of Blood it receives
from the Vena porta, administer Heat to the Stomach to help the Concoction of
the Meat; And moreover, does strain the Blood through his most fit Parenchyma
[Substance.] And as the Reins purges the Blood of its Serum, and the Melt of
its Acidity, so the Liver does deliver it of the fellowship of the Bile that is
mixed therewith.

For if no sourse of Chylous matter does come unto it, neither therefore does
the Liver impurplush any Aliment into Blood; And only the Trunk of the Vena
porta [which likewise does not from any place receive Chyle, as has been
shewn] does fill it with the Blood wherewith it swells; Neither does any man
wisely [if I be any whit wise] repute Bile the Excrement of the second
Concoction, neither should he esteem it separable by any other Instrument.

And indeed you shall not find any where, in any kind of Living Creatures, the
Blood without the mixture of Bile; The yellowish and salt Serum will testify
so much: Except perchance in some Creatures, to whom meek Mistress Nature has
concocted a sweeter Blood; As in others, in which she has infused Blood
without Acidity, whom she has endued either with no Melt at all, or at least
with a very little one.

The continual Heat, which cherishes the Heart, and warmeth the mass of Blood,
dissolves all the subtilest parts of the Serosity into Vapors, and again
Concocting the rest [which by its frequent frying, and pressing of the sweet
from the salt, I call the remaining Progeny] it would altogether turn it to
Bile; Except the providence of Nature for the purging of the bitter Excrement,
or rather of Salt thickened by too much Concoction, had endued the Body with a
fit Emunctory.

And as Fullers use to color their hands with those Liquors they die with, so
that Bilous Intral, the Liver, according to the diverse tinctures of Bile,
either is yellowish red, or of a languishing ash color, sometimes blackish
green, or brown, though the Blood be exactly red.

Hence in the Child in the Womb, in which there is never any Chyle bred, about
the beginning of its forming, the Liver has its Saffron-colour'd Cystis full
of Bile, though other ways the Blood be of a purple die: Which is an evident
Argument, that the Bile is not the Excrement of the Second, as they call it,
Concoction; but an Excrement of the Blood, which (Blood) is only transmitted
into the Liver of the Child in the Womb.

Neither may be the fervid Blood in the Mother, and strained by the Uterin
Liver [the Lump] in the Matrix, should in such purity err in the Veins of the
Embryon, except it should leave the greatest part of it in the Liver, into the
which it first flows by the Coeunt Pipes of the Umbilick Veins.

And this, as I believe, is the Chief Office of the Liver in Living Creatures.

THE OBJECTIONS Answered.
WIll you so indeed, say you, exhaust the whole Blood of its Bile by the
diverting Coeliack Branch?

Before (Reader) I answer what I think, I will interrogate thy knowledge by
vicissitude in this place: Prithee tell me by what Engine the Blood, which at
the same time enters the Iliack Arteries that it enters the Emulgent, does
issue its serosity into the Reins? For that without doubt the wisdom of Nature
appointed the necessity of the Blood's Circular motion, that through diverse
periods at last the whole Blood might succeed into the same Inns.

Again, you demand, by what means this Transcolation is perfected; and how it
comes to pass, that those passages pervious to the Bile, exclude the Serum and
Blood: Neither they on the other side are patent to the Bile which admit the
Serum? whether because the Serum is more subtle than the Bile? or otherwise?

I confess the Cause of so great a wonder is hid from me, if you will not admit
for a sufficient reason the diversity of Figures which is in the straining
bodies, and in the openings of the Colon.

In vain will thou endeavor to put a Triangle of the same altitude with the
Diameter of a round hole, into it, or into a three-angled hole a Quadrangle, or
some other many Angled Figure: And I shall easily suffer my self to be
persuaded, that the same kind of Figures is not found in Aqueous Parts which is
found in Bilous; and that therefore the Bile [at least that which is most
gross] being unfitting to the passages of the Reins, cannot retire thither; As
neither can the thicker serosity, for the same discommodities enter into that
Province which is only proper to the Bile.

But if thou demand, whether or no there be Figures in the most smallest
particles of Bile or Water.

I will answer first, That the Water is not only a porous body, but likewise
cavernous with many Figures of pores. The Learned Gassendus has demonstrated
this with great sagacity. But in vain shall the diversity of Figures be
asserted into the Aqueous Pores, which diversity thou deniest to admit in those
parts whereof the Water consists. But that there was diversity of Figures in
the Pores of the Water, Gassendus proved by a Noble Experiment.

He threw a Measure of common Salt into Spring Water; the Water within a short
time did only dissolve a certain part of this, the rest of the Salt remaining
untouched. In the same Water Nitre being infused, a part of it did by melting
mix it self with the Water, a part remained undissolv'd. Thirdly, by the same
a part of Allom dissolved, a part remained whole. Fourthly, Sal Amoniack tried
the same Fortune, with others, which by themselves he had mixed with the Water.

As I think you may also express the Figures of melted Salt in that Water
which is commonly called Stygian, or Aqua Fortis, and the ways of dissolving
Metals in the same.

This Aqua Fortis is of two sorts; One, called Common, dissolves all Metals
except Gold; The other, called Regia, reduces their King to Powder; Silver
nevertheless therein reserving his Figure with unspotted Constancy, scorning
the Pride of such a prerogative.

The Matter of the Common is the Spirits of Vitriol, Nitre, and Sea Salt.

This becomes Regia, if you impregnate it with as much Sal Ammoniack as it can
dissolve. But neither, as I think, can the Common make impression in Gold,
because the figured little Bodies of these Spirits do so exactly fit the Golden
Pores, that flopping their motion, they rest within the Metal. It dissolves
the rest either with its Fire, or with the Sulphur which is in Metals arroding
with the sharp points of their Figures the diverse Cavities of the Metallic
Pores, whilst they contend to be admitted into the fellowship of those fitter
to them; I had almost said, battering down the Cavities: But because Sal
Ammoniack, mixed with these Salts, does agree with the Pores of Silver, but no
ways with with those of Gold, it first occupies the Silver Pores, so that it
quieteth the invasion of his fellows, whom it stirs up against Gold, the
Wall being demolished, and admits them desiring it.

If thou have any other Cause of these Events, Reader, different from the
Figures of the Aqueous Pores, and those which determine the Salts and their
Spirits, prithee communicate it to our knowledge.

Truly the quadrat space of the Pores shall be so filled with the wonted
quadrature of Sea Salt, as their six-corner'd profundity shall be possessed
with hexaedron solidity of the points of Nitre.

The same judgment is to be given of the Figures of the rest of the Salts.

If Bile, which we acknowledged to be Salt mixed with a certain Oilous humor,
be mixed with Serum, it salts it: and the Urine is in so much more brackish, as
there is more Bile mixed with it: And if the abundance of Bile exceed the
dissolving force of the Water, whatsoever remains, being rolled up in
Crystalline Sand, and like Salt, fusi'e by Fire under it, it is just it should
settle in the bottom. Hot Water will contain more Salt mixed with it than Cold
Water will, viz. the Fire enlarging its Pores by reason of the fellowship of
the Air contained there, and easily rarefied.

Whence, seeing there is neither Guts nor Cavities promiscuous to the Bile and
Serum, neither promiscuous diverticles, but seeing that only of the Bile
flows out to the Urine, which being most subtle in the mass of Blood, is
most fit to tincture the Urine; so neither does the grossest of the Serum
penetrate into the Gall, but that only that can lubricate the way, and in
which the Bile can flow; it will not therefore be amiss to admit in both Bile,
viz. and Serum, diversity of Figures.

I said the most subtle: For the Bile is not of one only consistency; Yea I
think it threefold, and that to be most subtle which being mixed together with
the Serum, avoydeth with the Urine.

The other two sorts is demonstrated by the Liver; That which is more subtle,
enters the Gall; The other, of more gross juice, possesses the Hepatick
Passage; The out-flowing of both may be moves the inmost Tunicle of the
Intestins, both of them discharge the duty of natural Clysters, and being mixed
with the Excrements, are evacuated.

So the variety of the Searcher-like passages, and the diverse configurations of
straining. Bodies, does in this place stop the passage of fluid things, but in
that allows it. Hence the Urine, together with the Bile, passes through the
Reins into the Bladder, I mean that which is subtillest in the mass of Blood;
The Acidity goes to nourish the Melt; The Subtiller Bile flows out of the
Liver into the Gall, the Grosser running into the Hepatick Passage. I will say
in a word, That the Excrements can take up their Inns by the Gates only
appointed for them, the Posterns of others being altogether shut against them.

Mundus regitur Opinionibus.
FINIS.

