Babylon the Great DESCRIBED.

The City of Confusion.

In every part whereof Antichrist Reigns.

Which knows not the order and unity of the spirit, but striveth to set up an
order and uniformity according to the wisdom of the flesh, in all her
Territories and Dominions.

Her SINS, Her JVDGEMENTS.

With some plain Queries further to discover her, And some considerations to
help out of her Suburbs, that her inward building may lie the more open to the
breath and spirit of the Lord, from which it is to receiv its consumption and
overthrow.

Also, An Exhortation to the Powers of the Earth.

By Isaac Penington, the younger.

That which is far of, and exceeding deep, who can sind out? I and mine heart
compassed to know, and to search, and to seck out wisdom, and the reason, and
to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishnes and madness. And I find
more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares and nets, her hands
bands. He that is good before God, shall escape from her, but the sinner shall
be taken by her, Eccles. 7. 24, 25, 26. He that is born of the pure immortal
seed, and lives in the anointing, escapes the golden cup of fornication, and
all the painted beds of fornication, and is not defiled with women, Rev. 14. 4.
but remains chaste to the Bridegroom. London Printed for Lodowick Lloyd, and are
to sold at his Shop in Co^nhi(...) next door to the Castle, 1659.

LO this is the City which is built up of, and filled with images, and
likenesses of the ways and truths of God, without the life and power.

On her outside there is the likeness of a Church, the likeness of a Ministry,
the likeness of the Ordinances, Duties and ways of holiness.

On her inside there is the likeness of the good knowledge, the likeness of
repentance and conversion, the likeness of faith, the likeness of zeal for God,
the likeness of love to God and his Saints, the likeness of the Lambs meekness
and innocence; the likeness of justification, the likeness of sanctification,
the likeness of mortification, the likeness of hope, peace, joy, rest, and
satisfaction, etc. but the substance, the truth, the virtue of all these is
wanting to her, and she her self is found persecuting that very thing (where it
is found in truth) the image whereof she cries up.

This, This is the woman that has bewitched the whole earth for these many
generations, and is still changing her dresses and paints, that she might still
bewitch people, and sit as a Queen reigning over their consciences. But blessed
be the light which is arisen to discover, and the power which is able to
overthrow this stately, this lofty, this mighty City, and all that take part
with it.

The Lord God Omnipotent reigns in Sion, and Antichrist with his City Babylon
falls. Sing praises, sing praises O inhabitant of Sion, to him who subjecteth
Babylon (with all her glory) under thy feet.

For he brings down them that dwell on high, the lofty City he lays it low;
he lays it low, even to the ground he brings it even to the dust. The foot
shall tread it down (the feet of the poor, the steps of the needy) Isa. 26. 5,
6.

The Preface.
THere has been in me a zeal for God from my childhood, and a most earnest
search into the Scriptures (which my soul deeply relished, and my heart
honored and loved, and still does) for the revelation of the mind and will of
God. Two things did I earnestly search and beg for: The one was, for the
discovery of the outward way of worship; The other, for the inward life, virtue
and power, which I looked upon the outward, as the proper means to lead me to,
At the beginning of the troubles in these Nations, there was a lively stirring
in me, and an hope that God was bringing forth somewhat; I likewise felt the
same stirring in many others, at which my heart was rejoiced, and with which my
soul was refreshed; but I found it soon begin to flag and wither, which forced
me to retire, and to separate from that, where I found the life and power dying
and decaying. In my separation the Lord was with me, my soul remembers it
right well, and he had regard to the simplicity, honesty, and integrity of my
heart, (which he himself bad kindled in me:) And though I felt too soon into a
way of Church Fellowship and Ordinances, yet he had regard to me, and pittyed
me, and refreshed my life even there. But at length the form overgrew us, and
the sweet and precious life in us began to dye. Then the Lord found out another
way to refresh us (namely by a sensible relating of our conditions, and of his
dealings with us, and workings in us) which was very sweet and precious at
first, but the enemy crept in there also, Out of this state I never made any
change, but here the hand of the Lord fell upon me, striking at my very root,
breaking all my life in sunder, and trampling my crown in the dust. Then I
became a man of sorrows (being stripped of all my life, faith, hope; joy,
comfort in one day) not knowing which way to look, nor what to desire.
Sometimes there were breathings stiring in me, but they were presently judged:
Sometimes a little glance of refreshment from a Scripture presented to me, but
suddenly taken away, and my death and darkness increased thereby. Then should
I wish, O that I might appear before his throne; for surely my conscience is
clear in his sight, and I have not wickedly departed from my God, but was
broken in pieces by his hand, even while my soul was earnestly seeking after
him. O how my soul did mourn, to see how I was fit to be made a prey to every
ravening spirit! and many did seek to devour me, but the hand of the Lord was
with me, preserving me, though I knew it not. And though I was wholly broken,
and desolate of all that I had called, or could call knowledge (insomuch as that
I could not call any thing either good or evil) yet the Lord by a secret
instinct, preserved me exceedingly out of that which was evil, and kept my
heart secretly panting after the fountain and wel-spring of good. Yea when I
was at length (through deep despair of ever meeting with God any more in this
life) captivated by the world, and betrayed by the love of it (which at last
rose up in me, and gained upon me by persuading me, that my present estate and
condition did require the free use of it, and the enjoyment of all it could
afford) yet the Lord followed me, and often was I visited with secret loathings
of the world, and turnings from it, and pantings after the spring of my life:
but these were dreaded by me, and suddenly quenched by the evil part, for fear
of that misery and unutterable anguish which I had felt hereby, the remembrance
whereof was fresh in me.

In this my courting of the world, and estrangement from the life, the
reasoning part (which the Lord has been long battering, and had laid very low)
gathered strength in me; and I began to grow wise again, and able to judge of
the things of God, and to hope and wait for some great appearance, wherein at
length I might be visited, and meet with that which I so vehemently desired,
and stood in such need of. Thereby the enemy deeply deceived me, pleasing me
herewith, and keeping me hereby from unity with that, which alone was able to
give me the sight of him, when ever he should appear. And in this fleshly
wisdom, I judged and despised the true life in others, as weak and low, and
not able to bring them to that which I stood in need of, and waited for. Yea
the more I considred and reasoned in my mind, and the more I conversed with
them (hoping thereby to find some clear ground either of owning or turning from
them) the further off still was I, till at length the Lord powerfully touched,
and raised up the life in me (which by all these reasonings and consultations,
all this while, I slew) and then by degrees (waiting upon that) I saw, I felt,
I tasted, I handled, as the Lord pleased to open to me here, that which was
shut out from me in my narrowest search and closest reasonings. Thus the Jew in
me was cast off, and the Gentile called: but who can read this? I am sure the
eye of man's religious wisdom cannot.

Hereby my eyes have been opened, and I have seen the fetters, whereby I have
been held captive from my life all my days: yea many of the streets, and
chambers of Babylon has my eye beheld (in the pure life) wherein the Witch
dwells which inchanteth from the life: yea I have heard the tongue of the false
Prophet, which speaks so like the true Prophet, as no flesh can discern or
distinguish between them: yea I have seen the Dragon in the Temple, worshipped
there for God by the strictest sort of Professors. And now in tender bowels, in
the true light of life, from the pure movings of the eternal Spirit (as the
Lord pleases to guide and direct) do I come forth to visit my poorfellow
creatures and captives in Babylon. And what I have seen and known I testify
for the relief of others, that if it be possible (by the mercy and good hand of
God) they may escape that misery, wherewith my poor soul has been overwhelmed,
and may come out of that filthy abominable City which God is making desolate;
where the pure life, the conquering faith, the suffering love, the purifying
hope, the putting off of the body of sin, the putting on the living garment is
not, nor cannot be witnessed but men are only dreaming of these things in
Babylon, where all the satisfaction they have, is from the pleasure of their
dream; but when they awake they will find leanness and penury, and nakedness
upon their souls.

A Description of Babylon, for the sake of the Daughter of Sion, which at
present dwells in the midest thereof.
Now though the world be deaf and blind (even all sorts of worldly professors,
from the highest to the lowest) yet open your ears, and hear the joyful sound;
open your eyes, and see the City of desolations, and of all the abominations of
the earth (both of flesh and Spirit:) and feel in your selves what it is, which
is to be led out, and what is to lead you, that your feet may be guided to, and
set firm upon Mount Sion, where the life rules over all her enemies.

BABYLON is the spiritual fabric of iniquity, the Mystical great City of the
great King of dark ess, built in imitation of Sion, painted just like Sion,
that it might be taeken for Sion, and he worshipped there, instead of the true
eternal ever-living God and King of Sion.

This is the seat of the man of sin: Where there is a building framed in any
heart, or in any society of men like Sion, there he lodges, there he lives,
there he sits as God, there he reigns, there he is worshipped, there he is
exalted above all that can truly be called God in that heart, or in that
society.

1. It is a City, This is a proper parable, to discover the Mystery of iniquity
by, in this state, it is just like a City, in its kind it is a City. In a City
there are several streets, in the streets houses, in the houses several rooms,
to which familyes and persons appertain, and to all these there are Laws and
Governments. Thus it is here, there are many streets in this City Babylon, many
houses in every street, many rooms in every house: and the houses and rooms
have their several familyes and persons appertaining to them, and they have
their Laws and Governments, their knowledge of God and Christ, their order,
their worship, their discipline in which they walk, and by which they order
themselves in their several services, places, offices, and employments under
the King of Babylon.

2. It is a spiritual or mystical City, It is not an outward building of
earthly materials, but an inward building of inward materials. As the outward
Sion, the outward Jerusalem is passed away in it is use and service: so the
outward Babylon is out of date too. (Ye need not look so far for it.) And as
God has built up an inward City, a spiritual building: so has the King of
darkness likewise. (He could never have tempted from the City of the living
God, from the City of the mystery of life, but by the City of the mystery of
deceit.) And as God builds his City of hewn stones, of squared stones, of
living stones: so also has the King of darkness his hewings, his squarings,
his preparations, his qualifications for his buildings. If the light break
forth, and make it appear too gross to have the whole Nation a Church, or to
admit an whole Parish to Ordinances, he will gather a Church out of the Nation,
and select some of his choicer stones out of the Parish; yea he may grasp in
some of the stones of the true Temple, if they come within his reach and
circle, that is, if they look abroad, if they step forth, and keep not close to
the anointing within, which is the great and only Ordinance of the Saints
preservation from Antichrists power: for if they step forth, but so much as
into a prayer against Antichrist, out of this; they are caught in his snare,
and are serving him in that very prayer, which they may seem with great
earnestness and zeal to put up against him.

3. It is a great City, an overspreading City, a City that overspreads the
earth. As Sion was a vast City, a City that did overspread the Nations: How did
the faith of the Gospel overrun the world in the Apostles days! so this City
has also overrun the world. Indeed it has taken up the whole Territories and
Dominions of the other City (and has enlarged it self further) and Sion has
been laid in the dust, and trodden under foot. And though many Witnesses,
Prophets, and Martyrs have mourned over her, yet none have been able to raise
up the Tabernacle of David which has fallen down, nor to recover Sion to this
day, but Babylon has had the power over her. Look with the true eye, and
behold how all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and Languages have been drunk with
some or other of the mixtures of this false woman's cup (some of them over, and
over, and over again) and have been Inhabitants of this City crying her up
(though not all in her gross habit, but some in her more refined shapes and
transformings) for the true Church, for Sion, whereas alas, she has only Sions
dress, Sions shape, Sions outward garment (which is the likeness wherein she
lies in wait to deceive) but not Sions spirit.

4. It is a City of iniquity, of hidden iniquity. That which is hid in this
City, it is not the life, it is not the righteousness, the holiness of the
Saints; but iniquity, sin, transgression of the life: Look into any of the
streets of Babylon, into any of the houses, any of the rooms, any of the
chambers of darkness: there is sin there, there is unrighteousnes there, there is
not one cleansed heart to be found there, not one pure eye to behold the God of
life is to be found there; but in every heart sin in a mystery, iniquity in a
mystery, unrighteousness in a mystery. They seem to be for God and Christ, and
to be cleansed by them, but uncleaness lodges in them, and sin rules in them
against God, and against his Christ in a mystery, which their eye cannot see;
and so must needs mistake their state. Yet this is the true state of Babylon in
all the parcels of it, it is the unclean City, where purity of heart and life
cannot be known, but though it be washed and transformed never so often
outwardly, yet still it remains inwardly polluted, that which defiles keeping
possession and dominion there in a mystery. The living water, the living blood
runs not in any of the streets of this City, so that there can be no true
cleansing there. Nay, such strangers are the choicest Inhabitants of Babylon to
the Fountain of life in Sion, to the river that cleanses and heals, that
they cannot so much as believe that there is a possibility of cleansing, and
perfect healing and making sound and whole here, while on earth. There is great
talk of these things (of the water, the blood, the cleansing) in all the
Regions of Babylon, (which has heard of the fame, and forms to it self a
likeness) but the thing it self is not to be found there, and so the virtue,
which comes from the thing it self alone, cannot be felt there.

And here, in this there is a great difference between the vessels of Sion, and
the vessels of Babylon. The vessels of Sion, they are weak, earthen, foolish,
contemptible to the eye of man's wisdom (which cannot look for any great matter
of excellency there:) but the treasure, the liquor of life in them is precious.
The vessels of Babylon make a great show, appear very holy, very heavenly, very
zealous for God and Christ, and for the setting up of his Church and Ordinances
all over the world. Thus they appear without, but they are Sepulchers, there is
rottenness within: under all this there lodges an unclean, an unsanctified
heart, an heart unsubdued to the spirit and power of the Gospel, while it makes
such a great show of subjection and obedience to the letter.

5. It is the City of the King of darkness, of the great King of darkness, of
the Prince of the power of the air, who rules universally in the darkness, in
the mystery of iniquiry throughout, even in every heart. Where ever is sin,
there is Satan's throne; and there he has his Laws, his Government, his power
in every heart of his dominion. And where there is the least subjection to him,
he is yet a Prince, his building is not as yet there wholly thrown down, he is
not there as yet dispossessed and cast out. As long as there is any thing left
wherein he may dwell, he knows his own, and keeps his hold of it. It is his
right, and he will not loose it. All sin, all darkness is properly his: it is
his seat, and he has the Government there. Man is the Land where these two
Kings fight, and what ever is good and holy belongs to the one King, and what
ever is evil and unclean belongs to the other, and there is no communion or
peace between them, but each keep their own, and gather of their own unto
themselves. And where the fight is once begun between these, there is no
quietness in that Land till one of these be dispossessed: but then there is
either the peace of Babylon, most commonly under a form of holiness, or the
peace of Sion in the spirit, life and power.

6. This City was built (and is daily built) in imitation of Sion, painted just
like Sion. The intent of it is building was to eat out Sion, to suppress Sion,
to withdraw from the truth by a false Image, and to keep her Inhabitants in
peace and satisfaction, under a belief and hope that it is the true Sion; and
therefore it must needs be made like Sion, else it could no way suite these
ends. Every street must be like the streets of Sion, every house like the
houses of Sion, every Tribe and family like the Tribes and familyes of Sion,
every person like the persons in Sion, all the Laws, Ordinances, etc. like the
Laws and Ordinances of Sion, the worship like the worship in Sion, the faith
like the faith of Sion, the painted Christ like the Christ of Sion, all that go
for truths like the truths of Sion, they would not deceive else; City Babylon
would be soon seen through else, and become quickly desolate and forsaken, did
she not lay her paint very thick, and with great art and skill. Now here is the
wisdom, here is the true eye tried, to see through all the paints of this city
in all the shapes and forms of it, to turn from every street, every house, every
chamber, every image and false appearance of truth, every false appearance of
ordinances and ways of worship, every likeness of things which this spirit
forms from the letter, every duty that it thus calls for, every promise of
Scripture which it endeavors to apply to that to which it belongs not, that it
might lull the soul asleep, and cosen and deceive it of the thing promised:
here I say is the true eye tried to turn from all this, and to wait for the
raising and redeeming of the true seed of Sion, and for the springing up of the
true life and power in it and from it: For as long as this spirit can deceive
you with any likeness, ye shall never know the truth, nor come to the worship of
the true living God, which alone is in the spirit and in the truth.

7. The end of all this, of Satan's building up this city, this great city (thus
accurately in the power of deceit, and in the very likeness of Sion) was and is
that it might be taken for Sion, and he worshipped there as God, and that
without jealousy or suspicion. And he has attained his end, his city has
deceived and does deceive, it passes current for Sion among all the inhabitants
of Babylon; almost every sort of people cry it up for Sion, in one appearance
or other, though al do not cry up the same appearance; but their own image, way
and worship, every one extolls; their own image of the truth for the truth,
their own way of worship for the way, their own church and family for the
church and family of God. And worshipping here, they worship him, and not the
Lord: for the Lord cannot be worshipped in any part of Babylon, but the King of
Babylon is worshipped in Babylon, and the King of Sion alone in Sion. Ah how
deeply do men deceive their souls! they think they believe in God, they think
they pray to God, and hope to be owned at length by God, and yet are so far
from coming out of Mystery Babylon, that it was never yet so much as discovered
to them; but they have either walked in the way of religion and worship they
were brought up in in the apostasy, or perhaps have removed out of one or two
of the broad streets of it, and so thereby think they have left Babylon, when
as the same spirit has sit down in another street of the same city, building
up another house by the direction of the King thereof, and there worshipping
the same spirit as they did before; but their souls never knew the fire in
Sion, and the furnace in Jerusalem, by which the very inwards of their spirits
must be cleansed, before the pure ey of life be opened which can see Sion.

Now because ye are more able to receive things from Scripture-expressions,
then from the nature of the thing it self, spoken as it is felt in the heart
(concerning which, much more might be said, were ye able to bear it) consider a
few Scriptures.

Babylon is called a great city, Rev. 16. 19. and a great and mighty city,
chap. 18. 10. O the power of deceit in that city to bewitch from the life! O
the multitude of lying wonders that are there shown in the heart, to make a man
believe that he is in the life! to persuade men that the King thereof is the
King of Sion! and that the laws and ordinances of worship there, are the laws
and ordinances oi Sion! that the prayer there, is the prayer of the true child!
that the believing there, is the true faith! the love there, the true love! the
hope there, the true hope! etc. Some parts of Babylon, some likenesses of truth
there, are so taking, that none but the elect, by the opening of the eternal
eye, can espy the deceit.

And it is a spiritual city, a mystical city, a city built by the working of
the mystery of iniquity, 2 These. 2. 7. whereupon she is called Mystery, Rev.
17. 5. It is not a city of plain wickedness, but a city of sin hid, of sin
keeping its life under a covering, under a form of godliness, of sin reigning in
the heart under zeal, under devotion, under praying, believing, worshipping,
hoping, waiting, etc. Where sin lies hid within under these, there is Babylon,
there is the mystery of witchcraft, there is the painted throne of Satan, there is
spiritual Egypt and Sodom, where the Lord of life is daily crucified. This is
the city, the mystical city, the spiritual city, Rev. 11. 8. And here is
building up and throwing down continually. She builds, the spirit of the Lord
confounds, then down goes her building, then up with another, then down again.
This is her course without end, when the Spirit of the Lord disturbs her, for
otherwise she can settle in any form of knowledge or worship: though in her
ordinary course she has also many changes and turnings, One while this or that
being a truth, another while not, One while this or that being the sense or
meaning of such a Scripture, another while not. Babylon is hardly ever without
this kind of building up and throwing down.

And this city is a great city, a city spread over all the earth, she made all
nations drink of the wine of the cup of her fornication, Rev. 14. 8. The woman,
which is this city (Rev. 17. 18.) sat upon peoples, and multitudes, and
nations, and tongues, Rev. 17. 15. She sat upon them as Queen, as Princess,
guiding them in their knowledge and worship of the King of Babylon. And those
that once hated her, and made war with her, and burnt her flesh with fire, she
cosoned them with a new paint, got them into her new bed of fornication, and
made them worship the King of Babylon again, Rev. 17. 12, 13. and v. 16, 17.
and there they lay committing whoredom with her, til the time of her last
burning and utter desolation: but then they forsook her, for fear of her
torment, when they saw the smoke of her burning, Rev. 18. 9, 10.

In the Temples of this city (for in all the streets thereof, yea in every house
there are Temples) Antichrist sits as God, and is worshipped, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. He
as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. He has
clothed himself like God, he appears like God (like the holy pure Spirit of
life and power) he appears in the temple of God, he sits there, he rules there,
he gives forth laws and ordinances of worship and devotion. Yea if any one will
question his godhead, or his right to do thus, he will prove it, he will make it
manifest, in the very temple of God, that he is God: He as God sits in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God. He has exalted himself into the
throne above all that is called God, he has got into the temple, he sits
there as God, and there he makes it manifest to al his worshippers that he is
the God, in so much as among all the inhabitants of Babylon he is acknowledged
and worshipped, and the true Spirit of life is hid from their eyes, and denied
and crucified. He shows himself that he is God, he gives demonstrations of his
godhead, which that eye which is out of the life cannot but acknowledge and take
to be true. There is none can see and acknowledge the true God, the true Christ,
but those that have the true ey, the true anointing (no man can say, that Jesus
is the Lord, but by the holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 3.) and yet how many can speak
great words of God and of Christ, who know not what belongs to the anointing?
Alas, alas, Al nations and sorts of professors out of the life, are co^oned
with the devils demonstrations, with Antichrists demonstrations, with the
whores demonstrations, with the false Prophets demonstrations, which are
undeniable to that wisdom wherein they stand, and to that eye wherewith they
look to see.

Now mark this, Antichrists coming, when he first deceived, was very mighty,
exceeding strong, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. Whose coming is after the working of
Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness
of unrighteousness etc. Weigh the thing well Satan used al his art, and al his
strength to conceive and bring forth this mystery of iniquity, so like the
mystery of godliness, that it might pass for current in the world, and he rule
as God in in i^. With all power, etc. no power of deceit wanting, he did not
spare for signs and lying wonders, yea (...) gave power to the beast to do
wonders and miracles, even to make s(...)e come down from heaven on the earth,
in the sight of men, (which was the sign and wonder whereby the God of Israel
was distinguished from Baal, power to work this very sign Satan gives to the
Beast, to confirm the godhead of the Dragon and Antichrist with.) Rev. 13. v.
13, 14. These are the things men look for, see but great power, signs,
miracles, they are satisfied: the whole world stands ready to be deceived with
this. Yea, and if the eye be not opened in persons, which can distinguish of
power, they must needs be deceived. Signs, wonders and miracles had their place
in the first covenant, and were to that part to which the first covenant was
(not to them that believe, but to them that believe not.) Now after the full
demonstration of the truth by signs and miracles, the power of Satan rises up,
and by lying signs wonders and miracles overturneth the truth. Now the
unbeleeving part in man expects and calls for signs and miracles, and says that
will determine the controversy, and settle the state of the Church again, but
that part is not to prescribe God his way: yea he will steal as a theif upon
thee, whose ey is abroad, and look for demonstrations without.

And as Antichrist got up thus, so Antichrist will go out thus: he will raise up
this power, and what lying signs wonders and miracles he can, to defend himself
with, now the Spirit of the Lord is risen up to dispossess him, and cast him
out of the house which he has long lodged in. And he that can be cosened with
power, with signs, with lying wonders (which are lying, because they come from
the spirit of deceit, with an intent to deceive, though they may come to pass,
and appear true to man's eye, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.) or with any of the
deceivablenes of unrighteousnes, shall never come out of Babylon, but only be
translated into some of the more refined cha^bers of it, and fed with somemore
fresh likenesses of truth, where he shall still remain an Inhabitant and
worshipper in some Image, perhaps of universal love life and liberty, and yet
be out of the life, out of the love, out of the liberty of the truth, which
stands in the power and presence of the Spirit of God, and not in the most
refined Image or likeness.

All the world wondered after the beast, and they worshipped the Dragon which
gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, Rev: 13. 3, 4. The
Dragon is the Devil, the beast is that spirit of the earth which he raises up,
and feeds in men with a form and appearance of truth; to which he gives his
power, and his seat, and his authority: and every man has a measure of this
according to his state, condition, place and service in Babylon. And now what a
man does here in Religion (be he never so devout and zealous, and frequent in
Ordinances and duties) is the worship of this spirit, and of the Dragon who
sits and rules in this spirit. I am run into hard expressions, very hard,
because the nature of these things is hid from men's eyes, and they are in the
mist of Antichrists raising, in the smoke which comes from the pit, where there
is no opening of the true eye, nor no true sight of things: but truly, if ever
ye espy the Dragon, the beast, Antichrist, the whore, the false Prophet, ye
must look at home, and read within: and there having found the thing, and seen
it in the true light, ye will be able to read it certainly abroad also. Now do
not go about to distinguish these things, in the notion of the understanding,
but come to feel the life, to unite with the life, and the eye will open which
can see into the nature of things, and will behold all in it is season: for that
eye which is so eager to see, shall never see these things, but that eye alone
which waits in stillness and quietness, on the pleasure and good will of the
opener.

Now all this time, while Babylon stands, while Antichrist sits in the Temple,
while Satan reigns over all the Antichristian world, the true and living God
has not been known, feared, nor glorified (but men's knowledge has been of a
false God they have set up, and him they have feared, and given the glory to in
their worship) nay the Gospel has not been preached, the true Gospel, the
everlasting Gospel, the Gospel wherein is the light and power of eternal life,
to turn men from all Antichristian forms of knowledge and worship to the true
life and power. But when Babylon falls, and Mount Sion begins to appear again,
then this Gospel is to be preached again, even by an Angel who receives it
from God himself, Rev: 14. 6, 7. for man could never recover it again: it
requires a new inspiration. The law is to go forth out of Sion, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem. And this Gospel is to be preached to every Nation, and
Kindred, and Tongue, and people, v: 6. mark, There was not one Nation, not one
kindred, not one tongue, not one people that kept the everlasting Gospel, but
it was laid up in Sion, it was carried with the Church into the Wilderness, and
there it has been hid all the time of the apostasy since the days of the
Apostles. But now Sion is redeeming, the true woman bringing back again out of
the Wilderness, she brings back the true everlasting Gospel with her; and there
is an Angel chosen in the power of the Lord (even in the same power and Spirit
that first preached it) to preach it again to every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and
people. And the Lord has so ordered it, that he will have the voice of this
Angel as despicable to the wise in Religion, to the zealous in devotion of all
sorts of this backsliding age, as the former preaching was to the wise and
devout both among the Jews and Greeks. So that whosoever is wise in Religion
according to the flesh, whosoever is wise in expectation and waiting for the
kingdom, whosoever is wise in reasoning about it, and can tell the foregoing
signs. of it, etc. shall not know the voice: but he that can shut his eyes by
the leadings of the pure life, and enter into the hidden womb of wisdom, where
the light of life is sown, he shall be new formed, and come forth a child out
of the womb of wisdom with the new eye, the new ear, the new heart, the new
understanding and senses; and keeping in the childish simplicity, out of the
wisdom, zeal, and devotion which deceived him before, he shall receive and
enter into the everlasting kingdom.

Therefore all people wait humbly for the candle of the Lord, that therewith ye
may search out Babylon, and may come to see what of her treasures ye have
gathered, that ye may throw them away speedily, and give up your ships and
vessels (wherewith ye have traffiqued for these kind of wares) to the fire of
the Lords jealousy, that ye may receive the durable riches, that ye may hear
the joyful sound of the everlasting Gospel, and know the true Christ which it
alone reveals, and come to fear and worship and glori^e the true God, and not
go down into the pit or lake with the Dragon, the beast, the whore and false
Prophet, which will be the portion of the most zealous false worshippers. And
when your eyes come once to be opened in the true light, ye will bless the Lord
for giving you these warnings, and not be so angry at us (who have paid dear
for them) for our willingness, if it be possible, to save you some of the
charges they have cost us; however, at least to preserve your souls from that
ruin and dreadful destruction, which all the paths of Babylon lead to.

The sins of Babylon.
Although in the foregoing description, some of the sins of Babylon have been
touched at, yet I find my spirit further drawn forth (in way of service to the
Lord and his people) to take a further view, both of them and some other of her
sins.

THe sins of Babylon, by the Spirit of life (which has righteously measured
and knows them) are referred to these two Heads, Fornications and
Abominations. She allureth the spirit of the creature into a strange bed, and
there it acts filthily and abominably with this strange spirit. Now of these
there are two sorts; First, some more open and manifest; Secondly, some more
hid and secret, hard (yea utterly impossible) to be discerned without the
shining forth of the pure light of li^e.

All sorts of men are estranged from the life: under the whole heaven is the
Lord God forgotten, and his holy and pure Law and way of life, and filthiness
and abomination is committed every where. Now all this filth (even the common
filth of the earth) springs out of Babylon, has it is rise from her womb. Were
it not for her, the sound of life would be heard even among he Heathen, and
they would not be such strangers to him that made the^, nor would they act so
contrary to those leadings and teachings of the Spirit of God (who is the God
of the whole earth) which the darkest parts are not without. It is she, which
withdraws their minds from the pure glimmerings that rise up in them, setting
up another God in their eyes, and heathenish sottish ways of fear, worship and
devotion: and under this she makes them filthy and polluted, unclean in their
minds and in their bodies, brutish in their knowledge and in their practices:
For she is the mother of fornications and abominations of the earth, Rev: 17.
5. Look what of pride, of vanity, of cruelty, of envy, of wrath, of lust, of
covetousness, of idolatry, of blasphemy, etc. is to be found any where among
men upon the earth, she is the mother of it all. All the common filth and
stench of the earth springs out of this womb; this secret womb, this hidden
womb: For though in this her open and visible appearance, she be manifest to
the eyes of many; yet to those children of hers who are thus conceived, brought
forth and bred up by her, she is a mystery of iniquity, and they perceive her
not so much as here, and so cannot escape this her openly polluted bed.

Secondly, The whore has more secret fornications and abominations. Where she
can pass thus, she need not paint, either her self or her ware: but where need
requires she has her paint, she has her delicates for the curious eye (Rev:
18. 3.) she has her Cinnamon, Odours, Ointments, and frankincense for the nice
scent; she has her fine flower and wheat, etc. for the fine palace; and gold,
precious stones, pearl, and vessel's of ivory, and all manner of vessel's of
most precious wood for the more stately worshipper; as well as of brass and Iron
for the more common, Rev: 18, 12, 13. she can paint both her self and her ware,
so as to make them taking to the eye of all flesh. She can so mingle her cup,
as shall please every palate, but that which is truly living, and cast such a
color upon her abominations, as no eye that is without can suspect, but takes
with every young man that is hunting abroad, and knows not the spring of life in
himself. So that all the deceits in Religion, all the several forms and ways
of knowledge and worship, all the ordinances, duties, and devotions which the
spirits of most men take pleasure in, are of her. And herein is her pride and
glory, in subjecting these, in ruling over these, in blinding the eyes of
these, and opposing the true life and power by these. She does not value whole
Territories of the other, so much as one Congregation of these. For mark,

The great Masterpiece of the whore was to paint her self like the Lambs wife,
and so to withdraw from the true Church, and set up a false Church, which by
reason of its paint and likeness to that which once was the true, should pass
up and down the world, and be taken for the true: And here lies her beauty, her
glory, her majesty, her life, her heart, even in the deceivableness of this
appearance. Therefore her great care and endeavor is, to keep her possession
and dominion here. She often renews and changes her paint, nearer and nearer
to the Image and former likeness of truth, that she might make it pass instead
of the truth, and so keep that which is indeed the truth down still under
reproach, contempt and persecution, as she has done these many ages. Therefore
she has her sorts of paint by her, her varieties of sorcery, of witchery, of
enchantments, whereof her cup is full, and wherewith her wine is made strong, to
make the Inhabitants of the earth drunk thereby, that being thus besotted,
being not themselves, but their spiritual senses bound up (as this wine does
very effectually, where ever her cup is drunk off) she might lead them up and
down from one thing to another, from one chamber to another, from one bed to
another, from one practice and way of worship to another, and still keep them
from the true living thing which their souls seek.

For were it possible for persons, who did but so much as read in the
Scriptures, concerning the power of life the Saints formerly enjoyed, the
living Ministry and Ordinances, their sweet walking and fellowship in the
light, the presence of the spirit in their worship, and in their whole course,
their sincere love in the spirit, and tender bearing with one another
weaknesses, doubts and differences; (which he that reads singly, cannot but
pant after;) And the state of the Gospel was not to be a decaying and dying in
these things, or a loosing of them, so that the power of the spirit, and the
revelations thereof should cease (as the whorish spirit, which has gone out
from the life, pleads;) but to grow and increase, and the last times to abound
most of all with the power and glory of truth: I say, were it possible for
persons who should read, and entertain the least taste or savor of thesethings,
to be satisfied with any of those dead ways and forms, which the whore has
set up instead of them, unless they were wholly bewitched, and altogether
deprived of their senses, being made dead drunk which the whores mingled wine
in this dark night of apostasy? Yea, professors are drunk, they have deeply
drunk of the cup, and are sorely overtaken, and their hearts overcharged with
strong liquor, which makes them even mad to draw others into their beds of
fornication, and to stand up themselves in great rage, and call also to the
Magistrates for the defense of them. Yea like the clamourous woman they make a
great noise about ordinances, duties, Ministry, Church, etc. (I have decked and
perfumed my bed, says the loud woman, the subtilhearted woman, Prove: 7. 16,
17.) but do not soberly consider which are the painted ones, which the truth.
We have run on headily after these things too long; it is now time to stand
still a while, and wait for the purging out of the wine wherewith all our brains
have been overturned, that we may come into soberness, and into a fit temper to
be led by the Spirit of life, out of the bed of fornications, and out of the
ways, worships, ordinances, and duties of fornication, into the bed of the
true and undefiled Spirit. Now he that worships God aright, must feel life
within (and that life raised and strengthened by him who begets it) and this
will savor death, and (faithfully following its guide) will come out of the
land of death, even that land wherein all the false worshippers inhabit, and
wherein all the false ways and worships, duties, ordinances, Ministeryes, etc.
are set up and flourish.

Now these secret sins of Babylon, are the same with the more open and gross,
the great difference is their secrecy, their not appearing like sins, their
paint, their color, whereby they are swallowed down for holy and good. As to
instance.

There is fornication (or adultery from the life) in the finest, in the purest
way of worship man can invent or imitate: but the fornication does not so
plainly appear here, but they who have drunk of the cup, take these things for
the ways and appointments of God. Those that set up the whores Church, do not
call it so (nor perhaps think it to be so;) those that set up the whores
Ministry or ordinances, do not give them that name, but call them the Ministry
and ordinances of Christ: yet this is as truly, as really fornication from the
life, as the grossest ways of Heathenish worship. O mark it, mark it.

If thou have read the Scriptures, and thrust thy self into any practices thou
there find mentioned, without the raising up of a living thing in thee, and
without thy following by the guidance thereof, thou have done this by the
whores advice, and in this thou art committing fornication, and erring from the
life: for the true worship lies in the Spirit and in the truth, and it is the
new birth that God seeks to worship him: but the spirit of man thrusting it
self into these things, the Lord abhors and rejects. And this spirit never can
be thus cleansed and fitted to enter into Christ's bed, but only gets a paint
from Scripture, and enters into the painted bed and bosom of the harlot, where
it remains unrenewed, unchanged, unmortified in the midst of all it is great
talk and profession of these things. And thus the Scriptures, the Holy
Scriptures of truth (which were given forth from the pure spirit of life) the
whorish spirit makes use of to estrange from the life. For what sort of
persons, which have fornicated from the life, but make use of the Scriptures to
maintain their whoredoms by, and to bewitch others into their whoredoms with?
Every sort cries up their own way and worship, to be the way and worship
according to the Scriptures: and if any be gathered out of all these witcheries
into the power of God, then the bewitched say that such are bewitched.

Then as for all the abominations of the earth, all the filth that defiles the
heart, it is to be found on the skirts of the whore, even in her most refined
dress: For her religion, her worship, her profession, her practices do not
reach to the purifying of the conscience, but only to painting over of the old
Sepulcher, where rottenness still lodges within. The sore was never thoroughly
searched, the heart was never thoroughly circumcised or baptized, the old man
was never put of, nor the new man put on, the blood of purifying (which truly
washes away the sin) was never felt in it is virtue and power, but only an
apprehension and talk that they are cleansed in Christ, from a notion they have
stolen out of the Scriptures, but not from the sensible feeling of the thing
in life and power in their consciences. And so the evil nature still remains,
the evil heart of unbelief is still to be found in them, and they want the life,
they want the power; they want the Spirit, they want the love, they want the
humility, they want the meekness, they want the patience, they want the
innocence and simplicity of the Lamb and Dove. And when the Lord comes to
provoke them to jealousy by the shining of his light, and by the appearance of
his power in some whom they despise; then the pride, the passion, the envy, the
heart-burnings, the hard speeches, the false surmisings, with the rest of the
enmity which still abides with them, stirs and rises against the life and
power, and their hypocrisy is made manifest. Yea some of the strictest among
them can scoff and jeer at the appearance of life, so strong is the evil and
unmortified nature in them, and so conceited are they in their ways and
practices, because of their cover, under which all this iniquity (for the most
part) lies hid from their eyes. But for all that it is there, it is there, the
Lords candle will search it out, and thine own eye shall see it, and find in
thy self bloody Cain, scoffing Ishmael, profane Esau, the uncircumcised Jew,
who is angry that his brothers sacrifice is accepted and his not, who disdains
and derides the true seed of of life, the living heir, who hunts abroad for
food pleasing to that nature which is to be famished, who crucifies the Lord of
glory because of his meaness, and because he appears not in that way of
devotion and holiness wherein they expect him. Neither will he appear so, but
to overturn all that which ye have set up, and to set up that which ye disdain.
This is the Lords work, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Now there are several sins which the Spirit of the Lord has charged Babylon
with, and which he will reckon with her for, and with all that partake with her
therein, some whereof I may mention. As,

1. Her deep fornications from the life, under a pretense of honoring and
worshipping of it. (Be not offended that I begin with it again, seeing it is
also mentioned among other particular sins of hers, Rev: 9. 21.) She speaks
fair words, she calls to have the worship of God set up, and a Godly Ministry,
and the Ordinances of God in a Nation; but the thing is not so in the sight of
God, but in all this she seeks the advancement of her own whoredoms. And this
was, and is the very way of Antichrists rising; he gets into the form, he cries
up the form; and by the form which he cries up, he eats out the power. If
Antichrist speak directly against the power, (without first creeping into, and
setting up a form, and crying up that) he would soon be detected: but under a
form and profession of truth, he hides himself, and covers his spirit of
enmity and persecution therewith; and here he can secretly and safely smite the
innocent, and fight against that very spirit, life, and power, which he
himself in his form makes a profession of being subject to. And this is the
Wolf in the Sheeps clothing, which by this fair appearance of the sheeps wool
on his back, covers his ravenous narure from the eyes of the beholders.

Now there are three ways of fornication, one of which this spirit is always
guilty of, sometimes of them all.

1. By inventing things which the Lord never commanded, or adding to that which
the Lord did command. The mind of man is very busy, and full of inventions: and
where the heart is touched with devotion and zeal toward God, the inventing
part exceedingly exercises it self this way, either in imagining and forming
somewhat which it thinks may be acceptable to God, or in adding to those things
which it finds commanded. In this way of fornication the popish Church abounds,
being filled with ceremonies of their own inventing, and of additions to such
things as are found mentioned in the Scriptures. The common Protestants also
have been too guilty here.

2. By imitating of those things, which were commanded to others. When a man
finds in Scripture the things which some others did, or which they were
commanded to do; and so he is venturing upon them, before he feels the leading
of that spirit, whereby they were led thereunto. Now in this, he errs from the
life, he goes without his guide, he does that which was a good thing in others
(who were led by the Spirit thereto) but in him it is fornication. This man is
a theif and an intruder, he steals into the outward knowledge and practice,
without the inward life and power, he intrudes into that into which others were
fairly led, coming in by the door, for which entrance he also should have
waited, and not have run on headily of himself. This way of fornication, the
strictest among the Protestants have generally been ensnared in, who have run
on further and further to search out the purest way of worship, the nearest
pattern to the primitive times, and so have applied themselves diligently
thereto, not knowing what they were to wait for to be their guide, and give them
the entrance. And here now, thinking themselves to be in the right, they have
contracted a lofty spirit, (and held forth their conceptions of the way, as the
only way) and so have lost the meekness and simplicity, which was fresh and
lively in some of them before, which sets them a great way back, and makes the
entrance into the kingdom very hard to them: Whereas if that simplicity and
tenderness were fresh in them, the Lord would show great regard to that, easily
pardoning this their error and (in mercy to them) visiting that evil spirit
with his judgments, which stood nigh them, and was the cause of their error.
But they are grown high, they are grown wise, they are become confident, they
know the way already, and can maintain it by undeniable arguments (as they
think) to be the way, so the Lord with his teachings is at a great distance
from them, that lying very low in them, which the Lord alone will teach.

3. By continuing in practices, to which they were once led by the Spirit,
without the immediate presence and life of the Spirit. For the whole worship,
the whole Religion of the Gospel consists in following the Spirit, in having
the Spirit do all in us, and for us. Therefore whatsoever a man does of
himself, it is out of the life, it is in the fornication. If a man pray at any
time without the Spirit, that prayer is fornication, and is not either
acceptable to God, or profitable to himself; but grieves the Spirit, hurts the
life, and wounds the soul. Now this way of fornication have they especially
fallen into, who have been acquainted with true leadings and openings of the
Spirit, and have afterward run to them for refreshment, and so by degrees
forgot the Spirit that opened. And by this means was that life, which was
precious and very favoury in the Ranters (before they were seduced, by the
Spirit of deceit, into that way of ranting) overturned. And thus they also (who
deeply saw into the mystery of whoredoms, and into the more inward ways of
fornication, above others) even they also were deceived with the whores cup,
and drank afresh of that wine of fornication, which the whore very cunningly
had new mingled for them, and they also are become a reproach to the
Inhabitants of Sion, who find a living habitation in that Spirit of life, which
they turned from.

Now if there be a true eye opened in any in the reading of this, how easily
and manifestly will he see whoredom, whoredom, fornication, adultery
generally in men's Religions practices, in their Churches, in their Ministeries,
in their Ordinances, in their prayers, in their whole course! O how, think ye,
does the eye of the Jealous God behold these things! but your eyes, who are
held captive here, cannot see it. The God of this world, with his mists has
darkened you, the great whore with her sorceries has enchanted you, and ye are
her slaves,: ye are drunk with her cup, and how can ye judge soberly, either of
your own estate toward God, or concerning your practices in Religion?

2. Her notorious blasphemies. Having fornicated from the life, and from the
Spirit, then she blasphemes the life, and the holy pure power and movings of
the Spirit. The woman which sat upon the scarlet colored beast (with whom the
Kings of the earth committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth were
made dru^k with the wine of her fornication) was full of names of blasphemy,
Rev: 17. 2, 3. Yea the beast which carried her, which had many heads horns and
crowns, he also had on his heads names of blasphemy, Rev: 13. 1. And there was
given to him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies, ver: 5. And he,
with the whore together (for he did it by her spirit and instigation, by virtue
of the wine he had drunk out of her cup) opened his mouth in blasphemy against
God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven,
ver: 6. This has been the work of the tongue, in every head of the beast,
namely, to blaspheme the life, to blaspheme the true living power, in all ages
and generations, since the apostasy from the life and spirit of the Apostles.

Now there is a twofold blasphemy, which the whore (and the powers of the earth
that serve her) are guilty of.

1. There is a speaking well of the ways of their own invention, or the ways
which they have imitated without the life, to call these the ways of God, the
true ways of life is blasphemy, I know the blasphemy of them which say they
are Jews, and are not, but a Synagogue of Satan, Rev: 2. 9. There were even in
the Apostles days, persons who pretended to be Christians, and pretended still
to be of the Church, though they had lost the life, and this the Spirit of the
Lord says was blasphemy. And what is their gathering into a Church, who were
never gathered into the life, and setting up Ordinances and pastors? what is
this? what is it for him to call himself a Christian, or inward Jew, who never
had the foreskin of his flesh cut off by the circumcising knife of the Spirit?
what will the Lord say this is, when he comes to judge?

2. There is a speaking evil of the truths of God. The true knowledge, the true
fear, the true worship, the true Saints, the true God, the true Tabernacle, the
true Temple, the true Heaven (all which is in the Spirit, and is alone revealed
and seen there) there are reproached, these are misrepresented (and the true
sight and acknowledgement of them called error, heresy, and sectarism) by all
the blasphemers of Babylon.

Israel, who had the Law and the Prophets, the true Ordinances and the true
Priests, yet they called evil good, and good evil; they put darkness for
light, and light for darkness; they put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter, Isa: 5. 20. They were so wise in their own eyes, and so prudent in
their own sight, they were so mighty to drink wine, and men of such strength to
mingle strong drink (justifying the wicked for reward, and taking away the
righteousness of the righteous from him) that there was no convincing of them
by the light of God shining from the Prophets, of their casting away of the Law
of the Lord, and despising the word of the holy one of Israel, ver: 21. to 25.
Nay they were observers of the law, and bearkned to the Prophets and Priests of
the Lord, Jer: 5. 31. Therefore when the overflowing scourge came, it should
not come near them: Yea when the true Prophets of the Lord threatnedthe^ with
his coming with dreadful vengeance, and his strange work, they in the height
and confidence of their spirits could reply, Let him make speed, and hasten his
work, that we may see it, Isa: 5. 20. How blind were they from seeing their
blasphemies, their calling of evil good, and good evil etc? Yea in the very
days of the Apostles, The way of truth was evil spoken of, and Synagogues of
Satan setting up, and blasphemies growing up apace from those which held the
true form, but denied the power, even while the powrings forth of the Spirit,
and revelations from the Spirit did abound: How can it be expected it should be
otherwise now, when the Spirit is grown such a strange thing, that to mention
such a thing as being moved by the Spirit, or acted by the Spirit, is become
ridiculous? and the very teachers of the Nation (who must speak by the Spirit,
if they speak the word of God) cry revelation is ceased, and count it a
reproach, for a man so much as to pretend to speak by the movings, and in the
power of the Spirit.

Now this double blasphemy necessarily follows the fornication. Whoever is
fornicated from the life, he blasphemes the the life, in all his knowledge, in
all his worship, in all his Religion. He calls that prayer which is not prayer,
that an ordinance which is not an ordinance, that a Church which is not a
Church, (...) a Minister which is not a Minister: and that which is indeed the
prayer, the ordinance, the Church, the Minister, he denies and blasphemes, and
cannot do otherwise, until the righteous judgments of the Lord purge the
whores wine out of him, and he be led back to that life and Spirit again, from
which (in all these ways of worship, inventions, and imitations) he is gone a
whoring.

The whore, for these many ages, has been laying blasphemy to the charge of
such, as in any degree, have been led by the Spirit of the Lord from her
whoredoms: but now the Lord is taking it off from them (who have long been
unjustly charged therewith) and charging it upon her, and she cannot escape his
judgment: for though she put on never so fine dresses, and appearances like
the Spouse and Church of Christ, yet the Lord can distinguish and find out his
Spouse, though naked, in the wilderness, and without her attire; and can also
espy the whorish spirit, though clothed with the Churches attire, and can
charge her blasphemies (against him, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
Heaven) upon her.

3. Gross or more refined idolatries. Little children, said John, keep your
selves from Idols, 1 John 5. 21. He saw Antichristianism breaking in apace,
many Antichrists being already come, and now says he, keep to the anointing,
and keep from Idols. Without a very strict watch, without a mighty preservatio^
by the anointing, he saw idolatry would even creep in upon them, who had tasted
of the true power and virtue of life. But how shall they keep from Idols, who
know not the anointing, but think the revelations thereof are ceased? He that
buyeth not the tried gold of Christ (Rev: 3. 18.) How can he avoid buying
untried gold of Antichrist, or silver, or brass, or wood, or stone, which his
Merchants traffic for, and make idols of? Rev: 9. 20. If thine eyes be
anointed with the true eye salve, thou may see, and read the parable.

Idolatry is the worshipping of God without his Spirit (that is the plain,
naked truth of the thing.) to invent things from the carnal mind, or to imitate
things which others (who had the Spirit) did in the Spirit, by the command of
the Spirit, for thee to imitate and practice this without the Spirit, is
idolatry. An invented Church, an invented Ministry, an invented worship, an
imitated Church, an imitated Ministry, an imitated worship without the life,
without the Spirit, all these are the work of men's hands, and are idols, and
all that is performed herein is idolatry, Rev: 9* 20. This is a Religion
without life, a worship without life, a fabric for idolatry; and the whole
course of worship and service in it, is idolatry. For the living God, the Lord
God of endless life and power, is alone worshipped by his Spirit, and in the
truth of that life which he begets in the heart, and all other worship (though
never so seemingly spiritual) is idolatrous. Ah professors, professors, if ye
knew how many idol-prayers, and services ye have loaded the Lord with, and how
ye have been whoring from him, while ye have seemed to be drawing nigh to him,
ye would hang down your heads and mou^n: For what ever ye have done, in the
worship of God, without the leading and presence of his Spirit, it has been
idolatry. For the worship of God under the Gospel is in the Spirit and in the
truth, and required of them who are in the Spirit and in the truth, and not of
others, John 4. 23. for them alone the Lord seeks to worship, and the Lord
will admit of none to his worship, but such as he seeks. And if any else will
thrust themselves into his worship, it is not accepted, nor do they worship the
true God, but they worship they know not what: and their whole state and course
here, is a state and course of idolatry.

4. Sorceryes, witcherafts, divinations and enchantments (I do not mean outward
sorceryes or witchcrafts, they are but the shadow or figure of the inward
mystery of deceit of this black dark spirit, which appears as an Angel of
light, that he migh bewitch and deceive.) Neither repented they of their sorcer
yes, Rev: 9 21. This false Church, this adulterous woman, she has her golden
cup, and her wine mingled, and with this cup she bewitches the eye, with this
wine she inflames the heart, and intoxicates the brain. She invents ways and
worships like to the true, or she imitates the true ways and appearances of
life, and when the poor simple young man is singly seeking after God from some
true touches of his life, before he comes to know the Spirit of life, before he
can come to be married to the Lamb, she comes with her golden cup, and with her
tempting wine, and bewitches the poor heart therewith, and so leads it aside
into her painted bed. Would thou enjoy God, says she? would thou worship
him aright? would thou have fellowship with him? Lo here is the way, here is
the Church, here are the Ordinances, here is the Ministry, here are the means.
Thou must wait upon God in the use of the means, and these are them. Did not
the Saints formerly do thus? did not they meet with God here? did not they
serve and worship God thus? Come thou hither also, do what they did, enjoy what
they enjoyed. Yea, but thou whorish woman, did ever God appoint means without
his Spirit? Thou leavest the main, yea indeed the only thing behind thee, which
it self alone is accepted, and without which nothing is accepted. And this is
the course of the whore in all her transformings, in all her baits, in all her
temptings, she still leaves the Spirit behind her. She may perhaps speak of the
Spirit, to hide her self the more (because the letter of the Scripture is so
express therein) and teach people to look and wait for the Spirit, but so as
is never to be obtained: For he that begins in Religion either to pray, or
worship, or seek the knowledge of God without the Spirit, shall never meet with
the Spirit so; but that way of knowledge, religion, and worship of his must
first be broken down, and he become a fool, and recieve the Spirit as a fool
(out of all his religious knowledge and wisdom which he had gathered before)
and afterward, following the Spirit which is thus received, he shall be led
into the true wisdom. Now mark that which follows, ye that have a desire to
understand.

This spirit of deceit, this whorish spirit, this spirit of divination and
witchcraft, (which by her sorceryes deceived all Nations, Rev: 18. 23.) came
forth curiously decked at first with all manner of deceiveableness of
unrighteousness. It had the exact form of life, (the true form of Godliness)
and a lively spirit in it: it had the form of knowledge, and the form of
worship, and with these it came to tempt, and draw away them from the life and
from the power, who were in the life and in the power: and it did prevail upon
such as kept not close to the anointing. But after it had overcome, and gained
the Churches territories, then it might safely corrupt the form; and so it did,
and went into multitudes of inventions and fopperies (as at this day may be
seen amongst the Papists.) Now these are easily discovered, and seen through by
any simple plain honest eye, upon a little breaking forth of the light.
Therefore the whorish spirit, when she perceives her self found out here, she
changes her shape and attire, and comes back, back again by degrees (as need
requires) to the forms of knowledge and worship, wherewith she was arrayed,
when she deceived at first: yet still she is the same, and does this to keep
poor simple hearts, still in her bands, from the life and from the Spirit. And
thus painted, thus decked, thus holding forth Scripture-knowledge, and
Scripture-wayes of worship, she is the more subtle witch, the more subtle
sorceresse, and is able to deceive any eye, but that which is opened in the
light. With her Lo here Christ, and lo there Christ, she would deceive the very
elect, if it were possible: but it is not possible; for they are taught by the
Spirit not to go forth, and the anointing within preserves them. And he that
knows not this preservation, is bewitched by her, and his fear of God is such
as may be taught by the precepts of men, and practiced without the knowledge of
the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which is the Saints rule, guide,
and preservation. For as the Apostles were able Ministers, not of the letter,
but of the spirit of the New Testament, 3 Cor: 3. 6. So they that received
their Ministry (or that which they ministered) received not the letter only, but
the Spirit; and were preserved, not by the letter, but by the Spirit; and were
made able to try words, things, and Spirits, not by the letter, but by the
Spirit. But this the whorish spirit is departed from, and bewitcheth others
from, first possessing them that the Spirit is not to be looked for, and then
persuading them to make as good shift as they can without it: and then (having
thus prepared people) she brings forth her wares. Look ye, says she, this is
the way, thus and thus the Saints practiced, do thou thus also. But thou must
receive the Saints spirit, before thou either know or worship, or thou know
and worshippest out of it: and in that path of sorcery and witchcraft from the
life, thou shall never meet with the life, but the further thou proceedest
therein, wilt be more and more entangled from it, and become still a greater and
greater enemy to it, and more and more in love with the whore, and her whorish
paths and pleasing ways of devotion, whereby the false spirit in thee is
raised up and nourished, but thy soul famished: for that can be nourished with
nothing but the bread of life from the hand of the Spirit, but not with words,
or forms of knowledge, or ways of worship invented, or imitated; which do but
tickle the understanding or affectionate part of man, but reach not the life,
so that that which should serve the Lord, is not there raised, but still bound
over with the bond of iniquity.

5. Luxury, excess, and pleasure. She is rich with her Merchandise, and she
enjoyes it to the full, she takes the pleasure of it. She builds costly houses,
wears rich apparel, fares deliciously (read spiritually with the spiritual
eye.) She is rich in knowledge, rich in ways of worship, rich in duties, rich
in religious performances and practices. And as she gained these in her own
will (without the leadings of the life) and by her own search and wisdom: So
she can make use of these in her own will, and according to the direction of
her own wisdom. She can fast when she will, give thanks when she will, preach
when she will, pray when she will, sing when she will, meditate when she will,
bring forth her knowledge to others when she will. Look on the Papists, how
rich are they in outward buildings, in gorgeous Ceremonies, in times of
worship, in ways of mortification and penance, in fasts, in feasts etc! Look
on the several sorts of Protestants, they have their riches in their kind too,
their Churches, their buildings, their arts, their sciences, their languages,
their bodies of divinity; their cases of conscience, etc. They can open the
whole body of Religion, resolve all doubts, expound all Scriptures, etc. The
great City was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked
with gold and precious stones, and pearls, Rev: 18. 16. And she sat thus on
the Throne like a Queen, living deliciously, and taking her pleasure, to which
her torment and sorrow afterward is proportioned, ver: 7. Yea she had treasure
and costlinesse enough to make all her Merchants rich that would trade with
her, ver: 19. What knowledge, what delicate food, could the wisest or greatest
of the earth desire, which she had not ready for them, see ver: 3. and ver: 9.
But Sion, all this while, has lain in the dust, and been despised: She has
had no building, no fence, but has been trampled under foot by every unclean
beast: Her witnesses have been clothed with sackcloath (a garment which all
the lofty inhabitants of Babylon disdain:) her sare has been hard in the
Wilderness, only a little Manm (which with fleshly Israel, who lust after rich
and large knowledge, is counted light bread, and their souls soon loath it:) Nor
had she this in plenty, but only a small proportion daily from the hand of the
free-giver, sufficient to keep life in her in the Wilderness, and to furnish
her with strength to give in her testimony against Babylon, so far as the Lord
saw good to call any of her seed thereunto. Now what professor can be willing
to fare thus with her at present, and to wait for her future riches, fullness,
beauty and glory! Nay, nay, they have so long lived richly, and fared
deliciously in Babylon that they know not how to eat the bread of affliction,
and drink the water of affliction with sad and desolate Sion. And yet this is
the only way and passage out of Babylon into Sion: That which has been rich
and fat, and ful-fed there, must become poor, and lean, and feel hunger, and
have none of the bread of life administered to it, no nor so much as husks
neither: And in this sad day and state of misery, the poor is visited which
receives the Gospel, and the dead raised, which receives the life.

6. Worshipping of the Devil. All the world wondered after the beast, and they
worshipped the Dragon, Rev: 13. 3, 4. Now the Dragon is the Devil, Rev: 20. 2.

There is no other worship of God under the new Testament, but in Spirit and
truth: and he that worships otherwise, worships not God, but that Spirit which
teaches to worship out of Gods Spirit, and out of the truth. Every prayer is
not a prayer to God, but only that prayer which is from and in the Spirit.
Every Ordinance or duty is not an Ordinance of God, or a duty performed to God,
but only that which the Spirit leads into, and guids and preserves in. This is
the way that all the earth have departed from the Lord, namely, by erring from
his Spirit. They cry up practices in Religion, duties, ordinances, the means,
the means, a Church, a Church (as the Jews did the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord:) but they find the Church, before they have found the
Spirit of the Lord; and so they find not the Church that is in God, the Church
that is of his building, but they, poor hearts, frame up a building as well as
they can according to the pattern they find in the Scriptures; and so they are
not an habitation for God in the Spirit, but are estranged from the life and
Spirit in all their worship: and so are not found by the Spirit (which
searches them and their worship) worshipping of God, but the works of their own
hands, and Devils, Rev: 9. 20. For that charge stands good against all the
inhabitants of Babylon, even to the highest and strictest of them all, whether
in forms, or out of forms: There are many men who are very zealous and devout
in their ways of worship, who were never taught by the Spirit the way of
worshipping God, nor do at all know how to worship in the Spirit: these my soul
exceedingly pittyes. They have received into their understandings from the
letter of the Scripture, that God is to be worshipped in Spirit, and that God
will give his Spirit to them that ask it. They have asked, and they hope they
have the Spirit, but poor deceived hearts, they know not what spirit they are
of, nor in what spirit they act, nor what spirit they serve; and so perish for
lack of knowledge, the key whereof has been hid from them. Now let such
consider:

There are but two spirits, the Spirit of God and the spirit of Satan, one of
which guide all men in their devotion and Religion, and one of which they serve
therein. He that is led by the Spirit of God, he serves God, he worships God:
He that is led by the spirit of Satan, he serves not God, but that spirit which
appears in the Temple of God, like God, and gives such demonstrations that he
is God, as no flesh can deny, 2 Thessalonians: 2. 4. Here now is the great
deceivableness of unrighteousness. In profaneness, in manifest wickedness,
Satan is easily seen: and men that are found here, it is granted that they are
serving the Devil: but that he should sit as King in gathered Churches, in
duties, in ordinances, in ways of self-denial and mortification, and be
worshipped here, this is hard to be seen: yet any of these which the Spirit of
the Lord leads not into, or which are performed at any time without his Spirit,
he is worshipped in. Consider this, ye that are wise in Religion, and are
dilligently reading the Scriptures and gathering knowledge, and rules of
worship, and applying promises, etc. Do ye this in the life and Spirit of God?
or in your own wisdom, and according to your own understanding? Does not the
wisdom of that spirit which is out of the truth, guide you in your searchings
after truth? O do not serve that spirit which the Lord hates but come back to
that, from which in all this ye err, and which in all this ye cannot serve and
worship. And let not your Religion any longer consist in mere practicing what
the Saints formerly practiced (for that ye may do without the same spirit) but
in yielding up to that life, power, and pure spirit that they were led by. And
when ye are joined to this, then do not prescribe the Lamb the way that he
shall go, but follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes. Do not tell the
Shepherd (by your gathered wisdom) the way that he must lead you in, but know
the voice and follow: For this I can truly testify, that if once ye come in
faithfulness and true light to follow the Lamb, he will lead you in paths ye
have not known, and out of the paths ye have known.

7. Compelling of others to worship, Rev: 13. 15, 16. The false woman and the
beast set up a worship in the will, and they do not know why any in the will
also may not subject and submit to it. They can give them reasons, they can
give them arguments from Scripture, and if they will not yield to these, they
are to be looked upon as stubborn and refractory, and to be compelled by
outward force. This has been the course generally throughout the Land of
Babylon, But these show hereby that they themselves are erred from the truth
(and therefore very unfit and unlikely to teach it others:) For that which God
works upon is the conscience, which he convinces by the light of his Spirit,
and no other light can truly convince it. That therefore which would have a man
yield to any practice, or way of worship, till he be truly convinced, is of the
Devil. My son, give me thy heart, says Christ, the wisdom of God: Come not to
me with oblations and sactifices, but give me thy heart. My son, give me thy
knee, give me thy obedience to the ways I have set up, give me thy conformity,
says Antichrist, says the adulterated wisdom: and if any refuse, she
endeavors to compel them. Thus like Jeroboam the son of Nebat, she makes (that
which she calls) Israel to sin: or like Nebuchadnezzar, she sets up an Idol,
and causes all her children to bow to it. Thus the load of the iniquity of
multitudes lies upon that scarlet whore, who forces her cup of abominations and
filthiness upon all she can, Rev: 17. 4. causing all both small and great, in
all her Territories to receive her mark, and worship her Image. The work of
the Minister of Christ, is to keep the conscience tender, that the voice of
Christ may be heard, and the Law of his Spirit of life (which makes obedient to
the God of life) spring up there: but this is the Image, here is the way, bow,
conform say the Ministers of Antichrist. But we are not convinced in the sight
of God, that this is the way, say poor souls. It is your own fault, ye may be
convinif ye will, say the Ministers of Antichrist, we are ready to give you
arguments and Scriptures to convince you, how is it ye are not convinced? Ye
must be convinced otherwise, the Magistrate must deal with you. Thus they
endeavor to harden the conscience, that they may set upon it and ride it, and
terrify it from it is subjection to it is only true and lawful King. O the
havoc that has been made of souls by this means! the Lord is requiring it of
this generation.

But let me ask this question to all the learned and wise, in all the Regions
of Babylon, under what painted form or way of worship soever. Can any worship
God aright, before they be truly convinced of his will and way? can any be
convinced without his light and Spirit? were it good and acceptable in the
sight of God, for any persons to run into that way, whereof thou say thou
art convinced that it is the way, before they themselves are convinced? If it
be not good or acceptable, what is that that goes about to compel them? Away
with thy carnal weapons; and if thou will draw to God, draw by that which is
spiritual: but if thou will still be using outward force (running to the laws
of men, and power of the Magistrate) the Lord has opened an eye, which
discovers thy nakedness herein, and is able to make it manifest in the sight
of all people, and thou shall not long cover thy shame. The Lotds people shall
be a willing people to follow him in the day of his power: but all the Lords
people have been unwilling to follow thee in the day of thy power, which is
near an end; and the very fountain of thy deceit (and tyranny over the
conscience) is opening and making manifest.

8. Persecution of such as she cannot compel to her worship. She sets up her
form of knowledge, she sets up her way of worship, and those that will not be
drawn to own the one, and practice the other, she sets her brand upon them for
erroneous persons, Schismatics, Heretics, they must not buy or sell, Rev: 13.
17. They must be banished or imprisoned, or perhaps put to death, for she is
hardly satisfied, til she has drunk the blood of those, who in any eminent
degree are the witnesses of Christ against her, Rev: 17. 6. This was a thing
wondered at by John with great admiration, to see this woman, this great City,
out of which all the venomous darts are shor, against the Saints and Martyrs of
Jesus, under a pretense of zeal for the Church and ordinances of Christ. For
this is the engine, whereby the Dragon makes war with the true woman's seed,
(which keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ)
even by this false woman which rides on the beast, by whose power and strength
she overcomes the Saints. She sets up a way of doctrine, a way of worship in a
Nation, and gets laws made for the defense of it, and against them that will
not submit to it, and here she is too hard for the Saints, by this means she
overcomes the Martyrs and Witnesses, and keeps the truth down, and keeps up her
way of deceit, which without this prop would soon sall.

This whorish spirit scents the Spirit of the Lord, she knows it will soon be
her death, if she cannot make it appear odious, and suppress it: Therefore she
hunts this spirit, she hunts the life and power of what she her self professes
(especially if it appear vigorous and strong in any) she seeks advantages
against the servants of the living God, representing them to the earthly powers
as persons of dangerous principles and bad practices, inventing all manner of
what can be called evil against them, and spreading it among the people, that
the truth may start up no where in the earth, but every where be knocked down
by the violence of the multitude, or by the sword of the offended Magistrate.
Now what is the matter of all this great noise and fury? Why this: A Lamb is
risen up in the innocence, the pure harmless spirit is appearing in the earth,
the true life. (which discovers the hypocrisy, and dead forms and ways of the
whorish spirit) is breaking forth: Therefore she makes a great out cry,
awakpeople awak, the church is in danger, arise Magistrates, Magistracy and
Ministry will down, if this Lamb-like spirit be suffered. Nay, nay; These shall
stand, but Babylon shall fall, and her mystery of iniquity be discovered, and
her deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness made manifest; and the true life and
Spirit shall arise and take possession of the hearts of people, and make them a
clean and fit habitation for God: and people that are subject hereto, shall
feel it and enjoy it, though the Merchants of Babylon say, men shall never be
made clean while they live, but must still have a body of sin and death hanging
about them. But how shall they put on Christ, who have not put off the body of
sin? Shall those who are made Kings and Priests to God here on earth, minister
in their filthy garments.

These are some of the sins of Babylon, that painted harlot, which is subtle in
heart and lies in wait to deceive, in the absence of the true Church, whose
clothing and resemblance she takes up and appears in.

And when she has done all this, When (like Egypt) she has kept the seed in
bondage in all her Territories and Dominions, in every Church she has set up,
and by all her Ministries and Ordinances: When (like Sodom) she has filled the
whole world with filthiness, uncleanesse, and all manner of spiritual
abominations: When (like old Jerusalem the bondwoman) she and her children
have scoffed at the Spirit in every appearance, all the time of her reign, and
have trampled upon and domineered over them, who have but spoken of the coming
of the just one in his people, sporting her self in her own deceivings: Yet,
after all this, She wipes her mouth, and says she has done no harm: She has
been for the Gospel, and Church, and Ministry, and Ordinances, and the says
once delivered to the Saints, and only against deceivers, seducers,
blasphemers, and heretics. But the Spirit of the Lord cannot be thus deceived,
nor shall the Nations be always thus deceived, and suffer her to sit as a
Queen upon their consciences, but she shall see sorrow, and they shall taste
joy at the sound of the everlasting Gospel, when once again it comes to their
ears, Rev: 14. 6. and Chap: 19. 6, 7.

The judgment of Babylon.
BAbylon the great, this great City of abominations, which has reigned over
the whole earth, which has bewitched all sorts of professors with the golden
cup of her fornications, which has subtly led from the life, and held all
sorts captive in the witchery of her deceit, and has triumphed over the holy
seed, making Sion their mother desolate, who sat in the dust, and was trampled
upon by her. This great City, this glorious City, this rich City, this mighty
powerful City, this Queen of the earth (which knows not what belongs to Sions
misery, sorrow, poverty, and desolation) with Antichrist her King and husband
(who has clothed himself with the garments of light, and appeared in the
likeness of the King of Sion, and has long been so acknowledged and
worshipped) is to be judged by the Spirit of life, which arises up out of the
dust of Sion.

And though Babylon the great whore (who in all her transformings has still
remained an enemy to the life) has great power and great wisdom, and can shift
very subtly to save her self by both; yet strong is the Lord God who judges
her, and he also is wise, and she shall not escape his hand, but he will pursue
her with his voices, with his thunderings, with his hailstones, with his
earthquakes, with his woes, with his plagues, with his cups of indignation,
till he has made her manifest, till he has broken her in pieces, till he has
crumbled and laid her in the dust, till he has brought her down to the very
pit, where the feet of Sion shall trample upon her for ever. Sing, sing O
inhabitant of Sion, do thou not behold the Crown of pride going down apace?
The decree is sealed against her, she cannot escape; yea she is fallen, she is
fallen, she is already taken in the snare, the eye of my life sees it, and
rejoices over her in the living power.

The plagues of God Allmighty, from the fierceness of his indignation, are
visiting her whole Territories, and passing over all her Land. Nothing can help
her to avoid his stroke, no paint will serve, no cover will hide, no
profession, no practice, no duties, no ordinances, no Church, no Ministry can
avail to conceal her, but that spirit is pursued by the Spirit of the Lord, and
found out every where, and plagues are prepared and pouring out upon her. Nay,
though she leave all her forms, and pretend to wait and seek for the Lord, yet
she is found out there also.

Now what is her judgment? Destruction and utter desolation from the hand of
the Lord, to be an hissing and reproach throughout all generations, to be
brought down (by powrings forth of the wrath and vengeance of the Allmighty)
into the pit, and there to drink the fullness of his wrath for ever. Sion shall
be exalted, Sion shall drink the cup of life, the cup of blessing, the cup of
love, the cup of salvation for ever: but Babylon the cup of fury, the cup of
indignation for ever and ever. Sion shall sing, but Babylon shall howl: and all
that saw any beauty, or took any pleasure in her, shall mourn over her; Alas,
alas, for her, she who has so many ages gone for the Church, is now proved to
be the whore; those who have been taken, in their several transformings, for
the true Ministers, made manifest to be the false Prophets; their ordinances
and duties, but thefts and imitations; things which they have stolen from what
they read in the Scriptures, but never received from the hand of the Spirit.

The wrath of God, the dreadful cup of his fury and jealous indignation for the
cause of Sion, is to go over her whole Land. Over her Sea, and all the Ships
that trade therein, and all her Merchants with all their precious traffic and
merchandise. All her doctrins which she has stolen out of the Scripture, all
her disciplines, all her experiences, all her performances (even those which
are most like the performances of former Saints;) nay though she may speak the
very words of truth, yet as they come from her mouth, they shall be thrown by
and judged, and be of no service or esteem in Sion. The preciousest of her ware
shall be dross and dung in the Land of life, where there shall be no Sea, nor
no such kind of Merchants, traffic or trading for ever.

Her Earth also shall be made desolate, and burnt up, with all that is found
therein: All her settlement shall be shaken, all her fruit trees shall be
rooted up, all her fruit shall wither, rot, dye, and perish. All her
conversions of people to God (as she calls it) shall come to nothing: Yea, and
if she have yet any more dresses, or secret coverings, wherein she would appear
like the Church again, and bring forth again, yet she and her children shall
immediately be discovered, her flesh burnt with fire, and her children dashed
against the stones. Every street in her City, every house and idol in every
street, every room in every house, with every inhabitant, shall drink of the
cup of astonishment, and stumble, and fall, and rise no more. Thou have long
triumphed over me, O mine enemy, because I have fallen, and have long sit in
darkness: but rejoice no longer, for I shall rise again, and the Lord shall be
a light unto me; but thou shall rise no more, and thy light shall be put out
for ever; glory to the meek suffering-Lamb, even to him that sits upon the
throne of life for ever.

Her Air also shall be darkened. The Lord shall enlighten my darkness, but the
light of Babylon shall be darkness for evermore. The light of a candle shall be
seen no more at all in thee. Many lights has Babylon set up in the dark night,
but the rising of the Sun of righteousness shall extinguish them all for ever,
and Babylon shall be shut up in utter darkness. Yea all that have retained to
Babylon, all that have walked by the light of any of her candles, that have
cried up any of her false ware for orthodoxe, that have given up their names to
her under any of her dresses or appearances, or that have received any of her
marks, they shall partake of her shame, of her misery, and of her torment from
the hand of the Lord God. Yea her throne also shall be visited, and the seat of
Antichrist in every heart shall feel the wrath.

Rise up from the dust, and shout forth with joy, O captive daughter of Sion,
who have long dwelt under oppression, in the midst of the daughter of Babylon.
Behold Babylons King shall be no longer judge over Sion, but thy King shall be
judge, and he shall judge the King of Babylon. And let all the powers and
potsheards of the earth strive to their utmost, yet, says the Lord, have I set
my King upon my holy hill of Sion, and he shall rule in my people, and rule over
Babylon.

Therefore, O inhabitants of the earth, great and small, learn meekness, learn
righteousness, learn the fear of the Lord; Kiss the Son, harden not your
selves against him, calling him a deceiver, a blasphemer, a seducer, an
heretic (for what ye do to the least that appear in his life, ye do to him:)
but hearken to the word of his everlasting Gospel, which says, FEAR GOD, AND
GIVE GLORY TO HIM, FOR THE HOVRE OF HIS JVDGEMENT IS COME, and ye cannot escape
his hand by that fear, which is taught by the precepts of men, or by
traditional knowledge out of the Scriptures, nor while ye seek that honor
which came out of the earth, and is of the earth, and to that which is earthly.
Therefore let your hearts learn to know him, and your tongues to confefs him,
and your knees to bow to him: which, if ye do, ye must forget all that
knowledge, and those confessions and bowings, which ye have learned in Babylon:
for though ye may have confessed some true things, yet (having learned this in
Babylon) ye have confessed falsely, even as the Jews who said, The Lord lives,
yet swore falsely, Jerem: 5. 2.

Now consider, ye Ministers of several sorts, and ye several sorts of
professors: We may appear great enemies to you, because we witness against your
ways, and tell you what the end of them will be; but are we enemies to you
indeed, whose desire it is to save you from this great wrath, which has
already entered into the earth, and seized on some? Should we sooth you up, and
not witness these things to you (which we infallibly know) how should we answer
it to the Lord our God, or to your souls, when we shall appear before him? If we
were in your condition, would we be content to be let go on, and to be
overtaken with this great destruction? We cannot be silent. Ye must be silent,
but we cannot. We know ye must be silent: for that which now speaks in you,
has been silenced in us, and is not to minister the things of God. But the
Spirir of the Lord must not be quenched in us, no notwithstanding all our
weakness, but the treasure must issue forth from the earthen vessel, for the
relief of the poor in spirit, who alone receive the Gospel. Therefore though ye
hate us, though ye persecute us, though ye speak all manner of evil against us,
and use us never so hardly; yet there is love rooted in our souls toward your
souls, yea and toward your persons also: and having both felt the wrath, and
tasted of the mercy, we cannot but warn you of the one, and invite you to the
other (and O that ye might find a shelter under the shadow of his wings in the
stormy season, when wrath shall be showred down without mercy!) And this we
cannot but tell you, that the several ways of Religion in the Christian world,
are but so many several coverings; and that that which is covered with them is
the whorish spirit, which the Spirit of the Lord is hunting, who will strip her,
and make her naked, and she shall appear to have been the whore under them all.
Now that which lies beneath this Spirit in you, which is despised and trampled
upon as a thing of naught, which is burdened and daily slain by your
multitudes of Ordinances, professions and Religious practices, this is the heir
of life; and by the raising up and living of this in you, may ye come to life,
and no otherwise. And all Religion without this (even the most inward) is but
the deceit of the whore, who makes a great show of worship, and of zeal toward
Christ, his Ordinances, and Ministry (as she calls them:) but by all these, and
under all these holds the life in bondage, and strives by all means to slay the
heir, that the inheritance might come to her son. But Cain the sacraficer,
Ishmael the son of the bondwoman, Esau the hunter abroad after venison, the
Jew full of profession, zeal, ordinances and worship, shall not inherit: but
slain Abel shall be raised to life, Isaac (who was born of the dry and barren
womb) shall have the promise, plain Jacob the blessing, the outcast Gentile be
sought out. Thus it shall be, can ye read it? yet it is the desire of our souls
that a remnant of you may be saved, and now is the gathering. Therefore seek
humility, seek poverry of spirit, seek the suffering seed, seek the meek,
innocent, harmless Dove-like nature, even the love which does no il, nor
thinks no il, for this is the Spirit which is to be gathered: but the high and
lofty, the wise and knowing, the fat and strong, the rough and confident in
their wisdom, and in their duties, Churches, ordinances, etc. (which they have
gathered, and stolen from the Scriptures, out of the life) are with all these
to be rejected, and to be shut up in blindness and hardness of heart. Seeing
they are to see, and not perceive, and hearing to hear, and not understand,
lest they should be converted and healed. Yea it is this spirit, which is to
fret under it is pain and torment from the woes and plagues, but cannot repent,
but passes on with Babylon to ruin and destruction, Rev: 16. 9, 10, 11.

Babylon is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit,
and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Come out of her, my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev:
18. ver: 2. and 4.

This is the cry concerning Babylon just upon her fall. Her iniquity is full, her
filth overflows, the pure seed is gathering out of her, and nothing but Devils,
and foul spirits, and unclean and hateful birds remain in her. And the call still
is to the people of God, from one remove to another, from one part of Babylon
to another, to travel on and pass away still, til they come quite out of it all.
To come out of one part of Babylonish worship, that is not enough, or to come
out of some pieces of Babylonish knowledge and wisdom, will not answer the call,
but ye must come out of it all. Depart ye, depart ye, this is not your rest,
for it is polluted. Stay not in any part of the unclean Land, O child of the
pure life: but be separate and touch not the unclean thing, if thou will have
the holy one to receive thee. Not only the several dresses and forms of the
whore are polluted, but her spirit also, and all her inward fabric of
Religion, out of which thou must also come, if ever thou be joined to the pure
life. Thy faith, thy hope, thy love, thy patience, thy joy, thy peace, thy
justification, thy sanctification, thy mortification, thy ability to pray, to
give thanks, to wait, etc. All must down, all must suffer loss, all must become
dross and dung to thee, that thou may know the building of true life from
and in the Spirit. For the Lord will not own any of these, nor receive thee
with any of these which the whore has touched, but if thou will have the pure
life both within and without, thou must part with the corrupt life both within
and without. (This is a faithful and true testimony, but who can receive it?
will not both the houses of Israel be offended and stumble at it?) But if any
of the people of God will abide still in Babylon, and not hearken to every call
of the Spirit of the Lord, to follow its guidance out of every part of her,
they shall receive (from the impartial hand of the Lord) of her plagues, and
shall have torment and sorrow proportionable to the glory and pleasure they
have had with her. Therefore, if after one, two, three, or many removes out of
some parts and practices of Babylon, the voice still follow, crying, Come out of
her my people (the spirit of Antichrist is yet among you, the wine of
fornication from the pure life, is not yet purged out of you) do not stop your
ears, thinking this belongs not to you, because ye have forsaken some paths
which are Antichristian; but hear and follow, for it is your life, and your way
to rest and peace in the Land of the living, and your sure preservation from
anguish, perplexity and misery, in the hour of Babylons judgment and sore
distress.

Now there is one thing, which lies as a great block in the way, to hinder this
testimony from entering into the hearts of those, to whom it is directed, or at
least to weaken the spirits demonstration of it to their consciences (for
exceeding subtle is the whorish spirit, to keep every one of her subjects from
the sight, or suspicion of her in themselves, and to darken every beam of
light, whereby it pleases God to make any way for the discovery of her in
them) which is this.

Object: But has all our Religion for these many ages, been Babylonish, and
whoredom from the life? all our Churches, all our Ordinances, all our duties,
all our Ministry, etc? We can never be drawn to believe this. We are sure we
have felt lively touches from God many a time, and enjoyed sweet communion with
him in them. God has often met us there, and refreshed our spirits, which he
would not have done, had they not been of himself.

Answ: There has been a simplicity and sincerity of heart, strring in some
people toward God in all ages, even among the Heathen under all their Idols,
and among the Jews in the midst of their great apostasy: which simplicity is of
God, and accepted with him, notwithstanding all the load of filth that may hang
round about it. Even in the midst of Egypt, or in the midst of Babylon, if
Israel groans the Lord hears, and may return sweet answers to Israel, even
there. When Israel was a child I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt. The
lowest breathings of true life toward God is the voice of his son, and enters
into his ears from the darkest part of Egypt or Babylon.

Now in this Nation, the simplicity has more stirred, then in other Nations;
the seed of God in this Land, has been exceeding precious and dear to him. And
at the beginning of these late troubles, the stirring of the simplicity from
the pure seed, was more vigorous and lively, then it had been in many ages
before: and accordingly the answers of God to it were more fresh and sweet, and
there was a taste of him, and fellowship with him, and sweet hopes and
refreshments to the soul. Though the way of praying, preaching and worship
(either public or private) was not right before him; yet he over-looked that
which his soul hated (winking at the time of ignorance and Antichristian
darkness) and met with that which he loved. And if the simplicity had grown and
thriven, communion with God (and life from him) would have increased, although
the pure path of the Sanctuary had no yet been made manifest.

But this was it destroyed all, another thing got up under a cover, and the
simplicity sunk, and so the life withdrew, and God has grown strange to his
people. He missed that which he loved and came to visit, he found that thrust
upon him for his, which his soul cannot own or unite with, and so he became but
as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry for a night, Jer: 14. 8. Enter
into your hearts, O ye backsliding children, is it not thus? You, who had
sweet tastes of God is he not become a stranger to you? You that had sweet,
fresh, lively breathings after God, are you not sit down in a form (or under
some pleasing notions) and have got a covering, but lost the simplicity of your
life, and the sweet tastes of God, and refreshments from him? Thus it has been
in all reformations: there was commonly a pure, single, naked beginning, but an
evil thing soon got dominion over it, slaying the pure living stirring by the
form which it raised up, under a pretense of preserving the life thereby, and
of serving God more uniformly and acceptably therein. Ah the precious seed that
was sown at the beginning of these troubles! What is become of it? how is every
one turned aside from the pure life, into some Idol or other of his own heart!
some into one way of worship, and some into another; some into one notion, and
some into another; and all joining together to keep the seed in bondage,
endeavoring either to bring it back again to Egypt (to make it serve there) or
to destroy and bury it in the wilderness. But the Lord has visited his poor
desolate seed, and has been gathering it from all quarters, from amidst all
empty forms, on the one hand, and all vain high notions on the other hand; and
he will preserve it, overturning all his new enemies as well as his old. This
then is the sum of the Answer.

1. No way, or particular act of worship under the New Testament, is acceptable
to God without his Spirit.

2. All invented or imitated ways or acts of worship, to the performing
whereof, the mooving, presence, and power of his Spirit is not necessary (but
men can perform them without it) are Babylonish, and whoredom from that Spirit
to which the true Christian is joined, and in which all that he does is
performed.

3. Under this Antichristianism, under this whoredom (even in the Land of
Babylon, where the true Israel is captive) a true simplicity and zeal toward
God may sometimes be stirring.

4. When this at any time is stirring toward the Lord, the Lord pityes it, the
Lord loves it, the Lord accepts it, When this calls, the Lord hears, and waits
that he may be gracious, and return answers of grace to it.

5. Though the Lord accept of this in the midst of Babylon, and in the midst of
the whorish ways of worship that have been learned there, yet this does not
make Babylon, or her ways of worship acceptable, nor are not to be made use of
(nor cannot) by any that fears God to justify them.

6. Where they are so made use of, and the Babylonish ways and forms of
worship cried up (because of Gods visitations and tender mercy to his seed
under them) God is provoked, his presence withdrawn, life lost, and wrath
prepared against those forms and ways of worship, which will reach to the very
bowels of those who are found there.

And let this word come home to your hearts, O ye that ever knew what belonged
to sweet communion with God! If God was so tender to you in Babylon, when he
stirred up in you a pure simplicity and zeal there, what would he have been to
you, if ye had come out of Babylon? Ah, ye have lost the substance for a
shadow, and that not a right shadow neither, but a shadow of your own forming!
and now ye are angry with them, who will not also leave the substance to cry up
your shadow. Ah enter into your secret chambers, and let shame cover your
faces, ye who would propagate that apostasy from the Lord, which your own
hearts have too far entered into, and are so deeply involved in. O that the eye
were opened in you which can see it! Do not your hearts a little feel it? O
mourn after the Lord, and mourn after the loss of that which once (in some
measure in you) was true to the Lord. O that the lost sheep might be sought
out, and that which has been scattered (in the day of your loftines, and
seeking dominion and great things) might be gathered again to the Lord! for
great is the wrath and severity that is toward you, and he is become exceeding
jealous for his seeds sake; and judgment must begin with you, who cry out
against Antichrist in one gross fleshly by appearance, and yet are serving him
your selves, some of you in other forms, some in Spirit.

This is a standing ttuth, What ever is not of the Spirit of God in Religion
and worship: is of the spirit of Antichrist. What ever the spirit of man has
invented or imitated, is not the thing it self, is not the true worship: for
the true worship is only and continually in the Spirit, and never out of the
Spirit. The true praying is in the Spirit, the true singing in the Spirit, the
true preaching in the Spirit: Whatsoever is out of it, is of Antichrist in man.
Now therefore give up all your Religion, your knowledge, your worship, your
practices which are out of the Spirit, and return unto the Lord, and wait for
his raising of that seed in you, which once began to spring, but is now slain,
and lies in death and captivity under all these, and the earthly part (wherein
all this Religion and these practices stand) covers its blood, so as ye cannot
see how ye have slain, and daily do slay the just one.

O the blood, the blood, the innocent blood that daily cries to the Lord
against you! How can the Lord accept any of your services, while your hands are
full of blood! while the pure simplicity is slain, the love grown cold, the life
lost, and the whorish way and path (wherein and whereby it was lost) cried up
for the way of God. Shall not the Lord visit for these things? Shall not his
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Yea his wrath is kindled, the
fierceness of his wrath is kindled against the professors of this age, and woe
is from the Lord toward them. Woe to the Protestant Congregations, woe to the
select Churches, woe to their pastors, who have helped them to wander from the
life to dead idols, which cannot profit: Woe to them who are exalted in notions
and high knowledge: ye have judged and condemned the Papists, and the Lord has
found out the same spirit of idolatry in you! But turn from your Idols, return
to your simplicity, put away your adulteries from between your breasts, and
return to your first love, and the Lord will receive you, though ye have
wandered after many lovers, and have been inflamed with the love of idols under
every green tree: but in these your Church ways and worships the soul of the
Lord abhors you, and all your former zeal and simplicity is blotted out and
forgotten, and in your present adultery and idolatry shall ye dye, unless ye
hear the voice of the Lord recalling you, and turn at his reproof.

Now in tender bowels to help you a little, consider that which follows.

The same spirit that steals away the true simplicity, raises up and
steals in a false image thereof, which there is no perceiving at present,
unless the soul lie very low, and be kept open and clear in the pure light.

And as in the true simplicity, the true light, the true knowledge, the true
faith, the true hope, the true love, the true meekness, the true zeal, the true
poverty and humility, etc. springs up and is nourished: so in the false image
of simplicity (which the Devil secretly conveys in, when he steals away the
true) there is a likeness of all these springing up and growing.

And here is the beginning of Babylon in the heart, here are the inward riches
and treasures thereof. What can Sion pretend to, which Babylon has not in the
resemblance? Is there simplicity of heart in Sion? and is there not simplicity
of heart among the inhabitants of Babylon? yea; a false image. Is there light
in Sion? and is there no^ also light in Babylon? yea there is the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Moon, and the light of the Stars which fell from
heaven, and the light of many candles shining in Babylon. Is there true
knowledge in Sion? There Is knowledge fasiy so called in Babylon: a false
knowledge of the Cross of Christ, a false knowledge of his death, a false
knowledge of his blood, without feeling the living virtue thereof, which truly
washes away the sin. So for faith, hope, love, meekness, zeal, humility, etc.
There are false images of all these in Babylon, and of what ever else is
wrought in truth in the inhabitants of Sion.

Now when the truth is lost, and the false image crept in (both which are done
at unawares, while the husbandman is asleep; and so he perceives it not, but
thinks in his very heart that it is still the seed of truth that is growing up
in him) then begins the mystery of fornication, idolatry, witchcraft, and all
manner of spiritual wickedness and deceit to work in the heart. Thy believing,
thy hoping, thy love, thy zeal, thy praying, thy waiting, etc. All here is
abomination, it is from a false root, it is of a false kind: it is not of the
true seed; the enemy has stolen away that, while thou wast negligent and
slumbering, and all this arises in thee from the seed which he did sow instead
thereof, and is the fruit of the Land of Babylon.

And having thus committed inward whoredom in thine own heart, then thou
seek and set up outward ways of whoredom also. Having first set up an
inward image of the inward life of the Saints, thou then seek and set up
another image of their outward worship, an image of a Church, an image of a
Ministry, an image of Ordinances, an image of praying, an image of singing, an
image of preaching, an image of baptism, an image of the Saints communion. And
thus thou art defiled within and without, and art mad with envy and rage that
thou can not bewitch the inhabitants of Sion (who are kept pure from all
these defilements, and reserved as witnesses against thee) into thy bed of
whoredoms. And thus while thou think thou art the chief worshipper, thou
art all over polluted, the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint,
there isno cleanness, no soundness within or without, but wounds, and bruises,
and putrefying sores, which have not been closed, neither bound up, nor
mollified with oil: but the hurt of the daughter of my people has been healed
deceitfully, by Physicians of no vallue, who had notthe oil. (Isa: 1. 5, 6. and
Ezekiel: 13. 10.)

This is generally the state of professors at this day, but they cannot see it:
for they have put out the eye of the simplicity (wherewith alone God will
suffer the things of life to be seen) and God has blinded the eye of their
wisdom, that they shall not see, nor be converted and healed that way. So that
exceeding miserable is their estate: They will not see Gods way, and God will
not let them see their way. So that though there be line upon line, precept
upon precept, here a little, and there a little; yet it is that they might
stumble, and fall, and be snared, and broken, and taken: For as discoveries of
truth grow more clear and manifest; so they grow more hardened against it. And
as they, on the one hand, increase in walking contrary to God; so God on the
other hand, proceeds in walking contrary to them, delighting more and more to
stumble the wise disputing part, which would so fain know, but must be made
blind, that the eye of the babe may be opened, which sees that in the childish
simplicity, which the other eye can never reach in the most manly wisdom.

Therefore put away all your images and likenesses of truth: Put away your
false faith (which can never overcome the worldly nature and spirit in you) and
your false hope (which can never purify your hearts) and your fained humility
and self-willed fasts (which can never bring down the lofty exalted nature in
you) and your false love (wherewith ye can never love the brethren in the
truth, but only the brethren in your own, or some such other likeness of the
truth) and your false zeal, meekness, holiness, etc. All which spring and grow
up from the wrong seed, in a seeming simplicity; and all your praying, reading,
preaching, etc. which ye have taken up and practice in your own wills, which
should be crucified, and wherewith no service, worship, or performance can be
pleasing to God: and wait for the raising of the true seed of life in the true
simplicity, whereby ye may serve God acceptably here, and be saved hereafter.
And be not mockers, lest your bands be made strong, for the consumption is
determined against you by that Spirit of life, whose breath will wast you: All
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field! Surely this
people is grass, and their zeal, and profession of God, like the fading flower.

Some plain Queryes, drawn out of the Book of the Revel: for all sorts of
Professors of this age, to answer between God and their own souls, that they
may see whether they have received that light from him, which his Spirit judged
necessary to give forth, to keep people chaste to him, and to preserve them from
the several painted beds of Antichrists fornications and whoredoms from the
life.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand, Rev:
1. 3.
The time of deceit was then at hand for Antichrist (with his false Church, and
false Prophets) to get up, which were to last til the hour of judgment, Rev:
14. 7, 8. Have thou read? have thou heard? have thou kept the things written in
this book? then happy art thou? But have thou not read in the Spirit? have thou
not heard the true sound of these things from the Spirit of life? have thou not
kept the things written therein? Then thou have been deceived with the mystery
of iniquity, and must smart with the whore in the hour of her judgment.

The Queryes are these which follow.

I. What woman was that which was clothed with the Sun, and had the Moon under
her feet etc? Rev: 12. 1. Whether it was the true Church or no?

II. What that wilderness was whereinto she fled, where she had a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there 1260 days? verse: 6.

III. How long those 1260 days did last? and whether they he yet expired? and
whether the true Church is any where else to befound all the time of the 1260
days, but in that place in the wilderness?

IV. What are all the Churches, the Ministry, the Ordinances that appear out of
the wilderness all this while, while the true Church is there?

V. What was that beast which came out of the Sea; to which the Dragon gave his
power, his seat, and great authority? which all the world worshipped, Rev: 13.
ver: 1. to 5.

VI. What is that Sea and those ships, wherein and wherewith the Merchants of
the earth traded with Babylon, and were maderich by their traffic? what were
those Merchants? what their Merchandise? and what kind of riches was this? Rev:
18. ver: 15. to 20.

VII. What was that name of God, and that Tabernacle, and those inhabitants of
heaven, which was blasphemed, by the beast that arose out of the Sea, all the
time of the 42 Months, Rev: 13. verse: 5, 6.

VIII. What is the Lambs book of life? and where is it? and how are the names
of any so written in it, as to preserve them from the worship of the beast?
Rev: 13. 8.

IX. What is that beast that came up out of the earth, with the horns of a Lamb
(as if it came up in the Lambs power) which does great wonders, and justifies
his sacrifice by making fire come down from heaven in the sight of men; who
both causes men to make an Image to the first beast, and also puts life
into the Image which men make? Rev: 13. ver: 11. etc. So that here is not a mere
dead Image, but there is life in the beasts knowledge, ordinances and worship:
yet with God all this is dead, for it is not the true life.

X. What is the beasts mark, his name, his number? (Rev: 13. 17.) For if I do
not infallibly know this, I may have receved his mark, I may help to make up
his name, I may be of his number, and be (unknown to my self) a worshipper of
him and his Image, and so be liable to partake of the torment of the fire and
brimstone threatened to such; Rev: 14. 9, 10.

XI. What is that song, which none could learn but the 144 thousand, which were
not defiled with women, but remained Virgins? Rev: 14. 3.

XII. What was that other woman, which took and kept the place of the former
woman (after she had fled into the wilderness) and enlarged her territories in
Nations Kindreds tonguus and peoples? Rev: 17. 4. and ver: 15.

XIII. What was the purple and scarlet colors, and the gold and precious
stones she was decked with? ver: 4.

XIV. What was the golden cup she had in her hand, which was full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornications, in the midst of all her
glorious appearance of zeal, devotion, humility, and holiness? ver: 4.

XV. What kind of drunkenness was it, wherewith the Kings and inhabiters of the
earth have been made drunk with the wine of this cup? Rev: 17. 2.

XVI. How may th^se who have hated the whore, and made her desolate and naked,
and cat her flesh, and burned her with sire, yet after all this, give their
kingdom again to the beast? Rev: 17. v: 16, 17. How may this be done? and how
often may it be done?

These are plain simple Queryes, not to entangle men's minds, or set their
brains on work (for that way shall they never be able to resolve them) but to
awaken the simplicity in them, which will readily let them see what the Lord
has revealed to them herein and in which they are to wait for the knowledge
hereof, that they may escape or come out of the snare. And in the mean time not
to boast, as Israel of old did (when the Prophets from the mouth of the Lord
accused them) that they had not polluted themselves, they had not gone after
Baalim: (Jer: 2. 22, 23 and v: 35.) but wait O backsliding Christian, and thou
shall see thy way in the valley. And though thou have often traversed thy
ground to change thy path, gadding from one form to another, from one notion to
another; yet all this has been out of the life, out of the pure power, and
still in the whoredom. Open the weak sick eye in the weak heart (For how weak is
thy heart, while thou have done all this) and let the languishing simplicity be
my witness: for (under all thy wisdom, thy zeal, thy knowledge, thy worship)
that faints, that fails, that is not what it was in the beginning. Though thou
art grown much higher, wiser, and greater otherwise, yet there thou have lost:
and happy will thou be, if all thy gains ever since, may become loss to thee
for the recovering of this.

Some considerations, helping out of the Suburbs or out-skirts of Babylon, that
her inward building may be the better come at, and lie the more open to the Axe
and Hammer, which is to batter it down, and to cut it up for the fire.
FIrst, Consider what it was the Church fled out of, when she fled into the
wilderness. Was it not out of that Church State or building, which the Spirit
of God had raised up for her here in the world, to which her ordinances and way
of Churchworship belonged? Was it not here that the Dragon assaulted her, and
from whence she fled into a desolate place and state?

Secondly, What spirit entered into these, when she fled out of them? Were not
these the Conquerors spoils? did not Antichrist get possession of the form? did
not the whore get the Spouses attire? did not the Wolves gather up the sheeps
clothing, and cloth themselves therewith? Was not the outward Court (what is
the outward Court under the Gospel, but the visible Church State with the
visible Ordinances thereof?) given to the Gentiles, who trod under foot the
holy City, all the while they were worshipping in the outward Court? Rev: 11. 2.

Thirdly, What spirit is it directs men to these, since the true Church has
been fled out of them? and to what intent? Is it not that spirit which would
keep men from the life, that they might not be born of the barren womb in the
wilderness, but be born of some of the fruitful wombs of the visible Churches,
while the true Church is invisible, and has no visible place in the earth, but
remains in that place in the wilderness which God prepared for her, and where
she receives her food all the 42 Months? Rev: 12. ver: 6. and 14.

I have smarted deeply for these things, and have been taught by the briars and
thorns of the wilderness, whereby my ears came to be opened, to hear the sound
of the everlasting Gospel, to which they were before through ignorance stopped.
For I also did believe and expect great things in a Church state and way of
worship; and in simplicity of heart did I enter into it, and walk in it, and
was not without knowledge, warmth and experiences there. But all this the Lord
broke down by a strong hand in one moment, and has taught me since to throw
away all my gains here and elsewhere, and to count them but dross and dung,
for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. And having tasted,
having seen, having felt, having handled, I cannot but commend the life, and
dissuade all men from all knowledge, all worship, all Religion, all ways and
practices (though never so taking, pleasant, and promising) out of the life.
And this is to know Christ, namely, to know the life: and this is to obey
Christ, to obey the life: and this is the kingdom of Christ which is to come,
to have the life reign in power and great glory. But the knowing or believing
of an History concerning Christ, this is not the knowledge or the faith:
Antichrist all along the apostasy, in all his various forms and dresses, has
known and believed thus: and this kind of knowledge must pass away, further
then it can find a place and service in the life. Be not angry at my testimony,
it flows from pure love, and comes forth in great good will to your souls.

Yea if it be possible that I might be a little serviceable to you (for my soul
travels for the redemption of professors from the witchery of the whorish
spirit, even of such as are ready to revile that which alone can redeem them)
in the meekness and coolness of your spirits, out of the fiery false zeal,
consider yet a little further these few things following.

1. The state of the Gospel is an invisible state, a state consisting of
invisible things (as the Law was a visible state, or a state consisting of
visible things) The light invisible, the life invisible, the power invisible,
that which converts invisible, that which is converted invisible, that which it
is converted to invisible, and the whole course ofspiritual life lies in the
invisible.

2. This invisible state has a visible way of appearance to the world, by
garments which it wears, by motions and exercises which the life chooses for
itto appear in.

3. These garments are subject to corrupt, and to be worn by that which is
corruptible and corrupted. That which has not the life, may put on the
garment; and that which has lost the life, may still keep the garment.

4. The preservation of the life lies not in the garment, or in the observation
of any thing wherein the life did once appear; but the preservation of the
garment lies in the life. And the life may change it is garment at it is
pleasure, and may refuse to wear those any more, which the whore has worn, but
as the life again leads.

5. When the life is at any time lost, the only way of recovery, is by retiring
to the invisible, and keeping there, and growing up there, and not coming forth
in the visible further then the life leads, nor staying there any longer then
the life stays.

Now this is the mistake of persons generally, they look for the finding the
invisible life in visibles. They run to corrupted ordinances and ways of
devotion, and think to find God there; but do not wait to feel him in their
hearts, and to be led by him into what he pleases: and to stay no where any
longer, then while he stays there, but to follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes.

Some others mistake in running to that, and waiting there where they once felt
life, but do not know the way to wait on the life it self: and so they are
running to an image, waiting at an image, worshipping of an image, and the
living God will not meet them there. But throw away your images, let Ephraim
the dear child say to his idols get you hence, thrust away your adulteries
which provoke the eye of Gods jealousy, receive the forerunner (the severe
purifyer) into your bosoms, and let the fire of his jealousy cleanse your
hearts, and the pure will soon come after, and lodge again between your
breasts: Can ye hear this sound? That which is born of the same wisdom, cannot
but hear it: but the other birth must have it is ear stopped.

Now hearken to this advice. When the invisible life is felt and known, do not
disdain to follow it into what ever visible thing it leads. Let not thy wisdom
be judge what the life will lead into, or what the life is to be followed in;
but let the life it self be judge: and let the child, which is born of the
life, follow it singly without murmuring, without disputing. The life has
foolish ways (to the eye of thy wisdom) of breaking the wisdom in thee which
is contrary to it, which thy wisdom will be reasoning and disputing against,
and if that wisdom be hearkened to, the life is overturned in its course, and
the head of the Serpent remains sound in thee, which the foolish and weak
things (which the wisdom of God chooses to cross and disturb it by) would
help to break and crush.

An Exhortation to the present Powers.
BAbylon the great, the mystery of iniquity, which has deceived and held
captive the whole Christian world, for these many generations, under forms and
appearances of Godliness and devotion, is at length come into remembrance
before God, who is arisen to judge her, and overturn her seat. The Army has
been preparing, and many Soldiers have been drawn forth, the trumpet has
sounded, the battle is begun, and blood has been shed on both sides; the blood
of the creature on the one side, the blood of the whorish spirit on the other
side.

The whore (with the power of the beast on which she rides, and by whose
strength and assistance she makes war with the Lamb) is mighty and dreadful;
and it has long been said, Who is able to make war with the beast? (whose
strength is hers.) But the Lord God (who has arisen out of his holy habitation
to judge, and has begun to judge her) is more mighty, by whose arm and
strength she shall fall, and the beast shall not be able to carry her up and down
any longer, nay nor to uphold her in her seat of government over the
consciences of men.

Be wise now therefore, and consider the present state of things: and if ye
find not hearts to help the Lord against the mighty, yet take heed of helping
the mighty against the Lord. The vessels, wherein the life arises and appears,
are poor and very contemptible, and ye may easily trample upon them: but the
life which rises up in them, is very precious, and too strong for the powers
either of earth or of hell. The Lord did not appear formerly among you, or of
late begin to raise you up again, that ye should become enemies to him, or
aiders of his enemies against him, but that ye might let his seed go forth to
worship him in the wilderness: (for in this dark Land of Egypt they cannot.)
Therefore break the yoaks, and take off the burdens, an(...)er there be no new
snares laid, but leave the conscience (where the Lord chooses to appear, and
which he delights to draw out of the world to himself) free to the Lord.

The Lord has kindled, and is kindling the fire, with which he is burning, and
will burn the flesh of the whore. Come not near to help her, lest ye feel the
flames. Stand afar off, and see her burning, and at most pity her, but help
her not.

We fight not against the flesh and blood of creatures, but against that evil
spirit which captivates, and makes them miserable: nor do we fight with carnal
weapons, but with such weapons as are able to reach that Spirit. Now if ye
interpose with your carnal weapons, and smite the vessel which the Lord is
pleased to make use of in this warfare, his hand will be upon you: yea if ye
endeavor to bear off the stroke from the whore, it will light upon your
selves, and the Lords hand (and his strokes in this day of his jealousy and
vengeance) is very heavy.

Do what ye can, ye shall not be able to hinder the Lords victory (who will
overcome, even by this very people, whom the wise of all sorts despise:) all
that ye can do in taking part with the enemy, is but to bring wounds and
judgments upon your selves, and to shorten the days of your government: but
the work of the Lord will go on and prosper; and this painted harlot (which
pretends to be the Spouse of Christ, and has decked her self so pleasingly with
her stolen knowledge of Scriptures, and lays claim to his Ministry and
Ordinances) shall be stripped naked, and her shame seen, and every child in the
life shall be able to point at her, and the song of triumph over the Dragon,
the beast, the false Churches, and all the false Prophets (who are not made,
nor prophecy not by the anointing) shall be sung in righteousness, even to the
Lamb who daily gets, and will get perfect victory: for to him it is given,
over all his enemies.

A Postcript.
THe redemption of the soul is by the Spirit of the Lord, which he that would
enjoy from it, must know its appearance and operation in himself, and not
quench or limit it, but universally be subject to its guidance and leadings.
All man's inward misery arises from man's inward rebellion, which is as the sin
of witchcraft (springing from the spirit of witchcraft:) his recovery and
happiness is in the faith and in the obedience to the pure power, movings, and
operations of the Spirit in him.

The Lord God who made all mankind, who is the Lord of all, he is redeeming a
people to himself by his Spirit. And this Spirit will not be limited by the
powers of the earth, but will break Nations in pieces, and trample upon Princes
as Mortar, and as the potter treads clay, til it has made its way through
them.

O open the eye, the inward eye, which can discern the seasons! It is not now
the time for Antichrist to prevail, or for proud flesh to rise up in its heady
will to stop the outgoings of its maker. This season is past; and the season of
the prevailing of the life, and power of the Son of righteousness is now come.

Therefore lift up your heads, O ye weak and faint of the flock, for iniquity
and oppression must fall both within and without, and the tender God of
everlasting love will turn back the captivity of his people, and of his
creatures. Be not therefore affrighted at the inward power of sin in the heart,
nor at the outward oppressing powers of the earth: for the redeemers strength
is above all, and he is stretching forth his mighty arm to save: in the true,
and living faith of the elect it is felt, it is felt.

And O ye potsheards of the earth, strive not with your maker, limit him not,
for he will assuredly break through you. Think not to subject him to your Laws,
but learn his Law, come under his yoke, and be bound by him, that ye may taste
of his liberty. Wash your lips, and kiss the Son, and be not angry at his,
various appearances so contrary to your wisdom, but fear his dreadful name,
and his threshing instrument which has teeth, and seek an hiding place under
the shadow of his wings, against the sharp season of the breaking forth of his
wrath, and jealous indignation for the cause of Sion which hastneth apace.

He has long let the Spirit of Babylon have its liberty, and his has been
silent: now is the time for his Spirit to speak, and for Babylous to be silent.
Will ye still force him to silence, and open Babylons mouth? Will ye not suffer
him to speak, but according to the Laws and orders of Babylon? Must that
counterfeit Queen still sit on the Throne among you, and the true Princess be
made her servant? O let it not be grievous to you, to see the Spirit of the
Lord arise, and make Babylon appear Babylon! Her wisdom, her knowledge, her
unity, her uniformity, her order, her comeliness, her beauty, is but folly,
confusion, disorder and deformity before the Lord. happy is the eye that sees
it, and the foot that turns from her.

Therefore awake, arise and stand up from the dead, come out of the thick dark
Land, where the pure God of life is not to be found: Come out of Babylon, and
touch not the unclean, that the pure life may receive you into unity with it
self: but the spirit that is unpurged from its Babylonish worships and
practices, the Lord will not suffer to come near him. Therefore search what is
Babylon, and of Babylon in all your ways and worships; and wait on the Spirit
of the Lord to be redeemed out of it, and separated from it, or ye must remain
separated from the Lord, and not partake of his life and virtue, from which
that City (with all her inhabitants) is shut out for ever.

The Lord has had a sore controversy with this Nation (with her Rulers, her
teachers and people) for his seeds sake, which he has been begetting to
himself, and calling forth to worship him (according to the pure Law of his
spirit of life) out of the ways, worships, and Heathenish customs of the
earthly spirit.

Israel is his first born, whom he will not have any longer kept in bondage.
They are his own, of his own begetting and forming, of his own nourishing and
bringing up, the plants of his own right hand, whom he waters with the dews
of Heaven, and with the showrs of his everlasting mercy and loving kindness;
whom he has gathered by the arm of his power, and whom he leads and
defends by his cloud and pillar of fire, over whom he is tender as of the
apple of his eye. They are his anointed ones, whom he will not have touched,
but rebukes Kings and Parliaments, Armies and Councils for their sakes,
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

Have ye not seen, how no strength nor Council has been able to prevail
against them? They have had no fence, but the arm which has gathered them.
What plottings and contrivings has there been against them? How are they as
sheep appointed for the slanghter, destinated to be devoured, crushed, and
trodden under foot? what divinations and enchantments have been used against
them, even to blot out their name and remembrance from the earth?

But why do ye strive and contend thus with the God of Jacob? can ye prosper?
He that made the earth, will not ye let him have room therein for his people?
Must they be subject to your wills? Must they bow to your image? shall not the
God of the spirits of all flesh, have the command of the spirits of his own
people? can ye stop the Spirit of God from breathing upon them? or will ye fall
foul upon them, if they be obedient to the breathings and movings of his
Spirit? May it not suffice that they are innocent, and harmless among you in
their conversations and practices, but will ye still Lord it over their
consciences? will ye put the Lord to it to the very last, to try it out with
you, whether he can defend his people and make way for their liberty?

Well, If peace be taken from you, if your rulers, laws, and governments be
broken in pieces, if his hand be stretched forth against you, if he curse your
very blessings, whom can ye blame? Why do you provoke him against your own
souls? are ye stronger then he? If ye be stronger and wiser, ye may prevail:
but if he be stronger, and will put forth his arm, his people shall be saved
and find a shelter in him, in the midst of all that wrath which is pouring down
upon you. Your peace has been lengthned out for their sakes, If it had not
been for their sakes (for the remnant which the Lord has had to gather) ye had
ere this been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah. The Land is full of filthiness,
which the Lords soul loathes; and instead of drawing forth the sword against it,
ye draw it forth against his witnesses. There is liberty enough for sin and
vanity, for excess and riotousnesse, for images and idols: but to worship God
in Spirit, to obey his pure movings, this kindles your rage, and these are the
people who are a burden to you. Ah how fain would ye ease you of this people!
(Sion is indeed a burdensome stone, and will fall heavy on all that meddle
with her) But the Lord will ease himself of the adversaries of his life and
Spirit, and he will bring forth his righteousness which he has prepared, and
set it up in the earth, and none shall be able to stop him. Therefore gather
your selves together in battle; associate your selves, that ye may be broken in
pieces; take council together, it shall come to naught; speak the word, it
shall not stand: but the Lords council shall stand, and he will fulfill all his
pleasure, and will delight himself in his people, and raise them up by the
fall of their enemies: and then ye shall see against whom ye have plotted and
contended, and what ye have helped to bring about by all your secret plots and
designs If the Lord had not been on our side, now may Israel say: if the Lord
had not been on our side, what had become of his poor people! Ah poor worm
Jacob, how often would the foot of pride have trampled thee down (again and
again) had not the everlasting arm been stretched out for thee! But fear not
worm Jacob, nor be not sollicitous for thy preservation, but trust that arm
which delights to preserve thee.

Ah foolish people and unwise! who strive against your own mercy, who see not
upon what hinge all your mercies hang, but make it your work to break down the
Wall that defends you.

Jerusalem is the City of the great King, which is coming down from heaven, and
Israel is his people, and both must have a place in the earth: the Lord has
determined it, and who can withstand it? what prejudice can Jerusalem, or the
inhabitants thereof bring unto you? They are enemies indeed to this earthly
state of things, and would have all brought in subjection to the life and power
of their King, and all that stands in opposition to God brought down, and made
pliable to his spirit; and this the unyoked earthly spirit cannot bear. But
this is the interest of your souls, and the way to unity with that life which
is their happiness, peace, and rest for ever: for if ye could pass through the
fire, and bear the burning up of your dross, ye also might become vessels for
the Finer, and might dwell with them in their everlasting habitation.

The Saints formerly had an entrance ministered to them into the everlasting
Kingdom, and came to mount Sion which cannot be removed, and to Jerusalem the
City of the living God, Heb. 12. 22. where the blood of sprinkling, the peace
that passes understanding, the everlasting righteousness, and the joy
unspeakable and full of glory was witnessed in the renewed spirit, which
receives the Kingdom which cannot be shaken, and enters into the everlasting
rest.

And this is again revealed, and the (...)nesses shall ascend into heaven in
the sight of their enemies, even into the new heaven and the new earth where
righteousness dwells, and the old heaven and old earth (withal its inhabitants)
shall be burnt up: and then shall it be seen that righteousness becomes, and
belongs to the house of God for ever. And his City shall be a quiet habitation,
free from all the noise and hurry of Babylon; where the pure river of life runs
clear, free from all the mud and mixtures of Babylon; and the Lord God of
infinite fullness will not disdain communion with his creatures, but will
tabernacle among them, dwell with them, sup with them, walk in them, and take
them into his holy habitation, and they shall dwell with him, sup with him, and
walk in him.

But who shall abide in his tabetnacle? who shall dwell in his holy hill? He
that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in?
his heart, etc. he who contemns the vile person (how great and high soever) but
honoreth them that fear the Lord, be they otherwise what they will. This man
shall dwell on high, above the reach of all low, creeping, dark spirits, even
in that holy habitation of life and power, which nothing can touch or annoy.

I shall now conclude with a few words concerning the present estate of this
poor distracted Nation.

This Nation has long lain wounded and sick: She has had many Physicians (on
whom she has spent much) who have promised her fair, but have not effected her
cure. Of late her wound has been much enlarged, yea she is become sick at her
very heart, and in great danger. Many are spending their judgment upon her,
some thinking a King would help all, some a Parliament, and some hoping for
good from the Army; but every eye sees her case to be very desperate. Ah
England, England, Thou strivest with thy Maker, and he overturns thy strength
and councils. The life and wisdom which thou despisest, is that which alone can
heal thee. Thou strivest to keep off the strokes from the enemies of God, and
smitest his dear ones, how can he spare thee? Hand stils join in hand to keep
the Lords stroke from reaching Babylon, which he has directed at her heart,
and will not miss her, but will pierce through every thing that stands in his
way. Though the cry has long been, Hurt not the tender conscience, it is that
on which God works, and wherein he chooses to appear, and with which he is
pleased, and pitties. Many promises have been touching liberty of conscience,
yet still the meek of the earth, the innocent lambs of Christ (those that are
faithful to the light of God in their consciences) are persecuted and suffer.
What can thou plead, O England, why the Lord should not break thee all in
pieces, and save his people himself, by and in the midst of thy ruins. The Lord
will have the victory over thee in this particular, about which he has so long
striven with thee. It would be better and easier for thee to yield unto, then
be forced by his hand. Therefore at length hear his voice, which has so osten
and so loud cried unto thee. Let my people go, that they may serve me.

The End.

