The Pedigree from Old Andrew Barrett, Esquire having seven Sons, who made several
Feofments to several Trustees in Trust of all his Estate to theuse of his Last
Will, who made the said Will in Dublin, July 9. 1613. and thereby Intails all
his Estate upon Sir James Barrett his eldest Son, and to his Heirs Male; and
for want thereof, to the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th Sons, as by Inquisitions,
Deeds and Records, may, and will appear.
Old Andrew Barrett, Esquire and Katherine his Wife had seven Sons, as follows:

Eldest Son, Sir James Barrett had Issue. Sir Andrew, who Married Barbara, the
Sister of Capt. St. Ledger, who had Issue. Sir William Barrett who made the
Will, and by which Will only Captain St. Ledger claims his right, and by no
other pretense.
Joanna Barrett, Daughter to Sir James, and Married James Coppinger. Mary
Coppinger, who Married Sir John Mead.

John Edmond, and William Barrett, being the 2d, 3d, 4th Sons, Dyed without
Issue Male. Fifth Son, Richard Barrett, who had Issue. James Barrett, who had
Issue. John Barrett the Defendant being Heir inheritable, as well by the first
Settlement, as by Sir William Barrett his Last Will, made in Bristoll.

Sixth Son, Robert Barrett, being yet alive, and has by his Fathers Will and
Settlement 10 l. per annum annuity, from every Heir inheritable, and received
the same accordingly, and has been, and is to this day paid by the now
Appellant John Barrett, Esquire as being now Heir Intail. Seventh Son, Andrew
Barrett died without Issue Male
BRISTOLL, February 16. 1672.
The Will of Sir William Barrett, by which alone Capt. John St. Ledger Claims
the Estate of John Barrett, Esquire is as follows.
THIS is to let the litigious and wrangling World know, That I leave (as
Justice and my Conscience tells me I ought) all my Estate that is Intailed to
the Right and Lawful Heir; and that which is not Intailed, to my Uncle John St.
Ledger and his Heirs Males; but for want thereof, to return to the right Heir. I
do also desire that he will be Guardian to the youth, and breed him as well as
he can; and if he prove good for any thing, dispose of him as you think fit; if
not, turn him amongst the rest. I do leave also to my Uncle John St. Ledger, the
remainder of Sir Richard Kirle his Bond, which is 100 l. and this last half
years Rent, of which I have not received one penny: Out of this Money, pray pay
40 s. to Mr. Watson, Goldsmith, and 12 l. to Mr. Danvers, Laceman, who lives in
a little Alley beyond Somerset House, 40 l. to Mr. Poulin, Draper, at the sign
of the Raven in Fleetstreet, and 46 s. to my Brother Warham; and I desire
further, in case you accept of this trouble, that during the youths minority,
you reserve out of the Estate 200 l. 100 l. to be paid to my Sister Mary St.
Ledger upon the first day of her Marriage, and the other 100 l. to be paid to my
Sister Garthwright St. Ledger on the first day of her Marriage, and to satisfy
the Bonds for 50 l. that lay in Colonel St. Ledger 's hands: and so I bid the
world farewell, and leave this as my Last Will and Testament,

William Barrett.
If you can, prefer this Servant, and give him 10 l.

As I always lived decently, pray bury me so:


Being present at the Signing of this my Last Will and Testament, Ann Brinsden,
John Field, George Turner.

This is a true Copy of the Original Will, Examined Febr. 28. 1672. by us,

Ann Brinsden, George Turner, John Field.
Tho. Hartwell, Not. Pub.



The CASE of JOHN BARRETT, Esquire Appellant from a Decree made by the High Court
of Chancery in Ireland, in a Cause there Depending, wherein John St. Ledger, Esquire
is Plaintiff, against the said John Barrett, Defendant: Humbly Offered to the
Consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled.
SIR William Barrett being seized of several Manors, Territories, Lands and
Tenements of the yearly value of 1500 l. or thereabouts, if set to the real
value, situate, lying and being in the County of Cork in Ireland, of an Estate
Tail, with remainder in Tail to the Appellant, and being also seized in Fee of
diverse other Lands and Tenements, did, Feb. 16. 1672, by the persuasion of his
Landlady where he lodged, make his Last Will and Testament in Writing, whereby
he left (as in Justice he ought to do) and did bequeath to the Appellant all
his Intailed Estate; and his Estate in Fee-simple to the Respondent John St.
Ledger and his Heirs Male, with remainder over to the Appellant: made the
Respondent Guardian to the Appellant, and shortly alter dyed.

After Sir William's Death, the Appellant entered upon, and took possession, by
the Respondents permission, of all the Intailed Lands, and the Respondent
entered possession of those which were fee-simple.

The Respondent also accepted (jointly with John Barrett the Appellants Uncle)
of the Guardianship of the Appellant, and entered into Articles under Hand and
Seal, faithfully to perform the Trust of a Guardian Covenanted to sue for the
Writings relating to the said Intailed Estate, and to account to him for the
Profits thereof, when he should come of Age, and then to deliver him back his
said Estate and Trust; in which Articles there is contained one, That the
Appellant, when of age, should intermarry with his Daughter, which certainly
the Respondent St. Ledger would not have covenanted to do, had he not known the
Estate in Question was Intailed, and belonged to the Appellant, who had not one
Groat in the World beside to depend upon.

Pursuant to which agreement, the Appellant lived with the Respondent a year,
was and is a Protestant, and constantly went to Church, and the Respondent
permitted the Appellant to receive the Rents and Profits of the Lands in
question, and in his Right, and as his Guardian Exhibited a Bill into the High
Court of Chancery in Ireland, against the Respondents own Sister, who was the
Mother of Sir William Barrett; in which Bill he set forth all the Ancient
Intails, under which the Appellant claims, and the Appellant's Title to the
said Estate in Question; by which Suit he got into his possession from his said
Sister all the ancient Deeds and Writings, relating to the Appellants Title;
which done, and the Appellant leaving him, and choosing a new Guardian, because
he would not marry his Daughter; he the said Respondent contrived how to
Defraud him of all his Estate, and for that purpose took the method following.

He Exhibited a Bill in the High Court of Chancery in Ireland against the
Appellant, thereby setting forth, that most of the Intailed Lands in Question
(and which then by the Respondents own permission) was in the Appellants
possession) belonged to him; the said Respondent for that they never were
Intailed, but were Lands whereof Sir William Barrett dyed seized in Feesimple,
and had given to him by his Will aforesaid, and to induce the Court to believe
that the said Lands were Fee-simple Lands, he set forth, that the same were the
Inheritance of Katherine, the Wife of Old Andrew Barrett, who was Great
Grandfather to Sir William Barrett and the Appellant, and that Andrew, their
said Great Grandfather, could not Intail the same; prayed to examine Witnesses
in perpetuam Rei memoriam, to prove the Will of his Testator, Sir William
Barrett, whereby the same were devized to him and his Heirs.

To which Bill the Appellant answered, and denied all the Allegations thereof.
Issue thereupon was joined, Witnesses examined, Publication past; And The Cause
came to Hearing before his Grace the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, 29 Nov. 1677,
when (and at several other Hearings thereof before) the Councels for the
Appellant insisted, that the Will being proved, the Cause ought not to proceed
any farther in that Court. That Court having no Jurisdiction thereof, it being
a Question of Freehold and Inheritance, which is properly and only
determinable at the Common Law.

Nevertheless his Lordship, upon the said hearing, directed that a Trial at Law
should be had upon one single Issue.

Viz. What Lands Andrew the Great Grandfather was seized of in Right of
Katherine his Wife, and whether he made any Intails, and of what Lands.

To this Trial neither the Appellant nor his Counsel ever gave their consent,
but were forced thereunto; nor did the Appellant consent that a Jury should be
appointed by the Court of Chancery, but his Grace commanded the Sheriff to
bring the Panel of the County into the Court, where the same was named: the
Foreman whereof Sir Richard Aldworth married his Grace's Niece, Sir Richard
Hull was his Sisters Son, besides these there were others related to his Grace,
and the Respondent Impannelled; none of which the Appellant durst presume to
accept against, because of their Relation to his Grace, and his Graces Relation
to the Respondent, who is Brother-in-law to the Earl of Inchiqueen, which Earl
intermarried with his Grace's Sister.

A Trial upon the Issue aforesaid was had, 28 Jan. 1677,
when the Jury found that Andrew Barrett, the Great Grandfather was seized in
Right of Katherine his Wife of most of the Lands in Question, and also many
thousand Acres of Land belonging to other persons, which the Respondent did not
Claim by the Bill (adding as follows), viz. We do not find that the said
Andrew made any Intail.

After which Verdict, the Cause coming again to be re-heard, Exceptions were
taken to the Proceedings of that Court therein (and against the said Verdict),
for that

1. The Court ought not to have proceeded in this Cause to direct the Trial of
any Issue whatsoever, nor otherwise than to have enabled the Respondent to
prove the Will in Question.

2. The Issue was unreasonable, Restraining the Appellant from the just Defense
of his Right and Title, it being only to try whether Andrew the Great
Grandfather made any Intail; whereas if Grandfather, the Father, or Sir William
Barrett himself had Intailed the same, the Respondents pretended Right is bound
thereby.

3. The Issue was to try an Intail de Jure only; whereas an Intail de facto is
sufficient to make good the Appellants Title; and it is notorious that Sir
William Barrett in his lifetime looked upon it as Intailed: and in his Answer
to a Bill in Chancery, Exhibited against him in his lifetime, Swore it was
Intailed, and as such devised it by Will to the Appellant, which Intail de
facto is sufficient to assertain the Appellants Title.

4. The Verdict in it self is uncertain as to the matter, for it only says
they did not find that Andrew Barrett made an Intail, but does not say that
Andrew Barrett made no Intail; and yet upon this Verdict, which recites but
part of the Land in Question. 5 July 1677, the Court of Chancery,
notwithstanding the Exceptions aforesaid, proceeded to Decree from the
Appellant, and to the Respondent all the Lands in Question, without admitting
him to a new Trial, though moved for, and Affidavits made of new Evidence being
found after the aforesaid Trial had; which Evidence, by the Respondents Art,
were kept concealed till the said Trial was over. The Cause coming again to be
heard, 4 May 1678,
his Grace called to his assistance the Lord Chief Baron, Mr. Justice Reynell,
the former upon hearing Counsel on both sides, declared the Cause was improper
for that Court, and that both the Issue and Verdict were uncertain. His Grace
(as by the Notes taken upon that days hearing appears) declared he was
satisfied, 1 Feb. 1677,
Sir William Barrett believed there was an Intail, and that he intended
something to the Appellant by his Will, but what, was the Doubt. Whereupon he
ordered a Reference, advised the Parties to agree, declaring, That if they did
not, the Court had the Rains in their hands, and a Hank upon them both; adding,
That if the Respondent should insist too much upon his Right, the Court would
give the Appellant liberty to defend his Right at Law; and the Court has the
Appellant in their power, if he should insist too much upon his Right. It
having been found there is no Intail; whereupon the Court, in the Appellants
absence, without his consent, and when he was above 100 Miles distant from
Dublin, proceeded to make an Order of Referrence (the Respondent then present,
and naming his Referee); by which Order it was directed, that the Appellant
should meet the Respondents Referree at Cork and there name his Referee to join
with him, and the Court would make choice of an Umpire; but the Appellant
(being advised by his Council, that it might hazard his Title, and injure the
Heir in Remainder to attend the said Referrence) never appeared: Whereupon for
his Contempt, the Court awarded a Sequestration against all his Estate, before
any final Decree made, which Sequestration was continued till December 1678.
When his Grace re-heard the Cause, assisted with six Judges; but before the
Cause was entered upon, declared to the Judges, that they should only speak to
the Construction of the Will aforesaid.

But not to the Jurisdiction of the Court.

Nor whether the Cause were properly Cognizable by that Court.

Nor whether the Issue tried at Law were a proper Issue; nor whether the
Verdict obtained upon that Trial were certain: Nevertheless the Lord Chief
Baron, Sir Richard Keneday, and Mr. Justice Jones delivered their Opinions
positively.

1. That the Respondents Bill ought to be Dismissed, for that Court had no
Jurisdiction of the Cause; and gave as their Judgment, that upon the Will it
self the Matter of Law was for the Appellant.

2. The Lord Chief Justice Booth, and Mr. Justice Johnson delivered their
Opinions, That allowing their former Proceedings to be regular, and that there
was no Intail de Jure, or de facto; that then, and in such case nothing past to
the Appellant by the Will in Question.

But Mr. Justice Reynell declared, That his Grace ought to proceed to Decree
for the Respondent: Whereupon

His Grace declaring, 7 Feb. 1678,
That nothing the Judges delivered had prevailed with him to alter his Opinion,
therefore Decreed all the Lands in Question (being all the Estate the Appellant
has) to the Respondent; notwithstanding the Verdict does not extend to many of
the Lands in the Respondents Bill mentioned; and for which his Grace upon
former Hearings had declared the Respondent could have no Decree, yet the
Respondent is like to be put into the possession of the Estate which this
Appellant and his Ancestors have enjoyed, and been possessed of for many Hundred
years last past.

And although it is mentioned, that the said Decree should be without prejudice
to the Appellants having a new Trial, in case he can find out any new Intail,
yet is the Appellant ruined thereby: for, first, there never was any Intail,
but what he has now found, and moved for a new Trial, because kept from him at
the former Trials, and such new Trial denied.

2dly, For that as the Order is penned, if a new Intail should be found, yet
cannot the Appellant have a new Trial, till he has first performed the Decree,
so that he must deliver the possession of his Estate to the Respondent; which
done, he has not a penny to help himself, or wage Law against the Respondent
for recovering of it back; besides, the Respondent has most of the Evidences
that prove the Appellants Title in his possession; so that if the Estate be
Decreed his, and delivered to his possession, the Deeds relating to it belong
to him also, and the Decree will warrant his destroying them; which being done,
will put an utter impossibility upon the Appellant ever to prove his Titie, or
recover back his Estate by any Trial at Common Law, where the Respondent ought
to sue for his Right, if he have any, and not in Chancery.

From which Decree and Proceedings (for the Reasons aforesaid, April 1679.
as well as for that the same is Illegal and Arbitrary, and tends to the
subverting the due course of Trials of Rights of Inheritance and Free-holds;
and if led in Example and President, may prove pernicious to the public, and
by consequence, in a short time, become the Destruction of Property) the
Appellant addressed to this Supreme Court of Judicature and Fountain of Justice
for Relief, and appealed from the Jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery in
Ireland in this Cause, as well as from the Decree aforesaid, and prayed the
Respondent might Answer, and the Cause be heard, and he receive Relief
agreeable to Justice, and that his possession in the mean time might be
quieted, which Appeal was signed by Sergeant Maynard, Sir Francis Pemberton,
Sir Henage Finch, Sir Francis Winnington, and Mr. Keck.

To this Appeal the Respondent answered, this Appelant replied, and a
re-joynder was put in, but the Respondent prevented a Hearing the last
Parliament save on, by alleging all his Papers were in Ireland, when as he
came into England on purpose to attend the said Appeal.

The Appellant from April 1679, till Aug. 1680, attended his Appeal in England,
waiting for the Sitting of the last Parliament.

The Respondent delivered Appellants Tennents Declarations in Ejectment in
Ireland, Easter-Term, 1680,
and pressed for a Trial last Summer Assizes, when the Appellant, with all his
Evidences, were in England waiting for the Session of the last Parliament (by
which be intended to have surprised him); but that was denied, and a Trial at
Bar directed to be had Michaelmas-Term last; accordingly a Jury came from the
Country of Cork to try the Cause: Notice was given that the Trial should be had
the 22d of November. 1680. 48 l. was Deposited in Court by the Respondent to pay
the Jury, and the Respondent upon Apellantsmotion in Chancery (that he might
Elect which Court to proceed in, for that he ought not to have two Suits
Depending in two several Courts at the same time, and for the same matter)
chose to proceed at Law, and his Bill in Chancery had been Dismissed, but that it
was Exhibited to examine Witnesses in perpetuam Rei Memoriam; so that the
Appellant well hoped his Appeal had been at an end, it seeking only for Liberty
to try his Title at Law; but the said Respondent, because the Court would not
grant Liberty to Exemplify the Deposition of one Mrs. Brimsdom, Sir William
Barretts Landlady examined by him at Bristoll (who is now living), and to use
the same at the said Trial (which was opposed by the Appellant, as being
contrary to the Practice of the Court, therefore the Respondent would not
proceed to Trial; took his 48 l. out of Court, and moved, that the Suit might
be discontinued; the last motion was denied, and the Suit is still Depending,
and ready for Trial; but the Appellant by these means has been put to vast
charge, in going to Ireland, Feeing Counsel, providing and bringing Witnesses
to Dublin; and the Court of Exchequer 27 Nov. 1680, by Rule declared it was not
the Appellants fault the Trial was not heard last Michaelmas-Term.

Now the Reason why the Appellant insisted upon it by his Council, not to give
way to the use of the Deposition, desired it as follows.

The Respondent first Exhibited a Bill only to prove the Will in question: To
which the Appellant answered, and not opposing the proof thereof, suffered him
to Examine Witnesses Ex part; one of which swore they saw him sign, seal and
publish the Will: and this was the Evidence he desired to use at Law.

Afterward the Respondent Exhibited his Bill against the Appellant, not only
to Examine Witnesses in perpetuam Rei memoriam, but also to have the Estate in
question decreed to him. In this Cause the Appellant joined in Examining
Witnesses, and Cross Examined the Witnesses he desired to make use of at Law;
who swore not only the Will made and published, but also that it was done at
her desire; and that at the same time Sir William Barrett told her he had
refused to make a Will before, though pressed thereto, for that his Estate was
Intailed, and he left it to a poor boy in Ireland of his Name, to keep up the
Name of his family; adding, That seeing God had given it him, he would not take
it from him.

The Appellant never denied the making use of this persons Testimony in the
Cause, wherein the Decree was pronounced, and the Trial aforesaid directed, but
offered to consent thereunto; but the Respondent would have published it in the
first Cause, where Examined Ex part; in which Cause never any farther
proceeding was yet had: and this purposely to defeat the Appellant of the
benefit of his cross Examination; which the Appellant opposed, and the Court
denied to Grant: Whereupon,

The Respondent leaving the Appellant in Ireland, 20 Dec. 1680,
came to London.

Petitioned this most Honorable House for a hearing, alleging great damage by
the Appellants delay, and obtained Order for the Cause to be heard 20 Jan.
1680, without any other notice to be given to the Appellant, then by the
affixing up the Order upon the door of this most Honorable House. The
Appellant Petitioned, 14 Dec. 1680,
setting forth the Proceedings aforesaid, and what delays and tricks had been
used by the Respondent, that he was advised his Appeal was at an end by the
Respondents choosing to proceed at Law: Therefore prayed that he might not be
surprised, offering, if he might have convenient time to come to a hearing, if
your Lordships should think fit to hear the Cause. Whereupon

It was Ordered the said Cause should be peremptorily heard the 1st of February
1680.

Accordingly Sir Matthew Dean his Agent came into England 16th January 1680,
found the Parliament Dissolved, and has ever since waited here in order to the
hearing of his Cause before this most Honorable House.

This being the third time Sir Matthew Dean, with the Records and Evidences to
prove the Appellants Title to the Estate in question has been hazarded at Sea;
(which Evidence if lost, the Appellants Title at Law can never be made out).
The Appellant has spent these six years in Suits to defend his Right above
4000 l. which has put him into so great debts, that he cannot appear; and if
the Cause be not determined by your Lordships, the same will be his, and his
posterities utter ruin. Therefore it is most humbly prayed this Cause may
receive a determination before your Lordships this present Sessions.

Old Andrew Barrett, Esquire his Will, whereby he Intails all his Estate on his
Seven Sons, and to their Heirs Males; who was great Grandfather to Sir William
Barrett who made the Will in Bristol, by which Capt. St. Ledger claims only his
Right; which abovesaid Old Andrew was also Great Grandfather to the Appellant
John Barrett, Esquire.
IN the Name of God, Amen, I Andrew Barret of Ballincolly in the County of
Cork, Esquire being at this present God be praised in perfect health, and ready to
depart for England, have thought fit for avoiding of such dangers and
inconveniences as might befall, do make this my Last Will and Testament for
the direction of the Estate that it pleased God to lend me, and disposing of
the same in the best manner that in so short a time I could call to mind.
First, I commend and commit my Body and Soul to Almighty God, whose Divine
Spirit, Grace and Assistance, I humbly implore to guide, direct and accompany
me for my defense against all wicked spirits, and the suggestions of my
spiritual Enemy. And whereas I have Infeoffed my Cousin Mr. Patrick Roch Fitz
Morice, by my Deed dated the ninth of this present month and year, of all the
Manors, Castles, Towns, Lands and Tenements, expressed and mentioned in the
said Deed, to the use and uses of my last Will and Testament. And now my will
is, that the said Patrick his Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of
all and singular the said Manors, Castles, Towns, Lands and Tenements, and
Hereditaments, except such Lands as I have past for my Wife Katharine Barrets
Jointure during her life only, and such Portions as I have made assurance of
for my beloved Daughter Gennet Sarsfild, during the continuance thereof, and
such Mortgages as I have made and stand now in force during the continuance of
the same to the use of payment of all debts that shall lawfully appear to the
said Patrick to be due upon me by specialty or otherwise; and after taking
order for such payments, then to stand seized for preferment of both my
Daughters, Ellen and Ellyne in manner following: Vid. for Ellen my Eldest
Daughter whom I love, and offended me not, if she shall be matched with the
advice and consent of her Mother, her brother James, and their friends, Three
hundred pounds, I mean no Irish money, but the best Coin; and for my Youngest
Daughter Ellyne, whom I also love, matching as before, Two hundred pounds of
the best Coin. My Will is, that my Daughter Ellens Portion shall be increased
to Two hundred pounds, which preferments are thus to be rated, vid. the Aids
due upon my Tenements to be levied; and if her Match be to her friends liking,
fifty pounds more, being duly raised of what shall remain to be paid out of the
rents and profits of the said Lands in this Manor, vid. out of my Wifes
Jointure (being too great for my Estate) if I had not great respect (as I ought
to have of her) the third part of the said overplus of preferments; and out and
from my Son and Heir James Barrett two parts; and all the said payments and
preferments so paid, then my will is that the said Patrick his Heirs and
Assigns shall be seized of all the Premises, (except before excepted) and the
four Plow-lands of Garriadin, Ballivillum, Ballivorinse, Balluveran, Kileuomly,
and Killmyllion, to the only use and behoof of my Son and Heir James Barrett
and to the Heirs Males lawfully by him to be begotten on the body of my loving
Daughter Gennet Sarsfild, and for want of such Heirs Males of the body of the
said Gennet by him, to the Heirs Males of his body on the body of any other
Wife lawfully to be b^gotten; and for want of such Heirs Males of his body, to
the use of John Barrett my second Son, and the Heirs Males of his body lawfully
to be begotten, and for want of such Heirs Males of the said John's body, to
the use of Edmond Barrett my third Son, and the Heirs Males of his body
lawfully to be begotten; and for want of such Heirs Males of the said Edmonds
body, to the use of William Barrett my fourth Son in like manner as before, if
he become not a Priest or Spiritual man, as is intended; and if he become a
Priest or Churchman, or otherwise want Heirs Males of his body lawfully
begotten, then to the use of Richard Barrett my fifth Son, and the Heirs Males
of his body lawfully to be begotten; and for want of such Heirs Males of the
said Richard's body, then to the use of Robert Barret my sixth Son, and the
Heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and for want of
such Heirs Males of the said Robert's body, to the use of Andrew Barret my
seventh Son, and the Heirs Males of the said Andrew's body to be begotten; and
for want of such Issue, to the use of my right Heirs for ever. And further, my
will is, that my said Son and Heir James Barrett, shall after my Wifes death,
and after determination of all other Estates in being (...)


