ANGLORUM SINGULTUS: OR, THE SOBBS OF ENGLAND, Poured out.

To be presented to His Excellency GENERAL GEORGE MONK.

London, Printed for D. L. 1660.

Anglorum Singultus: OR, The Sobs of England poured out: To be presented to his
Excellency, General George Monk.
THe hopes which was generally raised in the spirits of all men, who have any
true sense of the bleeding and gasping condition of the three once famous and
flourishing Nations, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, have received some
Check, by what is published, of the mind and intentions of your Excellency, in
relation to the public affairs; yet can we not conceive them utterly blasted,
whilst we remember, you are a Christian, an Englishman, and a Gentleman, and
one whose Prudence and Policy in the conduct of Affairs both Civil and
Military, has appeared signal and eminent amidst the many stormy violences,
which, of late years, have so much, and so often threatened our utter ruin and
destruction, both in Church, State, and Commonwealth: Oh let not the Sirens of
blood and mischief further charm your ears, and delude your apprehension, by
many specious pretenses, and beguiling suggestions, come they clothed in what
shape or color soever: But keep those Scintillas divinae facis, those divine
faculties of your soul, your Understanding, Reason, and Will, free and
untainted from all the enchanting allurements of private interest and Faction;
and with the generous soul of a freeborn Native of this Land, look about you,
and with true Christian compassion behold the new Chains and Fetters, which the
black Operators of mischief are now afresh hammering, upon your Anvil, and with
your Tools. It is now complete eleven years, since that fatal and horrid act,
that Crimen fulmine dignum, executed by the wicked Instruments of him, from
whose dark conclave of Fiends it had its product? You that hitherto have stood
free from the gnawing guilt of so direful, grand, and piacular a crime, have
so much pity upon your own soul and honor, as not to sully either, with so
much contamination, as to enter Councels, much less Interests, with that
bloody crew, of the most diabolical humanities, which clothed with flesh and
blood, ever entered the stage hf this world in any age or place whatsoever,
since Adam dug for his first transgression in Paradise. To say nothing of
what preceded, but to take a short view and glance toward the dismal wasting,
and destructive contingencies, which in those sad eleven years have befaln us,
viz. since December. 5. 1648. from which time the first grand Contrivers of all
our deplorable miseries, began with bare face, to show their horrid shape; what
have we had since that time, but a continued concatination of successive
mischiefs, one rushing upon the neck of another, and all under the gilded show
of a free Commonwealth; when, of all the true real and essential parts thereof,
we have enjoyed not so much as the least glimpse or iota? Was there ever upon
earth any state and society of men, who in so few years have endured such, and
so many bitter pangs and throws of vicissitudinous thraldom, as we since that
tiem have done? What heaving and shooving have we often tremblingly beheld for
the Empire and Dominion over us, and in whose hand that iron Rod should be that
we poor Vassals were (however) to be scourged with? and when ambition had
climbed and even reached the very pinnacle of its aspirings, what sudden and
stupendous revolutions have afresh assaulted and amazed us? What a deluge of
innocent blood (now crying under the Altar) has been waded through, to grasp,
and assert the grandeur for some persons; and what millions of treasures (all
robbed and extorted from us) have been squandred by every uppermost Power to
support its own usurpation and greatness? and we poor hackney'd, spurred and
galled people, held under a severe and imperious charge and command to believe,
that all this while, we were a free Commonwealth, and had gained that liberty
which we were seduced so long, and vigorously to contend for; although the
chains of this our cruel bondage lay so hard and heavy upon us, as that they
even fretted and eat into our very bowels and vitals: Are we not from hence
become the scorn of our neighbor Nations, and without Gods infinite mercy very
likely to become some of their prey? Was ever poor Church, State, and
Commonwealth (twenty years since the wonder and envy of the whole Christian
world) reduced by a few of its own members, most of them of meanest birth, and
almost all of inconsiderable quality, to such a condition as we are? even the
basest, and most vile of all slavery and servitude, that ever was known or
heard of among the sons of Christian men? And any thing which but looks like
freedom, so utterly banished from us, that it is almost become treason, to name
or mention the word (FREE;) no, not in relation to that authority which calls it
self supreme; we must not dare speak, much less declare our desires to have a
Free Parliament; if so, whips of Steel are providing for us, to tear off that
little flesh which yet remains upon our so much bloodied and bruised bones:
What the interest and aims of private and particular Factions and persons are,
it is, by many sad experiences, become most apparently evident, and no longer
to be obscured, under any specious and glossy terms whatsoever, invented only
to dazzle and amuse the vulgar and common notions, which have been so often
cheated and deluded by them. The true proper and general interest of the People
and Nation undoubtedly is, The settling and securing of the ancient and known
fundamental Laws of the Land, upon which depends the property and true liberty
of every individual member, the reviving and restoring of our languishing and
dead Trade, both at home and abroad, which together with our traffic
manufactures is by our ruinous disorders frighted from us to our neighbor
Nations: To settle and establish Religion, that great and sure bond which
fastens our securities all other ways: The procuring (after such fatal storms
of feud and animosity amongst us, and something else of a higher nature) a
sure, firm and general indemnity for all past actions whatsoever: To have the
Government in such hands as may securely settle our foreign allyances, whose
particular interest is involved in the public, and buton'd by a Title and
just possession, which needs not a consuming exorbitant, and all terrifying
force, and power to defend and support it. These at present are the chief
points of the Nations true interest: And where can these things be treated,
debated, and concluded of, with any good fruit or effect, or the least hope
thereof, bu^ in a full and free Parliament, and the whole Nations convention?
What is it, that makes this word (Free) so terrible, and detestable to some
persons? is force so pleasing and delightsome to them: why then did they so
lately and loudly call and cry out for help and assistance against it? And yet
no sooner by the Nations joint concurrence delivered from it, but immediately
they fall to put the same in practice upon such their deliverers, and continue
it upon them with far more dread and terror than it was in any sort ever
exercised upon themselves, in their utmost extremity. Must a small cantel of
the substitutes only enjoy freedom, and the residue substituted, being almost
ten times their number, together with the whole body of the Nation
substituring, be kept under a force? Is freedom only the portion of some few
the meanest of the people, and force to be entailed upon all the rest, to all
eternity: Or be we in a dream all this while, or so stupidly ignorant, as not
to understand, what is force, or what is freedom? Or does the season or
circumstance of time, alter the nature of one and the self same act in omni
modo? Is that force in 1653. and the same thing not force in 1648. and 1649? Do
those men who thus, as it were sport themselves with our misery, and their own
usurped Empire, think that the eyes of God, Angels and men, are all shut, and
that none beholds this their grand tyrannical and deluding imposture?

There has been, and may be so much truly said, in this and many other
particulars, that it seems no less than a kind of wonder, that there should be
such a sort of Natives of this Land, endued with reason, and such refined
reason, as pretends to the steerage and government of three ancient, potent and
flourishing Monarchies, and yet should openly dare to breath the common air
thereof, whilst with severest rigor, they impose such the most indign of all
prevarications upon it, and seem to have such confidence in their acts of
tyranny and force, that although (if they go on thus) their infamous ruin is
so apparent to all sober bystanders, and cannot surely be otherwise to
themselves likewise in their own secret thoughts; yet are they so hurried on by
that Monster Ambition ( Herostratus-like) to put all into a flame rather than
suffer their hot and high aspirings in the least to chil or take cold, till
themselves and their designs drop into ashes and rubbish.

It is you (Great Sir) who have been long looked upon as the Grand Moderator
between these few unparalleld men, and this whole Nation, with all its
Dominions, all the Nobility, Body of the Gentry, and Commons of the same; every
County, City and Borough, and indeed every degree and society of men
throughout the same; such especially as have at any time been engaged in the
late war upon the Parliament account (and not now in arms) hereby jointly as
one man Addressing themselves to you, as the only Esculapius to apply a
seasonable remedy to this malady of Force, which is the epedemical and
contagious disease, that has so long, and now more then ever corrodes and
plagues us, and so much distorts our ease, settlement and quiet: You have
brought with you store of medicaments of all sorts, potent Antidotes against
the malignity of forcible power, and subtle imposture, nor want you skill and
courage seasonably to apply them; we regard not the lying Trump of Fame, which
publishes various stories of your being already engaged against us, and come
rather to shackle us faster, then loose us from our long endured chains, to
pull off our very skins which are already so close clipped by our shearers,
rather then to afford us any ease or reluxation from our long endured misery.
Much less do we credit that vain and empty whisper of your pretense of title to
the Crown, as of the blood of a Plantaginet. These we look upon as inventions,
raised by such as to retain us still in slavery, would have us think, that the
scorching oil in the frying pan, is more tolerable than the glowing heat of
the fire; we are very well acquainted with subtleties of this kind, and are
most confidently persuaded, that your prudence and experience is such, that
(would Religion and conscience permit in you such an attempt yet) the late
ruinous downfall and exposition to general contempt, infamy and scorn of the
Person and Family, and almost whole Alliance of such a daring Usurper, is so
fresh in memory, and so visibly and apparently acted by Divine Providence in
the very summity and height of their glory; that the very thought of such an
aspiring, will be most execrable and abhorrent to you: The Government of this
Nation and its Dominions, having in that particular much resemblance to the
Ark of God, which till it came again into its right appointed place, was but a
burden and plague almost to the utter destruction of whosoever durst set upon
the retaining of it; witness our many late revolutions, and in them the downfall
and sudden precipice of almost all that have in any sort taken upon them its
steerage and management: To say nothing of the signal judgments, which have
not been infrequently visible amongst us, upon such as have been eminently
active in its first unhinging.

There are many particulars more to be hinted, much too long for this Paper,
yet very necessary for your advertisement; so that if freedom of argument in
writing, or otherwise, were by your favor and indulgence to be used, without
the danger usually in these times attending it: That which is said to be your
Letter into the West, would soon clearly appear to you, to be very Paradoxal,
and as Hetrogenean to true policy, as detestable to all piety.

All new bypath, though somewhat trodden before experience shows us, will
certainly lead to no other place but precipice and ruin; for whatsoever is
contrariant to the ancient settled foundation, upon which (if duly and without
prejudice considered) we are so evenly and so excellently bottomed, though to
such as look with false and bribed spectacles; the same may seem plausible,
plain and easy of digestion; yet it is almost impossible, but that there must
needs be thence a production of the same evils, which have been acted amongst
us under several shapes and forms, ever since the year, 1648. And which will as
certainly and undoubtedly return and rush in again upon us, and that the same
causes cannot in nature but produce the same effects, and this without any
difficulty is clearly and infallibly to be demonstrated to each rational and
capable apprehension; if pens were permitted that freedom to undeceive, as
they are countenanced, nay hired to becloud, corrupt, and ensnare men, that so
their chains and bonds of slavery and servitude may appear somewhat necessarily
to be continued upon them; and whatsoever tyranny and vassaledge they undergo
and feel, they must yet believe (because they are so commanded) that it is
liberty and freedom which they enjoy, and that they are Members of a
Free State and Commonwealth.

The way you are desired to walk in, is not at all obscure; but as it is plain
and easy; so is it most open, clear and manifest to all prudent and unbyassed
men, free from self interest and partiality; such as we doubt not but to find
your Excellency; especially ( dum res sit integra, with you, and before you
drink deeper of the cup of enchantment prepared for you) if you will please but
seriouslly to cast your thoughts upon, believe truths, and duly consider the
preparations and resolutions abroad: And with the tender bowels of a true
English Gentleman to ponder the most earnest and intense desires (almost to
rude clamors) at home, of all sorts from the highest to the lowest, and in all
parts and places of the Nation; and preserve your self fortified against the
allurements, and not be taken with the seeming bounties, but really empty
husks, of those who (though at present you are the darling of their courtship)
yet you may be sure, intend no further to honor you, then as it is useful for
themselves, nor make use of you longer, than (after their own turn is served)
they have an opportunity and power to crush and destroy you; which as is
credibly reported, an eminent one amongst them, not long since affirmed in
effect to his Friend.

Providence has brought it so to pass, that you have now the scale of your
future fortunes in your own hands; be wary how you poize them, and look
circumspectly to the weight in each scale; and take heed you make not the dross
weigh down the gold. It is now undoubtedly in your power to settle firmly and
lastingly the peace and quiet of this so long miserably torn and wasted Nation,
and that in all probability, without the least drop of blood: A piece of Honor
and Christianity, which hitherto has not been vouchsafed so clearly to any
person or power whatsoever, since our fatal and unhappy struglings: Loose not
this your happy and glorious opportunity, (as diverse others have done theirs,
and perished) least any glimpse thereof never dawn more to you: The cure is so
easy (done with a word or two, A Free Parliament) and so natural for the
malady and distemper; that surely it would be the greatest of all tyrannical
cruelties, to suffer a longer perseverance in denying so certain a remedy for
such a sore and desperate evil; you have potent Arguments Sir, and such only
they are, which the grand Opposers and our tormentors have used themselves to
be convinced by: Oh look upon, and more than seriously consider the rufull and
deplorable condition which your poor Mother Nation, without this your
intercession, will most unavoidably and desperately be involved in. Think upon
her, and her Churches former and ineffable sufferings; and let her not be
denied this one boon so necessary to preserve her from final and utter
destruction; she (as it were upon her bare and bended knees) begs this from
you, her own Son; and that it may be speedy and effectual, not hampred and
shackled with (we know not what) absurd and empty previous Votes, made by a
handful of inconsiderate and corrupt interessed men, to the infamy, stain, and
dishonor of those grave, high and honorable Assemblies, but free and absolute,
without any dread, force, restriction, or aw upon it, which really and indeed
destroys its very essence, and renders it a mere slavish, captived
Conventicle, and no true English Parliament: By which, and no other way or
remedy under Heaven, she can hope to obtain any effectual and successful cure;
agd which by your means procured for her, shall immortalize your fame and
renown, not only through these Nations, but through the whole Christian world,
and merit Trophies of honor to be erected to you; and your Name and Posterity
by all sorts and degrees of men, be justly magnified and exalted, so that no
length of time shall defeat its just merit, but the same remain upon record to
all succeeding generations.

But yet after all these hopes, and expectations of your generous integrity, if
you shall, by what allurements whatsoever, be warped and wrested from this
undoubted true interest of your own and your Mother Country, and shall comply
with that rotten Rump, and Bob-tail of a Parliament, the most base and unworthy
for all sinister and corrupt interest and faction that ever entered the walls of
any of our English high Assemblies; in so much that never any crew of men,
since this Island was first peopled, how vile and bad soever, incurred more
than they, such odium, scorn and contempt from all sorts and degrees of
persons, from the highest to the lowest, throughout the whole Nation, which may
be easily heard and seen, not only in the open streets chanted out in Rithmes
and Sonnets, but upon the walls of almost every Alehouse and Tipling-hutch; yet
if such be the power of their Rhetorique to persuade, and your faculty to
believe and comply, then look to your station, and the Reed you choose to lean
on, for you will assuredly find your ground very slippery; and your seeming
support, though weak in it self, yet piercing your hands; and although perhaps
you may seem to flourish a while, and swallow down great hopes, yet be assured
they will never come to good digestion, but must up again: The incensed Nation,
though dejected for a time, will again rouse themselves, and never forget the
delusion, cheat, and indeed no other than an absolute Tre-pan put upon them, by
which so many of them have incurred some hazard and danger, and all from the
good hopes they had of your prndence and integrity, and your loyalty and good
intentions to the true National interest, which you seemed so much to profess,
and plainly asserted the same in your Answer to the City of London's Letter,
telling them, that you concurred with them in their Declaration, which in
express words was for the obtaining of a Free Parliament; nor can your
Mermidons help you at the long run neither; but you and your posterity will
find your name and memory noysomly stink in the nostrils of all good and sober
men; and your Exit (at least of honor) in all probability become more speedy
than it is possible you now deny or imagine, and that in the most abject and
contemptible kind of all others your fellow-destroyers and Ruiners of three
famous and potent Kingdoms; nor will that be the worst neither. There is an
account likewise to be given (a very deadful one) at that impartial bar of the
great and general Tribunal, where no martial force, pomp or policy, will at
all be prevalent; and where perhaps this very paper, (if slighted by you) may
add something to your astonishment and confusion.

But we yet hope better things from your Excellency, and such as shall be
worthy your self, as you are a Christian, a Gentleman, and an Englishman, and
one so eminent, whose lot it is, to be furnished with that power in such a
conjuncture of time as this, that if you please but to pronounce the desired
word only, all our miseries end, and our chains immediately fall off, which
otherwise may be somewhat lasting, upon us; yet such is our hope and confidence
in the great Disposer of all things, that we dare in faith and sincerity use
the words of Mordecai concerning Gods people, recorded by the Holy Ghost,
Esther 4.14. Deliverance shall arise from another place, and thou and thy
Fathers House shall be destroyed, and who knows whether thou art come to this
honor for such a time as this? etc.

But we retire, stand still, and expect, etc.

FINIS.

