THE ENGLISH EPISCOPACY AND LITURGY Asserted by the Great Reformers abroad, AND
The most Glorious and ROYAL MARTYR The Late KING His Opinion and Suffrage for
them.

Published by a Private Gentleman for the Public good.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach, for Henry Seile, over against St. Dunstans
Church, in Fleetstreet, 1660.

The English EPISCOPACY AND LITURGY ASSERTED.
THat Government is as necessary to the preservation of the Church, as
preaching the Gospel was to the plantation of it, is apparent by the Apostles
practice, who no sooner had converted a Province, City, or any considerable
number of Persons, but presently left it in the hands of some faithful
overseers, to dress, tend and water, till it grew up to such a perfection as
became the Spouse of Christ; And in all such perfect and settled Churches, That
there ought to be, three distinct Orders and Degrees in the pastoral charge
thereof, viz. Bishop, Priest or Presbyter, and Deacon, is so fully and
abundantly Asserted and Proved, by so many able Pens, upon occasion of the late
differences in point of Church Discipline, and the same is thereby become so
known and manifest a Truth, especially to the Learned, Solid, and Judicious,
that it cannot but be believed that those of any considerable Abilities, and
Ingenuitie, who chiefly opposed it, Remain now very well satisfied in that
particular, it being indeed very clear and apparent to knowing and impartial
Judgments, That Government by Bishops superior to Presbyters, is of
Apostolical institution; and this as fully to be made good, by Ecclesiastical
Records, as it is possible for any Truth to be that way demonstrated: Nor does
the Canon of the Sacred Scripture it self, depend upon more undoubted and
unquestionable verity and demonstration.

And although the absolute and distinct precept of Christ himself for it, is
not so clearly to be Asserted; Yet his own superiority to the twelve Apostles,
and Theirs, to the seventy Disciples, is such an exemplary Copy of Bishop,
Priest or Presbyter, and Deacon, in the Government and Discipline of the
Church, as that it was Transcribed in the very next Age (witness Ignatius, St.
John's Contemporary) and allowed to receive Esteem and Honor; the Bishops as
Christ, the Presbyters as the Apostles, and Deacons as the Seventy. Nor is
superiority in Order less clearly Apostolical by the example and practice of
themselves, who when Judas had fell from the orb and dignity, he first moved
in, They by the direction of the Sacred Spirit, assumed Matthias from an
inferior, to a superior Order amongst them; The Hierarchy of the Church in
Government, being derivative as it were from God himself, and the same in
Character and Representation which he is pleased to exercise amongst the
Blessed in Heaven.

That therefore which some of a more unsatisfiable nature and disposition,
though beaten out of all holds, for the Divine right of their Geneva Platform,
yet loath to depart with that Classical, nay Parochial supremacy, and more than
Lordship, which they Phansied themselves so near the absolute possession of,
make now the matter of their frequent converse, in all companies, and upon all
occasions, is to extol and magnify the order and manner of the Discipline of
the reformed Churches abroad, and (to allure and captivate vulgar
apprehensions) very much advance and prefer the same, before that which has
been so long and legally established here in the Church of England, under
Bishops, and which has rendered us so famous and flourishing a people and
Nation throughout the world.

Howbeit if you demand now, of such an extoller of Foreign order, what Church
abroad it is, not governed by Bishops, which he so much magnifies for its
Discipline; And wherein the excellency of it is beauty lies; He knows not where
to fix, but is at a kind of loss presently, and after a small while, the
paradox does so puzzle him in its maintenance, and hunt him from one absurdity
to another, that in conclusion, he is fain to sit down, wildred and benighted
in the fogs and darkness of his own brain and Intellect.

The difference of Discipline amongst the reformed Churches abroad, is very
well known, how those of the French differ, from the Scottish, the Scottish from
the Flemings or Dutch, those from the Switzers, and so others in like manner,
and the necessity of some Churches to fit their Tapestry to their Rooms, viz.
their Discipline, to the state and condition they live in, is as notorious. And
certainly the modesty of that grave and excellent Prelate is much to be
commended, who having fully proved the imposition, or laying on of hands by the
Bishop, to be of most ancient institution in the Christian Church, uses these
words, I write not here (says he) to prejudice our neighbor Churches; I dare
not limit the extraordinaray operation of the holy Spirit, where the ordinary
means is wanting, without the fault of the persons, God fed his people with
Manna, so long as they were in the Wilderness. Necessity is a strong pleader;
Many reformed Churches live under Kings, and Bishops, of another Communion;
Others have particular necessitating reasons, why they could not continue, nor
introduce Bishops, But it is not so with us, etc.

The exigence of time, place, and persons may possibly be with Divine pity
beheld in all their prejudicial hindrances, provided that divine order and
institution be duly observed.

Another reverend Bishop has likewise as charitable an expression; Bishop Hall
in his treatise of Episcopacy
I must cordially respect (says he) those foreign Churches, who have chosen and
followed an outward form, which in every respect is most expedient and suitable
to their condition; And again, another speaks thus, Some plants thrive best in
the shadow; where the form of Government without Bishops agrees best with the
constitution of some Commonwealth, we pray to God to give them joy in it, and
pray them to say as much for us. Damus petimusque vicissim.

These very charitable and moderate passages of the Church Prelates, and
Bishops, are the rather hinted (and very many more might be) to manifest the
difference there is, between the spirits and dispositions of such, and those of
some other persons, who condemn all as Heretical and Antichristian, and to be
extirpated Root and Branch, which complies not in Omni modo, to their
judgment, or rather Phansy, and that by an Oath or Covenant imposed, not only
upon siterate persons, but upon such also, who were so far from understanding
the depth of what they swear, as that they were utterly ignorant whether the
words Hierarchy, and Liturgy, which they covenant to extirpate, be Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, French, Italian, etc. or what other language, and yet cry down
those Prelates, for Lordly, Imperious, and Tyrannical.

We have it as a common rumor amongst us Gentlemen, and it is supposed it will
not be denied, that a Declaration, or Letters missive, were by some grave
persons in Assembly, addressed to the reformed Churches of France, the
Low Countries, and Switzerland, with diverse other Churches, and States,
inviting their concurrence, and approbation, to what those persons had
prevailed with Authority here to ordain and appoint concerning Church
Discipline, and the rooting out of Episcopal order, Prelacy, and the Liturgy,
but the success we are told it had in all places, is so far from being bragged
on, (which had it answered some expectations would no doubt have been exalted
to no small height) that it is scarce at all known whether there were ever any
such thing or not, but an Altum Silentium thought fittest in the business. It
is not I suppose so proper for me (I leave that to others, who as much more
concerned, so doubtless, more truly knowing particulars) to publish to the
Nation what I have credibly heard; nor perhaps will it (as affairs now stand,)
be taken well on any part to relate what I read in a modern grave and sober
Author, (a Member also of a foreign eminent reformed Church) as an answer from
that reformed Church, where at that time they must needs feed their Phansy with
the best and fairest hopes of success every way answerable to their
expectation; nor shall I recite other particulars I read likewise concerning
that address, which it seems being printed, was sent to no less than
seaventeen Churches and States beyond sea; nor what acceptance that Author
says it had, and what censure, the Phrase, the Latin, the Tenor and ends
thereof met with in some places, Albeit as the said Author affirms, the same is
divulged to the world in several languages, though so little known here amongst
us, and how the rest to whom it was addressed received the same, themselves it
is supposed best know; And certainly, it would be a signal piece of Candor and
ingenuity in them, and what (in such a conjuncture of time as this) would be
most grateful and acceptable to the whole Kingdom, especially such as my self
Private-Lay-gentlemen who hear of these things at a distance, and sometimes
read what casually comes to their hands, and would very gladly hear the truth
of what opinion their brethren of the reformed Churches abroad, had of their
address, and of the extirpation of Episcopacy and Liturgy here amongst us.

But lest this may in vain he called for, it shall here be very faithfully
though briefly hinted, what some of the most eminent and renowned sort of the
Reformation abroad (amongst many others which may in a little time be collected
and set forth likewise) thought and expressed themselves concerning those two
particulars of Episcopacy and Liturgy, which for some ends, have of late been
such ponderous and heavy burdens, and such grievous eye-sores to some people.

Calvin, it is hoped is one, who is, Omni exceptione major. And therefore
fittest to lead the Van in this particular, who in an Epistle of his to
Cardinal Sadolet, speaking of the Church of Rome says thus, Let them (says
he) establish such an Hierarchy, where the Bishops having the dignity, resuse
not to submit themselves to Christ, and depend on him, as their only head, and
refer themseves to him, And let them retain amongst them such a brotherly
Society, which is not entertained but by the Bond of Truth; then if there be
found any persons who refuse to respect such a Hierarchy, with Reverence and
Sovereign Obedience, I do acknowledge and confess him worthy of all sorts of
Anathema. This for the Episcopal Order and Degree in general, and from the Pen
of Calvin the supposed Grand Anti-Episcopist, methinks should bear much sway
and credit with some men.

That great Professor at Geneva, Lib. 2. Praescript. Theolog.
Iacobus Lectius, makes the English Bishops such true and lawful Bishops as St.
Paul writes of to Timothy and Titus. And we deny not (says he) but there has
been formerly such Bishops, and that there are some now; and that they elect
such now in the Kingdom of England.

Beza writes thus to Archbishop Whitgift; March 1. 1591.
In my writings (says he) touching the Ecclesiastical government, I have
opposed the Roman Hierarchy, but it was never in my intention to oppose the
Polity of the English Church, or to desire of you to conform your Church,
according to the pattern of the Presbyterian discipline; for whilst the
substance of your Doctrine is uniform with the Church of Christ, It may be
lawful for us to differ in other matters according as the circumstances of
time, place, and persons require, and as is avowed by the prescription of
Antiquity, and for this effect I desire and hope that the sacred and holy
society of your Bishops will continue, and maintain for ever, their right and
title in the government of the Church etc.

That great Author of the Buckler of faith, expounding the 30th. Article of the
Churches of France Confession of faith, clearly expresses the great regard and
esteem they have of their neighbor Churches, where the Bishops have
superiority. And in his disputations of Divinity in the university of Sedan,
one of his Theses is this, We maintain that the Bishops of England, after their
conversion to the faith, and their abjuration of Papistry, were faithful
servants of God, and ought not to forsake, neither the name nor Title of
Bishops.

Where can it be made appear, that any of the Reformed Churches abroad ever
quarrelled at this our Church, as Antichristian, or showed the least regret
against it, for retaining the Episcopal Order or Liturgy amongst us? nay what
high Encomiums and Gratulations from many of them, may be produced of this our
Church, and Condolements of their own Condition, that they are not so happy and
blessed as we are, in that particular of their Church Government, Order, and
Discipline.

It may therefore well be deemed more than a hard Task to procure those
Churches, so far to decline their Reason and Charity, as to contradict all
their former professions so frequently made upon all occasions, and their
Consciences too, merely to gratify the humor and interest of some persons,
who though they had then (as they thought at least) a great esteem and credit
abroad, found themselves as much mistaken in their expectations in that
particular, as they were erroneous in the Marks and Characters of
Anti-Christianism.

It is possible the French Churches were much looked upon, as examples for
Regulating the Reformation so much noysed and talked on here amongst us; It
cannot therefore be amiss to hear what a Sober, Learned, and Solid Member of
the Church there writes, and that with sadness enough for their enforced and
necessitated condition.

The best (says he) that they were able to do, (having the Court and Clergy
against them) in matters of Order and Discipline, was, to provide Pastors, who
should teach purely, and leave them in a simple equality, there being no
questioning about Governing, in times of persecution, but to instruct and
suffer; And it being a thing of danger and envy to erect New Degrees, which
could not be done without quarrelling at them which were established; Necessity
(says he) contributed to Prudence in that Reformation, the same being most
commodious for their present State; and hardly could there be found a more
proper and fitting for a Church that lives under Magistrates of a contrary
Religion, and in such expectation of those who enjoy the Ecclesiastical degrees
to come in likewise into the Reformation; They by their humble and equal order
keep themselves in a State of obedience, proper and ready to submit themselves
to their Diocesans, when it shall please God to convert them, And that their
Fathers chose this equality not as in opposition to the degrees of the Clergy,
but as a way to dispose them, and as a Plank ready to invite their Bishops to
pass over to the Reformation, and so receive them into their charge; We are
not offended at the Degrees of the Clergy, nor their Revenues, etc.

This paper is intended to be very brief, and therefore these great lights of
the reformed Churches are only now mentioned, there being many others
produceable to the same purpose, who very highly magnify and extol both our
Government by Bishops, and also the Liturgical order and manner of our Divine
worship to Almighty God, Concerning which last particular, I shall likewise
present the opinions of some of those worthies of the Reformation, who upon
occasion have so declared their judgments thereupon, that the Framers of the
Directory had surely very little cause to make the Nation believe, That by a
long and sad experience, (as is expressed in the Preface to that Directory)
they find that the English Liturgy is offensive to the Foreign reformed
Churches, And that it is to answer the expectation of those Churches that they
reject it.

Calvin himself shall again lead the Van, upon this sally likewise, for
presently after the compyling of our Liturgy, by those great Champions of the
English Reformation, men of signal eminency and renown, for wisdom, piety, and
learning, and some of them, upon that very score and account, glorious for
Martyrdom also; The same was sent to Mr. Calvin, who wrote thus back to the
then Protector of England, his Majesty Edw. the 6th. being then in minority.

As for the form of Prayers, and Ecclesiastical Ceremonies I much approve, That
they should be established, as a certain form from which it shall not be
lawful for the Pastors to go in the execution of their charge, that so there
may be provision made for simplicity, and the consent of the Churches
themselves may more certainly appear, and the extravagant levity of the
affecters of novelty may be prevented; Here we see Calvin the great Zam Zummim
(as to some particulars) of the Framers of the Directory, clearly asserting
both that there should be a certain form, from which it should not be lawful to
digress, And also approving the book of the Common Prayer sent to him, and the
Ecclesiastical Orders and Ceremonies of the English Church.

The same Calvin in his notes upon the 20th. Psalm, affords us a further and
ample testimony of his approbation of set forms of Prayer, and Liturgy; And in
the Confession presented in the name of the Churches of France, to the Emperor
and Princes of Germany, he affirms thus, That every Church has right to make
Laws, Statutes, or Canons, and to establish a common Policy or Discipline, And
that obedience is owing to them, and those that refuse this, are to be
accounted seditious and wilful. Thus Calvin.

Martin Bucer speaking of the form of our divine service or Liturgy, says
thus, Script. Anglican. p. 445
I thank God who has given you grace to reform those ceremonies in such a
purity; For I have found nothing in it which is not taken out of the word of
God, or at least is not contrary to it being rightly interpreted.

Gualter and Bullinger men who cannot be denied their rank and due place of
eminency amongst those of the Reformation, in a joint Epistle of theirs wrote
to some discontented Brethren here in England, concerning the Discipline and
Ceremonies of this our Church, say thus; That if any of the People persuade
themselves, that those things smell of Popery, Let them learn to know the
contrary, and let them be perfectly instructed; and that if the clamors of any
raise up trouble among the multitude, let them beware, lest in so doing, and
provoking Authority, they draw not upon their necks a more heavy yoke.

Beza likewise in his Epistle Ad quosdam Anglicarum Ecclesiarum fratres,
Speaking of the same subject matter, expresses himself fully to the same
purpose, and tells them withal, That the Surplisse is not of such importance
to raise scruples in any against the wearing of it, And so likewise for
kneeling at the Sacrament, Music in Churches and things of like nature, That
they are matters of such indifferency, Lib. precum f. 202. 112.
that they should no ways be troubled at them.

Gilbertus a German, in a book of his long since written, propounds the English
Liturgy, for a sample of the ancient forms used in the Church of God.

Isaac Causabon that man of so great fame and learning, admires the care of our
English Church for Antiquity, and Purity, and generally proclaims it in all his
Epistles, That there was not any where else the like to be found, nor that he
ever hoped to see it in any place, till himself came hither into England.

What the Church of Zeland, especially the Wallachrian Classis returned in
answer to some persons, who addressed to them, is manifest enough, they not
only approving of set and prescribed forms of public Prayer, as tending much
to edification, but give reasons of such their approbation, from Scripture, and
the practice of reformed Churches, and conclude it to be a precise singularity
in those who reject it.

It would be endless to relate the particular assertions of Foreign persons,
of choice sincerity, and great learning, mayn Opposers likewise of the Roman
rubbish and superstition, approving and applauding Liturgy, and set forms of
Prayer for public use in the service of God, the whole Christian World
indeed, in all ages (including Christ himself and his Apostles) and in all
places, asserting, approving, and advancing the same.

And surely had some persons but called to mind (for it is not possible to be
imagined they should be ignorant of it) what general approbation, the English
Liturgy and Ceremonies of this our Church received at Dort, by the Divines of
Germany, France, Denmark, Swedeland, and Switzerland, which appears in the Acts
of that Synod, many of which Divines, as also some of our own then and there
present, it is probable, may either yet be living at this day, or very lately
Dead; I say had they been mindful of this, they would certainly have forborne to
say there, where it is public legible enough, That by long and sad experience
they found, that the English Liturgy was offensive to the foreign reformed
Churches; for certainly that is a very great error and mistake, It being most
manifest and notorious, that we are so far from giving them offense in that
particular, that it seems they desire nothing more earnestly, than to be in the
same condition with us, which appears by a Declaration made by some Divines of
note and esteem in foreign parts, and that but few years ago, and since some
of our late troubles here amongst us first began, which inter alia speaks thus.

One day, when it shall please God to perfect, Edit. a D. Jobanne Duraeo An.
1638.
and confirm Amity in these Churches, we may be able by a universal Council and
Consent to form a certain Liturgy, which may be as a Symbol and Bond of
Concord amongst us. Some persons, ('it is true) have made it a Malum Discordiae
here; But we see, our neighbors look upon a Liturgy, and constant set form of
Prayer, to be as a Symbol and Bond of Concord to them.

Nor indeed is there any thing more true, than That all the reformed Churches
abroad have their certain forms of Prayers for their Public and Sacred
administrations, nor is it less true, That many of the said Churches have
Bishops likewise in full order and dignity, answerable and correspondent to
those of this our Church of England, as all those Countries subject to the
Crowns of Denmark and Sweden; Almost throughout all Germany likewise, the
Episcopal Order and Degree is kept up and preserved, though under another name
and Title, viz. Super-Intendents, and in some places, as in Brene, the name of
Bishops still remains; In the large and ample Territories of Bohemia, Polonia,
and Transylvania, the Evangelical reformed Churches are Governed by Seniors, as
they call them, who are in the same nature, quality, and degree, and armed with
the same power and authority for Church Government, as our Bisheps.

To say nothing of those Churches of Russia, Grecia, and India, and the rest of
the world, whose Doctrine indeed we less know what it is, than we do their
Discipline, it being not unknown, that their Church Government there, is by
Bishops, both in quality and Title, so that it may well be deemed as a thing
very improbable, that the Oppugners of Episcopacy and Liturgy here amongst us
at home, will ever be able to make it appear by all the Art or endeavors that
can be used, That any approbation, countenance, or assistance to them in such
their design, will ever in any way or sort be affoorded to them from abroad,
especially from any considerable place of the Reformation, who are so far from
desiring the glory of the English Church, heretofore so famous and flourishing
in all respects whatsoever, and yielding such protection safety and honor to
all their reformed neighbors and allies, in all parts and places, should be
any way darkened or ecclipsed, or its eminency and luster in any kind
diminished, or abated; That nothing (questionless) has been, is, or can be,
greater matter of Sorrow and Condolement to them, than the Ayms, Attempts and
Desires of some men; nor more Joy and Pastime to our Romish Adversaries, than
to see the Sons and Members of that Church, heretofore so terrible and dreadful
to them, and their Usurpations, rending and tearing out their Mothers Bowels,
and all for controversies of Government, Discipline, and Ceremony, and that
without the least show of ought tending to any need or necessity whatsoever.

Thus much for a taste only, how the Reformed Foreign Palats have, and (without
all doubt) still do Relish that sharpness which has here been used, against
that Government, Order, and Discipline, which has so long beautified and
rendered glorious that Kings Daughter, our Church of England, and which had such
a beginning, continuance and so firm and often repeated an establishment.

And having made the precedent mention of the great joy and pleasure which our
Romish Adversaries (no doubt) take, at these differences here amongst us, And
since that some persons (who perhaps least meant it) have indeed (which it is
hoped is now become clear and manifest to them) but waged their War, and fought
their Battails, wherein themselves, by all their Learning and Policy, could
never make so great an advance as of late years since our Troubles began; Let
it be remembered, that upon the Reformed Composure of our Liturgy, the great
quarrel then against it, was always made by the Papists, which they set on
foot, under several Modes and Guizes, sometimes complaining of that, which they
called Craft and Subtlety in our Reformers, in their seeming compliance with
them, and how politic they were to order things so, as might in show seem no
great departure from them, in their public worship and service of God, yet
really and indeed they had thereby given them the far more deadly wound, and
such, whereof it would be very difficult for them ever to work out a recovery.

Sometimes in down right terms they fell upon it, being so reformed and reduced
to pure Antiquity; Insomuch that John Old in Queen Mary's days, and many
others eminent Assertors thereof, publicly wrote against them in Defense of
it. And Archbishop Cranmer, made a Public Challenge, that if he might be
permitted to take to him Peter Martyr, and 4. or 5. more, he would enter the
Lists with any Papists living, and defend the Book to be perfectly agreeable to
the word of God, and the same in effect which had been used in the Church of
God for 1500 years.

And in those fiery days of Queen Mary, when the use of it was interdicted, it
was frequently burned as an haeretical piece condemned by Roman Authority, in
the same Fire with such as suffered Martyrdom, for asserting that and other
Doctrins and usages of our Church, of which there is amongst others, this
memorable Record in the Acts and monuments of our Church, That one John Hullyer
fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, who being at the stake, A book of
Comon-Prayer amongst others, was thrown into the fire to him, and happened to
fall between his hands, which he received with the greatest joy that could
possibly be expressed by him, and read in it till the flame and smoke hindered
his sight, and then he clapped it to his breast, closely embracing it, and with
elevated hands and devout prayers he yielded up the ghost.

Archbishop Cranmer before mentioned (who amongst other things objected, for
such asserting the Liturgy etc. suffered Martyrdom likewise by the Papists,) in
his letters published by Miles Coverdale, laments it, as the most cruel and
severe piece of persecution and tyranny toward him, that they would not suffer
him to have the use of the Common Prayer book in Prison.

What troubles at Frankfort, arose to the Reformers, flying thither for refuge,
and by whose fomentation, and encouragement they befell, and continued amongst
them, is manifest enough, and how learnedly and unanswerably the English
Liturgy, and every part thereof, was there maintained by them against all
Opposers whatsoever, is as manifest likewise.

Nor can it be thought a difficult matter to guess who privately and obliquely
excited and encouraged, Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington, in Q. Eliz. time,
and many others which might be named, who though under a quite contrary
pretense, and zealous show of detesting Popery and Superstition, yet acted the
part of the stoutest and most dangerous Champions to introduce it, as that Age
could any way have afforded.

Certainly that Liturgy, and form of Divine worship, must needs be very near
the Golden Mean, and no less blessed and happy in its composure, whose fate it
has always been, to be crucified between two grand contrary opposing parties,
and stigmatized with their several Characters, the one branding it for Novelty
and Heresy, the other for Superstition and Popery.

And this, no doubt but, was foreseen by the Reformers, whose great wisdom
and piety in their labors therein can never be enough Admired, and Celebrated,
they stoutly and piously flinging off all both in that, and the doctrine of the
Church, which had any tincture or savor of Superstition or Popery in it, and
with as little outward alteration (which was their singular wildome and
discretion) as such an affair could possibly admit, keeping and Retaining all
recommended and practiced by pure Antiquity; And which doubtless is as free
and clear from any true charg of Popery, as any period expressed in the
writings of such who have laid that heavy charg upon it, they knowing well that
Liturgy, Moderation, Charity, and as near a compliance as possibly might be
admitted without Sin, was a far better and more probable way to convert
Papists, and confirm Protestants, than Sequestration, Directory, and Ordination
by Presbyters only; Nor did they forget that there were many thousands of
Parishes in this Realm and Nation, where there is no such promise of Divine
inspiration, to be relied on; But that in all probability, many of the Minsters
will not be always able publicly to speak, as in the presence of Angels,
which the woeful experience of the late times has abundantly verifyed to us.
To say nothing of the flat and empty Nonsense, and hydeous Blasphemies, the
expression whereof (had they been duly collected in all places) would surely
fill a volume, and are far more fit to be buried in utter Oblivion, than that
it should arrive at the ears of Posterity, to accuse the Rashness and Folly of
such persons, who would needs thrust out the unwearyed Labors, Piety, and
Wisdom of so many Glorious Martyrs, and instead thereof, bring in, only the
extemporary volatile expressions of particular Persons (how able soever) into
the public Worship and Service of Almighty God, refusing the standing
Treasures of the Church for help and assistance, and making use of such Coin,
as is so far from having any stamp upon it, as that it is perpetually to be new
run, and mynted; Not remembering, or duly considering at least, that there were
in the Apostles times, diverse gifts, and every Minister had no promise to
succeed in all, But one in one, and another in another gift, yet all by the
same spirit, etc.

It is believed that Doctor Preston is not without a precious Memory amongst
the chief of such who have opposed Liturgy; his observation therefore, may not
unduly be here hynted, which was this; That whilst those who in opposition to
set forms, require the Minister to conceive a Prayer for the Congregation, They
consider not, that the whole Congregation is as much stynted and bound to a set
form, viz. of those words, which the Minister conceives and pronounces, as if
he read them out of a Book; Nor will the prescription of the matter at all help
out, in this case of unpremeditated and extemporary prayer, as some perhaps may
think; for if that be flown too for refuge and cure of obliquities; That remedy
proves every whit as bad as the Disease, the Spirit being in that case stynted
likewise (the only thing in pretense to be avoided) The matter prescribed,
every way as much hindering and obstructing that, which they call the Freedom
of the Spirit in Prayer, as if the very words themselves were confined and
prescribed also.

And whereas this sacred form of Prayer, and service of Almighty God, and some
other rites and usages of the Church, have been so much and often accused to
savor of Popery, and to keep those of the Romish faith in hopes and
encouragement of our return to them: The quite contrary Argument may certainly
with far more reason be thence assumed and taken up; It being our compliance
with the Ancient Church of the purest times, and not with them, which we
practiced; And our retaining and keeping those ancient forms and Rites, being a
more probable way of gaining them to us, than any hopes they could thence have
of our coming in to them; Nor could such compliance of ours with them, so far
as any way we lawfully might, signify ought else to any rational Papist, But
that we meant thereby (which questionless is the truth) to leave them without
all excuse, if they did not answer us in the like compliance with us in what
they might, And so restore the so much desired Peace and Union of Christendom;
And of this certainly the Jesuits and others amongst them were in such dread
and fear, that it might be effectually operative upon the moderate sort of
Papists here amongst us, that none were more mortally hated by them than such
as were chief upholders, favorers and supporters of that Ancient Government,
Order, Rites and Service, and the strict rules and prescriptions thereof, which
they so much feared and were offended at for the cause and reason aforesaid.
And therefore if Romes Master-Peice (a book appointed by the long Parliament to
be set out) say true, The late Glorious King, and the then Archbishop of
Canterbury Dr. Laud, whose ways and course in this particular they saw so
cross and opposite to their designs, and putting them into such frights of
losing all their game, prey, and Mart here, were in particular destined by them
to the slaughter, as persons (questionless) whom they not only utterly
despaired ever to gain to them, but were very likely to endanger the ruin of
the whole Roman Cause. Others there were too, They knew, who seemed in Noise
indeed, far their greater Enemies, yet we never had the least murmr of any
such design against any of them, though it cannot but be believed, such were
truly and really their Enemies likewise; They knew too well what use to make of
their Zeal and discontent; And doubtless excellent good use might have been
made against the Romish designs of such-their Zeal and fervor, if they would
have permitted it to come under a due and prudent management, by those who had
just and lawful authority over them.

I promised brevity, and therefore but one word more is to be Craved, and
although by me but Craved, yet it is such, as may justly clayman Audience and
Regard from, and a convincing likewise to, the most wilful and obdurate
whatsoever in these particulars of Episcopacy and Liturgy. It is a word from a
King, Their own King, their own dying King, nay Their Martyred King, Martyred
chiefly upon this very score and account, to preserve Episcopacy and Liturgy to
the People; whom God had committed to his charge.

How dear and precious to all sober and pious Protestants, is the memory of
those Prelates of our Church, who first compyled the Liturgy for its use? with
what high Honor and Renown did we all along (till this last wild and sudden
Tempest arose amongst us) exalt and magnify their names and memories, from one
age to another since their Martyrdom, who willingly and cheerfully laid down
their lives in justification of what they had therein done, against their Roman
Adversaries, And in a Fiery Chariot passed from Earth to Heaven, to receive the
reward and Crown of Martyrdom, for such their pious and eminently useful, and
truly profitable Labors for the Church of God? how greedily did we catch each
word they spoke, and with what care and diligence were they preserved in the
grand Record of the Acts and Monuments of the Church (a Book I hope no way
subject to exception from those to whom this is chiefly intended) And what
Impressions have they always made, in the minds of the sober Readers, such as
must needs keep out all thoughts from Breasts not totally poisoned with
malicious prejudice and Suspicion, of any Popish or Superstitious Tyncture to
have its Residence in those persons. And if so?

Shall then the words, the last words, upon this Subject, of a Dying King of
Martyrs, receive any slight, or lose their due effect? which as written with
the Seraphick Quill, of one of those Glorious Attendants, upon the highest
Divine Majesty (for such is its Solidity and Elegancy) deserves a Registry
(with reverence be it spoken) in the acts and monuments of the Church
Triumphant in Heaven, where that glorious Royal Martyr enjoys his due place,
and has reached and put on that Ilustrious, Immortal, and Immarcessible Crown
prepared for him there, having despised and deposited an earthly one here,
rather than deprive his people of that benefit, which he well knew, they could
not but receive from the divine Order, Degree, and Function of Episcopacy; And
the most excellent discipline and devotion of our refined Liturgy and public
service of Almighty God. It being notoriously known, that if he would have
sacrificed the Church, he needed not have been The Churches Sacrifice.

But let a Retreat be made from these crude lines, and a Listen given to those
Charming drops from a Royal pen Seraphically enabled whilst on earth, and now
so transcendently qualified, as not to be reached so much as in any
imagination, which frail humanity is in the least sort capable of.

Concerning Episcopacy, his Royal words are these.
TOuching the Government of the Church by Bishops the common Jealousy has
been, that I am earnest, and resolute to maintain it, not so much out of piety,
as policy and reason of State.

Wherein so far indeed reason of State does induce me to approve that
government above any other, as I find it impossible for a Pince to preserve the
State in quiet, unless he has such an influence upon Churchmen, and they
such a dependence on him, as may best restrain the seditious exorbitancies of
Ministers tongues; Who with the Keys of Heaven, have so far the Keys of Peoples
hearts, as they prevail much with their Oratory to let in; or shut out, both
Peace and Loyalty.

So that I being (as King) entrusted by God, and the Laws, with the good both
of Church and State, I see no reason I should give up, or weaken by any change,
that power and influence which in right and reason I ought to have over both.

The moving Bishops out of the House of Peers (of which I have elsewhere given
an account) was sufficient to take off any suspicion, that I incline to them
for any use to be made of their Votes in State Affairs: Though indeed I never
thought any Bishop worthy to sit in that House, who would not Vote according to
his Conscience.

I must now in Charity be thought desirous to preserve that Government in its
right constitution, as a matter of Religion; wherein both my judgment is fully
satisfied, that it has of all other the fullest Scripture-grounds, and also
the constant practice of all Christian Churches, till of late years the
tumultuariness of People, or the factiousness and pride of Presbyters, or the
covetousnes of some States and Princes, gave occasion to some men's w^ts to
invent new models, and propose them under the specious titles of Christ's
Government, Scepter, and Kingdom, the better to serve their turns to whom the
change was beneficial.

They must give Me leave, having none of their temptations to invite Me to
alter the Government of Bishops, (that I may have a title to their Estates,)
not to believe their pretended grounds, to any new ways contrary to the full
and constant testimony of all Histories, sufficiently convincing unbyassed men;
That as the Primitive Churches were undoubtedly governed by the Apostles and
their immediate successors, the first and best Bishops, so it cannot in reason
or charity be supposed, that all Churches in the world should either be
ignorant of the rule by them prescribed, or so soon deviate from their divine
and holy pattern: That since the first age, for 1500. years, not one example
can be produced of any settled Church, wherein were many Ministers, and
Congregations, which had not some Bishop above them, under whose jurisdiction
and Government they were.

Whose constant and universal practice agreeing with so large and evident
Scripture-directions, and examples, are set down in the Epistles to Timothy,
and Titus, for the settling of that Government, not in the persons only of
Timothy and Titus, but in the succession (The want of Government being that
which the Church can no more dispense with, in point of well-being, than the
want of the Word and Sacraments, in point of being.)

I wonder how men came to look with so envious an eye upon Bishops power and
authority, as to over-see both the Ecclesiastical use of them, and Apostolical
constitution: which to me seems no less evidently set forth as to the main
scope and design of those Epistles, for the settling of a peculiar Office,
Power, and Authority in them, as President Bishops above others, in point of
Ordination, Censures, and other acts of Ecclesiastical Discipline; than those
shorter Characters of the qualities and duties of Presbyter-Bishops, and
Deacons, are described in some parts of the same Epistles, who in the latitude
and community of the name were then, and may now not improperly be called
Bishops, as to the oversight and care of single Congregations, committed to
them by the Apostles, or those Apostolical Bishops, who (as Timothy and Titus)
succeeded them in that ordinary power; there assigned overlarger divisions, in
which were many Presbyters.

The humility of those first Bishops, avoiding the eminent title of Apostles,
as a name in the Churches style appropriated from its common notion (of a
Messenger, or one sent) to that special dignity which had extraordinary call,
mission, gifts, and power immediately from Christ, they contented themselves
with the ordinary titles of Bishops, and Presbyters, until use, (the great
arbitrator of words, and master of language) finding reason to distinguish by a
peculiar name those persons, whose power and office were indeed distinct from
and above all other in the Church, as succeeding the Apostles in the ordinary
and constant power of governing the Churches, the honor of (whose name they
moderately, yet commendably declined,) all Christian Churches (submitting to
that special authority,) appropriated also the name of Bishop, without any
suspicion or reproach of arrogance, to those who were by Apostolical
propagation rightly descended and invested into that highest and largest power
of governing even the most pure and Primitive Churches, which without all doubt
had many such holy Bishops, after the pattern of Timothy and Titus, whose
special power is not more clearly set down in those Epistles, (the chief
grounds and limits of all Episcopal claim, as from divine right,) than are the
Characters of those perilous times, and those men that make them such, who not
enduring sound Doctrine, and clear testimonies of all Churches practice, are
most perverse Disputers, and proud Usurpers against true Episcopacy: Who, if
they be not Traitors and Boasters, yet they seem to be very covetous, heady,
high-minded, inordinate and fierce, lovers of themselves, having much of the
form, little of the power of godliness.

Who by popular heaps of weak, light, and unlearned Teachers, seek to over-lay
and smoother the pregnancy and authority of that power of Episcopal Government,
which beyond all equivocation and vulgar fallacy of names, is most convincingly
set forth both by Scripture, and all after Histories of the Church.

This I write, rather like a Divine than a Prince, that posterity may see (if
ever these papers be public) that I had fair grounds both from
Scripture-Canons, and Ecclesiastical examples, whereon my judgment was stated
for Episcopal Government.

Nor was it any policy of State, or obstinacy of Will, or partiality of
Affection, either to the Men or their Function, which fixed Me: who cannot in
point of worldly respects be so considerable to Me, as to recompense the
injuries and losses, I and My dearest relations with My Kingdoms have
sustained, and hazarded, chiefly at first upon this quarrel.

And not only in Religion, of which, Scripture is the est rule, and the
Churches Universal practice the best commentary, but also in right reason, and
the true nature of Government, it cannot be thought that an orderly
Subordination among Prebyters, or Ministers, should be any more against
Christianity, than it is in all secular and Civil Governments, where parity
breeds Confusion and Faction.

I can no more believe, that such order is intonsistent with true Religion,
than good features are with beauty, or numbers with harmony.

Nor is it likely that God, who appointed several orders, and a Prelacy in the
Government of his Church, among the Jewish Priests, should abhor or forbid them
among Christian Ministers; who have as much of the principles of schism and
division as other men; for preventing and suppressing of which, the Apostolical
wisdom (which was divine) after that Christians were multiplied so many
Congregations, and Presbyters with them, appointed this way of Government,
which might best preserve order and union with Authority.

So that I conceive, it was not the favor of Princes, or ambition of
Presbyters, but the wisdom and piety of the Apostles, that first settled Bishops
in the Church, which Authority they constantly used and enjoyed in those times
which were purest for Religion, though sharpest for Persecution.

Nor that I am against the managing of this Presidency and Authority in one
man, by the joint Counsel and consent of many Presbyters, I have offered to
restore that, as a fit means to avoid those Errors, Corruptions, and
Partialities, which were incident to any one man; Also to avoid Tyranny, which
becomes no Christians, least of all Churchmen; besides it will be a means to
take away that burden and odium of affairs, which may lie too heavy on one
man's Shoulders, as indeed I think it formerly did on the Bishops here.

Nor can I see what can be more agreeable both to Reason and Religion, than
such a frame of Government which is Paternal, not Magisterial, and wherein not
only the necessity of avoiding Faction and Confusion, Emulations and Contempts,
which are prone to arise among equals in power and function, but also the
differences of some Ministers gifts, and aptitudes for government above others,
does invite to employ them, in referernce to those abilities wherein they are
eminent.

Neither is this judgment of mine, touching Episcopacy, any preoccupation of
opinion, which will not admit any oppositions against it: It is well known I
have endeavored to satisfy My self in what the chief patrons for other ways
can say against this, or for theirs: And I find they have, as far less of
Scripture grounds, and of reason, so for examples and practice of the Church,
or testimonies of Histories, they are wholly destitute, wherein the whole
stream runs so for Episcopacy, that there is not the least rivulet for any
others.

As for those obtruded examples of some late reformed Churches (for many retain
Bishops still) whom necessity of times and affairs rather excuses than
commends for their inconformity to all Antiquity; I could never see any
reason why Churches orderly reformed and governed by Bishops, should be forced
to conform to those few, rather than to the Catholic example of all Ancient
Churches, which needed no Reformation: And to those Churches at this day, who
governed by Bishops in all the Christian world, are many more than
Presbyterians or Independents can pretend to be; All whom the Churches in my
three Kingdoms lately governed by Bishops, would equalize (I think) if not
exceed.

Nor is it any point of wisdom or charity, where Christians differ, (as many do
in some points) there to widen the differences, and at once to give all the
Christian world (except a handful of some Protestants) so great a scandal in
point of Church Government; Whom though you may convince of their errors in
some point of Doctrine, yet you shall never persuade them, that to complete
their Reformation they must necessarily desert, and wholly cast off that
Government, which they and all before them have ever owned as Catholic,
Primitive, and Apostolical: So far, as never Schismatics, nor Heretics
(except those Arrians) have strayed from Unity, and Conformity of the Church in
that point; ever having Bishops above Presbyters.

Besides, the late general approbation and submission to this Government of
Bishops, by the Clergy, as well as the Laity of these Kingdoms, is a great
confirmation of My Judgment; and their inconstancy is a great prejudice against
their Novelty; I cannot in charity so far doubt of their learning or integrity,
as if they understood not what heretofore they did; or that they did conform
contrary to their Consciences; So that their facility and levity is never to be
excused, who, before ever the point of Church Government had any free and
impartial debate, contrary to their former oaths and practice, against their
obedience to the Laws in force, and against My consent, have not only quite
cried down the Government by Bishops, but have approved and encouraged the
violent and most illegal stripping all the Bishops, and many other Churchmen,
of all their due Authority and Revenues, even to the selling away, and utter
alienation of those Church Lands, from any Ecclesiastical uses: So great a
power has the stream of times, and the prevalency of parties over some men's
judgments; of whose so sudden and so total change, little reason can be given,
besides the Scots Army coming into England.

But the folly of these men will at l^st punish it self, and the Desertors of
Episcopacy will appear the greatest enemies to, and betrayers of their own
interest: For Presbytery is never so considerable or effectual, as when it is
joined to, and crowned with Episcopacy. All Ministers will find as great a
difference in point of thriving, between the favor of the People, and of
Princes, as plants do between being watered by hand, or by the sweet and
liberal dews of Heaven.

The tenuity and contempt of Clergymen, will soon let them see what a poor
carcass they are, when parted from the influence of that head, to whose
supremacy they have been sworn.

A little moderation might have prevented great mischiefs; I am firm to
Primitive Episcopacy, not to have it extirpated, if I can hinder it. Discretion
without Passion might easily reform, whatever the rust of Times, or indulgence
of Laws, or corruption of Manners have brought upon it. It being a gross
vulgar error, to impute to, or revenge upon the function, the faults of times,
or persons; which seditious and popular principle, and practice, all wise men
abhor.

For those secular additaments and ornaments of Authority, Civil honor, and
Estate which my Predecessors, and Christian Princes in all Countries have
annexed to Bishops and Churchmen; I look upon them but as just rewards of their
learning and piety, wh^ are fit to be in any degree of Church Government; also
enablements to works of Charity and Hospitality, meet strengthenings of their
Authority in point of respect, and observance, which in peaceful times is
hardly paid to any Governors by the measure of their Virtues, so much, as by
that of their Estates: Poverty and Meanness exposing them and their Authority
to the contempt of licentious minds, and manners, which persecuting times much
restrained.

I would have such men Bishops, as are most worthy of those encouragements, and
best able to use them: if at any time My Judgment of men failed, My good
intention made my error venial; And some Bishops, I am sure I had, whose
learning, gravity, and piety, no men of any worth or forehead can deny: But, of
all men, I would have Churchmen, especially the Governors, to be redeemed from
that vulgar neglect, which (besides an innate principle of vicious opposition,
which is in all men against those that seem to reprove, or restrain them) will
necessarily follow both the Presbyterian parity, which makes all Ministers
equal; and the Independent inferiority, which sets their Pastors below the
People.

This for my judgment touching Episcopacy, wherein (God knows) I do not
gratify any design or passion with the least parverting of truth.

And now I appeal to God above, and all the Christian world, whether it be just
for Subjects, or pious for Christians, by violence, and infinite indignities,
with servile restraints to seek to force Me their King and Sovereign, as some
men have endeavored to do, against all these grounds of my Judgment, to
consent to their weak and divided novelties.

The greatest Pretender of them desires not more than I do, That the Church
should be governed, as Christ has appointed, in true Reason, and in Scripture;
of which I could never see any probable show for any other ways: who either
content themseves with the examples of some Churches in their infancy and
solitude, when one Presbyter might serve one Congregation, in a City or
Country; or else they deny these most evident Truths, that the Apostles were
Bishops over those Presbyters they ordained, as well as over the Churches they
planted; and that Government being necessary for the Churches well-being, when
multiplied and sociated, must also necessarily descend from the Apostles to
others, after the example of that power and superiority they had above others;
which could not end with their persons; since the use and ends of such
Government still continue.

It is most sure, that the purest Primitive and best Churches flourished under
Episcopacy; and may so still, if ignorance, superstition, avarice, revenge, and
other disorderly and disloyal passions had not so blown up some men's minds
against it, that what they want of Reasons or Primitive Paterns, they supply
with violence and oppression; wherein some men's zeal for Bishops Lands, Houses,
and Revenues, has set them on work to eat up Episcopacy: which (however other
men esteem) to Me is no less Sin, than Sacrilege, or a Robbery of God (the
giver of all we have) of that portion, which devout minds have thankfully given
again to him, in giving it to his Church and Prophets; through whose hands be
graciously accepts even a cup of cold water, as a libation offered to himself.

Furthermore, as to My particular engagement above other men, by an Oath
agreeable to My Judgment, I am solemnly obliged to preserve that Government,
and the Rights of the Church.

Were I convinced of the unlawfulness of the Function, as Antichristian (which
some men boldly, but weakly calumnia^e) I could soon with Judgment break that
Oath, which erroniously was taken by Me.

But being daily by the best disquisition of truth, more confirmed in the
Reason and Religion of that to which I am sworn; How can any man that wishes
not My Damnation, persuade Me at once to so notorious and combined Sins, of
Sacrilege and Perjury? besides the many personal Injustices I must do to many
worthy men, who are as legally invested in their estates, as any who seek to
deprive them; and they have by no Law been convicted of those crimes, which
might forfeit their Estates and Livelyhoods.

I have often wondered how men pretending to tenderness of Conscience, and
Reformation, can at once tell Me, that my Coronation Oath binds Me to consent
to whatsoever they shall propound to Me (which they urge with such violence)
though contrary to all that Rational and Religious freedom which every man
ought to preserve, and of which they seem so tender in their own Votes: Yet at
the same time, these men will needs persuade Me, That I must and ought to
dispense with, and roundly break that part of my Oath, which binds me
(agreeable to the best light of Reason and Religion I have) to maintain the
Government, and legal Rights of the Church. It Is strange My lot should be valid
in that part, which both My self, and all men in their own case, esteem
injurious and unreasonable, as being against the very natural essential liberty
of our Souls; Yet it should be invalid, and to be broken in another clause,
wherein I think My self justly obliged both to God and Man.

Yet upon this Rack chiefly have I been held so long, by some men's ambitious
Covetousness, and sacrilegious Cruelty, torturing (with Me) both Church and
State, in Civil dissentions, till I shall be forced to consent, and declare,
that I do approve, what (God knows) I utterly dislike, and in My Soul abhor; as
many ways highly against Reason, Justice, and Religion; and whereto, if I
should shamefully, and dishonourably give My consent; yet should I not by so
doing, satisfy the divided Interests and Opinions of those Parties, which
contend with each other, as well as both against Me and Episcopacy.

Nor can My late condescending to the Scots in point of Church Government, be
rightly objected against Me, as an inducement for Me, to consent to the like in
my other Kingdoms: For it should be considered, that Episcopacy was not so
rooted and settled there, as it is here; nor I (in that respect) so strictly
bound to continue it in that Kingdom, as in this: For what I think in My
Judgment best, I may not think so absolutely necessary for all places, and at
all times.

If any shall impute My yielding to them, as My failing and Sin, I can easily
acknowledge it; but that is no Argument to do so again, or much worse; I being
now more convinced in that point: Nor indeed has My yielding to them been so
happy and successeful as to encourage Me to grant the like to others.

Did I see any thing more of Christ, as to Meekness, Justice, Order, Charity,
and Loyalty, in those that pretend to other modes of Government, I might
suspect My Judgment to be biassed, or forestalled with some prejudice and
wontednesse of opinion; But I have hitherto so much cause to suspect the
contrary in the manners of many of those men, that I cannot from them gain the
least Reputation for their new ways of Government.

Nor can I find that in any Reformed Churches (whose patterns are so cried up,
and obtruded upon the Churches under My Dominion) that either Learning, or
Religion, Works of Piety or Charity, have so flourished beyond what they have
done in my Kingdoms (by Gods blessing) which might make Me believe either
Presbytery or Independency have a more benign influence upon the Church, and
men's hearts and lives, than Episcopacy in its right constitution.

The abuses of which deserve to be extirpated, as much as the use retained; for
I think it far better to hold to Primitive and uniform Antiquity, than to
comply with divided Novelty.

A right Episcopacy would at once satisfy all just desires and interests of
good Bishops, humble Presbyters, and sober People; so as Church Affairs should
be managed neither with tyranny, parity, nor popularity; neither Bishops
ejected, nor Presbyters despised, nor People oppressed.

And in this integrity both of My Judgment and Conscience, I hope God will
preserve me.

MEDITATION.
FOr thou, O LORD, know my uprightness and tenderness; as thou have set Me
to be a Defender of the Faith, and a Protector of thy Church, so suffer Me not
by any violence, to be overborn against my Conscience.

Arise, O LORD, maintain thine own Cause, let not thy Church be deformed, as to
that Government, which derived from thy Apostles, has been retained in purest
and primitive times, till the Revenues of the Church became the object of
secular envy, which seeks to rob it of all the encouragements of Learning and
Religion.

Make Me, as the good Samaritan, compassionate, and helpful to thy afflicted
Church; which some men have wounded and robbed; others pass by without regard,
either to pity, or relieve.

As my power is from thee, so give Me grace to use it for thee.

And though I am not suffered to be Master of my other Rights as a King, yet
preserve Me in that liberty of Reason, love of Religion, and thy Churches
welfare, which are fixed in my Conscience as a Christian.

Preserve, from Sacrilegious Invasions, those temporal blessings, which thy
providence has bestowed on thy Church for thy glory.

Forgive their sins and errors, who have deserved thy just permission, thus to
let in the wild Boar, and subtle Foxes, to waste and deform thy Vineard,
which thy right hand has planted, and the dew of Heaven so long watered to a
happy and flourishing estate.

O let me not bear the in^amous brand to all Posterity, of being the first
Christian King in this Kingdom, who should consent to the oppression of thy
Church, and the Fathers of it; whose errors I would rather, with Constantine,
cover with silence, and reform with meekness, than expose their persons, and
sacred Functions, to vulgar contempt.

Thou, O LORD, see how much I have suffered with, and for thy Church; make no
long tarrying, O my God, to deliver both me and it, from unreasonable men,
whose counsels have brought forth, and continue such violent confusions, by a
precipitant destroying the ancient boundaries of thy Churches peace; thereby
letting in all manner of errors, schisms, and disorders.

O thou God of order, and of truth, in thy good time, abate the malice, assuage
the rage, and confound all the mischievous devices, of thine, mine, and thy
Churches enemies.

That I, and all that love thy Church, may sing praises to thee, and ever
magnify thy salvation, even before the sons of men.

Concerning the Liturgy, his Royal words are these.
IT is no news to have all Innovations ushered in with the name of Reformations
in Church, and State, by those, who seeking to gain reputation with the Vulgar
for their extraordinary parts, and piety, must needs undo whatever was formerly
settled never so well and wisely.

So hardly can the pride of those that study Novelties, allow former times any
share or degree of wisdom or godliness.

And because matter of Prayer and Devotion to God justly bears a great part in
Religion (being the Souls more immediate converse with the Divine Majesty)
nothing could be more plausible to the People, than to tell them, they served
God amiss in that point.

Hence our public Liturgy, or Forms of constant Prayers must be (not amended,
in what upon free and public advise might seem to sober men inconvenient for
matter or manner, to which I should easily consent, but) wholly cashiered and
abolished, and after many popular contempts offered to the Book, and those that
used it according to their Consciences, and the Laws in force, it must be
crucified by an Ordinance, the better to please either those men, who gloried
in their extemporary vein, and fluency; or others, who conscious to their own
formality in the use of it, thought they fully expiated their sin of not using
it aright, by laying all the blame upon it, and a total re^ection of it as a
dead letter, thereby to excuse the deadness of their hearts.

As for the matter contained in the Book, sober and learned men have
sufficiently vindicated it against the cavils and exceptions of those, who
thought it a part of piety to make what profane objections they could against
it, especialy for Popery and Superstition; Whereas no doubt the Liturgy was
exactly conformed to the Doctrine of the Church of England; And this by all
Reformed Churches is confessed to be most sound and Orthodox.

For the manner of using Set and prescribed Forms, there is no doubt but that
wholesome words being known and fitted t^ men's understandings are soonest
received into their hearts, and aptest to excite and carry along with them
judicious and fervent affections.

Nor do I see any reason why Christians should be weary of a well composed
Liturgy (as I hold this to be) more than of all other things, wherein the
Co^stancy abates nothing of the excellency and usefulness.

I could never see any reason why any Christian should abhor or be forbidden to
use the same forms of Prayer, since he prays to the same God, believes in the
same Savior, professes the same Truths, reads the same Scriptures, has the
same Duties upon him, and feels the same daily Wants for the most part, both
inward and outward, which are common to the whole Church.

Sure we may as well beforehand know what we pray, as to whom we pray, and in
what words, as to what sense; when we desire the same things, what hinders we
may not use the same words? our appetite and disgestion too may be good when we
use, as we pray for, Our daily bread.

Some men, I hear, are so impatient not to use in all their devotions their own
invention and gifts, that they not only disuse (as too many) but wholly cast
away and contemn the Lords Prayer, whose great guilt is, that it is the warrant
and original pattern of all set Liturgies, in the Christian Church.

I ever thought that the proud ostentation of men's abilities for invention, and
the vain affectations of variety for expressions, or in public Prayer, or in
any sacred administrations, merits a greater brand of sin, than that which they
call Coldness and Barrenness: nor are men in those novelties less subject to
formal and superficial tempers (as to their hearts) than in the use of constant
Forms, where not the words, but men's hearts are too blame.

I make no doubt but a man may be very formal in the most extemporary variety:
and very fervently devout in the most wonted expressions: nor is God more a God
of Variety, than of Constancy; nor are constant Forms of Prayers more likely to
flat and hinder the Spirit of Prayer, and Devotion, than unpremeditated and
confused variety, to distract and lose it.

Though I am not against a grave, modest, discreet and humble use of Ministers
gifts, even in public, the better to fit and excite their own, and the
peoples affections to the present occasions: yet I know no necessity why
private and single abilities should quite justle out, and deprive the Church of
the joint abilities and concurrent gifts of many learned and godly men; such as
the Composers of the Service Book were; who may in all reason be thought to
have more of gifts and graces enabling them to compose with serious
deliberation and concurrent advise, such Forms of Prayers, as may best fit the
Churches common wants, inform the Hearers understanding, and stir up that
fiduciary and fervent application of their spirits (wherein consists the very
life and soul of Prayer, and that so much pretended Spirit of Prayer) that any
private man by his solitary abilities can be presumed to have: which, what they
are many times (even there, where they make a great noise and show) the
affectations, emptiness, impertinency, rudeness, confusions, flatnesse,
levity, obscurity, vain and ridiculous repetitions, the senseless, and often
times blasphemous expressions (all these burdened with a most tedious and
intolerable length) do sufficiently convince all men, but those who glory in
that Pharisaick way.

Wherein men must be strangely impudent, and flatterers of themselves, not to
have an infinite shame of what they so do and say, in things of so sacred a
nature, before God and the Church, after so ridiculous, and indeed, profane a
manner.

Nor can it be expected, but that in duties of frequent performance, as
Sacramental administrations, and the like, which are still the same; Ministers
must either come to use their own Forms constantly, which are not like to be so
sound or comprehensive of the nature of the duty, as Forms of public
composure; or else they must every time affect new expressions when the subject
is the same; which can hardly be presumed in any man's greatest sufficiencies
not to want (many times) much of that compleatnesse, order, and gravity,
becoming those duties; which by this means are exposed at every celebration to
every Ministers private infirmities, indispositions, errors, disorders, and
defects, both for judgment and expression.

A serious sense of which Inconvenience in the Church, unavoidably following
every man's several manner of officiating, no doubt, first occasioned the wisdom
and piety of the Ancient Churches, to remedy those mischiefs, by the use of
constant Liturgies of Public composure.

The want of which I believe this Church will sufficiently feel, when the
unhappy fruits of many men's ungoverned ignorance, and confident defects, shall
be discovered in more errors, schisms, disorders, and uncharitable
distractions in Religion, which are already but too many, the more is the pity.

However, if violence must needs bring in, and abett those innovations, (that
men may not seem to have nothing to do) which Law, Reason, and Religion
forbids, at least to be so obtruded, as wholly to justle out the public
Liturgy.

Yet nothing can excuse that most unjust and partial severity of those men, who
either lately had subscribed to, used and maintained the service book; or
refused to use it, cried out of the rigor of Laws and Bishops, which suffered
them not to use the Liberty of their Consciences in not using it.

That these men (I say) should so suddenly change the Liturgy into a Directory,
as if the Spirit needed help for invention, though not for expressions; or as
if matter prescribed did not as much stint and obstruct the Spirit, as if it
were clothed in, and confined to fit words: (So slight and easy is that
Legerdemain which will serve to delude the Vulgar.)

That further they should use such severity, as not to suffer without penalty,
any to use the Common Prayer Book publicly, although their Consciences bind
them to it, as a duty of Piety to God, and Obedience to the Laws.

Thus I see, no men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exacters
upon others to conform to their illegal Novelties, than such, whose pride was
formally least disposed to the obedience of lawful Constitutions, and whose
licentious humors most pretended Conscientious liberties, which freedom, with
much regret they now allow to Me, and My Chaplains, when they may have leave to
serve Me, whose abilities even in their extemporary way, comes not short of the
others, but their modesty and learning far exceeds the most of them.

But this matter is of so popular a nature, as some men knew it would not bear
learned and sober debates, lest being convinced by the evidence of Reason, as
well as Laws, they should have been driven either to sin more against their
knowledge; by taking away the Liturgy: or to displease some faction of the
people, by continuing the use of it.

Though I believe they have offended more considerable men, not only for their
numbers and estates, but for their weighty and judicious piety, than those are,
whose weakness or giddiness they sought to gratify, by taking it away.

One of the greatest faults some men found with the Common Prayer Book, I
believe was this, That it taught then to pray so often for Me; to which Petitions
they had not Loyalty enough to say Amen, nor yet Charity enough to forbear
Reproaches, and even Cursings of Me in their own Forms, instead of praying for
Me.

I wish their Repentance may be their only punishment; that seeing the
mischiefs which the disuse of Public Liturgies has already produced, they
may restore that credit, use, and Reverence to them, which by the ancient
Churches were given to Set Forms of sound and wholesome words.

MEDITATION.
ANd thou O LORD, which art the same God, blessed for ever: whose mercies are
full of variety, and yet of constancy; thou denyest us not a new and fresh
sense of our old and daily wants; nor despisest renewed affections joined to
constant expressions.

Let us not want the benefit of thy Churches united and well-advised Devotions.

Let the matters of our Prayers be agreeable to thy will, which is always the
same, and the fervency of our Spirits to the motions of thy holy Spirit in us.

And then we doubt not, but thy spiritual perfections are such, as thou art
neither to be pleased with affected Novelties for matter or manner, nor
offended with the pious constancy of our petitions in them both.

Whose variety or constancy thou have no where either forbidden or commanded,
but left them to the piety and prudence of thy Church, that both may be used,
neither despised.

Keep men in that pious moderation of their judgments in matter of Religion;
that their ignorance may not offend others, nor their opinion of their own
abilities, tempt them to deprive others of what they may lawfully and devoutly
use, to help their infirmities.

And since the advantage of Error consists in novelty and variety, as Truths in
unity and constancy: Suffer not thy Church to be pestered with errors, and
deformed with undecencies in thy service, under the pretense of variety, and
novelty. Nor to be deprived of truth, unity, and order, under this fallacy,
That constancy is the cause of formality.

LORD keep us from formal Hypocrisy in our own hearts, and then we know that
praying to thee, or praising of thee (with David and other holy men) in the
same forms, cannot hurt us.

Give us wisdom to amend what is amiss within us, and there will be less to
mend without us.

Evermore defend and deliver thy Church from the effects of blind zeal, and
ov-erbold devotion.

SIlence after this, best becomes humanity, No fit addition to this
All-Comprehensive brevity can possibly be expressed by any Pen, in the hand of
a Mortal; yet since Presumption has dared to insert these few words, after
such divinely-inspired, and transcendently elegant and pithy lines; What better
amends can be made, than to cloze up this Rude breach, by a second Retreat, And
listening again, to what (as to the particulars before treated of) that
Caelestial Quill left Engraven as his last words amongst many others, his truly
Royal and most eminently-Pious and Paternal Instructions to his Son, then Heir
apparent of all his Earthly Crowns and Dominions, and now our most Dear and
Dread Lord and Sovereign.



ABove all, I would have You, as I hope You are already, well grounded and
settled in your Religion: The best profession of which, I have ever esteemed
that of the Church of England, in which you have been educated: Yet I would
have your own Judgment and Reason now seal to that sacred bond which education
has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not other men's
custom or tradition, which you profess.

In this I charge You to persevere, as coming nearest to Gods Word for
Doctrine, and to the Primitive examples for Government, with some little
amendment, which I have otherwhere expressed and often offered, though in vain.
Your fixation in matters of Religion will not be more necessary for your Souls,
than your Kingdoms peace, when God shall bring you to them.

For I have observed, that the Devil of Rebellion, does commonly turn himself
into an Angel of Reformation; and the old Serpent can pretend new Lights: When
some men's Consciences accuse them for Sedition and Faction, they stop its mouth
with the name and noise of Religion; when Piety pleads for Peace and patience,
they cry out Zeal.

So that, unless in this point You be well settled, you shall never want
temptations to destr Yoy ou and Yours, under pretentions of Reforming matters
of Religion; for that seems, even to worst men, as the best and most auspicious
beginning of their worst designs.

Where, besides the Novelty which is taking enough with the Vulgar, every one
has an affectation, by seeming forward to an outward Reformation of Religion,
to be thought zealous; hoping to cover those irreligious deformities, whereto
they are conscious, by a severity of censuring other men's opinions or actions.

Take heed of abetting any Factions, or applying to any public Discriminations
in matters of Religion, contrary to what is in your Judgment, and the Church
well settled, etc. You may never expect less of Loyalty, Justice, or Humanity,
than from those who engage into Religious Rebellion; Their interests are
always made Gods, under the colors of Piety, ambitions policies march, not
only with greatest security, but applause, as to the populacie; you may hear
from them Jacobs voice, but you shall feel they have Esaus hands.

Nothing seemed less considerable than the Presbyterian Fashion in England,
for many years; so complyant they were to public public order: nor was their
party great either Church or State, as to men's judgments: But as soon as
Discontent drove men into Sidings (as ill humors fall to the disaffected part,
which causes inflammations) so did all, at first, who affected any Novelties,
adhere to that Side, as the most remarkable and specious note of difference
(then) in point of Religion.

All the lesser Factions at first were officious Servants to Presbytery their
great Master: till time and military success discovering to each their
peculiar advantages, invited them to part stakes, and leaving the joint stock
of uniform Religion, pretended each to drive for their Party the trade of
profits and preferments, to the breaking and undoing not only of the Church and
State, but even of Presbytery it self, which seemed and hoped at first to have
engrossed all.

In these two points, the preservation of Established Religion and Laws, I may
(without Vanity) turn the reproach of My sufferings as to the Worlds censure,
into the honor of a kind of Martyrdom, as to the testimony of My own
Conscience: The Troublers of My Kingdoms having nothing else to object against
me but this, that I prefer Religion and Laws Established before those
alterations they propounded.

I have, You see, conflicted with different and opposite Factions (for so I
must needs call and count all those, that act not in any conformity to the
Laws established, in Church and State) no sooner have they by force subdued
what they counted their Common Enemy, (that is, all those that adhered to the
Laws, and to Me) and are secured from that fear, but they are divided to so
high a rivalry as sets them more at defiance against each other, than against
their Antagonists.

Time will dissipiate all Factions, when once the rough horns of private men's
covetous and ambitious designs, shall discover themselves; which were at first
wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smooth pretensions of Religion,
Reformation and Liberty: As the Wolf is not less cruel, so he will be more
justly hated, when he shall appear no better than a Wolf under Sheeps clothing.

If You never see My face again, and God will have Me buried in such a
barbarous Imprisonment and obscurity, (which the perfecting some Men's designs
require) wherein few hearts that love Me are permitted to exchange a word, or a
look with Me; I do require and entreat You as Your Father and Your King, that
You never suffer Your heart to receive the least check against, or disaffection
from the true Religion established in the Churc of England.

I tell You, I have tried it, and after much search and many disputes, have
concluded it to be the best in the world; not only in the Community, as
Chriastin, but also in the special notion, as Reformed keeping the middle way
between the pomp of superstitions Tyranny, and the meanness of of fantastique
Anarchy.

Not but that (the draught being excellent as to the main, both for Doctrine
and Government, in the Church of England) some lines, as in very good figures,
may happily need some sweetning, or polishing; which might here have easily been
done by a safe and gentle hand; if some men's precipitancy had not violenly
demanded such rude alterations, as would have quite destroyed all the beauty
and proportions of the whole.

The scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object, and urge to You
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily Answered to
them, or Your own thoughts in this, That scarce any one who has been a
Beginner, or an active Prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the
Laws, and Me, either was, or is a true Lover, Embracer, or Practiser of the
Protestant Religion, established in England: which neither gives such rules,
nor ever before set such examples.

It Is true, some heretofore had the boldness to present threatening Petitions
to their Princes and Parliaments, which others of the same Faction, (but of
worse spirits) have now put in execution: but let not counterfeit and
disorderly Zeal abate Your value and esteem of true Piety, both of them are to
be known by their fruits; the sweetness of the Vine and Figtree is not to be
despised, though the Brambles and Thorns spould pretend to bear Figs and
Grapes, thereby to rule over the Trees.

And if God will have disloyalty perfected by My destruction, let My memory
ever, with My name live in You, as of Your Father that loves You, and once a
King of three flourishing Kingdoms, Whom God thought fit to honor, not only
with the Scepter and Government of them, but also with the suffering many
indignities, and an untimely death for them; While I studied to preserve the
rights of the Church, the power of the Laws, the honor of My Crown, the
privilege of Parliaments, the liberties of My People, and My own Conscience,
which I thank God is dearer to Me than a thousand Kingdoms.

Keep You to true principles of piety, virtue, and honor, You shall never want
a Kingdom.

I pray God bless You, and establish Your Kingdoms in righteousness, Your Soul
in true Religion, and Your honor in the love of God and Your people.

FINIS.

