OF THE Internal and Eternal Nature OF MAN IN CHRIST.

HEBR. 6. verse. 19. Which hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail.

Verse. 20. Whither the Forerunner is for us entered; even Jesus, made an high
Priest for ever after the order of Milchisedec.

And also 2 COR. 3.15. But even to this day when Moses is read, the vail is
upon their heart.

Verse. 16. Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, it shall be taken away.



London, Printed by John Macock, 1654.

OF THE Internal and Eternal Nature of Man in Christ.
REader, J would advise you out of my love to read this following Discourse,
soberly and warily, and above all to remember, that Wisdom is justified of her
Children.

1. WHen through the fire of Repentance we get into the Spirit of Mary the
Virgin, the Bride in our Souls, and are falling before Christ's feet the
Bridegroom, we taste of the Love that through Faith God presents us with, which
we find experimentally true when ever we make trial of the same; yet the
Bridegroom will never admit of any to come to such a communion with him, but
the Bride only, who comes through fire to drink of the living Waters, into the
inward society of Love; for then there is no more a comprehension, but a divine
communion and union through faith. 1 John 4.16, 17. And we have known and
believed the love that God has to us: God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him. Herein is our love made perfect, that we
may have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this
world. And thus we find the saying true, My yoke is easy and my burden is
light; whereby we are made likewise to live one with another, in the unity of
love and the bond of peace, as well as within our selves, finding the beasts of
the field, who lived before in enmity, living now in Noah's Ark in perfect
amity, in our hearts.

2. O take heed of stifling in your souls the light which leads you to the
discovery of your selves. Look but in your consciences, and 'twill enlighten
every corner and crany thereof; but doubt not, neither fear to look upon those
Images it will infallibly manifest to your soul.

3. Herein is all the policy the Devil has, to keep you from looking
ingeniously and heartily into your selves; Knowing he has no other way but to
blind you therein, whereby to continue you under his dominion: for if once you
do discern the hideous Monsters and Sorcerers he does delude you with as
natural men, you will never take more pleasure in them; but his art is to
disguise them, and make them seem otherwise then they are; and he is terribly
afraid above all measure you should know you have the Word in your Souls, lest
it should come into your hearts. John 1.4.5. In him was life, and the life was
the light of men. And the light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not.

4. O take heed, Christ is a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and is
come into the world in our very nature and humanity, only to suffer, and make
peace through the Blood of his Cross, but to tell us also that he is the light
and life in our Consciences. Colos. 1. verse. 26, 27, 28. Even the Mystery which
has been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest to his
Saints, To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of Glory: Whom we
preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

5. Man is fallen into death; he has awakened the spirit of all creatures in
him, of a Fox, a Lion, a Goat, a Swine, etc. Here is the death we are fallen
into, and to these we must absolutely dye in this lifetime, and become as
little children again; then shall we see the Law of Moses written in our
hearts, and find the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world: and if upon
the discovery of this divine light, ye repent; then shall you fulfill in your
selves the great Mystery, and through the mighty power of faith, witness Christ
risen a quickening Spirit in your hearts: Then you shall evidence it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; there is a natural body, and there
is a spiritual body: and so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living
Soul, the last man Adam a quickening Spirit. Now if we look into our selves
through the power of God, we shall see our selves, that we were a living soul,
free from the subjection of the spirits of the beasts of the world; and if
through the virtue and merit of Christ, we cooperate with him spiritually, we
shall find our selves become a quickened spirit, dead unto these natural,
corruptible desires. And thus shall we easily believe the Son of God was slain
himself in our humanity, by the Jews, if we do but reflect on our selves, and
find that we slay him in our hearts daily as sinners, unless we Regenerate our
souls; then are our sacrifices no more the sacrifices of Cain, but of Abel: 1
John 3. v. 6, 8. Whosoever abides in him, sins not: Whosoever sins, has
not seen him, neither known him.

He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning: for this purpose the Son of God was manifest, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil. And our freedom is in Righteousness. But Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. But as then
he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit, even so it is now. Read likewise the duty of the children of the
Spirit, Chap. 5. v. 22, 23, 24, 25. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance:
against such there is no Law. And they that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk
in the spirit.

6. Prepare therefore for him, and go out of darkness, which hinders you from
seeing him, lest he come like a Thief in the night, whilst you live in your
unbelief, worshipping of Images in your own wisdom and imagination only,
denying the presence of God, which is continually so near you. Acts 17.17.28.
That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find
him, though he be not far from every one of us. For in him we live, and move,
and have our being, as certain also of your own Poets have said, For we are
also his offspring.

7. O prevent these things; lest Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, when your
Soul after death shall rise out of your worldly will and fancy, committing
Idolatry with your own wisdoms, and excluding the wisdom of God; he will then
make all things manifest and apparent at his coming, showing you your misery,
by the Holy Ghost the Spirit of Truth, at which time your soul will lose the
harmony and virtue of the light of Christ.

8. One Adam was created a living soul, and another must become a quickening
Spirit; now the Virgin-fire that is in every man's soul, must consume all its
wisdom and its selfishness, which it has got by falling from the Will of God,
and Regenerate the same: The mortification of the body is only in order to
that work; here nothing but the Virgin-fire of faith can prevail, the wisdom of
man is foolishness before God. This is the single Talent that is given to every
man; but if he bury the same in the ground, it is given to him that has ten
Talents; it is the light in every man's conscience, which according to its
proportion would augment it self; but the slothful servant says this is very
difficult to do, to mortify the body, and Regenerate the soul entirely
likewise. Who can do this? can this ever be done in this life? sure I am it
must be done before we can possess Heaven, no impure and undefiled thing can
enter there: then if a man may do it when he dies, why not an hour before? if
an hour before, why not an year before? etc. It is true, the Cherubins stands
here with a flaming sword. Genesis 3. v. 24. So he drove out the man: and he
placed at the East of the Garden of Eden, Cherubins, and a flaming Sword, which
turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. And till Christ be
formed in us Gal. 4.19. My little children of whom I travel in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you. This work cannot be done but then we shall see
him through faith. Ephesians. 3.17 18, 19. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in Love, may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height: And to
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all
the fullness of God. Whereby we comprehend him and find him to be a consuming
fire, Heb. 12.29. For our God is a consuming fire. 1 John 3. v. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Whosoever abides in him sins not: whosoever sins, has not seen him,
neither known him. Little children, let no man deceive you: he that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. He that commits sin is
of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning: for this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin because he is born of God. And chap. 5.18. We know that
whosoever is born of God sineth not: but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

8. And this is the great love which he has showed us, in giving us this
pearl, whereby we are made partakers of his Divine Nature, enabling us to be as
Gods with him to all Eternity, Psalm. 82.6. I have said, ye are Gods; and all of
you are children of the most High. And also 1 John 3. v. 1, 2, 3, Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God: therefore the world knows us not because it knew him not.
Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear, what we shall
be: but we know, that when we shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall
see him as he is. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself
even as he is pure. But to do this you must get into the Cross, the Virgin
fire, to the Bride, else there is no coming to the Bridegroom. For this is the
Saints Prerogative, the true Purgatory, 1 Pet. 4.12. Beloved, think it not
strange concerning the fiery Trial, which is to try you, as though some strange
thing happened unto you.

10. O let us take up but this Cross daily, and we shall enter into the Holy,
where Christ the only true High Priest will live in our hearts, making
continual Sacrifices, enlightening our souls, and reducing our knowledge into
practice. For this is the Fathers will, that we taste of his wrath, and that
suffering with his Son for well doing patiently, we may find him appeasing our
souls: this is divine reason whereby Christ is known in the spirit, in the
new birth; for by the wisdom of man we cannot comprehend him, he is
incomprehensible, he is only known in the spirit by his power and virtue, where
he reveals himself. Luke 10.21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and
said, J thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. 1 Cor. 1.17.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel: not with wisdom of words, lest the Cross of Christ should be
made of none effect. For the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish,
foolishness: but unto us which are saved, it is the Power of God. For it is
written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. For the
Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom. But we preach Christ
crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness:
But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the Power of God,
and the Wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God is wiser then men: and
the weakness of God is stronger then men. For ye see your calling brethren, how
that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things
which are mighty: And base things of the world, and things which are despised
has God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that
are, That no flesh should glory in his presence. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption: That according as it is written, He that
glories let him glory in the Lord. Chap. 2. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. And J, brethren, when J came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or
of wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God. For J determined not to
know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And J was with
you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. And my speech, and my
preaching was not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the Spirit, and of power: That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the Power of God. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are
perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world,
that come to naught: But we speak the Wisdom of God in a mystery: even the
hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world, unto our glory. Which none
of the Princes of this World knew: for had they known it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him. But God has revealed them unto us by his
spirit: for the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. For
what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him?
Even so the things of God knows no man but the spirit of God. And read
likewise, Heb. 8.10.11. For this is the Covenant that J will make with the
house of Israel after those days, says the Lord: J will put my Laws into their
mind, and write them in their hea ts, and J will be unto them a God, and they
shall be unto me a people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the
least to the greatest. And 1 John 2.26, 27. These things have J written unto
you concerning them that seduce you. But the anointing which ye have received
of him, abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you: but, as the
same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. Also 2 Pet. 1.19. We have
also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as
unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day Star
arise in your hearts.

Thus it is apparent we have a light within our selves, better then any candles
of our own wisdom, namely, the wisdom of Christ; a day star, that the Apostle
directs us to; and that the way to know Christ, and the only way, is, by the
inward unction, the Baptism of the Spirit. Now when our soul receives a glance
or beam of Gods wrath, thereby it reflects on its fall, and sin is made
manifest to our consciences, whereby we are overwhelmed with sorrow and grief
for a time. For where the entire will of sin is pierced quite through by
repentance, and so opened and searched, there the anointing Oil of Love,
penetrateth and heals all the wounds. Thus the Father Baptizeth, the Son
Sanctifies, and the Holy Ghost Orders All, and directs us to a new Life.
This is the manner wherewith the Holy Trinity Baptizeth in its Manifestations
in Man. Now beyond and besides this is the Trinity it self, God in one only
Good. Where we do not affirm that the Father is wrath the Son this or that
thing, but the good being in himself: But according to the great Mystery before
named in the fourth Paragraph, wherein he does manifest himself. For the
creation of man was made to this end and purpose only, namely, that God might
be known. Thus you may understand the Baptism of Regeneration in the inward
spring and fountain of the soul, where the Father Baptizeth with fire, whereby
we are inwardly made sensible of the bitter sufferings of Christ, 2 Cor. chap.
11. v. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. So that we are brought into bondage and slavery and
afflicted by wrath, that we may be freed by Love, who pacifieth the same,
whereby we are likewise made apprehensive of obtaining a victory. Thus the soul
is wounded by the wrath of God, healed by the Love of God, and by the Holy
Ghost the comforter, baptized with a new life and understanding. I speak not
against the outward Baptism of water, cause Christ himself used the same,
provided it be used as a Figure only of this. Now when we are thus baptized,
we are often in communion with God, eating his body and drinking his blood: and
it were well if upon this account we met at the Supper of the Lord, breaking
bread daily, Joh. 6.33. For the bread of God is he which comes down from
Heaven, and gives life unto the world. And Verse. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54,
55, 56, 57, 58. J am that bread of life. Your Fathers did eat Manna in the
wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which comes down from Heaven, that
a man may eat thereof, and not dye. J am the living bread, which came down from
heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that
J will give, is my flesh, which J will give for the life of the world.

Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, J say unto you, Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Who so
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has eternal life, and J will raise him
up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and J in him. As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats me,
even he shall live by me. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not
as your fathers did eat Manna, and are dead: he that eats of this bread shall
live for ever. And verse. 63, 64, 65. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh
profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you they are Spirit, and they
are life. But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning, who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. And he
said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were
given unto him of my Father. But this spiritual Resurrection, this spiritual
Baptism and Supper of the Lord, (Joh. 5.21, 25. Verily, verily J say unto you,
He that hears my words, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.
Verily, verily J say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live) is that
which Lucifer defaceth and brings into contempt in the very hearts of men, by
endeavoring to make them believe this to be a Fancy, or else to neglect and
put off the time, whereby the great Mystery of Christ is overruled and trampled
upon: which he cannot help, unless, together with him, we sink down into the
Cross, the wrath of God; then the light shines in our hearts, and by that
means we see our fall, our danger, and our Redeemers great love and mercy. Luke
13. v. 34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together,
as a Hen does gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not? Here indeed
is the unspeakable Mystery, that Christ in whom the Trinity dwells bodily,
(Colos. 2. verse. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily)
should take upon him our nature, and suffer therein a reproachful life and
ignominious death, by the Prince of the world, the Prince of the air, for the
Redemption of mankind, and that the same Christ should be manifested himself
through faith in the mystical Body of his Saints, whereby he forms himself in
us, out of himself, that so he may be brought into an Image, thereby to know
himself: 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord. Therefore praying that our Lord Jesus, would
establish and strengthen us, I will name some Texts, whereby we are commanded
to suffer with him, without which we cannot reign with him. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea
and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. 2 Timothy
2.11. It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live
with him. Verse 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him,
he will also deny us. Luke 9.23. And he said unto them all, Jf any will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
Verse 26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his glory, and in his Fathers,
and of the holy Angels. Romans 6. verse. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. 2 Cor. 1. v. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. Heb. 12. v. 6. For whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. Verse 7.
Jf ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with Sons: for what son is he
whom the Father chasteneth not? Verse 8. But if ye be without chastisements,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.

Ephesians. 3.20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all
that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us.

Gal. 2.20. J am crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not J, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which J now live in the flesh, J live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

1 Pet. 2.20. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God. Verse. 21. For even hereunto were ye
called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps.

1 Pet. 4.13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy. Verse 14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ happy are
ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you: on their part he is
evil spoken of, but on your part is he glorified. Verse 16. Yet if any man
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this
behalf. Verse 17. For the time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of
God; and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel of God?

1 Pet. 5.10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you.

To search further and beyond this we have neither ground nor authority; for
it is in the Will of God himself whose Will is infinite, and no man can possibly
attain to the knowledge of what farther Creations he will make.

An Addition, Unfolding and clearing some Things only touched upon.
REader, To prevent mistakes, in some obscure Mysteries, and my expressions on
them, take these few Explanations, before J bid thee Farewell.

1. Whereas in page 3. I make mention, of the Spirit of the Virgin Mary, know,
there is a twofold mystical Virgin; the one is the pure Word or Doctrine of
God, out of which Christ is born in us according to the Flesh; the other is the
eternal Wisdom of God, out of which Christ is brought forth in us according to
the Spirit; and this last is the Virgin, which we here meant.

2. Whereas in that page also, and page 4. line 7. we speak of the Bride of
Christ, this also is twofold; the one is the Jerusalem, which comes down from
God out of Heaven, which the promised Spirit, the everlasting Kingdom of
Righteousness, that descended upon the Apostles in the day of Pentecost:
concerning which you may read more at large, Jer. 3.16. And it shall come to
pass when ye be multiplied and increased in the Land, in those days, says the
Lord, they shall say no more, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord; neither shall
it come to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it,
neither shall that be done any more. Revel. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I
make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I will
write upon him the Name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, which is
the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God; and I will
write upon him my new Name. And Chap. 21.2. And J John saw the holy City, the
new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned
for her Husband. Of which Jerusalem, we also make mention, page 10. line 3. out
of the fourth Chapter to the Galatians: Our Jerusalem above is free. The other
Bride of Christ, is his beloved Spouse the Church, at which the Apostle speaks
at large, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, etc. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it.

26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word.

3. Whereas page 5. line 6, 7, 8. we declare, that after the peace and love of
God are perfected in us, we find the beasts who lived before within us in
enmity, now agreeing with each other, as sometime those in Noah's Ark lived in
amity: we desire you to understand, that there are two sorts of lusts, desires
and affections in us; the one of these are reformed according to upright
nature, and kept in due subjection to the Spirit, having a true proportion and
temperature among themselves; and these are the beasts here meant, which were
signified by the clean beasts that entered into Noah's Ark: and according to the
tradition of the Hebrews, these had a distinct or several room apart for
themselves in the Ark. The other are unnatural and inordinate thoughts, lusts,
and passions; these are the brute beasts which we do awaken, by breaking our
wills off from the will of God: of which beasts we spoke page 7, in the 4 last
lines; in the beginning of page 8. and in the 9 also; and these are very soul,
unclean, and deadly beasts.

4. Whereas page 8. line 12 and 13, we said, Then you shall evidence that it is
sown a natural body, and it is raised a spiritual body, there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual body; our clear intent was to intimate, that
besides our outward body of the four Elements, which shall be raised up again
in one pure Element: according to some writers, which are Authors of singular
credit, there is an inward body of inordinate members, which must be sown or
buried in mortification, that a new spiritual and incorruptible body may rise
up in stead thereof.

5. Whereas, page 12. line 11 and 12. there is mention of one and another
Adam, one of them was created a living soul, and another must become a
quickening Spirit, as it is there hinted, for there is a twofold Adam, so
termed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.45. And so it is written, The first man Adam
was made a living soul, the last man Adam was made a quickening Spirit. And so
much we have expressly mentioned, page 8. line 17 and 18. where we used the
words of the Apostle, though we coted him not. The first Adam may be
understood, both of our first parent, and of our earthly and natural man also;
but the second Adam or man from Heaven is Christ himself, of which the first
was a figure, as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 5. v. 14. Nevertheless death
reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, who was the figure of him that was to come.

6. Whereas we say, page 17 line 1 and 2, But to do this you must get you into
the Cross, the Virgin fire, and into the Bride; we would not be so understood,
as if these three were one and the same thing: for, first, The Cross in a large
sense and meaning signifies the whole work of our Humiliation, Repentance and
Regeneration, as page 19. line 1 and 2. we use it, where we with S. Paul, 1
Cor. 1.18. say, that the preaching of the Cross of Christ is to them that
perish, foolishness; but to them, etc. And thus to sink down in our selves by
the sense of Gods wrath, and to become humble, penitent, and tractable, to do
and suffer the will of the Lord, is the first step to that Cross, of which we
give a touch in many places, as page 22. li. 13. page 16. and page 30. and
lines 12, 13. But the spiritual Cross in a more peculiar notion, is the like
patience or sufferance of Christ, through which we dye voluntarily unto all
temptations and allurements of sin, and are enabled to persevere in the
greatest trials of faith, till through the power of Christ's assisting grace we
have gotten the victory. And upon this account S. James exhorts us thus, Chap.
1. v 3, 4. But let patience have her perfect work in you, that you may be
perfect and entire, wanting nothing. But the Virgin fire, or fire of Faith, is
in it self a fire of Light, a Love-fire, and yet a consuming fire to all
darkness and iniquity: And finally, the Bride is that Jerusalem aforesaid,
which follows in order after the iniquity is consumed.

7. Whereas we make mention also in page 17. line 5. first of the Saints
Purgatory, and immediately after of the fiery Trial out of 1 Pet. 4.12. we took
occasion from the purging fire which we had mentioned, to speak of our
condition and trouble, which we must necessarily pass through, whilst we are
under the Refiners hand; but the fiery Trial it self arises not so much from
that fire which in it self is soft and gentle, as from the fiery darts and
temptations of the Devil, mentioned by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all
taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked: and from fierce and fiery persecutions, by which the
Saints are sometimes tried also.

8. Whereas in the same 17 page, line 12. we say, That by taking up our Cross
daily, which is the sufferance of Christ aforesaid, we enter into the Holy, the
sacrifices which we through the help of Christ offer up unto God therein, are
our sin offerings of Repentance, our whole burnt-offering of mortification, and
our death-offering in passing through a spiritual, but yet a temporary Hell,
and all this in conformity to Christ's voluntary offering himself upon the
Cross, and sufferings in the flesh, which is the thing we hinted at in page 4.
line 8, 9, 10. the words are these, namely, Who comes through fire to drink
of the living waters, into the inward society of Love: yet through this Holy we
enter into the most Holy, where Christ the chief high Priest first brings unto
us gifts and offerings of unvaluable price, as the final Remission of sins, the
heavenly Bread and Wine, whereof that of Melchisedec was a figure, and the
everlasting Benediction of all heavenly Treasures, of which you may see more at
large, Hebr. 7. v. 3. Without father, without mother, without descent, having
neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God,
abides a Priest continually: and then enables us to offer unto God the
sacrifices of everlasting praises; not of sins, but remission of sins. Thus you
may understand the Authors meaning to the Hebrews, how Melchisedec was Without
father, mother, having neither descent, beginning of days, nor end of life; but
made like unto the Son of God: which St. Peter confirms also in his first
Epistle, Chap. 1.23. Being born again not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever. And Chap.
2.5, 6. Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

6. Wherefore it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a ch of
corner stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded.

Lastly, Whereas we alledg diverse Texts of Scriptures in our four last Pages,
to arm us for our duty and conflict of suffering with Christ, that afterward
we may reign with him; we conceive, that most of those Scriptures speak of
those inward afflictions and sufferings which we must pass through, under Gods
chastisements and Satan's temptations, whilst we suffer the loss, death and
burial of all our own imaginations, carnal wisdom, chosen holiness, self-made
righteousness, turbulent zeal, as well as of our sinful lusts, desires and
affections; and that those testimonies aforesaid are not to be restrained to
the oppositions and persecutions of wicked men only.

Loving Friend,
HE that continually sinketh down through Faith, waiting in patience, besides
his continual preservation; when it is meet for him, the Lord does comfort him
with unspeakable joy, letting him know, that he has ordained him to inherit
the Promises; For by that means when the Virgin will reigns, our own wills
forsake their title, and are secured by that of our Lord Jesus: For a pure
heathenish Virgin yeildeth to no defiled desire, but enters into the unity of
Virtue; whereby she is protected by the harmony of an unknown Power, arising
from the divine Law written in her heart, namely, the spirit of Abel, who
delivers her from the multiplicity of treacherous and perfideous delights:
Therefore by faith let us appeal to our only Redeemer and Protector, leading us
to that pure and undefiled Champion and Conqueror, Christ Jesus, in our Souls,
who fights for us only, and not after the manner of Aaron, for himself and
others, showing always his almighty Power when we have most need of the same.

I heartily rejoice, that in the Name of the Lord you purpose to meet; for
wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst
of them: upon which account likewise, by the joint custom and consent of those
who meet within the Walls, called Aldermary Church, upon the first day of the
week, I am, if God determine not otherwise, resolved to meet there, where I
doubt not but many of the children of God will meet, coming singly in his Name,
to receive spiritual promises; therefore let not place divide the unity of our
spirit: so we shall at the same time in several places, through faith in God,
receive in his holy Name, what is necessary: So professing my self your
unfeigned Friend, for the love you bear to our Lord Jesus, I remain yours.

Dear Friend,
THe Grecians did abound in natural wit, and lived much in bondage under the
false will, namely their own will, being very ambitious of self-humane wisdom
and reason, that certainly was the Idol that more then in an ordinary measure
they worshipped; therefore the Apostle said unto them, 1 Cor. 2. verse. 6, 7, 8,
9.

6. Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of
this world, nor of the Princes of this world that come to naught.

7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which
God ordained before the world, unto our glory.

8. Which none of the Princes of this world knew; for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

9. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him.

Men certainly are as inclinable and willing by false rules to adorn themselves
with unregenerated and unbeleeving wit and wisdom, and set up their Rest
therein, as women to adorn and embelish themselves with overmuch art and care,
which breeds vain thoughts and vile inclinations, nourishing thereby the
false will, that leads into temptation; the former being thereby inclined to
determine the will of God, regulating and governing the same by his
comprehension, the latter the will of Nature by art and dexterity; whereby
knowledge in man, and ingenuity in women, is made captive to the false depraved
will: Yet Nature when she returns again, and yeildeth obedience to the will
of God, is good; for Nature her self stands, and has its center and being
therein: But our own will, that is artificial, it is a violent possession, a
false usurped propriety, a peculiar self-conceited selfishness, gotten by Adam
when he fell from Gods will into his own: O therefore return unto the will of
God again; for the life of faith more by far excels our own wisdom and
willing, then transitory and corruptible Nature in her perfection does excel
sophisticated and counterfeited Art; therefore I hope the good will in us will
enable us to sink down into the Cross, and crucify the bad will; then shall we
know and plainly understand the mystery of Christ crucified, that immortal and
pure Wisdom, that incorruptible and resplendent Beauty. Thus may you clearly
see the Apostles meaning, 1 Cor. 1.22, 23, 24. For the Jews require a sign, and
the Greeks seek after wisdom.

23. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto
the Greeks foolishness.

24. But unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of
God, and the wisdom of God.

Let none hence conclude, 'cause I speak of right and regenerated Nature, that
I would endeavor to persuade women to think well of transitory and fadable
beauty; no, I would most humbly have them look after that eternal and unfadable
one, 1 Pet. 3. v. 2, 3, 4. While they behold your chaste conversation coupled
with fear.

3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the hair,
and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel.

4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

And Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. In like manner also, that women adorn
themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array:

But (which becomes women, professing godliness) with good works.

Now as corruptible beauty is destructive to it self and others, unless the
inward man be renewed; for in Christ there is no difference twixt man and
woman: Galat. 1.27, 28. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ.

28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

For the vanity, pride and lust of artificial and sophisticated beauty allayeth
very much virtue and piety, alluring and inwardly kindling vile thoughts,
interrupting many times the simplicity and innocence of a harmless
conversation. Thus it is with those likewise who live in artificial painted
self-reason, making faith subservient to their humane wisdoms: And the Apostle
found it so amongst the Grecians, who gloried in their self artificial
knowledge, not regarding the mystery of Christ crucified. Hereby we may
conclude, that the wit of man unregenerated is like unto horsedung, which
before it is well rotted spoileth all the moulds it is mixed with: Repentance
and Resignation fitteth every man only; wherefore the Apostle says, 1 Corinthians. 1. verse. 23. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness. They indeed would reign with Christ,
but it must be in their own artificial wills, not in his; in their own false
wisdoms, not in his: Fain they would live with him, but not dye with him; know
him they would most willingly, suffering for them; but to suffer with him, by
no means that: They would fain have his Power and Crown, but not his faith,
virtue and patience: Like a seed that would fain be a fine flowr, and have a
fine scent, but not go into the earth to rot, putrify and dye.

Take this Direction.
PAtience is the divine Water, Humility the divine Earth, and Faith the divine
Sun; Love and Charity the divine Man Christ himself in the Spirit regenerated
from thence. Now as all things proceed from Water falling into the Earth, being
percolated and strained by virtue of the Suns warmth: So likewise is it in the
eternal Nature, as in this temporary; where the natural man is made of a clod
of earth, nourished by moisture, circulated and digested by heat: Even so the
inward man Christ is generated; Humility is the earth of which he is made,
Patience the water with which he is nourished, and Faith the Sun of divine
Righteousness, by which he is digested, circulated, and brought to perfection,
whereby God is regenerated in us, namely, love and charity. This is the
Process; if any one practice the same, the vail shall be drawn from off their
heart, and the great Mystery shall be made manifest in them, in their several
proportions, according as God has ordained: Colos. 1. verse. 26, 27, 28, 29.
Even the Mystery which has been hid from ages, and from generations, but now
is made manifest unto his Saints,

27. To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this
Mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.

28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

29. Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working which works
in me mightily.



Farewell.
FINIS.

