SOME REMARKS Upon a Book, entitled, Christ's Lambs defended against Satan's
rage, etc. Being the Quakers Answer to The Quakers Unmasked, etc.
In a Letter to E. S. Esquire
LICENSED, June 19. 1691.
SIR,
HAving had the curiosity and opportunity of reading, The Quakers Unmasked,
Their Double dealing and False-heartedness discovered, etc. I thought it
impossible for the Quakers to vindicate themselves from that Authors Charge;
which made me desirous to read their Answer; and having perused it, I can
scarce forbear to Remark some few Passages, which are clear Confutations of
their boasted Innocence, Plainness, and Christian Charity.

In the Advertisement to the Reader, G. Whitehead takes notice that The Quakers
Unmasked, etc. was sent them in Manuscript in the year 1677. and that Liberty
of Conscience being established by Law, and placed upon the Book in writing, is
the cause of its now publication. Which (says G. W.) looks as if he envyed our
present Liberty. Behold the Spirit of this Answerer! Mr. Pennyman kept his
Books unpublished for 13 years together, lest it might be any occasion of the
Quakers Persecution; but when Liberty of Conscience is established by Law, he
publishes 10 or 11 of them, presuming there is now no danger of their being
persecuted. Does this look as if he envyed their present Liberty, and not
rather that he was glad of it, as no doubt he is.

In p. 6. to the Reader. Our Adversary, again p 14. (says he) deals very
unfairly and unjustly by G. W. about some of our Friends, saying, They give
forth Writings from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God, and by the same Spirit
and Power that was in the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles; unto which he
falsely adds, And their so speaking (G. W. says) is of as great Authority as
the Scriptures and Chapters are, and greater; his words (and their so speaking)
are J. P's own Abuse and Perversion. Now I beseech you, Sir, read the Passage
in p. 14. and see wherein J. P's Abuse and Perversion lies. It lies in this,
that he added these words [ and their so speaking] and did not put them in a
different Character, to distinguish them from G. W's words, though they did not
alter the sense at all; if you leave them out, the Passage is as much to the
same purpose, as if they were in. Did ever any Writer charge his Adversary with
Abuse and Perversion upon so slender an account? What an affront is it to the
simple-hearted Reader to write at this rate? This is the Man that in his Letter
to J. O. threatens Mr. P. farther to detect and unmask him if he will not be
reduced to Christianity. Does he mean by Christianity, Quakerism, which it
seems teaches him to use the basest Equivocations and Slights that can be found
in any Writer?

Of his Book, p. 3. He utterly denies it as a Slander, that the Quakers
formerly exhorted Men to fight and would fight themselves. I must refer you to
The Quakers Unmasked, etc. to judge whether that is a Slander, or not? It will
abundantly satisfy you, whilst you understand their Writings in the plain
honest sense of the Words without their after Equivocations. J. P cites one of
the, Quakers Ministers, saying, We directed all People to the Spirit of God in
them, and if that led them to fight, I had nothing against it; for this, says
G. W. he quotes, fol. 4. but tells us not what Book. But why did he not tell J.
P so 13 years ago when he desired to know what Errors they sound in the
Quotations, (if there were any; however to satisfy him that it was a true
citation, he took it out of the Quakers Book, where Foreign Letters were
recorded, which was first in J. O's custody and afterward in J. P's.

P. 4. The Quakers tell Rich. Protector, 'That he would walk with the Lord, and
preserve his People, then thy Name shall be greater than was thy Fathers, and
the numberless number of this [Now] distressed People will be unto thee a
strength, and stand by thee, and Defend thee and thy just Government. Sir, If
you had been Protector, I persuade my self, you would have thought these People
would have fought to defend you and your Government: But whatever they or you
thought then, the meaning now is, according to G. W. etc. they would defend him
and his Government, By Righteousness, Prayers, and Faith, and by Contributions,
Taxes, etc. or the fear of the Lord, as in the days of Jehosaphat. Would you
not judge that Man perjured, that should swear Allegiance in such terms, with
such a meaning? And must we not take the Quakers words for as binding as an
Oath?

Next, p. 5. you will please to note what G.W. Answers to the Charge of
upbraiding others with that which themselves, for many years, were as deeply
concerned and engaged in, etc. To all which, says G. W. I do conscientiously
Answer, He has most grossly and palpably belyed the People called Quakers in
these Passages diverse ways. First, in rendering them, without exception of
Persons, not only Justifiers of the late Wars, and what had been done therein,
without exception of things done, but also equally concerned with the
Presbyterians, Independents, and others therein. But do the Quakers when they
charge these things upon the Presbyterians, etc. make any exception of Persons
or Things? And yet it is well known, and it is proved out of their own writings
in The Quakers Unmasked, etc. that their Chief Leaders approved of the greatest
things done in the late Wars against the King, and to his Person; whereas the
Presbyterians generally dis-approved of them. Besides they say, their giving
forth Papers or Printed Books, is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God, and
that their Preachers are guided by an Infallible Spirit, and that they are of
one Mind and Judgment, and the like; and therefore an indefinite, and general
charge will affect them more generally than other Parties.

G. W. says, p. 6. The War began in 41. and in 48 the King was Beheaded, and
all this while no Quakers heard of, till about 50.51, 52. when there was no
Wars in England for them to be concerned in, how false then is J P. to say, The
Quakers were as much, or more, concerned in the War against the King as any
others. But G. W. confesses, that diverse who have been since, and now of us,
[Quakers,] have formerly been concerned in the late Wars. And J. P. has made
evident their approbation of what was then done, and that many that turned
Quakers in the Armies, continued there till they were turned out, that the
Protector is blamed for putting them out by G. Fox and others, that they are
called, Sober Men and true Hearts that feared God and trembled at His Word,
valiant Captains, Soldiers, and Officers, it may be for saying thou to a single
Person, or for wearing their Hats, etc. the distinguishing Characters of
Quakers from others. Whereas, he says, there was no Wars in England in
50.51.52. it is a piece of his cunning, and is false; for Worcester Fight was
in the year 51. and Sir George Booth's Insurrection in 1659. when the Quakers
gave intelligence, calling them Rebels, for but endeavoring to bring in the
King; and for some years there were Wars both in Scotland and Ireland, and upon
the Sea, and in Flanders. See E. Burrough's Alarm Sounded, etc. 1659. The
Quakers Unmasked, etc. p. 6. 9. You see then how G. W's Answer is both false
and deceitful

P. 7. 8. G. VV. charges J. P. with an apparent lie, in saying, the Quakers had
been engaged in the same Cause, so as to Preach up Battles, etc. But I pray
Sir, what difference is there between Preaching up Battles, etc. and exhorting
Generals, Officers, and Soldiers, to go forth against mighty Enemies till they
had subdued them, and set up their Standard a top of Rome, and done many other
things which were to be done by Fighting? And that in the Quakers Spirit. See
E. B's Alarm Sounded, etc. p 28.

P 9, 10. G.W. Commends the Quakers for their forbearance toward J. P. and is
confident that had J. P. looked upon them as Fighters, etc he durst not have
adventured to have given them such frequent and public occasions of
provocations and frequent disturbances and interruptions. To this, J. P. says,
he has always been careful never to interrupt them, nor to give them any
disturbance otherwise than by speaking a few words, either before they began to
Preach, or when any one of them had done Preaching; and though the words which
he spoke they could not gainsay, but were true; yet because they looked upon t,
that in what he spoke he meant them therefore (notwithstanding his peaceable
behavior) he has sometimes found himself in much danger from the Quakers, who
have frequently done violence to him them selves, and that in the place where
he has a Propriety.

P. 10. They would excuse G. Fox in what he says against an Earthly King, etc.
by turning it into an Earthly oppressing King, and setting an Earthly King over
them, p. 11. But did not King Charles the Second (to whom they addressed so
early, professing their Innocence formerly, and their present Truth and
Fidelity to him) challenge the Supreme Power over the Church? Are not all these
Elders Christians, that will dote so much of an Earthly King Traitors against
Christ? says G. Fox; And whom did they dote upon but Charles 2 (and afterward
upon King James) whom the Quakers do now love, own, and honor? Neither do you
read, says G. F. that there ever was an Earthly King since the days of the
Apostles, but amongst the Apostate Christians. So then according to their own
Principle, when King Charles 2. was among the Quakers he was among Apostate
Christians; or else they temporiz'd and changed their Principles, holding that
there might be an Earthly King among true Christians. And how could they
profess their Innocence to the King, and that none had any just cause against
them, since they had maintained such Principles as aforesaid? The case of the
Prophet Samuel was far different from that of the Quakers, he was chief
Magistrate himself, and they a little part of a People that had put to Death
their King, and kept out the Heir by Arms, (of both which the Quakers
sufficiently approved.) Now, suppose, Samuel had been the Representative of the
Quakers, and the Heir made King contrary to his mind and endeavor, would he
have addressed him, and said. You are not acquainted, O King, with my Principle
and Practice, neither have known my Innocence and Sufferings, they that speak
against me as a Person that was an Opposer of your Kingship, and did vehemently
exhort the People from subjecting themselves to your Arbitrary and Oppressive
Power, had no just ground for that Charge. I love, own, and honor you and your
Government. Might not the King have answered him, Are not you ashamed, Samuel,
to play the Hypocrite in this gross manner? Do you brag of your Principle, and
Practice, and Innocence before me in this matter, since if the People had acted
according to your Principle, and done as you would have had them, I should
never have recovered my Kingdoms? If you are innocent, who is guilty? Is this
your Innocent Plainness? Who then is Equivocating and Deceitful? Your Pride
will not suffer you to acknowledge any Error in Principle or Practice, because
ye have professed to speak and write from the immediate Eternal Spirit of GOD,
though you are found fallible and foolish as other Men.

P. 15. The Quakers Unmasked, is cited, saying, Are not they in their own
Judgments become Apostates, for now they say we love, own, and honor an
Earthly King. G. W. answers, p. 16. And where do we use these very words
Earthly King on this occasion, but that we love, own, and honor the King,
(whom here this Mau has judged an Earthly King,) does this show us to be
Apostates. Remark Did you ever read a more frivolous Answer? Was it any other
King but that very King Charles 2. whom they had writ so bitterly against,
under the Name of an Earthly King? he was an Earthly King before, when they
said, They were Traitors against Christ that will dote so much on an Earthly
King; but now the Quakers love, own, and honor him, he shall not be called an
Earthly King. He was an Earthly King before when the Episcopals and
Presbyterians doted on him; but now he is become the Quakers King he must be
somewhat else; I presume not a Heavenly King; but this is somewhat of the
Quakers plainness.

P. 19. G.W. says, I am persuaded that reproving him [ O. C. Protector] for
putting such [as feared GOD, sober Men and true Hearts, because of their
faithfulness to the LORD,] out of the Army for their Consciences, was MORE upon
his breach of Promise, than with an intent to have them always continue in it,
in order to War and Fight. Here G. W. or whoever writ this passage, would seem
to have some sense of Conscience; for his saying MORE is a comparative with
what follows; and argues that it was written with an intent to have had them
always to continue in the Army in order to War and Fight, though MORE upon his
breach of Promise. I doubt we shall not find G. W. etc. guilty of so much
openness again throughout the whole Book. Do not the Quakers hold that none
fear GOD truly and rightly but themselves? That they are in the Truth, and none
but they; and only among them is GOD known?

Christ was not contradictory to himself in bidding his Disciples to sell their
Garments, and buy Swords, and consequently to wear Swords (as Peter did,)
because He says my Kingdom is not of this World, or from hence; but Christ was
contradictory to the Quakers sense of that saying, because if it was not lawful
to Fight, in any case, Christ would never have bid them buy Swords: But I did
not intend to argue the lawfulness of Fighting, only G. W. brings it in
needlessy.

P. 21. One of their chiefest Preachers had said, It is no Rebellion to call
away those in Power; by which J. P. understands to Depose those in Power that
perform not their Trust: G. W. calls this a perverse addition of a meaning, as
if to call away and to Depose were both one in common acceptance. But G. W. is
not pleased to tell us what other thing was meant by it, and I am persuaded
that no Man but a fore-warned Quaker will take them for other than both one.

But I must hasten; read his 23 page, and you will find it amount to this, Had
you [the Army] been faithful to the Power of the LORD GOD, you had gone into
Spain to require the Blood of the Innocent, -- and knocked at Rome Gates, etc.
[And done wonderful great things by wicked and unchristian Fighting, or
otherwise by the fear and terror of your Power, Arms, and Conquests without
Fighting,] or as the Host of the Midianites fled and were overcome. and yet not
by Fighting on Gideon 's part, but by a mean Stratagem. Quere, Whether they
that kill by Stratagem do not Fight? And when the Ephraimites slew Oreb and
Zeeb, and brought their Heads to Gideon, and pursued Midian, they did not
Fight? Judges. 7.25. And whether Barack, Jepthah, Samson, David, Samuel, and
the Prophets, who by Faith subdued Kingdoms, and turned to flight the Armies of
the Aliens did not Fight? G.W. has found out all these ways of an Army's
Conquering without Fighting. Sir, I know you are an impartial Man, can you
think seriously (not that any Man to whom the Quakers wrote, or any Man that
should read what they wrote, would understand them in any such sense, without
Fighting; for I take it for manifest no Man did; but) whether they that wrote,
or even the Quakers themselves, (till now they are pressed with these
passages,) ever thought of such Senses? And if not, where is the Quakers
plainness, whereof they so nauseously boast?

P. 24. G. W. says, It cannot consist with our Christian Principle, so much as
to avenge our selves. Who are more ready to avenge themselves in Word and Print
than Quakers? How have they railed and reviled their Opposers? Witness those
Names G. W. calls Will. Rogers, F. Bugg, Tho. Crisp and others, in the Preface
to his Book, Judgment fixed, viz. Apostate-Informers, Treacherous Hypocrites,
False Brethren, and Deceitful Workers, Betraying Judas's, Devils Incarnate, who
having tossed their first love to Truth, and gone out from us, are become
degenerate, without Natural Affections, Dogs that are without, Wolves, and
raging waves of the Sea, that foam out their own shame. And a multitude of
other such like Names do they call those that oppose, and cannot conform to
their outward Prescriptions and Impositions, besides their frequent violence
with their own Hands, See the complaint of one of their own People, touching
this matter,

It has been their lot to be haled, (with violence) out of the Assemblies, --
Did I think to see the same violence offered in our Assemblies! Nay, but with
Sorrow, mine Eyes have seen pulling down, haling out, and thrusting forth of
our Meetings, and they went to the utmost, as far as their Power; and doubtless
they wanted not Will but Power to punish.

And although they exercise the Oppressions beforementioned, (and much more as
may be seen in the said Book;) yet by their deceitful flatteries, they make
People believe, That they are harmless, innocent, and peaceable People,
suffering and bearing wrong but not doing any. And if any Person write, or
speak their Grief, they will represent them under such terms as may render them
odious; and the more effectually to weaken their Testimonies they will fix upon
them scurrilous and contemptible Appellations, as Scotch-Men, Welsh men,
Tinker, Tailor, etc. Some of them utterly untrue; and to prevent an Inquisition
into the matter, they would make People believe, that they are envious,
malicious, and discomposed Spirits, bad, dirty, factions, and ranting Spirits,
who are gone from Truth, and are out of Truth. Such is the Portion of those
that appear in the least against their imperious, tyrannical, and lascivious
Actions: And whatever Man detected the Fallacies, and destructive Cheats of
imperious, disdainful Men, but was thus reproached?

Must it be Justice in them to complain of their Oppressions; and Envy, and
Malice, etc. in us to complain of ours? Their years are but few; yet verily
they have been exceeding expert to learn of the Papists, Subtilties. Spirit of
the Hat, p. 29, 36, 37.


and what is a great part of this Book of G W. etc. but avenging themselves of
J. P.? They might have said all they had to say in their own vindication,
without those manifold reproaches, and even Curses, which they belch out
against him, such as that in p. 30 God will smite thee, thou malicious
Hypocrite. Our Innocence shall rise up in Judgment against thee. Read to the
end of that Paragraph. Of this nature is G. W. glorying, that Jer. Ives not
long after his malicious Works against us [Quakers] was soon cut off by Death,
p. 33.

I must desire you, Sir, to read p. 34, 35, 36, 37. of their Vindication of
that Declaration to which Mr. P -- 's Name was amongst the rest subscribed, and
then judge what disingenuity and deceit there was in him, to insert the
substance of that Declaration, without telling that his own Name was to it,
since his Name was not to those after Declarations, which are inconsistent with
this. 2. Whether it is possible to give a more Equivocating Answer to any
charge, than G. W. etc. has given of this? They say, God might command
Thousands and Ten Thousands of His Saints, at this Day, to Fight in His own
Cause This passage, and the like, the Quakers left out in the reprint of E. B
's works, knowing (it seems) they would expose them in their clear sense; but
being brought to light, they then study to put an equivocal sense on them.
. But it must not be taken for granted (says G. W.) that therefore he would do
it. But that which GOD may do, and which we cannot yet believe that He will
make use of us in that way, and therefore for the present we are given up to
bear and suffer, etc We must needs conclude that this is one of those things
that GOD has made no DECREE to the contrary, but that He may Will it to be
done, even by us in the future, though He has not done it at present. And all
that G. W. etc. has Criticiz'd upon the Equivocalness of the term YET, does but
bewray his and their Equivocation; for though YET may be taken for
Nevertheless, when they say, but YET His Kingdom is not of this World;
notwithstanding it cannot be so taken, when they say, neither can we YET
believe, etc. but it must be taken to denote the time to this present [adhuc,
as yet] in exception to the time to come; especially when it is farther
explained by the clause, for the present; which is necessarily opposed to the
time to come, and imports clearly that Fighting may be commanded as in the
Future, as now bearing and suffering is commanded. I am very confident that G.
W. etc. cannot produce any one instance out of any Man's Writings, that
understood well the English Tongue, of the use of the term Yet, in such a
Phrase and Construction, in any other sense than of Time. But if all
unconcerned Readers must and will understand it in this sense, then G. W's
Answer is full of gross Equivocation.

These are the People that exalt themselves above all other Professors
whatsoever, that they reckon all them to be of the World, out of the Truth; and
themselves the Only People of GOD, and that they are in the Truth, and none but
they, Christ's Lambs, and the like. And for distinguishing themselves from
others, they took up some Observances, or Ceremonies, which did it effectually;
such as saying Thou not You to a single Person; calling no Man Master, but John
or Thomas, etc. not I thank you, but I receive thy love; not carrying the Feet
but the Head foremost of their Dead, and the like. They condemn utterly the
courtesy of putting off the Hat to any. In short, they affected singularity in
most things that were customary in England, how innocent soever: And under the
notion of not Swearing, they only refuse the Ceremony of an Oath, as the laying
the Hand upon, and Kissing the Book. Now, I pray Sir, what of true Religion, or
real Goodness, is there in these things? Suppose the whole World did observe
them, would they be at all the better for it? However, by these things they
have cut off all others, how religious and sincere soever. And if any Man
oppose what they say or do, instead of meekly answering, they are ready with
the most virulent, opprobrious, and threatening Language and Writings that can
be found in any sort whatever. They will diligently seek out, and take up any
thing may reproach one; and will insinuate Crimes that Men are most free from:
Thus have they changed the Meekness and Gentleness of Christianity, into
Fierceness and Churlishness; Humility and Modesty, into Arrogance and
Self-conceit; Peaceableness into Contentiousness; Mildness into Clamor; and
Blessing into evil speaking and reviling; Plainness and Simplicity, into
Equivocation and Craft; and all this under the Profession of the most unspotted
Innocence and Sincerity. Truth, Righteousness, and Holiness.

But I would not be understood to impute these Immoralities to the Quakers in
general, nor to all their Teachers and Leading Men, but to the Foxonian Party
that love to Govern and have the Pre-eminence, who have endeavored to suppress
those who have at any time proposed any thing contrary to their Sentiments.
Thus in a few years, instead of being led and guided, and being obedient every
one to the Light in himself, they were obliged to submit to the sense of the
greater number of the Governing BODY, though never so contrary to their own
sense. Nay, this Imposing Spirit proceeded so far, at a Quarterly Meeting in
Barbados, where they did not act with that Caution and Cunning as here at
London, that they made and subscribed this following Order, viz.

I desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Spiritual and Temporal
unto the Spirit of God in Men and Women's Meetings, as believing it to be more
according to the Universal Wisdom of God, than any particular measure in my
self, or any particulars with whom the Men and Women's Meetings have not Unity.

The Actings, Writings, and Speakings of that kind I have spoken of, being
observed by some W. Rogers, T. Crisp, F. Bugg, W. Macklow, J. Story, J.
Wilkinson, Charles Harris, J. Rance, Tho. Curtis, J. Ansloe, and many more.
among them, who were either too wise, or too honest to be persuaded, that
those corrupt Fruits could proceed either from the Spirit of God, or from the
Light within, that they grieved and mourned to see that excellent Principle of
Reformation, The Light in every Man, so grossly perverted and undermined, that
they were made to oppose and testify against them.

Sir, I might go on throughout G. W.'s etc. whole Book, and show many more
gross Equivocations, Palliations, and Deceits; but I will not proceed farther,
lest I may seem to question your Judgment, in not observing those things that
are so evident. But I think we that read Books have just cause of indignation
against those Quakers, who have the face to impose upon the World such
abominable Stuff, under the Notion of the Teachings of the Light, of the
unspotted Innocence and Christian sincerity. But it may reasonably be thought
they write not for vindication of themselves to those that are of the World,
(as they call all that are not in their Form;) but for their own Party, that
are so blindly addicted to their Leaders, that they swallow every thing they
say without consideration: Unhappy Men! that have given up their Minds to the
Glory of a singular Party, in contempt of all others, and can find no other way
of vindicating themselves. I may need your excuse for writing so much, and
therefore will now subscribe

Sir, Yours A. C.
May 23. 1691.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
AND besides what I said about Fighting, I am credibly informed, that some
Quakers have not only fought, but that with great Courage and Magnanimity. The
first I shall mention is Mr. William Mead an eminent Person, who being set upon
by three High-way-men, and having only a Cudgel, or Staff, in his Hand, did not
only bravely defend himself therewith, but knocked down one of the Robbers so
wounded, that the other were forced to carry him away, whilst Mr. Mead escaped
their Hands. The next shall be one Matthew Renshaw (Master of a Ship,) who
fought both with great and small Guns, till he was overpowered by the Turks.
Another, one John Thompson, who fought exceeding stoutly, and killed a great
many Men before he was taken by the Enemy. These two Masters were not only
Quakers themselves, but their Owners generally, if not every one, such. More
might be named, but these suffice to show that the Quakers will fight in a just
Cause, and that stoutly too; which puts me in mind again of G. Fox To the
Council of Officers, etc. p. 5. who says (of those that had been put out of the
Army for being Quakers,) Of whom it has been said among you, that they had
rather have had one of them than 7 Men, and could have turned one of them to
seven Men.

And since my writing the above, I have spoken with Mr. Pennyman touching the
Accusation against Stephen Crisp, mentioned in The Quakers Unmasked, folio p.
14. and which in their Answer, p. 14. they say, Steph. Crisp absolutely denies,
that he either forced him, or that the Party did show any dissatisfaction
before he Signed and Sealed the said Paper. Oh! what shall we say to these Men,
who not only use Equivocatious in their Writings, but do absolutely deny matter
of Fact? to which Mr. Pennyman was an Eye and Ear-Witness, and is ready to
attest it, if called thereto; but would not then subscribe as a Witness, being
greatly dissatisfied with the unworthiness of the demand.

I will add here something concerning the Nature of an Oath, whereby it may
appear that the Quakers are mistaken about it.

Of the Nature of an Oath.
WHen the Author to the Hebrews says ( Chapter 6.16.) Men verily Swear by the
greater; and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of all strife; he
plainly shows us, that an Oath is the greatest and utmost Evidence of Truth and
Sincerity that can be given; for if a Man openly appeals to GOD, who searches
the Heart, and therefore knows not only what is outward in Men's Words and
Actions, but their most inward thoughts, that Man gives the utmost assurance he
can possibly give; for he that falsifies in the prefence of Men, calling them
for Witnesses, who know the matter, and whose office it is to judge and punish,
incurs all that reproach, infamy and other punishments, which so great an
offense and abuse deserves: So he that falsifies in the presence of God,
calling Him for Witness, incurs the greatest punishments of Divine Vengeance,
as one that makes God Almighty a Partner and Confederate to a Lie,
presumptuously and to his very face. So that however God perhaps is not
expressly invocated to do vengeance upon him, yet in appealing to God as a
Witness, that is employed, because He is such a Witness as is also the Supreme
Judge, whose Justice and Truth is herein appealed to. Therefore calling God to
Witness is as much an Oath as any other form of Words, as having as much
evidence and assurance as any other Form whatever, and as great Penalties
attending it. Now to assert any thing in the presence of Men expressly, is all
one as to call them for Witnesses: So also to assert any thing in the presence
of God expressly, is all one as to call God for Witness.

Farther see several Forms of an Oath. viz.
I Do hereby testify in the Truth of my Heart, and in the Presence of HIM that
knows all things, and in the Presence of these Faithful Witnesses, [The
Quakers Form.] See Q Vnm. folio, p. 14.
etc. Or, GOD is my Witness. I call GOD to record on my Soul. The GOD and
Father of our LORD Jesus Christ knows that I lie not. GOD is Witness between me
and thee. Any of which (or the like) without laying the Hand on the Book, or
other Ceremony, or more Words, is not only an Oath, but, [as says a knowing,
judicious, and worthy Person,] if Authorized by Act of Parliament, is as much a
Legal Oath as any now in use amongst us.

And as the Quakers have been mistaken about an Oath, so they have been about
their paying of Taxes, in that they allowed and paid the Royal Aid Tax, and
that of carrying on the War against the Dutch, and the like; yet they would not
pay toward the Trained Bands, notwithstanding they are chiefly intended for a
Defense; and the other, not only to Defend but to offend our Neighbors, as the
Government sees cause. So that it is plain, the Tax they then refused was more
justifiable than that they allowed and paid, inasmuch as to Defend is more
allowable and justifiable than to Offend.

LONDON, Printed for J. Gwillim over against the Great James in
Bishops-gate-street, and R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1691.


