The FRAME OF THE GOVERNMENT Of the Province of Pennsylvania In America.

Printed, and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane in
Shoreditch, 1691.

The Frame of the Government of the Province of Pennsylvania, etc. in America.
TO all Persons to whom these presents may come: Whereas King Charles the
second, by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date
the Fourth Day of March, in the Thirty Third Year of the King, for diverse
Considerations therein mentioned, has been Graciously pleased to give and
grant unto me William Penn, by the Name of William Penn Esquire, Son and Heir
of Sir William Penn Deceased, and to my Heirs and Assigns, for ever, All that
Tract of Land or Province called Pennsylvania in America; with diverse great
Powers, Preheminences, Royalties, Jurisdictions and Authorities, necessary for
the well-being and Governing thereof. And whereas the King's Dearest Brother
James Duke of York and Albany, etc. By Deeds of Feoffment under his Hand and
Seal, duly perfected, bearing date the four and Twentieth day of August; One
Thousand Six Hundred Eighty and Two, of all that Tract of Land, lying and being
from Twelve Miles Northward of New Castle upon Delaware-River, in America, to
Cape Inlopen, upon the said River and Bay of Delaware Southward; Together with
all Royalties, Franchises, Duties, Jurisdictions, Liberties and Privileges,
thereunto belonging; Now know ye that for the well-being and Governing of the
said Province, and Territories thereunto annexed, and for the Encouragement of
all Freemen and Planters, that may be therein concerned, in Pursuance of the
Rights and Powers aforementioned, I the said William Penn, have declared,
granted and Confirmed, and by these presents for me, my Heirs and Assigns, do
Declare, Grant and Confirm, unto all Freemen, Planters and Adventurers, of, in
and to the said Province and Territories thereof, these Liberties, Franchises
and Properties, so far as in me lies, to be Held, Enjoyed and Kept by the
Freemen, Planters and Adventurers, of, and in the said Province of
Pennsylvania, and Territories thereunto Annexed forever.

Imprimis, That the Government of this Province and Territories thereof, shall
from time to time, according to the Powers of the Patent, and Deeds of
Feoffment aforesaid, Consist of the Proprietary and Governor, and the Freemen
of the said Province, and Territory thereof, in the form of a Provincial
Council and Assembly; which Provincial Council shall consist of eighteen
Persons, being three out of each County, and which Assembly shall consist of
thirty six Persons, being six out of each County, men of most note for their
Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, by whom all Laws shall be made, and Public Affairs
transacted, as is hereafter limited and declared.

2dly. There being three persons already chosen for every respective County of
this Province, and Territories thereof, to serve in the Provincial Council, one
of them for three Years; one for two Years, and one for one Year, and one of
them being to go off Yearly in every County: That on the tenth Day of the first
Month yearly forever after, the Freeman of the said Province and Territories
thereof, shall meet together in the most convenient place in every County of
this Province, and Territories thereof, then and there to choose one Person
qualified as aforesaid, in every County, being one third of the number to serve
in Provincial Council for three Years, it being intended that one third of the
whole Provincial Council, consisting and to consist of eighteen Persons,
falling off yearly, it shall be yearly supplied with such yearly Elections, as
aforesaid, and that one Person shall not continue longer than three Years: And
in case any Member shall decease before the last Election during his time, that
then at the next Election ensuing his decease, another shall be chosen to
supply his place for the remaining time he was to have served, and no longer.

3dly That after the first seven Years, every one of the said third parts that
goes yearly off, shall be incapable of being chosen again for one whole Year
following, that so all that are capable and qualified, as aforesaid, may be
fitted for Government, and have a share of the care and burden of it.

4htly. That the Provincial Council in all cases and matters of moment, as
their arguing upon Bills to be past into Laws, or proceedings about erecting of
Courts of Justice, sitting in Judgment upon Criminals impeached, and choice of
Officers in such manner as is herein after expressed, not less then two Thirds
of the whole, shall make a Quorum, and that the consent and approbation of two
thirds of the Quorum shall be had in all such cases or Matters of Moment. And
that in all cases and matters o^ lesser moment, one Third of the whole shall
make a Quorum, the Majority of which shall and may always determine in such
Cases and Causes of lesser moment.

5thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall have the Power of
preparing and proposing to the Assembly hereafter mentioned, all Bills which
they shall see needful, and that shall at any time be past into Laws within the
said Province and Territories thereof; which Bills shall be published and
affixed to the most noted place in every County of this Province and
Territories thereof twenty days before the meeting of the Assembly, in order to
passing them into Laws.

6thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall take care, that all
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, which shall at any time be made within the
Province and Territories, be duly and diligently executed.

7thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times have the
care of the Peace and Safety of this Province and Territories thereof; and that
nothing be by any Person attempted to the Subversion of this frame of Government.

8thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times settle and
order the Situation of all Cities and Market Towns in every County; m delling
therein all public Buildings, Streets, and Marketplaces, and shall appoint
all necessary Roads and Highways in this Province and Territories thereof.

9thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times have power
to inspect the management of the public Treasury, and punish those who shall
convert any part thereof to any other use, than what has been agreed upon by
the Governor, Provincial Council and Assembly.

10thly. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall erect and order all
public Schools, and encourage and reward the Authors of useful Sciences, and
laudable Inventions in the said Province and Territories thereof.

11thly. That one Third of the Provincial Council residing with the Governor,
shall with the Governor from time to time have the care of the management of
all public Affairs, relating to the Peace, Justice, Treasury and Improvement
of the Province and Territories, and to the good Education of Youth, and
Sobriety of the Manners of the Inhabitants therein, as aforesaid.

12thly. That the Governor or his Deputy shall always preside in the
Provincial Council, and that he shall at no time therein perform any public
Act of State whatsoever, that shall or may relate unto the Justice, Trade,
Treasury or Safety of the Province, and Territories as aforesaid, but by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Provincial Council thereof.

13thly. And to the end that all Bills prepared and agreed by the Governor and
Provincial Council, as aforesaid, may yet have the more full concurrence of the
Freemen of the Province and Territories thereof; It is declared, granted and
confirmed, that at the time and place in every County, for the choice of one
Person to serve in Provincial Council, as aforesaid, the respective Members
thereof at their said Meeting, shall yearly choose out of themselves six Persons
of most note for their Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, to serve in Assembly, as
their Representatives, who shall yearly meet on the twentieth day of the third
Month, in the Capital Town or City of the said Province, unless the Governor
and Provincial Council shall think fit to appoint another place to meet in;
where during eight days, the several Members may confer freely with one
another, and if any of them see meet, with a Committee, which shall be at that
time purposely appointed, to receive from any of them Proposals for the
alteration or amendment of any of the said proposed and promulgated Bills, and
on the nineth day from their so meeting, the said Assembly, after their reading
over of the proposed Bills by the Clerk of the Provincial Council, and the
occasions and motives for them being opened by the Governor, or his Deputy,
shall upon the Question by him put, give their Affirmative or Negative, which
to them seems best, in such manner as is hereafter expressed, but not less
than two thirds shall make a Quorum in the passing of all Bills into Laws, and
choice of such Officers as are by them to be chosen.

14th. That the Laws so prepared and proposed, as aforesaid, that are assented
to by the Assembly, shall be enrolled as Laws of this Province and Territories
thereof, with this Style, By the Governor, with the Assent and Approbation of
the Freemen in Provincial Council and Assembly met. And from henceforth the
Meeting, Sessions, Acts and Proceedings of the Governor, Provincial Council
and Assembly shall be styled and called, The Meeting-Sessions and Proceeding of
the Province of Pennsylvania, and the Territories thereunto belonging.

15th. And that the Representatives of the People in Provincial Council and
Assembly, may in after Ages bear some proportion with the increase and
multiplying of the People, the Numbers of such Representatives of the People
may be from time to time increased and enlarged, so as at no time the number
exceed seventy two for the Provincial Council, and two hundred for the
Assembly; the appointment and proportion of which Number, as also the laying
and methodizing of the choice of such Representatives in future time, most
equally to the division of the Country, or number of the Inhabitants, is left
to the Governor and Provincial Council to propose, and the Assembly to
resolve, so that the order of proportion be strictly observed, both in the
choice of the Council, and the respective Committees thereof, viz. one third to
go off, and come in yearly.

16th. That from, and after the Death of this Present Governor, the Provincial
Council shall, together with the succeeding Governor, erect from time to time
standing Courts of Justice, in such Places and Number as they shall judge
convenient for the good Government of the said Province and Territories
thereof; and that the Provincial Council shall on the thirteenth day of the
second Month, then next ensuing, elect and present to the Governor, or his
Deputy, a double number of Persons, to serve for Judges, Treasurer, and Master
of the Rolls within the said Province and Territories, to continue so long as
they shall well behave themselves in those Capacities respectively, and the
Freemen of the said Province in an Assembly met on the thirteenth day of the
third Month, yearly elect, and then Present to the Governor or his Deputy a
double number of Persons to serve for Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and
Coroners for the Year next ensuing, out of which respective Elections and
Presentiments, the Governor or his Deputy shall nominate and commissionate the
proper numbers for each Office the third day after the said respective
Presentiments, or else the first named in such Presentment for each Office, as
aforesaid, shall stand and serve in that Office the time before respectively
limited: And in cases of Death or Default, such vacancy shall be supplied by
the Governor and Provincial Council in manner aforesaid.

17th. That the Assembly shall continue so long as may be needful, to impeach
Criminals fit to be there impeached, to pass such Bills into Laws as are
proposed to them, which they shall think fit to pass into Laws, and till such
time as the Governor and Provincial Council shall declare, That they have
nothing further to propose unto them for their Assent and Approbation: and that
declaration shall be a Dismiss to the Assembly for that time. Which Assembly
shall be notwithstanding capable of assembling together upon the summons of the
Governor and Provincial-Council at any time during that year, if the Governor
and Provincial Council shall see occasion for their so assembling.

18th. That all the Elections of Members or Representatives of the People, to
serve in Provincial Council and Assembly, and all Questions to be determined by
both or either of them, that relate to choice of Officers, and all or any other
Personal matters, shall be resolved or determined by the Ballot; and all things
relating to the Preparing and passing of Bills into Laws, shall be openly
declared and resolved by the Vote.

19th. That at all times when the Proprietary and Governor shall happen to be
an Infant, and under the Age of one and twenty Years, and no Guardians or
Commissioners are appointed in writing by the Father of the said Infant, or
that such Guardian shall be deceased, that during such Minority, the Provincial
Council shall from time to time, as they shall see meet, constitute and appoint
Guardians and Commissioners, not exceeding three, one of which shall preside as
Deputy and chief Guardian, during such Minority, and shall have and execute,
with the consent of one of the other two, all the Power of a Governor in all
public Affairs and Concerns of the said Province and Territories thereof,
according to Charter; which said Guardian so appointed, shall also have the
care and oversight of the Estate of the said Minor, and be yearly accountable
and responsable for the same to the Provincial Council, and the Provincial
Council to the Minor when of Age, or to the next Heir in case of the Minor's
death, for the Trust before expressed.

20th. That as often as the days of the Month mentioned in any Article of this
Charter, shall fall upon the First day of the Week, commonly called the Lords
day, the business appointed for that day shall be differred till the next day,
unless in cases of Emergency.

21. And for the Satisfaction and Encouragement of all Aliens, I do give and
grant, that if any Alien, who is or shall be a purchasor, or who does or shall
inhabit in this Province or Territories thereof, shall decease at any time,
before he can well be naturalized, his Right and Interest therein shall
notwithstanding descend to his Wife and Children, or other his Relations, be he
Testate or Intestate, according to the Laws of this Province and Territories
thereof in such cases provided, in as free and ample manner, to all intents and
purposes, as if the said Alien had been naturalized.

22. And that the Inhabitants of this Province and Territories thereof may be
accommodated with such Food and Sustenance, as God in his Providence has
freely afforded, I do also further grant to the Inhabitants of this Province
and Territories thereof, liberty to fowl and hunt upon the Lands they hold, or
all other Lands therein, not enclosed, and to fish in all Waters in the said
Lands, and in all Rivers and Rivulets in and belonging to this Province and
Territories thereof, with liberty to draw his or their Fish on shore on any
man's Lands, so as it be not to the detriment or annoyance of the Owner thereof,
except such Lands as do lie upon Inland- Rivulets that are not boatable, or
which are or may be hereafter erected into Manors.

23. And that all the Inhabitants of this Province and Territories thereof,
whether Purchasors or others, may have the last worldly Pledge of my good and
kind Intentions to them and their Heirs, I do give, grant and confirm to all
and every one of them full and quiet Possession of their respective Lands, to
which they have any lawful or equitable Claim, saving only such Rents and
Services for the same, as are or customarily ought to be reserved to Me, my
Heirs and Assigns.

24. That no Act, Law or Ordinance whatsoever shall at any time hereafter be
made or done by the Proprietary and Governor of this Province and Territories
thereunto belonging, his Heirs, or Assigns, or by the Freemen in Provincial
Council or Assembly, to alter, change or diminish the form or effect of this
Charter, or any part or clause thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning
thereof, without the consent of the Proprietary and Governor, his Heirs or
Assigns, and Six parts of Seven of the said Freemen in Provincial Council and
Assembly met.

25. And Lastly, I the said William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of the
Province of Pennsylvania, and Territories thereto belonging for me, my Heirs
and Assigns, have solemnly Declared, Granted and Confirmed, and do hereby
solemnly Declare, Grant and Confirm, tha^ neither I, my Heirs nor Assigns,
shall procure or do any thing or things whereby the Liberties in this Charter
contained and expressed shall be infringed or broken: And if any thing be
procured by any Person or Persons contrary to these Premises, it shall be held
of no force or effect. In Witness whereof, I the said William Penn at
Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, have unto this present Charter of Liberties set
my Hand and broad Seal, this second day of the second Month, in the Year of
our Lord 1683. being the thirty fifth year of the King, and the third year of
my Government.

William Penn.

THE END.

