SOME PROPOSALS For a Second Settlement in the Province of Pennsylvania.
WHereas I did about nine Years past, propound the selling of several Parts, or
Shares of Land, upon that side of the Province of Pennsylvania, next
Delaware-River, and setting out of a Place upon it for the building of a City,
by the name of Philadelphia; and that diverse Persons closed with those
Proposals, who, by their ingenuity, industry and charge, have advanced that
City, from a Wood, to a good forwardness of Building (there being above One
Thousand Houses finished in it) and that the several Plantations and Towns begun
upon the Land, bought by those first Undertakers, are also in a prosperous way
of Improvement and Enlargement (insomuch as last Year, ten Sail of Ships were
freighted there, with the growth of the Province, for Barbados, Jamaica, etc.
Besides what came directly for this Kingdom) It is now my purpose to make
another Settlement, upon the River of Susquehannagh, that runs into the Bay of
Chesapeake, and bears about fifty Miles West from the River Delaware, as
appears by the Common Maps of the English Dominion in America. There I design
to lay out a Plat for the building of another City, in the most convenient
place for communication with the former Plantations on the East: which by Land,
is as good as done already, a Way being laid out between the two Rivers very
exactly and conveniently, at least three years ago; and which will not be hard
to do by Water, by the benefit of the River Scoalkill; for a Branch of that
River lies near a Branch that runs into Susquehannagh River, and is the Common
Course of the Indians with their Skins and Furrs into our parts, and to the
Provinces of East and West-Jersy, and New York, from the West and North-West
parts of the Continent from whence they bring them.

And I do also intend that every one who shall be a Purchasser in this proposed
Settlement, shall have a proportionable Lot in the said City to build a House
or Houses upon; which Town-Ground, and the Shares of Land that shall be bought
of me, shall be delivered clear of all Indian pretentions; for it has been my
way from the first, to purchase their Title from them, and so settle with their
consent.

The Shares I dispose of, contain each, Three Thousand Acres, for 100 l. and
for greater or lesser quantities, after that rate. The Acre of that Province is
according to the Statute of the 33th of Edw. 1. And no Acknowledgement or
Quit-Rent shall be paid by the Purchasers till five years after a Settlement be
made upon their Lands, and that only according to the quantity of Acres so
taken up and seated, and not otherwise; and only then to pay but one shilling
per annum for every hundred Acres forever. And further, I do promise to agree
with every Purchasser that shall be willing to treat with me between this and
next Spring, upon all such reasonable conditions, as shall be thought necessary
for their accommodation, intending, if God please, to return with what speed I
can, and my Family with me, in order to our future residence.

To conclude, that which particularly recommends this Settlement, is the known
Goodness of the Soil, and Situation of the Land, which is high and not
Mountainous; also the Pleasantness, and Largness of the River, being clear and
not rapid, and broader then the Thames at London Bridge, many Miles above the
place designed for this Settlement; and runs (as we are told by the Indians)
quite through the Province, into which many fair Rivers empty themselves. The
sorts of Timber that grow there, are chiefly Oak, Ash, Chestnut, Walnut, Cedar,
and Poplar. The native Fruits are Pawpaws, Grapes, Mulberys, Chestnuts, and
several sorts of Walnuts. There are likewise great quantities of Deer, and
especially Elks, which are much bigger than our Red Deer, and use that River in
Herds. And Fish there is of diverse sorts, and very large and good, and in great
plenty.

But that which recommends both this Settlement in particular, and the Province
in general, is a late Pattent obtained by diverse Eminent Lords and Gentlemen
for that Land that lies North of Pennsylvania up to the 46th Degree and an
half, because their Traffic and Intercourse will be chiefly through
Pennsylvania, which lies between that Province and the Sea. We have also the
comfort of being the Center of all the English Colonies upon the Continent of
America, as they lie from the North-East parts of New England to the most
Southerly parts of Carolina, being above 1000 Miles upon the Coast.

If any Persons please to apply themselves to me by Letters in relation to this
affair, they may direct them to Robert Ness Scrivener in Lumber-Street in
London for Philip Ford, and suitable answers will be returned by the first
oppertunity. There are also Instructions printed for information of such as
intend to go, or send Servants, or Families thither, which way they may proceed
with most Ease and Advantage, both here and there, in reference to Passage,
Goods, Vtensels, Building, Husbandry, Stock, Subsistence, Traffic, etc. being
the effect of their Expense and Experiance that have seen the fruit of their
Labors.

William Penn.

Printed and sold by Andrew Soul* at the Crooked Billet in Holloway Lane,
Shoreditch, 1690.


