THE IMPERIOUS BROTHER.

Dedicated to the COUNTESS OF STRAFFORD.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil, 1656.

To the Right Honorable, THE COUNTESS OF STRAFFORD.
MADAM,
THe Boldness which I presume in suffering this little Volume to make its Humble
Address to your Honors fair Hands, is so great, that I should despair of ever
finding Pardon, were it not that the Virtuous Stella, a Lady, both Noble in
Extraction, and in the Luster of her Beauty and Soul, yet in all these,
infinitely inferior to your Honor, lies prostrate at your Feet, imploring a
forgiveness for this Presumption; and to make it known, That she owes her
Description to a more Noble Author; since all the Glory I pretend to, is, to
have the Honor of Presenting Her to You in the English Dress: Yet when I
consider, that among the Old Greeks, the meanest Offerings, which with a pure
Heart they Consecrated to the Temples of their Divinities, found no less
favorable Acceptance, than those Statues and Vessels of massy Gold, which were
Offered by that Lydian Monarch, the Envy of his Age for Riches, unto the
Temple of Jupiter Hammon, when his Thoughts had devoured all Asia with his
Numerous Army: I am the more Fortified in the Confidence of this Address; it
being made unto a Greatness, equal to those who have been esteemed Deities; and
to a Goodness, incomparably more Obliging: Especially having assumed the
Confidence to Dedicate the Illustrious Shepherdess to your Noble Sister, the
Marchioness of Dorchester; to whom the Relation is the same in Merit as in
Nature; both being Daughters to that most honored Lady, who is known to the
World as much by the Greatness of Her Virtues, as Her Quality. It had been the
highest of Errors to have Presented this to Any, but Your Self, whose
Illustrious Affiances, since I have had the happy occasion to mention, I ought
not to forget to pay a just Adoration unto the Memory of that Renowned Lord,
whose High Prudence and Heroic Magnanimity still Survive in the perfect Image
of his Virtues, your Noble Husband. And, Madam, I am bold to Affirm, That
Montalvan Himself, the Grandeur of whose Air and Spirit in all his Writings,
have rendered him an Admiration to all men that have been so fortunate as to
read Him, would, had he had the like Opportunity, have thrown himself, and all
his Works, at your Feet, with a Devotion as equal to that wherewith the Famous
Scudery Presented his Cyrus to the Duchess of Longevile, as all those Glories
and Transcendencies of Mind and Body, which he Attributes to that Great
Princess, are equaled, if not excelled by those Divine Rays of Virtue which
Crown you with unspeakable Brightness: And it is but just, that this Piece,
which small as it is, has not many fewer Examples of Virtue and Heroic
Actions in it, than the most Voluminous Romance contains, should be
Consecrated to a Personage, who alone, Comprizeth all that is Great and Noble in
the World: But, Considering how small the Advantages are which this Version
has Contributed to it, and that what there is of Handsome in it, it Derives
from the Original; to hope, that an Essay so little Worth, coming from a Person
less worthy, outshin'd and Eclipsed by so many nobler Productions, should find
an Acceptance equal with the Devotion wherewith it is Presented, were an
Arrogance as Great as the Person against whom it is Presumed. But on the
other-side, not to repose a Confidence on those Extensive and Universal
Civilities which you equally distribute to all men, were to call in question
that high Complaisance, that generous mildness of Nature which has gained you
so large an Empire over the Spirits of all the Vertuosi; whenas the Sun, your
Emulatour, in the large diffusion of his Favors indifferently upon all
Objects, shines as well upon the ignoblest Weed, as on the most radiant Flower:
at leastwise I may Hope, That Stella being of a middle Nature, between your
height of Glory and my Imperfections, as the Moon is between the purity of the
Sun, and the grosseness of the Earth, may receive the light of your Rays, and
reflect it back upon this Humble Address: for a meaner Excellency, which
requires the presence of Deformity to set it off, would yet enjoy a
considerable Felicity, if it should be thought to deserve the Condition of
being a Foil to your more exalted Brightness: And perhaps, there are in Stella
such Advantages, as may allow her a pretension to that Honor, and admit her to
wait upon your Triumphal Chariot; an Advancement, in which she will shine more
gloriously than any of those bright Creatures, whose Name she bears, do in the
Heavens: and whatever Defects she may be thought culpable of, I am persuaded
they are neither so Many, nor so Great, but that they may be capable to Merit
your Condescension and Forgiveness; and thereby Confirm you Eminent, by the
Discovery of one Virtue more, for whom all Noble Attributes are reserved, of
which there can be none Greater than that of your Goodness, in cherishing a
Virtue which Offers her self up to your Service with so perfect and zealous a
Resignation: And it is with the same Devotion to your Service, though far less
pretensions of Merit, that I Passionately Aspire to be Admitted into the
Glorious Quality of being,

MADAM, Your Honors most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant, E.
P.

The Illustrious SHEPHERDESS.
The Imperious BROTHER.

Written originally in Spanish:

Now made ENGLISH, And Dedicated to the MARCHIONESS Of DORCHESTER, And the
COUNTESS Of STRAFFORD, BY E. P.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil. 1656.

The Imperious BROTHER.
IN Sevil, a place both otherwise famous, and for being the capital City of
Andaluzia, was born Carlo the second son of Count Horatia, who for his virtuous
qualittes was so well beloved, that all that knew him were afflicted that he
was not the chief Heir of his fathers estate. He was in his deportment gentile
and pleasing; of a comely and graceful person; in his apparel not exceeding the
moderation that became a younger brother: but that which was chiefly
commendable, he was of a clear and candid Judgment; a gift which does not
always speak men fortunate. His Brother, whole name was Alfredo, though
superiout in years, yet in virtues far inferior, by the death of his father
became possessed of all his honored Titles and great Possessions; his right
pre-existing above his brother Carlo's by the privilege only of one years
Seniority: He was more envious than for one of his quality might seem possible;
proud, and above sufferance imperious: and in so despightful and haughty a
manner treated he Carlo, as that he might well have been thought rather his
utter enemy, then his brother. If any thing may be said in favor of Alfredo,
it is this; That since he would needs be envious, his Envy could not have
sound a nobler object. O powerful Disease! how generally do thou reign over
the whole world, and how strangely infest all sorts and degrees of men! thou
not only frequentest Courts, Palaces, Universities, and Religious Societies
themselves; but even taintest the blood of persons most nearly related. But
whereas Alfredo was of so uncontrol'd a power, so respected and so feared of
all; what reason had he to bear so great an envy toward one so curbed and
depressed, that there seemed no great difference between him and one of his
servants? There needs no other answer, but that famous saying of an ancient
Author: The Envious man hates all: his Inferiors, because they do not equal
him; his Equals, because they do not exceed him; his Superiors, because they
are above him: so that neither brothers nor dearest friends are exempted from
his malice. It was Envy which put so great a difference between the two Roman
twins, who had the self-same Cradle upon the banks of Tyber, and the self-same
Couch in the Hostile field that Romulus, to assume the whole Empire to himself,
gave license to the murdering of his brother Remus: It was Envy which so
dis-united the affections of powerful Mithridates from his brother, that
Mithridates, to enlarge his power and dominion, commanded his brother to be
publicly beheaded. To conclude, where this Monster rules, neither means, nor
honors, nor even life it self, can promise any to themselves security. Carlo,
that he might set himself to resist the discourtesies of Fortune, and not
depend any longer upon his brothers cold courtesies, he resolves to engage
himself in the love of some fair and rich Lady of that City, whose portion
might dis-enthral him from that servile estate which he lived in under his
brothers tyranny. But among all the Illustrious Dames which that famous place
afforded, (and it afforded not a few) he thought none more fair, and there was
none more rich, than a Lady whose name was Donna Stella, whose father was of
the noblest and wealthiest Gentlemen of the City, having acquired a great
estate in the Indies. This Stella was doubly fair, as being both fair and rich:
both these respects make Carlo desirous to be her servant; both these respects
render Stello worthy of his service: but as yet he is resolved to communicate
his degsines to no body but his own thoughts. There is nothing that abateth the
courage of Lovers more then Poverty; nothing that more restrains them from
revealing the secrets of their minds. If the riches of Stella moved him at
first to seek her love, no less powerful with him is her beauty now, to
persuade him to persevere in that mind: but the means and opportunity of
discovering his faithful flames, and preferring his amorous suit to her, were
denied him by the malevolence of his stars. He knew he was not able to promote
his design, nor have access to his Mistress, without employing the industry
and fidelity of some of her servants: and to have made use of their assistance,
without the demonstration of his own liberality, would have been a great
dishonor to him, not having wherewithal to reward them according to the
greatness of his Generosity and Birth, as being Brother to him who was absolute
Lord of the whole Country. To prove ungrateful, the generousness of his mind
made him scorn; to appear co^ferable, and in want, the greatness of his spirit
made him disdain: therefore the language of his eyes only had liberty to
express that which his tongue was constra^^ed to conceal. The day came nor more
certainly, then he was certain to dispose of himself in some secret Walk near
the back part of her house; that if at any time she come forth that way, he
might obtain his wished sight: and there passed not a night, wherein he did not
duly walk by the door of her house; that at least if he might not be so happy
as to enjoy her sight, he might in some sort please himself with seeing the
place made happy by her presence. But when he considered with himself what an
airy contentment he now enjoyed, and that time was trifl'd away, ^^d his loves
labor lost, while his affections were kept unreveal'd from her who was the
Mistress of his affections; and that he had small reason to expect favors from
her, who scarce knew him, much less knew him to be her servant; he saw himself
constrained (for want of other means) to cast himself upon the courtesy of his
discourteous Brother, and to impart those counsels to him, which he had
purposed to lock up in the most secret Arcanum of his breast; presuming he
should come off with the more credit, and his address to his Mistress find
greater acceptance, being backed by his brothers authority; whom although he
knew not to stand so well-affected to him or his proceedings, yet he assured
himself that he might happily be led to it, if not by any other respect, yet at
least by a willingness to be rid of his company he so little cared for, and to
be freed from the charge he was at in maintaining him; with this assurance, he
repairs to Alfredo, represents to him the exquisiteness of Stella's beauty, and
effectually sets forth with what passionate desires her beauty had enflamed
him, and how extremely it perplexed him not to obtain that which he so
infinitely desired. His Brother outwardly commended his discreet choice,
inwardly maligned it; promised to further him in it what he might, intended
nothing less: for having considered well the excellent feature and the rare
endowments of Stella, he purposed to obtain her for himself; nor did he seek
her more for his own love and her deserts sake, then out of a desire to deprive
his brother of that contentment and felicity he aimed at; so great was his
envy toward him: whose mean and low condition, if it were so much the object
of his envy; how much more would he have been envied, being advanced to a
contented and prosperous estate, wherein he should not any longer have stood in
need of him! He was not, in times past, so much not his friend, as now he is
resolved to become his mortal adversary: so that, making his brothers desires
the promoters of his own design, he often frequented the house of Stella's
father, and, after a few visits, revealed to him his mind. No marvel if the
old man willingly consented; knowing, that to accept of the Counts profer,
imported him no less then the marrying of his daughter to the greatest Fortune
in that Country. In all haste, he goes to Stella, and tells her the happy
news: who grown to woman's estate, and thinking the time long till she were
married, embraced the motion with much gladness. Carlo perceiving his brother
to be much at the house of Stella's father, rested secure of his good success.
He whose mind is free from traitorous intentions, is least apt to suspect
others for being guilty of the like, Stella, by some means or other, became
acquainted with Carlo's affection to her; which could not find any place in
her heart, being prepossest already by that of Alfredo. And there wanted not
those, on the other side, who informed Carle of his brothers proceedings toward
him; dissuading him from continuing any longer a servant to her, for that she
was extremely incensed against him, both for his boldness in aspiring to her
favors, which were elsewhere bestowed; and for his rashness, to stand in
competition with his brothers Authority in so high a nature, as to become his
Rival. In this manner did the two Brothers prosecute the same design; but with
far different success: Carlo's love was hindered by the fraud of Alfredo;
Alfredo's seconded by the favor of Stella. Notwithstanding Carlo, seeing
himself thus slighted, was resolved not so easily to take a repulse from one
whom he never talked with; but rather to try if by speaking with her, who was
the cause of his innocent flames, he could prevail with her to know what should
be the cause of her disdain. This resolution of his was favored by an accident
no less fortunate than unexpected; he having long, and with much impatience
awaited the approach of night, at length that silent season came, wherein
darkness and solitude had given truce to the busy motions and labors of men,
and kept the inquisitive neighbors from stirring abroad to his hinderance;
when Carlo, more curious then prudent, hastes toward the Mansion of his
Beloved, whom to his joy he found standing in a Balcone, in expectation of
Alfredo's coming: for seeing him resolutely bent to be her Spouse, she longed
to have conference with him first, without any other witness than the still
silence of night, that she might make trial whether his wit and understanding
were correspondent to the properness of his person, and the greatness of his
estate: having absolutely concluded with her self, that if he proved any way
defective of judgment, she would rather choose to want the pomp and splendor
which his alliance would bring her, then to tie her self to the tediousness of
leading her whole life with such a one, whom folly and simplicity should make
unfit to be conversed with. Carlo imputed it to the goodness of his stars, that
he had lighted upon an occasion so much according to his desire, so much beyond
his hopes; and so drew near unto her: and she imagining nothing more, than that
it was the Count himself, (because it had been agreed between them the night
before, to meet in this place, and at the very same hour) received him with
more obliging expressions then he had reason or hopes to expect: and after she
had affirmed to him her great desire to speak with him, she entertained him
with the subtil'st and most complemental discourse (for she was not altogether
void of Eloquence) that her woman's wit could furnish her withal; that the
acuteness of his wit and understanding might be made to appear and he replied
in terms so amorous and discreet, that Stella rendered Heaven thanks for her
happy fortune, in having obtained a servant so complete and to her mind, that
her own fancy could not have depainted forth a nobler. Thus were they both
deluded, both favored by each other. Stella persuading her self that Alfredo,
and no other man in the world, was to be possessor of her beauty, That
pleasure, said she, Alfredo, that you have done me, in coming so alone to visit
me alone, at a time and place so lovely, is such, that it ought not to be
registered in the roll of common courtesies. I have had a great desire to
communicate unto you some particulars which have disturbed the tranquillity of
my mind: And although I would willingly have concealed this distaste; yet
because it is a kind of treason in the Will, to bury in silence those things
which ought to be revealed, I should make my self guilty of this crime, if I
should hide this business from you, which it imports you so much to know. Carlo
exceedingly amazed to see that he should be so much not diseern'd by Stella as
to be taken by her for Alfredo, dissembled as much as in him lay, the trouble
and confusion of his thoughts; and recollecting himself, turns to his beloved
Enemy, to hear what she had farther to say; who thus went on: You are to know
(said she) that your Brother Carlo, who in the opinion of most is held for
discreet and virtuous, is so discourteous to my Honor, so traiterous to your
Love, that having fixed his affections on me, he not considering that I was
born to be wholly yours, boldly promises to himself a possibility of
triumphing over the conquest of my Will: how audacious and obstinate a besieger
of my Chastity he is, these Walls, which at all hours he haunts, can testify;
insomuch that I have some reason to be afraid, lest at this very moment of
time, that we are now talking together, he should be within hearing of us. I
had certainly concealed from you this extravagancy of his, had not this
consideration moved me to be willing rather to let you understand it from me
than any body else, that, if happily you may hereafter hear from the hand of any
body beside, this thing so tending to your dishonor, you may assure your self
it was not my beauty, but his want of wisdom, which prompted him to so
inconsider ate an attempt.

No wonder if Carlo with the utmost of his discretion had enough to do to
suppress his outrageous passions, which through the anguish of his mind, were
ready to burst forth into vehement outcries; on the one side he saw himself
disdained by her whom he most admired, on the other side injured by him of whom
it was impossible for him to take revenge: the rigor and neglect of Stella
pierced him deeply to the heart, and as deeply did he resent the blows of
adverse Fortune, which so apparently persecuted him, but that which most of all
afflicted him, was, To have a Brother of so perfideous a disposition, that
having been entreated with so much submission, such a deluge of tears, to
assist him in obtaining the reward of his faithful and long-languishing
desires, had not only not effected it, but with a most ignoble fraud, sought
himself to reap that fruit which for so many days his hopes had husbanded.
Carlo was just about to frame an Answer to Stella, if he had not at that very
instant been disturbed by a certain Man interposing himself between them; who
told him, That this place which he possessed, was by right another, and
therefore desired him presentty to avoid it. Stella supposing him that came
last to be Carlo, was afraid, lest if they had come to Swords-dispute, the life
of Alfredo would have been in danger. But Carlo less dismayed than glad at this
present occasion, judged it now a fit time to ease his big stomach of that
great indignation wherewith it swelled by reason of the former injury offered
him, by taking revenge of this present affront; and either not thinking him
that surpised him to be his Brother, or thinking if it were he, to take a
brave revenge of him for his treacherous dealing, he, with his rapier drawn,
answered him in such rugged terms, that if Alfredo had not quickly retreated,
it is to be doubted, lest he had stayed to the hazard of his life. By this time
the tumult was heard by some of Alfredo's Attendants, that had stayed a pretty
way behind; they coming near, and knowing Carbo, admonished him by all means
to desist from so unadvised an Enterprise: so both parties retired, without so
much as speaking to each other, or giving any satisfaction: as for Alfredo, his
pride was such, he would give none; Carlo was so injured, he had no cause to
give any.

Poor deluded Stella remains all this while in great perplexity of mind; yet
glad to see, that the courage of her supposed Lover, was answerable to the
pregnancy of his wit: so that whereas Carlo had been the Actor of so much
Gallantry, Alfredo usurped the praise and honor. Carlo was he, that both by his
Language and Valor ravished the thoughts of Stella; Alfredo was the Man
thought worthy of her Affection and care, triumphing in the achievement of
Actions which he could never own. Alfredo would no longer delay the execution
of his Will, but went again the day following to Stella's Father, to consult
farther with him about the Match: from whom he receiv'ed this comfortable
Answer, That he might securely build upon this assurance, that she should be
his; and, that it might appear how much the good will he bore to his Daughter
pleased him, he from henceforth gave him free leave to visit her as often as he
pleased. This permission, which Alfredo esteemed the greatest of Favors, he
soon made use of, and went forthwith to visit Stella; who received him with a
charming Modesty, honoring him with those gracious and rich Beams of Favor
from her fair Eyes, that those of far more merit than himself might have been
proud of the like. They had not far entered into their Discourse, which was of
sundry matters, before Alfredo, besides that he betrayed much ignorance,
uttered so many unsavory and impertinent speeches, that Stella quickly observed
neither his Behavior nor his Wrds to be any way consistent with that which she
had been Witness of the night before; and the thought of this, took so strong
an impression in her mind, that in stead of resolving him fully in the
business which he came about, she earnestly desired of her Father to give her
time to consider of it, that she might not rashly enter into a condition which
she must be tied to all her lifetime, without well considering beforehand what
she went about. Alfredo remained for the time pretty well satisfied, although
not free from suspicion, both because he had seen Carlo with her the night
before, and because she was doubtful in her Answers when he made the motion:
nevertheless, relying upon the promise which her Father had made him, he gave
out, that within four days he was to be Married. This went for current among
credulous vulgar, who observing him often frequent that house, thought nothing
able to resist the power and will of so mighty a man. With what grief and
amazement the Heart of Carlo was struck when he heard this news, let him judge
who has lost the chief joy of his life by so unjust a way. Carlo now expects
no other than to see himself miserable, than to see in the arms of his
Adversary, his loved Stella; yet Carlo still loves, Carlo is still discreet:
can it possibly be, that he should either love or be discreet, and not become
frantic with grief, being so injuriously deprived of his hopes and desires?
Having often revolved these things in his mind, at last he reasoned thus to
himself, That if his Competitor, either a stranger or his enemy, had done this
wrong, he should not have had that cause to admire; but that his own Brother
should do him so great a despite both in his Content, his Credit, and his
Honor, was a vexation so grievous to him, that although necessity forced him
to undergo it, yet his stomach would not permit him to endure it. A thousand
times did he, incited with these injuries, vow to revenge himself; and at other
times repented himself of his rash Vow, not so much out of tenderness to his
Brother, as for fear of offending Stella: but at length, seeing there were
small hopes left him of ever being able to prevent those misfortunes which grew
so fast upon him, he pitched upon this, as the surest course he could betake
himself to; namely, for a while to shake hands with his native Country, thereby
to try if while he changed his Climate, Fortune would smile upon him with a
more propitious countenance: So putting himself into a Military garb, he
resolved upon a voyage to Madrid, with an intention to procure Letters of
recommendation from thence to Don Juan of Austria, who at that time governed
the Low Countries. Alfredo applauded his noble Resolution; Saying, That it
became men nobly born, to set upon the bravest and highest Adventures, such as
might lead them to Fortunes, which (however denied them by the P^^simonie of
their Fates) were yet most correspondent to the greatness of their qualities:
and readily furnished him with two thousand Crowns, w^^h his promise to be
Assistant to him upon all emergencies. Carlo rested satisfied, comforting
himself with this thought. That whatever benefit he enjoyed beside* he should
at least be freed from having continually before his eyes the object of his
disquiet, and that the large distance of place would separate between him and
those inconveniences, which, remaining at home, he must have unavoidably run
into: And when the time of his departure drew nigh, he used to come abroad in
so brave an Equipage, that like the Sun under a Cloud, he appeared bright in
the midst of obscurity; nor did he show forth less gallantry than if he had
lived in the height of Splendour and content. Thus being clad in sky colored
Satin (a true Emblem of the grief he suffered) edged about with Gold, while
the braveness of his Aspect drew admiration from the peoples eyes, the
crossness of his Stars drew pity from their hearts. But he supposing, That to
take his journey without first giving Stella a visit, would be both a great
discourtesie, and a thing apt to breed suspicion, he went to take leave of her,
and to receive his dispatch from her fair eyes; both that the memory of them
might be the more fresh and present with him in his travels, and that their
kind influence might be the more auspicious to his enterprises: he found her
more sad than she was accustomed to be, or than he imagined to have found her;
yet he made no great wonder at it, because he persuaded himself for a certain,
That this solituriness of hers was rather feigned, on purpose to send him on
his journey the more cheerful and contented, than any real sorrow conceived for
his departure; so easy it is to show favor to any, when we imagine it is the
last favor we shall need to show them; but most certain it is, that Stella
weighing with her self the displeasing conditions of Alfredo, his mean wit, and
his immeasurable pride, was much troubled in her mind, that she had so far
imparted her favors toward him, as that she was hardly able to recall them;
being somewhat ashamed to let her father now understand her disaffection to him,
to whom he knew she had formerly expressed so much good will; complaining much of
her hard hap, for that she had seen so much desert in a man whom both her
honor and her former choice constrained her to disrespect. In the midst of
these troubles and doubts, so deep a melancholy possessed her, that it caused
admiration and pity in all that knew her and beheld her in that disconsolate
plight, which began to seize upon her from this very time that Carlo came to
take his farewell of her: for carelessly lifting up her eyes upon him, after she
had earnestly viewed all his perfections, his sprightly carriage, his comely
person, and the noble anger and disdain he showed in accusing the severe
carriage of his Lordly Brother toward him; she entreated the cause of this so
suddenly undertaken journey. Whereunto, in brief and discreet terms, he
replied, That in his own Country he perceived himself so discourteously
entreated, as he could not with any content or satisfaction to his mind remain
at home, and therefore had bethought himself of an expedient to try if by
living in a place where he was less known, he should be more respected. But the
principal reason which incited him to this voluntary banishment was the fervent
affection wherewith he had devoted himself to a Lady of that City; whom yet he
loved so warily, and with such respect, that although for her sake an Aetna of
desire was kindled in his breast, yet the tender regard he had to her Honor,
and the consideration that one more deserving than himself was already possessed
of her Favor, moved him to suppress those flames by absenting himself, which
if he had staid would difficultly have been stifled; and the rather, because of
the anguish which to see her in another embracements would plunge him into, if
he did not speedily withdraw himself into some remote part, until either the
death of his rival should put a period to his jealousy, or his own should lay
those thoughts asleep which suffered him living to take so little rest.

Not with more attention than pleasure, did Stella hearken to the words of
Carlo, who delivered himself with such a natural and comely Grace, in such
apposite Expressions, and so movingly setting forth the lively sense of his
Condition, that she was no longer able to withstand the force of Love, which,
by his winning Person and Behavior, had captivated her Heart: she plainly
perceived her self to be the Object of his Love; and assured her self, that his
Love was firm and real since for her sake, and that he might not see her in the
power of Alfredo, he was so willing to forsake both Country, Friends, and
Kindred, and all those Comforts which those Men must needs be deprived of, who
are secluded from their Native Soil. She has now plainly found, That her
affections are wholly subdued by the Gallantry of Carlo; insomuch, that through
the relenting of her Heart toward him she was hardly able to contain her self
from requesting him to desist from his intended Journey; but she was quickly
withheld, by the Conscience which she always made of keeping her Modesty
inviolable, and a certain timorous caution, not to precipitate her self rashly
into the choice of a new Lover, having had her Expectation so much deceived in
the old one. Alfredo; who being, for the space of a Night, represented unto her
fancy a most accomplished and prudent Personage, proved afterward to be
nothing less than the Man she took him for. Thus taking his farewell of Stella,
he left her not without some sadness and regret for his departure; for so it
often falls out, that those things which being present are lightly esteemed,
use when they are wanted, to leave behind them a deep sense of their absence:
he put off his journey no longer than till the next day; and because to have
been silent, at his departure, of those things he had to say unto his Brother
concerning his unkindness toward him, had been to go his journey with a
disquieted and surcharged mind, he had a desire to declare himself at large
unto him. It is not the least of satisfactions to a mind agriev'd, and not
having any other means to be avenged, to complain freely of the wrongs
received, unto the party by whom they are offered; He hearing that he was at
the house where Stella lived, went thither to him, and tali'd him aside, that
he might privately confer with him: Alfredo unwilling to send him away with an
exasperated mind, refused not to go aside with him to know his pleasure; and
the rather, because happily it might be the last time he should have to do with
him. No sooner were the two Brothers retired unto a corner of the Court that
was on the backside of the house, but Stella having had some intimation of the
business, she led by a woman's curiosity (a quality incident to that Sex)
ascended up into a Balcone which jutted forth on the same side; where she stood
not only safe and unsuspected, but so commodiously withal, that through a low
Lattice, she could both plainly discern them, and hear most of what they said:
Among other things that past between them, she might hear Carlo in an angry
mood speak thus unto his Brother; Tell me (said he) Brother, Have I not all the
reason in the world to tax you of cruelty and infidelity? since I having so
faithfully imparted to you the good will I bare to Stella, imploring your
assistance, and you seeming to favor my intent; you went about,
notwithstanding this, to bereave me of my content, my hopes, and even my life
it self (for, to bereave me of Stella, was to bereave me of all these) Is it
possible that there could harbor in your heart so high a degree of inhamanity
toward me? Had I been a mere stranger to you, as I am your Brother, what could
you have done more? Nay, had I been your utter Enemy, what greater cruelty
could you have offered me? If indeed it had appeared to me before I had
communicated my mind, that you had been before hand with me in your Addresses
to her, I should not have thought it strange to see my self prevented by you,
but should have thought your love grounded upon virtuous Principles; but that
you should promote your service to her, not so much out of any real love
derived from your own free choice, but merely that you might disappoint me of
the innocent happiness I aimed at, was such a carriage in you, as I both admire
and detest: It is a thing scarce ever heard of in any story, That one extracted
from so noble a Race should stain his generous blood with a deed so infamous.
It Is true, when I consider your power and authority, I do not much wonder that
your tyranny over me has been so great; for it is not unknown to me how much
you have ever hated me: but as often as I consider how dear a thing Honor and
Reputation is to those that do but pretend to the least Gentility, I am
astonished to think that you should not be ashem'd, not only to commit so much
baseness, but even to have the least imagination of it. To be brief. Alfredo, I
love Stella, as you well know; I would to Heaven you had never known it: You
are now aspiring to her Nuptials, whilst I am going I know not whither, and
for no other cause, but that I may sequester my self from a place where to live
in this unfortunate condition would be worse than to die a hundred deaths. Know
this, That an insufferable injury may prove of dangerous consequence, even to
the Actor, when it lights upon such a one as knows how to resent it with
disdain: yet since it appears that Stella meets your Love with equal Ardor, so
much a Servant I am to her desires, so fearful of being any hinder ance to her
content, that, not to distaste her in the least measure, I am prepared to go
this Voyage, on purpose that I may suffer you to enjoy her freely; and may ye
enjoy her for multitudes of years, so I be not a beholder of your happiness,
which is my unhappiness: for I verily believe, That if I should see her in your
embraces, such a torrent of Jealousy would burst forth from my enraged breast,
that the whole world would not be able to allay it. Nay, even that night when I
thought my self so much blessed by being admitted into her company, she in
detestation of the love I professed to her, spoke so many things ill of me to my
self, (thinking without doubt it had been you to whom she spoke) that had the
fervency of my Affection been any whit less than it was, I had scarce been able
to refrain from breaking out into some outrageous Act; and while you at the
same time came thither to our amazement, and forbid me the place which I had
more right to than your self, that I did not then pay you the reward of your
treachery, was not for want of courage, or that I was not thoroughly spirited
with anger, but because your prudent caution advised you to retire your self
(and it is not so safe to pursue eagerly a retreating person:) and now that I
may not be a perpetual molestation to you, or zun the hazard of ruining my
self, therefore it is that I betake my self to stranger-Countries, happily to
meet (if heaven be not the more propitious) with an untimely death; for my life
is exposed to the mercy of a Fortune, which how unsure and deceitful a Guide
she has been to me, the experience of many years has taught me. These things
I speak to you, not that I make account my words will ought more prevail with
you, than if they were spoken to the Wind; but that laying them open before
you, you may be made conscious to your self of your unworthy dealings toward
me; and that at the remembrance of them, the sting of your guilty mind may
afflict you a little, since your cruelty has afflicted me so much.

Alfredo was both ashamed and angry at himself, that he had endured to hear out
with patience this so peremptory and taunting Speech of his; and attributing
that to inordinate Liberty in him, which was indeed a just resentment, He told
him, That whereas he had taxed him so much of Imperiousness and Tyranny, he
had all the reason in the world to account him merciful, for that he had so
often suffered his insolent carriage to go unpunished; especially that night
when he found him in Discourse with Stella, when being attended with his
Servants, he had both the power and opportunity to have punished him even with
death it self. Moreover, he advertised him, That his depriving him of the
enjoyment of Stella, was not out of envy, but a just check to his Arrogance;
because that he knowing well how much he hated him, had gone about
notwithstanding to make him a forwarder of his desires. He added farther, That
if he Married her, it was not so much for any real love he bare her, as because
he disdained that any attempt which he had undertaken should not succeed; for
that although she were fair, witty, and nobly descended, yet that in other
respects she came short of deserving him. In this sort had inconsiderate
Alfredo run on disparaging Stella, had not Carlo stopped the swift carreer of his
tongue, by saying, That he did unworthily, in speaking any thing (...) the
dispraise of her, and wished him to be assured, That if he did not think Stella
not only to be his equal in desert, but also to be a companion for one far more
deserving than himself; his presumption deceived him very much. Adding withal,
That he should sooner be moved to draw his Sword in the defense of her fame and
virtue, than in his own behalf. He had no sooner spoken these words, but
Alfredo weary of what had been said already, and impatient of hearing any more,
flung from him in a fume, without giving him any other Answer. Upon this, Carlo
immediately departed thence, and betook himself to his own Lodging, to prepare
all things in a readiness for the taking of his Journey the next day.

It is not to be expressed, in what vexation of Spirit, in what sadness and
suspension of mind Stella remained, after she perceived her self so palpably
undeceived: not able to suppress the grief, wherewith her heart went great,
she confined her self to her Chamber; that so breathing out her Complaints to
her self, she might have a little ease and respite from those restless
passions where with her mind was agitated: she revolved in her mind the
person of Carlo, his gallant deportment, his prudence, and above all, his real
and noble Intentions: and at length called to mind that Carlo must needs be
the man who first gave her a testimony of his love; complaining on the
injustice of Fortune, that robbed her eyes of the sight of him whom she loved,
and imposed upon her the company of so loathed an object. It was not long since
Carlo, small in her esteem, did all that might make him worthy of her Service;
Alfredo invested in her favor, did nothing that was not unworthy of it: now
Carlo, enthroned in her heart and affection, must be banished from her sight;
and Alfredo, long since cashiered from her favor, must remain to afflict with
his Sollicitings: and her mind giving her that the last time Carlo had been at
her Fathers house, her eyes had taken their last farewell of him; the thought of
it drew tears from her eyes, and pierced her heart with grief: She was
infinitely sorry in her mind, that his Country and she were to be deprived so
soon of him; and persuading her self that if she were but once more to have
come to the Speech of him, her words would have so far prevailed with him as to
have retarded his journey, if not to have put an end (...); With tears in her
eyes, and love in her heart, Oh Carlo (said she) if these Complaints of mine,
which I breath from the bottom of my heart had wings to fly unto you, they
would doubtless be so powerful with you, as happily to make you change your
resolution of leaving Sevil, at least to depart with the greater contentment of
mind; for now so strong an Ascendant have your perfections upon me, that it is
in vain for me to flatter my self any longer in thinking that I am able not to
love you; the truth and reality of this love, I have but now began sensibly to
feel, although many days are past since it first took root within me: that to
me so fortunate night wherein I had the happiness to discourse with you, there
was not any thing you did which I did not admire, nor spoke you ought which was
not wonderfully pleasing; and from that time forth I was really yours, although
I seemed Alfredo's; for it was your valor, your prudence, and discreer
carriage, which enamored me of him, thinking they had proceeded from him. It
is true, when first I knew my self to be loved by you, I thought I had some
reason to be offended, thinking it had been your envy toward your Brother that
moved you to affront me for his sake; but since it has been so clear unto me,
that the passion you have for my love, has been so constant and faithful as
not at all to grow cold through ill success, and that on the contrary it was
rather out of envy to you, than any true affection to me, that your Brother
professed himself my Servant; be assured, Oh Carlo, that I am not only not
offended with your love, but even so pleased that I am thought worthy of it,
that nothing but death it self, and scarce that neither, shall have power to
make me prove unthankful. In this one thing I account my self happy, that I may
as justly, without danger of being deceived, boast my self to have dominion
over your heart, as she that has been both an eye and an earewitnesse of the
same. But whereas I owing you so much respect, can notwithstanding consent to
suffer your absence, and not yield you the place your virtue deserves, I seem
to my self to surpass the cruelty of my own Sex: and yet, fool that I am, how
do I know, what thoughts you may be apt to conceive of me, if I should go about
to show my self but indifferently familiar? for a person of quality is above
others liable to bring her fame in question, by striving to appear not
ungrateful. Thus stood she discoursing with Carlo absent, as if he had been
present; and carefully considering with her self, that the next morning being
determined the ultimate time of his stay, she could not be permitted the
happiness of seeing him, to perform the dear Ceremonies of a parting Lover,
she reassumed her old Complaints afresh; yet having put on a firm resolution
that Alfredo, whose Service was utterly hateful to her, were he never so
imperious, never so importunate, never so much backed with her Fathers
authority, should notwithstanding be constrained, through her utmost neglect of
him, to forgo all his interest in her; she immediately took in hand (although
not without some fear of her honor) to deal so effectually with Carlo, as to
possess him, that his long absence from Serail, would be a means to bring her
life in danger: To this end, she forthwith dispatched short Note, desiring him,
He would be pleased, the night following, to give her the meeting at the
back-gate of her fathers house, for that she had to communicate unto him a
business that would much import him to know, before his leaving Sevil; and in
requital of so great an honor, he should receive such satisfaction touching the
Effect of his constant love to her, as perhaps would be unto him no less
welcome than unexpected. No sooner was the morning come, but she delivered this
Letter to her Maid (the confident of all her Secrets) bidding her To enquire
for Carlo's Lodgings, and to present him with the Letter so privately, that no
body should be present at the delivery of it. All that her Mistress commanded,
the Maid punctually performed in every circumstance; and came at the very
season, that Carlo was wholly taken up with his Friends and Kindred; when
calling him aside, she delivered her Message and Letter; telling him withal,
That she was not to stay his Answer, partly lest it might be discerned who she
was, by some curious pryer into Secrets; and partly because the Letter required
not to be Answered at present, but in the evening, and that by himself in
person. He stood for a while astonished at this undream'd of news. but knowing
there was that with him which could easily disdeceive him (for he knew it to be
Stella's hand) he broke up the Seals; and after having slightly glanced over
the contents, and ruminated many things to himself he began to enter into a
serious debate, what might be the reason that moved her to send him this
request, whenas he was fully possessed, not only that he was not favored of her
himself, but that she having given her hear already to Alfredo, was shortly to
(...) her hand in Marriage: Notwithstanding he was altogether impatient t^ll he
had obeyed her desire; he would fam have put off his Journey for a while
longer; which could difficultly be done, both in regard that between him and
the Friends who were met together, the farewel-Salutations had already past;
and because almost all the people of the City were flocked together in heaps to
see him pass out of Town: so that he was constrained at least to counterfeit a
departure. He went forth accompanied with the chief Gentlemen of the City, and
was bid adieu by the loud exclamations of the multitude; carrying along with
him out of Town as much happiness and prosperity from the voices of the
people, as he left troubles and vexations behind him in his Brothers tyranny.
It was not long before Fame conveyed this unwelcom news unto the ears of
disconsolate Stella: to think that he should set solittle by her kind proffer,
afflicted her mind with the bitterest sorrow that could be imagined, and made
her repent that she had any way manifested her love to him; resolving
thenceforward to hold this for a maxim, That for a Lady to confer her favors
on any man, is the only way to make him prove perfidious and ungrateful. She
accused her self as inconsiderate, for ventring over-hastily to impart her
courtesies, since so unfortunately they had lighted upon one that either
distrusted, or disregarded them. By this time the daylight, as it were
dismayed at the blackness and deformity of night, had hid it self under the
shadow of the earth; when Stelia chancing upon some or other occasion to go
into that place, where the night before she had been a witness of Carlo's
Gallantry, she might discern a man, who seeming well acquainted with every part
of the Court, fixed him self in the middle of it; and looking more intently
upon him, she strongly conjectured that either her eyes deceived her, or by the
Majesty of his person it should be Carlo: Nor was she indeed mistaken; for he
having, with some difficulty, dis-engag'd himself from the Company that
attended him, made a shift to return back, to see his beloved Stella, and to
know what she had to command: And hearing some little noise about the window,
he called by her name the Maid that had brought him the Letter in the morning;
upon which Stella knew him by his voice: and that she might not lose the
opportunity which the time and place offered her, she immediately discovered
her self; and after she had related to him the false Title that his proud
Brother pretended to her, the mistake that happened many nights ago, the much
wherewith his virtue and discretion had enamored her, the means she took to
disdeceive her self, the reason that moved her to love him, and how bitterly
she resented his absence; she continued thus:

It was for no other reason, Carlo, that I writ to you, than to endeavor to
divert your intended voyage: and you may well think, that before I could
prevail with my self to put such a design in practice, it cost me many a
sorrowful tear: and it is a usual art (among women highly born) to keep their
flames so, not to be discovered by any, unless by their secret tears and
sighs, that in time they grow too masterlesse for either their breasts to be
able to contain, or their eyes to dissemble them. Heaven knows what frequent
and painful conflicts I have had with my Honor, till in the end, my Affections
prevailed more with me than my Fame; so that I am confirmed in this truth, That
to be able to overcome ones self (especially in things relating to the vehement
desires of the Soul) is a work rather of Practice than of Contemplation. You
see, Carlo, how much the night befriends me in hiding my blushes; which makes
me the rather presume to be so plain and free with you as I am, not putting any
false gloss upon my words. In fine, I am devoted yours; and of all men living,
you are he alone that shall have power to dispose of my heart: The wealth that
my Father has abundantly to spare, is of it self so sofficient, that you may
have where with to live splendidly, and yet not need to be beholding to your
Brother for the least supply. All the favors he can boast to have received from
me, are so few, so slight, that to have showed himself a Gentleman for one
nights space, would have much more conduced to the advancement of his hopes.
Impute not (I request you) this my freedom to any impudence in me, but rather
to those your irresistible Charms that have inflav'd my Affection to you; nor
think me guilty of any great Grime in laboring to requite him with love, of
whom I have been so much beloved; who has been so eminent in constancy, as to
honor and respect me, although rejected by me. I appeal to your self, whether
you think it is ordinary with men, to love with so much truth and
faithfulness? I profess to ye, That were you not endued with those perfections
that cause me to little less than idolize you, your loyalty and firmness would
be sufficient of themselves to endear you to me. And be assured, howsoever
Fortune deals with me, whether your first Resolution be more powerful with you
to hold on your journey, or my late invitation to you to alter your mind, I am
prepared to receive either condition with as equal a mind as it is possible
for me; at least, I shall have attained to this degree of contentment, That I
have given a little earnest of the much that I am indebted to you. With
attentive admiration Carlo heard her speak these things, whereby it grew
apparent to him, by what means it came to pass, that Stella was so melted in
her rigor toward him: with a graceful humility he rendered her thanks for the
great and new favor she had done him, as far from expected as deserved;
promising that to serve her he was ready to become her very slave. The
conclusion of this amorous Discourse, was, that she gave him her hand, in token
that she unfeignedly desired to be his Wife. By this, the royal Sun had
summoned the day to appear, while he with his beams gilded the tops of the
western Groves, when Carlo took his leave of her, with a purpose to divide his
time between two esteemed persons; in the daytime, to hush himself up in the
house of Leonardo, a Gentleman of quality, his intimate friend; in the night,
to visit his Mistress Stella? which having vowed to perform as often as the night
came, he went to find out Leonardo, to whom he communicated the particulars of
his whole success. There past many nights and days, wherein there interceded
between these two Lovers such familiarity as was not inconsistent with modesty
and civility. Stella, all this while, had much ado to forbear betraying by her
looks the disturbance which was in her mind, seeing Alfredo still continued to
haunt her with his foolish importunities; and her Father having found her at
first pliable to his desires, she had promised him, that which both her honor
and her second choice enjoined her not to consent to. The very next time Carlo
and she met, she declared unto him her Fathers cares and watchfulness over her
ways, and unto what difficult streights their counsels were like to be reduced.
These words sorely perplexed the poor Gentleman; who ntistrusting that through
Stella's fear, and observance of her Fathers pleasure, his hopes might be in
danger to miscarry, told her, That if she found her love was not powerful
enough to resist those stronger Obligations before mentioned, she had best to
consult with her own mind, and do as she thought fit; that for his part, he
had been so accustomed to the brunt of adverse Fortune, as that he should not
count it any new mishap, although the greatest that had yet befaln him. He
would have said something more, but that through the suddenness and greatness
of his passion, he became as mute and motionlesse as a marble Statue. Whereupon
she, to take from him all that might give him cause to suspect her reality,
affirmed, that when she first made her love known unto him, it was not out of
any other design, than an unfeigned intention that he only should enjoy her;
and therefore she purposed (the better to free her self from the persecution of
her Fathers carfulness, and Alfredo's troublesomnesse) to let him in at a
private gate, the night following, which should stand ready open for him; that
so her Father (when he should come and see him with her, and find him to be of
the selfsame extraction with Alfredo, seeing no other means left to preserve
his daughters honor) might give way to the accomplishment of their lawful and
honest desires.

Carlo overjoyed to hear a matter proposed so likely to take effect, was scarce
able to express how much he resented her continued favors; and wished that
she could have read his heart in his eyes, that her courtesies might the sooner
appear to have been bestowed upon a person that knew not to be ungrateful; and
that if he had been born to the whole Empire of the World, as he was destined
but to low Fortunes, (though he were a Gentleman) he would have been
nevertheless ready to have prostrated himself at her feet; protesting, that
his Fates could not have conferred a more contented estate upon him, than to
have rendered him worthy to enjoy her beauty. By this the morning having
displayed her Lilies in the East, Carlo was fain to retire himself from his
beloved station. Never had any day been so tedious to him, as was this, wherein
he thought Time performed his course more lazily than he was wont: but the day,
and his restless expectation, had at length an end. No sooner was the wished
night returned, but he hasted out of doors, accompanied with his friend
Leonardo; whom leaving at the entrance of the Court, to guard (if need were)
that part of the house, he went directly toward the window: he had but touched
it with his Sword, when he might discern a glimpse of his beautiful Sun, whom
love had made diligent to observe her time exactly. After she had fetched a
turn about the house to make sure all things, leaving her Father in bed, and
the rest of the Family retired every one to their rests, unaccompanied of any
but her Servant-Maid (a fit coadjutor for such an enterprise) she came back to
Carlo; and first giving him a brief admonishment how much it behooved him to
continue resolved and firm to his first engagement, that if ever he should
happen to prove so much a mere man, as to grow cold in his Affection, he should
yet be careful not to let slip out of his memory, how much she had suffered for
his sake, how many dangers undergone; afterward she directed him to go about to
the false gate of her house, where she would be ready to receive him. While he
obedient to her will, was about to perform her directions; and she gone to
expect him at the place appointed, there happened to meet him in the street,
through which he was to pass, a great company of people, whom by their
multitude he ghess'd to be the city-watch: he thought it not expedient that
they should see him enter Stella's house: and to have staid their coming up to
him, would have made him in danger of being discovered by them; therefore he
resolved to avoid the street till they were past by: and so stealing by them,
he and his Friend slipped into the next house they saw open. The street was
wholly possessed with the great number of those that came in quest of these two;
who seeing them nowhere to be found, and disdaining that two men should be able
to baffle the hopes of so many, they divided themselves into several companies,
the better to be able to search every corner of the street. And Carlo, as soon
as they were dispersed, thinking the coast had been clear, he told his friend
Leonardo, that now, if he pleased, he might return to his own house, for any
thing that was now to be done, which would either require his company or his
assistance: and so ventured abroad again, as being fully persuaded, that the
people he had seen, were no other than the Watch, that nightly were to walk
about, to see if any tumult or disorder were stirring in the City: but he was
deceived; for his Brother Alfredo, out of a capricious perseverance in his Suit
to Stella, because he would needs show himself to have omitted no pains, no
earnestness, nor vigilance to win her impregnable heart, went accompanied with
all his train of Servants to visit her; and having by chance espied, about the
entrance into the Court, two men who seemed to slink away fearful of being
discovered, he commanded some of his followers to pursue them, and not to
return till they discovered who they were; and destitute of company as he was,
went directly toward Stella's house; just at that juncture of time, when she,
according to her appointment, was come to open the door, and her arms, to her
expected Lover; telling him, (for she thought it had been Carlo) in the most
endearing terms that could be imagined, That he was happily come to receive the
reward of his fidelity. Alfredo knew well, that he was not the man, to whom
these Favors were intended; but imagined that one of the Maidservants of the
house was to steal a Meeting with her Sweetheart at this appointed hour; and
that being deceived by the darkness of the night, and his design, she had
mistaken him for her Enamorado: therefore he resolved to lay hold upon this
opportunity for the gaining access to the sight and speech of his Mistress. And
so, invited by the false persuasion of her that opened the door, he followed
her in, wrapping his face up in his Cloak, that he might not be discerned by
her; who, not less ashamed than deceived, led him up stairs into her Chamber,
which she thought to be a place where she might entertain him with the greatest
freedom. By this time Carlo arriving at the house, had only not reached the
door, when it was shut against him by the Maid; to whom the sad Lover called
out, and prayed her to tell her Lady that Carlo was now at the door awaiting
her promised Favors, and that she should not long be ignorant of the accident
that detained him from her so long. How can this be, (replied the Maid) whenas
Carlo is already entered, and possessed of those Favors which you speak of?
Carlo at first suspended with admiration, came near enough to be discovered by
her; who when she knew him, was strangely surpised at this encounter; and
almost dead with amazement, confusedly related to him, that a certain man, who
he was she knew not, coming just as her Lady was opening the door, took
advantage of her mistake, and slipped in without being discovered. Carlo ashamed
that his resentment was not powerful enough to take away his life, instantly
entreated her to open him the door, lest the growth of this mistake might
proceed to the ruin of his dearest hopes. She opened him the door; counselling
him so to bridle in his passion, as that it might not break forth into any
disturbance, to the betraying or endangering of either of them; and with much
entreaty (for he was all on fire to unwind this intricate deceit) she led him
to the Chamber, where finding the door locked, he quickly espied a crevise,
through which it was no hard matter for him to discern plainly whatever was
done in the Chamber: he perceived Stella with a Dagger in her hand, resolutely
defending her self against Alfredo; to whom, both weeping and enraged, she
spoke thus: So great is the rudeness that you have shown in this disorderly
action, so great the disgrace I suffer in your rashness, that I should have
much ado to forbear bathing my Steel in your infamous blood, before you stir
out of this place, if the consideration of my honor did not more withhold me,
than any humor I have to put up so villainous an affront; but I swear by
heaven, Though I am a woman, and hindered by the imbecility of my sex, from
making your life a sacrifice to my just anger and revenge; yet I will at least
venture to knew who you are, that ye may not live secure from my rage, though
you should obscure your self in the bowels of the earth; for outrages of this
nature, as they cannot be excused from blame, so they ought not to remain
unpunished: I invited you in, it is true; but it was because I thought you to be
the man, who is tomorrow morning to be my Spouse: at length, mistrusting some
deceit, I could not but seek the satisfaction of knowing who you were; but your
face was so muffled, your whispers so low, that I could not inform my self
either by your countenance or voice who you should be: no wonder, if after my
earnest, but vain endeavors to know you, your obstinate silence rendered you
suspected to me. Nor had I less reason to be afraid, when being both alone, and
a woman, I perceived it your design, by obscuring your self, to deprive me of
the hopes of discovering your imposture: but whoever you are, I have reason to
conclude, that you are not the person whom I expected; seeing your actions are
so little conformable to that nobleness and civility which always accompanies
his behavior, and that you are no other than of the meanest and rudest sort of
men: he, whom shame forces to conceal his face, is made to discover the
falsity of his heart. I had called out to raise the Family, if I had not feared
that my Fathers passion, should he find me in such a state as this, would
hinder him from giving ear to any reason I should allege to justify my
innocence; so that I have put my self upon this defensive posture; and Heaven
has been so favorable to me, as to permit me the means both of opposing your
villainous intentions, and of being able to quit this wretched life, rather than
consent, in the least manner, to my own dishonor: therefore resolve suddenly
what it is you would with me; for if you shall dare to attempt any thing
ignoble upon my person, you shall soon seem weltring in my blood, and your
design made frustrate by my death.

Carlo's mind was pretty well pacified, when he saw how ill it succeeded with
the unknown in his base enterprise, and with what courage Stella defended her
self from whatever violence he might offer: but he became inflamed with a
generous desire to make it appear to her, how highly he resented the injury
that was offered her, and that he wanted neither force nor courage to revenge
it. He ordered the Maid to run in haste into her Chamber, and to give out, That
her Master was coming: whereat Stella was as much troubled, as Alfredo amazed;
his haughty heart condescended to wish that he had been out of the house at
that instant: yet when he bethought himself, how much affection and good will
the Old man had for him, he boldly opened the door, as rather hoping that this
might prove advantageous to his design, than fearing it would be any hinderance
to it; but he was scarce out of the Chamber, when he saw his Brother coming
toward him, who setting his Sword to his breast, threatened him with present
death, unless he would instantly declare to him who he was: So surprised was
Alfredo at this Rancontre, that what he heard and saw before his eyes, he could
scarce believe to be any other than a dream; perceiving him present, whom he
supposed to have been many miles off. It was not a little confusion to him, to
behold Carlo with fury in his looks, still persist in his menacing demand:
Nevertheless he made this resolute Answer, That he would as soon consent to be
cut in pieces as to declare his name; but That if he esteemed his own puissance
such, as to be able to extort from him a confession of his name, he might (if
he pleased to repair to the street which was near at hand, and a place much
fitter to decide such controversies in) give testimony of it, with more honor
and safety to himself, and with less hazard to the reputation of Stella. The
thing which he proposed was not more pleasing to Carlo than distasteful to
Stella, who thought her self as much concerned in his well or ill being, as if
one life had been common to them both; and would by all means have hindered
their purpose, but knew not how. Carlo went forth followed by Alfredo, who
beheld him with a world of envy, since he had so plainly discovered, that he
was become absolute Lord of Stella's affections, and that it was he whom she
expected, and in stead of whom he himself was admitted into her Chamber. Who
would have thought, that had but heard Alfredo word it so resolutely with
Carlo, and so freely to appoint a meeting, that he had not been of the most
valiant? but it was indeed upon this confidence only, that his followers, in
whose obedience he reposed much trust, had seen him enter into the house, and
were standing at the door to attend his coming forth: yet so cunningly masked
his cowardice, that it caused Stella to have much trouble and fear for the
safety of her loved Carlo.

At length, into the street went the two adverse Brothers, but with far
different Resolutions; for whereas Carlo thought of nothing less than being
avenged of his Enemy; Alfredo was on the other side much dismayed when he
looked round about him, and saw not one man in the street except his adversary;
for it seems those that came along with him, weary of tracing to and fro the
street, returned to the place where they had left their Lord; but finding him
not there, they were gone to seek him in some houses of recreation, which for
his divertisement he was wont to visit, which stood ready open at all hours to
entertain those of the most principal of that place. Alfredo fearful of the
valor of his enraged Brother, and somewhat distrustful of his own, told him (to
hinder if it were possible by some excuse the drawing of Swords) That he had so
much love and affection for that Lady, as that he would not that any tumult or
mischief should happen so near the place of her dwelling; therefore he thought
it more expedient that they should retire into the next street, where they
might more freely determine, by the dispute of their swords, whether of them
had the greatest interest in her. The motion Carlo willingly accepted, as
thinking that none ought to be more tender of Stella's honor than himself; who
in the mean while suspicious of the event, Ay me! (said she, all bathed in her
tears, which were able to make the rocks sensible) Who would have thought, that
so hopeful a beginning as our loves had, should be attended with such
improsperous success? What avails it me to have been favorable to Carlo 's
passion, and to be disdeceiv'd in the Opinion I had of his indeserts, when this
very night, wherein I made full account to have been entirely his, I see my
self in such danger of utterly losing him? O Love! how certain is it, that one
sorrow wherewith thou of flictest us, countervaileth all those joys which thy
aliurements promise to us! I know not what Witchcraft it is wherewith thou
inveiglest men's minds; but sure it is, thou treatest all discourteously, and
yet all follow thee; thou deceivest all, and yet all admire thee: It must needs
be, that Heaven has invested thee with some secret virtue, to make thee so
charming, that those who have cause to complain of thee, solicit thee; those
whom thou rejectest, adhere unto thee. O cordial poison, which at once both
comfortest and killest! Deceitful fire, which burnest without consuming! Sweet
Tyranny, which Oppressest all, yet make all delight to be Oppressed by thee!
In fine, Thou art a Universal Tragedy, that smilest at the beginning, yet art
accompanied with disustrous ends. There is no condition to which thou art not
injurious. When one loves, the other disdains, what despair ensues? When both
love, yet are debarred enjoyment, what impatience it breeds? If separated, what
dejectedness? If affected with Jealousy, what trouble and disquietudes? But,
if being Married, through interest of Fortune, they both happen to disgust each
other, what greater misery can be imagined? With these, and such like
discourses, sought the disconsolate Stella to divert the violence of her
passion, when looking into the street after the two Duellists, and seeing
neither the one nor the other appear, she began first to revolve in her mind,
what should have betided them; next, to doubt of the event; and lastly, to have
sollicitous thoughts for the safety of her Lover; nor could she refrain from
fearing (though she strove to suppress that imagination) lest he might be
either wounded or slain: but to free her self from the perplexity of these
tormenting doubts, she resolved to attempt a thing, which though it seemed
somewhat inconsistent with the decency of a virgins behavior, yet might be
excused by the violence of a Lovers passion; well knowing, that whatever she
could do for Carlo, could not be liable to a deeper censure than what she had
already done, in professing she had designed him to be her Husband. So that she
went boldly into the streets, leaving her Maid to stand sentinel at the door;
and passing the first, she came to the place where Carlo behaving himself with
much gallantry pressed hard upon the life of his Antagonist, who less
courageous than his late bravado promised, in stead of manfully defending
himself, began to complain of his Brothers presumption, and to question him how
he, knowing him to be Alfredo, durst offer so great a violence to his person?
But Carlo transported with anger at the memory of former injuries, and resolved
not to suffer any longer under his Imperious Envy, vowed not to treat him as a
Brother, but as an Enemy. By this, Stella approached so near, that him whom
wilful silence and his muffled countenance withheld from her knowledge in the
chamber, she could now easily discern to be Alfredo; and finding into what
danger the valor of Carlo had reduced his life, foreseeing the evil which
would accompany his death, for that it would be the means of her Lovers
banishment, and so deprive her at once both of his presence and her own life,
she interposed her self between the two combatants, just at the juncture of
time, when Alfredo, through haste to avoid his enemies fury, having stumbled
and fallen to the ground, Carlo was about to give that fatal blow which was to
have put a period to his wretched days, if at the same instant he had not
beheld something like an Angel stand ready to defend that life which he sought
to take away; at which he held his hand, and saw that to be Stella, which he
had but even now taken for some heavenly Apparition; who giving way that
Alfredo might rise, spoke to him in this manner;

Is it possible, Alfredo, that being born great, and having had the fairest
opportunities that might be, to know the world, you should not yet know that
Love is a thing not to be gained by any force or compulsion; and that the Will
has so absolute a freedom in it self, as not to be overruled by any power
less than Heaven it self? You think, belike, that to subdue a Lady's Affection
is the same thing with batt'ring down a Wall, or taking in a strong Fortress;
but you deceive your self: for the Ice is not more obdurate against the
piercing gusts of the North Wind, than a Woman's heart against the importunity
of an indiscreet Lover. Perhaps you will tell me, that you did it thinking to
weary me out with your incessant Solicitations, especially since your flames
had not arrived unto this hight of Ardour, had they not received nourishment
from the respect wherewith I seemed to treat you at the beginning of your
Address. To this I shall Answer at a more convenient season. That which I
shall now say, is only this, That in despite of all your traiterous practices
to hinder our Loves, it may plainly appear to you, if you are not blind, by the
same token to which but even now you have been witness, that the love and
respect I have for Carlo, is no less than what is due to a Husband: And know
this, That when a Woman of my condition is driven so openly and freely to
declare her passion, to go about to remove it, is no other thing than to
attempt impossibilities. But because of the unseasonablenesse of the time, and
for fear of what inconveniences would follow, if our late stirring should have
caused any disquietude to my Father, I must not consent to any longer delay's
in this place; you therefore I commend to your Lodging and repose: as for your
Brother, he may (if he please) henceforth account my habitation his.

Stella had not quite made an end of her last words, before Alfredo, pierced to
the heart with envy and despair, went away, casting about in his mind all
ways whereby he might be revenged. Carlo on the contrary remained so joyful and
contented, as if it had seemed to him, that Fortune weary of persecuting him,
had reserved no more afflictions for him: but he that was born to be the object
of her malice, soon found his imaginations to be but Chimera's; for Heaven had
decreed to imbitter the glory of this his Conquest with such variety of
misfortunes, that he might in some sort have been said to be a gainer, if he
had not gained the accomplishment of his hopes. It happened, while Stella was
deciding the quarrel between the two Brothers, that her Father having been
wakened by the noise which their stirring in the house had made not long
before, and not being able again to compose himself to sleep, for thinking what
might be the cause of it, he chose rather to rise and satisfy himself of his
doubt, than to watch the whole night out in such a tedious suspension of mind:
and so taking his Hat and Cloak, and calling one of his Servants to light him,
he went to all the avenues, and searched every corner of the house; being
resolved either to pacify or confirm his jealousies: nor did he leave any
probable cause unsuspected, except his daughters entertaining Carlo; the
decency of her words, the modest composure of her countenance, the reservedness
and decorum which she duly observed in all her actions, rendered her
reputation so unspotted, that it would have been the most hard thing in the
world to have possessed him with the least prejudice against her integrity. That
which he had most to suspect, was, lest some one, who thirsted after his
wealth, had watched an opportunity to ease him of as much of it as they could;
willing rather to purchase it at so easy a rate, than to take a journey for it
to the Indies as he had done. At length he came to the place where the
centinel-Maid stood, expecting the return of the two Lovers; who well aware of
her Masters coming, before he could approach near enough to see her, had
betaken her self to a secret place to hide her from his sight: but so
distracted she was with this sudden surprizal, that she forgot to take the Key
out of the door. the Old man wondered at it, but imputed it to the carelessness
of the Servant that had been employed that night to shut the doors; and so
leaving them fast locked himself, he took out the Key, and returned back to his
Chamber, to compose himself again to his rest. In the mean while Carlo and
Stella were come back secure of any such great misfortune: Carlo called to the
Maid to open them the door; but seeing himself (after many call's unanswered)
he concluded that she was fallen asleep; but she, as soon as she was assured of
her Masters being retired, was about to have returned again to the discharge of
her Office, which his coming had interrupted, and to see if she could discover
the return of the two Lovers: But when she came and found the Key missing, she
presently called to mind the error she had committed in leaving it in the door
when she went to hide her self; and going into the Balcone, she found them
arrived, and related to them all that had happened. Stella, whether it were that
she saw Carlo too much troubled already to be farther afflicted with her
lamentations, or that the excess of her grief obstructed the passage of her
words, uttered nothing but sighs which she fetched from the very bottom of her
heart; and lifted up her eyes to heaven, to which she seemed to complain of the
many injuries wherewith Fortune had treated her. Carlo beheld her with pity,
and wished her to consider that all these crosses came upon her merely for his
sake; and that it was only because she loved him, that she was so tossed upon
the waves of adversity; and that he was so much more afflicted for her
misfortunes than his own, that he could willingly have consented to sacrifice
his life to her quiet, and to the freeing her from those cross influences
which she participated of with him. Ye do well, Carlo, (answered Stella)
knowing that I am so much yours, as that I slight all dangers to make sure of
your safety, to be so ready to forsake your life to please me; presenting me
with the greatest of discomforts, at a time when I stand most in need of
encouragement. But what is it (I beseech you) that causes in you this
willingness to die (if, as you say, no afflictions are grievous to you
otherwise than I am concerned in them) whenas you ought to be confident that
your life is the sole cause that makes me have a desire to live? Ah, my Carlo,
what greater content can there accrue to me, than to see you live long and
happy? Consider that I am devoted to you, and that if I have expressed a deep
sense of this misfortune, it is for your sake that I resent it more, than for
what I my self suffer; so long as I am with you, there can nothing so sad or
disastrous befall me, that shall have power to move me to any great dejection of
mind. Dispose of me according to your pleasure, and bring me to what place you
shall think most convenient, where I may live concealed from my Fathers sight
until his displeasure be over passed; and he at length finding me disposed of
so much to my content, may applaud both his own Fortune and mine, for having
given him a Son-in-law so noble, me a Husband so virtuous. Carlo expressing
himself infinitely joyful, gave her thanks for the high favors wherewith she
had obliged him, as briefly as the time and place required: and musing a while
with himself what course they were best to take, it was not long ere he
resolved upon the house of his friend Leonardo for a safe retreat to him and
his Lady, where they might consult at leisure for their own advantage. The maid
was unwilling to remain in her Masters house, to run the hazard of those
inconveniences that attended her, in case it should be discovered that she was
a party in her young Ladies fault; and therefore being let down from the
Balcone, by the help of Carlo, she went along with him and Stella: being
arrived at Leonardo's house, they related to him all that had happened; and
reposing much confidence in the counsel of so faithful a friend, they besought
him to give them his best assistance and advice in this extremity whereinto
they were plunged; which he faithfully did; telling them, That being it could
be no way safe for them to remain there, he thought it would be most expedient
for them, before the morning light, to retire to a pleasant Country House of
his, about three Leagues from the City, beautified with Fountains and
delightful Gardens. And to that end, he immediately gave order to one of his
Servants to make ready his own Coach; and commanded him to wait upon them, and
to observe them with the same respect as if it were to his own person. Carlo
and Stella having rendered him thanks in such affectionate expressions as showed
how highly they resented this so great Favor, took their leaves, and prayed
him, That he would be careful to give them notice from time to time what rumors
or effects this flight of theirs would produce in the City, and what
apprehensions the Old man would have of it.

The mind of Stella, considering the several Scenes of Chance she had run
through in the space of two days, was by this time fluctuating in the midst of
many various and doubtful thoughts; but when she bethought herself, that all
these disturbances were but to make way for her to the free enjoyment of her
loved Carlo, she resolved to bear them with an undaunted patience. Carlo
pretended to all that were in the Village, that Stella was his Sister, lest the
Country People resorting to the City, might happily in their common discourses
let fall some passage or other tending to their discovery. Thus concealing both
their Conditions and their Name, they lived for a while contented and secure.
But Carlo's malevolent Planet not yet weary of afflicting him, found out new
and unexpected means to complete the number of his sorrows; and to effect this
work, there was an Agent provided, the fittest that could have been imagined;
it was the daughter of him who had the overseeing of Leonardo's Gardens; she
was a Virgin, of person not unhandsom, brisk and lively in her behavior; and
of a wit more penetrating, than from one of her birth could have been expected;
who seeing in Carlo so many graces and attracts worthy both to be admired and
loved, entertained a passion for him, so unbridled, that it could scarce avoid
the suspicion of Stella her self. But as for Carlo, his imagination was so
entirely employed in contemplating the perfections of his Mistress, that there
was no space left void for any other thoughts to enter. Leonardo was used to
visit them every night, to see how they fared in their new habitation; and to
give them notice how their affairs succeeded: but one time above the rest, he
enjoined Carlo, as he tendered his safety, not to stir abroad where he might be
seen of any; for that Stella's Father having already given his word to the
Count, ambitious of being advanced to so honorable an Alliance, was so far from
being to be appeased by any entreaty, or admitting of any of those excuses that
were made by many of Carlo's Friends in his behalf, that he complained to the
Magistrate of the City, and obtained of him, to proclaim the reward of two
thousand Growns to whomsoever should apprehend him, or bring any tidings of
him. This diligent inquisition did not at all trouble the mind of Cario, who
thought himself secure in his Country-palace; nor did he care for going any
whither abroad, having at home abundantly enough to content him; for in the day
time, beside the company of his Lady, he entertained himself with the delicacy
of the Flowers, which yielded pleasure both to his sight and scent, and the
soft Music of the clear Streams: In the nightime he intermitted to be
Stella's Brother. And thus for a while they enjoyed one another in security and
innocent delight.

One evening they were sitting together in the Garden, to take the benefit of
the West-winds cool whispers, when they might hear Lucinda (for so was the
damosel called, that was before mentioned) incited by the violence of Love, and
secure of any bodies over-hearing her, breath forth her Passion in this Song.

ON a green bank sat a fair Shepherdess,
From whose Aspect the morn might seem to rise;
Save that some clouds of care and heaviness,
Obscured the serene luster of her eyes.
Her sighs into the empty Air she vented;
She sighing sang, and singing thus lamented:
How shall I shake this tyrant from my heart?
It Is death alone, I fear, can Love remove:
If then my life be cause of all my smart,
Cease heart to live, that I may cease to love.
But if thou art denied by Fate to die,
This only's left, To suffer constantly.
Lucinda concluded her Song with so deep a sigh, that Stella could not choose
but observe it; and being touched with a kind of jealousy, she beheld Carlo
with a look less serene than at other times: but neither did he take any
notice of it, nor seemed she at all to be troubled at it. Lovers, in the
infancy of their enjoyments, are scarce at leisure to entertain jealousy, or
strange Loves: yet Carlo his being so passionately loved by Lucinda, cost him
dear; for the Servant, whom Leonardo had appointed to attend upon the two
Lovers, having, not many days since, conceived a passion for Lucinda; and not
apprehending any other cause of her insensibility, than that her heart was
prepossest with an affection she bore to Carlo, bethought himself of a way
either to ingratiate himself into her favor, or to be revenged of her for her
disdain, which was, to discover to her the whole progress of the loves of
those two persons, and the true reason of their living concealed in that place.
As this action of his was most ignoble, to betray those that were committed to
his fidelity; so it fared with him accordingly: he only obtaining the balest of
those ends which he had proposed to himself: for this discovery did not at all
move in Lucinda any affection for him, but only made her despair of that
success which she had promised to her self in her love to Carlo, which was not
long concealed from him himself.

One day, as he was sitting to repose himself at the foot of a shady tree,
there appeared unto him, near to the place where he sat, Lucinda, in a posture
so melancholy, that grief seemed to have made her really, what was but feigned
of Niobe; which he strictly observing, could not forbear to demand of her what
might be the cause of her so deep melancholy? The cause (replied she, in a
troubled and disdainful way) is so apparent, that do but enquire of these
trees, these flowers, nay, toese rocks themselves, and they will all declare my
sufferings, being much more sensible than those that are the Authors of them.
This purling fountain that you see run whispering along the smooth pebbles,
about what, think ye, are all her murmuring discourses, but about my love, or
rather my fondness, who have suff'red my self to be transported with an
affection for him, who (by reason that he has disposed of his heart already to
one that has more right and title to it) is obliged to be inflexible toward
me? I know I ought not, as the case stands, to expect any milder treatment from
you but tell me plainly, since your true condition is not altogether hid from
me, however you have sought to mask it; Is not this Stella your Spouse, whom
you feign to be your Sister? are not you Brother to Count Alfredo? and is not
she daughter to Don Ferdinand of Aragon? did not you seduce her from her
Fathers house? To what end serves this counterfeiting the names of Brother and
Sister, whenas the night, through all her darkness, can discern a different
relation? Little do you imagine into what inconveniences this disguisement of
yours has plunged me: for had you appeared at first what really you were, I
had been sufficiently warned to fortify my mind against all unlawful desires;
it being a thing that cannot enter into my thoughts, that any woman, be she
never so wanton or unchaste, would give her self liberty to cherish in her
breast a passion for one who is entirely another. But, Oh unhappy me that I
am, not to be informed of your true condition, until I had lost my self and my
liberty in a fond misapprehension: now I am disdeceiv'd, I shall labor with my
whole might, to suppress these unwarrantable flames, before they proceed any
farther to ruin me. Nevertheless, I would not have you ignorant that you owe
your safety to the good will which I have born you, though now I strive to
forget it: and do not imagine I speak this to flatter you; for is there any
one, think you, that knows the abode of a person whom Justice requires, and
hearing the reward of two thousand Crowns proposed to whomsoever should bring
tidings of him, would have patience to conceal such a person, without some
great consideration? You see I know your abode, and who you are; having an
opportunity both to be rich, and to revenge my self of your disdain; if I did
not approve the reason of it, and forgive it: but to give you proof how
unfeignedly my affection has been, and to let you see that I am not really
what these homely garments make me appear to be, long may you enjoy your fair
Stella with all the tranquillity and happiness that these Solitudes can
afford, while I implore Heaven to give me strength to extinguish these flames
which my breast has unfortunately harbored so long: And I doubt not, but
Time, which is wont to bring about greater miracles, will also effect this,
since we oft-times see, that that which is doated on to day, to morrow is
forgotten.

Carlo remained in a kind of ecstasie, to hear from Lucinda's mouth such an
exact relation of the important accidents of his life; and was somewhat
comforted in the assurances she gave him of keeping secret all that she knew of
him: yet knowing how little confidence ought to be reposed in one that loves
without being beloved again; and that his own life, and the safety of Stella
depended upon her silence; he thought it his wisest course to appear outwardly
to her, not altogether insensible of her love; supposing, that by a seeming
compliance, though but for a while, she might be lulled into such a pleasing
contentment, as might make her forget all thoughts of divulging any thing to
his harm: And just as he was putting this resolution in practice, telling her
how much her good esteem of him had obliged him, and wishing himself in a
Condition free enough to entertain her love; Stella, with whom it was an
unwonted thing, to be never so little absent from him, going to seek him in
that fair province of Flowers, came to a little thicket of Myrtles and Laurels,
through which, although she could not see him; yet by the distinct sound of his
Speech, she ghess'd him to be but at a small distance from her: her curiosity,
to know who it was that he discoursed with, led her to a tree, whose branches
wider displayed than the rest, permitted her plainly to discern Lucinda and him
together.

This unexpected sight, inflamed her with a desire to know what should be the
occasion of this so great familiarity; so that (with a most greedy attention)
drawing as near as possibly she could without being discerned, she heard Carlo
say, (but it was rather to engage Lucinda to sec acy, than out of any free
inclination to serve her) That he was no less sersible of her passion, than
deeply affected with her beauty; and that if he did not requite her with those
real Services which her love deserved from him, she was to impute it to a Cause
that was very well known to her self; for that being bound to Stella by
obligations of so high a nature, that the least of them was her having left her
Fathers house to follow him, he was utterly deprived of the liberty to dispose
of himself according to his own mind* But that when his troublesome estate
should be becalmed, and his affairs quietly composed, he would contrive things
so much to her contentment, that she should plainly see how much he was her
Servant.

Lucinda upon this retired, perceiving some of the Gardiners people coming that
way, not without reason; for her love was not so closely carried, but that it
was whispered among them.

Stella remained a while so lost in astonishment, that she had scarce life and
sense enough left in her, to perceive that she was jealous; and when she came
to her self, she was not able to endure, so much as to think of Carlo's
treachery, or of Lucinda's impudence: So transported she was with rage and
jealousy, to see Carlo not only love a person so much inferior, but with so
great a passion as to reveal those things to her which he ought to have kept
undiscovered, if it were possible, even from himself; that she rushed out in a
fury from among the bushes, where she had stood, exclaiming with loud and
con^u^'d cries against his disloyalty. To what end, (said she) ungrateful man,
serve all these feigned shows of affection, whenas I evidently see that you
only pretend a love to me, in the mean while carrying on a secret design,
unworthy both of my quality, of your many obligations to me, and the dangers
whereunto I have exposed my self for your sake? you ought to appear what you
are, Carlo, the most perfidious man the earth bears. I confess I shall not be
able so far to forget the good esteem I have formerly born you, as altogether
to refrain from tears and pity, if your life should chance to be endangered;
yet this advantage I should have, That I should see my self revenged of the
ignoble dealings of so infamous a person; for it is much more agreeable to a
woman of a generous spirit, to die, than to bear the infidelity of a person to
whom she has given her heart. How worthy a recompense have you given me for
the loss of that which I held more dear than all things in the world beside?
Is it to this, that all those promises are come, which flowed from you in a
stream of tears, when I permitted you to become master of this unfortunate
beauty? I am glad, however, that at length you appear to me in your own
colors; that although I cannot take from you again, what to the prejudice of
my honor you have already obtained of me, I may at least free my self from
those your impostures, to which hitherto I have lived a Victim: I am likely to
see you shortly exposed to the vengeance of your Brother and my Father, who as
they are persons both potent, and highly incensed against you, will hardly be
satisfied with any thing less than your life: therefore I will only deal so
heartily with you, as to give you warning beforehand, that you must look for no
greater favor from me, than what you would expect from your greatest enemy;
and that I shall combine with those that hate you, that they may prosecute you
with the more violence.

Much more than this, had Stella to utter, if grief and vehement passion had
not stopped up the passage of her words: so she retriv'd the violence of her
grief with tears, which to a heart oppressed with excessive sadness, are
rather a heart-easing, than a burden.

Carlo observing the whole village rung of Stella's loud Complaints, and
considering well the nature of those rustic people, foresaw that his Tragedy
only wanted but little of being completed; assuring himself, that the news of
his being there, would quickly be conveyed to those that sought his life; which
was in effect no sooner feared than accomplished: For, one of the Bores,
frantic with the hopes of Gold, flew to Sevil, and informed the Ministers of
Justice of all that had passed in the Village.

Stella, in the mean time, was more than ever dismayed, when she perceived
Carlo more sensible of her distaste, than of the dangers that were impendent on
him; and seeing him so much troubled and endangered, she could not choose but
repent her of what she had done.

Love may well boast himself the Son of a God, since he partakes of quality so
proper unto those above, Aptness to forgive.

Carlo, on the contrary, desirous to remove from Stella's mind the least
remainder of Suspicion, brought Lucinda into her presence, to manifest unto her
the manner how she came to be acquainted with those secrets which he had been
suspected to have declared unto her himself.

Lucinda having unfeignedly declared unto them the truth; Carlo, to make an end
of clearing himself to Stella, told her,

That the reason why he spoke so obligingly to one of her mean Condition, was,
to engage her to be silent of what was in her power to divulge concerning them;
conceiving it more prudence to delude her with false expectation, than to stand
to the courtesy of an incensed woman's tongue, in matters of so great
concernment.

Stella confessed her mistake no otherwise than by silence; but within a very
short space, while they were discoursing of the strange accidents this night
had produced, there came in a Messenger, to advise Carlo,

That if he desired not to come into the hands of Justice, it was then high
time for him to make all possible speed away, for that the Pursuivants were so
near at hand, that it would be very difficult for him, if not impossible, to
escape them.

Stella also seeing the great danger he was like to incur, if they should take
him in her company, prayed him to shift for himself, being that he was the
principal object of her Fathers vengeance. He accordingly obeyed; and after
some mutual caresses, and many a deep fetched sigh, took his leave; telling
her, That he would fly to Granada, where he had many Friends and Kindred, and
there expect the blowing over of these storms.

But to let him see how constant a friend his ill Fortune was to him, in never
forsaking him; By that time he was arrived at the uttermost gate, he found his
passage stopped up by his enemies; who demanding of him who he was? his high
Courage would not consent to resolve them. Therefore drawing his Sword, he
stood upon his own defense; thinking (as indeed he had reason) that alife would
not be ill lost, to avoid the miseries of a prison. And he had lost it, if
Leonardo had not come in opportunely enough to persuade him, not to cast away
his life so rashly, when he saw himself overpowered by so great a number of
his pursuers: whereupon he rendered himself, though with much regret, and more
out of compliance with his Friends advice, than out of any fear of his enemies
power. Having secured his person, they made a diligent search after Stella; but
that labor might well have been spared, for she thinking Carlo had had time
enough to evade the Hue and Cry that was made after him, thought it her best
course likewise to commit her self to the safeguard of her heels: and when the
Soldiers were all busied in apprehending of Carlo, she found a way to escape
out at a contrary gate, which was not guarded; resolving to take up her first
station at the very next Village she came at.

Thus, with a mind as calm as her Sorrows would permit, and the hopes that at
length she should recover again the sight of her dear Carlo, she went along
unattended by any other company save her own Sorrows, with whom she silently
discoursed all the way, till at length, overcome with weariness, and invited
by the freshness of a most pleasant Rivolet that ran gently sliding along
under an impending Rock, she cast her self upon the Flowery bank, yielding up
her Senses to the sweet Captivity of Sleep, out of which her very cares could
not waken her, until the Sunbeams gilded the mountain tops with light. When
she awaked, and saw her self alone, and in a strange place; not knowing which
way to direct her steps unto the place which she intended, she was in no small
perplexity: When casting her eyes toward a pleasant valley, she saw a great
flock of Sheep; and not far off, their Shepherd sitting in a melancholy
posture; who to a certain musical Instrument, which Shepherds use in those
Countries, sung this following Sonnet:

CElio remains disconsolate,
for saken of his cruel Lover;
Who not ashamed to viclate
her Faith, does her false heart discover.
Often does he his hard Fate bemoan,
Inveighs on her inconstant mind;
Often blames himself, for deating on
A thing more fickle than the wind.
Sometimes (unhappy man) he deemed
Her absence might have quenched his flame;
But now more fair than ere, she seemed;
His flames increase through her disdain.
Now naught is lose him but despair:
His adverse Fate brought him to see,
Things distant most admired are;
Enjoyment breeds satiety.
He goes to see the fair unkind,
Whom her new Lovers arms immure;
Him she vouchsafed not unce to mind,
In her incenstancy secure.
Was It not enough, Phyllis said he,
That thy deceitful charming Wiles
Should cheat my fond credulity,
That thou seen'st others to beguile?
If amid'st these thy nere delights,
Tho^ have no (...) me,
Think how awakened (...) frights;
Think Phyllis on thy perjury.
Longer to grieve he sav 'twas vain,
Longer his troubled thoughts to vex;
Phyllis triumphs in her disdain,
Phyllis the falsest of her seis.
As soon as he had ended his Song, she inquired of him, which was the way to
the next Town? The Shepherd no sooner saw her, but that by her surprising
beauty, and those many graces that always accompanied her, his natural
rusticity was on a sudden transformed into those Civilities, which might have
befitted a personage of far higher rank; for besides that he omitted no
importunities to make her accept part of those poor Viands which he carried in
his Wallet; He left his flock, to conduct her to a little Village at the foot
of a Mountain, where having provided her of a fit receptacle, both for Safety
and Accommodation, he took his leave, and committed her to Heaven's protection.

She remained not long in this Village, but remembering that Carlo had
determined to go to Granada, she prepared to go thither after him with all the
speed she could: to that end, she sold one of her Jewels, and furnished her
self with a Mule, and other necessaries for her Journey; and hired a poor
laboring man to be her guide; who promised to serve her with all faithfulness.

But before she arrived at Granada, Carlo was a close Prisoner in Sevil, and
under strict guard: but so many, and so powerful were his friends, and so great
the respect the whole City bare him for his many laudable qualities, that Don
Fernando, mollified by their persuasions, was inclined to pardon all that was
past, so that his Daughter were but restored him. They dispach'd Messengers in
all haste to the Village where Carlo and she had been concealed; but the people
Certified them, That she stole away from thence the same night that Carlo was
apprehended: Then they made a strict enquiry throughout all Sevil, but could
not meet with any body that could give them the least intimation where she was.

This was a grief which went deepest to Carlo's heart of all that had yet
befaln; wherefore he besought Heaven with tears, to fortify him with patience
against all the heavy Crosses that crowded so fast upon him.

Alfredo now is he only, of all men, who grieves not that she is lost; who
since he had been so unsuccesful in his Love to her, is become so far possessed
with malice against her, that he wished in his heart no less mischief were
befallen her, than the loss of her life. But his evil wishes recoiled upon his
own head, instead of reaching her to whose harm they were directed: For Stella
had not been long arrived at Granada, before she received information of
Carlo's imprisonment, and of her Fathers indulgence to her: she speeded away a
Messenger to Certify him that she was in Granada, and in health. The Old man
overjoyed to hear such welcome News, went forth to receive her, accompanied
with Carlo, and the prime Gentry of the City: Only Alfredo refused to
contribute his presence to that Festivity, wherein others joy was his
discomfort; nay, so sensible was he of his reproach, when he perceived that his
envy and ignoble carriage was notorious to the world, that soon after, he kept
his Chamber; and being seized with a violent sickness arising from no other
apparent Cause but a deep melancholy, within a few weeks he ended his wretched
days.

The Sorrow which Carlo had for his Brothers death, was greater then might have
been expected from him who gained so fair an inheritance by it, and who had
been so discourteonsly treated by him in his lifetime: But Nature commonly
combines more effectually, than other respects can dis-unite; especially in
noble breasts, and those not possessed with the Spirit of Ambition. With a
serene and sober countenance, he received the congratulations of his new
Estate, and gave God thanks that had freed him from the bondage of misery, and
brought him to a tranquillity of life, which but a few days before he despaired
of ever obtaining: (so it most frequently falls out, that good or bad Fortune
come when they are least expected.) Thus, after many rugged brunts of
adversity, Carlo lived in great Splendour and happiness, enjoying the society
of his beloved Stella, and the Honors of his deceased Brother, of whom the
common voice was, That Rancor and Envy shortened his life: a deserved End for
him that repines at other men's Prosperities, as if they were his own
Afflictions.

The End.
Reader, These Books following, are Printed by Nath. Brook, and are to be sold
at his shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
Times Treasury or Academy for the Gentry, for their accomplishment in
Arguments of discourse, habit, fashion: summed up all in a Character of Honor,
by Ri. Brathwait Esquire. That excellent piece of Physiognomy and Chiromancy,
Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical Proportions and Signal Moles of the body; the
subject of Dreams: to which is added, The Art of Memory. By Ri. Sanders. Fol.
Magic Astrology vindicated, by H. Warren. Fons Lacrymarum: or, a Fountain of
Tears, with an Elegy upon Sir Charles Lucas. By J Quarles. 8. A treatile of
Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times. By Jos. Hall, late B. of
Exon and Norwich. 12 Mirror of Complements, fitted for Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Scholars, and Strangers; with forms of speaking and writing of Letters most in
fashion: with witty Poems, and a Table expoun ding hard English words. Divinity
no enemy to Astrology: A Sermon for the Society of Astrologers for the year
1653. By Dr. Tho. Swadlin. Select Thoughts: or, Choice Helps for a pious
Spirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus, by J. Hall, B. of Norwich.
A new piece. The holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion. To which is
added Songs in the night: or, Cheerfulness under Affliction, by Jos. Hall,
Bishop of Norwich. A new piece. The Art of Memory: a cure for a weak Memory,
useful to all persons, from the Gown to the Clown. A new piece. That complete
piece called the Exact Surveyor of Land, showing how to plot all manner of
Grounds, and to reduce and divide the same. Also Irish measure, reduced to
English statute Measure; useful for all that either sell or purchase, by I. E.
Milk for Children: or, A plain and easy Method teaching to Read and to Write,
with brief Rules for Schoolmasters to instruct their Scholars in, and Masters
to instruct their Families in, by Dr. Thomas. Culpepers Physical and
Chyrurgical Remains, of his own admired Experience, never published before now
by his Wife, being his last Legacies. Culpepers Semiotica: or, his Astrological
Judgment of Diseases, much enlarged from the Decumbiture of the sick, which way
to find out the Cause, Change, and End of the Disease. Also whether the sick
be likely to live or die: With the signs of life and death by the body of the
fick party, according to the Judgment of Hippocrates. With a Treatise of
Urines, by N. Culpeper. Cornelius Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy,
of Geomancy: Magical Elements of Peter de Abano, the nature of Spirits, made
English by R. Turner. Pulpit Sparks, being set forms of Prayers used before
Sermon by Dr. Jeremiah Tailor, Dr. Cillingham, Dr. Hewit, and many other
Eminent Divines. The Queens Closet opened. Incomparable secrets in Physic,
Chyrurgery; preserving, candying, and cooking, as they were presented to the
Queen, transcribed from the true Copies of her Majesty's own receipt-Books by
W. M. one of her late Servants. The Conveyancers Light, or the Complete Clark
and Scrivener's Guide, being an Exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances
now in use, as they were penned and perfected by diverse Learned Judges, eminent
Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient and modern; whereunto is added a
Concordance from K. Rich. 3. to this present. Wits Interpreter, the English
Parnassus, or a sure Guide to those admirable Accomplishments, that complete
our English Gentry in the most acceptable qualificarions of Discourse or
Writing: Also the whole Mystery of those pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and
Love are made ease, in the Art of Reasoning, Theater of Courtship, Labyrinth of
Fancies, Love-Songs, Drollery; The perfect Inditer of Letters, Alamode, by I.
C. The Floating Island, a Tragedy-Comedy acted before the King, by the Students
of Christ-Church. By Dr. Stroud. Wit and Drollery: with other Jovial Poems.
Paracelsus of Occult Philosophy, or his Secrets of Nature.

