To the Parliament, the Army, and all the Well-affected in the Nation, who have
been faithful to the Good Old Cause.
THat there has been a backsliding and turning aside from the GOOD OLD CAUSE,
even by the Army (who formerly were glorious Instruments in the hand of God)
has been lately confessed, and that they have cause, and desire to take shame
to themselves.

Now that they may see the cause of shame that lies upon them, and may abase
themselves in the sight of God, and before all the World, it behooves them to
search narrowly into their backslidings, and consider the fruits thereof, that
they may be truly humbled, and turned from that Spirit which led them aside,
lest any of them take advantage to make a feigned Confession for their own
ends, and fall afresh to seek themselves; and their own Interests, and not the
God Old Cause singly, and nakedly, as in the sight of the Lord.

Many bad fruits have grown from this Corrupt Spirit, and the corrupt course it
has run in these late years, which would be narrowly searched into, and
considered of: Some few general ones I may mention.

1. The Name of God has been blasphemed in the sight of the whole Earth, and
that holy Spirit and Power (which many hearts can witness was the Beginner and
Carrier on of this Work) made a scoff and derision to the Enemies of Truth in
these Nations, and in the Nations round about, who watched to see the issue and
result of these things. The Controversy was very great and eminent, and drew
many eyes upon it, the Lord was Appealed to on both sides to decide it; and
many know, That by his Presence and Power in the Army, the Scale was turned,
(even when they were very low, and cried out for Prayers, and made large
Promises in the day of their Distress.) Yea, the Lo^d did not desert the Army,
but heard their Prayers, and the Prayers of his People for them, carrying on
the Deliverance, until he had given a perfect Victory into their hands. But
then the Army deserted the Lord; and just like men that were ruled by the
Spirit of the World, forgot the Lord, and his Cause and Interest, and their
fellow companions in the hard Travel and Service, and set up themselves, and
their own Interest, making their General the greatest, and their Officers
great. Thus the Cause was betrayed, the measure of it lost, a Private,
Particular, Selfish, Earthly, Corrupt Interest set up, and men countenanced and
advanced, not according to their Fidelity to the Good Old Cause, but according
to their compliance with this new selfish Interest.

2. The great work of God, both in these Nations, and in the World, has hereby
been turned backward. In these Nations, that Spirit which began this Work (when
at any time it has appeared in simplicity and singleness for the prosecution
of it) has been snibbed; what was built up formerly, thrown down; and that
which was thrown down, now again built up; so that the Face of the Nation was
changed, and unrighteous ones came into place and power, and the innocent and
upright (those that feared God, and could not seek themselves, or the pleasing
of men*) have been oppressed and crushed. And if the work was thus stopped in
these Nations, its advantage of spreading further must needs be interrupted.
God had raised up a Power against Oppression, in which he eminently appeared,
even to the dread of the Nations round about: and how far this Power should
have gone on in his work, by the Leadings of his Spirit, had they waited in his
Council, kept to their Leader, and not turned aside to another Spirit, and to
other Ends and Interests, who can tell?

3. Great and Vast Treasures have been expended, for the maintaining of you in
greatness in your black-slidings, and the poor have groaned to bear the
burden: and while ye have grown thus high, extravagant, and exceffive, many
(who remained faithful) have wanted even that which was their due, and have
undergone great hardships thereby.

4. The Account of all the Blood which has been shed lies somwhere. Was it for
a thing of Naught? Was in of no Value? Nay, It was precious in the sight of the
Lord; many (yea very many) in the singleness and simplicity of their hearts
losing their lives for the Cause. And yet how soon had you forgot all this,
casting it, and the Cause behind your backs, and setting up your selves! Thus
have ye grieved that good Spirit, which never gave you Victory over your
Enemies for this end, that h^s Name, and Cause, and Interest should be
forgotten, and yours grow great: but the Name of the Lord should have been
exalted by you, and ye should have remained low and little, both in your own
eyes, and in the eyes of others. But the Lord has been Veiled by your
Greatness, and that Vail lies upon him at this day: Read this in the true
humility, and in the fear and dread of his great Name, who will be exalted over
all, and whom no power or greatness on earth shall be able to hinder from
arising. Remember these things, o ye backsliding children, and be abased; that
the Lord may forgive you, and may vouchsa^e yet once more to make use of you in
his service.

But I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, lest ye should confess, and
turn back, not with an upright heart, but feignedly: and it so, then you will
not lie flat in your spirits, either before the Lord, or before men, but will
be keeping up the greatness ye have got in your backslidings, and seeking your
own interests, and self ends afresh. There has been often a naked, honest,
simple, pure thing stirring in the Army, which the great ones (seeing some
present use of) fell in with, and improved for their own ends, but destroyed
the thing it self; so that it attained not to the bringing forth of that
righteous liberty, and common good which it seemed to aim at (and did indeed
aim at in those in whom the stirring did arise) but was made use of as an
advantage to advance them in their particular Interests against their Enemies,
and so set them up. Have ye seen this use made formerly of such lively
stirrings in some, and such fair pretenses in others after righteousness,
liberty, and the Common good? Take heed of it now. Let not the pure stirrings
after good, be betrayed into the selfish lusts and interests of your own
corrupt hearts. Do not fall so hastily to the work of Reformation nor be not so
forward to propose things for settlement; but wait to be purged from that
backsliding sprit (which sticks closer to you and makes you unfitter for this
service then you are aware) that you may come into a capacity of desiring the
Common good, and of being faithful in the prosecution of it; and put off your
greatness and swelling honors that ye have contracted in the time of your
backslidings, and come at least into an equal balance with them that remained
faithful. Are ye humbled before the Lord for your backslidings, and yet keep
your corrupt standings? Is this true humiliation? Is this taking of shame to
your selves? Ah, do not force the Lord to deal with you! do not force the Lord
to strip you, and manifest your shame! If it be truly in your hearts, that the
work of the Lord should go on, let such be picked out who have not back
slidden, and let them carry it on; and stand ye by a while, till it be made
manifest that your hearts are changed, and there be a Testimony given to the
Nation, that you are truly humbled, and become men of other spirits: For while
this spirit remains in you, ye will be secretly for your selves, and cannot
possibly be cordial, either to the Lord, or to the Nation, in the work of
Reformation; but while you seem to be setting your hands to it, your hearts
will be erring from it, and your endeavors will be to obstruct those whose
hearts are entire and faithful to it.

Now to the Parliament, let me say this, Ye have one day more by the good hand
of God, by the great mercy of God, ye have one day more; (not for your
righteousness, not for your fitness for the work; but for the unrighteousness
of that power, which would not go on with the Lords work, but bring back again
to Egypt, has the hand of the Lord been stretched forth against them.) Be not
sl^thful, be not selfish, be not wise in the flesh: but know that Wisdom which
is to be your Guide and Leader, and let it be your wisdom to follow. A
Providence has brought you together; let the same Providence lead you. Be
single and honest to the Nation, and upright hearted toward God; and if any
straights come, be not hasty, but wait for the manifestation of his Council,
for the unvailing of his Arm to protect you. Let not the Army be your
confidence. Do not any one thing to please the Army; much Jess a corrupt
interest of a part of the Army; but apply your selves to do that which is truly
just and righteous in the sight of God, of the Army, and of all men. The Lord
has as it were new Created you, and given you a new Being; look up to him to
preserve you, and apply your selves faithfully to his work, without self ends
and interests in your selves, and against all self ends and interests in
others, leaving it to his power to stand by you and p^ese^ve you therein; and
do not join (through fear or favor) with that which is great and powerful, but
with that which is single and honest. Mind the stirring of that Spirit in the
Army, and in the Nation, which revived the Good Old Cause; and cherish it, and
cleave to it: Mind likewise the Apostatizing Spirit, which would color over
the Apostasy, and make it seem as little as they could, and frown upon it,
though in persons never so great. Ye are in the place of God; respect not
persons, but righteousness, and ye shall have honor, even that honor which
will stand, when the vain honor and titles which corrupt man aspires after,
whereby his heart is lifted up above his brethren (which the King of Isreal's
was not to be) shall fall to the ground, do men what they can. Open your eyes
(that eye in you which alone can see the power that has wrought this change)
there is the Arm of Flesh, and the Arm of the Lord before you, choose which you
will cleave to. The Lord has a work to do, a great work, and he will not want
Instruments. Ye have a time of trial, whether ye will become fit Instruments in
the hand of the Lord; improve it in his fear and in his wisdom; and do not
think your selves secure, as ye can gain the present Powers on your side; but
be single to the Lord, and he will bring over the hearts of the Army and Nation
to you. And take heed of your debates; let every man fear his own wisdom and
his own will, in every word he speaks in the House; for that which comes from
self, will be but for self (though under a pretense it may seem to be for God)
but pursue what is manifestly good and righteous, and not what the wisdom of
the Serpent can cast a color over, and make appear so.

To those who have remained faithful in the Nation, and waited for this day, I
have one word also. Keep your eye on the Lord; fix not your hopes on the Army,
or on the Parliament; but look through them, to him who has the power over
them. Man is a vain, empty, foolish thing, there is no good to be expected from
him. If the Lord appear in them, and they abide in his fear, and be guided by
his council, they may be Instruments of good in his hand, otherwise they will
prove but broken reeds; but he that waits on the Lord shall not be
disappointed, but shall meet with and receive the good in the Lords season. The
Lords mighty Power is at work, he snappeth Instuments asunder at his pleasure.
When they are wise, when they are strong, when they are puffed up in the
imaginations of their hearts, he overturneth them with his finger, and calls
up that which was not, that which the foot of Pride trampled upon. The Lord is
known by the Judgment which he executes; the wicked is snared in the work of
his own hands. Wait on the Lord: If these also prove treacherous, his hand can
overturn them also; and he will at length bring forth an Instrument, which his
Soul can take pleasure in, and which he will make faithful to him in his work.
O Nation of England, wait on the Lord! wait on the Lord, O my Soul!

From Chaffont in Bucks, the 18. of the 3. mon. 1659. This from one who is a
friend to the Commonwealth, a lover of true Freedom, and desires the good of
all men. Isaac Penington the younger.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle near the
West end of Paul's, 1659.


