Mr. PEPYS To the President and Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL upon the Present
State of the said HOSPITAL.
To the Honored Sir John Moor, Knight. and President, and the rest of my Honored
Friends, the Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
York-Buildings. Monday, Novem. 21. School. Gentlemen,
IN pursuance of a Resolution of his Lordship the present Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen at their last Sitting (our Worthy President Sir John Moore present)
in approval of a Proposition of mine on that behalf: I enclose You Copys of two
Papers of mine lately wrote, and for their readier Use prepared as these are,
and directed to the several Members of that Court; relating to what has passed
between the late Lord Mayor, the said Court, and My self, upon the present
State of this Hospital.

And this I do; as well for your Information in all my Proceedings in this
Matter, and satisfaction in the Regard shown therein to the Honor, no less
than Service of this House (notwithstanding what has been so injuriously
averred in it to the contrary) as for inlight'ning at once your whole Body, in
the Truth, and Moment of the Particulars in present Debate concerning it.

In order whereto, and for that the Court of Aldermen have not yet thought fit
to allow of my repeated Suit to Them, for their disburthening me of the Charge
I still lie under from them, as your Fellow Servants. I do (as such) tender it
as my earnest and humble Advice to you, that these Papers may not, like others
of mine of equal Import, be taken-up, and the knowledge of them suppressed, to
the (I fear) irreparable Wrong of this House: But, if it may stand with your
good liking, communicated to a General Court specially called on that behalf.
For as much as, that being done, I shall not doubt a much happier Issue of your
Deliberations thereon, than can attend any longer want of it: Besides the
preventing what I should otherwise be most unwillingly driven to, of supplying
the ineffectuallness of these Papers thus addressed to You in a Body, by a
several One to be transmitted to every Member of it. Which I cannot but think
my Duty to see done; while standing all of us equally interested in the
knowing, and accountable for the due improving thereof, to the Benefit of the
Poor, and satisfaction of Those we stand intrusted-by for Them.

Which praying your taking in good part from me, as the last Occasion, I hope,
ever to have of asking it on these Terms; I do with most sincere Respect remain,

Honored Gentlemen, Your faithful and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

At a General Court holden in Christs-Hospital. the 21th. day of Novem. School.
UPon reading a Letter with some printed Papers from Samuel Pepys, Esquire; which
were all enclosed in a Cover, and directed to the President, and Governors of
this Hospital, assembled in Court this 21th of November School. It was by this
Court ordered, that a General Court shall be summoned to meet on Friday next in
the Afternoon, particularly for consideration of these Papers; And Major
Aungier is desired to attend Mr. Pepys, and acquaint him with the meeting of
the Court next Friday. and request the favor of his presence, and to let him
know, that if he does not think that a convenient Day, than to desire him to
appoint some other short Day, as may best suit with his occasions; and come
provided with the particulars of his charge against this Hospital.

William Parrey.

To the President and Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL assembled in Court, this
25th. of November School.
York-Buildings, Friday, November. 25th. School. Gentlemen,
I Truly meant what I said, when in Apology for the trouble of mine of the
21th. instant, I bespoke your Pardon; as for the Last I then thought my self
ever likely to have occasion of asking it from you on that Subject. But your
Commands of the same Date, since brought me by one of your own Number,
notifying your Concurrence with me, in assigning this day for holding a special
Court upon the Papers I then presented you with; require my appearing to you
once more, not with an Approval only, but with my most serious Thanks for what
you have therein done; in confidence of its having the good Effects I then
bespoke to this unhappy House from it.

But having said this; there are two Particulars you at the same time demand of
me, which for the sake of such Gentlemen (and those only) as the
Extraordinaryness of the Summons may possibly draw hither, beyond what the
common Businesses of the House either are, or can reasonably expect to be
attended by; you have made it necessary for me, in right both to them and my
self, to give you a more particular Return to, viz. your bespeaking my Personal
Attendance at Your present Meeting, and the bringing with me the Particulars of
my Charge against this Hospital.

As to the Former whereof; it might possibly be deemed too much for me, here to
anticipate the Satisfaction I have largely provided for these very Gentlemen on
this Head, out of Your own Books, in that Report of mine, which has lain from
more than eight Months since, in the Hands of Your late Lord Mayor, and is now
remaining with his honorable Successor in the Court of Aldermen. From a
Committee of whom, having lately had the Honor of a double Visit, upon the
Subject thereof; I assure my self of your soon receiving from that Court, full
Satisfaction in the Truth of what I here assert.

In the mean time nevertheless, I shall crave leave to observe to these
Gentlemen, that the Evils being all now actually falling on Us, which I so long
ago foretold, and most painfully labored to prevent; None, I presume, will
wonder, if I forbear unnecessarily to bring my self within the Reach of a Ruin,
I then in Writing advised you of the Reasons of my Withdrawing from; but will
(may I pre-judge of any thing) see occasion, sooner to lament their own, than
censure my Proceeding herein. Especially, when in the Public Inquisitions
which this Matter must inevitably draw on Us, they shall find themselves, from
the very Register of their Attendances, made accountable for the Obliquities of
our Courts and Committees, even in those very Transactions, wherein themselves
possibly were wholly passive, if not open Opposers: And this also most to be
apprehended, from the very Men they were so overborn by, therein. For such was
my Observation in my own Case, in more than a few Instances (still to be
recurr'd to) before, for Self-security, I was forced to let fall the Personal
Duty I had for seven Years had the honor of paying to this House; and not (I
thank God) without some Marks still extant of the Fruits of it.

But for the Other, relating to the Particulars you ask-for, of my Charge
against this Hospital. I do not know, that in any thing I have hitherto said or
done in this Cause, I have so demeaned my self; as to deserve being treated as
your Accuser. Forasmuch, as had that been in my Eye, I should not have chosen
either this Style or this Place for the exeeuting it in.

But if there be any of our Number, whose Managements of their Trusts have been
such, as will not endure a plain and impartial State of our Condition to be
laid either before the House it self, or those to whom it stands immediately
accountable for it (and that is all I have hitherto pretended to) without
giving it the envious Brand of a Charge against them. I must not then disown my
being indeed their Accuser: But in lieu of the former Difficulty, declare my
self yet so much the more surprised, how they should come now to own the want
of a Charge from me, whose every Paper, from the day of my Withdrawing from
them to this, has been little other. A Truth that will but too soon become
necessary to be shown them.

But forasmuch as I have reason to believe this Demand to be owing only to the
Vneasinesses it has been my Misfortune to occasion somewhere, by my late
Enquiries into these Managements, and from my Endeavors to apprise this Court
of the true Effects thereof, upon the miserable Infants we stand here
accountable to Almighty God for. I shall take leave to put them in mind, of
what was (at their own instance) laid before them from me on this Subject, now
near twelve Months since. Whereof, least it may have been the Fate of That
also, to miss your View, as it has been Another's of a later Date: I am
prepared for supplying you with such a Copy of it, as these Gentlemen will
least question the Truth of, when they find it transcribed all with the
Treasurer's own Hand, and attested by the Clerks of most present Credit with
them, Mr. Reeve, Mr. Plumb, and Mr. Yeo. And if this Paper, with what it
contains of the present State of this House, must be taken for a Charge against
them; I am not surprised at their Disquiet under it: As knowing how much I
should my self be grieved, to have that asserted to me of any One other
Foundation of Charity in England, which is there said by me of this; without
having to this Hour received from them one Word of Exception to it, tho invited
thereto, with an offer on my part, of exposing to them, from their own Books
and Registers, the Grounds of every Article in it.

And if this be the Case in this Instance; how much less will there appear of
Reason for their calling on me for the Particulars of a Charge, when I shall
yet refer them to my forementioned Report (whereof this is but the Contents of
one Part only) which was by me lodged with Sir Humphry Edwin your late Lord
Mayor, and directed to you so many Months since, with his then Undertaking for
its speedy Delivery and public Enquiry into; and yet but now newly discovered,
and taken into the Custody of his honorable Successor and the Court of
Aldermen; for the Good, I hope, (as late as it is) of those for whose sake I
provided it?

In order to which, having thus said what I think needful and my Duty to do, in
Return to this your Order; I shall (as One not yet free from my Obligation to
this Place) take the liberty of giving it you as my most humble Advice, That
this Court would (in the most satisfactory manner it may) apply it self to the
Court of Aldermen for the Original or Duplicate of that Report. As that without
which (in the Hands you at present are) I see not how possibly you will ever
arrive at a true Knowledge of the wretchedness of your Condition, even in the
single Point of your Revenue; which is the sole Subject of it. Besides what I
have elsewhere noted, relating to the Moral Part: To which (at least in the
Reproachfulness of it) you will, I fear, find that to bear no other Proportion,
than the Deficiency of Light at a Gloomy Noon, does to that of the darkest
Midnight.

Nor can I permit my self to let pass unobserved to you on this occasion, what
I have lately understood, touching the Difference now newly raised between the
Court of Aldermen and this House, upon the General Point of Subordinacy, and
particularly in that of Accompting.

Concerning the former of which; let me beg you, as One whose Searches, in this
your Service, have made him more than ordinarily conversant in the History of
your Hospital; not to be misled to an Opinion contradictory to the Tenor of
your own Books, and the Practice of your Predecessors, through all the Marks of
Subjection incident to such a Relation. And this from the very first day of our
Institution; confirmed by our having at this hour no other Title to the Trust
we our selves are now exercising in this Place, than our Election and
Appointment thereto from that Court.

And for the latter, touchiug our Accompting to them; I beseech You to
consider, Who it is, we would be thought to own Our selves accountable to, if
not to those we are entrusted by? Or, Would we give the World ground to think;
that while we stand answerable for our being able to convince all Gainsayers in
the Matters of our Faith; and answer every Demand touching the Reason of our
Hope; we would be exempt from an Accountableness to any body, for our
Managements of Charity, that is Greater than Either of them?

True it is; That for the Difficulty made by Your Treasurer and his Accountant
in their Compliance with the late Orders of that Court, for their Signing and
remitting thither under their Hands, the Accounts formerly sent them unsigned:
There may be more Reason for it, than either Your selves are permitted to know,
or that Court can yet conceive; as being (I affirm to You) in no wise to be
justified, when Signed. But as their Demand herein seems no otherwise
restrained to these Accounts, than as they came to them Vnattested; nor Our
selves to be thought, at this time of day, unprovided for rendering them full
Satisfaction in this Particular, after little less than two Years Notice given
your Auditors, by the Treasurers Resignation of his Office, of a Thorough-State
necessarily to be adjusted of his Accounts, in order to Your Election of a
Successor: Toward which nevertheless, I hear not of One Stroke yet struck in
November School, for so much as the Account of the Year 1697. So must that
Gentleman be very little acquainted with the Practice of this House* who knows
not how much it has in all Ages, not only been subject to the Demands of the
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen in this Particular; but have Themselves made
use of it in their Distresses, as their surest and indeed only Resort for their
Supplys; I mean by their Applications to that Court, with their Accounts
showing the Reasons of those Distresses. Besides that it is not only They, from
whom alone (as before) we derive these our Trusts; but They also, who stand
accountable to the Body Corporate of the City, as That also does by solemn
Covenants to the King, for our well-discharging the same.

Be pleased then to think of putting a speedy End to this Dispute, that must
otherwise prove distructive of the very Foundation we are concerned for.

Nor let what is here offered You, lose any of its Force, for the sake of him
that offers it. As being One, too well acquainted with other Subjects, more
worthy his sacrificing so much of the little Residue of his Time and private
Study to, than this before us: Were it not, that he would be glad, to convert
some part of the Leisure God Almighty has been pleased to bless the Evening of
his Life with, to a Good so publicly meritorious, as he takes This to be: and
is therefore grieved to find Marks of Hardship placed by you upon those of your
Servants, who can but be suspected of having given any Assistance toward it;
and that most of all on him, from whom of the whole number of your Clerks I
have received the least (as you may shortly have occasion to see) though from
None of them more, than by their Duty and special Order of Court they were
obliged to; nor yet All that when put together, near so much in the moment of
it, as from the Treasurer himself and his Accountant, now lying by me under
their Hands.

But when the Management of Public Charities shall become a Business of
Mystery; it will be time for Good men to think of being their own Almoners. And
I pray God, it prove not our Misfortune, to set the first Copy toward it;
there seeming nothing left within my Vein (should this my last Attempt with
both Bodies, the Court of Aldermen I mean, and This, together fail) but a Royal
Visitation to prevent it.

With which; I do with the deepest Respect take my final leave of this sort of
Intercourse between you and me on this Occasion; remaining,

Honored Gentlemen, Your most faithful and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

A COPY of Mr. PEPYS's forementioned Representation sent to CHRIST-HOSPITAL
near 12. Months since.
To the Honored Sir John Moor, Knight. and President, and the rest of my Honored
Friends, the Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL, assembled in Court this 17. of
December. 1697.
York-Buildings December. 17th, 1697. Gentlemen,
I Have received the Notice ordered me from your last Court of the 10th.
instant, touching the Respit then put to your Election of a new Treasurer, upon
the Want, (as it would seem) of my expected Report of the State of your House.

In answer whereto, and that the Consequences (if any) of that Delay, may not
rest upon this supposed Failure of mine; be pleased to be reminded of your
being expressly advertised of the readiness of that Report, by a Worthy Member
of your Body, at a very full Court, upon the 28th. of September last, now near
three Months since; without the least intimation given me, either then or
since, of your desiring it from me, but rather the contrary, to this day.

Nor durst I, unasked, take upon me the exposing of it; nor shall even now, of
more than may be useful to the special Purpose for which you now demand it,
relating to the Treasurer. And I pray God, the bringing even this, all at once,
to a Public Court, may be followed with no inconvenience. But You have
required it, and I obey; praying You to accept of what I have here with all
respect to offer You thereon, in these few and succinct Propositions.

1st. -- That by the first General Audit, after your present Treasurer's
Accession to his Office in 1683. (for I think it enough on my part, and no more
than so on yours, that I go so far back in my Retrospection) he became charged
with a Ballauce in Cash of 3300 l.

2ly. -- That upon a strict Collating of the Nett Receipts of each Year, from
that time to the Close of the Year 1696, or according to the peculiar Style of
this House, to Midsummer 1697. I find to have been Received and Expended of the
Stock of the Poor within this House (that Balance included) above 175000 l.

3ly. -- That neither, of this Sum, nor of any Part of it, nor of the State of
your Revenue in general; has there ever been any one Representation made to, or
Cognizance had of it by the Lord Mayor and Body Corporate of the City (the Only
Governors of the Hospital-Revenues) though peculiarly Charged with an
Accountableness for our Managements of the same, to the best Benefit of the
Poor; But so much the contrary, that I find not one Account thereof to have
been ever reported even to Your selves, from your Committee of Auditors; much
less controlled, approved, and confirmed by You in Court (as all Acts of
Committees, especially in Fundamentals like this, ought to be) to this day.

4ly. -- That it does not appear to me, either from your Books, or my best
informations from your Clerks and Accomptants, that any Share of the
Controlling and Auditing-Part of your said Accounts, is regularly Executed, by
a Quorum of that Committee duly summoned thereto, saving the last Act of it
only, I mean, the Signing of it de been esse, after being engrossed. Which (and
that alone) appears indeed to have a solemn Day and Entertainment assigned for
it, at the Charge of the Hospital.

5ly. -- That in consequence of this, and of the general Order of those your
Accounts, I have not found any one Year's so digested, as that by it alone, a
sincere and strict Enquirer could be either fully or truly apprised of the
General State of the House's Revenue; or so, as to be able, though possibly
true, to satisfy himself in its being so.

6ly. -- That as one Evidence only of this last Truth; You may be pleased with
very little difficulty, to inform Your Selves, that in as ill a Condition as
this House is on all hands known to be; there is not any one Year (as far as my
strictest inspections can enlighten me) wherein Your General Account thereof so
audited, has not declared You Masters both of a Remain of Cash and Balance in
Stock, frequently to above 10. sometimes 11. and 12. and one Year with another
to above 8000 l. (all Debts provided for) from the very first Entrance of this
Gentleman upon his Treasurership, to this Day.

7ly. -- That notwithstanding the 175000l. received as before; with the
continued Representations of our being always thus amply in Stock; We have at
this day, not only Complaints hourly shower'd on Us, as well of our Wants at
Home, as the Distresses of our Nurses and Children Abroad; but (as far as your
own Books may in any wise be rely'd-on) stand indebted at this very hour, to
the Wills of our Dead, and Appointments of our Living Benefactors, and to
others our Creditors (beyond all We have in View toward discharging the same)
to the Value, with the Interest upon both, of above 35000l.

8ly. -- That as surprising as this may appear at its first Opening to this
Court; I am well convinced, that it will not do so, to any who shall apply
themselves with the same Attention I have done, to the noting and considering
all those unnecessary, unprecedented, wasteful and Arbitrary Methods, to be
found in the Management of Our Expenses, wholly inconsistent both with the
Orders and Ends of our Pious Benefactors.

9ly. -- That of this Debt of 35000 l. there rests no less than 19500 l.
specially owing to the Royal Foundation; and of that, above 1300 l.
unlay'd-out, of the Sums annually received by Us of the King's Bounty out of
the Exchequer, for putting forth his Children to the Seas; notwithstanding what
you were the last Year misled, to the asserting and imposing on the Lords of
the Treasury upon that Subject, to the contrary. And this; without any one End
of the whole Institution answered, or likely to be, under our present
Managements; Or any one Year lately passed, wherein our Printed Reports thereof
will bear Examination; any more than the present Year is likely to produce One
Child of its whole Number, either duly Sent Abroad, or qualified for it as he
ought to be; While the Season too is so near at hand, when Our Performances
therein should entitle Us to another Year's Payment.

10ly. -- Lastly, That besides this Debt of 35000 l. thus lying on Us; We
labor under a further Annual Charge amounting (by the Medium of Our last Seven
Years Expenses) to above 14600 l. per. Ann. And this; without Ought in present
View, toward either Clearing the One, or Supporting the Other, but a Revenue
We our selves published but at Easter last in Print, to be little more than a
Moiety of our Necessary and Unavoidable Charge.

Which deing so; and for the better applying the same to the Oceasion for which
you now call for it; it remains only, that I subjoyn thereto these Three Short
Reflections.

1st. -- That before the Address, (which I presume) will be of Course on this
Occasion made, to the Lord Mayor and City, for their Concurrence to the
Discharge of the present, and Admission of another Treasurer; it seems
indispenceable on our Parts, that they be thoroughly apprised of the contents of
this Paper; in order to their considering, what may be expedient to be first
done for their own needful Security therein. And this the rather; for that,
whatever they may think fit to do with respect to any other Article of ir; I
hold my self bound to tell you, that the Interest which my self in particular
bear, in all that concerns the Mathematick Foundation (with regard no less to
the Glorious End of it, in the Advancement of the Navigation of England, than
my own special Misfortune, in contributing what I did, to the unhappy Choice
made by my Royal Masters its Founders, of the Place they lodged the Trust of it
in) will oblige me, as a standing Piece of Duty to the Crown, to insist upon a
strict Account to be given, of so unexampl'd a Miscariage, as that of this
their Foundation, not yet 25. Year-old, yet every Penny of its Endowment
already spent, and the Support of it thrown upon, and at this day wholly born,
out of the Common Stock of of our otherwise sufficiently wretched Orphans, who
have no relation to it. While at the same time, no single Instance is to be
shown, of the End of its Institution answered, within the whole time of our
present Retrospection.

2ly. -- That if in this Paper ought appears, whereto either the Treasurer, or
any other Member of this Society, shall see reason to except; and exhibiting
the same to this Court, shall have it communicated thence to me with their
Approval; I shall most readily, from Your own Books and Registers, expose to
you the Grounds of what I have asserted herein; as One, who am not conscious
(though yet fallible) of any one single Prevarication from, or Aggravation of
the Truth, in what I have here offered You.

3ly. -- Finally, That as unhappy as by this my Draught of it, the State of
your House must necessarily be thought to be, with respect to its Revenue,
Charge and Debt. I cannot but in faithfulness thereto further tell you, that it
is yet the very best Side of the Prospect I have to give You of its Condition,
in the other Parts of my Report. And that therefore I shall not dare to trust
either my self or this Court, with the immediate Exposing of it, though
Originally designed for You; as deeming it on many Considerations, more
becoming me, and more behoofeful to the Service of the House and its Poor; that
I rather deliver it into the Hands, and submit it to the Disposal of Those, who
as standing primarily accountable for Our Managements to the King, are entitled
to our aceounting for the same first to Them: I mean, my Lord Mayor and the
forementioned Body of the City; from whom alone, or in their Failure from a
Royal Visitation, the same (if ever) must receive its Remedy.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble and faithful Servant, S. Pepys.

The Summons to the forementioned Court at Christ-Hospital.
SIR,
YOur Worship is earnestly desired to be present at a Court to be holden in
Christ-Hospital upon Friday next, being the 25th of this instant November, at 3
a Clock in the Afternoon precisely; for the due considering two Printed Papers
lately presented by Mr. Pepys to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen, and to the Court held at this House the 21st instant, Upon the
present state of Christ-Hospital.

William Parrey, Clerk.
Christ-Hospital 24 Nov. School.
To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Child Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen.
[Accompanying Copies of the precedeing Papers.]

York-Buildings, Tuesday, Dec. 6th. School. My Lord and Gentlemen,
AS fully as I had determined against interrupting this Court or myself, with
the Interchange of more Papers; I hold my self accountable to you for the Issue
of your late Allowance of my communicating those I last sent you, to the
Gentlemen of Christ-Hospital. Which I did; to the procuring the Call of an
Extraordinary Court, for the Consideration of the same. Duplicates of which
Transaction, with a Copy of the Summons it self provided thereto, I think it
for your Service to lay before you; together with the Issue of the Whole, which
you may please to take as follows. -- Viz.

1st. -- The Number present at this Court of its near four Hundred Governors
was Fifty six. Which, tho short of what I have known attending the Choice of a
Beadle, a Porter, or such only Occasion; was yet double the Appearance seen at
Ordinary Courts.

2ly, -- As full nevertheless as it was, no Part of the Work it was specially
called for, was either done, or had any Entry made toward it: the Papers
themselves, in the full three Hours of its sitting, not having had so much as a
Reading-Time allowed them, nor any other assigned for the doing it.

3ly. -- The Matter mainly handled therein, was that of their Treasurer's being
required by this Court to Sign his Accounts, and present them back thereto,
when Signed. In which I had the good Fortune of offering these Gentlemen,
together with the forementioned Papers, some Thoughts of mine upon the
Deference due to You, both from that and every other Hospital; so as to obtain
the Reversal of their former Resolution in opposing it. But not till by the
length of the Contest, their Fifty six were reduced to Twenty nine; and not
then neither, upon a Division, by any greater Majority than of Three. And this
too in the Case of an Account* wherein not their own Orders any more than
yours, have Mr. PEPYS, upon the State of Christ-Hospital.

Paper III.

been of force with either Accountant or Auditors, in more than two years, to
produce any Compliance, or (for ought I can yet hear or see) any Preparation,
Disposition, or even Capacity toward it.

What rests there then for me to say, either to you, My Lord and Gentlemen, or
My-self in this Cause; more than the recommending it to you, as I most
earnestly therefore do? Either instantly to exert the Authority thus asserted
by me in your Right, and since submitted to my honored Friend Sir Robert
Clayton, and your learned Council, with the Grounds of my doing so: to the end
both you and I may have the Satisfaction of foreseeing some Effect of what we
are now doing, toward the Remedying no less than Ascertaining the Evils we are
in pursuit of, on behalf of our Orphans. Or leave me to the Method I have
heretofore communicated by purpose to you of resorting to, by a Royal
Visitation. Which from the Proof I lately gave you of it, in the Case of St.
Catharines; We are well assured, both can and will make it self equally
effectual, to them and Us, in Both. I am

My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most faithful and most obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

Mr. PEPYS To the President, and Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL upon the Present
State of the said HOSPITAL.
To the Honored Sir John Moor, Knight. and President, and the rest of my Honored
Friends, the Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
York-Buildings. January 25th. School / 9. Gentlemen,
LET not (I beg you) my Appearance here yet once more as I now do, be imputed
to any Satisfaction I have in the uneasiness of this Court, whose Honourer I
truly am; nor yet to the Want of wherewith otherwise to employ every Hour of my
Life, more to my own Content; but to the Sincerity of that Concernment for the
Prosperity of this House, which I shall always bear about me, while They at
least who first called me to it (My Lord Mayor, I mean, and Court of Aldermen)
shall think fit to suspend the Delivering me of the Share I yet hold, as their
Servant, in the Charge of it. A Favor I have been long their Suitor for, and
should thankfully acknowledge any Assistance from this Court toward it.

Not that it is my Purpose to trouble You with ought I have at any time already
laid before You: But what alone You have Your selves been pleased to administer
fresh Subject to me for, since the Date of my last. And particularly,

1st. -- In the Vnconcernedness wherewith this Court is still pleased (after
all I have been able to inculcate concerning it) to overlook the making-up of
your Public States and Lists of the Children of the Royal Foundation, annually
required from You by the King, and expressly calculated for the Service of the
Crown. Whereof not One has now for some Years past, been composed with the
Integrity becoming the Dispensers of so Sacred and Princely a Charity. Nor of
them all; any One so little justifyable, as that which was last delivered as
Your New-Years-Gift into the King's Own Hand by Your Treasurer's, in the Name
not only of the President and Body of us the Governors of this Hospital, but
of the Lord Mayor also of this City, the First Trustee of the Crown for that
Foundation.

Which how far his Lordship or this Court shall think fit to sit-downwith, I
ask not; but hold it my Duty to make (as I hereby do) my own most solemn
Protest against it; as against a Paper, neither sincere, nor true; but (as
such) most injurious to the Honor both of Hospital and City.

2ly. -- In your arraigning the Credit of your own Dealings (beyond all that
could be offered to it from without Doors) in the Public Review lately had by
Your Order, of that One Chapter of Your Treasurer's Account which specially
relates to that Foundation. An Account, that after a Demand of more than two
Years standing, and as long a Preparation, has been once actually laid (as from
this House) before the Court of Lord Mayor and Aldermen; with Copies of it gone
abroad, and one of them now in my Hand. And this Review executed, not by the
Body of Your Auditors, nor yet of those of them whose Hands lie originally at
Stake for the Truth of it; But by a Junto of the Treasurer's single
Appointment: of whom the Greater Part such, as appear not to have assisted at
any One Audit, within the whole Time of his Treasurership; nor now disposed
(for ought I hear) to assert under their Hands the Truth of what they have been
so doing, and are this day designed to give You their Report of. A Proceeding
most hazardous, if not of certain injury to the Honor of this Place; by adding
to the Difficulty of justifying this Double Account, even where they agree; the
yet greater of reconciling them, in what they differ.

Which being the Case; the most effectual Proof I can hope to give You of my
Solicitousness for the Credit of this Court, against the Enquiries of a yet
Higher Form to be expected into this and every other Article of your
Treasurer's Accounts; where not his Hand only (as now) but his Oath also and
his Accomptant's will be held little enough to gain them Admission: is the
directing you to the Worthy Members of this Body, whose singular Applications
to, and long Inspection into the Business of your Compting-House, do especially
entitle them to the Charge of seeing Right done both to Themselves, to you, and
to the Poor therein,- viz. Sir Mat. Andrews. Sir Will. Russel. Mr. Stroud. Sir
Edm. Turner. Mr. Lockington. Mr. Foster.
Who having, among them, been at the Audit of, and warranted by their Signing,
every Account (from first to last) of the present Treasurer; have therein done
more than any like Number, or even the whole remaining Ninety of your Committee
of Auditors.

Nor, for the same reason, ought I to neglect the noting to you the no less
Worthy Gentlemen, to whose eight Months Labor, and special Influence,
signalized at your late Select Committee for the State of your House, You stand
most indebted; and for the advantageous Report they are pleased at this very
day to entertain the World with, of it -- viz. Mr. Midgley. Mr. St-Amand.
Doctor Carr. Mr. Lane. Mr. Boddington. Mr. Mallory.
Upon whom also I do myself chiefly rely, for the Convictions promised me, of
the Errors of my own less grateful Computations touching the same: When (by the
Delivery of this Account of Yours to the Court of Aldermen) You shall become
possessed of that Report of mine lying with them, by which you will be admitted
to such a View of our Wretchedness, as was never yet exposed to, nor is ( I
fear) ever likely to be otherwise come-at, by this Court.

On which Score, and that no Time may be lost in your Arrival thereat; let me
once more beg Your hastening the Removal of the Impediment given thereto, by
your Refusal of this Account to that Court: In contradiction to the most mature
Resolution taken by One of your own, summoned in the most solemn Manner, and on
the most solemn Occasion; that the Business or Trust of this House is capable
of; and owing only to the Presumption of a Private One, not yet confirmed by
any other; and so rendering the whole Transaction of this Committee entirely
Extra-judicial; and as such, by a Worthy Member of this Body most justly and
publicly protested-against.

Besides; that till the matter of our Revenue (the sole Subject of that Report)
receive a Decision; it seems too soon to proceed to what I have yet behind,
upon the so-often-mention'd Article of the Moral State of this Hospital: As
thinking it of little Use, and less Satisfaction, to be offering more Matter
for Grief and Reproach from the Pollution of its Manners; till better assured
of wherewith to support them, when (by being bettered) they shall be brought to
deserve it.

Which no Man (I fear) will think they now do* that is privy (as I am) to the
Universal Looseness of them, both in Kind and Degree, beyond what is almost
conceivable from a Nursery consecrated to Uses so pious, and to the Benefit of
Objects so little to be suspected susceptible of the very thoughts of them.

A Truth too extensive to be here enter'd-on, even were it now a Time for it.
Let it only suffice, as an Instance of what I shall then have but too long and
ungrateful a deduction to give you of; that I recommend to your present
Enquiry, the prostituted Use made of the Public Access allowed to your
Children's Devotions in the Hall and the adjacent Rooms on Sunday-Evenings; and
particularly the Riot committed by their lewd Visiters in the Girls Ward, but
on Sunday last. I say, the Girls Ward; where (as blameable as I take the Whole
of our present Discipline to be) nothing appears more abandoned, than that
Order and Modesty which, till now, has been ever held Sacred in that Place;
whatever might hap'ly be found less justifyable elsewhere.

And This; notwithstanding the Infamy laid (but few Evenings before) at your
own Door, by a Coach conducted by the Mob, charged with two of your
Mathematical Boys, distinguished by the Badge of their Royal Founder, taken-up
at Billins-gate, brought through the City, delivered to you (as before)
Dead-Drunk, and by their Fellows discharged (insensible) into their Ward. Their
Ward I say; wherein, as in the former, Excesses of the same Kind, though not in
the same Measure, are ( God knows) but too familiar: And particularly with Him
of these Two, who being now Head of the School, and Leader in this Fact, is
One, who after having enjoyed for near nine Years together, the Benefit of this
House's Charity, and spent twice the Time originally established for his Stay
in that School; was but lately rejected at the Trinity-House, as not yet
qualified for the End of his so chargeable Education. And who being also
arrived to the full Age limited for it by the King; it seems worthy your
Considering, what it is you have now to expect from One, whom Debauchery has
carried out of the reach of Command, before either his Learning or your
Discipline has fitted him, for knowing how to Obey.

Let me only, on this Occasion, take leave to lament a little more nearly, the
unhappy Conduct of this House: By which it seems at this day brought under the
greatest Weight of Reproach, from that alone, which was Originally calculated
for, and accordingly received, as its greatest Honor and the largest Instance
of Royal Beneficence, that was ever at once conferred on a House of Charity: I
mean, this Mathematick Foundation.

The Thoughts of which compel me so far at least to resume the mention of the
Account relating to it; as once again to recommend it to this Court, that no
more Imposures on his Majesty be adventur'd-on, by Applications to his Treasury
for further Payments on that Score; till We shall have first discharged our
selves of the Debt I so long since noted to You thereon, without ought ever yet
returned me in Solution of it.

3ly. -- In the little Regard had, after near two Years passed since the
Treasurer's Resignation of his Office and Your accepting it, to the forwarding
the Adjustments of his Accounts necessary to the Execution of it: We being now
entering into 1699, without any Audit closed, much less engrossed and sign'd-to
for the Year 1697.

Besides that (by all I can yet learn of what is done toward it) Your Receipts
for that Year have exceeded those of the Year preceding; as amounting to full
12000 l.: Without a Farthing of it yet applied to the lessening either Your
13000 l. Debt to Benefactors for Purchases, or the 20000 l. I make You
accountable-for to the King on his Foundation. Nor yet above 200 l. Discharged
of the 8400 l. lately owing for Principal Money taken-up at Interest; nor more
than 100. and odd Pounds given-in for your Remainder in Cash. While at the same
time I have it to observe to you; that in consequence of the Importunities you
have heretofore suffered from me, for the discontinuing your so frequent and
almost unlimited Admissions of Children (as the only certain Expedient I could
then, or can yet propose for rescuing Us from Ruin) their Number is from 1030.
lowered to 430; and consequently, your Charge diminished (through the
successive Abatements of about 120 Yearly, between Easter 1694. and that now
approaching 1699) by 600. Children: And the Savings therefrom (of what, had the
contrary Practice continued, your Expense must have amounted to) fallen little
short of 15000 l; and the Condition also of your Purse, some way or other, been
as much bettered. Whereas, if what has been above-inform'd me be true (which
God forbid, and yet I dare not disbelieve) This also is gone; and the Hospital
rests in the same Degree of Distress it was in, when thought nearest being
undone.

And this too; without One Penny of our Charge retrenched, either in the Number
or Expense of our Officers, from what it was when the Number of our Children
was more by Three Fifths than they now are: But so much the Contrary, as to
have the Charge of Officers said to be now Greater, by several Hundreds of
Pounds, under our present 430 Children; than it was in the Years 1660 and 1661
with above 1100.

For God*s sake therefore, Gentlemen, let us from these Effects be incited,
instantly and closely to Consider in what Hands the Treasure and Stock of our
Poor now lie. Hands, that (in one Word) need no other Evidence of their
Vnsitness for the Trust; than the Public Reluctance they are not ashamed to
show, to every thing that but Looks like bringing them to an Account.

Besides the Consideration, of how much more to be Lamented any Miscarriage
would be, and less to be Excused, that should attend the Neglect of it, in case
of any unexpected Change in the Person of our Treasurer; whose known Age will
alone justify my Apprehension of it, even without the Help of that Declaration
which Himself two Tears since thought fit spontaneously to make in open Court,
of his Disability (even then) both in Body and Mind, for longer executing his
Office; and therefore resigning it had it accepted of by you.

4thly, -- In the Liberty taken by some Gentlemen, not of the lowest Name in
the Management of this House; of arraigning in Common Conversation as well as
singly to my self, these Enquirys of mine on behalf of our Orphans; as tending
at least (if not designed) to the wresting the Government of it out of their
Hands, who valuing themselves upon the Title of Church-of-England-Men, seem
impatient under the Apprehension of being supplanted in it by the Fanatics. A
Thought (God knows) of too little Weight with me, for Fither's sake, to trouble
my Head with: As well knowing, how little the Felicity of Mankind has at any
time been owing to Nominal Distinctions in Religion; and no less remembering,
how little the Bishop of Jerusalem, St. James, could be thought ignorant of
that best of Names (of Christian, I mean) when to ascertain the Religion
intended by him under his Epithetes of Pure and Undefiled, he waved the Use of
either that or any other; and rather chose to distinguish it, by the Moral
Lessons, of Visiting the Fatherless and the Widow in their Afflictions, and
living unspotted of the World: Lessons read to Mankind, long before the Name of
Christian or of its Holy Founder was ever heard of therein.

In pursuance of which; If to subject our Orphans to all the Consequences of a
Misspent Revenue; if to add to the Affliction of their Widow-Mothers, the
sorrowful Effects too often seen in them of a corrupted Education; if the
Disappointments arising from both, to the religious Purposes of their pious and
bountiful Benefactors, be in the Sense of these Gentlemen's Church the
fulfilling of that Description; Much Good may do them with their
Churchmenships; and may I be their Castaway.

5thly. -- Lastly, In the Proof so lately given me, of the little to be
hoped-for of Remedy to these Evils, from what I must acknowledge my having
lodged my last Relyance-on, toward it: namely, The getting them fairly laid
before a General-Court. Forasmuch as from the Ineffectualness of all my
Endeavors on that behalf, in the Solemnity of the Summons provided for that
held the 25th of November last; I find the Predominancy of those whose Business
it is to obstruct it, such; as to have been able to prevent the very Reading of
the Papers it was alone called to the Hearing of; and consequently, to send
them home as little apprised of the Import thereof to the Weal of the House, as
they were at their coming thither.

From which so fresh Confirmation of a Truth I had but too often before both
experimented and complained of; and from the further Practices occurring to me
on this occasion, of intercepting, suppressing, and otherwise indirect
disposing of Papers not thought for some Private Turns fit to be admitted to
Public View: I think it high Time for me, to laydown the Tenderness wherewith
I have hitherto governed my self, in the exposing of what I have already said,
and may hereafter have further to say hereon; proceeding (as I lately told You,
I should) to the communicating the same without Restriction to the Gentlemen of
this House, in the like Open method I have (with good Acceptance) been for some
time using toward the Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen our
immediate Superiors, on the same Subject. I am with great respect,

Gentlemen, Your most faithful and most humble Servant, S. Pepys.

Mr. PEPYS, upon the State of Christ-Hospital.

Paper IV.

Mr. PEPYS To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Child, Knight. Lord Mayor, and to
the Court of Aldermen, upon the Present State of Christ-Hospital.
York-Buildings, March 7th. School / 9. My Lord and Gentlemen,
THAT nothing may rest uncommunicated to this Court, of what goes from me to
that of Christ-Hospital; any more than, by your Allowance, I withold from
Them, ought of what I offer You: I here tender you a Copy of a Letter of mine
thither, of the 25. of January.

The Contents of which bearing my Farewell to Them, as with all respect my
purpose is in this to You; I cannot but recommend the Perusal thereof to this
Court; as carrying with them such a Representation of the perishing State of
that House, in some fresh Particulars essential to the Wellbeing of it, as
render it a thing little less than hopeless for me (by ordinary Means, at
least) any longer to think of saving it: After finding my self put to above
seven Months Labor, in compassing only its Treasurer's Signing that one
Article of his Account, which you had before had from him Vnsign'd; and more
than ten, in finding Passage only, through this Court thither, to my late
Report of the State of the same.

And What it is that may be look't-for from it, even now it is there, with a
Committee of few less than forty, and of them the Majority such, as will find
little Work for them in it, but Self-Arraignment; I submit to your Lordship and
this Court.

Especially, when you shall be pleased to reflect upon the present
Circumstances of that House's Government; viz.

UNDER the Guidance of a President, equal indeed to the worthiest of his
Predecessors, both in his general Virtues, and special Munificence to that
Place. But One, whose Piety has outlived his Strength for being otherwise
personally aidful to it, in any of the Weightier Duties of that Charge.

UNDER a Treasurer, who (besides what you have elsewhere before you concerning
him) was also pleas d to declare himself unable both in Mind and Body, for the
longer Execution of his Office; and therefore made his formal Resignation of
it, and had it as formally accepted-of from him in Court there, above two years
since.

UNDER the Direction of Gentlemen acting indeed as Governors, and to whom as
such I have for more than 23. years had the Honor of reckoning my self a
Fellow Servants; but are said to stand reported to You at this day by your
Learned Council, not to be such, nor capable of being so, without (what they
have never yet had) the Confirmation of this Court.

And lastly, UNDER an Administration also on the part of your Lordship and your
Honored Brethren, so Gentle; as to have suffered your Orders thither, even in
Points the most important, to lie 7. Months together wholly neglected, and your
Authority as openly renounced; without having yet thought fit to have ought
done (within my Notice at least) in Assertion of it.

A Reflection, My Lord, as hard to be accounted-for, as in it self Grievous..

Forasmuch as, If after so uninterrupted a Jurisdiction, as has been always
exercised by this Court, and with a Submission as constantly paid thereto from
these Hospitals; If after so long a Succession of Gifts and Bequests to them,
and those to great Values, in reliance upon the Credit and Authority of this
Court alone for their Security; If after so established a Veneration acquired
to it, as Guardians of these Foundations, and particularly as the Moral Fathers
of the Orphans of this House, when in your Easter and other Solemnities, They,
as Your Children, bear no small part in the Honor of your Processions; And
lastly, If after what in my particular I have been endeavoring herein for Your
Service, and for the Service of the Poor; this Court shall appear to have been
all this while thus credited and thus obeyed, without Authority at this day,
under the greatest of their Miscarriages, to visit and reform Them; for so also
your Learned Council are said to have determined. What must be thought of this
mistake? And particularly,

How will the Pious Credulity of our Princely Founders and past Benefactors be
to be lamented; and what more to be either hoped or wished for of Them, on
these Terms, in time to come?

What must the Apprehensions now be of Those, whose Subsistence rests upon the
Authority only of this Court, for the Payments that House stands charged with
to their Use, out of the larger Benevolences of their Charitable Ancestors?

Or Theirs; whose Debts of more modern Date, lie unpaid (many Thousand Pounds
deep) by that Hospital at Interest, upon no other Security?

What is there to be rely'd-on of Fruit from the Retrospections said to be now
on foot there, or those lying before your Lordship and this Court, from my
Report?

Or in a Word; What to be hop'd-for either of Satisfaction for so much of our
Poor's Stock and Benefactor's Bounties as has already miscarried; or of better
Provision in time to come, for securing the Remainder?

What, I say my Lord, must the Result of all this be, and how to be
answerd-for; should this Court be so unhappy, as knowingly to permit such a
Foundation and its Revenue to rest one day longer, in Hands no otherwise
qualify'd-for, nor better entitled to the Trust of it? While by a Resolution of
its own, not yet 16. Months old, you have been pleased to declare your selves
standing Governors of the same, and (as such) required your being (as
anciently) summoned to every of its Courts, and accordingly have ever since
been so, and now are: To the entitling Your selves ( I fear) to a nearer
Concernment in the Fate of it, than may have been yet sufficiently reflected
on; and possibly, to an Accountableness with Them, for the good or bad Events
of their Managements there.

A Consideration I am the more willingly your present Remembrancer in, from the
fresh Endeavors said to be now on foot there, for resuming their Old Liberty
of taking-in Children, while unprovided of a Bit of Bread for those they now
have, otherwise than by running into new Debt, or lengthening their Score of
Interest upon the Old; Besides sacrificing the Innocence of so many fresh
Infants, to the Dissoluteness of Manners now reigning, among those they are to
be there mixed-with. The Evil of whose Contagion, and Pressure of which Debt, I
take to be no otherwise removable, than by a total Stop to be for some time
put, to the Occasions of Both.

An Expedient, that I well know will at the first hearing be thought as
Impracticable, as in other Respects Extraordinary.

But the Case is Extraordinary too; and consequently, to restrain its Remedy to
Ordinary Methods only, is little other, than to leave it Remedy-less. Which I
cannot think any Gentleman, who has the Honor and Trust of a Governor there,
will contentedly sit-down with, while furnished with any thing to offer toward
the Saving it, as (for want of better) I do this: And yet with an Opinion so
far from deeming it Impracticable, as to reckon it a Work neither of Length nor
Difficulty; if, in Atonement for that Misconduct of ours, by which, from the
Prosperity this House was in while under the Care but of 16. Governors with
500. Children, it has been brought into the Condition it now lies with 400.
Governors (little more or less) and but 400. Children; if (I say) in Atonement
for that Misconduct, we would improve the Opportunity of this nearness in our
Numbers, to the ^asing the House at once of the Whole, by every Governor's
taking to himself One: Thereby leaving the Income of it entireiy free to the
Discharge of its Debts, doing Right to its Founders and Benefactors, and that
being done, to the setting-out afresh, with a Revenue cleared, its Discipline
reformed, and Provision made for its future better Conduct through the Whole.
And this I lay with all Deference before your Lordship and this Court, as that
without which, or some other Aequivalent, I must avow my Despair of ever seeing
this unhappy House in the State it ought to be; and therefore would be glad,
with your Concurrence and the Concurrence of the Gentlemen of that Body, to be
doing my part, either in this or any other Effectual Proposition, toward it.

I am well aware, My Lord, of the Censure this Fervor of mine may expose me to,
as One overpressing in a Cause, wherein Others neither less interested nor less
discerning than my self, are pleased to show so little of the Dissatisfaction I
do; and without any surprise on my side at it, as well remembering how little
different my own Sentiments were of it, while my Knowledge thereof (like
theirs) had no other Direction, than the Information of Others. Whereas no
sooner was I engaged in the closer and more deliberate Enquiries applied
thereto of my own, but that Indifference of mine was awakened to the Degree of
Concernment I now profess; and which, on like Conviction, would be no less in
any other, whose Morals (like mine) know no middle, in matters of Trust at
least, between scrupulously Just, and downright the Contrary. Or to speak more
plainly; between mixing my own Hand in the Ruin of this Religious House, and
sitting silently within View of its being brought-about, by the Vanity,
Supineness, Prodigality, or Self-interest of Others.

Indulge me therefore, My Lord, the Liberty of this One only closing Note to
Your Lordship upon this Subject. Namely, That as the Direction of the
Hospitals, has in all times hitherto been undeniably exercised by your
Honorable Predecessors, in this Place; and as uninterruptedly submitted-to. So
is it no less evident, that however an Occasion has now (after sevenscore years
Practice) been administered to the questioning it; Your said Predecessors, (the
Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London) upon Covenants first by Them
entered-into with K. Edward VI. for the good Government of Them, were by his
special Charter of Incorporation as Governors thereof, furnished with all the
Powers requisite to the enabling them to make-good those Covenants.

In consideration of which, and in Duty to Your Lordship, to the City, to this
Court, and to the Poor, I cannot (as a Servant to all) but most earnestly pray;
that this Matter may without delay, be laid for Remedy before that Body
Corporate, wherever it now rests; in order to the preventing, if possible,
any unnecessary recourse to Methods Extraordinary, for what should be thought
attainable by Ordinary. Especially while, Sitting a Parliament, with so many of
your own Number, and of the Hospital's, Members therein, and with a Bill
already (I take it) before Them, relating to Charitable Uses* no reasonable
Supplement ought to be doubted from it, to that Ordinary Power: If any such can
be judged wanting, after so illustrious a Proof, as I have sometime since given
you, of the issue of his Lordship, the present Lord Chancellors Proceeding in
the late Memorable Case of St. Katharines A Proceeding I cannot but remind you
of; as well as of the Check put but few years before at the Great Seal, to a
Visitation then offered-at, in a Method less regular, in the Case of St.
Thomas's.

To conclude, My Lord, this Calamity of ours in our Hospital-concernment is a
Spot not to be covered in our Feasts of Charity, once the Glory of this City.
And a Spot not at the worst neither, but daily spreading, and daily deepening
too, through every part of it. Witness its Appearance (where least to have been
lookt-for) in the very last act of our Treasurer's signing this Account; as
giving you therein, his own Hand in Evidence against the Truth of what you had
had before from his Vnsign'd* and in which, as in all other its former
Editions, to my self, to the Hospital, and from thence to the Lords of the
Treasury, there had been suppressed in the single Article of Sea Wages, a Sum
no less than 1400 l. besides others of greater Moment yet behind. And this too,
notwithstanding repeated Cautions to them concerning it; and particularly in my
last, whereof this brings you a Copy. And since which (as fresh at it is) they
have nevertheless adventured to ask, and actually received more than 700 l.
upon that very Head on which the Treasurer has so lately owned his having twice
that Sum of the King's in his Hand, yet to be accounted-for.

Be pleased therefore to think of some speedy Prevention to the Growth of this
our Reproach. And toward it, permit me only to say; That as uneasy as the
Undertaking may appear to ' others; I see no Cause of apprehending any thing of
more difficulty needful toward it (whether as to the due animadverting upon
what is past, or better providing for what is to come) than a Right Choice of a
very few Hands to be assigned thereto, supported with an Authority suited to
the Work, and Powers requisite to the rendering their Labors and Determinations
therein Effectual.

Which being adjusted, and that only; I should with great assurance of success,
both readily and gladly pay the utmost of my personal Service to the Gentlemen
so commissioned; as well in detecting the Errors of my own Calculations (and
which for the Poor's sake I could wish more, than I dare yet hope them to be)
as suggesting and applying adequate Remedies, to what those Gentlemen in their
happyer Enquirys may find truly needing the same.

But if after all (which God avert) it should be our Infelicity, even with the
aid of that Charter, not to have wherewith of our own to help our selves
herein. The Cause nevertheless is too sacred, both in it self, and as it is the
King's, to be permitted to sink, while within the support I have so often
mentioned, of his Own Sovereign Visitation; And more particularly in what
relares to Himself within our Care in the Mathematical Foundation; by
translating it, from the Hands in which it now languishes, to those he is
pleased to entrust with that of his Own later Erection, to the same Royal
Purpose in the Advancement of Navigation, within his Own Palace and Inspection
at Greenwich.

I am in most respectful manner, My Lord and Gentlemen, Your ever most faithful
and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

upon the State of Christ-Hospital.

Paper V.

Mr. PEPYS To the President, and Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL, upon the
Present State of the said HOSPITAL.
To the Honored Sir John Moor, Knight. and President, and the rest of my Honored
Friends, the Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
York-Buildings, March 30th. 1699. Gentlemen,
YOUR Resolution of the 22th instant, importing your Election of me to the
Treasurership of this Hospital, was delivered me by the worthy Gentlemen
appointed thereto, with a degree of Respect as obliging on their part, as the
Message it self was on Yours; and both surprising.

Surprising I say; but without ought of what (I find) was in too much
Tenderness apprehended from me by some of this Body concerning it; as being
One, who think nothing below the Character of any Man to execute, in a Service
of Charity: And who therefore in my late Searches into the Condition of this
House, descended to Offices much beneath any thing that can occur in what you
are now calling me to.

I therefore do most thankfully own the Proof you herein tender me of the
Continuance of your Esteem, after the unwelcome Freedom I have for some time
been unavoidably exercising toward you, upon the Unhappy Subject of your
present State; in which Your selves are now pleased to give me this Testimony
of your acquiescence: and in the Redress whereof, this Court shall never want
any thing within my power improvable thereto.

But whether in the method you now propose, is what I have made it my business
for some days to consider; without being able to bring my self to any other
Determination in it, Than that the giving you any conclusive Answer (whether of
Acceptance or Refusal) before this Resolution of yours shall have passed the
Censure of another Court, is a no less Exposing of Myself, than Imposing on
You, (as in a very late Case) under the Uncertain Issue of a subsequent Court;
and when that is over, of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen also: As that
without which, by the known Constitution of all our Hospitals, no Election of a
Treasurer is valid. A Consideration of more than common Weight at this time;
from the Question under which the Authority of that Court now lies with this;
without Ought I can hear-of yet done on their side, in its Assertion.

Which while in doing, and for Your clearer Guidance in Your second Debates on
this matter at the next Court, I think it becoming me, in faithfulness both to
You and Myself, to lay before You the few following Considerations.

1st. -- That I am no Freeman; and consequently, according to the Original Book
of Ordinances by which alone (without entering into the Reason of it) this Court
and that of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen are at liberty to Act herein; I neither
am capable of being Your Treasurer, nor You nor They, apart or together, in a
Capacity of making me so. Nor is there, I believe, any one Instance to be shown
me, of a Treasurer not a Freeman: And should therefore most unwillingly subject
Myself to Question, for meddling unwarrantably with a Revenue so Sacred as that
of the Poor's; or be an Occasion of Your adventuring upon that in my Case,
which was never yet done in any, nor can now justifiably be in this.

2dly. -- That the Office and Work of Your Treasurer ought not to be estimated
by what we have seen of it in its Execution for some Years past; but by the
Condition the House is reduced to, from its being executed no otherwise. As
being an Office, that calls at once for Qualifications, such and so many, as
rarely meet in the same Person: Such are (besides that of an approved
Integrity) Vigor of Mind, Steadiness of Health, Entire Leisure,
Vninterestedness, Zeal for and Tenderness toward the Poor, General Experience,
and particular Practice in the Business of Accounts, a Genius fitted for
Command joined with Temper, a Thorough-Insight into the Laws and Ends of our
Constitution, and a Capacity of Controlling every of our Officers and Masters
in the Execution of their Dutys, with a constancy of Attendance and Application
(in his own Person, and not by Others) to the Performance of his own. A Task
both in Bulk and Weight, too much for my Age and known Infirmities; Besides the
Disabilitys I am alone Conscious to my self of, for it.

And though what I have here to add, might not possibly be reckoned of Moment
enough alone in this Debate: yet in Conjunction with what is already said, I
know not how without Injury to my self to omit the observing; that I can with
no Satisfaction think of accepting of a Charge, which my self must be owned to
have had the greatest Hand in the rendering Vacant.

3ly. -- That suitable to my Advice to you elsewhere on this Subject, I do not
see with what Safety this Court can proceed to the giving a final Discharge to
its late Treasurer, nor how it should expect his being Succeeded by any Person
of Sincerity or Substance, till a State shall be first Adjusted of all your
Accounts, Revenues, Charges and Debts, to your Own and Their Satisfaction; and
that also laid before, and acquiesced-in by the Court of Aldermen. Besides the
Review and fresh Establishment fit to be first had of the Work and Instructions
of that Officer, before the Admission of a New. As foreseeing little Fruit from
any Change of Hands (be it what it will) where those Hands shall be obliged by
no other Rules nor Restrictions, than those we owe our present Distresses to.

For the more Successful Dispatch of which, as well on the part of your said
Treasurer as Your selves; I submit it to You, whether it may not be advisable,
that the Current Work of this Office be for the Present lodged with a small
Commmittee of Your own Number, properly chosen; till by the Adjustment of these
Matters, You shall be in a Condition of restoring it to its Ordinary Methods.

4ly. -- Lastly, That no Degree of Industry, Experience, or other the Virtues
(before required) in a Treasurer, can alone be thought Sufficient at this
Juncture (where our Whole Constitution lies at once out of Order) to compass
its Reformation, without equal Aid from a no less vigorous and persevering,
however otherwise meritorious a President. One, I mean, whose
thorough-knowledge in the Design, Powers, Limitations, and Orders of this Pious
Foundation, and the Rules of their Execution, is able both to preserve himself
from being either discouraged or imposedon, and by his Authority, Zeal and
Vigilance, to prevent those Practices which, from the want hereof, the
Generality of this House has been so long misled by, to its Undoing. A
Reflection, that in one word, would alone suffice (lay there nothing else in my
way) to deter me from the Undertaking You invite me to, under the Circumstances
we at present labor in this Particular.

Which having said, and the Reasons of it thus opened; it remains only for me
to beg, that my declining Your present Offer may not be taken for a Declension
in any part of my Concernment for the Prosperity of this House. Forasmuch as no
Consideration shall ever discourage or divert me from the pursuit of it; till
by some Means, Ordinary or Extraordinary (though much rather the former) I see
it restored to the State wherein all Good men wish it.

In view whereof, give me leave with great Satisfaction once more to assure
You, that (without any such Obligation as this of your Treasurership) neither
You nor Your helpless Orphans shall ever want the best Effects of my Personal
Attendance and Service, from the Moment that, by Your thorough-Applications,
and those of the Court of Aldermen toward it, I shall have any Grounds to
hope, that such my Attendance and Service, may be followed with any Success, to
the Recovery of the lost Honor of this House, by its Return to that Religious
Strictness which once distinguished it from all others, in its Compliances with
the holy and charitable Ends provided for by its Munificent Founders and
Benefactors, I am

Gentlemen, Your most humble and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

upon the State of Christ-Hospital.

Paper VI.


