THE Proposed Comprehension Soberly, and Not Unseasonably, CONSIDERED.
ALthough the Benefits wherewith Almighty God has Universally Blessed the whole
Creation, are a sufficient Check to the Narrowness of their Spirits, who would
Unreasonably Confine all Comfort of Life within the straight Compass of their
own Party (as if to receed from their Apprehensions, whereof themselves deny
any Infallible Assurance, were Reason good enough to deprive other Dissenters
of Nature's Inheritance, and which is more peculiar, ENGLAND's FREEDOMS) Yet
since it fares so meanly with those Excellent Examples, that many vainly think
themselves then best to answer the End of their being born into the World, when
by a Severity, which least of all resembles the God of Love, they rigorously
prosecute the Extirpation of their Brethren: Let it not seem Unreasonable, or
Ill timed, that we offer to your more Serious Thoughts, the great Partiality
and Injustice, that seem to be the Companions of a Comprehension, who only can
be concerned at this time, to prevent It, by a more Large and Generous Freedom.

First then, Liberty of Conscience (by which we commonly understand the free
Exercise of any Dissenting Persuasion) is but what has been generally pleaded
for, even by the Warmest Sticklers for a Comprehension, and without which it
would be utterly Impossible, they should be comprehended: The Question then
will be this, What Ground can there be, why Some, and not All, should be
Tolerated? It must either respect Conscience, or Covernment: If it be upon
Matter of mere Religion, What Reason is there that one Party should be
Tolerated, and another Restrained; since all those Reasons, that may be urged
by that Party, which is Comprehended, are every whit as proper to the Party
Excluded? For if the Former say, They are Orthodox, so say the Latter too; If
the one urge, It is Impossible they should Believe without a Conviction; that
the Understanding cannot be Forced; that Mildness most Gains; that the True
Religion never Persecuted; that Severity is most Unworthy of her; that Sound
Reason is the only Weapon which can Disarm the Understanding; that Coertion
does rather Obdurate then Soften; and that they therefore choose to be Sincere
Dissenters, before Hypocritical Conformists: The other Party says the same. In
fine, There can be nothing said for Liberty of Conscience, upon Pure
Conscientious Grounds, by any one Party in England, that every one may not be
Interested in; unless Any will undertake to judge that of Five Sorts of
Dissenters, Two are really such on Convictions, and Three upon mere Design. But
if such Sentence would be looked upon as most Arrogant and Unjust, how can it be
Reasonable, that those whom some endeavor to exclude, should be thus
prejudged, and such as are comprehended, be therefore so only from a strong
Opinion of their Reality: We may conclude then, that since Liberty of
Conscience is what in it self Comprehenders plead, and that it is evident to
affirm this, or that, or the other Party Orthodox, is but a mere Begging of the
Question. What may be urged for one, is forceable for any other: Conscience
(not moveable but upon Conviction) being what all pretend themselves alike
concerned in.

But they say, that such as are like to be comprehended, are Persons, not
Essentially Differing; that it were pity to exclude them whose Difference is
rather in Minute Matters, then any thing Substantial, whereas you Err in
Fundamentals. But how Paradoxal soever such may please to think it, that we
should therefore plead the Justice of taking those in, Some unkindly would have
left out, we know not; however, we believe it most Reasonable to do so; For
certainly the Reason for Liberty or Toleration, should hold Proportion with the
Weighty Cause of Dissent, and the Stress Conscience puts upon it. Where Matters
are Trivial, they are more blameable that make them a Ground for Dissent, then
those who perhaps (were that all the Difference) would never esteem them worth
Contending for, much less that they should Rend from that Church, they
other-wise Confess to be a True One: So that whoever are Condemnable, certainly
those who have been Authors and Promoters of Separation upon mere Toys and
Niceties, are not most of all others to be Justified. Had they conscienciously
offered some Fundamental Discontent, and pleaded the Impossiblity of
reconciling some Doctrines with their Reason or Conscience, yet promising Quiet
Living, and all Due Subjection to Government, they might have been thus far
more excusable, that People would have had Reason to have said; Certainly small
Matters could not have induced these Men to this Disgraceful Separation, nor
any thing of this Life have tempt them to this so Great and Troublesome
Alteration: But to take pet at a Ceremony, then Rend from the Church, set up a
New Name and Model, gather People, raise Animosity, and only make fit for
Blows, by a Furious Zeal kindled in their Heads, against a few Ineptiae, mere
Trifles; and being utterly vanquished from these Proceedings, to become most
earnest Sollicitors for a Comprehension; though at the same time of hot Pursuit
after this Privilege, to seek nothing more then to prevent others of Enjoying
the same Favor, under the Pretense of more Fundamental Difference; Certainly,
this shows that had such Persons Power, they would as well Disallow of a
Comprehension to those who are the Assertors of those Ceremonies they receed
from, as that for mere Ceremonies they did at first Zealously Dissent, and ever
since remain more Unjustifiably Fierce for such Separation. And truly, If there
were no more in it then this, it would be enough for us to say, That some in
England never Rent themselves from the Church at all, much less for little
Matters: that they never endeavored her Exile, but she found them upon her
Return, which they Opposed not, nor yet since have any ways sought to install
themselves in her Dignities, or enrich themselves by her Preferments. We appeal
then to all Sober Men, if what is generally called the Episcopal Party of
England can with Good Conscience, and True Honor dis-inherit those of their
Native Rights, Peace, and Protection, and leave them as Orphants to the wide
World, indeed a Naked Prey to the Devourer, who from first to last have never
been concerned, either to endeavor their Ruin, or any ways withstand their
Return, whilst it may be some of those, who have been the most Vigorous in
both, and that for Circumstantial, and not Essential Differences, may be
reputed more deserving of a Comprehension, then we are of a Toleration.

But it will be yet said, You are Inconsistent with Government, They are not,
therefore You are Excluded, not out of Partiality, but Necessity. What
Government besides their own they are consistent with, we leave on the side of
Story to tell, who can better speak their Mind then we are either able or
Willing to do: But this give us leave to say in general, If any apprehend us to
be such as merit not the Care of our Superiors, because supposed to be
Destructive of the Government, let us be called forth by Name, and hear our
Charge; and if we are not able to answer the Unbyast Reason of Mankind, in
reference to our Consistency with the Peace, Quiet, Trade, Tribute of these
Kingdoms, then, and not before, deny us all Protection. But that Men should be
concluded before heard, and so sentenced for what they really are not, is like
Beheading them before they are Born. We do aver, and can make it appear, that
there is no one Party more Quiet, Subject, Industrious and in the bottom of
their very Souls, greater Lovers of the Good Old English Government and
Prosperity of these Kingdoms among the Comprehended, then for ought we yet see,
may be found among those who are like to be unkindly Excluded; However if such
we were in any one Point, Cure rather then Kill us; and seek the Public Good
some cheaper Way then by our Destruction: Is there no Expedient to prevent
Ruin? let Reason qualify Zeal, and Conscience, Opinion.

To Conclude, If the Public may be secured, and Conscience freely exercised by
all, for the same Reasons, it may be some (and since Liberty of Conscience, is
Liberty of Conscience, and the Reasons for it, equivalent) We see not in the
whole World, why any should be deprived of That, which others for no better
Reasons are like to enjoy.

Let it not then be Unworthy of Such to remember, that God affords his
Refreshing Sun to All; The Dunghill is no more excepted then the most
Delightful Plane, and his Rain falls alike both upon the Just and Unjust: He
strips not Mankind of what suits their Creaturely Preservation; Christians
themselves, have no more peculiar Privilege in the Natural Benefits of Heaven,
then Turks or Indians. Would it not then be strange, that Infidels themselves
much less any Sort of Christians should be deprived of Natural Privileges for
mere Opinion, by those who pretend to be the Best Servants of that God, who
shows them quite an other Example, by the Universality of his Goodness as
Creator; And Believers in that Christ, who himself preached the Perfection of
Love, both to Friends and Enemies; and laid down his Life to confirm it when he
had done. If Men should Love their Enemies, doubtless they ought at least to
Forbear their Friends: And though some Differences in Judgment about Religion
be a Sufficient Reason to excommunicate a Man the Air Ecclesiastical, yet
nothing certainly of that Sort ought to dis-Priviledge Men of their Air Natural
and Civil to breath freely in: And let that GOOD our Superiors have observed
to be the Fruit of Toleration, not be Weakened or Blasted by an Untimely
Comprehension of some, to the Exclusion of the Rest; since the Reason holds the
same for the less Formidable Separatists, that may not be however any whit less
Conscientious.

We will omit to mention, how much more Suitable it were to State Matters, that
all Parties should be kept upon an Equal Poize, a thing most True in it self,
and most Secure to the Public Magistrate: and will Conclude at this time, That
though We no ways Design a Mis-Representing of any, much less their
Exception, and least of all their Persecution; yet, a Comprehension either
respecting the Persons and their Qualifications, or their Separation, and the
Grounds and Reasons of it, We seriously believe, can never be consistent with
that Conscience, and Honor, and Wisdom, and Safety, that ought to be the Mark,
those who are concerned in it, should take their Aim by. But if a Comprehension
should at last be compast, it is not doubted by many Wise Men, but it will be
found as Impracticable as other ACTS more seemingly Severe have been, and at
last will necessitate to that Well-Ordered Universal Toleration of all, who
both profess and Practice Peace, Obedience, Industry, and Good Life, which will
best please Almighty God, and Rejoice the Hearts of all Good Men.

From Real Friends to King and Country.


