The People of SCOTLAND's Groans and Lamentable Complaints, Poured out before
the High Court of Parliament.
THE People of Scotland, most Illustrious Patriots, like Children in a great
measure deprived of the Kindness and Protection of One of their Parents, have
Recourse to you as the Other. When one Parent is dead, or under a moral
Incapacity of performing Their part, if the Other prove unnatural or negligent,
the Poor Children must unavoidably be Undone. The People of this Kingdom, whom
you Represent, have been deprived of the Benign Influences of our Kings these
100 years. Our Neighbors having the Political Fathers of our Country, under
their Command, are so far from leaving them at Liberty to Treat Us as Subjects
and Children, that they have from time to time made 'em Treat Us like Enemies;
but never more than at present, as is obvious to all the World, to Our great
Loss and Dishonor.

We have no other Remedy left Us then, most Noble Representatives, but to
prostrate Our Selves at Your Feet, and to throw Our Selves into your Arms, as
those of Our Other Parent, humbly imploring, nay Conjuring You by all that is
Sacred, and by the Honor of the SCOTTISH Name, that You* would not suffer this
Ancient and Gallant Nation to be so much Contemned and Injured. We beg of You
to consider, how Our Sovereignty and Freedom is Violated, Our Laws trampled
upon, and our Trade interrupted; how Our Brethren have been Starved and made
Slaves, Our Colony deserted, and Our Ships burnt and lost Abroad; whilst Our
Petitions have been rejected, Our Company baffled, Our People Famished, Our
Metropolis burnt, and slames of Division kindled amongst Us at Home. We entreat
You to consider, how they that ought in Kindness, nay in Gratitude, to have let
Us had Provisions for Our Money, whilst they enjoyed Plenty, and ought to have
Protected Us with their Ships, since We are under one Sovereign, and have lost
so many Men in their Service by Sea and Land, suffered Us to die for Want, and
would not let Us have the Use of Our own Friggots, that were built at Our own
Charge. We must beg You to take into Your most Serious Thoughts, how Your own
Authority has been trod under Foot, Your Acts Violated, Your Address slighted,
and the Company of Your Establishment Opposed and Oppressed. We pray You to
Remember, how Promises made You to advance Our Trade, have been broke; how
those to Our Company have been falsified; and how English Ministers have had
Private Orders to act contrary to those Promises. We beseech You to Remember,
how a Petition for delivering from Slavery, Gentlemen Related to so many of
Your Families, etc. was slighted and opposed; How Our Liberty of a National
Petition for Calling You together, Most Illustrious Representatives, to Redress
Our National Grievances, was invaded and traduced: How Your Meeting has been
unreasonably adjourned from time to time, tho the Bleeding Honor and Interest
of Our Nation called aloud for a present Remedy.

We beg of You with Tears, as You tender the Honor and Welfare of this Ancient
Kingdom, to undeceive His Majesty, who by His Answer to Our Commissioners seems
to have been informed, that Your Sentiments, and those of the Nation expressed
in Our Petition, would not be the same.

We hope you will consider the Dishonor put upon your Selves, by the effectual
Answers given to the Addrresses of a Neighboring Parliament, whilst yours is
unregarded; and that you will assert the Liberties of this Injured Nation,
against the Insolence and Oppressions of Ungrateful Neighbors: Consider the
Noble Achievements of our Ancestors, in defience of our Freedom and Honor.
May it never be said, we are so much degenerated, as meanly to part with those
Jewels which they purchased for us with the Price of their Blood. And much
less, that those who falsely reproached us with selling our King, should have
just grounds to tell us, that any of our Representatives sold our Country. Let
not this Nation, that they could never Conquer by their Swords, be ingloriously
subdued by their Money.

We must leave it with You, most Noble Patriots, to take Care, that no such
Judas's bring a perpetual Infamy upon the Parliaments of Scotland. May the very
Aspect of your August Assembly prove their Bane; may it force them to confess
their Treasonable Crime, in betraying our Blood and Honor; may they afterward
go to their deserved Place; and may their Posts be filled with Honester-Men.

We must in the last place humbly beseech You, to prevent our being further
impoverished and enslaved, by a standing Army in time of Peace. We have the
same Love for our Country that our Ancestors had, and are as willing to defend
it as they, without mercinary Troops. Let us all be Armed and Disciplined as
they were, and then we shall soon make good our Motto of Nemo me impune
Lacesset: Our forefathers did wonders without standing Armies, and that we have
not lost our Native Courage, is evident from what our undisciplined Men did,
both here and in Ireland, since the Revolution.

Let not a Nation then, who formerly spread the Glory of their Arms al^ over
Europe, be dispirited under the Bondage of a Foreign Court. Let not that Blood,
that formerly used to gather Laurels in the field of Battle, and raised the
Honor of our Country, be so prodigally spilt in Quarrels of other Nations that
make us such Ungrateful Returns. May Heaven inspire Your August Assembly with
proper Methods to deliver us from being Oppressed at home and Despised abroad.
May you be Blessed to improve the present Opportunity of so doing, which if
lost the like is not to be again expected; And as you have had the Honor to
begin and advance our Deliverance, may you have the Glory to Complete it, and
to render your Memory Sacred to all succeeding Ages.


