Mr. PEPYS to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen upon the Present State of
CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
To the Right Honorable Sir Humphry Edwin, Lord Mayor.
York-Buildings, July 11. School. My Lord,
MY last to your Lordship is now more than three Months old. In which, led by
your Lordships own Invitation, I chose to lodge in your Hand the Execution of a
Matter, to which I fully believe your Lordship did then as little design, as I
did expect, or indeed the Matter it self could be thought to bear, the
unnecessary delay of three Days. Such was the Account it brought you of the
then wretched State of Christ-Hospital; and that under an hourly Declension
toward worse.

The esteem I have, My Lord, of the Sincerity of your Intentions, and the
Assurances you were pleased at the same time, and by repeated Messages since,
to give me thereof, will not permit me to charge this Loss of Time (though
greater in it self than the whole Remainder of your Lordships year of
Mayoralty, will (I fear) suffice to make amends for) upon ought else, than some
unforeseen Difficulties in your attempting that Singly, which would call for
the Strength, as it does indeed on the Duties, of More; I mean of the whole
Body Corporate of the City, entrusted therewith by the Crown.

Which Body not being (that I know) to be otherwise come-at by me, than through
that of the Court of Aldermen; I have determined upon discharging my Duty
thereto in this Matter, by a Line or two at its next Meeting: When your
Lordship with them, assisted by my forementioned Paper of the 5th. of April,
and the Report accompanying it of the 23d. of March, will, I doubt not, be
fully enabled both to judge and do what shall then appear reasonable. I am with
all Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordships most obedient Servant S. Pepys.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen. York-Buildings,
July, 12. School. My Lord, and Gentlemen,
IT being from this Court only that I derive my relation as a Governor to
Christ-Hospital; it is to it alone I hold my self first accountable for the
Issue of my Endeavors under that Charge.

Not that either You or my self (could it have been avoided) had ever had the
trouble of it in this Place: As having made it my many Years Labor, to have
prevented or cured elsewhere (at the Hospital, I mean) those Evils, which from
my disappointments there, I am now driven to expose to You here.

What they are, I take leave to refer You for Information to two Papers of
mine, of the 23d of March and 5th of April last; which (besides many others
lying with the Hospital) have for some Months been by me lodged, in the Hands
of the Right Honorable and my Honored Friend the Lord Mayor; showing the
present State of this Unhappy House in its Revenue, Stock, and Debts; with
another prepared at the same time, and ready (when seasonable) to follow them,
relating to the no less wretched Condition of it, in its Moral and Religious
Economy: Making together, such an Instance of ROYAL and PRIVATE CHARITIES,
consecrated to Uses the most Pious and Public, so spent, so misapplied,
perverted, and unaccountably sunk, within so little time, to so great a Value,
and with so reproachful an Account to be given of any End of its Institution
answered, toward either God or Man; as I firmly believe, the Story of no one
House of Charity, in any Christian Age or Place, can parallel.

And because I foresee, that without immediate application from this Court,
nothing herein can receive Amendment; But that on the contrary, the Support,
Service, and Honor of this Religious House must fall, and both its Miscarriage
and Debts become the City's to answer-for. And more than so; that for what
concerns the Mathematick Foundation there, erected by my Royal Master King
Charles II. for the Advancement of Navigation; my Personal Interest in the
Prosperity of it, will oblige me to become an Assistant in the Enquiries, which
in Right to His present Majesty must be expected, into the Effects of what has
been spent thereon; and the Balance (to above 20000 l.) yet resting to be
accounted-for to Him. I thought it my Duty, while under my present Relation to
this Your Service, to endeavor hereby, and by Your timely improving it, both
to excite and enable You, to bring-about such a Reformation herein of Your own,
as may prevent the Consequences of the want of it.

If not; it remains only, that I beg Your disburthening me of my Charge herein;
that I may be at liberty to pursue what may offer it self of greater Efficacy
toward the Recovery of this Foundation, and the Advancement of the great End
of it in our Navigation; under the nearer Influence and Protection of His
Majesty, in that of his own late Erection on the same Royal Design elsewhere. I
am, with great Respect,

My Lord, and Gentlemen, Your most Faithful and most Obedient Servant S. Pepys.

upon the State of Christ-Hospital. Paper I. Apr. 29. 1699
Mr. PEPYS to the Lord Mayor Upon the Present State of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
To the Right Honorable Sir Humphry Edwin, Lord Mayor. Tuesday, October. 25.
School. York-Buildings. My Lord,
ANother Three Months are now run-out, and the whole twelve of your Lordship's
Great Office at the Eve of their Expiring; while our poor Orphans remain in the
same reliefless State I left them in with your Lordship, in my Letter of the
5th. of April last. Wherein nothing more was proposed of Trouble to your
Lordship toward the remedying it (and that too of your Lordship's own seeking)
than the accompanying with your Authority my Report thereof to the Gentlemen of
Christ-Hospital (to whom it was specially directed) and to the Body-Corporate
of the City, which, as I have heretofore noted, stands originally answerable
for the same, to the Crown.

In neither of which, though abundantly apply'd-to in both, has your Lordship
thought fit to express any regard to your Undertaking to me. But so much the
contrary; as to have arraigned my late Memorial to you concerning it (even
after your Own and the Court of Aldermen's solemn Thanks to me for it) as a
Libel, and the only Occasion of the No-Voice given your Lordship, at the late
Parliament-Election for the City. And this delivered me from your Lordship, and
my Lady Mayoress too, as your Joint-Message, by the same Worthy Citizen, and
Member both of your Common Council and Hospital, whom your self was first
pleased to employ to me, on those Pious Errands I was misled by, to the
submitting the Execution of this Matter singly to your Lordship.

My Lord, I shall not offer at the asking-after, or even aiming at the Ground
of this your so extraordinary Dealing, in a Cause of so Religious an Import; as
leaving that to God, the City, and your Self, to be reckon'd-for. It shall
suffice me, My Lord, to observe, That it has arisen from neither of those
Causes, whereto the Court of Aldermen were led to join with your Lordship in
the assigning it, and in the yet unperform'd Undertaking for its Recovery; your
Sickness, I mean, My Lord, and Sir Tho. Stamp's Absence.

A COPY of the forementioned Letter of April the 5th.
York-Buildings, April 5th. School. My Lord,
AFter acknowledging with all thankfulness to your Lordship (but with no small
uneasiness to my self, from my not being yet able to do it as I ought) for the
double Honor of your Lordship's late Visits: I take this time for putting into
your Hand (by your Servant Mr. Parry) my expected Report, upon the Subject you
have been pleased to give me so much Evidence of your compassionate Concernment
for; I mean, that of Christ-Hospital: closed at the Day I lately presumed to
bespeak of your Lordship (had it stood with your well-liking) for its Delivery
in Court there. And this I take the liberty of giving your Lordship the single
trouble of;

First, As by your Great Office you are, and stand originally declared to be,
Chief Ruler and Governor (in Superiority to the President himself) both of
that and every other Hospital. In which Quality I submit it afresh to your
Lordship to consider; How far you may yet think fit to concur with me, in the
having it communicated to that Court: For the sake of the many Gentlemen of the
first Degree for Honor and Probity in that Body, wholly uninform'd in every
Article of its Contents, and who (were they appris'd thereof) would as little
bear being thought Assistants to the present Managements there, as my self can,
who have now from 14 Years past, been on that Score alone, avowedly withdrawn
therefrom.

Nor do I repeat this, My Lord, from the least View I can yet have of any
Success from it, after the Reception met-with there by my last. But in pure
Discharge of what I hold it my Duty to do, toward that House and Them, and to
their late Resolution in Court touching this Matter: Whatever their Returns may
be for it, toward either Themselves or Me.

Next, with regard to your yet greater and nearer Interest in this Affair, as
Head of that Body, the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, incorporated
by K. Edward VI, as Governors General of all his Hospitals. To whom We of the
particular Houses rest accountable for what We do; as (with due deference) I
take Them to be, by Solemn Indenture, to the King; and particularly,

That the Revenues of the said Hospitals, over and above the ordinary Fees,
Pensions, and Lawful Charges, going out of the same, without Fraud or Covin,
shall be wholly bestowed, employed, and go, to the Relief and Sustentation of
the Poor.

And under this Character I am again to submit to Your Lordship, the
Consideration and Choice of Your Time and Method, for bringing it before Your
self in Conjunction with that Body, for its further Disposal, as in Your and
Their Wisdoms shall be found reasonable.

Allowing me only to add; That the late Unhappy Case of the Orphans of your
Rich, seems yet too fresh (could it be prevented) to be so soon followed by One
of so much a more moving sound as This, of the Orphans of your Poor. The Point,
of all others, wherein the Credit of this City has (from the immortal
Performances of our Forefathers) been hitherto preserved the most unshaken: And
therefore lest fit for our present Violation; as bearing in it the Cause of
dead Benefactors and living Infants, a-like incapable of being their own
Advocates. And so much, My Lord, the more worthy of, as well as needing, your
Lordship's Patronage, and the Benefit of your Authority ( great indeed, but
daily short'ning) as in a Service, at once, acceptable to God, aidful to his
Poor, profitable to the Public, and of consequence to the general Honor of
the City, and eminently so in particular to your Lordship.

Toward which, if ought further from me may be thought useful; your Lordship
is fully Master both of Me and It. Whether as to the Whole, or that special
Part of it, which respects the Mathematick Foundation, instituted by my Royal
Master K. Charles II. for the Advancement of Navigation. Which I must not spare
the declaring to your Lordship my being too particularly interested in, ever
silently to see the Ruin of. And therefore must beg your Lordship's and their
making such Use of it, in your Procedure and Adjustments with the Treasurer and
his Security in their approaching Discharge, as on the King's Behalf and your
Own shall appear expedient.

Nor yet (as before) would I be thought so far to restrain my Care herein to
this Foundation, as to forget my general Duty to the Whole: By omitting to
observe to you, That there lies no less Room open, for the Exercise of your
Lordship's and the City's Authority, Trust, and Paternal Regard to the Weal of
that Whole, than of this particular Branch of it: By seeing; that the near
200,000 l. of our Poor's Estate concerned in that Gentleman's Account, (and
never yet allowed, look'd-into, or so much as regularly laid before a Court
there) receive its Passage through yours, in such manner as it ought, and We
would it should, were the Effects thereof all our own Fathers Gifts, and the
Orphans interested in them our own Children. As in a Civil, as well as
Religious Construction, they indeed are little less: Being most of them, the
real wretched Orphans of our Fellow-Citizens.

To Whom, as such, I have ever most affectionately labored, and from this your
Lordship's and the City's earnest, though late, Interposition on their Behalf,
will not yet despair, of seeing my self once again in a Condition of being
Useful. Remaining,

My LORD Your Lordship 's most faithful and most obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

Mr. PEPYS, upon the State of Christ-Hospital. Paper II. Apr 29. 1699.
Nor am I ignorant, my Lord, how far your Self and Court have expressed your
Resentments of the want of it from him: and on that Consideration, think my
self under the greater Obligation of giving you this View thereof, in the
Method I did my last. Wherein with what Tenderness I governed my-self, toward
both this Court and the Hospital concerned in it, will be best understood from
the Enclosed, and what I might further appeal to from some of your own honored
Members concerning it.

Which Paper, my Lord, I therefore thus humbly lodge in your Lordship's hands
and Theirs, with two Others on the same Subject (one of older, the other of
later Date) of equal Service to the illustrating of the same; And all submitted
to such your Applications of them, as your Predecessor shall be found to have
left you Opportunity for.

One thing only I have to prae-bespeak concerning them. Namely, that the
Earnestness wherewith I may be thought delivering my self therein, touching the
Necessity of a Royal Visitation; may not be interpreted to arise, from any
Propension in me to the removing this Affair out of Your hands; or as
pretending to any power or purpose of doing more toward it, than the bringing
it within the Notice of that Minister, with whom the Crown has lodged the
determining of the Reasonableness, of taking it into its Own. And so much, my
Lord, I think my self, in Faithfulness to It, to You, and to the Poor,
indispensably bound to do: And that, upon such Convictions, of the Necessity of
it, as the Piety of this Court (when truly enlightened in 'em, and apprised of
what my Former and This show you to lie yet unreported by me, of much harser a
Hearing than all that has been yet spoken of) will be but too well and, I fear,
too late satisfied in the Reasons of.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, S. Pepys.


