A SERMON OF Mr. Benjamin Perkins, At the Funeral of Mrs. Martha Robient, Who
deceased September the 15th. at Colchester, 1700.

Enlarged into a Discourse on the excellent Life and Glorious Death of a
Christian. From 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. With an Enquiry into the Reasons of the Grand
Prohibition on the Servants of God to continue here in his Service; signified
to them by Death: From Heb. 7.23. By T. BEVERLEY.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by John Marshall, at the Bible in
Grace Church Street.

TO Mr. Thomas AND Mrs. Sarah Prior. Inhabiting the Town of Colchester.
My very Esteemed Christian Friends,
AS I have taken the Full Freedom of changing, and making Additions to the
Sermon committed to my Revisal at your Desire, and with the Consent of Mr.
Perkins; So I do in his Name, and I doubt not, with his Desire, as well as my
own, give it into your Hand, as Persons so nearly concerned in, and related to
Her; who was the mournful, and also the to be rejoiced in, occasion of it; as
the Testimony of my Remembrance of Her, and of all the Kindness received from
You, when with You in the occasional Ministration of the Gospel at Colchester.
As God has made you, I am much persuaded, Instruments of Good, where He has
placed You; so that He would bless You, and Your growing up Family, and
sanctify to You both, and make Consolatory this Discourse, and increase You in
all Grace and Service to Him, is the Earnest Prayer of; My Esteemed Friends in
the Lord,

Your Faithful Friend, And Servant in Him, T. Beverley.

THE PREFACE TO THE Serious, Candid, Christian READER.
IT has been always looked upon as one of the greatest Points of the Wisdom of
a Man, to understand, and to consider Death, to research into all the Rules of
prudent Conduct in the preparing for, and regularing our Reception of it: All
the great Men of Morals have Treated of it, as one of the principal Points of
Morality; but it is the Excellency and Glory of the Word of God, to have
understood the Way, and Path of this Wisdom; before whom Death and the Grave
are Naked and Open, and Destruction has no Covering: That alone Teaches to
number our Days, so as to apply our Hearts to Wisdom: To make wise, to
understand this; to consider our latter end: This gives the sure Grounds of
Hope in Death; yea, of Triumph, of appearing more than Conquerors over Death.

I have considered the many Removes God has of late made of many eminent
Persons of all Conditions; From that, ever to be with Honor remembered,
Princess, the late Queen; that (so very lately) Illustrious young Duke of
Gloucester; that very Venerable Person, Dr. Tillotson, A. B. C. those truly
Honorable Persons, Judge Rokeby; Paul Foley, Esquire in his time Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons: the very Eminent Christian, the Lady King, late
Wife to the so known Physician Sir Edmund King: Many Eminent Ministers of the
Gospel, Mr. Thomas Cole, Mr. Nathaniel Mather, Mr. Matthew Mead, Dr. Bates;
with many others of very worthy Name; and I cannot omit, because so early
taken, that young Hopeful Servant of Christ in the Gospel, Mr. Philip King. The
Consideration of so many great Examples of Dying gave me deep Searchings of
Heart, what the Reason and Meaning of such Transposes should be; and nothing
has given me greater Satisfaction, than the Reflections I have been enabled to
make on the Great High Priest and Apostle of our Profession, in whom the
Charter of all the Servants of God from the first Promise of him, Genesis 3. is
founded, and whose Intercession Bears them up, and by whom they are removed
moved into Higher Galleries, Zach. 3. into the Walks of Angels, who always
stand by, or next the Presence Chamber of the Great King; waiting His Appearing
and Coming forth in Glory; who has the Unchangeable Priesthood, Himself alone,
made after the Power of an endless Life: In the mean time their Remove (as it
appears) has the more severe Style of a Prohibition, Heb. 7.23. to express it;
or not being suffered to continue, by Reason of Death: This manner of speaking,
upon the Occasion of the Death of that so Honorable (beloved by all) Judge
Rokeby made great Impression upon me, and Thoughts of Heart; as in a Public
Congregation I declared soon after; and it has lain by me with an Intention of
further Publication; For I know God is pleased with His surviving Servants, in
rendering Precious the Death of his Servants gone out of this State; even as in
his Sight, so in the Sight of others it ought to be precious, and not soon
forgotten; and He is displeased, when the Righteous and Merciful are taken
away, and none considers, nor lays it to Heart; when They are taken from the
Evil to come, (Oh that now it may not be for that end) and each one rests on
his Bed, walking in their Uprightness, Esaias 57.1. Such general Honorable
Memorials are pleasing to our never-dying High Priest, though the profuse
Praises of Funeral Sermons, no way encouraged hereby; the Occasion of the
present Publication is, It having pleased God to remove a young Woman from a
Family in Colchester, where I have had very kind Christian Acquaintance and
Reception; and had Opportunity of knowing and observing that Person, as one,
who gave all Reasons of Hope of her Love to Jesus Christ, his Truths, Holy
Ways, and to his Servants, and of Faith and Hope in Him: A Sermon hereupon was
Preached in Remembrance of Her, by a Person, I must acknowledge a Stranger to
me, my self a Stranger to him any other way, than by Discourse of Friends; this
Sermon Presented to Them by Him, was by Him and Them, my very estemeed Friends,
the near Relations of the Deceased, put wholly under my Power; And that Grand
Scripture, so every way Great in it self, was so fitted to the great Purposes
of a Discourse on that Prohibition of the Servants of God continuing here;
That, I hope, without any just Reason of Offense on either side, I took the
Advantage of it, and not slighting, or waving, what I found to my Purpose in
the Sermon, have yet taken the Freedom to adapt all thereunto; and have with
the most Christian Friendly Respects to that Person, and to that Family, and to
the Memory of their deceased Relation; and as a Memorial of the before-recited,
with all other, the Servants of God so lately removed, I have, as I Earnestly
Desired to make it Public, so now done; And so, as that it may be both in
Honor to them; and also may be recommended to all the living Servants of
Christ, as a Mirror of their own State in Life and Death; and that it might be
blessed in general to all Readers; but above all, that it might be supremely to
the Honor of the great Founder of that Happy Society of his Servants, who
appoints each their Measure in his Service, and the Time of it, and lays his
Prohibition upon them of exceeding either, by Death. To Him be the Glory, by
the meanest and unworthiest of his Servants, the Prayer of the Humblest
Minister of his Gospel,

Mon. 9. Day 10. 1700. T. Beverley.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
2 Timothy iv. Verse vii. viii. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the Faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day:
And not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.


SOlomon the Wise tells us; To every thing there is a Season, and a Time, a
Time to be Born, and a Time to Die, a Time to Mourn, and a Time to Rejoice,
Eccles. 3.1. etc.

I doubt not, All the Godly and the Serious, and Sensible here present, will
readily acknowledge with me, That this is a Time to Mourn: But will it not look
like the adventuring on a Paradox, to affirm to you* That it is also a Time to
Rejoice?

A Time it is indeed to Mourn for the loss of so dear a Relation, and so Pious
and Christian a Friend: But are we not Christians as well as Men? And while
Nature feels, sighs, nay sinks at the dismal Loss of Friends, or Relations;
Grace should triumph over Nature, and Faith over Sense. While we are bemoaning
their loss, we should be Rejoicing in the Crown and Glory of Saints, of which
number she was we have so great Reason to be assured. Our Deceased Friend was
one of their Number, who by their Holy Conversation give a plain, and sensible
demonstration of the Power of the Principles of our Holy Profession, both by
their Life, and their Death; For Words have not that Energy and Force, that
Action and Conversation has; a shining Life, and a triumphant Death, persuade
beyond all the Power of Argument, or charms of Rethoric.

And concerning the not only unblameableness, but Piousness of her Life, for
whose Death we now Mourn, it was so well known to all that knew her, that she
has therein a better Character, than I can give her; for modesty of Style, and
Reserves of Expression become me, when I consider the Modesty and Humility of
her Deportment, through the whole of her Life.

I come therefore now to the Text I have proposed to Discourse upon. The whole
Text is drawn in Figures, borrowed from the Olimpic Games, well known in the
Times, and Places in which the Apostle wrote. Games appointed for all the
activities of Persons, prepared by Frame, and Constitution of Body, Vigor of
Mind, and Inclination, and strictly Disciplined, Dieted, and Exercised
thereunto: Such an allusion is at other times made use of by the Apostle, as 1
Cor. 9.24. And being Sanctified by the Divine Spirit, is most elegant and
expressive of holy Senses.

In this Place The Apostle of the Gentiles gives us under these Emblems a
threefold Character of himself; and then sets out the Prize.

1. His Encountering, and Combating all the Temptations of Satan within, and of
the World without; wherein he Fought, not as one that beats the Air, but at
sharps (as they say) with great effect for Offense and Defense, as those
Combatants alluded to used to do.

2. He (who received the Prize) Finished his Course. Therein he alludes to
those, who Run in a Race that they might Obtain: He Ran not as in certainly: He
Ran the whole Course of Doing and Suffering, and of his Ministry, and
Apostleship, the whole Race set before him to the very Mark.

3. He kept the Faith, the great Faith of the Gospel, in union to the Crucified
Jesus, which was the scandal of the Jews and Gentiles; even the Cross of
Christ, and the Obedience of Faith in all the Holiness, Mortification to the
World, and the Lusts of it within, and without; and does extend to all kinds of
Suffering, Heavenlyness of Mind, and Conversation: Hereby he behaved himself,
as a mighty Champion, that by no means would let go his Hold, or Deposium, the
Pearl of great Prize, or surrender it to the violence against it.

And so he leads us to the second Part of this great Text, under the same
allusion, The Crown, or the Prize; not the Cornuptible Crown of those Games,
but the Incorruptible; to which the Apostle refers, a Man is not Crowned except
he strive Lawfully; and herein he thus expresses himself; Henceforth is laid up
for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Righteous Lord shall give me.

Before I begin with the First Character, I would consider the Apostles
Expression of himself; I have Fought, I have Finished, I have Kept. Now it is
certain the Apostle, who acknowledges himself chief of Snners, and least of
Saints, would not speak of himself, as in, or of, or by himself; but is to be
interpreted by 1 Cor. 15.10. etc. By the Grace of God I am what I am; and not
I, but the Grace of God that was with me. And Gal. 2.10. I Live, yet not I; but
Christ Lives in me. Although therefore at the first view, the Apostle may
appear, as a self-Subsisting, a self Confident Person in that three fold (I:)
Yet when we duly weigh what he says in those places, Not I^ It shows, when he
speaks thus, he considers himself as in Christ the Head, and Savior of the
Body, who represented his, in all he Did and Suffered. But further, He is in
all his united to him by Faith, He does all their Works in them, and for them,
and thus in him, by the Power they receive from him, by being strong in the
Grace, that is, in Jesus Christ. They do all, They do, so that the Apostle when
he says, (I) does not mean himself, by (I) as single, solitary, divided from
Christ; but as in him, by him; as to the Strength, Life, Principle he acted
from. He did all in Christ; and not only so, but as the Power, and the Action
flowing from it was in Christ; So the acceptance, the making up the
Imperfections, the taking away the Guilt, the Corruption; The setting him free
from the Law of Sin and Death; In regard of condemnation falling upon Sin
dwelling in him. In all this, he looks wholly to Christ; and so his Fighting,
Finishing his Course, keeping the Faith, Are to be limited; Not I, but Christ
alone did all in me and was accepted for me in all.

This is therefore, the not only Encouragement, but the very support, nay more,
the subsistnce of Saints in all their holy Action and Motion: All is in Christ.

And this is their consolation in the midst of so many Clouds of Guilt, and
Imperfection; that they have a faithful and merciful high Priest who makes
Reconciliation; and perfumes their Persons, and services with his much Incense.
And though many are ignorant of this great Gospel Doctrine, this was the
consolation of our Friend in her Dying Hours.

Now this Explication of the Apostles as it shuts out on one side all the
Pharisaic Boasts in our selves, all the Self-righteousness and Self-sufficiency
of Legalists; so it utterly condemns all the Licentious pretensions of
Carnalists, to live as they please; or to be Slothful, Negligent, Careless,
Unactive in these great Transactions: For though they live all in Christ,
depend wholly on Him for acceptance; yet all His are under the Holy Constraints
of Love, and the Obligations of Filial Obedience; and Christ in them is a
Principle of Spiritual Life, and Highest Activity. So that they can neither be
loose or plead Liberty as a Cloak of Wickedness, nor be dull, and stupid in the
ways of Christ. And herein our Deceased Friend had learned Christ; In all
things sensible of Duty; but Living as to Justification and Acceptance with God
above. With those, who ^re the Circumcision, Worshipping God in the Spirit,
rejoicing in Christ Jesus; and having ^o confidence in the Flesh, and so she
was able, though so young a Person, to sing the Song of Victory: O Death Where
is thy Sting?)h Grave! Where is thy Victory? I thank God through Jesus Christ
my Lord, who has ^iven me the Victory. This made Her ear^estly desire a remove
out of the Body, and ^o be with Christ.

Thus I have given the True Evangelical sense of the Apostle placing so much
upon himself, I have Fought, and Finished, and Kept. It Is but as if he had
said, I have, (...) can do all things through Christ strength^eing me: and I
can look look upon all with Joy and Triumph, because all my Impurities and
Imperfections are answered for, and my Person is washed with the pure Water of
his Sacrificing Blood.

Let us then consider the great sense of the Apostle; I have faught a good
Fight. Wherein he comes forth in the strength of Jehovah Jesus Christ the Lord
of Hosts. As David the Warrior of the Lord, under the Captain of Salvation.
Resolved, and armed ^t all Points; and that had with Courage and Fidelity,
almost now to the very last, carried on so far, as his Station reached, ^he
full Conquest and Victory of Jesus Christ, he is now triumphing over all
Enemies.

For the Explaining of this warfare, in the wars of the Lord, as they are
styled Numb. 21.14. We are to consider the Great Lord mighty in Battle, who
arms all his even the Lord Jesus, who appoints them* who are therefore styled
Good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, who has Redeemed them from being slaves of
Justice, of Wrath, of Satan; and they therefore are said to over come by the
Blood of the Lamb. So their very setting out is by his Blood; They are Armed by
him with Courage, Spirit, and Might within. He teaches their hands to War, and
their Fingers to Fight; by him they run through a Troop, by him they leap over
a Wall; it is he that Girdeth them with strength to the Battle, that they may
help the Lord against the mighty; and that all Enemies may be subdued to him;
and trherefore the Fight is called a good Fight with great Reason.

1. The Apostle had to Fight with himself, his carnal Reason to Throw down the
strong holds of that, to bring every thought into Captivity to Christ, all
those high Thoughts of self-Righteousness, to slight all conferences with Flesh
and Blood, and to repel them, when tempted to such disloyal Treaties; to bring
under the Law o^ his Members that warred against the Law of his Mind, and would
bring him into Captivity to the Law of Sin, and Death to bring under subjection
that carnal Mind that is enmity to God; not subject to the Law of God, nither
indeed can be; that in dwelling Sin. All those Willings and Lustings against
the Spirit; In regard of which, the Apostle Expresses himself in the Language
of a Combatant in those Games, that deals the most subduing, and mortifying
Strokes and Blows; so he upon all Bodily Inclinations and Lusts. And this is
one great Point of the good Fight, the Apostle reviews with so much comfort:
But it is in Christ, and through Christ, by whom, in whom as Crucified with
him, the Flesh with its Lusts and Affections are Crucified and not in, or by
himself.

2. The Apostle had to Fight with the World, in all both its inticements and
blandishments, and in regard of its Threats, Rages, and Persecutions; In both
regards says He, I am Crucified to the World, and the World to me, Gal. 6.14.
But it is in Christ, and his Cross alone enabled Him.

3. He had to Fight with all the Enemies of the Gospel of Christ, in resistance
to the Grace of Christ in the Hearts of all, to whom He Preached; For speaking
of the Preaching of the Gospel, He says, The Weapons of our Warfare are
mighty: So with the open professed Oppositions to the Truth of Christ in his
Redemption. To the Jews a Scandal; as it it was contrary to all the Revelation
of God, in the Old Testament; and to the Gentiles Foolishness, as if it had no
Agreement with the Reason, Learning, and Wit of Men of Understanding, and
Accomplishment, 1 Cor. 1.23.

4. He had to Fight with the Powers of Darkness, Spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places; as every Christian has, For as He says, we War not; That is, not
principally; against Flesh, and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers,
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World. And for the maintaining this Fight,
He had the same necessity with all Saints; To take to himself the whole Armor
of God, that he might stand in the evil day, and having drne all to stand, Ephesians.
6.10.

5. All the Persecutors, and their cruelty, like the Beasts of Ephesus, in what
Sense soever taken, He had to Fight with; wherein He suffered, as an evil doer;
and was Killed all the Day long. But in all, He was more than a conqueror,
through him who Loved him.

6. He had to Fight with Guilt, Death and the Grave, the Wrath to come; and
with all the unbelief of his own Heart; But he over came by the continual
Application He made to the Death and Resurrection of Christ Jesus, who Loved
him, and gave himself for him, in whom he desired to be Found. So that he Ran
up to that assurance, to make that challenge, who shall lay any thing to my
charge, as one of Gods Elect; to be assured, That neither Life, nor Death,
Things present, nor Things to come, should be able to separate him from the
Love of Christ; and so he could Sing that Triumphant Song; Oh Death where is
thy Sting? Oh Grave where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin; the
Strength of Sin is the Law, but thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
as in the case of the Body of Sin and Death. All he places still in Christ; and
thus we see on all accounts, The Apostle Fought a good Fight, and through
Christ had the Prospect of a High and Noble End of the War, that is, of
Victory.

Head 2. I come then to the Second Point of the Apostles Triumphing Declaration
of his own State in Christ; I have finished my course; That we may rightly
apprehend, Here are two things to be understood by it.

I. The General course of a Christian State in its own Motion, Action,
Conversation, from the Time of Conversion unto the very Hour of Death. This was
one thing the Apostle understood by his course, for God having drawn out the
Line of Life, as he has seen fit for every one of his Servants; Their course
of Christian Action is by him drawn out proportionable; So that there is no
part to be unadorned; Something of Public, Private, Secret, ^nholy Action is
to be applied to every part of it; There must be a Running to obtain: It is
called therefore Running the Race, that is set before us; Looking to Jesus; to
show in whose strength the whole Race is run; So, It is expressed concerning
David, by his serving his Generation according to the will of God; and of John's
fulfilling his course, as a Servant of God in a Holy Conversation, besides his
Ministerial service: How many great concernments has every Christian to look
to; His Implantation into Christ, Renovation, New Creation; The In-dwelling of
the Spirit, the Graces, and Fruits of it; His Living, walking in the Spirit;
The work of Faith with Power; Sorrow after God working Repentance to Salvation
never to be Repented of. The constraining Love of Christ, the living to him,
the dying Daily; Converse with the Word of God, Hearing, Reading, Meditation,
Holy Discourse, Prayer, Thanksgiving; Self-denial, Sufferings, being made meet
to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: All these with much
more set before us in Scripture, show us, what the Race of a Christan is; what
his course is; Now to find our Heart engaged herein, with all earnestness
Pressing forward to reach the mark by the utmost stretch and extending our
selves to it, is what the Apostle speaks of himself: He had run on in this
Christian course, on this Line, to very near the End of his Line of Life; and
it is a Glorious Review of a sincere, much more of an Eminent Christian; while
he can behold Christ, the Alpha, and Omega, the Beginning, and End of All; All
the Haltings, the Falls, False-steps, the many Lingerings, made up, Answered,
and Attoned for by the Author, and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy set
before Him, ran the whole course, the Father Lined out to Him, Doing always the
things pleasing in his sight; Who set every step according to his Obediential
Love to the Father, and thefore went forth to his Death with highest
Resolution; Let us Arise (says he) and ( John 14.31.) Go hence: He endured the
Cross, despised the shame, and is set down on the right hand of the Majesty on
High: And thus his servants follow his steps, and so we have reason to hope of
this his Servant, that she was swift, she Finished her course, she Finished the
course she was set in, though a more private, and retired one, before she was
Prohibited, as the true sense of that word, we Translate (Not suffered)
signifies, Heb. 7.21. To continue any longer therein.

2. There is yet a higher, and more exalted sense of the Apostle Finishing his
course; not a more substantial or Fundamental sense; For that is indeed the
Fundamental; All the redeemed of Christ in, and by him, running their course,
and so entering into their Masters Joy; but there was also in all times a more
Public, and high sphere of Action; Into which God has been pleased to raise
some of his servants; and there has not been a higher, then the Ministry of
the Gospel and most particularly, the Apostolic; and t^ this undoubtedly the
Apostle had regard, when he here says, I have Finished my course.

For herein the Apostle had a Line given to him and a measure, the measure of
the Line, which he would not stretch himself, nor into other Men's Labors, but
according the Rule or Line prescribed him by God, 2 Cor. 10.13, etc. And this
was so abundant, that he Labored more abundantly, then any other, 1 Cor.
15.10. He was the Apostle of the Gentiles, Ministering the Gospel of God so to
them, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be a Sacrifice, Acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, being sanctified by the Holy Spirit; which was indeed a
high sphere of Christian Gospel-Activity; and whereof he says, He might Glory;
And the Line was so every way enlarged, that he Preached the Gospel round about
from Jerusalem to Wyricum, Romans 15.16, etc. He did fully, or Fulfill to Preach
the Gospel of Christ, and He strived to Preach where Christ had not been Named;
And all this was made efficacious, by Mighty Signs, and Wonders, by the Power
of the Spirit of God. So that it was best for the Churches, and more needful he
should continue, though to his loss, Phil. 1.21. In all this Notwithstanding;
He was most mindful to ascribe all to Grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God
he was All, that He was; and after all his Discourse of his Line, and measure,
He concludes; He that Glories, Let him Glory in the Lord, 2 Cor. 10.17. The
Apostle Finished this course, under and by the High Priest, and Apostle of our
Profession, whose the fupreme Glory in all is; Inasmuch as He, who Built the
House has more Honor, then the House; whose House with all Prophets,
Apostles, and Saints, Heb. 3.1. The Apostle was; For He, who Built All Things
in his Church, is God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Head 3. I come now to the third Head, or Character, the Apostle gives of
himself. I have kept the Faith: This Completes the whole: Herein the Apostle
speaks again, as a mighty Champion, that retained the Riches of Faith, Much
more precious, then of Gold, that Perishes: The Faith he retained with such a
Might, and would by no means suffer it to be forced out of his Hand.

1. That Great Principal, and most essential Faith, the Apostle kept, or held
fast, is Jesus Christ Himself, and his Righteousness, who is pleased, because
he himself is indeed the All of Faith, ^o be styled Faith it self, Gal. 3.23.

2. It is the whole Truth of the Gospel, as the Apostle Jude gives it the
Honorable Title of the Faith once, at once, once for All; Delivered to the
Saints, Jude 3. Comprizing the Righteousness of Faith by which the Just Live,
and receive even full assurance of understanding: The Righteousness of God
revealed from Faith to Faith; The Faith embracing the truth that is after
Godliness, which whoever walks contrary to, denies the Faith; The Faith that
looks to the Eternal State and Condition; which Hymeneus and Philetus, denying
by saying, The Resurrection was past already, overthrew the Faith of some. This
the Apostle held fast in all the senses of it, now given, and would by no means
part with, or betray to any Seducers, or Adversaries of one sort, or other; as
was before asserted under the first Character of Fighting a good Fight.

3. The inward Grace of Faith in the Heart, and Holy confession of which the
Apostle says, Romans 10. With the Heart, Man believes unto Righteousness, and
with the Mouth confession is made to salvation; The Life, he lived by the Faith
of the Son of God, who loved him and gave himself for him. The Faith even the
Plerophory of it, sprinckling the Heart from an Evil Conscience by the Blood of
Jesus, the Faith, by which we have Peace with God, the faith that embraces the
Promises, by which we cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh, and
Spirit; the shield of faith, The Apostle Exhorts above all to take, to quench
the fiery Darts of the Devil; The faith, by which the Elders obtained so
Honorable a Testimony, and Memory, Heb. 11. In all those their great Acts; The
faith that passes through all afflictions, temptations, and trials, till those
Pillars are set up with this Inscription, Rev. 13. Here is the Faith and
Patience of the Saints, here are they, who keep the Commandments of God, and
hold the Testimony of Jesus; Lastly the faith, the very presence of things
hoped for, raises to that Plerophory of hope, that enters within the Veil. All
Saints with the Apostle who by faith have dyed, and slept in, and by Jesus, and
are entered into rest with him, even as this servant of the Lord has lone by
the same faith; and whom God even our Lord Jesus will bring with him, the
Living remaining Saints shall not Anticipate; The Lord my God will come, and
all his Saints with him: But in all this faith, our whole subsistence is in,
and by the Author, and Finisher of Faith.

And so we are come to the second part of the Text; Henceforth is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness; This is the Prize of the High Calling of God in
Jesus Christ; Eternal Glory, the Eternal Inheritance, Eternal Redemption; the
whole Excellency, Glory, and Blessedness of the Eternal State is the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; which is alone by Jesus Christ in us, the
Hope of Glory reserved in Heaven: This the Lord as a Righteous Judge gives, and
he gives as a Crown of Righteousness; Because Jesus Christ has purchased it
with his own Blood, and Obedience; And in him, it i^ that Saints are able to
subsist in this Eternal Glory; Being made like him, by seeing hi^ as he is; but
most Glorious, herein is tha^ State, He in the Father, the Father in Him and
Saints hereby in Christ, and in the F^ther; and the Love wherewith the Father
Loved Him, even before the Foundation (...) the World is in them, because He is
in them and in all this the Son Intercedes with the Father, as a Righteous
Father, John 17.2^ etc.

To open this part of the Text, accordin^ to the Tenor of the present
Discourse, (...) far, as we have proceeded.

1. That expression of the Apostle; Hen^^ forth, or as the word in the Greek
signifie^ (...), That which remains is, there (...) laid up for me, etc. An
expression suitab^^ to this is that, Heb. 4.9. There remains rest for the
People of God; This has (...) Immutable certainty; If the Judgment wicked Men
be laid up in store with Go^ and Sealed among his treasures, Deuteronomy. (...) 34.
How much more the Salvation, (...) Glory, and Blessedness of his Saints: It as
cerrain, and much more certain, the^ in themselves, the precedent Fighting
(...) good Fight, etc. For their assurance is not themselves; They would fail
and come (...) hind, as Combatants not obtaining the Pri^^ If all the certainty
were in themselves; the Angels not Elect, and Adam failed, or f^ short: But the
Prize it self to be given to them, who do Fight, and Run, is in the nature of
the thing out of themselves, and in God alone; and is assured by his
Righteousness, and Veracity, that cannot fail. This remainder is so Connexed,
as not possible to be separated, from what went before; and more Impossible by
far to fail, then what went before, as in us, but as all is sure in the Great
surety, It is to be fulfilled in all his; Even as the Debt He paid for them is
set far above all doubts.

2. In this assurance of the Prize, the Apostle speaks so triumphingly of, he
says, The Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give me; He Styles the Lord, the
Judge, and the Righteous Judge, in agreement with the custom of those Games; In
which there was a Person, solemnly constituted, who should adjudge the Prizes,
and Determine the Lawfulness of the striving, as the Apostle says, a Man is not
Crowned, except he strive Lawfully. And it was expected from such a Person in
that State of Honor, that he should be Fair, Equal, and Just in all his
Judgment, and Determination; and it assures the Judgment of the Lord to be in
all things, admirable for its greatest Equity, Righteousness, and Judgment; For
the Righ^eous Lord Loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. And thus in allusion to
this in that so known Seat of allusion to these Games, the Apostle says; I keep
under my Body, and with the Austerest methods, Bring it into subjection; Least
while I Preach to others; I my self should become one Rejected, to whom the
Prize is not Judged; one unworthy the Prize; Because he who Determines, is a
Righteous Judge, and will not be Imposed upon with outsides, or Formalities.

But here the great doubt is, where is the Saint to be found, who can stand
before a Judge, a Righteous Judge, such a Righteous Judge as the Lord is?

And the alone Answer is, according to what has been said already; That it
depends wholly upon what has been done by the Captain of their salvation; His
Obedience and his Sacrifice, the Author, and Finisher of Faith; What he has
done without them; That, in which he was wholly alone, and none of his with
him; and that which he works in all his, as their Head of Life, and Influences;
making them strong in the Grace, that Resides supremely, and vitally in
Himself, and flows continually into them; and that by way of inward Residence
and Possession, by his Dwelling in them, John 6.57. And they in him; Even as
the Living Father sent him, and he Lives by the Father, so all Believers live
by Him and in Him;

This then being the Fundamental Meritorious Account; Christ All, and in All,
there is a Glorious, Resplendent Justice, and Equity in Gods Adjudication of
the Prize to all Saints in Him; Because there is an exact Balance, between
what is Christ's, and the Glory of the Crown, and of the Prize; So that
Scripture delights in the use of the Word, Just, Righteous, Righteousness in
the Admensuration to all in Christ at that Day Just, and the Justifier of Him
that believes in Jesus; He is Just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousuess, by way of Acquitance, and Judiciary discharge;
because, The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son has by satisfaction, and Sacrifice
for sin, first cleansed from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.10. And there is an
Illustrious Ensign of Justice, and Righteousness, in the Judgment of God,
(...); And a Flag of Defyance against all Adversaries, the Calumnies of
Malicious Devils, and enraged Spiof wicked Men, 2 These. 1.5, etc. Hung out; (we
translate a manifest token) in that Day, a Day of Adjudging the Prizes; That
Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2.5.

And therefore the Crown is called, as in some places a Crown of Glory, 1 Pet.
5.4. And a Crown of Life; So here a Crown of Righteousness, as due to Christ in
his; though to us, as in our selves, It is a Crown given, the Gift of Free
Grace; as Eternal Life, opposed to Death the wages, due demerit, or desert of
Sin: It is Free Gift in Jesus Christ, upholding the Glory of Justice, and
Righteousness in that Gift.

3. The Crown (says the Apostle) shall be given at that Day; There are two
Times eminently Styled in Scripture, that Day.

1. The Day of the first opening of the Glory of the Gospel; and after a time
of Eclipse by the Antichristian Apostasy, shining out again in Glory; In which
first and last the great Prophecies of Scripture are Fulfilled; we find
therefore often in the Prophet; In those Days, and In that Day, as all
Comprised under that great Point of time, the Fullness of time; the appearance
of Christ in the Flesh, Gal. 4.4. And the time from thence running to his
appearance.

2. The, that Day of the Appearance of Jesus Christ, and of his Kingdom; as
they are joined a little before the Text; that Fullness of All I imas, when all
shall be placed, that is Happy and Blessed under their Head, Ephesians. 1.10. And so
that Day is often used in the Epistles of the Now Testament; as here, and
continually; that Great Day, that Day, wherein shall be so Glorious an
Unveiling, a Revelation of the things, that have now been kept secret, but
shall then be set out in the truest, and most Glorious Light; The Beauty of
every thing in its own proper season, to which God has referred in that
General Table of time, God has drawn, and that Solomon gives in short the
Heads off, in that so wise Book, the Book of Ecclesiastes, or of the Preacher.
At the End of the several events, there recorded; saying, God has made every
thing Beautiful in its season; But, because it does not, or may not without
wise References to that Eternal World be understood to be so; He says, God has
set Eternity, or the Eternal World in their Hearts, Eccl. 3.1, etc. Then also
are all the Great Mysteries of the Gospel shall be clearly unfolded, and laid
open; All the various dealings of God with his own, and with the Men of his
present Hand, and might; the Men of this World; shall be unriddled, and
disengaged from all their Darks, and Intricacies, and the Crown set with
Glory, and the Glory of Righteousness on all his Saints: And this because it is
the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God; And then as the wicked shall
be all in Horror, Tribulation, Anguish, and Amazement; So Christ will be
Glorified in the Saints, and Admired, in all them, who believe, who have Fought
the Good Fight, so as not to beat the Air; They have run not as Incertainly,
and as in Naval Contests, have not Shipwrack'd, but held fast the Faith: And so
the Crown Adjudg'd to them by the Righteous Judge of the Combatants, and their
Activities in and through their great Agonothetes, Jesus Christ and the supreme
Agonistes, Master of All, and chief Combatant.

4. The Apostle joins with himself all those, who, Love the appearing of Jesus
Christ, as those, whom the Righteous Judge will give the Crown of Righteousness
unto, And this expression offers two considerations to us.

1. That seeing, the Apostle gives this short Character of Saints in General,
and not so particularly, (as Fighting the good Fight; Finishing all their
course, and keeping the Faith,) but Loving the appearance of Jesus Christ; It
shows, there may be; and there is a different eminency of Saints; But as they
all meet in the Head, Root, Corner Stone; So whatever their different measures
are in making up the full stature in Christ, yet they are all alike in the
Glory, the Crown of Righteousness; Because it is all given by grace in Christ,
and so the Least, as well as the greatest are Crowned in Him; He gives the same
Crown to the Last, as to the First, even as in the Parable, Mat. 20.

2. In that all Saints Love the Appearance of Christ, it is made certain; They
are those, that have Fought, Run, held fast the great Depositum, Committed to
them, so as to obtain, and not to be rejected; the Faith, which gives them the
assurance, and lifting up of the Head at the appearance of the great Judge, and
Arbitrator of the Prize; and so they desire, long for, and Love his Appearance;
And thus I have given a brief View, and Examination of the words of this Great
Text.

Applic. That which I would now infer from the whole discourse by way of
Doctrinal conclusion, by way of Practical enforcement, by way of Consolation,
relating to the particular occasion, shall be.

First, That we would look to it; To hold the Faith of Jesus Christ in its own
Purity; For the Gospel is so pure, separate from all mixtures, as Silver
Purified in a Furnace of Earth, Purified seven Times, that we must not pervert
it any way; Every Word of God, Prove. 30.5, 6. Much more the Great
Gospel-Points: Whoever add to it, or diminish from it, will be found Liars unto
it; Blessed are they that trust in i^ It will be to them a Shield of Salvation.
As to that Great Point, Righteousness by Faith in Christ without works; How
suddenly do Men slide down to Another Gospel under the Apostles Anathema; and
yet It is not another, but the clear, pure streams of Gospel Truth and Grace
are hereby troubled; and the satisfaction, and comfort of Believers disturbed,
and the Invitingness of it to strangers much obscured and defiled: Now here in
the subtility of the Enemies of the pure Doctrine of the Gospel is seen; That
they being afraid to take up the Insolent, Antichristian Word; Merit, or as
the Apostle calls it, Debt. They would yet Privily bring in such a supposed
presence of works after Grace, as sincere obedience, though not perfect into
Justification, as the condition of that Covenant, upon which it justifies; even
as perfect obedience was the condition of the Covenant of Works; and yet merit
not once Named nor Allowed; Because Adams strength to work by, if he had
rightly applied it, was indeed from the Bounty and Goodness of the Creator; yet
as in a way of Condecency, of such a Creator to such a Creation, as the Humane
Nature; that came pure and perfect out of His Hand: But what Believers do is
from Grace in Christ, by and from His Spirit, Vouchsafed to Sinners, and so
cannot Merit: Now this has indeed very great Truth in it; Yet it does not
Answer the High Expression of the Gospel, excluding all Created, or Creature
Righteousness in the Court of Righteousness, or Justification; and placing all
in the Righteousness of God by Faith in Jesus Christ; In his obedience, in his
Expiation, Filling up, and so replenishing that Court; That nothing else can
enter, but is kept out by the Flaming Sword of the Fiery Law: Yea, Angels that
never sinned, yet Cover their Faces, Esa. 6. and their Feet, their Excellency
and the Nakedness, and Folly of all Created Being before Increated and consist
in and by Christ: Christ, as the Head of Amity, and Perseverance in their
Glorious State, and Adam, not Flying to it upon those tenders of it signifid to
Him, as by that real evidence of it; That he was, and could be no more, then
the Figure of Him that was to come, Romans 5.12. And that His, and His Posteritys
standing in Him, was only their standing in Christ; as this was also
represented in those Sacramental Types, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil, Genesis 2. Warning Him against subsisting in Himself, as a God knowing, or
able to determine Good and Evil, but to look to the Tree of Life, so great a
Type of Christ; as we find in the Revelation; Nothing therefore can enter into
the Court of Justification, but Poor empty single Faith Receiving, Owning,
Acknowledging, Grace; Receiving Grace in Abundance, (excluding all else,) and
the Gift of Righteousness by Jesus Christ alone; And to this it is enabled by
Grace, and Accepted only for that Righteousness sake it does receive.

As to the enforcement by way of Action, and Practice, we see in this Great
Portraicture, the Apostle gives of a Man in Christ; that Fights the Good Fight,
Finishes his Course, keeps the Faith; That a Believer in Christ is not a Loose,
or an Idle, Slothful, Unactive Person; but shall appear in that Day, as of the
Overcomers in those so Famed Games, or Exercises of all Prowess, Courage,
Action; so as to be judged worthy of those Crowns of which they were so
Ambitious, though but corruptible, by the justest Judges, or Arbitrators of
them; So the Saints shall be presented before the Father, the Lord Jesus, the
Eternal Spirit of Holiness and before Saints, and Angels, to the Terror, and
Amazement of all the Lost, as Persons of distinct Excellency; and the
Overcomers, as in the Apocalyptic Expression is repeated; and yet all in
Christ, and to the Glory, and Praise of Grace in Him; So that the Doctrine of
Free Grace is indeed the most Powerful, Effective, Fruitful Doctrine of
Holiness, and so is most Discriminative of Persons in Christ, and with greatest
severity on those, who are not; and of those, who shall be thought worthy of
the Crown, and who not; and yet without the least Injury to Free Grace in
Christ.

3. Great Consolation have they, who knew our Deceased Friend; who had always
Admiring, Adoring thoughts of Free Grace; and thereby a great sense of
Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, but all through Christ strengthening
Her; and in Fighting, Running, holding fast, an Eye to the Crown, but as
purchased for her by Jesus Christ; and that therefore she Loved the Appearance
of Jesus; When the Crown already received, shall with Glory be set upon her at
that Day.

That we may yet enter into the deeper enquiry into, and consideration of all
this Triumphant Declaration of the Apostle concerning Himself, and all Saints
in that supreme Point; their receiving the Crown of Righteousness; I will
propose to give a brief resolution of these following Points.

1. How in the lost undone State of the Children of Adam, there can arise such
a Generation of Servants of God, both more eminent and smaller in this World.

2. How, or why they fall all under the Prohibition of serving God any longer
here in the World, then the Finishing such a Course of service on such a
Measure of their Line Prescribed by God.

3. Why this Prohibition is served upon them by Death; Two Persons only, Enoch
and Elias, and why they only excepted.

Herein I shall with all the care and Caution according to the understanding
given to me by, and from the Word of God Discourse each of these.

Point. 1. It is indeed the wonder of Divine Grace, and Power; That there
should have been, and are such a Generation of the Servants of God in the
World, in every Age down to the present Time, in the midst of such a World of
Men, Ignorant of God, Alienated from his Life, without God in the World,
without Christ and Enemies in their Minds; so much given up to the World, and
the Lusts of it, as to be called; The World and the Men of this World, in a
State of Enmity to God, and his Kingdom; the Seed of the Serpent, the Dragon,
Haters of his Servants, and on all opportunities Slaying them; as Cair, the
Seed of the Wicked one, Did Abel in the very Beginning; That yet in the midst
of all these, there should be a Generation of Men and Women, that should be in
an (...), a course, a Lincal succession of the Saints and Servants of God, like
the succession, as in the House of Levi, of the Preisthood; and of the High
Preisthood in the Family of Aaron; the more Eminent, and the less Eminent among
the Servants of God; but all a Royal Priesthood; or like the Stars of the First
Magnitude in the Regions above, and those they call, the Sporades, the
Multitude of the lesser Stars.

Now the very Root, and Foundation and Corner Stone of all this is; That Grand
Elect Servant of God, in whom His Soul delights; who in Raising up a
Generation of the Servants of God, deals with all mildness; A Bruised Reed
shall He not break, nor smoking Flax shall He quench, but shall send forth
Judgment unto Truth of Victory, Esa. 42.1. That Servant of the Lord, with the
Key of David on his shoulder, and strengthn'd with the Girdle of Faithfulness
and Righteousness; The Nail fastened in a sure place, Esa. 22.20, etc. Upon
whom is Hung all the Glory of his Fathers House, the offspring, and the Issue;
All Vessels of Greater and smaller Quantity, from the Vessels of Cups, even to
All the Vessels of Flagons; Had not He been a Servant in the Foundation, There
had never been a Servant of God in the World. It is He, who has Loved, and
washed in His Blood; and constituted Kings and Priests unto God and His Father,
Rev. 1.5.

Now the Charter of His making Servants to God among the Children of Men, was
given to the Second Adam: Immediately upon the Fall of the First Adam, so quick
and immediate as to surprise the Power of Satan in the First Effort; when God
in a Judiclary process upon Satan, says, to Him, under the disguise of the
Serpent; I will put enmity between thy Seed and of the Woman; and this Seed of
the Woman, the one Seed, Christ shall break the Head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.
unto perfect Victory; and Thou shall bruise His Heel; (of which is presently to
be spoken;) There must be therefore a Seed of the Second Adam; Servants of God
in every Generation, who shall Fight, Finish their course, Hold the Faith of
the Seed of the Woman, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Quickening
Spirit, the Savior to the uttermost, who Lives for ever to make Intercession,
and so sustains all the Servants of God, coming to God by Him; He Bears them up
in their State of Preisthood, as the Priest for ever; Constituted after the
Power of an Endless Life, consecrated by the word of the Oath for evermore; the
High Priest and Apostle of our Profession, the Captain of our salvation; This
supports the whole State of the Servants of God in all the Service here
recounted here by the Apostle; Fighting, Running, Finishing their course in
order to the Receiving the Crown: And thus the Line of the succession of the
Servants of God has been continued from Adam through all Ages. From Adam by
the Patriarks, to Moses, Joshuah, the Judges, Kings, Prophets, Zerubbabel, and
Ezra, so to the Great Lord appearing in his Temple, Malach. 3.1. Then the
Apostles, and successive Ministers of the Gospel, and the Witnesses, Revel.
11.3. in the Time of the Apostasy; who being the Last course of the Servants of
God; There is an express mention of that First Representation of things; the
Serpent early appearing, as a Dragon in the Slaying Abel; and the Seed of the
Woman, He endeavored to devour by making War with them, by the Beast. Who
kills them, and they Lie Dead in the street of the Great City; Till the Spirit
of Life from God enter into them; And then the course of things goes on to the
Binding the Dragon, Satan, the Old Serpent, Chaining and Sealing up in the
Abyss, in his own Hell and Chains of Darkness; and then after a short Loosing
to show his ever remaining Diabolick Spirit, we have with all his Dead His
Final Casting into the Lake, which is the Second Death: And thus we have the
First Point cleared, How comes there to be such a Line and Succession of the
Priests, or Servants of the Most High God in so Degenerate a Humane Nature? And
how Long? Even till they come into the Glorious State of being Priests of God
and Christ, and Reigning with Him a Thousand Years; seeing His Face, as His
Servants serving Him with His Name on their Foreheads, and at Last delivered up
with the Kingdom to God All in All; which is the State of pure, and perfect
Eternity, Eternal Life in its Highest Orb.

Point. 2. I come therefore now to the second Point; How comes it to pass,
there is such a strict Limitation of the Servants of God: First under such an
Honorable Limitation, as Fighting the Good Fight, even unto Victory; their
Finishing their eourse, even unto obtaining the Prize; and their Keeping the
Faith, without betraying, Basely surrendering, or having made Shipwreck of it;
and so presenting it before the Righteous Judge, and receiving the Crown at
that Day; All these are Honorable, and yet Limitations; Their Fight, Course,
Keeping the Faith are not Lengthened out to that very Day; Now of this there
are very Great Reasons.

1. The Great Lord of Time has drawn the whole time with such exactness of
Wisdom, and Holiness; That every thing is in its own Place, Season, and Time;
and as it fills that up, and nothing is wanting, so it cannot exceed, nor reach
beyond it; And thus Every thing is Beautiful in its season; Thus from the very
Beginning; Abel the First Martyr Finished his Course, though short; Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, theirs; In the midst of whom appeared
Melchisedec, made like to the Son of God, without Beginning of Days, or End of
Life, Abridgeth a Priest continually; He was not a Type of the Son of God in
some particular excellency, but He was made like to the Son of God througout;
And thus is the Line of every Saints service drawn out, nothing can crowd into
it; and this Line can by no Violence be cut shorter, nor can any Zeal for
Service draw it out longer; The only Elect Servant is He, whose Service has no
Limitation; but, as was said, The Son Consecrated by the Word of the Oath for
evermore; and constituted after the Power of an Endless Life: Melchisedec
therefore, who was made like Him, was under no Limitation of Service in the
History we have of Him: Jacohs Patriarchal Line reached even to Moses, and
there ceased; Moses Faithful in All his House Run that whole, and very Great
Line of Service in the Wilderness; but was so Limited, He must by no means
enter into Canaan, but must Dye in the Borders; And Joshuah must enter upon his
Course; and having settled the People of Israel in Canaan, and after the Lord
had given them rest round about; He Finished his course. Then came on the Days
of the Judges, and their course with Samuel reached (with the Intervention of
Saul) unto David, who served his Generation according to the Will of God; And
so the Line came down to John Baptist Fulfilfilling his course, as a
Forerunner; and so to our Lord Jesus, who walked, as He said in his course here
on Earth, (though as the Son, an Eternal Priest) this Day, and to Morrow; and
the Third Day should be perfected. Then the course of the Apostles, and the
Witnesses under a most Definitive Line, as has been said: This therefore gives
great satisfaction in the Term of Life; Calls for Great self-Resignation, and
to have our Eye Fixed on the Great End of Life, the Line of Faith and Service.

It is true, There is a Line allowed to Evil Men in their Wickedness, and in
their Enjoyments of their Lusts, and Pleasures of this World; and they cannot
exceed it; But this is not of the present consideration; But it is most
necessary here to remember; That the Lowest and Meanest, even the Infant
Servants of God have their Line and Service, and the Just Times of it Fixed by
God; even as their Reward; because it is wholly the Reward of Free Grace, It is
in the essence of the Reward equal, as has been argued.

2. The Time of the Servants of God is therefore Defined, and Limited; That it
may be seen, God has no need of this, or that Servant, or Generation of
Servants; but that He has successive Servants, or Generations of Servants; and
He is so Far off being in want of them; That He can allow them no longer Time,
how Eminent, how Excellent soever, then He has appointed, and resolved with
Himself; and of Free Grace, as their Honor and Privilege, chosen them unto.

3. The Servants of God are many; That they may reach through, and unto the
Time of his Kingdom; And each must have His Time; and each must therefore, of
those, who go before, give way to those, who are to follow after; and so every
one is Limited to his own Time; For though it may be thought; They might be
together; The Wise God having appointed Times more Dark, and more Glorious; How
many of his Servants are proportioned to each, He sees, and knows, and so
Limits accordingly: There was one Noah, and no more in the Old World; One
Elijah only in view, in that so Fowl Apostasy of the Ten Tribes; And when the
Light is clearest and most High, It must not be clear Light till his Kingdom.
The General Assembly cannot be before, so each Time has such, and such Numbers
of Stars, which He tells the Number of, and calls them All by their Names,
and knows, what Luster of Rays and Beams each and together shall cast; There
is a Counterpoizing consideration of Wicked Men in the World, and the Darkness,
and Fire of Hell, they spread; But that is not within the present purpose.

4. There is a Gracious Pleasure of God; There should such Numbers of his
Servants be all along from Age to AGe with Jesus Christ their Lord, Philip. 1.
Dissolved from Body, and with Him in Spirit; Absent from the Body, and present
with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.1, etc. And in their House not made with Hands, Eternal
in the Heavens; And that our God may come and All His Saints with Him, Zech.
14. He comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints, as the Armies of Heaven on white
Horses, Bodies of the Resurrection washed in the Blood of Jesus, in fine Linen,
clean, and white, Rev. 19.14. To show, This has been all along from the former
Times of the World; There is a Reception in Heaven Styled, Abraham's Bosom; A
Jerusalem above, the Mother of us All, that shall come down from Heaven, Gal.
4. With all its Children, Rev. 21. There is the State of the Spirits of Just
Men, Heb. 12. Who shall be made perfect in Bodies, made like to his Glorious
Body, Phil. 3. ult. There must be therefore a Limitation of their Time of
Service here below; That they may be taken within the Veil and made acquainted
with the Glory, that is to be Revealed; And the Apostle Intimates; These Dead
in Christ shall have some precedence; For the Dead in Christ, shall not be
prevented by the Living Remaining, as we Translate; but shall not be so much,
as overtaken according to the true force of the Original; we shall not attain,
or come equal with those asleep, 1 These. c. 4. v. 13. (...), Nullo Modo
Assequemur; Now in all such Particularities, God is pleased to be at Liberty in
dealing with His own Servants; The essential Glory, the Crown of Righteousness,
the Crown of Life, the Crown of Glory being alike, sure to all: And so I have
opened the second Point proposed; The Limitation of the Time of the Servants of
God, continuing in His Service here on Earth; I come to the Point 3d.

3. That the Limitation of their Time is made known to them in the manner of a
severe, and angry Process, in the way of, what we Call, a Prohibition, the
proper sense of what we Translate, not saffered, Heb. 7.23. And this is a Point
worthy to be enquired into for the removing the fears of Death, and for the
Consolation of Saints in Death.

1. It must then be Acknowledged, that the outward Face, and appearance of
Death, hears the Resemblance of a Judgment, and of that Denunciation, In the
Day thou Eatest, thou shall Dye; Dust thou Art, and to Dust thou shall return.
It comes, as a King of Terrors, Flesh and Blood is ready to be affrighted at
it; Life is naturally Dear, even to the Servants of God; who desire not to be
uncloathed; They desire to continue in the Service of God here; but when they
are raised by Higher Considerations of being present with the Lord, Clothed
upon with their House from Heaven, they even desire to be Dissolved. And it
cannot be denied; That God does in the Dying of his Servants bear a Regard to
that Justice, and Truth of His Word; That when Sin came in, Death came in and
passed upon All, because All have sinned, Romans 5.12. When the Servants of God
therefore are warm and zealous, and lively in His Service, Often there comes a
Prohibition; Thou may no longer continue in my Service here; like the
command to Moses, to anoint Eleazar and to strip Aaron of his Priestly
Garments, who was presently to Dye; A Prohibition to Moses, to carry Israel
over Jordan, but to come up to Mount Nebo and to Dye; Deuteronomy. 33. God plainly
sent to Hezekiah, to set His House in Order and to Dye; against which
Prohibition that it might be under, as it were an Arrest of Judgment, He so
earnestly Prayed.

It is therefore to be duly considered; That for the Display of the Judgment,
and Indignation of God against sin, and because of the present State of the
Saints under a Remaining Body of Sin, and so of Death; and in the present State
of this World, full of Sin and Evil, and of so many of the Children of Adam,
Children of Death, even of the Second Death; In the Wisdom and Holiness of God,
It was by the Counsel of the Father, and the Son, that Death should continue,
and have the Face of a Judgment, and of a Legal Prohibition to continue in the
Service of God any longer on Earth; Till the Kingdom of Christ, the Kingdom of
Redemption should bring in a State of the Living Saints, then Remaining being
changed, and not to Dye.

2. Jesus Christ our Lord, Because the Children were Partakers of Flesh and
Blood, He took part of the same, that through Death, He might subdue Him, that
had the Power of Death; that is, the Devil; and Deliver them, who all their
Life were subject to Bondage by reason of the Fear of Death; and now therefore
Death came upon Him with the Violence, and Terror of a Judgment from which He
was taken and from Prison, Esa. 53.8. By the Mighty Power of his Resurrection;
It becomes all His to submit then to the Face of a Judgment in Dying, that they
may be conformed to their Captain and from the First Born, Heb. 2.14.

Obj. It may be Objected against this necessity of Dying, How were those two
Enoch, and Elias, exempted from that sentence of the Righteous, and Holy Law
that is stretched out so upon all; seeing sin had extended it self on them, as
well, as on others?

Answ. The Death of Jesus Christ, stood as a Full Ransom, and Price of
Redemption from the very first promise, so that it is not indeed a Point of
Justice, or of the Truth of God; That Believers in Jesus Christ are served (as
I may so speak) with a Prohibition by Death; but a Wise, and Holy Dispensation
of Government with Relation to the Servants of God in the present World; where
therefore, in that wise Government God thinks sit; there might be such an
exemption from the General Statute of Dying, or Prohibition by Death, as of
Enoch and Flijah; and many more Examples of such, Exemptions, there might have
been, if He had seen Good, having received such full satisfaction to his Law,
and to his Justice; and He has it in reserve an Universal Exemption at the
Kingdom of Christ, the Kingdom of Redemption; when the Apostle says, We shall
not all dye, but we shall all be changed; and he prefaces before it: Behold I
show you a mystery; And I am much persuaded and even assured; These two were
Types of the Living, Remaining caught up to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 Cor.
15. When he delivers up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, and has put down
all Rule Authority, and the last Enemy Death is subdued and cast into the Lake;
then shall the Living Remaining Saints be Transposed, or caught up, as Enoch;
and even conveyed to Heaven, as Elijah in the Chariot of that Fire, that
devours the Adversaries, 1 These. 4.17. with Rev. 20.9, 14.

3. The Judiciary part of Death is absolutely removed; For the Sting of Death
is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law, but thanks be to God who has given
us the Victory through Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.12. So that Death is to Saints,
a sleeping in Jesus, a Resting from Labors, an entering into Rest, a becoming
present with the Lord; A being with Christ, a being in Paradise, a being
clothed upon with our House from Heaven. And to show, It was not a Deadly
stroke; Before the Pronunciation of that Universal Prohibition of continuing
here; Dust thou Art, and to Dust thou shall Return; Death was more gently
expressed, and with assurance of Victory; The Woman's Seed shall break the
Serpents Head, but the Serpent shall only Bruise the Heel of the Woman's Seed,
This Body of Earth.

Applic. I will now by way of Applicatory Review, close the whole; How fit this
Context of the Apostle is to a Discourse with Relation to the Death of one, or
more of the Servants of God, appears by the Apostles Preface to it; I am even
now as it were ready to be as in Conformity to my Great Lord, Offered, and
Sacrificed, as a Martyr, and the Time of my Dissolution is at Hand; and so He
goes on, I have Fought, etc. As if He Preached his own Funeral Sermon, while
Living, and a Great one it is; but it has its Principal sense in Christ; and
in God; as appears in the following Part of the Chapter, v. 17. wherein we have
this Great acknowledgment, that in his Fighting the Good Fight, and Finishing
his Course, the Lord stood with Him, strengthened Him; that by Him the
Preaching might be Fully known, and the Gentiles hear; and the Lord Delivered
Him, out of the Mouth of the Lion, the Lord would deliver Him from every Evil
Work, and preserve Him unto His Heavenly Kingdom, and to Him he ascribes the
Glory of All for Ever; And He Includes all Saints; Even all, who Love the
appearing of Jesus Christ, in this High Elogium, or Speech of Praise; else I
must acknowledge, I have no Opinion of the Large Encomiums, or Praisings used
in Funeral Sermons, observing the Grand Exemplar of them; Gods Gracious
Remembrance of Moses, Joshua 1. Moses my Servant is Dead, and no more; and yet
that Fixed so Lasting a Character of Honor upon Him; that He is remembered by
it to the Last, Rev. 15. They Sang the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and of
the Lamb: But this of the Apostle Joined with that of Heb. 7.23. Gives me such
a History of the Life and Death of Saints; That I cannot, but Recommend it to
all the Servants of Christ, as the most excellent Rule of Life, and as the
Ground of the most Consolatory Hope in Death; and that the very Discourse of it
may be upon the Deceased Christian Friend, a Memorial of Honor; And so I most
Humbly Recommend it to the Relations of all the Friends of the so many lately
Removed Servants of God, and of this Particular one, on the occasion of whose
Death it is Published; through Him, who though the Eternal Liver, as the Son of
God, without Beginning, or End of Days; yet in our Nature Became Dead for our
sakes; but behold He is Alive for Evermore; Even so have all his Servants
Reason to say; Even so Amen. And He has the Keys of Hell; and Death; Let Him
Lay His Hand on the Servants of God in this Discourse, and Bless it to Them;
and on his Servants of all States and Conditions; saying unto them, Fear not.
And to Him be Glory for Ever.

THE END.
POSTCRIPT.
SInce the Finishng and Printing this foregogoing Discourse, it has pleased
the supreme Lord of his Servants State in this Work, to lay his Prohibition on
the Honorable Sir. Edward Harley, to continue on longer in his Service here;
to whose Memory, although I am every way obliged; yet in Honor to Him I shall
only say, Sir Edward Harley the Servant of God is Dead. Oh That many such may
be sound unto his Kingdom in his Service.

ERRATA.
The lesser Faults of the Press, let the Reader please to Correct, and Note
these, Preface Page 2. line 18. r. Mr. T. Gouge. page 9. l. 3. at the bottom,
f. it r. if, p. 11. l. 5. Bot. blot un, p. 21. l. 16. (...), p. 23. l. 7. blot
are, p. 33. Bot. 2d. f. abridgeth, abides, p. 37. Bot. l. 8. (...), p. 41. l.
9. before He, r. when, l. 12. f. when, r. then, l. 18. after them, r. viz.
Saints.


