A VOICE OUT OF The thick Darkness: Containing in it a few Words to CHRISTIANS,
About the late and present posture of Spiritual Affairs among them. Together
with a Postscript about darkening the Counsel of God. AS ALSO, Certain
Scripture-Prophecies concerning some Transactions in the latter Times.

By ISAAC PENINGTON, (junior) Esquire;

ISAIAH 2. 5. O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
Lord.

ISAI. 50. 11. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves
about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye
have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

MAT. 5. 29. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1650.

The Preface.
IT was my intention, some distance of time since, to have published somewhat
concerning the then present state of Affairs; wherein I should have expressed
ill will toward none, but only have uttered that deep affection that then was
in me, toward the soddering and healing the distempers of such spirits, as are
made more miserable by their own discontents, then they could be by any thing
else that can in probability befall them in this state of things, wherein it is
hard to determine what is truly best and most profitable, though most men are
very ready to determine, and very confident in determining, according to their
own desires and apprehensions.

It was then my design to have cast some water upon these flames, that they
might not burn so intensely within to the disturbance of men's own spirits
there, nor yet be so liable to break forth to the disquieting and endangering
of the public interest.

There are one sort of men whom I should more especially have applied my self
unto, who are wondrous eager after making the Nation happy; whose spirits can
be no ways satisfied till they see the attainment of that Universal Freedom,
and the flowing forth of that Universal speedy impartial Justice, which is
easy to be desired, but hard to be met with.

In pity toward these (whom I had cause enough to pity, I my self lying with
them under the same desire, though not expecting to meet with it in that way
wherein it was pursued;) I say, in pity toward these, I was ready to issue
forth to administer to them more especially what I conceived might be in any
kind relieving; and after such reasonings as should have fallen within my
shallow compass, at last I should have ventured to have proposed three
Directions to such as should be made willing to consider of them, which when
embraced, would not quite have taken them off from, but only have somewhat
allayed the vehemence of their Spirits in this their prosecution of public
good, which in tenderness to them and others I could not but desire.

These Directions being so few, and of a more general nature then to be
restrained unto them, or any one sort only, I shall here make mention of, being
settled in my Spirit to wave the rest of the Discourse.

The first of them is to this effect:

Be content to pass through your pilgrimage without the full enjoyment of that
Freedom ye have desired and pressed so hard after. There is a power above,
whose Will may cross yours in this, which may as well find fault with your
untowardnesse to be governed, as with the Self-Seeking of such as have been
Governors.

I might perhaps have said, if I had not suspected it would have relished too
harshly, Be content to be Slaves. It is a brave thing sometimes to oppose the
yoke, but a braver from Judgment to submit unto it. It is in many cases better
for particular persons, yea for Societies, to bear, then avoid the yoke. It
cost the Israelites dear that they would by no means be brought to put their
necks under Nebuchadnezzars girdle. Can thou say that a present Oppression is
not determined concerning thee by him who has power to dispose of all things?
If thou can not, take heed of overviolent resisting. If thou labourest for
Freedom with all thy might, and a greater power oppose, what will thou gain by
the contest? I have often repented of shunning, of avoiding, but never of
meeting and closing with misery. It is the stiffnesse of the neck, and
unbrokennesse of the Spirit that chiefly makes all our yokes so harsh.

2. Groan, pant after, and in a just way pursue the attainment of perfect
Freedom. Lie not down as a Slave, with a base abject Spirit, counting slavery
best, but with a sweet Spirit submit to it for necessities sake, and withal
let a Sense appear of your prizing and desiring of Liberty: And what way of
attaining it is made out to you plainly and evidently justifiable, forbear not
to fall in with; yet not in such a violent and irrational manner, as to make
your more noble parts far worse slaves to brutish passions within, to avoid a
more inferior slavery of the outward and more ignoble part.

3. Hasten your desires and expectations aright: Look not for it from thence
where ye cannot hope to find it, but thence from whence alone it can come: Look
not for it from man, Righteousness cannot grow there, it never grew there: Man
has not a Soil fertile enough for such trees to flourish in; Man has not a Root
deep enough to bear such Fruit. Besides, man seems now to be blown upon, and
all his excellency withers; adore him no longer. Is not the glory of all sorts
of men fallen? Why do ye so often remove your eyes from one sort of men to
another? Oh loosen them from all, and fasten them no more on any, if ye would
not be frustrated.

Solomon that deep wise man, who knew things in their causes, tells you what the
place of Judgment and Righteousness under the Sun is, even a place where
unrighteousness and iniquity is still to be found, Eccles. 3. 16. If ye look
for a place of pure Judgment and Righteousness under the Sun, ye will be
deceived. For this is the state that ever was and ever will be under the Sun;
There will be Oppressions exercised even there, and the oppressed ones may
weep, but they are like to have no effectual Comforter; for the power that
should comfort and relieve them, is still on the oppressors side, as that same
comprehensive man speaks in that same Book, Chap. 4. 1. Therefore look not
there for it any longer, since Wisdom has said, and Experience too has always
shown, that it is not, it will not, it cannot be found there. But if ye know
and can think of a Fountain of Righteousness, a Power that can issue out pure
and perfect Salvation, look thither; and when that Fountain shall be opened, ye
may chance to meet with it; but till then, your hunger and thirst is not like
to be satisfied, however your hopes to meet with it in this or that party, this
or that interest, may flatter you.

Now whether these may be useful to any or no, lies not in me to resolve; this
is all I have to say concerning them, that I found them in my own Spirit, and I
found my Spirit much composed by them, (in reference to the several tossings
and tumblings that have been,) they lying at the bottom there, from whence I
produce them into public view, not knowing but they may drop and distill into
some other Spirit, to bring it also to some kind of rest in this respect, in
the midst of such future shakings as are very incident and frequent after
dissettlement.

About the same time the state of spiritual things was presented to my view,
and I beheld the people of God in their several stations; some scattered this
way, some that way; some settled this way, some that way; some bewailing
themselves under their Scatterings, others blessing themselves in their
Setlings; some seeking, and others glorying, in what they imagine they have
found; some complaining of the breaches, growing greater and more Spiritual,
others crying out as fast, that their Antidotes, plasters and arts of healing,
which would easily help all, were not embraced. I found my Spirit likewise
drawn out to speak a little concerning this state of things, as I felt the
sense of them then upon me, and as I found it most ready and convenient to
communicate that sense; which though I had intended to wave also, yet finding
the state of things calling for some such kind of language to invite to a more
then ordinary consideration of them, I find my self willing to let it go forth
as an instrument in his hand, who knows how to manage it, to effect what he
pleases by it.

This is the account I thought fit to give by way of Preface, to lead to the
Discourse it self, which now follows.

A FEW Words to Christians, About the late and present Posture of Spiritual
Affairs Among Them.
IT was not only the Civil part of this Nation that lay under Misery and
Oppression before this great Commotion, but Religion also, and the Religious
party, had a deep share in it, being most of all trodden under foot. That
present form of Government, which then was in force, struck at the life and
power of that, which it was erected to be a wall unto. Nor did only the
sweetness of Liberty and Propriety put men, that were sensible thereof, upon
striving to regain and possess them; But the preciousness of Freedom to
Conscience, tender Conscience, which had been so long yoked and burdened, did
much instigate Christians to assay the recovery and re-enjoyment of it. And the
result has been much alike to both; both have been buried in the dust of
Contention and Confusion. The Contention has grown so hot, that men have
almost forgot what they contended for in both, which at first was not a power
to oppress and captive others, but to attain Liberty for themselves and others.

It is to you, O Christians, that I intend a few Words, (to which I hasten,)
and that concerning your choycest Jewel, Religion. In what state is it? In what
state has it been? Has it thriven, or decayed? Is it alive, or dead? Whom do
ye embrace in your bosoms, your true Love, or a stranger? What, is your
Religion of the right coin? has it the stamp of your King, or is it
counterfeit? Truly there are so many different pretenders stand up to lay claim
to him, who belongs but to one, (his own Spouse, as he is but one, his Light
one, his Will one, his Way one, in the midst of infinite variety and
contrariety) that he had need have infallible certainty, who satisfies his
spirit with his interest in him.

But I would speak but little to you; I will therefore come to those few
Questions I have to propose to your consideration concerning the state of
spiritual things, in reference to the many changes it has under-gone, and the
present condition wherein it stands. The first whereof may be this:

1. Whether Religion has not received a wound in the inward part of it, since
this Contestation about outward things, and the outward part of Religion?
Whether the life and power of Religion (which was always scanty enough among
the best) be not now much abated, and runs not so low, that it is hardly, if
at all, discernable? It has been the complaint of diverse, both Presbyterians
and Independents, and therefore may well deserve the consideration of each
sort. O Christians! Be not so busy about the outward part, about the dress of
Religion, as not to enquire into the state of the inward part, whether that
flourish, or languish and decay.

2. If it do appear to you, That Religion has received a blow within, a wound
at heart; let me ask you, in the second place, Whether it does not nearly
concern you, to bethink your selves how it may be cured in time, before it
bleed to death? Thou art busied, O Christian, about garments of Religion, for
thy self and others to wear; look within man, thy heart faints, thy life is
expiring: Thy faith is even dead; thou can not trust God, but runest to thine
own wisdom to contrive for thy self, and to thine own power to effect thy
counsels. Thy love, what is become of it? O what a strange thing is love among
Christians? Patience, Humility, Meekness of spirit, etc. where do they grow?
What is there of these left within, in the heart, when there is such a general
complaint, that they are not to be found in the lives of Professors?

3. Let me ask thee, in the third place, Whether the Establishment of, or
voluntary submission to, any outward Form of Government, or Church Discipline,
of what kind soever, can heal this breach within? Will Presbytery do it? Why
does it not do it in Scotland, where it has scope and power enough? Will
Independency or Anabaptism do it? How come so many then to lose the lives of
their spirits in such Relations? The Form does seldom contribute much to the
Power, but the Power is very commonly eaten out by the Form. I know men that
are engaged much to any way, are highly conceited of it, thinking it would
effect strange things, if it were but generally owned and embraced; and are
ready to impute all miscarriages and bad effects to the want thereof: but this
is but a favorable and self-ish judgment; I propose this question to thee to
consider and ponder of, till thou art enabled to pass a righteous judgment upon
it; and then perhaps thou will be as ready to condemn thine own form and way of
Administration in this behalf, as thou art to condemn such other ways as thou
now opposest.

4. Let me ask thee yet again, Whence this cure is to be expected, and can
alone be had? From whence did any true Life and Power flow at first, and
whither is it now retired? Who is it that has wounded? Can he heal? Can any
else but he heal? Who is it that has shaken the foundations of men's spirits,
and battered down the fabrics of their Religion about their ears; yea, even of
such as have built with hewn stone? Truly, Miserable is that man, whose life
is almost wasted, and daily wasting, and yet he still running to that for
Recovery, which destroys him. It is one fair step toward Redemption, to know
from whence to hope for it, and to have the eye taken off from every thing else.

5. And lastly, Let me put this one thing more to thee; What Dispensation
think thou are we under at present? Whether have we attained that Light,
that Life, that Power, by which we are to walk, and under which we may
comfortably sit down? Or are we to expect and wait for a reducement to that
state wherein the Primitive Christians were, when the Spirit was poured out
upon them, and they led thereby into Church Communion? Or are we to expect any
other state promised in the Scripture, and (as some say) experienced by
themselves, which this is to give way unto?

This is a very weighty question, and very needful, especially in these shaking
times, wherein men had need be much enquiring, and not over forward to settle,
when a Power above them stands so ready to shake, and has so sorely shaken,
that which was very likely to have stood.

To further such a little, as are desirous to bend their thoughts hereunto, by
opening a way for a more full and exquisite search, I shall communicate some of
the workings of my mind formerly concerning these three things.

As touching the first, Whether we have attained to such a Dispensation, as we
may walk on comfortably in? The workings of my mind have been very various and
doubtful concerning this; one while inclining to the one part, another while to
the other: Sometimes apprehending the substance both of inward and outward
Worship and Conversation, so clearly revealed in the Scriptures, and so
testified within, in the spirits of Christians; and so much life and power also
communicated from above, as might very well suffice to lead them on very
sweetly and comfortably in this vale of Tears to their Resting place.
Otherwhiles again apprehending from light sense, and evident experience, so
much deadness, so much darkness, such a vail over the heart, and over the
Scriptures; such uncertainty in things that were received, such a want of power
within to buckle with power without, that there appeared no possibility of
rubbing on like Christians after this rate; which has made me often wonder,
whether we were under the Law, or under the Gospel; there was so much work, so
little strength; so large promises without, so little of what they spoke
within. So that though I had many advantages, both from the earnestness of the
desire in my own spirit, and from the considerations that were administered to
me; as also from my own experience, and enquiry among such as pretended both
light and experience in the point in hand; yet still there was somewhat of
concernment to keep me back from a positive determination, even when I was
nearest unto resolving.

For the second, Whether we are to expect a Restoration of the the Primitive
State, or no? My mind wrought much after the same manner. Sometimes it seemed
very likely to me that it should be restored: Sometimes again the weakness both
of the Ordinances and Administrations of it, and their sudden death, made it
seem to me fitter to pass away, and give place to that which is more durable.

There were three things eminent in that Dispensation, Gifts, Administrations,
and Graces.

They had several sorts of gifts; gifts of healing, of speaking with tongues,
of working miracles: Again, they had gifts of prophesying, of singing, of
revelation, of interpretation, etc. Then they had Administrations, they had
proper ways of administering every gift, which were appointed to them, and
whereinto they were led, by the same Spirit which bestowed the gift. Some gifts
were bestowed in reference to persons without, for conviction and conversion;
and other gifts in reference to persons within, for mutual edification,
exhortation and comfort; the same Spirit leading them to the use of these in
some measure, who imparted the gift unto them. Then lastly, they had Graces,
strong, powerful graces were poured out unto them, graces that were truly
spiritual, not acquired by their industry, but breathed by the Spirit of Life;
such as Faith, Love, Patience, Humility, Meekness, etc. and there is a vast
difference between these when they are dropped out of Heaven, and those that
are extracted out of the Earth, though they may bear the same name, and carry
the same resemblance. The common fires of the Jews, and the fire on the Altar,
were not the same, how little difference soever might seem between them to
common judgments.

But what became of this glory? How soon did this Sun set! What Christ foretold
concerning the material Temple of Jerusalem, proved true also of this
Spiritual, this Apostolic building, there was not one stone left upon another
that was not thrown down. Who would have thought so glorious a fabric should
so soon have been laid flat! That the Churches, so well founded and settled by
the Apostles, and not barely by them, but by the Spirit of God in them, should
so soon come to ruin! And since it has thus passed away, must we not be
forced to confess, that there was some flaw, some defect in it, or else it
could not so soon have decayed and perished?

And truly methinks there seems to lie as just an Indictment (in kind, though
not in degree) against this Dispensation, as did against the Dispensation under
the Law, for weakness, for unprofitableness, for inability, to make the comers
thereunto perfect. What a poor state were the Churches in, even in the Apostles
times? How subject to be shaken in doctrine? How carnal and defective in
practice? They had the Spirit poured out upon them, and yet wanted both outward
light, and inward life and power. They had abundance of gifts, but knew not how
to use them toward the edification of the body, but employed them to the
building up of that which was to be destroyed.

And it was not only a weak state while it was enjoyed, but was also
continually languishing, and soon expired: And all the endeavors that have been
to rear up this fabric again since, either in the internal or external part,
have had the like success with those endeavors that have been used to re-build
the Temple of Jerusalem since its desolation; before the building can come to
any maturity or perfection, it is still blown down.

Such a continued, experimented discovery of the frailty of it, seems to me
to foretell its death, not its resurrection; its casting away, not its
restitution.

Now for the third Branch, Whether we are to expect any other state, which some
from experience (as they say) can and do testify concerning, whereunto this,
and all former Dispensations are to give way? Wherein two particulars would be
distinctly considered, The thing it self, whether such a thing is to be or no?
and the testimony which we hear, or at least may hear, given out by persons
concerning it, which is of a very high kind, they say, they have tasted, they
have felt it in their own experience, and commend it unto us as a thing they
know already is in part, and suddenly shall be more fully seen and enjoyed. I
intend to speak somewhat to both these, and that very freely, (for I hope the
time is coming wherein my heart and thoughts concerning all things shall be
opened) and first concerning the experience of these persons, which though it
come afterward in order of nature, yet I shall begin with it, to lay it out of
the way; and then I shall come more fairly and directly to the thing it self.

As touching the experience of those persons who thus speak; though they have
made a noise in the world, and drawn the eyes of many upon them, and the hearts
of many after them; yet there lies so just an exception against their persons
and practices, as cannot but damp their testimony, and eat out that strength
which otherwise it might carry with it. There is a greater ground of rebuke and
reproach lies upon them, then has usually attended the people of God, who have
always, and that too justly, layn open to reproach. The weakness of every
Administration, the frailty of the persons under it, the great boasts that have
still been made by some of them, of their interest in God, nearness to God,
power from God, and yet the low ebb that most commonly they are found in, has
still given too much occasion to wise flesh to despise such a weak and mixed
appearance of the Spirit of God in them: yet this is not their worst, but their
ordinary state; you shall sometimes have them buffeted by Satan, overmastered
by corruption, forsaken by God, giving up all their hopes, (My strength and my
hope is perished from the Lord, said Jeremiah, Lam. 3.) all their light
darkened, all their life extinguished to appearance; and this is such a
stumbling block as it is hard to leap over.

But none ever lay so open to reproach as these: Persons wallowing with delight
in that which the eyes of Sense and Reason (if the eye of Religion were quite
put out) cannot but call unclean, filthy, wicked: boasting that they are all,
and all is theirs, and yet possessing nothing; not knowing where to attain
necessaries for the body: speaking greater words then ever were spoken, but
with less demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, then God was usually wont
to give out to them whom he called to speak after a far lower rate. How can any
man's stomach forbear nauseating such kind of persons? I must profess there is
nothing I have met with more contrary to my temper, and answerably more
distasteful to me, who have been always strongly bent toward, and in
prosecution of exact purity, both within and without, to the utmost extent and
degree. My temper has likewise inclined me much to modesty, sobriety, silence;
I have still desired to be much, to enjoy much, but not to make any great sound
of what I was made or enjoyed; and I think few can testify any great boasts
they heard from me of that Light, that Life, that Power, that Sweetness, which
once I tasted of, nay for a season possessed, but still kept back the discovery
of it, further then the drawing of it forth into action (wherein I was not
overforward neither) did occasion it. To be, but not to appear, was very
delightful to me; but to make a glorious appearance beyond substance, to speak
great words beyond what I felt or enjoyed, was in no wise pleasing unto me, or
passable with me. And if I deal ingenuously, I must confess, I never found my
spirit rise with greater detestation against any thing, then this which I am
now speaking of. It was irksom to me formerly to hear men talk of the Spirit of
God, of being assisted by the Spirit of God, when it was too too clear that
their own parts and abilities were the Masterengine in all their performances:
but this was far more distasteful to me, and that which I could in no wise
brook, until I was thoroughly battered, and shown my insufficiency to judge any
thing.

Since which time, I have learned by much experience, that the clay is not its
own, but the Potters; nor has it liberty to choose its own form, but must be
cast into what form the Potter pleases, and into what several forms he
pleases: One while it shall be a vessel of honor, by and by a vessel of
dishonor; anon a vessel of honor again, then a vessel of dishonor again, of
greater dishonor then before; and afterward perhaps a vessel of greater
honor then before. The same piece of earth one while lies common with the
rest of the world, by and by is separated for a garden or vineyard to the Lord,
enclosed with his fence, surrounded with his wall, for him to possess and
please himself with; anon the fence, the wall, is broken down, and it laid
open, and made common again: and thus it is tossed and tumbled into several
sorts of various conditions as often as the owner of it pleases; and what shall
be the issue of all, who knows but he who is all? There are many devices in the
heart of man to exalt himself, and throw down others, (every one thinks it will
go well with him, and is ready to prophecy Woes to others,) but the Counsel of
the Lord it shall stand. Others shall meet with that blessedness he promises
to himself, and he shall meet with those Woes he denounces against others.

When Israel is a grievous slave, the despicablest piece of earth throughout
the whole Creation, then is Israel picked out, chosen for a vessel of glory:
When Israel lifts up it self above the rest of the world, looks upon the rest
as Heathen, as Dogs, (it was their usual phrase to term the Gentiles by,) they
were the chosen people, the rest cast off; they the holy people, the rest
profane, wicked, sinners of the Gentiles: Now must Israel be turned back, and
be put in mind of his own original, which was the same with theirs, (his father
was an Amorite, and his mother an Hittite,) and he must change places with
them, a parcel of the Heathen must become the choice separated people, and
these must be cast by. Having tasted somewhat of this in my own spirit, having
been hurled by might and power into several forms and shapes, and such too as I
have been strongly fortified against, and have strongly opposed, it has made
me somewhat shy of finding fault with any piece of clay, in what guise soever I
find it.

And I cannot but advise all, who have respect to their own ease and safety, to
take heed how they judge these persons. This is no ordinary case; and though
Sense or Reason, much more Religion, may presume upon the seeming clearness of
the ground, and so grow bold in pronouncing sentence against them; yet it is
the light of the day can alone declare things of this nature, and till the time
of judgment be come, that light may be withheld. The nature and end of the
various passages between God and his people, are many times then most hid, when
they seem most manifest: There is commonly deepest love in the bitterest cup,
and the purest glory is frequently veiled over with the darkest covering. Flesh
has been always bold in judging, it may now be met with; there may now be a
trap laid to catch and ensnare it to its own confusion and destruction. This
occasion is so palpable, that it will be very hard for Flesh to avoid, being
drawn out to judge and condemn; and yet its being drawn forth may be but an
entrance into its own judgment.

Methinks I see how apt man is, according to his own state in Religion, and
according to his own apprehension of things, presently to give out his verdict.
This is because the foundation was not well laid, will some say. This is the
effect of their leaving Ordinances and Duties, will others say. This is the
fruit of their prying into Mysteries and Secrets, may a third sort conclude.
But how know thou, O vain man, that it arises from any of these? or who
gave thee liberty to vent thine own Imagination concerning so intricate a
passage as thine eyes never met with before? I can tell thee of another cause
different from any of these, whence it may proceed for ought thou know.

There is a wine prepared for all to drink of, to empty them of all their
glory, which the people of God must begin with. God will have no glory stand in
his way: Religion is the highest glory, stands most in his way, therefore that
must first down. Nature is glorious, and does glorify God in its kind, but
yet it stands in the way of Religion, which is an higher glory; Therefore the
first thing Religion does, where it comes in power, is, to break Nature, to
dash the glory of Nature. Religion is more glorious, and does more glorify
God; but withal, being more glorious, it stands more in the way of a greater
glory, then the glory of Nature does; and therefore the present controversy is
more sharp against it, then against Nature.

There is a time to set up, and a time to pull down; a time to raise, and a
time to level: And that which is truly excellent and glorious in its kind and
degree, must vail and dye, when the season of the discovery of a greater glory
draws nigh. And the people of God speak very lamentably of it, as a thing they
did not look for, as a thing they thought to have avoided, but were forced unto
by a Power which could not be resisted; Thou have made us to drink the wine of
astonishment. There is a wine of Gods mingling that will astonish, a wine made
by his art and skill purposely to astonish, which can without fail effect it; a
wine that will quickly lay the Creature dead drunk, and strip him as naked (if
not more) of all the knowledge of God, yea, of all spiritual excellencies, as a
man drunk after the common natural way is of the knowledge of natural things,
and of natural excellencies.

There is a Consumption determined to pass through the whole earth, upon every
earthly person, and every earthly thing in persons truly spiritual. Every
earthly thing must be consumed. Not only earthly relations, earthly converse,
earthly imaginations, earthly endowments, customs, with the whole fashion of
this outward world: but likewise earthly Religion, earthly Ordinances, earthly
duties, earthly graces, earthly knowledge of God, earthly desires after God,
earthly enjoyments of God, earthly acknowledgments of God, earthly praising of
God, earthly hopes, evidences, assurances of everlasting life and blessedness;
all that is earthly must be consumed every where. And that which you call
spiritual, heavenly, in this dark eclipsed-Moon-light, God may call earthly in
his clear Sun-light; and whatsoever he calls earthly, must under-go this
Consumption.

All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the field: the
grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon
it. There is a blasting breath of the Lord gone forth, and going forth, which
shall make every thing that is fleshly, that is not pure spirit, to dye, and
give up the ghost. There is a terrible storm and tempest to come forth (Isai.
28. 2.) to batter down all the beauty and glory of Ephraim, of dear Ephraim, of
Ephraim the pleasant Child.

Now hence it may proceed, These persons may have been made to drink this wine.
This judgment, which is to go over all, may be begun in them. The Spirit of the
Lord, which will blow upon and make the glorious beauty of all to fade, may
have already blown upon them, and have so blown upon t^em, that there may no
remainders of that life and sweetness, whereof their spirits were once full, be
left standing.

Therefore look about you; Let him that stands take heed, lest he fall.
Consider what ye will do when ye come to drink of this cup; how ye will keep
off astonishment, and preserve in you the knowledge of spiritual things, when ye
are made to drink the wine of astonishment; how ye will do to retain the beauty
and glory of your Religion, when the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it. Alas
Sirs! If these things be done to the green tree, what will become of the dry?
If persons, in whom there was such an eminent power, purity and life of
Religion (as there was known to be in many of these) be thus dealt with, be
thus stripped, have the very foundation so struck at in them; what will become
of persons who have very little better then a Form, whether of Presbytery,
Independency, Anabaptism, or any other kind? how will these stand against the
tempest? how quickly will the unquenchable fire devour such stubble? If the
Oaks of Bashan, the Cedars of Lebanon, persons of such height, such strength,
be felled to the ground, be burnt in the fire, be so much consumed, have so
little (if any thing at all) left, what shall become of the Brambles of the
Forest? And yet none more forward and confident in judging, then such as are
least able to stand, and shall soonest fall, when they come to Judgment.

But I will insist no longer on this, which is (to the point in hand) but
circumstantial; but proceed now to the thing it self, which is of substance
indeed, and of very great weight, which is this, Whether we are to expect any
other state, which that we are or have been in, and that the Primitive
Christians were in, is to give way to? Whereunto I have this to say:

There seems to me to be a larger pouring out of the Spirit promised, and to
be expected in the latter days, then has as yet been dispensed; larger both
for extent and virtue: it is to be poured out more generally upon the people of
God, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and more effectually upon those
on whom it is poured out* and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc.
This second pouring forth of the Spirit is to be fuller of virtue and efficacy
in several respects.

1. In respect of the knowledge of things, and the way of dispensing it. There
was a great deal of knowledge given out then, in respect of what had been
before, and after a far clearer and more powerful manner: but yet it was still
weak, dark, imperfect, and given out by weak fleshly instruments, earthen
vessels, and in a weak fleshly manner, through much infirmity of the flesh, as
Paul speaks: And it was received in but weakly too; so that ignorance did still
prevail, and men were very carnal and dark under those administrations and
receptions of Light, and had need to be taught over and over again the very
elements and first principles of Christianity.

But at the second pouring out of the Spirit, there shall be no need of any
such givings out of Light, Ye shall not teach every man his neighbor, saying,
Know the Lord: Knowledge shall then be universal among the people of God, They
shall all know me, from the least to the greatest: The knowledge of the Lord
shall cover the Earth, as waters cover the Sea. Now there is a gasping after
more Light, more discoveries of God; but then every vessel shall be filled, and
filled from the Fountain. The waters shall be no more sullied by the pipes that
convey it, but pure Light shall spring from within.

2. In respect of the remembrance of things. It was a work appertaining to the
Spirit, upon his first pouring forth, to bring things to their remembrance. The
things that Christ had spoken, what they had known or heard, that was useful
for them, the Spirit was to put them in mind of, when they should need it,
either for direction or comfort.

But at the second pouring out of the Spirit, the Spirit shall indeed bring all
things to our remembrance much more fully: all the things of God, all the
things in God, all the things done by God. Then we shall indeed remember the
things of old, before this late Earth was formed; when there was nothing but
the Light of God, the Life of God, the Power of God, circling within its own
pleasure.

3. In respect of power over spiritual enemies and evils. They had power over
these in a great measure. They could in some sense play with sin, laugh in
their spirits at the condemnation of it, at the reigning power of it: There is
therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ; and if sin abound,
grace abounds much more; and again, Sin shall not have dominion over us, for we
are not under the Law, but under Grace: here is fine sporting with sin. But for
all that, it was but sad sport sometimes, sin gave them now and then such
gripes, as made them roar out, Oh wretched man! and, Who shall deliver! Yea,
the body of sin stuck so close, as troubled the best of them all their days,
so that they could not thoroughly do the things that they would, nor thoroughly
avoid the things they would not do, but were often forced, by the power of
sin, to do what they hated.

So for the world: They were delivered from this present evil world; but so as
they were still troubled with it, and feign much to be pressed, not to love the
world, nor the things of the world, not to fashion themselves to the world,
etc. They were half out, and half in; got out from the world, and yet the world
stuck close to them; drawn upwards by the Spirit, and yet still held downwards
by the flesh.

And for the Devil; his head was a little crushed, but he was not quite
trodden under foot. They were not ignorant of his devices, they knew his wiles
well, and yet for all that they were not free from being entangled by him. Paul
himself was buffeted by his messenger. He went up and down the very Churches
like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he might devour; neither was he content with
particular souls, but he never left till he had swallowed up all the Churches.

But at the second pouring out of the Spirit, spiritual enemies and spiritual
evils shall be pure sport. Nothing shall hurt or destroy in all Gods holy
mountain: Then the sucking child shall play on the hole of the Aspe, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice den. The sting of sin shall
be so taken out, that it shall be as harmless as any other thing. Such Light,
such Life, such Purity, shall then be dispensed, as shall transform the very
nature of things. Darkness shall become Light; Death, Life; Impurity, Purity,
unto them. They shall be so fully, so truly pure, as all things shall be pure
to them; so fully living, as all things shall be life to them; and full of that
light, which makes every thing light about it. Sin, and Devil, and Hell, have
no evil Originally in themselves, but only by a sharp Law are made terrible to
weak flesh, but are very pleasant to the might and strength of perfect Spirit.

4. In respect of wisdom to use things. They had not wisdom proportionable to
make use of the things bestowed on them. They knew not how to manage their
gifts and graces (as appears in the 12. chap. of the 1 Epist. to the Church of
Corinth) to the best advantage, but their very table became a snare to them.
Their food, though it was weak, yet it was too strong for their stomachs. The
wine of the Spirit was too heady for their weak brains, so that it turned them
out of the way. Paul himself, though more then an ordinary man, yet not able to
bear more then ordinary Revelations.

But at the second pouring out of the Spirit, he shall become a perfect guide.
There shall be wanting neither light to see the right, nor life to fall in with
it to the full. The way of holiness, true holiness (not a shadowie, not a
representative, but true holiness) shall be so plain, that waifaring men, that
never went that way before, though fools, who have no skill in it, who know not
how to ask a wise question about it, shall not err therein.

And this is my interest, herein lies my heart, this is all the little hope
that is left me, (or rather that is a little revived in me) after the bitter
death and loss of all. And if this also fail me, or be overmuch prolonged, I
know not which way to turn, having nothing further to expect, but to lie down
in misery. I have seen an end of all the perfection I have hitherto been
acquainted with; and if I had it again, yet it would be too narrow to yield my
Spirit content, which through much extremity has been forced from its hold, to
seek out and pant after, a firmer, a deeper, a larger foundation.

And now what shall I say to you, my dear ones? had I a word in Season, oh with
what delight should I give it forth unto you I and yet why should I poor
ignorant wretch be speaking, when he who knows how to speak, sees it good to be
silent? Had I not better fall a weeping over you? but what value have my tears
above my words? yet let me weep or speak, or both, at worst it can be but like
what we daily meet with; lost labor, vanity. And I could almost fall into a
patheticall persuading of you (if I were sure it might be prevalent and
profitable) to weep with me; yea, and yet somewhat further, even to leave this
same eager prosecuting the Forms and Shaddows of things (which pass away,
which perish in the very use, which did not contain life and substance in them,
even whilst it passed through them) to withdraw your Spirits from doting on
your present enjoyments (if they be present) and to consider what is absent,
what is worth the enjoying, and to mourn after it; To forsake the house of
Feasting in these poor, low, dark, shallow things, and to enter into the house
of mourning, after deep, after excellent things, after that life and substance
which will alone be in request for food and satisfaction of Souls, when these
shall vanish, and their emptiness and nakedness appear unto, and be
acknowledged by all.

There is ground of mourning in a double respect: both in respect of what is
lost, and in respect of what was promised to be enjoyed.

First, In respect of what is lost, and that in a double respect also: In
respect of what you your selves have lost, and likewise in respect of what the
state of Christianity has lost.

Consider what ye your selves have lost, and mourn over that. What Sweetness,
Meekness, Patience, Humility, Faith, Love, etc. did appear in Christians a
while ago? What Life and Vigor in Prayer? What inward searching of heart, and
outward strictness of conversation? Oh where is this! Is it not gone? Nay, is
it possible to be recovered? Be provoked to jealousy, O ye professors of this
age, hold forth the truth of things, or give up the name also: if ye have lost
the Substance, please not your selves with the Title, but throw it away also,
rather then it should hinder you from pressing after the Substance again.

Consider likewise, what the state of Christianity has lost: what it once
possessed, whereof the shadow is not now to be found.

What presence of God dwelling in them. God dining, supping, walking up and
down with them, and they with him. We know God by outward apprehensions, sucked
in from the letter of the Scriptures: They knew God from the sight of him, from
his ingoings and outgoings in their own spirits. They, by a spiritual eye
received from God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son, saw themselves in God
the Father and in Jesus Christ: They saw God the Father and Jesus Christ in
them. They were come to Mount Sion, to the City of the living God, etc. They
saw, they tasted, they handled, the Word of Life. They had golden Candlesticks,
and Christ walking in the midst of them.

What Power of the Spirit of God going forth in them. They could pray in the
Spirit, act in the Spirit, live in the Spirit. They knew how to move toward
God in his own Spirit. Out of their belly did indeed flow rivers of living
Water, which did continually run back, and carry them back into the Sea of Life.

What Liberty of Spirit, true Liberty, wherein they knew how to use every
thing, and be in bondage to nothing: Such Liberty, wherein the Spirit might
take its full scope to meet and enjoy God every where, in every thing; and the
flesh have no advantage thereby to feed it self any where, in any thing.

This was once the state of Christians, that which they were in a way to
attain, that which some did attain, yea that which was generally attained in
some degree. But where is it now? Who comes near it? Indeed a strong
Imagination may fancy, that it has attained some kind of resemblance of it;
but do but compare it with the reality of this state, how soon will it appear
but an Imagination, but a fancy? and is not this a just occasion of lamentation?

Again, There is ground of mourning, in respect of what was promised. More was
promised then they enjoyed. A more full presence of God, a more abundant power
of the Spirit, a more perfect liberty in the Spirit. He that believes, out of
his belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. I will dwell with them, and I will
walk in them, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. Though they had the enjoyment of this in respect of
us, yet this was but a promise in respect of what was to be enjoyed. Promises
are very large of plenty, fullness of bread, but the children of the promises
are very scanty, almost famished for want of it. How full are the Scriptures of
promises to the last days! We say, these are the last days, and surely we meet
with (in part) the misery that is spoken of, as belonging to the last times;
but the happiness, the sweet enjoyment of God, the plentiful pourings forth of
the Spirit, which are so abundantly promised to those times, seem more remote
from us in view, then they have been from preceding ages.

If ever there was a time for tears without, and grief of spirit within, this
seems the season: when after such an expectation of Light and Glory, of
Settlement and Establishment in the things of God, such thick darkness, such
universal shame, such dreadful Shatterings, have so apparently overtaken us,
and are so likely daily more and more to overtake us. Not only our
Superstruction, but our very Foundation is shaken; and when we have striven and
tried to the utmost to settle again, we may be forced at length to confess,
that there is no settling any more upon it, but we must come to a deeper bottom,
or sink for ever.

The Sense of A poor shattered Soul, Concerning His Spiritual Loss and Misery
thereby, Expressed in A LETTER To an intimate Friend.
The Letter.
MY dear Heart, mine own Soul; what shall I call thee? I can call thee any
thing in word, in form; but nothing in light, in power. I have not been
unwilling to write to thee, otherwise then I am made unwilling toward all
motions: But this I must confess, I am unwilling so far to grieve thee, as my
writing necessarily will occasion. How can thou bear to hear how I have been
tossed up and down, stripped of all; not of the outside, but of the inside; not
of my corruptions, (which I hoped had been burning up, and wasting away,) but
of the vigor and life of my spirit? Not one branch of knowledge, not one sweet
motion of my spirit, but has been confounded, condemned, taken from me, and
made odious to me. Very shy have I been of new Notions, till extremity made me
desirous to entertain any thing that might in any respect mitigate my torment,
and then fain would I believe any thing, imagine any thing, be any thing, for
ease sake. And yet to this day am I still held off from every thing. I can
neither receive any thing that is new, nor return to any thing that is old: but
every thing is darkness, death, emptiness, vanity, a lie. Thus they still
appear to me, and yet my spirit presently judges me for so thinking and
judging, while I know them not, nor what they may be. I am rent from all
things, but have nothing to turn to. My hopes, comforts, enjoyments, are all
dashed, but nothing new brought in their stead. I am like a wild Bull in a
net, entangled with misery and torment, which I know not what it is, no^ whence
it comes, nor whither it tends, nor see no likely hood of any issue. I am
perfectly weary of my self and all things, but continually more and more beset
with what I hate; and have quite lost the remembrance of what I desire, or
could love. Nor is there any use of any means for me, for there is no principle
left in me for any man, or means, to work upon.

I will tell thee one strange thing. After I had been long worried, and had had
all my Religion violently rent from me, piece by piece, and had long mourned
over the dead carcass; Having at length forgot the sweetness of it, I was drawn
to a willingness to part with it. Hereupon for a season I enjoyed a kind of
fools Paradise, yet not without intermixtures of anguish; but I was quickly
weary of it, and turned out of it too. At the same time also I felt my Reason
somewhat revive, which made me a little entertain this conjecture: That the
blows which did light so heavy on it were for Religions sake, which it was
still offering to be serviceable unto, while it remained; which when it had
once quitted, it much escaped the dint of those strokes which followed it so
incessantly before. And I find still somewhat more of it in me, then when you
were here; yet have very little comfort or sweetness in the enjoyment of it,
having this imagination at some times somewhat strong in me, That I must be
stripped of the Man, as well as of the Christian; and at present cannot think
otherwise, by Reason of the sharp wounds it sometimes sensibly receives.

I am weary of all things, of Religion, Reason, Sense, and all the objects that
these have to converse about: but yet there is somewhat in stead of these that
I would fain find within, and somewhat in stead of those objects I would fain
meet with without, which if once my spirit might be satisfied in, I should
find some rest; till when I cannot but remain truly miserable, and be fit for
nothing, but to torment, and to be tormented.

FEBR. 18. 1649.
A POSTSCRIPT About Darkening The Counsel of God, WHICH Most men pretend to
know themselves, and are too ready to undertake to reveal to others: Which
Counsel of his is much hid from Man; and the Light of Man, while it seems to
shine with clearness and perspicuity about it, does but darken it.

MATTHEW. 15. 14. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch.

ISAI. 28. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to
understand Doctrine? Them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the
breasts.

ISAI. 42. 16. And I will bring the blind by a way they knew not, I will lead
them in paths they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and
crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1650.

A POSTSCRIPT About Darkening The Counsel of GOD.
ABout the same time (when those former thoughts, mentioned in the Preface,
were fresh in me) or not long after, There was a Scripture presented to my
view, which flew into my face, and checked my spirit for some things, which I
thought I had humbly and conscienciously done. Perhaps it may speak somewhat to
some others also, where it may find entrance; upon which Peradventure it is
here annexed.

The Scripture was this which follows.

JOB 38. 2. Who is this that darkeneth Counsel by words without knowledge?

THis is Gods entrance into his Expostulation with Job. Job was an
upright-hearted-man, did truly fear God, and eschew evil, as God himself
testifies of him, Chap. 1. By temptation and affliction he becomes the most
miserable of men. There is great dispute between Job and his Friends concerning
the Counsel of God in this thing. His Friends say, it was because of sin: For
his wickedness and oppression, says one; for his hypocrisy and deceit, says
another. Job bears himself very high above them all, laughs at them, denies
utterly that it was either for one sin or other, and is so confident, that he
offers to plead with God himself about the matter.

In his dispute, this is the great thing he drives at: That God stands not upon
sin in his dealings with men, but perfect and wicked he consumes; falls upon
either sort as he pleases. (God casts the best into his furnace of fire, as
well as the worst; and when he casts them in, he melts the whole vessel, he
melts all that is in them; as well the silver and the gold, as the tin and the
dross: and both suffer loss in the fire, only with this difference: The one
loses its substance, the other its shape; the dross, the tin, is burned up in
the fire, is quite consumed by it; the silver and gold lose only their shape.
In plain terms, Fleshly graces, fleshly privileges, fleshly hopes, fleshly
joys, fleshly peace, fleshly knowledge of God, fleshly life in God, which did
not flow purely from his Spirit, but was strained by the wit and industry of
man out of the Scriptures, when it is once cast into the fire, shall never come
out alive, but perish there: But that which was truly spiritual, which did
indeed flow from God, which had the true life and power of God in it, shall
rise again in the same substance, though not in the same image.) Thus Job lifts
up himself in this high piece of knowledge (wherein he went far beyond the reach
of his Friends) till God here comes to take him to do; Who is this that
darkeneth Counsel by words without knowledge?

Counsel is the intent of a person concerning things, what he drives at in the
things he does. The Counsel of God is not the action it self, but what is
intended by him in the action. What he intends in the Creation, in making such
and such kind of things; what he intends in the Government of the World, in
ordering things in this or that manner; in the seasons of the year, in sending
rain, in withholding rain, etc. in the seasons of Ages, in lifting up, in
throwing down, this or that: So in the Government of the Church, in afflicting
some, in exalting others, etc. The aim, the intent of God, in any particular
transaction, that is his Counsel.

To darken Counsel is to cover, to hide, this meaning of God; to make it more
intricate and difficult to be understood. Light reveals, opens, discovers
things; Darkness vails, hides things from sight. To enlighten is to make
manifest, to expose to view; to darken is to make obscure, to hide from view.

By words without knowledge. Knowledge is the persons understanding of a thing, a
persons acquaintance with a thing, a persons insight into a thing, whereby he
is enabled to discover it to another, which he that has not knowledge cannot
do. A man cannot make that known, which he himself does not know. When a man
speaks concerning a thing to open it, he pretends to bring light, to bring
words of knowledge round about it, to make it manifest to him that is ignorant
of it; but if his words have not light in them, if they do not reach the nature
of the thing, then they are words without knowledge, darkening words.

This was Jobs case here. He takes up his Friends sharply for darkening
Counsel, for words without knowledge, and pretends to rectify them, to open
that Counsel which they had hid and perverted, to bring light about that which
they had darkened; and so he seems to do, till God comes to take him up also,
and tells him, that he also darkens Counsel by his shallow expressions of it,
and blames him for it, as taking too much upon him; Who is this that darkens
Counsel by words without knowledge?

The words seem to give forth these two things of their own accord.

1. The clearest holding forth of the Counsels of God, without the Light of
God, is but a darkening of them. Man's light, man's understanding, and from
thence revealing the things of God, though it may appear as a very eminent and
glorious discovery of those things, yet it is but a vailing, but a clouding of
them. Man is very ignorant of God, when he seems deep and high in the knowledge
of him; and does but darken him, when he strives to make him manifest. The
light of man is but darkness before God, and the casting abroad of this light
is but scattering darkness about God, which though it cannot darken God in
himself, yet it may, and does, darken him to those to whom it seems to reveal
him, though they perceive it not, but think they have attained some sight of
God by it. And Man would hardly believe, if he were told, that he shall not
come this way to know God, but must be plunged in darkness to have this light
buried, before the true light break in upon him: and yet it may be so, though
Man with his eye, and in his day, cannot discern it.

2. It is an act of presumption (a thing that does little beseem man) to hold
forth the Counsels of God without the Light of God. Man goes beyond his sphere,
when he will take upon him, by his shallow apprehension, to measure the things
of God, and so to give them out as the things of God. Who is this? that takes
so much upon him, that will be opening the Counsels of God, and yet has not
knowledge?

I may speak somewhat concerning both these.

For the first.

The clearest holding forth of the Counsels of God, without the Light of God,
is but a darkening of them. Job here a man eminently qualified with knowledge,
neither was he one whose knowledge God was likely to blast for any juggling in
his spirit, but of an entire heart too; a man that spoke as right of God, as it
was almost possible for a man to do; yea, God in part does justify him, Chap.
42. 7. yet Job, in thinking to open the Counsels of God, darkens them. In
comparison of what his Friends said, Job had spoken right, it was light
compared with their darkness; but bring it to the touchstone, set it by Truth,
by pure light, then it also is darkness.

There is none knows the mind of God but himself. What man knows the things
of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God
none knows, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. You may see a man doing many
things, but you know not his mind, his intent therein: so he that has a true,
a spiritual eye to see some motions and actions of God, yet may miss of his
meaning in them, unless his Spirit reveal it to him: and he that knows it
not, how can he speak it forth? his words must needs be without knowledge.

There is no gathering the mind of God from any of his words or works, but by
his own Light. All the sight Man has of things, without the Light of God, does
not reach the mind of God. Job was as entire, ingenuous, searching a man as
well could be, and had, no doubt, that which we call the blessing and
assistance of God, and did attain much: yet his knowledge was not the opening,
but the darkening of God, the hiding of his Counsel.

The sight we have of things is both a shallow sight, and a deceitful sight.

It is a dark, shallow, imperfect sight, both in respect of the things we see,
and in respect of their reference one to another.

In respect of the things we see. We see but part of things, but the least
part, the outside, the shape of a creature: we see not the nature, the inward
properties, much less the internal Substance of things. So we see the outside,
the rationality of a Scripture, but not the inward life and spirit of it. We
are come to the Mount that may be touched by our Sense, Reason and Experience,
but the spiritual Glory and Majesty of God is not discovered from that Mount,
nor to that eye that looks there for it.

And for the reference of things one to another: who sees how one creature, one
action of providence refers to another. There is no man sees Gods Works from
the beginning to the end.

And then that little sight we have of these is uncertain, liable to deceit. We
see things as they are not, not as they are: The true Being is hid, and the
appearance of things (being so various and mystical) easily cozens a weak eye.
We cannot judge of things that are veiled, by the vail that lies upon them; and
yet this is all the sight we have: And what man, from such a dark sight of
things, can give a clear account of things, or of Gods Counsel, of his meaning
in things? Therefore there is no knowing, or grounded declaring any Counsel of
God without his light.

As there is no knowing man, or the things of man, by any light beneath man's:
The sense, the understanding of the creatures will not reach it; that kind of
knowledge they have of man, deserves not the name of knowledge: So there is no
knowing God, or the things of God, by any light beneath his. The light must be
of the same kind with the thing it discovers, or it cannot discover it. The
light of the creature can never discern the Creator; but it must be the light
of the Creator let into the creature, which discovers the Creator to the
creature.

Indeed there is a kind of knowledge in the creature answerable to the state and
being of the creature; but this kind of knowledge is darkness, is ignorance, to
the true and spiritual kind: and an over-high conceit of the excellency of this
knowledge, is one of the greatest blocks to true spiritual knowledge. The
sensible use of this eye makes men insensible of the want of the true eye:
because they find they do see, they take it for granted they have an eye; and
so they have, both an eye and a sight, but not a right eye, not a right sight:
yea, though it be a right eye to them, it were better it were plucked out and
cast away, then possessed by them.

Thou know there is a God; Nature, the Scripture, teaches thee so: thou
can reason so from his works, from the things that are made, which evidence
to thee his eternal Power and Godhead: thou know he must needs be wise,
holy, righteous, powerful, etc. Well, in what light do thou see this? Does
thy Reason tell thee so? I do not blame thee for hearkening to the voice of thy
Reason, nor do I deny this to be knowledge in its kind, it is knowledge in the
earthly, in the natural man; but for all that, it is ignorance, it is darkness,
compare it with spiritual light: Thou may be a very Atheist in the eye of
God, and as ignorant of God, in respect of the true kind of knowledge, as the
bruit creatures are, notwithstanding all this.

So thou know, that thou art a sinner; that there is Redemption by Christ
for those that believe; that Faith is the gift of God; that those who receive
this gift, and Christ by it, must walk in new obedience.

But tell me, O poor Soul, cannot the natural understanding drink in all these
things? Is it not almost necessary, that a creature, touched with the sense of
eternal misery, should pant after Redemption, should hearken out for it, should
with readiness embrace it, and fight with all reluctances in it self against
it? If believing be the way, I will presently believe; or if I cannot believe,
I will pray for faith; if my self be my greatest enemy, I will deny, I will
hate my self, and by the strength of Christ I will walk in all the ways of new
obedience. How naturally does the poor frighted creature take this course! and
how vigorous will nature be, when it is put forth to the utmost, for the utmost
degree of self-preservation and happiness! And yet what man almost that finds
these anything lively and vigorous in himself, but takes it for granted, that
they are spiritual! No man can attain these things but by the Spirit of God; no
man can know Christ, or acknowledge him to be the Lord, but by the Spirit; no
man can believe, but ^e to whom it is given. I have, by the goodness of God,
been led into these things: therefore it is by the Spirit; and these in me must
needs be spiritual.

Ah poor man I why do thou cozen thy self? How come thou to be so subtle a
Sophister? Do thou not know it is against thine own Soul? The same things may
be seen with different eyes, naturally with the natural eye, spiritually with
the spiritual eye. The question is, with what eye thou see these things. Thou will prove it is the spiritual eye, because thou see them. It is true, if
thou could prove thy sight to be spiritual, then thou might conclude thine
eye to be spiritual: but there is a very clear kind of seeing with the natural
eye, as well as with the spiritual eye, which self-love, joined to a strong
desire to have it of the best kind, will easily persuade the poor creature to
resolve it to be so.

Ah Christians, Christians, how long will ye lay out your money for that which
is not bread! How long will ye feed on the husky knowledge of things which
cannot satisfy! Ye may please your selves in the night, in a dream, thinking
ye make brave meals; but when ye awake in the day, ye will find your bellies
empty; and then, oh what lamentation will there be over husky Knowledge, husky
Interpretations of Scripture, husky Graces, husky Comforts, husky Hopes, etc.
things that yielded great pleasure in a dream, in a fancy; but vanish when
reality, when truth comes to be discovered. Thus much for the first of these.

As touching the second, which is this:

It is an act of presumption to hold forth the Counsels of God without the
Light of God. Who is this, etc.

There is a threefold step or degree of presumption in it. One in respect of
God; another in respect of the things themselves; and a third in respect of the
state of the person who does this: all which together aggravate this
presumption, and raise it very high.

1. In respect of God; his Height, his Eminence, makes every transaction
toward him presumptuous, unless it be very circumspectly managed. The
greatness of persons makes those transactions presumptuous toward them, which
would not be so toward others. God is very high, very great, and that makes it
a very high presumption to intermeddle with things belonging to him without his
warrant.

Man, though he were created lord of all, yet the creatures are more Gods then
his; and if God had not sealed a Warrant to him, it had been boldness in him to
have touched the least creature. Now he has given no man liberty to open his
Counsels without his Light; he gives no man liberty to deface his Image, to
hold forth his own carnal apprehensions for the spiritual Image of Gods Truth.
God has set ranges about every spiritual thing, as he did about Mount Sinai,
that none may break in to gaze without his Commission; none but whom he leads
must enter into his Counsels; it must needs be therefore great boldness for any
person to venture to declare his meaning before he has received his light.

2. In respect of the things themselves, in respect of their nature: they are
great, mysterious, and secret. It is presumption to meddle with any thing that
belongs to a great person without his leave; but to meddle with his weighty
affairs, with his secrets, is an aggravation of the presumption. The Counsels
of God are secret things: the Actions of God are somewhat open and manifest,
but what he intends in his Actions is deeply hid. That the Tower of Siloam, by
the providence and Will of God, fell upon such and such, seems somewhat easy
to be discerned: but thence to conclude, that God did thereby intend to
signify, that these were sinners in a special degree above the rest, was a
presumption Christ warned them to beware of. The Counsels of God they are
(...), the depths of God, he is wonderful in Counsel; his Counsel is such, that
men and Angels cannot but wonder at it, when it is revealed; but there is no
certain guessing at it without his revealing it, and it is no small piece of
boldness to venture so to do.

3. In respect of the state of the persons, which is a low state far beneath
God, and a broken state, far beneath it self. The natural state in its purity
is far short of Spiritualitie. Adam the earthly man had an earthly image, an
earthly knowledge, but not a spiritual: and the natural man cannot discern
the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned. The Counsels of God
are far above the reach of our nature, yea above the reach of any spirit but
his own. His riddle is so deep that Christ himself could never have found it
out, but that he had his heyfer to plough with, into his own bo^ome. The Angels
they peep into things as they are revealed, but they cannot discern them till
they be revealed. How bold then is man, poor weak man, broken man, that will be
piercing into these things, and holding them forth as the light of God, without
the light of God. This raises the presumption very high.

What man almost in any trade, if a person that has no skill shall come and
pass his judgment upon his workmanship, but looks upon it with disdain,
accounting that person presumptuous, though far above him in degree? and yet
man has the same principle with man, to receive the things of man into: How
disdainfully then think you will God take it, that poor shallow man, poor
broken man, silly weak-eye'd man, that is so many regions below God, so far
beneath that principle wherein God lives and acts (who lives in light and acts
from light unapproachable) should be opening Gods Counsels by his shallow
brain, should be measuring the light of Gods infinite Spirit, by the darkness
(or, if you will, by the light) of his own understanding. So much for the
second likewise.

Now from both we may take notice of these three things.

1. It may blame us for our forwardness in opening Gods Counsel in things.
Every man almost can tell what God means in every thing: this, God intends in
this; this, in that: Is such a man afflicted so or so? oh, I thought he would
be met with; it was for such or such a thing. There is hardly an action of
providence, but every man will be ready to interpret; few Scriptures but bold
man will be ready to show Gods meaning in them, and that very confidently if he
have but a little bent his thoughts that way.

2. It may show us what the wisest undertakings in this kind are; what our wise
openings of Scriptures and Counsels of God, without the light of God are: if
any man can truly and groundedly say, not I but the Spirit of God in me, opens
this or that Scripture, thus and thus unto me; that is another matter, I have
nothing to say against that, but I speak concerning our own opening, though by
our most ingenuous and industrious search, by the fairest debating things i^
our own understanding; yea, of our wise opening, when we seem to give out the
full intent, the very life and heart of a Scripture, and fence it about with
strong Argumen's, making that interpretation safe from all reasonings of all
contrary judgments whatsoever, what is this? but a piece of folly, of madness;
a setting up the wisdom of man, an idolizing the pleasant conceptions of man's
working brain; but a darkening of God: So God said of Job and so Job confesses
his to be, chap. 42. ver. 3. Who is he that hides Conncel without knowledge?
therefore have I uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me
which I knew not: Ah what a fool have I been, says Job, to speak I knew not
what, to utter that out, which I my self did not understand within, to hide the
wonderful Counsel of God by my vain words, and how presumptuous have I been in
doing of it! Who is he that hides Council, etc. he brings this reproach close
to his spirit.

3. It may be a ground of silence and waiting for the light. This effect it
likewise wrought in Job. I will lay my hand upon my mouth, I will stop all that
my mouth would be uttering for the future, once have I spoken but I will no
more, yea twice but I will proceed no further; I will never undertake to open
the Councels of God again, after this rate: Now I have seen God, now I have
heard God, I perceive what my own knowledge was, I see what a dark blind
buzzard I was in the midst of my confidence, concerning mine own clear
eyesight. Oh it were excellent to be brought to this by the sight of God, as
Job was; but its good also to check proud reason by its own light; in which
balance, if things were duly weighed, there would appear little cause for our
insulting over one another, or for obtruding our light upon one another, with
such vehemency and confidence, as we are all too apt to do.

FINIS.
AN Additionall Word TO Such as it may concern, those who speak such lofty
language with such high confidence, saying, God is All.
I Must impart to you my inward sense, which is this: If ye have received these
things from pure power, with true and clear light, into an inward and spiritual
understanding; Oh how lovely, how excellent is this to the relish of my spirit!
O how I long to be one with you, in receiving the same things, or any thing
else after this manner!

Or if ye speak thus-like mad persons, who have been hurried by extremity out
of what ye were and understood, into ye know not what or whither: ye have
liberty to say what ye please, and my spirit cannot be offended at any thing
that is said or done by you through the force of this extremity.

But if the strength of Reason by its workings has purged out old notions, and
brought these and other like in their stead into the old vessel, the creaturely
imagination or understanding; I must profess, of all things this is the
greatest abomination to my spirit, and I thirst exceedingly to see the
unquenchable fire let loose upon these notions, and cannot but laugh in my
spirit to behold what havoc it will make among them, of whom it will be as
quick, greedy and powerful a devourer, as you expect to see it of any
principles or notions that have gone before them. The great Queen, that looks
to sit a Lady for ever, that says and thinks, I am, and none else besides
me, must have those words and thoughts fired out of her throat, and out of her
heart, and she also must come to sit as a widow, and know the loss of children,
yea this misery shall light upon her even in perfection, because of the
multitude of her sorceries and enchantments, wherewith she bewitched and
entangled the poor desolated people of God, and whereby she made account to
charm off all sorrow from her self, Isai. 47. 8, 9, 10.

I have nothing more to say to you, but this: Ye will one day confess, That the
Kingdom of God consists not in Word, but in Power. True Life, true
Spirituality, lies not in the height of notion, but in the inward vigor of the
Spirit of Life. High notions are very pleasing to the flesh, she loves to get
upon the pinnacle of knowledge, and to trample upon all that are in dresses
beneath her, though they be the same with her: yet is she never the more lovely
in the eye of God, but the greater object of his Jealousy and Indignation. He
cannot endure to see the Whore dressed like his Bride: These ornaments must
off, as well as the former. The Imagination, Reason, Wisdom, Understanding of
the creature, thus clothed, thus adorned, thus fortified, being for all this
but flesh, must feel that it is so, by being stripped, burnt, consumed, by that
fire, which will destroy all that cannot live in it.

The Isles shall wait for his Law. There is a Law which HE has to reveal; a
sweet Law, an inward Law, a Law of true Life, of true Liberty, whereas fleshly
liberty, in its highest strain, and utmost scope, is but bondage. There is no
attaining to the sight of this Law by any strivings or struglings of the
creature: happy is he who is led to wait for it. But till the discovery of it,
it is impossible to discern or distinguish those things, which it alone can
teach: and men's fleshly tossing and turning of things upside down, will be
esteemed but as the potters clay. A fleshly destroying, a fleshly throwing
down, will be of as little value as a fleshly rearing up; and flesh will be no
more justified in running apace from things, then it was in running to things.
When God puts his Law into our hearts, and writes it in our inward parts, and
takes such hold of us that we cannot depart from him, then shall we err no
more: but if we had never so clear and full discoveries, if we were withal
left in the least to our selves, we should be still at our old work, viz. a
raising up such a fleshly fabric in our selves and others, as would stand in
the way of Gods Glory, and our own happiness. Till God takes upon him to be
All, and to do all, not in Word, but in Truth and Power, all cannot be well.

O GOD, What a state are things in! Here is every one tugging for their
Inteterest, put in for thine too. Do thou gain, and let all sit down with loss,
whose gain lies not in thine. Take from us all, what we have stolen from thee,
for it cannot thrive in our hands, nor miscarry in thine. Cozen all creatures,
by bringing about a swifter, a fuller, a more universal Happiness, then ever
heart could imagine. Amen.

FINIS.
CERTAIN Scripture-Prophecies Concerning Some Transactions IN THE Latter Times:
With a Glance at the sense of some of them.

ECCLES. 9. 12. For Man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken
in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons
of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.

JAMES 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. Let the Brother of low degree, rejoice in that he is
exalted: But the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the
grass he shall pass away.

For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withers the
grass; and the flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it
perishes: so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.

Blessed is the man that endures temptation: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1650.

Certain Scripture-Prophecies, etc.
ISAI. 29. verse. 9. to 15. Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out, and cry,
They are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.

For the Lord has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has
closed your eyes: the Prophets, and your Rulers, the Seers has he covered.

And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is
sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray
thee; and he says, I cannot, for it is sealed.

And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I
pray thee; and he says, I am not learned.

Wherefore the Lord says, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their
mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from
me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:

Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people,
even a mavelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.


How dark must it needs be, when the whole vision of God is become as a sealed
book, that none, either unlearned or learned, can read any part of it?

Needs must the fear of God, the whole Worship of God, both outward and inward,
be taught by the precept of men, (if it be taught at all,) when the true Vision
of God is wholly hid.

Yet miserable is that fear, that worship of God, which is taught by the
precept of men, whose wisdom has ever been foolishness before, and hateful to
the eye of GOD.

But because man will be stepping into the place of God, and by his light
patching up those defects, which can only be healed by Gods Light; God will at
length not only confound these his presumptuous enterprises, but strike at the
very foundation of this wisdom, even in the wisest and most prudent, which have
been looked upon as the safest guides.

And what then will poor man do for his Religion, for his Worship; when the
wisdom of those that were wont to frame it for him is so smitten, that both
they themselves and others, cannot but see and acknowledge it perished?

ISAI. 28. verse. 1. etc. Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim,
whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat
valleys of them that are overcome with wine.

Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail, and
a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to
the earth with the hand.

The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under feet.

And the glorious beauty which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be a
fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer: which when he that
looks upon it, sees it, while it is yet in his hand, he eats it up.

Behold a drunkenness, which is not a matter of shame, but a crown, a beauty, a
glorious beauty; yet a Woe follows, which pitifully bemires this crown, this
beauty, this glory.

It is not the common sort of the world that are here spoken of, but Israel,
Gods own people; nor the common sort of Israel, but Ephraim, the pride or glory
of Israel, Ephraim the dear Tribe, the Tribe picked out to be blessed, (In thee
shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim:) Nor yet the common sort
of Ephraim, but the choicest, the peculiar ones, who by their worth and
excellency, their strictness and exactness, were the crown of that pride. This
drunkenness was a peculiar kind of drunkenness, incident only to the people of
God, my proper to the devoutest among them: it was Religion, Devotion, that
Ephraim was drunk with, it was the steem of that wine overcame him, overturned
his weak brain, and made him stumble and tumble into misery, while he thought
he was going on safely and swiftly toward happiness.

He that will take pains to search, and has an eye to see with, may perhaps
find Ephraim drunk with these three things:

1. With his religious Performances; his Sacrifices, his Obedience to the
revealed Will of God; his fasting, his feasting, or thanksgiving, and such
other Ordinances of Worship. Ephraim expressed his drunkenness herein, both by
his over-valuing them, and by his over-performing them.

He over-valued them, he looked upon them as more excellent things then they
were, forgetting out of what lump they came, as well as out of what lump he
himself came. He looked upon them as more pleasing to God then there was cause
for, who little regarded them at the best, but now began to turn much more from
them, finding man so taken with them. My Soul loatheth your solemn Feasts.
Praising God, using the creatures in a way of acknowledging and honoring the
Creator, a set and solemn lifting up of the Name of God, what can carry a
greater show of excellency in it? and yet, oh how God turns from it! My Soul
loatheth your solemn Feasts.

And Ephraim did over do them too, (as man thinks he can never exceed in acts
of worshipping God, especially if they be of his own institution.) Ephraim did
more of these then ever God desired of him; did even tire God out with the
multitude of his Sacrifices and Services. Wherewith shall I come before the
Lord, will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand
Rivers of Oy^, etc. Let God call for never so much, he shall have it. God had
so much of these, he was fain to cry, Hold. To what purpose is the multitude of
your Sacrifices, etc. your new Moons, etc. I am weary of them. Who has
required this at your hands?

2. With his spiritual Privileges; his nearness to God, his Interest in God,
the Testimonies of Gods presence with him, such as the Ark, Temple, etc.

Ephraim did overvalue these too, thought these to be of another nature then
they were, of a more excellent lasting nature. Little thought he that these
could pass away, or be of so little efficacy, as many times they were, while
they remained.

3. With his Security in respect of both. He thought himself seated in
blessedness, and far from misery. The overflowing scourge may overrun the
world, but he thinks himself safe from it: And as for Hell and Death, they may
seize on others, but he is at agreement with them, he is secured from them by
his interest in God, and by the promises of God to him, which cannot fail.

Ah poor Ephraim! what will thou do, when thou shall meet with this Woe? when
thou shall not only find thy glorious beauty a fading, but the Spirit of the
Lord blowing upon it with a strong East wind? when that Spirit that breathed
life into it shall not only withdraw from it, but blow sharply upon it? when
thou find by sensible and undeniable experience that which thou thoughtest
utterly impossible?

Whatsoever is not everlasting may pass away: that which thou call
everlasting may not be so. The narrowness of thy eye may cause thee to take
things to be everlasting, which are far short of it. Things everlasting after
thy measure may be of very short continuance after Gods measure: Look to thy
footing.

PSALM. 60. Verse. 1, 2, 3. O God, thou have cast us off, thou have scattered us,
thou have been displeased, O turn thy self to us again.

Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it: heal the breaches
thereof, for it shakes.

Thou have showed thy people hard things; thou have made us to drink the wine
of astonishment.

Here is the lamentation of Ephraim over his own dead and forlorn state,
wherein he very pathetically deciphers and bewails his misery, and casts an eye
of grief likewise upon the sad distasters that befall the world at the same
time.

The first Verse speaks mournfully of Gods sharp dealings with his people,
expressing withal their affectionate desire to have them changed. O God, thou
have cast us off, etc.

The second Verse holds out his sharp dealings toward the world, with a desire
of relief toward it likewise. Thou have made the earth to tremble, etc.

The third Verse contains a further aggravation of the sharpness of Gods
dealings toward his people, which it sets forth both in general, Thou have
showed thy people hard things; and lays down a particular instance, Thou have
made us to drink the wine of astonishment.

The hard dealings they complain of in the first Verse are three. Thou have
cast us off, thou have scattered or broken us, and thou have been displeased.
Thou have cast us off from thy self, scattered and broken us one from another,
and in our own spirits; and that which is worst of all, thou have suffered
thine heart to be offended against us, thou have been displeased.

Thou have cast us off. This points at the relation and state, which God and
his people stand in one to another, and should of right be found in: which is a
state of union, a state of fellowship, a state of embracement. He the Father,
they the children; He the Husband, they the Spouse; He the Master, they the
Servants; He the King, they his Subjects. They should live in the same Kingdom,
dwell in the same house, sit at the same table, lie in the same bed, have the
same share within, and the same lot without in every thing. Every thing that is
theirs must become his; every thing that is his must become theirs. All their
beauty, their excellency, their glory, must not be to adorn or serve themselves
with; but to adorn him with, to cloth him with, to serve him with. All his
Wisdom, his Excellency, his Power, his Love, his infinite Riches, Greatness and
Majesty, must not be to please himself, but to fill them with, to lay out for
them, to bestow upon them, to empty into them.

When God takes a people, he draws them nigh to himself, opens his bosom to
them, embraces them, pitches his Tabernacle among them to dwell with them,
builds an house for them to live together, erects a bed, prepares a table for
them, feeds, cherishes them, as the man does the wife, the father the child;
stands in their defense against all opposition. Sin within, enemies without,
nothing must speak a word against them: if they do, he takes it as spoken
against himself. He that touches them, touches the apple of his eye. And so
it is with them, The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.
This is the proper state between them.

But now behold, hearken, and you shall hear them complaining, and that to God
himself, O God, thou have cast us off. Thou have thrust us out of thy presence,
Thou have withheld thy sweetness from us. We are not now one, but severed, and
at a great distance one from another. We never meet at the same bed, at the
same board, in the same house, no not in the same Kingdom: but thou thy self
art gone into a far Country, and have left us here in a strange Land.

O God, our happiness lies in thine embraces, in union and communion with thee.
We desire nothing but to be near God, to dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of our lives, to see in the bosom of the Lord all the motions of our
spirits: But O God, thou have cast us off, thou have given us a bill of
divorce, and sent us packing. We can hear no news of thee, no news from thee.
Lie we in never so great depths of misery, and pangs of spirit, thou regardest
not. We are as a woman forsaken, bearing up and down the reproach of our
widowhood continually, O GOD, thou have cast us off.

Thou have scattered or broken us. There should be a public communion among
the people of God. They should have fellowship one with another, as well as
with God. They that are so near in one spirit, should not be such strangers
here in the flesh.

And there should be also a meeting and current of life in every ones
particular spirit. Faith, Love, Hope, Joy, Peace, etc. should meet in the inner
man, and go forth from the inner man into their several ways of spiritual
motion. Thus it is when things are right.

But now, Thou have broken us. Thou have scattered us up and down one from
another. How are the people of God rent in spirit one from another! So
scattered, that they can have no true spiritual communion together! And how
broken and shattered in their own spirits! their life broken, their light
broken, their joy broken, their peace broken, their hope broken, their faith
broken; yea every thing so broken, that there is nothing left whole within
neither. Surely some feel this.

Thou have been displeased. All Relations are knit up of Love. The relation
between King and People, father and child, husband and wife, are knit by
several ways of affections one to another, wherein their hearts stand toward
one another, according to the tie and bond of the Relation. Now in several
cases their hearts turn one from another. They do not only act harshly one
toward another, as it often falls out; but in some cases their hearts turn one
from another.

And this points at somewhat in God, who has so ordered things, that though
the original tie between him and his Spouse be ever the same; yet there are
certain cases, yea, he himself often casts her into such a posture, wherein his
heart turns from her. He can at the same time wonderfully love her, and yet
loath her in her present condition. Though he loves her in her person, yet he
loathes her in her state of weakness and vanity. And though the strength of his
love to her person causes him at sometimes to turn toward her, and entertain
fellowship with her; yet the vileness of her present state soon turns his
stomach, and causes him to withdraw again.

And so the husband likewise is at present in such an unlovely state, so dark,
so hidden, and in that respect so unlovely; his excellencies so clouded, and he
thereby appearing so unlike himself, that the Spirit of the Spouse too turns
from her Husband, and she does not like such a God as he now appears to be.

Now of all things, this is most irksom to each, When they perceive the heart
of either turning from the other. God regards not all the sins of his people.
Let him but find their love flow forth fully toward him, their hearts stand
entirely and only to him-wards, he has enough. Nor do the people of God much
grumble at the afflictions and miseries that befall them from God, they know
they have need of these things. But when they suspect that they take offense at
one another, that their hearts begin to withdraw, then they stir up one
another jealousy. God complains much of his peoples thus provoking him to
jealousy, and likewise speaks of his provoking them to jealousy in the same
manner. And this is that that lies sore here at the Spouses heart, Thou have
been displeased. Sure thou have taken some offense at us; or thou would never
have dealt thus with us.

O turn thy self to us again, Now the Spouse speaks to God, as he does at
another time to her; Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn
again to me, says the Lord. Thou have cast us off, and scattered us, and have
been displeased, O turn thy self to us again, says the Spouse; that will help
all, all the rest will quickly be forgot.

The Church feels her sickness, and knows what will heal her. Her wound, her
misery, came by Gods turning from her, by his turning his back upon her; and
she knows nothing will heal her, but his turning again to her, and that she
calls to him for. She does not pray to have her wounds healed, or to have
comforts or enjoyments from him; but she prays for that which will do all, O
turn thy self to us again. All our content lay in thee, All our trouble arises
from thy absence, from thy turning away and departing from us, O turn to us
again. She prays for healing for the world in the next Verse, Heal the breaches
of it, that will serve their turn: but no healing but the presence of thy self
will serve our turn. If thou intendest any pity, any relief to us, there is no
way but this to bring it home to our hearts, Turn thy self to us again.

There is nothing can thoroughly wound a Soul truly acquainted with God, but his
withdrawing from it: Nor is there any thing can heal that wound, but his return
again. This is all the request such a Soul knows how to put up from the bottom
of his spirit, O turn thy self to us again.

Verse. 2. Thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it: heal the
breaches thereof, for it shakes.

At the same time when God rouls up the Heavens like a Scrole, he kindles a
fire in the bowels of the earth. When he causes the spiritual Beauty, Glory,
Rest and Peace of his own dear people to pass away, the earth must not enjoy
theirs long after. When Christ cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, there was immediately an Earthquake: And when the people of Christ
(who are of the same Body, feel the same things, and cannot but express the
same sense) cry out, O God, thou have cast us off, thou have broken us, thou
have shut up the light of thy countenance (which was ever our life) in the
displeasure of thine heart; the earth shall feel somewhat to complain of too.
When he falls upon all the several parcels of his own holy Land to lay them
flat, he will likewise arise to shake terribly the earth: And he does here so
tear and rent it, that he makes it tremble under sense of what it feels, and of
what it further expects.

But this is no delight to the poor people of God, They desire not to have the
earth share with them in misery. Though the earth has ever delighted to see
them rent and torn, has been still persecuting them, even when God has smitten
them, yea most when they have been most smitten by him; yet they have no
pleasure in the breaches God makes on the earth, but would fain have them
healed, and put up a very affectionate request here for it, Heal the breaches
thereof, for it shakes. It cannot stand long in this posture, visit it betimes
with health, with Salvation. It shakes already, relieve it, rescue it, before
it shake quite in pieces.

Verse. 3. Thou have showed thy people hard things. Thou have dealt very hardly
with thy people: Oh many hard things that we could mention, many bitter, sharp
passages that our spirits have been sensible of. We never looked that God
should have dealt so with us. Who ever would have told us that God would have
dealt so with his people, we should have accounted him an abominable liar. We
looked indeed for hardships in the way, hard graplings with enemies; but we did
not look for such things from him. We thought he would have stood by us, and
have helped us; we did not think that he himself would have wounded us deeper
then any else could. We did not look for such kind of things from thee, O God,
and we cannot but complain of them as hard usage, nay in no wise justifiable
between God and his people, according to the measure that we understood his
Covenant and Promises by.

To give a particular instance of somewhat we have felt, but never could expect
or fear, Thou have made us to drink the wine of astonishment.

Astonishment is an amazedness of spirit: When one knows not what to think,
which way to look, nor what to do; then a person is astonished. Spiritual
astonishment is when the Soul is astonished in and about spiritual things; when
the Soul does not know what to think of any thing that is spiritual. A
spiritual man knows spiritual things: He knows the Father of Spirits, and the
way of a Spirits communion with his Father; the way of the Spirit of Life's
going forth in his own Spirit: He knows God, Christ, Heaven, Hell, Life, Death,
Joy, Peace, etc. Spiritual astonishment is the amazement of the Spirit
concerning these; when the Soul does not know what to think of any spiritual
thing, as of God or Christ, Heaven or Hell, etc. wonders whether there be any
such things or no, wonders whether his knowledge (as he accounted it formerly)
of them was not a mere imagination: wonders at every creature that he sees, at
every thing that he hears, what it is, what it means; is in a condition that he
is amazed how he came into it: finds continual misery and torment attending
him, but cannot tell which way to stir for any relief; can neither tell how to
stir* nor yet how to stand still; cannot tell how to hope, or how to despair;
would fain move some way, but cannot; would fain stand still some where, but
cannot; would fain know, or be quiet under its ignorance, but can find no
bottom to fasten either on. This is spiritual astonishment, true astonishment,
through astonishment. If the Spirit could fix any where on any thing, it were
not perfectly astonished. But when it knows nothing, can own nothing, can turn
from nothing, can turn toward nothing, can move no whither, nor abide any
where, it is confounded to purpose.

That which produces this astonishment is wine, drinking of wine; it is a
drunkenness with wine. A wise man can search through the causes of things, and
is not easily astonished: but if he drink wine hard, it takes away his
understanding from him. The spiritual man is very wise, can search into the
causes of spiritual things, and is not easily confounded at the variety of Gods
ways till he come to drink wine, and that strips him of his understanding
likewise. There is a wine of astonishment, a wine that does naturally produce
this effect, as it was purposely made for this end. A wine there is that God
has made and prepared for the creature to drink, which shall drink up all the
excellency of the creature; which whosoever drinks thoroughly of, will quickly
lose not only all his natural understanding, but all his spiritual
understanding also. Psalm. 75. 8. In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and
the wine is red: it is full of mixture. Red wine, wine mixed* yea thoroughly
mixed* full of mixture; sure it is very intoxicating: very easily may he be
brought into a state of astonishment who drinks such kind of wine.

But how come they to drink this wine? Thou have made us to drink. It was not
their love to the wine, they had no mind to it, they turned from it; but thou
have made us to drink. He pours out of the same, Psalm. 75. 8. The dregs the
wicked shall drink, but, they must drink the top. They must begin to the world,
they must drink the first draught, and be purged of all their earth and filth
first. Judgment must begin at the house of God. Jerusalem must begin the Round
to the rest of the Nations. Though till they come to taste of it, they are apt
to mock at the mention of it, (Isai. 28. 22.) thinking their nearness to God,
and interest in God to be such, that they may laugh at destruction, as
beholding the evil day far from them, and they themselves sufficiently fenced
against its overtaking them: No, it must pass over all. God holds the cup in
his hand* and if they will not drink, he will pour it down their throats; Thou
have made us to drink. Therefore Jerusalem is said to drink it at the hand of
the Lord. Isai. 51. 17. Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which have drunk
at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; thou have drunken the dregs of the
cup of trembling, and wrung them out.

When the Lord is pleased with Jerusalem, he has a cup of sweet wine, a cup of
joy and delight to cheer and refresh the Spirits of Jerusalem. But when the
Lord is angry, he has a cup of astonishment, a cup of trembling, a cup of
confusion, of sleep, of death; all which Jerusalem tastes in it, when she
drinks of it. And Jerusalem cannot choose whether she will dri^k the cup or no,
but must drink it, which have drunk at the hand of ^he Lord. God stands like a
mother that holds a potion of physic in her hand, and will make her child take
it, though sore against the child's mind. Yea some mothers will make their
children drink the very thick of the potion, the bottom of the cup: And poor
Jerusalem must drink the very dregs too, if God will have it so.

O how sweet is God in building up, how terrible in throwing down! How
pleasant, how quickening is the cup of his love; how dreadful, how destroying
is the cup of his wrath! There is none can so much as imagine the power of his
wrath, that have not tasted the power of his love. If Christ and his people had
not felt and known so much sweetness in the Love and Life of God, they could
never have found so much bitterness in the cup of his indignation, in that cup
of death which he prepares to put an end to that kind of life.

The people of God must lose that very life that Christ lost, by that very cup:
We must all taste of his Baptism. O how sweet is that life in its season, how
pleasant is it to thrive and grow in it! Communion with God, The mutual opening
of hearts one to another, The continual meeting every where in everything in
one and the same Spirit, is very ravishing and transporting: But to have this
pass away, or (if the the life of be too strong so to do) to have it killed by
power, by a cup of deadly poison, is so sharp and terrible, that the pangs of
dissolving the body are hardly worthy to be a shadow of it. Yet if any have a
desire beforehand to conceive what it is, such as have tasted of the spiritual
pleasure of this kind of life, may give some guess at it.

This drink is the Woe God administers to expel the former drunkenness by: This
wine, whoever is thoroughly made drunk with, will quickly find all his former
beauty and spiritual glory stained, and his nakedness uncovered by it.

ISAI. 43. Verse. 8. and 21. Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and
the deaf that have ears.

This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.

This is the Issue, the Result of all to Ephraim, though little expected by
him. God liked not his beauty, therefore stained it with his vomiting by the
force of a new kind of wine. But while Ephraim was drunk, had lost his eyes and
his ears, could see nothing of God, could hear nothing of God, God was forming
him anew; and after he has layn long enough in the grave, for his former shape
quite to rot and waste away, he must be brought forth anew to the praise of him
that formed him.

This people have I formed my self: You thought I was destroying this people,
and perhaps they themselves (because of what they felt) thought so too. They
were become the blackest people under Heaven, upon whom the blackness of
darkness seemed to have seized for ever. And indeed I was destroying that
fleshly shape and Image of holiness, wherein they formerly appeared, and which
their spirits too much doted upon; this was I resolved to lay in the dust, and
not leave the least relics of it. They were the most deformed people too,
without eyes, without ears, could hear or see nothing of the greatest danger,
nothing of the greatest good, but all good passes by them, and every snare
takes hold of them. Thus did I deal with them, thus did I undo them; but
withal, I was forming them anew. I was not only destroying the old form, as
men thought, and they thought; but I was likewise introducing a new form, and
that a very excellent one, one for mine own self; not to serve my design upon,
as allshapes I have hitherto cast my people in have been, but for my self to
possess, enjoy, and please my self in for ever. These desolate spirits have I
built into such a Tabernacle, into such a Temple, as shall never be pulled down
again; but here will I dwell for ever, this is the true place of my rest, these
vessels shall indeed hold all my glory. This fabric shall be so perfect, so
fair, so full of lasting beauty, that all that behold it shall not choose but
praise the skill of the workman, who has prepared so fit an habitation for his
own Spirit, and so perfect glory, pleasure and content for his own habitation.

Then shall the blind see, and the deaf hear, when those that now see and hear
may be made blind and deaf.

When the new eye and the new ear is brought forth in new-made Israel, the old
eye and the old ear in old Israel will be out of request.

Amen says my spirit within me; Let old things pass away, and all things
become new. Let the Scheam of this present world, both outward and inward, pass
away, and a new Scheam of both be brought forth. A new light, a new eye; a new
sound of things, a new ear to hear that sound; a new discovery of God, a new
mind to receive that discovery into; a new Heaven, a new Earth, and new
Inhabitants for both; a new Worship, new Worshippers, new wine, new bottles,
all new: and he that is perfectly weary of the old cannot but say Amen with me.
Amen, Halelu-jah.

Cursed be all the idol* gods of the Heathen, but blessed be the living God for
evermore. He shall be God indeed that does these things. Lo this is our God, we
have waited for him, and he will save us, and we will be glad and rejoice in
his Salvation. Amen, Halelu-jah.

Be not offended, We must tune our Harps to the new Song, when once we taste of
the cup of this new Salvation.

ISAI. 65. Verse. 13, 14, 15. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, my
servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink,
but ye shall be thirsty: behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed.

Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow
of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen; for the Lord God
shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name.

O doleful! O Joyful! weeping* wailing, gnashing of teeth in some, joy
unspeakable in others. The Prodigal shall be welcomed home with the fatted
calf, with mirth, music, dancing, which his other brother, through grief and
anguish of spirit, cannot partake of, nay perhaps it may prove the will of the
father not to admit him to this feast, which he makes to welcome home the
unthrift. He will fill the hungry with good things, but the rich will he send
empty away.

Yea, the Lord God will slay thee. Thou have a name now that thou live,
though thou art dead, but the Lord will kill that appearance of life in thee
wherewith now thou flourishest, and cast thy name out for dead. That name thou
now have shall rot and dye, and be no more accounted for a living name: He will
call his people no more after that name, but he will have a new name (which the
Mouth of the Lord shall name) to write in the foreheads of his servants, and to
call them by.

ISAI. 35. Verse. 5, 6, 7. Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.

Then shall the lame man leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for
in the Wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert.

And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of
water.

Then the Wilderness shall become a fruitful field, and the fruitful field
shall be counted for a Forest, Chap. 32. 15. And there will be great joy and
singing among the blind, the deaf, the lame, and the dumb, when they shall all
be perfectly healed; when the barren parched ground shall abound with that water
which it thirsted after, and grew so heartless and barren for want of.

EZEKIEL. 17. Verse. 22, 23, 24. Thus says the Lord God, I will also take of the
highest branch of the high Cedar, and will set it, I will crop off from the top
of his young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high Mountain and
eminent.

In the Mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring
forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly Cedar, and under it shall dwell
all fowl of every wing: in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down
the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and
have made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have spoken, and have done it.

Then said I, When, when! O Lord God, how long! Thou have a long time holden
thy peace. Awake, awake, put on strength, O Arm of the Lord. Uncloath thine Arm
of flesh, and cloth it with strength, if thou meanest to do these things.
Sleep no longer under the vail of flesh, but rent it from the top to the
bottom, and come forth in thine own likeness; and so soon as we see this in
this Equipage, we will sing and shout, Hosanna in the highest: Blessed be he
who is, and was, and is no longer a coming, but come. Even so, Amen.

FINIS.

