THE PENNY POST of LONDON.
FOR the Accommodation of all that Correspond with any Persons in LONDON, a
Contrivance is set on foot in that City, for Conveyance of Letters, etc.
Called, THE PENNY POST.

Mr. Dockwra and Partners, the Undertakers of that Design, having appointed
Messengers (who have given Security for their faithful performance) to attend
daily from Seven of the Clock in the Morning, till Ten at Night, in all parts
in and about the Town, for Conveying any Letters or Parcels, not exceeding a
Pound weight (or Ten Pounds in value) from one place to another, be it farther
or nearer, in any parts of London, Westminster, Southwark, and parts adjoining,
as the person that sends them shall direct; and this to be done for One Penny
each Letter or Parcel, to be paid by the party that sends; and nothing will be
demanded or taken (if offered) by the Messenger at the Delivery thereof.

Now though the Limits of this Conveyance by The Penny Post of London extend no
farther than in and about that City, yet the Usefulness of it is unlimited and
infinitely extensive. For as Negotiation and Commerce from all parts of the
World centers in London, so not a Dealer or any other Person, either in any
part of England or the World in general, that send Letters to London, either by
Land or Water, but may be accommodated by The Penny Post: For when Letters are
brought to London from such remote places as have no convenience of sending by
the General Post, there often happens either far greater trouble of charge in
conveying them from one part of London to the other; that is, from the hand
that brings them to Town, to the person to whom they are directed, then there
was in conveying them from the remotest part of the Kingdom to London; which
inconvenience the said Penny Post remedies, by handing them safe for One Penny
a piece, as aforesaid.

To reduce it to practice, Any person that would send a Letter by a Friend to
London, must send a Penny with it to pay the Penny Post; and likewise if more
than one, then as many Letters, so many Pence must also be sent for the same
end. And the Letters and Money must be wrapped up together in one Cover, fast
sealed and directed to Mr. William Dockwra and the rest of the Undertakers of
the Penny Post. And being so directed, will be taken in free at any Penny Post
House of London without any thing demanded. There being many Hundreds of Penny
Post Houses in and about the City, so dispersed in all parts, that there is one
still ready at hand in every part of the Town, well-known to the Neighborhood,
to accommodate all that have occasion; from whence the Letters are immediately
conveyed away as directed.

All Persons are to write such plain and full Directions, of Sign, Trade, and
Place, whereby their Friends may readily be found. And to take notice, If they
do not send a Penny enclosed, their Letter will lie undelivered.

London, Printed by Tho. James at the Printing-press in Mincing-lane. 1682.


