Frindly and Faithful ADMONITIONS BEING Some quickening motives to raise sinking
Sinners, From the sleep of sun that every man may be made Perfect in Jesus
Christ.

Being a Farewell SERMON Preached by Mr. WILLIAM PEN To his Congregation on
Sunday being the 6th of August at the Quakers Meeting-hous^ in Westminster.

London Printed and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster,

A Farewell SERMON William Pen.
On Sunday being the 6th. instant at the QVAKERS MEETING-HOVSE at Westminster.
Friends: Take heed that ye observe good Counsel, and let not the Light depart
from ye: Yea, Let the Wonderful Counselor be your Guide.
Licensed According to Order.

^T was the Blessed Encouragement that our Lord Jesus Christ gave to ^^s
Disciples, and all his Followers when he took on him the Nature of Man, and was
made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us (...) and therein to all the Sons and
Daughters of men, who should follow him through the many and great Tribulations
and give up their Names and Hearts to him, to be Witnesses of his Truth, and of
that Holy Testimony which he should communicate to them near his Farewell, and a
little before his being offered up, Let not your Hearts be Troubled, ^^t
believe in God, believe also in me: In my Fathers House are many Mansions, if
it were not so, I would have told you; I g^ to prepare a place for you, and I
will com^ again and Receive you unto my self, tha^ where I am, there you may be
also.

Now my Friends, These Mansion they are the Recompenses of Rewa^^ that are set
in the View of the Righteous, and promised of God b^ Christ Jesus. These many
Mansions are the manifold Rewards, Diversities of Rewards that Refer to the
Diversity of States and Conditions, and Persons, unto whom these many Mansions
do belong, As all are not of the same statute and grows neither are all these
Mansions of the same degree of Glory and Felicity.

There is one Glory of the Son, another Glory of the Moon, anothe, Glory of the
Stars; for one Star Differs from another Star in Glory, yet all these Stars
shine with a lusture and Glory, and the least S^^r has a Beauty and Excellency
i^ it and so the least of these many Mansions have a Mavelous light and Glory
in it. This refers to the state of every Man and Woman here below. All Members
are not the Hand, all are not the Head, but every member of the Body has its
Service,) and will have its Reward.

This is that which did Spring in my Soul this Evening, as I sat here among
you. O that all here present: may* become the living Members of Christ Jesus
our Blessed Head, and live the Life they live in the Body, By the Faith of the
Son of God. -- He that made us, knows our Frame; He that created us and formed
and fashioned us after his own Image, and gave us Powers and Faculties to
gloryfie and serve him, that we may come to enjoy him for ever he requires of
to man or Woman more then he has given them power and Abili^y to perform.

It concerns us all therefore to live in the Exercise of that Divine Gift,
and Grace, and Ability, which our Lord Jes s Christ has Distribu^ed and
Communicated to every Member of his body, that we may come to shine as Stars in
the Firmament of Glory. -- We should do good in several Places and stations,
according to our Differnt Powers and Capacities* And as every member is by the
Circulation of Blood, made useful and Beneficial in the Natural Body, so the
Divine Life and Blood of the son of God Circulates through his whole Mystical
Body, and teaches Life to every living member. Here is no Obstruction through
Unfaithfulness, or Inordinate love of the World, or any Temptation from
without us, or Corruption from within us. Here is a free Channel, here is an
open Passage for Life and quickening influences from Christ our Glorious Head,
to all his Members.

There is in Christ (in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily A River,
whose Streams make glad the City of God: A Fountain to Supply and refresh the
whole Generation of the Righteous, that desire to be found in him as the
Apostles speaks not having their own Righteousness; but Clothed with the Robe
of his Righteousness, which is the Garment of SALVATION Therefore VVait this
Day, My Dear Friends, to have your hearts fill^d with the Love and Life of the
Son of God that you may appear with Joy at his Tribunal, mankind must appear;
and every one give an Account of what he has done in the body, whether it be
good or evil. Let every one of you be careful to live according to what you
know and improve the TALLENTS that God has given you, and you shall find that
in keeping his Commandments there is a great Reward, and that God is good to
Israel to them that are of a Clean Heart Had not the Lord been on our side may
Israel, say had not the Lord been on our side when Men rose up against us, may
we say, they had swallowed us up and the Temptations of the Devil would have
prevailed over us, and we had fallen long ago; It is not we that have stood
firm in times of trial and trouble, but it is the Lord that has stood by us
and made us to stand: And the love of God to his People now, is as great as
ever it was: His Arm is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his Ear heavy
that it cannot hear; Therefore Travel on and Faint not, and you shall come with
Joy to the end of your JOURNEY, and you shall be satisfied with the Fatness of
God's HOUSE, and say with the Psalmist, Blessed are they that dwell i^ thy
HOUSE, they shall be still praising thee. It is the Faithful and sincere that
shall dwell in the HOUSE of the LORD for eve^ and enter into his everlasting
Kingdom. O My Friends, Live as a People bowed down in the presenc^ the of Great
and Holy GOD and wal^ Humbly with him; Be humble under his mighty Hand, and you
shall be exalted in due time.

The God of Heaven has Visited your Souls with his Divine Power and Grace and
given you a refreshing Sense, of his Love, that you may perceive and feel a
Daily Renewing of your strength. O Wai^ upon the Lord for his Divine Power to
enable you to Conquer the Power of Satan, that you may go on Conquering and to
Conquer. till you come to the New JERUSALEM the CITY of GOD and Land of Peace
and Rest.

Beware of IDOLATRY! Bow not down to the work of your own Hands: For though you
may not be Guilty of Gross IDOLATRY, yet there is a secret, and more hidden
IDOLATRY, that too, many are Guillty of. Who set their Hearts and Affections on
low and Earthly things: This sticks but too near to many. Let the Word of
Exhortation of the Apostle enter into your Hearts: Little Children keep your
Selves from IDOLS Let thi^ be the Cry of your SOULS, Lord Preserve and keep me
this Day ^very Day and to the end of my Days, that I may be not only Convinced
of the Truth, but really Converted to it, and Walk in thy Truth, and Perserve
therein to the end, that I may be saved. remember Lots WIFE; Look not back to
SODOM; Wall in in Lights as Children of Light wi^^ your Faces Sion-ward; and
rejoyc^ in hope of Glory of God. Ye were some time in Darkness, but now says
the Apostle Ye are Light in the Lord O Shine as Stars in the midst of a Crooked
Perverse generation, Shin^ in the Beauties of holiness, and Walk in the Light
of Christ, the Sun of righteousness, who was given for (...) light to lighten
the Gentiles, and to be the glory of his People Israel he shall be the Desire
of all Nations; the mighty Savior upon whom God has laid help: Believe in
him, cleave to him, and follow him, and you shall be Saved both from your Sins,
and from the Wrath to come. God is Light (says the Apostle JOHN in him is no
Darkness at all; If we Walk in the Light as he is in the Light then we shall
have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his son
Cleanses us from all sin, We know him to be the true rock and Foundation of
God, which ^^andeth Sure, and which will stand ^^re in stormy and Tempesteous
times Blessed are they that Build upon this Foundation which God has laid.

Blessed be God, who has Opened your Eyes and given you to see this sure
Foundation; which we must build all our hopes of salvation upon and not upon
any other Foundation whatsoever

We that are made Living Witnesses of the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of
God let us sink down into Self-Abasement and humility and we shall feel the
Living openings of the Spirit of Truth in our hearts, and receive with Meekness
that ingrafted Word, in which is light, and life, that is able to save our
Souls, and submit to the Authority of God therein; That the word of Christ may
dwell richly in us, and become the Power of God to our Salvation.

Now the God of Peace which brou^^^ again from the Dead our lord Jesus Chr^^^
the Great Shepherd of Sheep through (...) Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
m^^ you perfect in every Good Work, to do (...) Will, Working in you that which
is (...) pleasing in his sight to whom be Glory prais^ and Thanksgiving, who
alone is Worthy who is God over all, Blessed for ever an^ ever, Amen.

FINIS.

