To the ARMY.
Friends,
DO ye not see how often ye have been betrayed? The Lord has done great things
for you, and by you, and put great opportunities into your hands; but still
they have been lost, his work fallen to the ground, and his name become a
reproach over all the earth, through your means. O be abased before the Lord,
and lie very low, and consider how justly he may lay you aside from being his
instruments, in that great and glorious work he has to bring to pass. If ye
desire to stand, look up to the Lord to keep your Spirits very low, and poor,
and meek, and ready to hear. O wait to know what has betrayed you hitherto!
for assuredly that lies in wait to betray you again: and if the Lord mightily
preserve you not from it, will make you forget him, and cause you to mind and
seek your selves afresh, so soon as ever your fears are over. Therefore in the
day of your prosperity the Lord watch over you, and keep you close to the
stirrings and honest movings for public good, that have sprung up in your
hearts in the days of your adversity: and take heed, lest the subtilty in the
wise fleshly-reasoning part deceive you. But fear the Lord in your reasonings,
and beg earnestly of him to keep the simplicity alive in you, that the fleshly
wisdom get not mastery over it. For the evil counselor is near you, even in
your own bosoms, and he lies lurking in plausible, and fair-seeming
reasonings. Therefore keep close to the simplicity, and let your reasonings be
servants to it, and not Masters over it. Ah remember how often ye have started
aside like a warping bow: become now at lengtht uprigh to the Lord, carrying
faithfully to the mark those his arrows, which he is shooting at the Regions of
Babylon.

This is from one who waits for what the Lord will effect, and hopes at length
to see an instrument in his hand, wherein his Soul will delight. Isaac
Penington, the Younger.


