AN Historical and Geographical DESCRIPTION OF THE Great Country and River OF
THE AMAZONES IN AMERICA.

Drawn out of diverse Authors, and reduced into a better form; with a Mapp of
the River, and of its Provinces, being that place which Sr Walter Rawleigh
intended to conquer and plant, when he made his Voyage to Guianu.

Written in French by the Count of Pagan, and dedicated to Cardinal Mazarine,
in order to a Conquest by the Cardinals motion to be undertaken.

And now translated into English by William Hamilton, and humbly offered to his
Majesty, as worthy his Consideration.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleet Street near
Temple-Barre, 1660.

TO THE Imperial Majesty OF CHARLES II of Great-Brittain, France, and Ireland;
Defender of the Faith of Protestants, and of Protestants themselves by his
Title of signal providence; Happiness, Victories, Triumphs.
Gracious Sir,
NOt only freewill-offerings and gifts were acceptable to God, though they had
a member, or members superfluous, or were deficient in some, and so had much
imperfection, so it were not of the nature of unsincerity, in which respect
they behoved to be without blemish; (Levit. 22.23.) but in trespass-offerings
also, which were commanded and not left free, if the Party was poor, not only a
single Turtle, or young Pigeon was accepted (for the other was for an
Holocaust) but a single meat offering, a very little Flower or Meal, and a
little Salt to it, were accepted for both Holocaust and trepass offering under
one: (Lev. 5.7.) which being doubtlesly in use from Noah's time, or Adams
rather, as elsewhere I hope to make it appear, gave as undoubtedly the
beginning to that practice and proverb among the Heathens (Heathenism being but
an inveterate corruption of heresy and schism from the Religion delivered by
God to Adam, and Noah, as shall also God willing be made appea^) mola salsa
litant, qui non habent thura; such may acceptably sacrifice to God with meal
and salt, who have not frankincense. The like debonnairety to accept of mean
gifts from good minds, has also been annumerated to the heroic indowments of
the greatest Kings. Thus Artaxerxes disdained not a pitcher of water from a
Paisant. And Plutarch in his Apophthegms shows by one of them, the property of
a royal disposition to have been esteemed this; Non minus est regium parvula
accipere, quam largiri magna, It is no less Kingly to accept of little things,
than freely to bestow great matters.

And this, Royal Sir, is my humble request to your saered Majesty at this
time; That you will graciously accept a mean gift from a mean giver, and by
your royal return of justice and bounty to enable me to serve God, and your
Majesty with better; God himself inviting you thereto by his example, who
allowed even of poor freewillofferings, made to him of purpose, to obtain his
bountiful returns of some eminent benefits or favors. And yet a mean gift,
Sir, I call this of mine, not that the work it self should be so accounted, but
my work about it; which is but a Translation. For the Book though in bulk but
small, in its concernments is very rich; and, as highly commendable in it self,
so not much less in the Author. In its natural language it made its first
address to Cardinal Mazarine, in order to have set his Majesty of France on
conquest of the great Kingdom of the Amazone to himself. But having these five
years at least, that now it has been abroad, not made use of it that way, it
comes now by me to beg your Majesty's favorable acceptance, in hope of that
large retribution to your self, when your Majesty shall think fit to apply your
thoughts to it, for which it was intended to another. It was by an old servant
of your Majesty's Royal Fathers, and Gandfathers, I. L. D. brought over, and
communicate to one of your Majesty's most expert Seamen, C. W. who from his
youth up, and often times since, has been in, and knows perfectly all the
coasts of the Southern America. Both these are very confident, at least wish
heartily, and my self with the like affection do now humbly present it also,
That your Majesty would so consider of that great Empire, as if it were already
your own; as it may be with much ease, if your applications be seasonable, and
suitable to its worth. For it is possessed by the barbarous Natives only, except
in two Skirts; Brasile on the East, where the Portuguaise pitched; and Peru
upon the West, where the Spaniard is divided from the Inland by the tract of
the Andes, or Cordeliere hills: but in the Peninsular great continent your
Majesty may dress an Empire of near nine thousand miles in circuit, of the
pleasantest, fertilest, and richest continent in the world, whether for air,
waters, or soil; to which no Prince can pretend, much less lay a claim. For the
discoveries of that River by the Portugaise, and Spaniards, were more to
satisfy their curiosity, than that they could then hope for a conquest. And
the Natives not only in their forlorn condition, but by singular junctures of
providence, call for the Christian Religion from us, while others cease from
that duty, as the man of Macedon did Paul to help them while he was hindered to
go into Bithynia, Act. 16.7, 9, 10. and others have been hindered hitherto to go
to them for such end; but they may also easily be made to receive your
Majesty's Government with friendship, if wisely dealt with. For while neither
Portugal, nor Spain, nor France pursued the design here offered, God in in his
providence amidst, your Majesty's and your good Subjects troubles, seems not
obscurely to have been designing this for you, and your Britain; as may be
hoped from ancient prediction, not liable to exception from the solidest and
soberest wits (as at another occasion I may fullier clear, if your Majesty
command it) and so much the more, as his providence has prevented your
projecting, having already made way and brought to pass for your Majesty's
interest an opportune and considerable Colonie, by that noble Lord Willoughbee
of Parham, to his great travels, hazards, and vast expenses; both seeming to
concur with the foresaid prediction, and to point out your Majesty for the
layer of such a foundation both to Christ, and your self.

The Author of this work is a French Earl of a most ancient Nobility and
descent from those famous and honorable Commanders in the holy Wars, who for
their wise conduct and rare valor were employed in places of great trust, and
transmitted them with the Coat of arms and name of Pagan, (which was the badge
of their great exploits in mating and killing the Pagans, or Infidels) to their
suecessors of the same name and family, as the Author himself shows at large
in the Dedication of his rare Book of Fortifications, to another noble branch
of the same family: of whose rare accomplishments for gentile and manly
learning, and Soldiery, lest I should here presume too much upon your
Majesty's patience, I shall leave further account of him to my Epistle to the
Reader, and only present your Majesty with the sum of what he says to the
Cardinal about the conquest; and that is; That it will neither be hard nor
expensive, as neither needing great Armies, to give battles; nor great
provision of Artillery, for carrying on of sieges. There is need only of
preparations fitting for planting of five Colonies at the first aboard. The
first whereof is to be in the Isle of the Sun, for guarding the best entry
into the great Rivers mouth. The second on the famous Bosphore or Strait
thereof, to defend, or keep this Rivers passage. The third on the renowned
point of the Comanares, for the best seat of that whole Empire. The fourth near
to the mountain of Swana, whereby to be master of the goldmine there. And the
fifth and last on the mouth of the River of Maragnon, to watch over the
Frontier of that side of the Andes. And in favors of such a first
establishment, there might easily be added the alliances of the Illustrious and
renowned Nations of the Homagues, of the generous and noble Yorimans, of the
valiant and redoubted Topinambes; and order given for a Fleet-volant of about
twelve men of War, continually to be visiting, and going between these
Colonies: because the distance by sailing, of the farthest of them from the
others, will be at the least a thousand Spanish leagues and always upon the
channel of the great Amazone it self. Thus he.

I call my gift also, a mean gift from a mean giver; not that I was, or am so
mean in my self, as made so by the late troubles, and troublers of the times.
For, Royal Sir, my Father Sir Robert Hamilton of Goswick, was Gentleman of the
Privy-Chamber both to your Royal Father and Grandfather; and my Mother was by
King James himself preferred to his Queen, for one of her Maids of honor, and
afterward also by himself bestowed in marriage upon Sir Hadrian Dammane, Lord
Bisterveldt and Fair-hill; after whose decease my Father married her. My
Father, and any estate I should have had by him, I lost through the troubles of
the times; and have wanted them now these seventeen years; for reparation
whereof, and coming hither to wait for it, I left one place of considerable
value in Scotland, and spent here in three years attendance for reparation,
what I could then bring with me; and then embracing another place here in
England, not much worse than the former, was not only again put from it, before
I had enjoyed it full two years to an end, for keeping my fidelity to your
Majesty in refusing to subscribe an engagement, or allegiance (for so it was
indeed, whatever they called it) to another Sovereignty; but suffered also four
or five years banishment, to the almost irreparable detriment of my health and
estate both; yea, and refused all preferments from the usurpers, and the least
compliances with them, both before my banishment, and now for seven years
after, though I was wooed thereto, and might have got considerable advancement
with ease, could I have embraced it with compliance; but would never so much as
commence suit under them; though but for recovering some debts, or defending my
self from others unjust pursuits. And that these losses, Sir, wherein consisted
all my estate, and that a considerable one too, when your Majesty shall know
the particulars, should make me poor, is little wonder; and that poverty
through its disadvantages, and my former disparity of life, should ruin my
health, is as little wonder; and that all the disadvantages, that a ruined
health, and poverty can bring a man to, should disable me to do such thing as
otherwise I could, and would have done, to present your Majesty with, is yet as
little strange, as the former: but that I should yet be alive, poor as I am, to
offer this poor gift unto your Majesty, that is the wonder. And indeed it is
Gods good hand toward me, whom I hope he has reserved for doing himself, and
your Majesty some greater service, before I be called hence. For, Royal Sir,
God has not made me so poor in gifts of mind, (of which as I may not brag,
but by glorying in him, and in my infirmities or sufferings for him; so may I
not ungratefully conceal, lessen, or undervalue to his dishonor, what they
are, but with modesty confess, when just occasion flagitates and extorts it
from me) through his blessing, if your Majesty will but patronize me (I shall
not say Mecaenas- like; for that is too little for you, though it was truly
said of him, Mecaenas atavis edite regibus! but Angustus like rather, beyond
whom himself your Majesty is in this also, that you can number more Kings of
your Progenitors, than were in all the Roman race of Kings, and Emperors both,
either before, or after Augustus to this day) I hope to honor your Majesty
with such gifts of mine own store, as never a King in Christendom for these
sixteen hundred years, ever had Subject, that did the like, though many have
attempted, absint and jactantia, and invidia verbo: but your Majesty must
midwife them, and my self both into the world again, and then by Gods
assistance shall I renew my strength and youth, as the Eagle, and sublimi
feriam sidera vertice.

If here it be wondered, that thus I implore your Majesty's justice and favor,
and made not rather a privater address, for repairing of my losses; I shall
humbly and truly profess, that I have not left privater ways unattempted; but
find all so obstructed with difficulties, and non-considerancies, or cold
layings to heart of my case, that neither the health of my body, nor the
strength of my purse would suffer me to hope for much good otherwise, and from
Courtiers, than thus by ushering in my Petition; and then I hope more
seasonably, and succesfully to reap the fruits of a privater application. I
thought often of that course, that the poor Widow took with Philip of Macedon,
the Father of Alexander the Great: who when she had attempted by Courtiers, and
Favorites to get justice done her, but could not prevail with them to prefer
her business to the King; resolved to attaque him her self, the best she could,
come of it what would; though of him at worst, she hoped much better, than of
any of his Courtiers, as I also do of your Majesty now. Casting her self
therefore in his way, when she knew, he was to ride out, with high
vociferations she cried after him, Help my Lord, O King; help O King! He
commanding to stand, and see what ailed her; she desired him to read and answer
her Petition with justice. He answering that it was unfit then, and that he had
not leisure for it; she replied upon him boldly, That then he should not be at
leisure to be King, if he could not have leisure to right his meanest Subjects,
when all their patience and endeavors were otherwise frustrate and wearied
out. Upon which he was so far from being dissatisfied with her, that rather
admiring her resolution, he most generously and heroickly gave her a present
hearing, and full right of her wrong. Sir, my way is not so course, as hers
was, but by a gift (which both with God, and all noblest spirits among men,
finds acceptance) though but a poor onee, to have the softer access to your
Majesty's favor, and a cordialler consideration of my case, when it comes to
your Majesty in a more particular way; and an easier grant of privacy for
immediate imparting your Majesty with some things, which is more for your
Majesty's good, than for my particular. Thus wise Abigail not only pacified
David toward an unthankefull and churlish Nabal, but made way for her self for
such a surplussage of favor, as she little dreamed of, to become a Kings wife,
and royal bedfellow, and her issue preferred in the entail of the Crowr, before
all other of David's children, except Bathshebaes. It is re ported of Alexander
Severus, the Emperor, bAelius Lampridius in his life, that be quarrelledy with
every virtuous person, that be knew, who either asked nothing of him, or but
little. Quid est (inquit) quod nihil petis? An me vis tibi fieri debitorem? Why
ask you nothing of me? Would you have me to die in your debt? Sir, lest I
presume too much upon your Majesty's great affairs, in exceeding the bounds of
an Epistle to so great a Prince, for the length whereof already I humbly beg
pardon, my hopes and desires are that you shall not come short of any of those
Worthies, or of the most heroic Princes, but surmount them all, in all royal
endowments, to your becoming the Crown and rejoicing of all the reformed, in
prosecuting their interest, which is Gods, and becoming their uniter and head,
that you may be Carolo magno major, as undoubtedly you will, if thus you do:
and which that you may do, Long may your Majesty live in all piety, plenty, and
peace; or else just and happy triumphs here; and hereafter in the joys and
triumphs of heaven, where there is nothing but glory, triumphs, and joy without
end. So prays

Your Majesty's most humble, loyal, and faithful Subject and Servant, William
Hamilton.

TO THE Courteous and Candid READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Must give thee some more account of the Author of this Book, and of its
worth, and of my self, his Translatour, and so bid thee farewell. About the
Author, I shall not repeat, what has been said of him before, in my Dedication
to his Majesty for his just commendation, and of this Book of his in
particular, but refer thee thither, if thou art desirous to know it. I shall
here only add, That he was in great employment and favor with the late King
of France, Lewis the thirteenth, for his great parts of conduct and valor in
his service; wherein unfortunately he received a shot of a Pistol in the left
eye, whereby it was quite lost, and the conjugation of the optic nerves so
crushed, that he has lost the use of both now above these twenty years: yet,
which is wonderful, is still penning new Books, and in Mathematics
especially, which indeed needs least the outward sense; amongst which is that
masterpiece, The ten Books of Geometrical Theorems, wherein he completed and
demonstrated so many diverse, and distinct parts of Mathematical Sciences. His
Book of the theory of Planets is Geometrically demonstrated, without any
mixture of Physical equations, by which Reignoldus and Kepler labored so much
to perfect the Geometrical, wherein their deferents, and Epicicles could not
serve their turn. But this Gentleman has found out both the center of the
Planets, and demonstrated their motions to be ellipticall, which no man before
him could attain to. And in consequence to his theory, he published
Astronomicall tables two years ago, wherein with great facility and exactness,
the motions of all the Planets may be supputate, the Eclipses of the two great
luminaries, and the celestial configurations: and in consequence to them, a
facile method of finding out the true longitudes, both by sea, and land. His
more than ordinary skill in Geography, may be seen by his two Advertisements to
Geographers, at the end of this Book, and by the Book it self: wherein with
great judgment and brevity he has given an excellent, and the clearcst
description of a great part of America, that any where is to be had: he having
collected this out of all the best relations, and discoveries, that were
extant; and corrected their errors, adding a Mapp of his own. All which his
Pieces here mentioned, and in my Dedication to his Majesty shall be by me made
English Denizens, if this be well accepted, and the other required. The Books
are not here to be had for money, but from such, as himself gifted them to;
amongst whom is an old servant of his Majesty's, my L. D. from whom this Book
came, and who still keeps a correspondence with him, and is gifted with every
Piece, that be publishes. The Author is still a privy Counselor to his now
Majesty of France; and as his naturals appear to have been great, so also they
have been much adorned, and elevated by his Gentlemanny learning, which he has
industriously followed; and consists in these days (the greater the fault of
Pedants, that make any learning ungentile; as indeed none is where it has a
gentile client) chiefly in Politics, and History, and Mathematics with their
appendants, as conducible to a Gentleman, and a Soldier: and after he was
disabled from Field-action, by the loss of his sight, some theoreticaller
Mathematics also. This is not rare in France, That Grandees there are well
versed in such studies, as by Duke de Rohanes Interest of Princes, and Perfect
Captain, and many other French Gentlemen's Pieces of a like nature, may
appear. And it were to be wished. That elsewhere also, Grandees and Gentry were
both as well trained up, and had as good opportunity of such peculiar
Academies, where all gentile, and Souldierly exercises, and requisites for
conduct and command, are taught, as the French have; and the Prince of Orange,
to his immortal praise (himself having been bred in the Academy of Benjamin in
Paris, where I my self saw him at his exercises) to the Weal of his Country,
and from his own estate, was going to enrich the confederate Provinces; that as
they were before a School of War, for experience and practice, especially
about sieges, and taking in of Towns; so they might be for breeding also to
field-services, and all warlike achievements.

Yet the French are so far from envying others, that attain to any perfection
in these things, otherwise, or elsewhere, that there is no where readier
preferment for their merits, or more honor done to such, as I could instance
of late memory; which is truly noble. For there is a money-nobility, or Gentry,
that is now crepe into the world, through abuse, and pesters it with many
inconveniences, having nothing of the thing, but the name only, and empty
titles; nor of that connection of virtues, and with virtue, without which true
Gentry, or Nobility cannot be, nor subsist, had it never so much riches,
antiquity of descent, or windy titles from Prince or State. For true Gentry is
virtus generis, virtue running in a blood, and either increasing, or descending
in a race, or breed. It Is (...) i. e. generosity, or an excellency of a
kindred, or family, but sustained, or increased still with virtue suitable to
its beginning, or first advancement. Nobilitas sola est, atq: unica virtus. All
mankind was made of one blood, and all Nations of men, that dwell upon all the
face of the earth, Act. 17.26. (there were no Praeadamites, as brainsick
Pierrier dreamed) to whom God determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitations; so as none, either men, or Nations, can claim
truly any prerogative of nobleness, but by their virtue, as the Bereans are
witnessed to have been more noble, than the Jews of Thessalonica, for their
unprejudicateness and candor, by Gods own unerring Spirit, because they
unpartially examined, what was proposed to them, and held not the truth of God,
With acception of persons, Act. 17.11. All were certainly noble at first, and
had ever continued so, had it not been for sin, because all were the offspring
of God, Act. 27.28, 29. And God begot, or made no ignoble children, as the
Greeks and French use to phrase it. Sin only brought in ignobleness then, and
degeneracy, as virtue only makes and maintains the contrary: what for virtue
natural (let not Sciolists here mistake me; for virtue natural rightly
expounded, is no ways contrary to sound Divinity) what for acquired; what for
intellectual; what for moral; what for hereditary and transmitted by descent
(which is all one with natural; there being igniculi; and semina virtutum in
nature, which are called natural or hereditary virtues, as well as there is in
sicknesses, and soundness of health) it is only virtue still, that makes true
gentry, or generosity, and keeps it afoot. Est in equis patrum virtus, nec
imbelles and degeneres procreant aquilam columbae. The ground of generosity,
whence other gentry regularly proceeds, I mean that of pre-eminence in offices,
or power, whether Oeconomick, or Civil; where unto I must not now enlarge my
self, to speak in particular) Jacob in his testament to his sons, does both
philosophically and divinely set down, to wit, the impregnation of nature, and
elevating of the fancy and spirits, to the highest and noblest thoughts, and
inclinations, that ones condition, and way of breeding can suffer them to mount
up to; which God himself also teaches in another place, when he says, that he
would rejoice over Israel, as a bridegroom rejoices over his bride. For then
is that special time of loves, Ezekiel. 16.8. (not romantic only, much sinfully
such, as most romances are wicked, and have death in the pot, but common and
natural, especially to common men; though wise men, that under stand nature,
and can govern her, may both inhance that without sin, and make other times
equal, if not go beyond it) and love is the seminary of all nobleness, and
productive of all virtue, and virtuous emulation to virtuous actions, and
growth therein; as hatred and envy are of the contrary; witness that example
Act. 17 5, 6, 7, 11, 12. And it must needs be so, seeing conjugall love was the
first measure, and fountain of all neighbourly love, and neighbourly love is
the fulfilling of the Law; as the first sum of the second Table, or thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and do to others as thou would be done
to; was virtually included in that divinely inspired sentence of Adams; This is
now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh: according to that pronounced of all
poor, though never so great strangers; Hide not thy self from thy own flesh.
Primogeniture then and nobleness were divinely and naturally both supposed to
be conjunct, and consequent one to the other, because there the might of the
parents, and beginning or flowr of their strength, both as to body and mind
were put forth in point of affection, and affections are the seats of virtues:
and therefore also to primogeniture was given the excellency of dignity, and
the excellency of power, i.e. the preeminence and precedence before others,
both of merit, and of office; or of nobility and high places of trust, whether
in Church, or State-relation, and much more in Oeconomick: yet so, as it was
always forfeitable by vice, and devolvable to others more virtuous, as by
Cain, Ishmael, Esau, Reuben and many more, is manifest. But want of breeding to
noble thoughts, and ends; and instruction to inure to chaste and continent love,
and not to deflore so much as their fancies, before the due and lawful time;
abuse also of marriage to base ends and by-respects, especially of money; and
imprudent choices in sundry other respects, grown common with prodigality,
luxury, and many other vices, have in these Countries and times flatted and
unspirited all natural nobleness and generosity either into a soft effeminacy,
or sour vinegar of pride, and vanity, imbittered with the gall of many other
vices, instead of the generous wine, they came of. And where natural gentry, or
generosity is not, seldom is the other of moral and acquired to be found; and
so we are left to empty names of civil tities entailed upon riches and
descent, by creation, or patent. Certainly there is a wisdom, if we studied it
as well, as some do the other, of having a noble breed of men and women, as
well as there is of Horses, Cocks, and Cattle. None will think
dunghill-Cockrell, fit for game; nor a jadish race for the services of a
gallant Jennet: and yet we think any thing fit enough for our Progenie's, that
has but money enough. High birth and fortunes, are in themselves, both of
them, the good blessings of God, and are in honor with all persons of honor,
where ever they are, or have been in any, that have suitable virtues, but have
parted with fortunes for virtues sake. But for a Gentleman whose fortunes are
become unsuitable to his rank, whether by his own fault, or others, or by
neither, but by wrong, or misfortune, for reparation of an estate, so far to
forget himself, as to make money his leading motive in a choice, is ignoble
enough, and ungenerous, and can hardly expect better fruits of his way. We
know, he was a wise man, that said, Blessed art thou, O land, when thy King is
the son of nobles! Eccles. 10.7. And he that said, Nam genus, and proavos, and
quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco, in opposition to too much standing
on, or vaunting of descent without competent virtue and wisdom to correspond
with it; said also, Et Mi genus ab Jove summo, to show his esteem of descent;
and with virtue answerable; especially of such a descent, as claimed to the
best, that could be reckoned to. He that would be ashamed to claim so
honorable a privilege, if he can do it truly, and has just occasion and
circumstances to extort it from him, would show but himself too modest at best,
and almost unworthy of it, especially if he had a better Jupiter in place to
make both his address and claim to, than the other had. For as low as my
fortunes are, I can claim to the best blood in England, and that by England,
and neither very far off, nor in an illegitimate way. Neither need I to be
ashamed of my fortunes (though hitherto, which was my weakness, I have been
ashamed of them, whereas I ought not to have been ashamed, but of sin) seeing I
parted from them willingly, for retaining to virtue, and a good conscience.
Solomon has told me, that all things come alike to all; and that the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor
riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of skill; but time and chance
happens to them all, Eccles. 9.2, 11, etc. I was never lower yet, than that
great and noble General, of that great Emperor Justinian, was unjustly
brought, to his masters no little dispraise, Belisarius of immortal renown.
And why should I be ashamed to lay open my case to so Royal a Physician, as I
have done; or be diffident of the cure, since the fountain of civil honor
(which he is) will do nothing contrary to true honor; and Gods Great Steward
of fortunes and preferments, that are in his own gift, in his own dominions,
will neither deal niggardly, ungenerously, or unjustly, where nothing but
justice and right is sought? Far be any thing of this, from being taken as
contrary to the first founders of a noble race; who, though they cannot claim
descent, yet are beyond most of those, that can: since it is more to give, or
make a noble descent, than to receive it, and most cadets, prove oftener
cadents, than culminants, and seldom equal their founders, but unspirit
themselves, and evaporate to a vappidness of money -- or prediall-gentility. I
mean not so much that, which is bought with momy (for that may be so, where it
deserved to have been given) as that which has nothing but riches to sustain
it. Cicero answered Salustius his objection of an upstart, well, (if we suppose
the invectives to be theirs) Ego meis majoribus virtute praeluxi; Tu tuis
turpiter offudisti tenebras. And as for occupations, and offices, though some
be justly accounted more fordid, and illiberall; others more honorable and
gentile; yet all that are lawful, coming from God, and from his Spirit, as
well as these mentioned, and employed, Exodus 31.3. etc. none joined with virtue,
can justly ignobilitate any. Yea, I know none of the basest and meanest of
them, but in conjunction with virtue, and piety, but especially when they come
to put on something of the nature of piety it self, or immediate service to
God, as some of them did under the Old Testament, God has left place for them
to be pareille to, or in conjunction with the highest. Thus David wished rather
to be a doorkeeper in the house of his God (a Porter of the Temple) than to be
a King in the Tents of wickedness. And to Moses his posterity, though King in
Jeshurun, yea more than a King, a King, Priest and Prophet, which is more than
ever we read of any other (except Christ, of whom be was therein a singular
Type; ever a typical Mediator, for be consecrated Aaron to his Priesthood,
which without being Priest, he could not have dine) yet there was no more
allotted to them, but to be chief Porters in the house of God. What calling
meaner than a Butcher? Yet the High Priest, the second person in the Kingdom,
and sometimes, and in some respects, the first, was by his calling a sacred
Butcher; and if I be not mistaken, as I hope in my Scripturall researches I may
show, that I am not, the King himself in some cases, was such a sacred Butcher
in some sort, in that he killed his own sacrifices; and it was an high, and an
eminent honor to him too; and ever bad been accounted, as the privilege of
the firstborn, where the excellency of dignity, and of power was by divine
institution, before the Jews policy was erected. A Preacher of this City, that
now bears his head high, when a Gentleman showed him, (as I have heard from the
Party) a Tract by him done into Latin, and subscribed in the Title Page, Per
A. B. Nobilem, etc. he very smatterer-like, and pedantickly bewryed his
ignorance, that nobilis in Roman and purest Latin phrase, that we could have,
signified a Gentleman; but he would not understand it otherwise, but according
to the Anglism that he was acquainted with, whereby Nobleman is appropriate to
Barons, Vicounts, Earls, etc. Another person of quality in this City (as I have
heard the Story) rising from a mean degree to great fortunes, had a distressed
Gentleman (without the Gentleman's own knowledge) recommended to his company and
Table: and thereupon the Citizen himself inviting him too, he well accepted of
it, and was as well taken with; and upon further converse, so well, that he
justly apprehended some more than ordinary favors toward him, if he would lay
hold on them. To lay hold he was most willing, and did; but resolved to proceed
cantiously and slowly, for many Reasons, which if they had known, or had the
patience, till discreetly they might have been opened to them, they would have
allowed of. But they construing this slowness for neglect, were offended, and
that so far, that at length (the Gentleman not finding it best to alter his
procedure) the Citizen discharged him his house, though upon a contrary
pretense. He took this as an high affront, as indeed it was. And they coming to
know their mistake, invited him again, but so unsufficiently, the Master of the
house being excepted from being the inviter, though he had been the discharger,
that the Gentleman would not thereupon come so soon, as it seems, they expected
him; but he did cast himself to meet with them, where he might either have a
fuller invitation from them that had the right, or opportunity to tell them,
what an one their Deputy had given him. But he found them in a new discontent
and mistake upon refusal of that invitation, which increased to such distance,
that it could not be removed, through their too high carriage; which he
disdained the more, the higher it was; until at length going about to beget a
right understanding again, be received such another signal affront, as he
vowed never to enter their house, until be knew he had a full and free
invitation that came from him that discharged him. Matters standing thus now,
the Gentleman, to whom I could not deny such a courtesy, for many reasons;
requested me, That thus in a cloud to others, I would find a way as soon as I
could, to uncloud his business briefly to the parties concerned, that they
might make such use thereof, as they saw good. And I have chosen this way of
examples subjoyned to the discourse of generosity, by way of Apology for my
self, and first opening my condition from that obscurity it lay under, to
prevent, or repulse the currish snarls of clownish Pedants, and Schiolists. My
intent in this Translation, is (beside what I have expressed to his Majesty) the
propagation of Religion, and the good of England. But if Religion be not better
intended, and attended, and prosecuted by undertakers, than it has been at
home, it may justly frustrate all, and cast us in as great confusions abroad,
as it did at home. But because this would require more length, than this
Epistle is now fit to be drawn unto, and I may have another occasion for it
perhaps, ere long; I heartily recommend all to Gods blessing, and thy good
acceptance, and bid thee farewell.

Blackefriers this 22 of October 1660. W. H.


Advertisement.
These Books are newly Printed for, and Sold by John Starkey at the Miter in
Fleet Street near to Temple-Barre.

THe World Surveyed; or the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent Le Blanc of
Marseilles, who from the age of fourteen years to threescore and eighteen,
traveled through most parts of the World, viz. the East and West- Indies,
Persia, Pegn, the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco, Guinny, and through all Africa,
from the Cape of good hope into Alexandria, by the Territories of Monomotapa,
of Prester John, and Egypt, into the Mediterranean Isles, and through the
principal Provinces of Europe. Containing amore exact description of several
parts of the World, than has hitherto been done by any other Author, the whole
work enriched with many authentic Histories, originally written in French, and
faithfully rendered into English by F. B. in folio.

Aminta, The famous Pastoral, written in Italian by the admired Poet Signor'
Torquato Tasso, and translated into English Verse by John Dancer, being the
exact imitation of Pastor Fido, with other ingenious Poems in 80.

The Shepherds Paradise, A Comedy privately acted before King Charles the
First, by the Queens Majesty, and her Ladies of honor, written by the
Honorable Walter Mountague Esquite in 80.

To my Lord, the most Eminent Cardinal MAZARINE.
My Lord,
WHat can be offered greater, in a little work, than the great River of the
Amazones? It now offers it self, with all its grandures, to your Eminency,
after that it has hidden them so long time. It desires baptism from you, for
all its peoples; it desires laws from you, for all its Nations; and a valiant
King, for all its Provinces, that he may unite them to his Crown. If the
conquest thereof be easy, neither will the expense thereof be excessive. For
there will need no great Armies here, to give battles; nor no great provision
of Artillery, for carrying on of sieges. There is need only of preparations
fitting for planting of five Colonies at the first aboard; the first whereof is
to be in the Isle of the Sun, for guarding the best entry into this great
Rivers mouth. The second on the famous Bosphore or Strait thereof, to desend
and keep this Rivers passage. The third on that renowned point of the
Comanares, for the best seat of that whole Empire. The fourth near to the
Mountain of Swana, whereby to be Master of the gold-mine there. And the fifth
and last on the mouth of the River of Maragnon, to watch over the Frontier of
that side of the Andes. And in favors of this first establishment, your
Eminence might easily add the alliances of the Illustrious and renowned
Nations of the Homagues, of the Generous and noble Yorimans, of the valiant
Topinambes: and give order for a Fleet-volant of about twelve men of War,
continually to be visiting, and going between these Colonies; because the
distance by sailing, of the farthest of these from the other, will be at the
least a thousand Spanish leagues, and this always upon the channel of the
great River of the Amazones it self. But this is enough for an Epistle: and the
Book it self will speak the matter more at length: and in so noble a design
your Counsels will not be wanting to France: as I shall never be wanting, my
Lord, to give you all sort of honor, submissions, and respects; being as I am
of

Your Eminence the most humble, most obedient, and most obliged Servant Blaise
Francis de Pagan.
From Paris the 12th of March 1655.
map of the Amazon MAGNI AMAZONI FLUVII IN AMERICA MERIDIONALI noua delineatio


AN HISTORICAL AND Geographical Description OF THE Great River of the Amazones
IN AMERICA.
CHAP. I. Of the greatness of the River of the Amazones.
WHat the Danow is to Europe, Ganges to Asia, and Nilus to Afrique; the same is
the great Amazone to America. And as America is the greatest part of the world,
so is the River of the Amazones the greatest River in the Universe. His length
is of greater extent, than that of the Nile, and Negro in Afrique; his breadth
larger, than that of Ganges and Kiam in Asia; his navigation and portableness
is better, than that of the Danow and Rhine in Eurupe; his mouth, or entrance
into the Sea, is more open, than that of Plata, and Saint Lawrence in America;
and his depth is like unto that of the Oceane, and of the mediterrane-Sea. His
inundations or overflowings are yearly, and fruitful; his aspect is every
where and every way pleasant: all his branches and Rivers running out of him,
are inhabited; his fields are all fertile, and all his adjoining plains or
valleys cultivated. Chase, fishing, and Venison are there every where great
store; woods, fruits, and Cornfieldsd for harvest, cover the grounds and little
hills there; and the sweetness of his Air is through all alike equally
temperate: and both gold and silver are found in the Rivers and mountains
there. Its peoples are innumerable; its Isles great and infinite in number, yet
inhabited; all its peoples are spritely and nimble, and the riches of the
Climate furnishes them abundantly with all things. This River's course is
almost always under the equinoctial Line; and every where his nights and days
are of alike length; and the other Rivers, that pay their tribute to him, are
all under the torride Zone. Mavelous effects of the divine providence, which
having distanced so many Nations from the Seacoasts and its commodities, has
given them so great Rivers and waters in so great abundance, that this famous
River of the Amazones may reasonably enough be called an Ocean-Sea of sweet
waters. But all its prerogatives, which by an universal consent, have made the
title of the greatest River of the world be given unto it, shall more amply be
seen, and with more particular deduction of Circumstances, in the following
Chapters of this Book.

CHAP. II. Of the great Realm of the Amazone.
IN the Peninsule or almost-Ile of the Southerly America, and almost in the
midst of so great a Continent or main-Land, there is a great extent of Land,
covered with so many Nations, and watered with so many Rivers, that of it might
be formed a Kingdom, or Empire of three thousand Leagues in compass, for one
that would make the conquest of it. Its rich and opulent Countries (which all
of them together I call the great Kingdom or Realm of the Amazone, seeing all
their waters and Rivers render themselves into this great and renowned River of
the Amazones) have for their boundaries, Brasile toward the East; the Kingdom
of New-Granado, and the coast of Guiana toward the North; and toward the
West, Peru, and the great Cordelier; and Southward Tucuman, and Paraguais: all
Provinces under the Crown of Castile, except Brasile, subject to the
Portugallians, that inhabit it. I said, of three thousand Leagues in compass,
not precisely, but near to that dimension; because the diversity of Mapps, and
of their opinions and reports, that have compassed it, not only cross one
another, but also thwart themselves in their relations, that they give of it;
as by name Father Christopher D'Acogna a Spanish Jesuit, and a principal
author, and eyewitness of these things. But of these doubtful and diverse
mensurations we shall speak elsewhere; let us here draw toward an end of this
Chapter, in telling you, That all this great Realm of Amazone is inhabited only
as yet of Indians and Americans, and not at all of Spaniards, whether
Castilians, or Portuguais. These have indeed discovered it, and run its length
first of any, with their armed Navies; but only passed through, and never stayed
any where to build fortresses, or plant colonies, as they have done in so great
number, and with so great state and magnificence in other Countries of the same
America. But if Spain happily situated for commanding over this new world, had
turned her thoughts toward the conquest of this Empire of the great Amazone,
instead of consuming unprofitably so many Armies, and so great treasures in her
Wars of Europe, as she has done now for an hundred years; she might have
enjoyed by this time the glory and advantages of so great an Empire: from the
conquest of which now she is further off than ever, as well for the reason of
her present weakness, as her intestine division.

CHAP. III. Of the Nations of this great Realm.
THe innumerable Nations and Provinces of this great Empire of the Amazone are
not all yet distinctly known by their several names and languages, because the
Spaniards, who last navigated this famous River, have not marked them all, but
only one hundred and fifty of them. The Provinces are all so mightily, peopled,
and their habitations so thick, that from the last village of one Town, one may
hear the noise of such as travail from the first village of anopher. And yet so
near a neighbor hood not being able to keep them in peace, they are in
continual Wars one Nation against another. Yet neither ambition of command,
nor greediness of acquiring riches, not a desire to eat men, as Canibals of the
same America have, are any of the grounds of so many cruel and bloody Battles;
(without which were it not, for all this, so many people could never be
contained in these Countries) but the cause of all these Fights, wherein are
often slain an infinity of persons, is only for glory and renown, and to have
slaves of a strange, or other Nation than their own: and that because at home
amongit themselves, the innocence of their manners, and riches of the Climate,
not being, apt to bring men to a necessity of serving others of their own
accord, none is found there obliged to such a condition, but by force of Arms.
And yet this invincible courage, that they exercise thus against one another,
has not yet appeared against the Spaniards, (who navigate and run the River of
Amazones in Arms) for as much as hither to either a light fleeing, if at any
time they opposed them; or a mutual amity embraced and consented to by them,
have been the only Arms, which to this present they have employed against these
dominators of the new world, the Spaniards. But all America being barren of
Iron, we must not think it strange, if the inhabitants of this great Realm have
been surprised with fear, (as all other Indians were, and are) of the Sword,
the Musquiet, and of Artillery.

CHAR. IV. Of their Arms, and Commerce.
Seeing neither Steel nor Iron are found at all in the West- Indies, we must not
marvel, if the Americans of this great Kingdom have no other Arms, but Arrows
and Javelots; about which notwithstanding they are marvellously expert, not
only for making them of hard wood, and sharp pointed, but also for shooting and
casting them with so great force, that therewith they pierce through and
through the body of their enemies, which they hit. The same necessity makes
them also use stones well brought to an edge, and Tortoise shells, for Axes,
and Hatchets, and their instruments of traveling: the one for great wood, and
the other for less, and household Utensils. But they use the horn of certain
little Beasts, fastened to little hefts, for their finer works, which they make
upon wood with mavelous skill. As for the Commerce of all these peoples on
this great River of the Amazones, and on other Rivers that run into it, they
perform it in Boats, which they call Canoes, that are made all of Cedar, and
all of one piece, as in other places of the Indies; but with more ease, and
better, than elsewhere; because this great River during its overflowings,
brings down so great a number of great Trees, that these peoples have no more
to do to come by them, but every one to lay hold on, and stay as many as he
desires, at his House, there to cut and hollow them, as he thinks meet. As for
Clothes, such as use any, have them all almost of Cotton: and for such as go
naked (which are the greatest part) neither excessive heat, nor rigor of cold
forces them to cover themselves in that sort.

CHAP. V. Of their Customs and Religion.
THere were never any written Laws amongst those peoples; and all their
customs are almost much alike. Some of them live at liberty; and some of them
under Cacyques, or Lords, as the rest of America. They have Idols of wood made
by man's hand, which they adore as their gods, attributing to some of them the
power over waters, and giving them a Fish for their mark: to others the power
over fruits, and seeds of the earth. They have also such as they take for gods
of Armies and Battles; and they openly avouch that these deities came down from
Heaven to live with them, to do them good, and procure their profit. They have
neither Temples nor Ceremonies, wherewith they adore them, but leave them
carelessly in some corner of their House, until they have occasion to use them.
But when they take water to go to War, they place on the Poup of their
Vessels, their god of Armies; and so they use the others in like sort. They
have also Wisemen, or Wizards among them, of great esteem; who serve them for
Counselors as well for Religion and Physic, as for Law and policy; and in the
year 1639, the Portuguais found an Indian in these Countries, that called
himself the son of the Sun; who coming to a peaceable and loving conference
with them, was not satisfied with the grounds of our Belief, but going away
without renouncing his own imposture, said, that every night he went by the
Spirit to consult the Sun for the government of the following day. Finally, all
these peoples are of a good nature, nimble and quick of body, and of color not
so tawny and Sunburnt as those of Brasile. They are of quick apprehension and
understanding, and are very expert in their hands for all sort of works. They
are naturally sweet and meek, officious and tractable; and they converse
familiarly with strangers without any fear. They are every way so docile and
teachable, and so little possessed with malice, that from hence the easiness to
subdue them, as well to Laws and policy, as to Christian Religion, may be
guessed at.

CHAP. VI. Of the great Cordeliere.
IN the Southern America, to the East of the Kingdom of Peru, and as it were
from the North to the South, runs and rangeth along a garland of great
Mountains more than six hundred Leagues in length, under the name of the great
Cordeliere, And by a wonderful work of nature, all the waters, which from
thence arise in abundance, on that side of the great Mountains, that look
toward the East, do all render themselves into the North-Sea by one only mouth
and confluent. But these well-heads, and springs being so many, cannot be yet
all discovered: it suffices us in this Book to remark the chief ones, and such
of them as are famous, by the origin and source of the great River of the
Amamazones, and of others the most famous, that he receives into his channel,
to convey them together with himself into the Ocean-Sea. And amongst the
longest and greatest of all these Rivers, the Great Caketa, the Putumaye, and
the Aguarike, are on the North-side; and the Madera, the Amarumaya, the
Maragnon, and the Curaray, are on the Southside of the River of the Amazones.
Which being the only, and the principal object of our Discourse, we will here
begin to describe its source, in this Chapter, telling you that it is the most
Westward of all the sources, that are to the East of the great Cordeliere; that
which is furthest off from the Ocean, or Atlantique-Sea, and the nearest of any
to the Town of Kyto, one of the greatest and fairest Cities, not only of the
Kingdom of Peru, but also of any in all America; the seat of a Sovereign Court,
and Capital of a great Province, of three hundred degrees, and ten minutes of
Longitude, (counting from the first and fixed Meridian of the I Will of Saint
Michell, of the Azores) and sixteen minutes only of Latitude meridionale. But
for better clearing of this matter yet, we must add, that between the Town of
Kyto, and the source of the great River of the Amazons, these tops, or risings
of the great Cordeliere, that are after mentioned, are interjected.

CHAP. VII. Of the sources of the great River of the Amazones.
Pulcan and Guanama are two Mountains of the great and high Cordeliere, distant
one from the other little less than two Spanish Leagues, of three hundred
degrees, thirty six minutes of Longitude, on the terrestrial Globe; and twenty
minutes only of meridionale or Southern Latitude. They are in the great
Province of Kyto, of the rich Empire of Peru, about six Leagues to the
Southside of the equinoctial Line; and eight Leagues to the East of the Town
of Kyto, the Capital of that Province: and two Lakes, that are at the two
foots of these two Mountains, are the renowned sources of the great and famous
Amazone. That of Pulcan is the largest, openest, and best discovered; and that
of Guanama is the deepest and profoundest, and as it were almost covered by a
great rock overturned upon it by an Earthquake. But these two spring-heads, the
most wonderful of all the world, since they give the beginning to the most
memorable River of the universal world, run quickly into one, and pass along
together the terrible rocks of the Cordeliere, rolling their roaring waters
over its precipices and falls: from whence this great River coming forth and
running always strong, swift, and straight toward the East, receives
presently upon his leaving the Cordeliere, a mavelous great increase from the
Coca, the Payamine, and the Napo, (three considerable Rivers, whereof we shall
speak else where) and in short while makes his navigableness like unto that of
the great Ocean-Sea, as well for the depth of his channel, as for the less
rapidness of his current of water. But this remarkable place, where the River
of Napo enters into that of the Amazones (which the Spaniards call the Junto of
the Rivers, and we the conjunction or joining of the Rivers, to the same very
sense verbatim) is about sixty Leagues from the Town of Kyto, and under the
equinoctial Line. And it was in this place that the adventurous Francis
D'Areillane that Spanish Knight, made build a Vessel, in the which he first
navigated, and happily discovered all this great River of the Amazones.

CHAP. VIII. Of the length and course of this River.
AFter that the great Amazone has made his channel like unto that of the
greatest Rivers of the world, by the conflux of the foresaid three Rivers, he
goes on his way through the vast and fertile fields of America, always toward
the East, and without longer straying from under the Line, than five or six
degrees at the most, on the Southside, or that of the antarctick Pole. Yet
drawing his now-slow waters after him, by infinite turnings and windings in
plains and fields of so large and great extent, he casts out his arms on every
side to receive the more easily the Rivers which from all parts come unto him,
and that with such admirable agreement, that the least of his arms receive
always the least Rivers and Rivulets; and the greater the greater: and if Rivers
come to him, that are big and made great by a course of more hundreths of
Leagues together, he there shuts up all his waters into one channel, to
receive those greater worthily, and as it were with a greater state and
magnificence. As for his length from his source to his mouth at the
Atlantique-Sea, following the course of his wide channel, it is diversely
reported. The forementioned Areillane makes it of eighteen hundred, and Father
D' Acogna of one thousand two hundred seventy six Spanish Leagues, according to
the justest measures that we could gather from the Relations of this Author,
who contradicts himself often through forgetfulness, and not taking heed. Now
the sparingest reckoning of Father D' Acogna, being modester than that of
Areillane, seems to me to have more appearances of the truth in it; because the
distance of the mountains of Pulcan, and Guanama (where the Sources of this
great River are) in a straight line unto Zaparara, which is the Easterliest
Cape, at which he ends his course, is but of six hundred forty leagues of the
same sort, according to my Geographick Tables or Mappes, and the methods of the
eighth Book of my Geometrical Theorems. But because this distance in a
straight line, appears to me to be yet too far different from the foresaid
length of one thousand two hundred seventy six leagues; I could easily persuade
my self, that either the Southern longitude of America were greater; or that
the leagues of this Spanish Father Jesuit should be no other but
Celtiberian-Spanish leagues, or Biscay leagues, like unto our
French-sea-leagues, the which amounting but to twenty, for every degree of a
great circle, would give us seven hundred thirty two leagues in a right or
straight line, for the same distance between the Sources of the great River of
the Amazones, and the extremity of his mouth, or upshutting.

CHAP. IX. Of the Longitudes, Latitudes, and Measures observed in this great
River.
IN the design we have to set down in this place, and all along, the distances,
and their latitudes, which the Spaniards have observed an. one thousand six
hundred thirty nine, along the River of the Amazones, reported by D' Acogna
aforesaid, delegated by King Philip the fourth to this charge: we have also
resolved to add the longitudes, which we have adjusted as much as is possible
from confusion and uncertainty; and this as well for the curiosity of such as
love Geography; as for the help of these Authors, that would make new Carts
of these places. But going back to the end of the 7th Chapter, we shall
continue the course of this great River in this manner.

From the mouth of Napo, which is on the South of the great Amazone, to Anete,
are forty seven leagues. This place of Anete is yet under the line, and on the
South Side of the great River.

From Anete to the Agarico, are eighteen leagues. The mouth of this River, is
on the North-side of the Amazone, and under the line also.

From the Agarico to Chevela, twenty leagues. The mouth of this River is also
on the North of Amazone, and begins to decline a little from the line toward
the South.

From the Chevelu to the Curaray, forty leagues. The mouth of this River is on
the South of the Amazone, and under the second degree of Southern latitude.

From the Curaray to the Maragnon, eighty leagues. The mouth of this River is
on the South of the Amazone, having four degrees of Southern latitude, and
three hundred seven degrees and fifty minutes of longitude.

From the Maragnon to the beginning of the Province of Homague, sixty leagues.
All this Province consists in great Islands.

From the foresaid beginning of Homague, to a certain great habitation of the
same, one hundred and nineteen leagues. This place is in an I Will, on the
South Side of the body of Amazone, having three degrees of Southern latitude,
and three hundred twelve degrees, and fifty five minutes of longitude.

From this Habitation to the Putumaya, seventeen leagues. The mouth of this
River is on the North-side of the great Amazone.

From the Putumaya to Lyetau, fifty leagues. The mouth of this River is on the
South Side of Amazone, and has three degrees thirty minutes of Southern
latitude.

From Lyetau to the end of the Province of Homague, fourteen leagues. In this
place there is a great and puissant Habitation in an I Will.

From the end of Homague to the Amarumaya, twenty five leagues. The mouth of
this River is on the South Side of Amazone having five degrees of Southern
latitude, and three hundred fifteen degrees, and fifty minutes of longitude.

From the Amarumaya to the Village of the gold, twenty eight leagues. This
place is on the South-bank of the Channel of the great Amazone.

From the Village of the gold to the Yopura, fourteen leagues. The mouth of
this River is on the North-side of Amazone, and has three degrees of Southern
latitude.

From the Yopura to Tapy, four leagues. The mouth of this River is on the
Southside of Amazone.

From the Tapy to the Catua, twenty five leagues. The mouth of this River is on
the South side of Amazone, and toward the Green Lake, formed into that
condition by the great Amazone.

From the Catua and the Green Lake to the first mouth of the Araganatuba, six
leagues. This is on the North-side of the Amazone.

From the fist mouth to the second of the Araganatuba, sixteen leagues; on the
Northside of Amazone also.

From the second mouth of the Araganatuba to the end of the Province of
Corosirare, twenty two leagues. All this Province is on the South of the great
River.

From the end of Corosirare to the beginning of the Province of Yoriman, two
leagues. On the South Side of Amazone.

From the beginning of Yoriman to a great and very long Habitation, twenty
three leagues, on the South of the River to four degrees of that latitude, and
three hundred nineteen degrees, and thirty minutes of longitude.

From this long Habitation to the I Will Yoriman, thirty two leagues, on the
Southbank side of the Amazone.

From this I Will to the end of the Province of Yoriman, ten leagues. On the
South Side of the Amazone.

From the end of Yoriman to the Cusiguare, two leagues. The mouth of this River
is also on the South of the Amazone.

From the Cusiguare to the Basurure, thirty two leagues. The mouth of this
River is on the North-side of the Amazone, and has four degrees, thirty
minutes, of Southern latitude.

From the Basurure to the Rio-negro, or Black River, thirty leagues. The mouth
of this River is also on the North-side of the Amazone, having four degrees of
Southern latitude, and three hundred twenty two degrees, and twenty minutes of
longitude. And thus the course of the great River of the Amazones into
Rio-negro, or the Black River, is of seven hundred eighty eight leagues,
according to the preceding Measures.

CHAP. X. The rest of the Longitudes, Latitudes, and Measures observed unto the
Atlantique Sea.
FOllowing the same design of the Chapter preceding, wherein we made stay, till
we came to the mouth of Rio-negro, where he enters into the great River of the
Amazones, we shall in this Chapter make an end thereof, pursuing the Amazones
course into the great Ocean its self.

From Rio-negro then unto the Madera are four leagues; the mouth of this River
being on the South of the Amazone.

From the Madera to the beginning of the I Will of Topinamba, twenty eight
leagues. This great I Will is in the River of the Amazones, toward the South Side.

From the beginning to the end of this I Will, sixty two leagues. In this place is
a great and puissant Habitation of the Topinambians, having three degrees of
Southern latitude, and three hundred twenty seven degrees, thirty minutes of
longitude.

From the end of Topinamba to the Coruris, thirty leagues; the mouth of which
River is to the North of the Amazone.

From the Coruris to the Bosphore of the Amazone, twenty four leagues. This
strange narrowness has two degrees and forty minutes of Southern latitude;
and three hundred twenty eight degrees, and fifty minutes in longitude.

From the Bosphore to the Tapayse, forty leagues; the mouth of which River is
on the South of the great Amazone.

From the Tapayse to the Coropatube, forty leagues; the mouth of which River
is on the North-side of the great Amazone.

From the Coropatube to the Fort of the Destierro, fifty four leagues; which
Forteresse is also on the North-side of the great River.

From the foresaid Fort to the Ginipape, six leagues; the mouth of which River
is on the North-side also, having two degrees of Southern latitude, and three
hundred thirty one degrees and fifty minutes of longitude. And about two
leagues under this Ginipape toward the Sea, the great River of the Amazones
begins to open himself by little and little toward his great Mouth, or place
of discharge into the Sea.

From the Ginipape to the Paranaybe, ten leagues, the mouth of which River is
on the South side of the Amazone.

From the Paranaybe to the Pacache, forty leagues, the mouth of which is also
on the South of the Amazone.

From the Pacache to Commuta, forty leagues. This place is also on the
South Side of the Amazone.

From Commuta to Para, thirty leagues. This Town is also on the South-banke of
the great mouth of the Amazone, having one degree and thirty minutes of South
latitude.

From Para to the I Will of the Sun, fourteen leagues. This I Will is also near to
the same South-banke. And from Para to Zaparara, forty leagues; which is a
Cape on the extremity of the South-banke of the great River, having thirty five
minutes of South latitude, and three hundred thirty seven degrees and ten
minutes of longitude. And so the course of the great River of the Amazones is
from Rio-negro to Zaparara, of four hundred eighty eight leagues; and his whole
length is one thousand two hundred seventy six leagues, as have been set down
in the preceding Chapters. Yet to describe his North-banke of his great Mouth
also somewhat more, we shall thus set it down.

From the Ginipape to Corupa, thirty leagues; this place being on the
North-side of the River.

From Corupa to the Cape of the North, the distance is not well known: and this
Cape is on the extremity of the North-banke of the great River, having forty
five minutes of North latitude, and three hundred thirty three degrees and
fifty minutes of longitude.

CHAP. XI. Of the breadth, and of the Isles of this great River.
IF the great Amazone is wonderful for its length, it is no less admirable
for its breadth, and its Islands. The one is always of two, three, or four
leagues broad, but never so little as of one only: the others are innumerable,
and so great, that their compass is of five, or of ten, and sometimes of
twenty; yea, and more than of an hundred leagues sometimes, as is that of the
Topinambes. There is a great number also of very little ones, in which the
Natives make their Burial-places, having their Dwellings in the others, that
are greater. But the greater part of these Isles, and sometimes the greatest of
them, are in part at least drowned and overflowed every year by the inundations
of that River, but so fatned thereafter with the mud, that he scatters over
them behind him, that they are thereby exceeding fertile, yielding every year
without any intermissions of rest, their ordinary crops, which are of Maze,
Yoca, and Mandioca; which yield the common food for all America, where it is in
great abundance all along the great River of the Amazone. But to help the
inconveniences of overflowing, they make underground Cellers, Granaries, or
Caves well covered, where they keep their Maze, (which is their wheat) without
impairement; and the Yoca (which is a root) whereof they make their Casabe,
which is the ordinary, and less finish bread of all Brasile, and of all that
New-world. Returning then to the wonders of the large Channel of this great
River of the Amazones, we shall end this Chapter, in telling you, that he keeps
always about the same breadth, that we have before set down, until by an
enlarging him-self, and opening into eighty four Spanish leagues of breadth, he
comes to lose his name and waters in the great Atlantique Ocean, between the
two Capes of the North, and of Zaparara; this being in Brasile, and the other
in Guiana, Provinces of America.

CHAP. XII. Of its Depth, and Navigation.
SEeing the great and wonderful Channel of the renowned River of the
Amazones, as a certain long and vast Sea of sweet waters, receives so many
great, broad, and deep Rivers, we must not think it strange, if the depth of
his bed equal oftentimes the Abysses of the Ocean its self. This is for the
most part, from his beginning unto Rio-negro, of eight, twelve, and of twenty
fathomes; and from Rio-negro downwards to the Ocean, of thirty, forty, and
sometimes without ground, and unfathomable, according to the relations of all
that have observed it. But this mavelous advantage his depth has beyond
others singular, that for the most part they are alike, along the banks and
sides, as they are in the midst of this large Channel of the great Amazone:
whence it follows, that his Navigablenesse, and the fitness for commerce of
this great River, is open and sufficient enough for the greatest Navies, of the
greatest number, of the greatest burden; which may not only sail up all along
him to his first rise in order of Battle, and ready for fight; but also put to
Land easily, and apply to the shore, without any fear of rocks, or sands. And
Providence having purposed every way to render all these wonders yet more
considerable, has led the waters of this famous River always from West to
East, and near unto the Equator, to the end, that as Navale Armies might
easily come down from his very source to his mouth, carried by the sweet force
and strength of his current, and stream; so they might also as easily go up
from his mouth and first entrance unto his very source, against the stream of
his deep waters, by a favorable and continual wind, which blows there in a
good gale perpetually, and without ceasing, from East to West, either all the
day long, or at lest three or four hours of it together, because of the
Diurnall motion either of the Earth, or of the first moveable Heaven, or Orb:
so that on the North-sea, from the Canary Islands, to those of the Canibal's;
and on the South Sea, from New-Spain, unto the Philippine Isles; as also all
along the coast of Paria and Guiana, as one goes from the North-cape, to the
Cape of Sails, the same East Wind is always found to be on wing, and in his
reign, without ceasing. But as in those other parts abovenamed, it is
impossible for Ships to take the same ways back again, for returning to the
places from whence they came, that they held in coming from them, so long as
their Sails must be filled with those East-windes; so this great River of the
Amazones has this particular advantage beyond them, that whole Armadoes can go
from East to West, and from West to East, always under the line, and the same
way both of going and coming, and as the same time.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Bosphore of the Amazone.
THe Thracian and Cimmerian Bosphores, or Ox-swim-bredths were never so famous
in ages past, as the Amazonian Bosphore will be renowned in times to come, in
all apperance. This one strange Strait of this River (richer in one day, than
are at present both the Straits of Hellespont, and of Elsenore) shuts up in one
channel scarcely a thousand paces broad, or an Italian mile, the whole great
River of the Amazones, proud of the spoils of so many, and great, and long
Rivers; and highly puffed up for his course of more than nine hundred sixty
leagues, through Plains and Valleys the fertilest in the whole world; and
triumphing in all the waters, that rise from the East of the great Cordeliere,
from the Town of Popayan to that of Plata, which is the space of five hundred
leagues. This wonderful Bosphore, or Ox-passe, which Providence has reserved
to be one day the Key of the richest Trade in the world, and of the greatest
Kingdom that is in one only Continent, has three hundred twenty eight degrees,
and fifty minutes of longitude, and two degrees and forty minutes of
North-latitude, and is three hundred leagues from the North sea, following the
course of turning and windings of this great River unto Zaparara; however
Father D' Acogna (often enough variable in his measures) carry sometimes this
distance of the Bosphore from the Sea, unto the length of three hundred sixty
leagues. But until the longitude of this great part of America be better
observed, I intend always to follow the least measures of distances. Now this
one only and famous Strait of the great River of the Amazones, is yet further
considerable for this, that the flowing of the great Seas is here easily
perceived, offering a mavelous advantage to the commerce of this Rivers
Navigation, by the ebbing, and flowing of the Ocean. Whence it follows, that
the advantages of the first Nation, that shall possess its self by Colonies
and Forts of both sides of this Amazonian Bosphore, cannot be expressed in a few
words. For can any doubt, but that the riches of so many Mines discovered, and
not wrought, by the miserable depopulations of the rich Western Regions of this
Peninsulare America, will be one day snatched up by the greed of those will
follow us, and the multitude of men that will be born hereafter in these happy
Countries; and will in end be carried on the currents of so many famous Rivers,
as render themselves unto the Bosphore of the Amazone, to be afterward brought
into Europe, by the easy Navigation of the Atlantique Sea, in comparison of
the troublesome mountains of Panama, the Corsaires; and the Shipwracks of the
Gulf of Mexico; and the notable dangers of the channel of Bahame?

CHAP. XIV. Of the first three Rivers, that enter into that of the Amazones.
AFter that we have thus summarily described the course of the great River of
the Amazones, we will return to his beginning, to handle anew the things that
are without, and adjacent to it. But I could wish that Father Acogna, the
Author and eyewitness of a part of these relations, were more cleanly and
understandable in them. For not having been able to find either carts, or
books to help my cares that I have to unfold these ambiguities, I my self
therefore rest not satisfied in this behalf with mine own work. Without staying
therefore to censure a Person of his Nobleness and merit, by reasons which I
might, and the curious may themselves perceive in his writings, I shall take me
to my Subject, and tell you, that from the Town of Cofana in the Province of
Kixo, to the East of the Andes of Peru, and to the North of the line, comes
forth the Coca, a navigable River, which quickly renders himself on the
North-side into the beginnings of the great River of the Amazones; which as yet
in these parts having his stream too rapid and violent, has not therefore at
this place so convenient a navigation himself, as other Rivers, that enter into
his large bed on the side of the Antarctique or South Pole. The first whereof
passing on as it were about three days journeys from the City of Avila of the
same Province of the Kixos, renders himself in short while, and under the name
of Payamino, into the great River, on the South Side thereof, and below the
entrance of the Coca, though the distance is not known, nor set down. But about
eighteen leagues from the Town of Kito, beyond the Andes of the great
Cordelier, is the mount Antezame on the South Side of the line; from the foot
of which the River of Napo coming forth, and running amongst the Rocks without
being navigable until he come to a Port, or Haven of the same name well nigh
unto Archidona, he becomes yet more easy to be navigated four leagues beneath
that, as well for the greatness of his Channel, as for the less rapidnesse
and violence of his stream: and pursuing in this condition his way to great
River, he enters thereinto about thirty leagues only from Archidona. But
concerning the mouth of this River, you may look the seventh Chapter of this
Book; unto which I will here add, that the foresaid Port of Napo, where the
Indians have an habitation, is the best embarquing place, for all those that
from the Province of Kito, would sail or go into the great Amazone. And as to
this pleasant fair, and great enough River of Napo, it has this prerogative
beyond others, to roll along with him aamongst the sands of his current,
good store of Gold, which the Natives of this Country gathering, do therewith
without much pains or trouble pay their tribute, which yearly they owe to the
Spaniards of that same Province; a Province also that abounds every where else
in all sorts of Fruits, necessary for intertaining of the life; the like
whereunto may be said of it both for Fishing, and Hunting, or Chase.

CHAP. XV. Of the Agarique and the Putomaya.
HAving begun to show you before, the diverse Havens or embarquing places, by
which the great and rich Province of Kyto may enter into the commerce of the
great River of Amazone; we will now follow the like way, be the other Rivers
that come from the North-side, and give the like advantages to the rich Regions
of the Popayan, and of the Kingdom of new Granado: whereof the first are the
Aguarique, and the Putomaya, taking their beginnings in the Putomaya, taking
their beginnings in the great mountains of the Cordelier, both of them well
nigh to the Town of Pasto of the Government of Popayan, having three hundred
and one degrees, and thirty minutes of longitude, and one degree only of North
latitude. But though both these Rivers have their course from West to East; yet
that of the Aguarique, which is the Southerliest, comes first to the great
River of the Amazones in the Province of the Chevelues, or long-hair'd people;
and that after a course of more than an hundred leagues (all along Navigable)
through happy, fertile, and well-inhabited Regions, as all the rest of the
Realm of the great Amazone is. Now the mouth of this considerable River, (the
Name whereof is, The River of Gold, because he draws much of it along his
bank-sides) is on the North-side of the great River of the Amazones, and about
an hundred seventeen leagues from his own Sources and Spring-heads, and
likewise under the line. But the River of Putomaya taking a course much more
straggling and wandering, and watering a good many more Nations than the other,
makes also hereby his Navigation more considerable, and of greater Portation by
a course of far greater extent, and a greater number of Rivers, that on all
sides arrive unto him also. And after he has fertilized so many great champain
Countries by the fresh vapors of his waters, and by his ordinary overflowings,
as all Rivers of America do; he opens and enlarges himself near unto a leagues
breadth at his entry into the great River of the Amazones, and about four
hundred fifty three leagues from his own Sources, or Well-heads. Now the mouth
of this River of Putomaya, which carries along with him gold also, as most
others do; is on the North-side of the great River, and has two degrees and
thirty minutes of Southern latitude, having run under the line a great deal
more than the half of his course, and under the same measured (in his banks
and windings at least) the space and length of more than three hundred fifty
leagues. Thus the commerce of the great River of the Amazones will in time
coming receive no less enlargement by the happy Navigations of the Aguarique,
and of the Putomaya, than by other great and famous Rivers (which promise him
the same increase) as well for the richesse and fertile Countries of the Town
of Pasto, as for the situation of the same, which is too far distant from the
conveniences of the Port of Carthagena.

CHAP. XVI. Of the great Caketa, a considerable River.
THe third and last River, which from the North, and from the mountains of the
Cordelier, comes into the great River of the Amazones, goes under the name of
The great Caketa; and is acknowledged and celebrated for the greatest of all
the Rivers in America, next to the great Amazone. The Kingdom of new Granado
glories in its birth, and the Valley of Nicao of the Province of Popayan, is
the famous place of his Source, which has two degrees and thirty minutes of
North-latitude, and three hundred and three degrees, and forty minutes of
longitude, on the terrestrial Globe. This great River so much renowned, and yet
so little known to this day by Geographers, receives presently a mavelous
increase of waters, which descend in great abundance from the great mountains
of St Faith of Bogota; and taking his way from West to East, almost every where
parallel to the great Amazone, he insensibly draws near to run under the
line, continuing thus his course until about at one degree of North-latitude,
and three hundred eighteen degrees of longitude, he divides his large and
magnificent Channel into Rio-negro, and Rio-grand; i. e. into the Black River
and the great River. But the great Caketa is so wonderful at this place, that
this division hinders him not to render himself on the one side into the great
Amazone, by the first of his branches, and by an entry of more than one league
and an half broad; nor to keep for a long time the color of his own pleasant
and deep waters, until that the great River of the Amazones, all gathered up
into one great bed, for receiving of him, deface this appearance of the
Caketaes waters, but not until after a combat between them, for the space of
twelve leagues length. As for his other branch (which I take to be the great
River of the Orenoc, contrary to the opinions of Father D' Acogna, because I
see no other River from the Cape of the Sails to the Cape of the North, that
can be attributed to him) it turns its course toward the North, and renders
himself into the North-Sea by a mouth worthy of his greatness and magnificence.
But because the Orenos (as other Rivers of Guyana have) has leaps and falls
that are high and steep, amongst the rocks, that he passes through; (following
here the relations of Diego d' Ordas, of Alphonso de Herrera, and of Anthony de
Berreo, who were amongst the first of such as navigated it) neither the
commerce of the great Caketa, nor that of the great Amazone, can ever be
hindered on this behalf, as Father D'Acogna apprehends, grounding himself on the
passage of Lopez D'Aguirre, which he held from the River of the Amazones to the
North Sea by this track or way: but not knowing, that Lopez had not light
Boats, that can pass over all, and shoot such falls, (as Oars do London Bridge
at a low water) or that he made draw them along with him by land (as other
Spaniards also did before him) from the beginning of the leap or fall of the
River Orenoc, to the end of it, which is at least an hundred Leagues distant
from his mouth, whereby he enters into the great Ocean. Returning therefore to
the great Caketa, we shall have done with him, and this Chapter, if we tell
you, that he receives an infinity of other Rivers; that he waters sundry rich
Provinces, and many very warlike Nations; that his overflowings makes on all
sides many great Lakes, as is usual in all other Rivers of America; that now
and then he sends some arms or branches into the great Amazone, which are
equal to some good Rivers in other places: that his mouth of the Orenoc has
nine degrees of North-latitude, and three hundred twenty one degrees and twenty
minutes of Longitude: and that his mouth of Rio-negro (so called from the depth
of his pure-clear waters, whereby they seem black) has four degrees of
South-latitude, and three hundred twenty two degrees, and twenty minutes of
longitude, on the North-side of the great River of the Amazones, about some
seven hundred eighty eight Leagues from his first sources, the same distance,
that the Amazone has from this place to his head; as is before said toward
the end of Chapter the ninth.

CHAP. XVII. Of the River of Maragnon.
ONe of the principal and most famous Rivers, that the Andes of the Cordeliere
send forth toward the South of the great Amazone, is without all doubt the
Maragnon, as well for the rich and noble Province, whence he takes his
beginning, as for the renown of his name, whereby he is so celebrious in the
Histories of this New-world: forasmuch as Joseph Acosta, and Antony of Herrera,
give this name often both to the great River of the Amazones it self, and to
the River of the Orenoc; and the Portuguaise of Brasile give the same name also
to another considerable enough River, which loses himself in a great Bay, or
gulf, which they call the Bay of Maragnon, in the North-most Government of the
Kingdom of Maragnon, called for this same cause by that title also. But to the
end that the diversity of so many Rivers, and places called by this name, may
not beget confusion in my Geography; I shall for ever leave it to this one
alone, and famous River, that I now speak of, the name of Maragnon; a River
well known from all Antiquity in the great Empire of Peru, by this name. He
has this singular in the way of his course, that whereas he takes his
beginnings to the West of the great Mountains of the Cordeliere, and not from
its self, yet he ceases not to pass through them, and to draw all his deep
waters toward the East of America. His famous sources honor the Lake of
Boubon with the prerogative of his rise. This Lake is in the Countries of
Guanuco, a Colony of the Spaniards; and in the Province of Lima, the richest
and first of all the Empire of Peru, the most rich place of all the world. Its
longitude is of three-hundred and two degrees, and thirty minutes, on the
terrestrial Globe; and his latitude of ten degrees, and four minutes,
antarctick or meridionall; and his distance from the royal Town of Lima, forty
Leagues. So this famous River of Maragnon coming forth of this foresaid Lake,
waters the long and fertile Valley of Saussa, and cutting or crossing the Kings
high way beween the Towns of Guanuco, and Guamangue, under Bridges made of
cords and wood with a mavelous artifice, he passes through the whole Andes of
the Cordeliere; from whence coming out again at last much more mighty than he
was, by the continual confluence of Rivers, that on all sides arrive unto him,
he passes along the Province of Mayn to the East of the Cordeliere; and after
his having saluted as it were, the Town of St. James of the Mountains, still
made broader, deeper, and very swift and rapid in current, he afterward
spreads himself abroad at pleasure and with more liberty in diverse fair
Provinces, and amongst Nations puissant and warlike. In end following his
course, still growing bigger, and more impetuous and rapide, than one would
think that he could be navigable, he powers out all his waters into the great
River of the Amazones, at the Southside thereof, having four degrees of
Southern latitude at that place; and three hundred and seven degrees, and fifty
minutes of Longitude; and about two hundred fifty seven Leagues from the
sources of the great River of the Amazones. His own length is about three
hundred Leagues, reckoning by his banks; and as for his navigation which I
take, ought not to be reckoned further, than after that he has passed the
Andes, it will not fail one day to bring the greatest riches of all Peru, to
the great River of the Amazones, for the same reasons, that we have heretofore
mentioned, and in the Chapter of the Bosphore, by name.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Amarumaya, and of the Madera.
IN the same Province of Lima of the great and rich Kingdom of Peru, to the
East of the great Mountains of the Cordeliere, about twenty Spanish Leagues
from the royal Town of Cusco; about thirteen degrees and thirty minutes of
South-latitude; and three hundred eight degrees, twenty six minutes of
longitude; are the sundry and abundant sources, which presently cast themselves
into one Channel of the great River of Amarumaya, which in the Language of the
Indians, signifies Serpents. The River (according to the testimonies of Infant
Garcilassa, come of the Kings of Peru, and afterward turned Ctaholick) says
he, takes his course toward the East; he wades great Provinces, and renders
himself at last, into the North-Sea; without saying any more. But this long and
deep River, being the same that Father D'Acogna acknowledges under the name of
Cusco, but knows it not by the name of Amarumaya; after having received an
infinity of other Rivers into his bed, and after that he has run according to
the measure of his crooked banks, the length of four hundred Leagues, he
loses his name with his waters in the great River of the Amazones, to the
Southside of it, having five degrees of Southern latitude, and five hundred
forty two Leagues from the sources of the great River, and three hundred
fifteen degrees, and fifty minutes of Longitude. But the Madera without
contradiction, is the last River, that comes from the Southside, and from the
Andes of the great Cordeliere, to pay his tribute to the great Amazone. And as
he is remotest in his sources, so he is the longest, having a course of about
seven hundred Leagues. He wades inestimable fields, and infinite Nations, and
as it were jealous of the glory of his ending, he seems as it were upon design
to shun rencountring with the Lake of Xaraya, the original of the great River
of Plata, leaving it upon his Eastside only fifty Leagues distant from him;
that he might with more honor loose his name and waters in the great, and more
renowned River of the Amazones, and that by an entry, that is worthy of his own
greatness, at three degrees and forty minutes of South-latitude; and three
hundred twenty four degrees of longitude; and eight hundred thirty two Leagues
from the sources of the great Amazone. As to the birth of the Madera, whereof
we shall speak, (and to which the Spaniards gave this name, because of the
trees, that he brought down into his mouth at that time when they discovered
him) according to the best opinion, it is in the most rich and opulent Province
of Plata in the Kingdom of Peru, to the East of the Mountains of the Andes,
under the twenty first degree of South-latitude, and three hundred and
thirteenth of Longitude. The Topinambians vaunt, that they have come down all
the length of it, as we shall declare hereafter; and they tell wonders of its
greatness, as also of other Rivers, that on every side augment it. And finally
his navigation being once fully discovered, the Ages to come will doubtless
proclaim the great riches, that he will bring to the great Amazone, drawn out
of the Mountain of Potosie, thirty Leagues distant only from his source.

CHAP. XIX. Of the other Rivers, and of the Province of the Kixes.
THe other great and long Rivers, not less considerable than the preceding,
which come forth also from the Mountains of the Andes, to render themselves
into the great River of the Amazones at his Southside, (to follow the order of
the ninth Chapter of this Book) are first: the Curaray, between the Rivers of
Napo, and of Maragnon. His origin is in the Country of Macas, of the Province
of Kixo. The second is the Yetau, (called Lyetau in the ninth Chapter) as much
renowned for his greatness, as for the riches of his peoples (who wear
Ear-pendants and Bracelets of fine gold) which has his course between the
Maragnon and the Amarumaya. And finally, the Tapy, the Catua, the Cusiguare,
between the Amarumaya and the Madera, to be thought the greater and the longer,
by how much their entries into the Amazone are wider and broader; by means of
all which, and others, that will be hereafter discovered (whether they enter
into the great River themselves immediately, or mediately only into others,
that come at last to him, and pay their tribute) the commerce will always be
greater, and the navigation happy through the whole Kingdom of the Amazones.
But to give a beginning to the Relation, not only of the Provinces, and of the
Nations, that dwell on the length and breadth of this admirable River of the
Amazones,; but also of other curiosities, the knowledge whereof will beget him
no less advantages; we will come back to the Province of Kixo, the first of
them all, and the most renowned, by the glory of the Amazones rise, and of the
place wherein his navigation becomes like unto that of the Ocean-Sea, as also
has been declared in the seventh Chapter. It is fertie in gold and all other
things, being of the Kingdom of Peru, and a Government of the Province of
Kyto. It was discovered by the Spaniards, that passed over the Andes on the
Westside, Anno 1640, which was seven years after the Pizarres and the Almagres
from the Panama first approached to the side of Peru, and in fine conquered so
great a Kingdom. In this Government of Kixo are the Towns of Baessa the
Capital of Avila, and of Archidona, little Colonies of the Spaniards; and
sundry other places, Coffane, Payamino, and Anete, sometimes the abode of
Captain Joh^e de Falaci^s; who pushing further in than others, out of an
ambition to make further conquest, and from his zeal for Religion, seated
himself and his Soldiers in this remore habitation, on the great River of the
Amazones; but in the end was killed by the Savages his enemies. And so this
place of A^^^e was left by the Spaniards, as too far off from their Colonies,
and too much exposed to the dangers of so many warlike Nations, that neighbor
it. And this is enough of this Province, having also discoursed of it Chapter
the seventh, and the fourteenth, and of Ane^e in the ninth.

CHAP. XX. Of the Province of the long-haired, and of that of the Homagues.
AMongst the principal Provinces, which in going down the great River of the
Amazones, present themselves; that of the long-haired people is not the least
considerable, as well for its greatness, as for the valor of its peoples. It
is on the North-side, and begins from the River of the Aguarick, and being of a
good breadth, extends it self in length more than one hundred eighty Leagues
always upon the side of the Amazone. Its Rivers roll gold, its fields are all
fertile, and the yearly inundations make Lakes in it in great abundance. This
Nation is one of the valiantest in all America; it has always resisted all
sallyes of the Spaniards, and by the death of Johne de Palacios, it put a
sudden stop to their boldness. As well the men as the women wear their hair
long even unto their girdingplace; whence they were presently called the
Chevelues, or long-haired people, great and fair; as also a River was called,
that runs through the midst of this Province, and loses himself in the great
Amazone; on the mouth of which forty Portuguais and three hundred Brasilians
encamped for eleven months the year 1638, as we shall declare afterward. But
the greatest and the best of all the Provinces, that lie costing on the River
Amazone, is that of the Homagues: whose length is two hundred Leagues, and his
habitations so frequent, that scarcely one is out of sight, when another
appears. But its breadth appears not to be great, because it exceeds not the
extent of such arms as the Amazone casts out that way. All the Towns and
Villages are in great Islands, and in great number: and the beginning of this
long Province on the West side is about three hundred seventeen Leagues from
the sources of the great Amazone. Almost in the midst of it is the greatest and
best habitation of the Homagues, whereof we have spoken in the ninth Chapter;
as also of another mighty habitation, consisting of an infinity of houses
after their fashion, seated in an advantageous place; filled with the
valiantest men and best Warriors, and furnished with all sorts of Arms and
Munition of War; and that because, this, place, being the last of all the
Province on the East side, it is Frontier to many warlike peoples, against whom
the Homagues fight often, and almost without ceasing. This Nation is the most
reasonable, and the best governed of all others of this discovery; and that by
the benefit of such amongst them, as have frequented the Kixes of Peru, from
whence they were chased through sear of the Spaniards, that used them as
slaves. They are all honestly clothed as well men as women; who make not only
clothing for themselves of Cotton, which they have there in abundance; but also
to traffic with in other Countries, where their workmanships are sought after
for their fineness and delicacy. These Stuffs are very pleasant, woven of
diverse colors, or else painted with great skill. They are so subject and
obedient to their Caciques, or Lords, that they presently do any thing upon a
word speaking. They have all their heads flat out of a contrivance and are they
use for it when they are born. They have continual Wars on both sides of the
River with the Savages, who on the South side are the Curines, so numerous,
that they not only defend themselves from the Homagues, but also from other
Nations, that are further from them, yet fight with them daily. And on the
North side are the Tecunes, no less valiant and numerous than the Curines,
seeing as they, they make also Wars upon other Nations, that are further off
from them, than the Homagues.

CHAP. XXI. Of the condition of slaves; and of neighboring Nations.
ALl the Indians of the great Realm of the Amazone (as we have said elsewhere)
are served only with slaves: and the only penalty of the vanquished prisoner,
is all brought to this sad debt toward the victorious enemy, that took him in
War. But the Homagues are so generous toward such as have been overcome,
more by an evil fortune, or overruling power from heaven, than by any
feebleness that was in themselves, that they use them very gently, make them
sometimes eat with themselves, and never suffer them to be sold to who will
give most. This were highly to offend them, but to demand such things of them;
as the Portuguais often had experience, who coming down the great River Anno
1639, arrived one day amongst others at an habitation of these Homagues: who
received them in peace, and with great joy, and very liberally presented them
with any thing they stood in need of. They sold them Stuffes, also Canoes or
Boats, that were very light: but never any slaves, not enduring so much as to
hear of it. Whence it follows, that these peoples replenished with so much
sweetness and modesty, would easily enough receive the rule of a moderate
Prince, and the knowledge of the true Religion. But that we may lightly pass
over the Nations that are on the one side, and the other of the Province of
Homague; we shall only say, that to the North of the great River of the
Amazones, the Yorunes, and the Paryanes, and then the Atoyes, and the Cunes;
and finally the Homaguazietes (that is, the true Homagues, the valiantest of
these Nations, and as it were the superiors to the others) dwell along the
vast fields of both the banks of Putumaya, all along up toward its source, So
for the South side of the Province of Homague, the Tipunes, and the Guanares,
and then the Ozoanes, and the Nahones; and after them the Canomanes and the
Marianes, possess the large Regions between the Maragnon and the Amarumaya,
from the mouth of the Yet as to the Source of the same. But all these Nations
are so valourous, especially those that are furthest off, and that are at the
beginning of the River Putumaya, that oftentimes the Spaniards of the Province
of Kyto, and of Popayan, have been repulsed by them through force of Arms.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Province of Corosirare, and of the Neighboring Nations.
BEtween the end of the Province of Homague, and the beginning of that of
Corosirare, the two banks of the great River of the Amazones are possessed for
fifty three leagues space by the Cacygares and Tucuries on the South Side, and
in part on the Amarumaya; and on the Northside, by the Curis, and the
Guayrabes. The Habitations of all which Peoples are remote from the sides of
the River, for fear of the Homagues. But the Nation Corosirare, that dwell to
the South of the great Amazone, begins at The Village of Gold, and ends not
till after eighty leagues in length down the great River. Its Grounds and
Fields are higher than ordinary; and the Habitations of this Province are so
frequent, that oftentimes for four leagues together, and sometimes for six, one
can see nothing else. This people, though Savage, yet wants neither policy, not
good conduct of their affairs; all their Houses are well ordered, and
replenished with all sorts of Vivers, and Commodities. They have many Kills or
Furnaces, and make all fort of Earthen Vessels, which they sell and traffic
by with other Nations; but all by way of Exchange, as all other Indians do. As
to that Habitation of this Country, which the Portuguau, while they went up
the great River, an. One thousand six hundred thirty eight, called The Village
of Gold, (whereof we spoke also in the ninth Chapter) it was by occasion of a
pair of Ear-pendants of fine gold, which they took there from a woman: which
were so fine, that the gold was found of one and twenty caracts in the Town of
Kyto, after their arrival there. But so soon as these Natives of this Village
perceived the greediness of the Soldiers after ornaments of gold, they
presently thereafter hid all that they had, and no more was seen after that; no
not at the return of the same Portuguais in an One thousand six hundred thirty
nine, who could never obtain but one pair of these Ear-pendants by exchange
with the Indians, which Father D'Acogna himself bought, to let them be seen in
Spain. But the great Nation of the Suanes, which extends it self to the great
Caketa, fills all the Fields that are on the other bank of the North of the
great Amazone: but with this remarke, that their Plains are a great deal
lower, than the opposite Grounds and Fields of the Corosirares; in whose
Province are the Mouths of the great and fair Rivers of Tapy and Catua, this
last forming and fashioning Lago-verde, with the great Amazone. And along
these two Rivers, as one goes up them, dwells the great Nation of the Pacuanes.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Gold-Mine of the Suanes, and of the Neighboring Nations.
THe great Province of Suane heretofore mentioned, has this singular glory
amongst all the others, that are honored by the great River of the Amazones,
to carry Gold within her bowels. The famous Mountain that nourishes in his
bosom so great a treasure, has about two degrees of South latitude, and three
hundred seventeen degrees of longitude. It is two hundred leagues only distant
from the Town of St Thomas, a Colony of the Spaniards in Orenoc, and forty
leagues from the Atlantique Sea. And the precious River of Gold (for so the
Natives of the Country call it) which waters its foot, draws abundance of this
rich Metal with him, in form of grains of Corn, and little bigger billetts.
It presently disburdens its self into the Yopura, another considerable River,
which likewise loses himself into the great River of the Amazones, on the
North-side, at three degrees of South latitude, and five hundred eighty four
leagues, from the Sources of the great River. Whence it follows that the
commerce so advantageous of the great Amazone with this famous Mountain of
Suane, is made the more commodious by the Navigation of this River of Yopura,
by going up him into the River of Gold; and that the ages to come will one day
make famous these places with rich Towns and magnifique Inhabitants. For the
present, among all the Peoples of these Countries, the Managues are those, that
traffic with this Gold, the weight whereof, and its finenesse makes it so
perfect, that it is the most excellent of all America. The Indians that buy of
it, by exchange of other things for it, make of it little long Plates, which
they hang at their Noses, and Ears: and this rich Ornament is ordinary and
frequent in all these Provinces, according to the report of the Savages. But
the Nations (besides the Suanes) that are nearest to the treasures of this rich
Mountain, are the Aguaynes, the Mocunes, the chief of all such as dwell to the
East of the Suanes, and cultivate the fertile Fields, that are watered by both
the Channells of the Araganatube. Now all the Plains of these fertile Regions,
as well on the North as on the South Side of the great River of the Amazone,
where the Province of Corosirare is; are the best and manyest, and best
disposed to receive all sort of culture, of all America. But returning to the
Gold-Mine of the Mount of Suane, I wonder that neither the Spaniards of Hordas,
and of Berreo, nor the English of Kemnits, and of Ralech have never met with
it, that have searched with so much ruin and calamity to the Natives, along
the great River of Orenoc, the imaginary Treasures of the fabulous rather than
famous Lagad rado.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Province of Yoriman.
NEXT after the Province of Corosirare, as you go down the great Amazone on the
South Side, is the Province of Yoriman, being but of sixty leagues long, but of
such repute amongst the Indians of all these Countries, by reason of the
strength and valor of its Inhabitants, than the Navy of the Portuguais
themselves passing along did perceive it. They are of a good stature, of a fair
body, and well formed. They are expert in all things they take themselves to,
especially in Arms; and go all naked, as well men, as women. They are also so
numerous for multitude, that never any saw at one time so many Barbarians
together. It was an infallible token of their great courage, that they went and
came (as they did) amidst the Armed Vessels and Ships of War of the
Portuguais, to traffic with them, with extreme assurance of mind. For
whilst the Portuguais going up the great Amazone, sailed along by this
Province, every day there came to them above two hundred Canoes, full of Women
and Children, with Fruits, Fishes, Meals, and other such like Provision, which
they changed with the Portuguais for axes and knives, whereof they have great
esteem, as all others Indians of the new world. The Yorimans inhabit not only
the main Land of this Province, but fill also the great Isles that the great
Amazone makes by sundry of his Arms stretched forth. The first Village of this
Warlike Nation, is on the mouth of a Christalline River, which must be strong,
and come very far considering the force, wherewith he pusheth the deep waters
of the great Amazone. But the notablest of their Habitations, is the greatest
of any that lie on the great Amazone, containing more a good deal on the bank
of that River, than a good league: and in every of its Houses, four or five
Familes, and sometimes more; whereby easily may be gathered the great number of
the Inhabitants of this long Town, whereof we spoke also in the ninth Chapter
of this Book. It was in this place, so abounding with all things, that the
Fleet of the Portuguais stayed five or six days at its return, after it had
gone up the River of the Amazones before with good success, as shall be
afterward related. Not one of so numerous a people fled from his House for
fear of their arrival; but the whole Fleet got freely from them, all that they
stood in need of; and because the Navy was near an end of all its Provisions,
it got from their bounty five hundred Sacks of the Meal of Mandioqua, which
sufficed it for the whole rest of its Voyage. The other Habitations also of
this happy Province of Yoriman, are not much inferior to the former, they are
all along very frequent on the firm land; but yet both mightier and more
numerous in a great Island about thirty leagues lower; where it seems the
principal Forces are of this generous Nation; generous I say, both for its
valor, liberality, and numerousnesse of men, that inhabit it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Province of Surina, and the Neighboring Nations.
BUt to go from the Province of Yoriman, to that of Surina, we must in our
passage visit the Nation of the Cusiguares, that labor the fertile Plains
situated on the South-banke of the Amazone; which in this place receives the
plentiful waters of that great River, that gives its own name to this pleasant
Province. This renowned River of Cusiguare, both for the easiness of its
Navigation (though somewhat hindered now and then by Rocks appearing in it here
and there) and for the happiness of its Fishing, no less abounding here, than
elsewhere, will be no less considerable for the high stature and the great
courage of his Nation of the Motuanes, that cover the first Plain, that he
waters, who by testimony of the Indians, that report it, use also long Plates
of fine Gold, for Ear and Nose-Pendants; whence it would seem, that they are
not far from the rich Province of the Plata, and of Potosy, because even to
travel up to their Country, it takes full two months time. But upon the same
River, and between the aforesaid two Nations, the Curians, and the Catoses,
enjoy likewise the happy fruitfulness of so many good Grounds, and so many
pleasant Rivers, that on all sides enter into their principal River. Now, as
the Province of Homague is celebrated amongst all those of the great Amazone,
for its fine works of Stufles and Clothes of Cotton of so great variety; and
the Province of Corosirare for their excellent Pottery of Vessels of Earth so
artificially Painted, and fashioned: so the Province of Surina is no less
commendable for a delicate household stuff, or Utensiles of a mavelous fine
artifice. It is on the South of the great River, and to the East of the
Cusiguares: its Peoples being the Surines, and the Coripunes, Nations that are
the most curious and expert of working in Wood, of any in all America. They
make Seats and Forms in the fashion of Animals, yet so fine and commodious
for the ease of the body, that nothing can be added to their industry. They
make also Javelots and Arrows, with so much gentilenesse and elegancy, that all
other Nations seek after them. And the like Images, that they make to the life
are so perfectly done in all points, that our best Ingravers and Carvers, could
find no other occasion but to learn from them: so that by exchange of so many
singular workmanships of so sundry sorts, they daily make their lives more
happy by all necessary Commodities, which on all sides come unto them from this
rich traffic.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Province of Caribane.
FOr as much as the distances of all these Rivers and Provinces, are just
enough set down in the ninth Chapter of this Book; we shall say only of this
Province of Caribane, that it lies between the Rionegro and the great Amazone
in extent of more than an hundred leagues on the banks of either of them. Its
Fields and Plains are higher than that they are subject to the overflowings of
these Rivers, or of an equal height unto them; yet fertile and abundant in all
things. The River of Bazurura, which enters into that of the Amazones on the
North-side, makes here Lakes and Islands very pleasant: and the diverse Nations
of this great Province, are no less considerable for the plenteousnesse and
fertility of their Country, than for the happy condition of their life. Of
these, the Araguananes, and the Mariguanes, are the most Westerly, and lie
against the banks of the Yoriman, already mentioned. The Pogoanes, and the
Caraganes are on the Basurura. The Comanares possess that point which the two
Rivers for me at their meeting. The Tuynamanes, and the Comarurianes are on the
side of Rio-negro; and the others less renowned possess the Lands that are
furthest off from the Amazone. All these Peoples are valiant, and use-skilfully
the Bow and Arrow. They had from the year One thousand six hundred thirty
eight, Knives, and Axes, and other Instruments of Iron, after the fashion of
Europe; which they gave out to have bought from Indians their Neighbors, that
were nearer than they to the Sea; and these again from certain persons, that
were white of countenance, and clothed like the Portuguais, and armed with
Sword and Musket, that dwelt upon the Atlantique Sea: which have been without
doubt, either Hollanders, or English, who have both sailed into the Orenoc, and
dwelt for some time in the Coasts of Guyana; but were at length hostilely
chased from thence, by the Savages; as also all the French were an. One
thousand six hundred fifty four, from the I Will of Cayene in the main Land, and
on the same side of the Sea of the North; which is not above two hundred
leagues at the most from Rio-negro, but reckoning in a straight line, and by
the shortest distance. But because nature has not offered in all the Realm of
the great Amazone, a more favorable situation, than on the point of the
Comanares, for settling of a Colony of the most considerable ones of any in the
world, and which cannot fail one day to be the Seat of an Empire most
flourishing, and of great richesse in Trade; we shall therewith finish this
Chapter, in telling you, That the Land of it is right upon the banks of these
two great Rivers; that it is also mounted above the height of ordinary
inundations; that the surface of it is plain, sweet, and not shrubby: that the
Neighboring Fields abound in grains for necessary Provisions, and in good
pasturage for nourishing of Cattle: that Quarries of an excellent Stone for
Building, and easy to be cut and hewn, are as near it as Woods, and Trees of a
mavelous greatness and height, for the convenience of Buildings and Houses:
that the distance of the great Amazone from the Rio-negro, is not so great, but
the fortifications may conveniently and regularly be drawn along on the
Land-side, and that the Foussies of these fortifications, and this wall being
well ordered, may easily be made deep enough, and themselves filled by the
debordments of the one, or of the other River, at pleasure.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Rio-negro, and of the Province of Camsuara.
FOllowing the North-side of the great River of the Amazones, Rio-negro
incontinent presents its self next after the Province of Caribane. His breadth
and depth give him the prerogative to be thought the fairest and mightiest
River of all that enter into the great Amazone; whose mouth being wide a great
league and an half, has four degrees of South latitude, and three hundred
twenty two degrees, and twenty minutes of longitude, and seven hundred eighty
eight leagues of distance from the Sources of the great Amazone. The Amazones
course is here toward the North-east; and that of Rio-negro right East, where
he enters into the other with such grandeur and majesty, that he keeps his
waters distinct and separate from the others, and keeps half of the whole
channel to himself for the space of twelve leagues, before the great River
(though here all united into one great bed, to receive him) can overcome the
distinctnesse of his waters, with all the force that he has. The Spaniards
first, and after them the Portugall's, called it Rio-negro, because at his
mouth, as often also in his channel, his waters appear very black, because
indeed they are very clear, and without any color, but very deep. The Natives
also name it for the same reason Coriguacure, that is, the Black River. But as
Rio-negro is the great Caketa of the sixteenth Chaper of our Book; we shall say
no more of it here, nor stay again upon the obscurities of Father D' Acogna,
which we have there briefly unfolded; but pass on to the recital of the
Nations that inhabit its banks, and tell you, That the Province of Camsuare
is the first that presents its self, having on its South Rio-negro, on its East
the great Amazone; and on its North, the great Province of Guyane. All the
Plains of these Countries are mounted like those of Caribana, and not subject
to the ordinary overflowings, covered with infinite Peoples, and abundant in
all things, especially of Trees of a prodigious height and thickness. But
amongst the rich Nations of this fertile Province of Camsuare, those of the
Aguares, of the Agaypes, of the Jamnes, and of the Carupatabes, are not the
least considerable, without relating the Guaranacasanes, which make a Province
on the beginning of the River of Orenoc, as he comes out of the great Caketa.
See the sixteenth Chapter to make the knowledge of these things less confused
and imperfect, than they are in Historians and Geographers, who treat of them
either too diffusedly in great Books, or too lightly in little Tractates,
seeing also it becomes daily more certain by new and reiterated experiences.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Province of Cayane, and of the Nations Neighboring.
BUt going now to the South Side of the great River of the Amazones again, we
shall find to the East, and following that of Surina, the Province of Cayane,
through which the great and long River of the Madera passes, and renders it
self into the great Amazone. And because this River of the Madera (which was so
called by the Spaniards, because of the great number of Trees, which it drew
along with it into its mouth) is one of the principal Rivers of America, you
shall find the distances and measures, and other circumstances that concern it,
in the tenth and eighteenth Chapters of this Book. Now, the Nations, that
Province great enough, contains within its extent, whether lying along the
great Amazone, or in going up the great River of the Madera, which the Natives
call also Cayane; are no less happy for the fertility of their fair Fields,
and pleasant Rivulets, than other Peoples of all these fertile Countries are.
They are of no less courage for War, not less expert in Fights and handling
of Arms; they have also the like industry in their handy-works, that serve to
make their happiness of life the more accomplished, by the exchange of them
with such commodities as they stand in need of, and they keep likewise in their
conduct and Government of affairs, Laws and Customs like unto those, that all
other Provinces of the Realm of the Amazone do. But of all these infinite
Peoples, that cover so many considerable Plains and Fields, the Cayanes, and
the Anamares are the most renowned; and next to these, the Curares, and the
Goarinumes; and after them, the Abacares, and the Oragunagues; and lastly the
Sabucares, and the Urubingues in going down the great Amazone, which yet are
the most esteemed for their curious finenesse of working and making house
Utensiles. But the remotest of all in going down the great Amazone, and amongst
these the best known are the Maraques, and the Oregates, and toward the South,
the Guaranaques, and others without number, which undoubtedly border upon the
great Lake of Xaraya, out of which all Geographers, that give us the Carts of
America, make a considerable River to come forth, which they bring to that of
the great Amazones, whereof they ought to abstain to speak too hardily, until
by certain experience the truth of their first thoughts be better assured.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the I Will of the Topinambes.
SEeing the I Will of Topinambes is in this place of the River of the Amazones;
and that it is the greatest of all its Isles, the most renowned Province of any
that it waters; we shall say first, that it is of more than sixty leagues of
length; and that it is so situated in the great Amazone, that it comes nearer
to his South Side, than to his North, and that all the distances and measures,
that concern it, are in the tenth Chapter of this Book. Secondly, we shall say
that it is admirable in fertility of its Grounds, in the beauty of its banks,
in the multitude of its Habitations, whereof the most mighty is in the Eastmost
point of it, and has three degrees of South latitude. Finally, we shall say,
that once it was inhabited by its Natives, and original Indians, but that the
Topinambes coming upon them, chased them from it after sundry Battles, and
possessed themselves of it with so much glory and reputation for themselves, that
the terror of their names did reach to the neighboring Nations. Now these
Topinambes before had inhabited the South coasts of Brasile, where not being
able to endure the hard entreaty of the Portugalls toward them, after that
they had come upon them; they renounced their dear Country, and voluntarily
abandoned with great resolution more than eighty of their great Bourgades. So
they marched in infinite multitudes of men, women, and children, straight
toward the West, and under the same parallel. They crossed by swimming the
great Rivers of Parane, and of the Plata, and leaving on their left hand the
Province of Tucuman, they in end took up their lodgings on the beginnings of
the great River Madera. But it befalling one of these Topinambes some while
after to kill a Cow of a Spaniard on the frontier of Peru, for which he was
rudely chastised; the same fear that carried them too lightly to leave their
ancient abode, made them all to dislodge presently from this new one. And to
the end to put themselves far enough from all the Provinces of any
neighborhood with Peru possessed by the Spaniards; and and to make their Voyage
or removal with less inconvenience, and the more diligence and
circumspection, they embarked themselves in Canoes, which they had ready in
great number, and so suffered themselves to go at adventure down the stream of
Madera; and after sundry Months navigation, found themselves arrived in the
great Amazone, and so lastly on the banks of this I Will of Topinambe, which they
possessed by Arms, as has been said. Now this Warlike and valiant Nation
entertained very courteously the Portugalls at their passing them, and received
very pleasantly their proposalls that they made, of a mutual Covenant and
Alliance. Which alone might suffice for the conquest of the whole Realm of the
Amazone, seeing all ply to the only name of the Topinambes.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Bosphore of the Amazone, and of the Neighboring Nations to
it.
FOllowing the course of the great Amazone, you shall find about fifty four
leagues from the Topinambes, the Bosphore of the Amazone, whereby a mavelous
effect of the natural disposition of the ground of these Countries, all the
waters of the great River of the Amazones, and of all the others, that we have
described, reduce themselves by a sweet violence to the necessity of passing in
one only channel so strait, that it is no more than one good quarter of a
league. But of this famous Bosphore, and all that concerns it, see the tenth
and thirteenth Chapters of this Book; that we may pass without hinderance, to
the Province of Mataya, which lies on the South Side of the great River, from
the Province of Cayane beforementioned, unto the Bosphore of the great
Amazone. The Inhabitants whereof being often beaten by the Topinambes, have at
last submitted to their yoke, and are now their Tributaries; being bound
yearly to furnish them with Stone-axes, to fell their Woods, and great Trees;
and with other useful Instruments of the same matter for laboring and
manuring of the Ground; wherein the Topinambes are mavelous expert and
diligent, as appears in all their plains and champain Grounds. But on the
other North-banke of the great Amazone, the Province of Apanta presents it
self, happy enough in all things. It has for its confines on the West the
Province of Camsuare; on the East it passes the Bosphore; and on the North its
frontiers on the famous Region of the Amazones; which I pass over as well as
other doubtful reports, which the Spaniards and Portugalls have heard of it,
as they passed along the great River. The Inhabitants of this Province, next
Neighbors to the Topinambes, trade in Salt with them, and other Nations, that
are farther from them; and Salt is not found but in this place, all along the
whole course of the great Amazone. As to the Apantes, and Conures, they labor
their fair Fields, that are watered by the Coruris, which enters presently into
the great River, according to the tenth Chapter of this Book; as also the
Orixamine, a River no less considerable, of the same North-side and near to
the Bosphore. They have this singular amongst all the Peoples of that Country,
that their language is the common language of all Brasile, though they be
distant from it three hundred leagues. But it may be that the Topinambes, in
keeping their own, (which was this) have also communicated it to this
neighborhood. Finally, the best counsel that one can give on this behalf to a
Prince, or Republique in the progress of this conquest, is to keep the
Bosphore in his possession, and the Topinambes in amity and confederacy with
him.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Province and River of Tapayse.
PResently after that the Amazone is come forth of the famous Bosphore, he
betakes himself to his accustomed broadnesse again, and begins to mingle the
boilings of his waters, with the floods of the high-sea. The first Province
that he visits on his South Side, takes its name from the great and broad River
of the Tapayfe^, and is no less considerable for the abundance of his Fruits
and Crops, than for the courageous Nation, that inhabits it: the which is so
much the more redoubted to its Neighbors, as that it adds to its valor an
art of empoysoning their Arrows. But the Source of this fair and fertile River
is unknown to us as yet; and yet its greatness makes it appear, and persuades
us, that is it very remote on the South Side, between the coast of Brasile, and
the great Lake of Xaraya. About the year One thousand six hundred thirty, the
English went up his broad channel with one Ship, and coming down his banks
again, stayed there some time to sow, and gather Tobacco; but being chased from
thence with some loss by the Indians, they went away without returning.
Amongst the Habitations of this Province, the Portugalls found one in it, at
their return down the great River, of more than one thousand five hundred
Families; wherein they were so favorably received by this Nation, however
otherwise both hardy and barbarous, as has already been said, that all the day
long they ceased not to go and sell them Meal, Poullets, Fish, Fruits, and
other necessaries: and all with such confidence, that the very women and
children never scared at their Navy. And yet not content with these good
Offices (as it is the nature of valiant people, to be alivaies generous too)
they offered moreover to all the Portugalls there, if they would but leave
their own Country, and come and live with them, to serve them in peace, and
with a good will, and nourish them all their life time. As to the measures and
distances of the deep and broad mouth of the River of Tapayse, you may find
them in the tenth Chapter of this Book: and its length cannot well be thought
less, than from three toward four hundred leagues; whence will follow, that
he must receive many others into his bed, to become so great and broad as he
is: and that the Provinces and Nations neighboring upon him, must be very
many, abundant, and fertile.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the rich and great Province of Coropa.
BUt following of the River of the Amazones, and on the North-side, you find
after the Province of Apanta, that of Coropa, which extends its limits to the
River of Genipapa, the mouth of which is an hundred forty leagues from the
Bosphore, according to the tenth Chapter of this Book, which sets down all the
rest of its measure also. This Province has the name from the River of
Coropatube; because the name of Tube in America language, signifies nothing
else but a River. The Province is almost in the midst of the Rivers length; and
a Village of the same name is upon its entry into the great Amazone; which is
in peace, and under the obeisance of the Portugalls of the Kingdom of Brasile.
But this River is not so abundant in its waters, as in its richesse, if the
Natives abuse not themselves in assuring us of four mavelous Mountains, that
make it considerable, by the nearness of the precious Mines, that they contain
in themselves. The first is Yaguare, that contains Gold; the second, Picore,
that offers Silver, the third presents Sulphur; the fourth is Paragache,
which so shines by Sun and Moonlight, that it seems to be wrought as with
enammell, with sundry sorts of precious Stones. All these rich Mountains are
under the line, and about an hundred leagues only from Cayene, where the French
have had Colonies. But the commerce of them will be more opened, and more
commodious, by the navigation of the River of Coropa, because about six days
journeys from the same Village, that carries its name, Coropa receives another
little River coming from the Mount Yaguare, that brings with it abundance of
Gold, in form of grains and billetts. And as for assurances of the Mine of
Silver of the Mountain of Picora, they may be found from the consequence of the
relations of the same Savages; who give out with one voice, That they have
often drawn out white Metal of that Mountain, whereof they once made Axes,
and Knives; but that because of its softness, they left it off, as
unprofitable, and of no use. But in the same Province of Coropa, on the
Northbank of the great River, and six leagues before you come to that of
Genipape, is the Fort of the Destierro, where thirty Portugalls are ordinarily
in Garrison, under a Captain, that commands and governs all those Neighboring
Countries, without any s;et bounds to their extent.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the great Mouth of the great River of the Amazones.
The great River of the Amazones, the relations whereof cannot equal the
marvells of its magnificence, is no less admirable in the greatness of his
Mouth, than in all other things, that lift it up to so much glory. He begins to
open himself below the River of Genipape, and becoming always broader, he
incompasseth Islands without number, infinite Nations, and Peoples that speak
sundry languages; though the common language of Brasile extend it self also to
all these. But the most remarkable amongst others are the Tapuya, the
Aanxaiase, the Mayanase, the Angaybe, and that of the valiant Pacaches, which
inhabit also the banks of River of the same name, which comes from the
South Side into that of the Amazones. All these Isles, are wonderful in the
festility of their Fields, in the fruitful plenty of their Fishes; in the
beauty of their banks, which are crowned with a continual greenesse. But the
River of Pacach, considerable enough for its broadnesse, but yet of an
original or Source unknown, to us, bounds to the East the Province of
Paranayba, which comes after that of Tapayse hereafter mentioned. The great and
fair River of Paranayba gives it its name; whose Sources are far removed
toward the South, and the Nations that it waters in passing so many Fields,
are not as yet well known. His Mouth is two leagues wide, and the Habitations
of this Neighborhood obey the Portugalls, who govern them. And as to the
distance and measures of all those remarkable places, you shall find them in
the tenth Chapter of this Book; as also the greatest breadth of this wondrous
Mouth of the Amazone, to wit, eighty four leagues lying from the Cape of the
North, to the Province of Zaparara; which notwithstanding, because it is in an
oblique line, is not the just measure of the true entry of the great Amazone.
But to get a truer knowledge of it, follow the straight line from the foresaid
Cape of the North, to the Town of Para on the coast of Brasile, you will yet
find it so of more than sixty leagues of breadth, not to stay on the
mis-reckoning of the seventeenth Book of John Laet, a late flenmish Author,
who teaches how to find this distance, from the East point of the Mouth of
this great River, to the West Side of the same; drawing yet a more oblique
line, than that of the Cape of the North, to the point of the Zaparara, was.
But seeing we cite here the tenth Chapter of this Book, you must not fail to
put there the distance of the Genipapa from Corupa, of thirty leagues, to mend
the fault of the Printers, because of the importance of all these measures.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the great Prevince of Guyana.
SEeing the Province of Guyana ends the great River of the Amazomes on his
North-side; and Geographers have gained no great knowledge of it as yet; we
shall speak of it in manner following. On the East it has for its limit the
great mouth of the Amazone, from the River of Genipapa to Cap-north; on the
North, it is washed with the great Atlantique-Sea, for the space of three
hundred Leagues, from Cap-north, to the I Will of the Trinity: and on the West,
the great River of the Orenu serves for its coufines: but on the South it is
kept in by a ridge of Mountains parallel to the Seacoast, which separate it
from the Provinces of Camsnare, of Apanta, and of Corepa, already mentioned.
Now, these Mountains (though not yet known) are not imaginary, but real and
effective according to the natural disposition of all these Countries, seeing
the Rivers of Viapoco, of Cayene, of Maruyne, of Sequebe, and other
considerable ones of Guyana, which run all from the South to the North, and
enter into the Ocean-Sea; and those other of Genipapa, of Coropatube, of
Orixamine, and of Coruris, which run all from North to South by a contrary
course to the others, and enter into the great Amazone; have necessarily their
sources in those Mountains deep and fertile Valleys. But returning to that East
part of Guyana, which buts on the mouth of our famous River; we will first tell
you, that it begins from that of Genipapa, considerable enough both for the
greatness of his bed, and for the fine gold, that he draws along with him in
his waters: whence it follows by infallible conjecture, that the mountains of
his fource, and the plains of his neighborhood, are no less rich, happy, and
fertile, than in all the rest of America. Now the coast or this Province from
Genipapa to the Cap-nord (which forms the great mouth of the Amazon) is very
uneven in its bank, and very dangerous in its navigation, because of heights
and lowes, that are here sometimes found. But these difficulties are not in
coming down the great River, until after you have passed, and necessarily
taken notice of the place of Corupa, one of the Governments of the Portugalls
on these banks, about twenty eight Leagues from the place, where the great
River begins to open his mouth. But because Cap-nord ends the North side of
this great River, we shall tell you again, that it has one degree and forty
five minutes of North latitude, according to the tenth Chapter of this book;
likewise that the grounds about are very low, and covered with woods; the Sea
very rageing, and not very deep; the Sands moveable, and often covered with
Seaware, or weeds. And as to the rest of this coast, as you go from Cap-nord to
Corupa, see the Relations of the Hollanders, reported by Johne Laet in his
America, where you may find the knowledge of it little either necessary, or
delectable.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Province of Maragnon, and of the Town of Para.
AS the Province of Guyana ends the North-bank and brink of the great Amazone;
so the Kingdom of Brasile (under the Crown of Portugal) ends it on the South
side, by the Province of Maragnon, the Northerliest of all its Countries. It
took its name from a River and a Bay of the same name on the coast of the
Atlantique-Sea, where the Town of St. Lewis, the residence of the Governor,
and of justice, is in a very pleasant I Will. But that side of this Government of
Maragnon is far longer on the great mouth of the great River, than on that
side, that accosts the great Ocean; seeing at contains all the bank of the
Amazone for the space of an hundred Leagues from the River of Pacashe, to the
point of Zaparara. Yet in all this length of Lands so fertile, and abundant in
all things, there is but the one only Town of Para, that is considerable. From
the year 1615, the Portugalls established the Colonie there, and built the
fortress of it, which is a square of Mason-work on the Land-side; and of earth
or turfe on the Seaside. It is commanded by a Captain-major, who answers to
the Governour-Generall of the Province and under this Captain-major of the Town
of Para, are other three Captains of Infantry, dispersed in diverse places of
that Country. It is forty Leagues from the North-Sea, and from the point of
Zaparara, and thirty Leagues from the great Village of Commuta, once very
flourishing, but now ruinous, on the mouth of the great River of the
Tocantines, a Nation very fertile, and rich. It has also one degree and thirty
minutes of South latitude, and is about sixty five Leagues from Cap-nord, in a
right Line, and Geometrical measure, making twenty Leagues for every degree of
a great Circle, as we have done in the rest of this work. And as to other
distances on this South side of the great Amazone, you shall find them at the
end of the tenth Chapter of this Book; as also those of the I Will of the Sun,
which is by the waterbank of the Province of Maragnon, having more than ten
Leagues in Circuit, one very safe Haven, fish abundance, Crabs without number,
very good fresh or sweet waters, of lesser prey or game as much as they will,
and a very pleasant air. Finally a place much more convenient than that of
Para, to set up a Colonie and Forts in, whereby to command the best and safest
entry of all those, which lead from the Sea into the true Channel of the great
River of the Amazones.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Entrice into the River of the Amazones.
Such as are exercised in the navigations of the great Ocean, know nothing more
dangerous, nor more difficult, than the entries of Ports, of Bays, and of
Rivers. But in this, as in other points, the great River of the Amazones is no
less admirable, than singular. For being framed as it were to receive in times
coming the greatest and richest commerce of all the world, how could it hinder,
that its great mouth should not be defamed by Robbers or Pirates, as well as
the Gulf of Mexico? Now the same providence that has heaped upon it more than
upon all the Rivers of the earth, so many mavelous advantages and
prerogatives; would not in this either make it less perfect; having by a
certain and natural disposal and ordering of its Isles, sides, and lowes, or
flats, reduced its navigation into one only Channel, and rendered the other
passages as it were unprofitable; and by his impetuous currants (which carry
his waters thirty Leagues into the Sea) forbidden all strange Ships, and
hostile enemies to rest in these places, that they might there surprise any
Navy at their going in, or coming out. But the difficulties hitherto have been
great to find out the true tract, that Vessels ought to hold in going into the
great Amazone. And after having considered the diverse observations reported by
their Authors, Spaniards, English, and Flemish, some of them too short, and
others too confused and obscure; and most or all of them, uncertain, we shall
tell you in few words, that first of all, one must shun the currants in coming
down, going aside of them unto two degrees of South latitude; then go up again,
by the coast of Brasile, at half a degree latitude of the same side of the
Line, then double the point of Zaparara, and make Sail, or launch to the
Southwest, after that, follow the coast of the Province of Maragnon, and pass
the Channel of the I Will of the Sun at one degree and a quarter of
South-latitude, and twenty six Leagnes from the full Sea: finally make Sail to
the West, leave the side of Para, and keep the same latitude, to gain the
bankside of Corupa in the Province of Guyana: and for conclusion, follow still
the same side, and enter at last into the true Channel of the great River of
the Amazones, at two degrees of South-latitude, and thirty Leagues beyond
Corupa, which is but one degree and a half of the same side of the Line.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the first discovery of this River.
FOrasmuch as historical Relations are easilier understood, if they follow
Geographicall ones, we have changed the order of Authors, that went before us,
and begun at the latter. After that Gonsales Pizarro Governor of the Province
of Kito, had first of all the Spaniards (pushed on by the same ambition to find
gold and silver in the vast Countries of the great Amazone) passed the high and
dangerous Mountains of the Cordeliere, and discovered the Province of Kixo, his
Lieutenant General Francis of Areillana finding himself well far engaged (and
that in Challops only) on so many unknown and great Rivers; and not knowing any
sure way of going up again, and returning to his General, who with them that
were with him, suffered an extreme great want of Victuals; he would stay at the
famous place, where the River of Napo loses himself in that great one of the
Amazones; where causing his men to build another Bark, greater, and more
convenient than his others, for a long navigation, he resolved by an ambitious
desire to purchase glory, to commit his life and fortune to the uncertain
currants and waters of that great River. This admirable voyage and singular for
so many circumstances, was begun on the eighth of the Month of January in the
year 1541, and continued with so much good luck and happiness, that this great
and mavelous River was wholly navigated, and first discovered by this
ventorious Knight, from whom also the River had the name of Areillane. In
passing over the Provinces of the Cassique or Lord Aparia, this Prince received
him very courteously, and advertised him to take heed in his way of travel, of
certain Amazones and warlike women, the renown of whom, though they were very
far from him, yet ceased not to give him knowledge of them. Finally in his
course he had diverse successes, sometimes good, sometimes bad, according to
the fear or fearless confidence of the Nations, that saw him with astonishment
pass along upon the great River. And after having known not without admiration,
the Rio-negro, he saw in the Month of June, Indians in great number upon the
banks thereof; and at the head of them armed women, which seemed to command and
lead them to war: whereupon the Spaniards of Francis of Areillana, and
himself, were so persuaded of the truth of these Amazones, that they published
the report of it with such confidence, that from thence the name did remain to
this great and memorable River. Lastly, after sundry fortunes, and much
weariness, on the 26. of the month of August of the same year 1541. he went
out at the great mouth of this great River, and making sail toward the West
along the coasts of Guyana and Paria, Provinces of the same America, on the
eleventh of the month of September he happily attained the Isle of Cubagua,
near to that of Marguarite, both of them inhabited by Spaniards, and then rich
in the fishing of Pearls.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the second Expedition of Areillana in the same River.
AFter that Areillana was returned to Europe, had filled all Spain with the
admiration of his adventures, and the Court of the Emperor Charles the V. with
the hopes of the great River of the Amazones; had got also from this Prince,
(whose arms and ambition troubled no less the old, than the newfound world)
the charge of making conquest of it in the name of the Crown of Castile; and
that he had at his own leisure made ready three Ships, and manned them with
Horsemen, and provisions necessary, he made sail the xi. day of the month of
May in the year 1549. from the Haven of St Luke of Barrameda in Andalusia, for
the Tenariff in the Canaries, where the ships stayed three months, as also two
months more under Cape-verd on the Continent of Africa, loosing by those
stays an 150. soldiers by sickness. Passing from thence to the coast of
America, the tempest drowned one ship to him, which had xi. horse, and 70. men
aboard: and coming to half a degree of South-latitude, he drew up sweet water
in the full Sea, and by that conjectured, that infallibly he was in the River
of the Amazones, being not then above twelve Leagues from the point of
Zaparara. But having gone in an hundred Leagues, into the great mouth of this
great River, an 107. of his folks being yet wanting to him, and he perceiving
that the rest would not be sufficient to furnish out these two ships; he caused
of the one of them a Bark to be made, which was not completed in three
months; and making sail again, scarcely had he gone up twenty Leagues in the
same River, but he broke his other ship, of the planks whereof he was
constrained to make another Bark, which thirty men made an end of only in two
months and an half, and that with much toil and weariness. Areillana in this
mean while set himself twice with the other Bark to seek the true channel of
the Amazone; and never having been able to find it amongst so many arms and
Isles of that River, and so confused, he finished his life with his adventures,
being surcharged with travail, grief and sadness: so that the two Barks
retired themselves severally from the great Amazone, and following the coasts
of the firm Land of America, betook themselves to the Isles of Cubagua, and the
Marguarite; where the Spaniards, that were but few now surviving this so
ruinous an expedition, made an end of all the rest of their lives, dying there
of sickness.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Pedro D'Orsua, and of the Tyrant Lope d'Aguirre.
AS all the Authors, that have employed their watchings to describe largely
unto us the things of America, were neither good enough Geographers, nor good
enough Geometricians, to disintangle the difficulties, that grows ordinarily in
such matters; so they have but too often fallen into contrarieties, that make
their Histories confused; and into obscurities, that robs their Readers of
possibilities to understand them. Such as would take advantage at depressing
them, will somewhat strange at my censure of them: but I seeking nothing but
truth, and not after vainglory in my works; will pass on to my subject of
this famous River; the discovery whereof was no more essayed from Spain its
self, after the disgraces of Francis of Areillana; but by the Spaniards of the
Kingdom of Peru it was under the conduct of Pedro d'Orsua in the year 1560. by
the orders of the Viceroy there, who gave him a little Army in a fleet well
enough equipped. The embarkment for this expedition, was on the River of
Maragnon, the nearest to the Town of Lima; the chief of that Province. But a
few months after their departure, the soldiers mutinied against their
General, and put him to death; and Lope d'Aguirre, the boldest of them all,
took the title of King upon him, and made himself to be obeyed of some, by
threats; and of others, by promises. Following out the navigation of Maragnon
therefore, and always going down that River, he entered into the great Amazone,
and suffering himself to be carried down by the current of his ample channel,
he stayed chiefly at the mouth of Rio-negro: where coming to consider of the
greatness of his crime, and the danger he had to fall into the hands of the
Spaniards of the North-sea, if he went once out of the great River; he so
addressed his whole Fleet in Rio-negro, as having no other design than to rove
up and down so many Rivers, and pass through so many Countries, only to
sustain his tyranny. But fortune less blind than his prudence, thrust him in
his course of sailing into the River of Orenoc, which coming to end in the
Atlantick-sea over against the Isle of the Trinity (subject to the Crown of
Castile) he was presently there made to stay, partly by his own soldiers,
partly by the Catholic Kings officers, and led to the punishment, which his
felony deserved; his houses also in Peru, by the same sentence were razed, and
so continue and show themselves yet in our days. But a voyage so surprising
for Geographers, and so ill understood by Authors that have gone before me,
because not able to take up the strange order of all these Rivers, could not be
better hitherto cleared, than by the preceding Chapters of this Book,
especially the 16, and 17. And the only difficulty which presents it self now,
is only in the leap or fall of Orenoc, discovered 1531. by Diego de Ordas; as
also 1536. by Alphonse de Herrera, coming from Tinity-Isle. Herrera made draw
his Barks by Land, till he was above that leap of this River; the like possibly
having been done by the Mutineers of Lope d' Aguirre the Tyrant: or that the
descent of the same leap being uneasier to Challops, than to ascend it, because
of the force of Apanta, (which is the name of a River as well as of a Province)
it is possible also, that those of Aguirra have passed down the leap without
disenbarking any; and that so much yet the more easily, if it was in the time
of the inundation (which is ordinary in all those Rivers) which raises the
boylings of their waters above the rocks of their fall.

CHAP. XL. Of the Unfortunate Expedition of Maldonado.
MEan while the designs of this renowned discovery, was no less vigorously
embraced by the ambition and covetousness of the Spaniards of the Town of
Cusco. The great and deep River of Amarumaya gave them the occasions of it;
because the Province of Moxa, of their neighborhood, furnishes the abundant
Sources of it. And the first amongst them, that had a thought of it, (after the
Inca's, that had attempted it in vain) was Gomez de Tordoya, having got the
privilege from the Count of Niebla the Viceroy of Peru. He failed not
presently to make the necessary expenses for it, and by considerable advances
to order all its preparations. But his power expiring by the removal of the
Count of Niebla; and his Successor (that was of the House of Castro) conferring
it upon Gaspar de Sotelle, confounded all things by this change. This last to
authorize his own credit, had associated himself with the Inca Topacamare, of
the race of the ancient Kings, that dwelt at Bileobambe. And if the too great
number of Soldiers, that voluntarily offered to follow them, had not cast some
suspicion into the head of the Viceroy, and the spirits of the supreme
Counsel, who manage this conquest with an extreme great jealousy; Gaspars
enterprise had not been broken, and the same privilege granted to Johne
Alvarez of Maldonado. Who having finally An. 1566. passed the Mountains of the
Andes, and entered into the famous Province of Moxa, gave beginning to that
unfortunate rather than famous expedition, in going aboard his Rafts, or
Float-boates, with two hundred and fifty Soldiers well armed, and an hundred
Horse in good equippage; to follow the tossed waves of the Amarumaya, and by
suffering himself to be carried by his fierce stream, to go down into the vast
Fields of the great Amazone. But fortune being envious at the glory that he
promised himself from this famous discovery, failed not presently to overturn
the success. Gomez de Tordoya (as we have said) could not suffer with
patience, neither the outrage of calling him back, nor the loss of his
expenses: his ressentment of these, followed with courage, disposes him to
sedition, seeing all his complaints were always rejected; he therefore now
carries himself upon his own authority, to put the same enterprise in
expedition, and that against the discharging of him by the Viceroy. By his own
boldness he passes the Mountains and the Forests of those unknown places,
and being followed by sixty Spanish Soldiers, he prevents his competitor by a
precipitated march. When he had attained the River of Amarumaya, and known that
the Fleet was not yet passed, he resolved to wait on it in that place, and to
fight it, as he did, soon as it arrived. The medly was sharp, and endured three
days; the valor in the two parties was equal; and the number of the slain
and hurt was so great in this unfortunate rencountre, that the Chonques, (a
Neighboring People) casting themselves in Arms upon the rest, put all to
death, with Tordoya, none escaping in this miserable conflict, but the General
Maldonado, Father Diego Martin, a Portugal; and Simon Lope, that was excellent
in artillery: who, after having stayed two years amongst these Barbarians,
returned by I know not what way of accommodation, to the Province of Moxa, of
the dependence of Cusco, whither they went afterward.

CHAP. XLI. Of other Designs for the Discovery of this River.
THe sad events of the Fleet of D'Orsua, and De Maldonado did no more slacken
the courage, than slaked the greed of the Spaniards in research of immense, or
rather imaginary Treasures of the great Amazone. They were long enough time
both in Spain, and America, quiet, and moved not for this conquest. Only in the
year 1621, the King Don Philip the fourth, sent Powers to the royal Audience of
Kyto, to treat of fitting conditions, for the discovery of this River, with
those of his Nobility, that were employed in places and charges of that
Province. But by that time all these Orders (in order to Propositions, that the
Sergeant Major Vincent de Villalobos, Governor of the Province of Kixo, had
made for any that took that charge; and during the making whereof, for the
longsomenesse of the goings, and comings of Posts, and of consultations
ordinarily to be used in such rencontres, the time of his Government coming to
expire) were come to that point, that for any might take that charge, the good
intentions of the Catholic King in this, were for that time made
unprofitable, not only by the change of the Governor, but also by the death of
his Successor Alonzo de Miranda, who carried himself with the same zeal,
toward the same discovery. Now the rumor of these goodly and noble
Propositions of the Castilians of Peru passing presently into Brasile, the
emulation of the Portugalls made them presently make the like about the same,
in the Court of the Catholic King there, who was yet in possession of their
Kingdom. So that upon the warmth and zeal that Benito Maciel Governor of the
Province of Maragnon witnessed that he had for the discovery of the great River
of the Amazones, by that side of its mouth that bounded his Government; the
Patents were sent him 1626, in the ordinary conditions. But his generous
designs were yet hindered by the Wars of the Hollanders against the
Portugalls in the Province of Pernambouk, of the same Kingdom of Brasile, and
Frontier to that of Maragnon, who feared not a little the disasters of it. Mean
while the orders of this conquest are redoubled by the cares of the King Don
Philip. They are always sent to the Governor of Maragnon; and Francis Coeille
of Carvaille, who had then the Government of it, received them 1633, and 34:
who notwithstanding coming to consider, that in parting his Forces, for to send
some of them, or conduct them himself, for discovery of the great River of the
Amazones; that the rest that stayed in the Province, would not be able to guard
it against the assaults of the Hollanders, who from the year 1630, had taken
the famous Town of Olynda, of the Province of Pernambouk, and possessed the
neigbouring coasts; the expedition for the discovery was by him wisely delayed.
Thus a necessity to defend themselves, hindered yet the Portugalls for this
time, to aspire to the glory of an enterprise so much desired, and so often
before checked.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Religious of St Francis, that came down all the great River.
IT was in the beginning of the year 1635, that Captain Johne de Palacies (of
whom we have spoken before) accompanied with thirty Spanish Soldiers, and six
religious of the Convent of St Francis of the Town of Kyto, descended from the
Mountains of the Cordelier into the Plains of Kixo, to settle his abode (as he
did without hindrance as to the Savages) at the Village of Anete upon the great
River of the Amazones. In this Post (the furthest advanced of all those that
the Spaniards held in the East Countries of the Andes) the valor of Johne de
Palacios, and of his, seemed no less admirable, than the zeal of the religious
of St Francis, showed it self ardent for advancing the Christian Religion. Both
the one and the other exercised themselves in these places, either to make the
neighboring Nations obedient to the Crown of Castille, or to gain souls to God
from amongst so many Peoples, no less fierce than Savage. But neither their
perseverance in their travalls, nor their courage in their fights, nor finally
their holy and zealous exhortations, could ever prevail any thing, especially
in the Province of the long-hair'd People, where Captain Johne de Palacios
1636, was put to death by the Barbarians. Whereby all his Soldiers were so
discomforted, and the religious themselves were so far put back, that
abandoning all of them presently their abode at Anete, they retired all to
their ancient Houses; under the reserve or disposal of Father Andrew of
Toledo, Father Dominique de Brieve, and six Soldiers only that were resting;
not to stay any longer in those unfortunate places; but to go all into a little
Bark, and to expose themselves to the rapid current of the vast Amazone, and
try better adventures in his waters, than on the firm Land, that butted on his
banks. So destiny has reserved the Names of those two religious to be inserted
in Histories, that their mavelous hardiness to have enterprised a Voyage so
extraordinary for so many circumstances, might never be wiped out of memory of
Ages to come. For if Amerique and Drake have been no less glorious, for having
been but the seconds, the one for touching on the firm Land of America; and the
other for rounding the world; these other feeble and new Argonantes shall also
be no less renowned, for having but made the second Navigation of all the
great River of the Amazones. In end after much wearisomenesse endured, many
dangers escaped, and always upheld by Providence, these two Fathers of St
Francis, the six Spanish Soldiers, and their little Bark, the companion of
their glory, arrived happily at Para a Town of Brasile, where they presently
filled the eyes and ears of all the People with admiration: but above all the
noble courage of Pedro Texeira Captain Major, who commanded in that great and
rich Capitanrie of the Province of Maragnon; the Governor General whereof,
(then James Raymund of Norogna) resided at St Lewis, whether the two religious
went to him in like manner, to give him as much content by the pleasant
relations of their singular adventures; as emulation to this conquest by the
famous examples of their memorable Voyage.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Departure of Pedro Texeira for this Discovery.
IN end fortune being wearied, so long to cross a design, that Spain had
traveled with, with so much care; cast her favorable eyes on the person of
Pedro Texeira Captain Major of Para in Brasile, that his courage and prudence
coming to second the choice that she had made of him, and preferred him to so
many Subjects of merit, he might arrive at the glory to have been the first, to
make the whole great River of the Amazones feel the heavy and victorious Fleets
of the Catholic King. Now the necessity of the Portugalls self-defence, who
had the expense and diversion of a continual War in the midst of Brasile to
maintain, could not allow to this noble expedition, Forces more considerable,
than those that parted from the Town of Para the twenty eight of the Month of
October in the year 1637, under the conduct of Captain Major Pedro Texeira (of
the same Nation) followed by forty seven Barks, both great, and well armed;
by seventy Portugal Soldiers, and one thousand two hundred Indians fitted to
the War; by eight hundred Women and Vallets; and furnished with provisions
meet and necessary for so long, and doubtful an enterprise. The dexterity of
the Mariners and Rowers, and the favorable help of the winds, broke the
first difficulties, that the Fleet could have had, to gain without loss and
danger the true channel of the great Amazone. But in departing from the coasts
of the Province of Maragnon, and of the Countries that are subject to it, the
Portugalls could no longer know neither the bank-sides, nor the right ways and
courses of the great River, because of so many crooked Arms of his, that he
castes out, and thereby frames his many Islands. So that the Navigation
becoming longer, by following ways uncertain, and not before known; and the
troubles and toils inseparable from a Sea-Army, that must often disembark, to
camp on the firm Land, began to weary the Indians, and to distaste them from
further pursuing of the Voyage. Already many of them stole away, to regain (as
well as they could) the Land of their Nativity; and those that stayed peaceably
behind in the Barks, or in the Camp, ceased not to make their minds known by
their murmurings: in so far that the fear of a greater deserting of him, giving
this General occasion of just unquietness, he set himself to find out more
sure ways to prevent this disorder, since punishment and severity kept out
hardly to their duty the rest of the Indians, and Vallets of his Army. He was
but yet half way come in his Voyage; but feigned that he was near enough the
place, where the Fleet should arrive. And the better to persuade them to this,
he ordered eight Barks well furnished and well armed, to go before, and as it
were to make the encampments for the body of the Army to follow, in places
where it was to Land. But in truth, his intent was in this, only to find out
and discover the best ways, that were to be held in the great River, and by
these ambiguities to keep all his men in breath.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Arrival of the Fleet at Peru.
MEan while the Fleet goes on, her Sails being filled with an East Wind,
always favorable, and triumphs over the rapid current of the proud Amazone.
Already six Months were past, and six hundred leagues had been measured, which
they had run; the half of the way was done, and sundry Nations had been
discovered. The wildest amongst them fled to the Mountains, or lesser Hills;
the less fearful stood unmoved upon the Banks; the more confident came and
traffiqued with the Camp: but the valientest, no more than the others, never
armed themselves against the Fleet, nor against her Avantcourriers or
Vantguard: which already very far advanced, because of its lightness, was
tracing and following on the channells of the great River, the ways that were
streightest, and least oblique, and marked forth the addresses, or directions,
on the Banks, by Trophies set up, or by Ensigns set together. The Vantguard
was commanded by Bennet Rodrigue d'Olivera, a Portugal, who having been born
in Brasile, and brought up as it were amidst the Americans, he dived presently
into the secret of their thoughts, and by the least of their actions, he could
guess what they had in their minds: whence he was as well feared, as respected
by all the Indians of these Countries: so that by his good qualities, he had
also this prerogative, to contribute much to the happy finishing of so noble an
enterprise. So pursuing the Voyage with his Vantguard of eight Barks armed, he
attained with as much diligence, as good luck, the Port of Payamine in the
Province of the Kixes, the 24th of June in the year 1638, while the Captain
Major with all the rest of the Fleet followed the traces advices, and
addresses, that Olivera left at the places, where he had rested with his
Vantguard: whence the Soldiers of his Army, receiving every day comfort, they
thought always, that the morrow was to be the last of the Voyage. Thus
entertained with this hope, they arrived at the River of the long-hair'd
People, on the Mouth of which, Pedro Texcira made forty Portugalls, and three
hundred Indians of his Troops, to encamp, and gave orders to Pedro d'Acosta
Savela (who was appointed to the command of them) to stay in this place, and
not to depart thence, till he heard from him; leaving there moreover Pedra
Bayon a Captain also of infantrie. And himself continuing his Navigation with
some few persons, he came likewise to the Haven of Payamine toward the end of
September, having passed one thousand two hundred leagues in a continual going
up the River of the Amazones, since the 28th of October of the year before.
After that, from thence taking his way by Land, and cross the Mountains of the
Andes, he came no less happily, than gloriously to the Town of Kito, where he
was received with such Acclamations and Triumphs, as the greatness and
success of his Enterprise did deserve.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Orders of the Viceroy for the Return of the Portugalls.
AFter that the Royal Audience of the Town of Kito, had received from the
Portugalls all the informations that were needful on a business of such
importance, which looked toward the discovery, or conquest of the great River
of the Amazones; it would not for all that deliberate upon it, nor proceed to
things so weighty, without giving advertisement thereof to the Count of
Chinchon Viceroy of Peru. Who with the other Officers of the King of Spain,
having considered all the circumstances of a success so advantageous, sent the
Audience his Orders from the Town of Lima, the chief of the whole Kingdom,
dated the 20th of November in the year 1638, to send back with all diligence
the Portugalls, by the way that they came to the Town of Para, giving them and
furnishing them with all things necessary and fit, for fear that Brasile
suffered not inconvenience by the Hollanders, through so great and far an
absence of so many worthy Persons of service: and to persuade them to receive
into their company two faithful Persons, that were Dependants on the Crown of
Castile, to give an account to his Catholic Majesty, of all that was
discovered, and should be discovered along the great Amazone in the return of a
like Voyage. Presently after the Orders of the Viceroy were published through
the Town of Kito, sundry Spaniards, especially Religious, presented themselves
for the choice, to go on that Voyage. But as Don Johne Vasquez d'Acogna,
Lieutenant General of the Province of the same name, and Knight of the order
of Calatrave, was making offers much more advantageous for the Crown of
Castile, proposing to make Levies, pay the Soldiers, buy Provisions, and bear
all other charges in favor of this conquest, the Count of Chinchon broke
presently the design, judging it no ways convenient to the service of the
Catholic King, that that Personage should then leave his Charge. And Father
Christopher d'Acogna, his Brother, a Spanish Jesuit, who has merited to live
as long in the memories of men, as the great Amazone shall run in the Fields
of America, had the good hap of this nomination: wherein he behaved himself
with so much zeal toward God, so much fidelity toward his Prince, so much
affection toward the Soldiers, and so much care to remarke, and put in writ
all the circumstances of the great River, that his glory is beyond all praise.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Camp of the Portugalls in the Province of the long-hair'd
Nation.
While all this is in preparing by the diligence of Alonzo Perez de Salazar,
President of the Royal Audience of Kito, for the return of the Portugalls; and
the Rendesvows of the Fleet, and the Troops, is put upon the 20th of Feburary
1639, in the Town of Archidona, and at the Haven of Napo, a great deal more
convenient in all things, than that of Payamino: let us go visit the Camp of
the Portugalls on the River of the Chevelu's or long-hair'd People, until the
Army come to it again in its coming down. It was left in this place by the
prudence of the Captain Major Texeira, as well to content the Provinces of the
Crown of Custile, as to give the less jealousy to the Spaniards of Peru, in
keeping far enough off from the limits of that Kingdom. At the first, the Camp
had good correspondence with the Savages of that Country; it had victuals and
provisions enough for buying. But this peaceable commerce could not last long,
because of the late death of Captain John de Palacies, who was defait by the
Savages of this Country and Province. Some of the Camp desired to revenge it,
and chastise their boldness; but others feared to get hard measure and rough
handling from them. Thus the least occasion coming to sow the discord, and
three Indians of the Portugalls having been put to death by the Natives; these
fierce people put themselves in arms, to defend their own lives, and their
Countries. In so great a danger, the Portugalls lost not their courage; and as
having been used to this long before, not to suffer such a licentiousness
amongst the Native Indians where they were; they set themselves presently to
punish them for this. And after they had killed some of them, and taken alive
more than seventy, they kept them as slaves, until they all either died, or
escaped by flight. But after this the Portugalls could have no provision but by
the point of their Sword, and by continual excursions of their men, sent from
their Camp; both giving and receiving also a great deal of hurt, above all in
their Vessels, whereof some were saccaged, or spoiled, and the less strong of
them quite undone by these Barbarians. But in the snares and ambushes, as many
Portugalls as were taken alive, their throats were cruelly cut, which amounted
to some considerable loss to them; though that of the enemies was far greater.
Thus the prudence and valor of Pedro d'Acosta, the courage and fidelity of
Pedro Bayon, and as well the discipline, as obedience of the Soldiers, can
never receive their just enough praises, for having maintained their Camp thus
in the Province of the long-hair'd People, for eleven whole Months, and
without any other News from their own, than the return of the Fleet, upon which
they went all aboard again.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Return of the Fleet of the Portugalls.
ALl things being ready, and the embarking at an end toward the end of
February 1639, the Fleet of the Portugalls began their Return from the Haven of
Napo on the River of the same name: and after having sailed thirty leagues on
the current of this River strong and swift enough, it entered into the great
River of the Amazones, at the Junto of the Rivers, a much celebrated and famous
place, whereat the adventurous Areillana gave the first beginnings to the whole
discovery. In going down, the course of the great Amazone served them for
Sails, and the Mariners or Rowers less troubled with work rested them often,
and sleeped sweetly by reason of the murmuring noise the billows made, that
pusht forward their Ships. All the Peoples also and Nations upon the banks,
are pretty favorable to it: commerce of victuals and of merchandise, being
opened to it on all sides. The civility of the Homagues appeared to it very
pleasant; and the generosity of the Yorimans, seemed yet more obliging. But
arriving at Rio-negro the twelfth of October 1639, the undiscreet greediness of
the Portugalls stays the course and happiness of these civilities, and of their
own good voyage. The Portugalls could get no riches in Brasile, but by the
number of their slaves; and the Soldiers being angry for having gained nothing
in all this long expedition, force the Captain-major to leave the great River
of the Amazone, and to enter into that of Rio-negro, to take from them there by
force of Arms their slaves, which are in great multitudes among the Nations
that inhabit on that River. The Sails were already spread, and the East wind
blew on their poup, and the fear of an unbridled license made many fear a
greater change; when Father Christopher d'Acogna a Spanish Jesuit, pushed on
by an ardent zeal to see the accomplishment of so long and hazardous an
enterprise, presents himself to the General Pedro Texeira, and gives him a
protestation written and sealed with his own hand, as on the behalf, and for
the interest of the Catholic King: and exhorts him, to remove the Soldiers
from their resolution by his Authority, or to command absolutely to strike
Sail, for returning to the course of the great Amazone. This action so
vigorously undertaken, and worthy of praise, deserved to see no worse success,
than presently it did: the Sails struck, the Soldiers in silence, the Mariners
obedient, the Ships carried along again by the current of the great River.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the arrival of the Fleet at Brasile.
AFter the Portugalls of the Fleet of the great Amazone, had lost the sight of
the higher lands of the point of the Comanares on the great and famous mouth of
Rio-negro, which seemed to themselves to run back from them; visited also in
their passage the warlike and valiant Nation of the Topinambes, in the fashions
that we have before described; and heard in these places (as before the
Spaniards of Areillana had done) the rare and pleasant tales or fables of the
Amazones (which we reserve to the Chapter following, to give you an account of
them) the deep Bosphore, (into which the waters of the great River, and of all
the others that augment it, shut up themselves into one strait Channel of
about a good quarter of a League) gives them for the second time a free and
sure passage; that so following out their navigation with the like felicity,
but yet receiving from the T^payses the testimony of a mutual good will, they
might finally arrive at the Town of Para in Brasile, the twelfth of December
1639, as they did: but with so much glory and reputation not only to the
Captain-major Pedro Texeira, but also the Portugal Officers and Soldiers of
this famous expedition, that their memories engraven on tables of brass, shall
no less endure in ages to come, than the great Amazone shall in America. And
forasmuch as Father Christopher d'Acogna, and Father Andrew of Artieda, both
Spaniards and Jesuits, were deputed by the Royal audience of Kito to assist in
the name of the Catholic King, and of the Crown of Castill, to this important
discovery, and no less renowned navigation; as also thereafter to go into
Spain, to give an account of all to the Counsel of the Indies: these two
religious Fathers heaped with honor and praise, failed not to go there 1640,
where after they had laid out in the presence of the King himself Don Philip
the fourth, the greatnesses and marvells of the River of the Amazones; as also
the glory and importance of such a conquest; Father d'Acogna presently
published all the circumstances, and remarks that he had made, in a very short
work; from which we drew the better part of this our Book.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Amazones of America.
THat Asia may not vaunt her self of her reports of Amazones, whether true, or
fabulous, America yields nothing to her in this point. Let not the fields of
Themiscyra triumph any more in the renown of her famous women; the Province of
Apanta is no less famous for her heroic Dames. Neither let the River of
Thermodoon be puffed up any more with the glory of its conqueresses; seeing the
River of Coruris is as famous for her fair she-Warriors. His famous sources are
honored with their rich habitations. The Mountains of Guyana, fertile in mines
of gold and silver are their confines on the North-side; and the Mount
Yacamabe, proud above all the rest, is in the midst of their fair and fertile
Valleys. The first notice that the Spaniards had of them, came to them from the
generous Prince Aparia 1541, who told the first wonders of them to the
adventurous Francis of Areillana: and the consent of all the Nations of the
great River of the Amazones, in favors of this report, as true, has from them
given the name for ever to this admirable River. For all this, the guesses at
this matter are not very certain; but the famous actions of the goodly Ladies
of America, during the wars of all these conquests, do not a little confirm
the appearances thereof. For these have often appeared in Arms at the head of
Battalioes, as is to be seen in the Histories of Acosta, and of Herrera: and in
fighting with their own hands, they have sustained the assaults of the enemies,
and obliged the Indians at the same time to imitate the effects of their great
courage. The valor of that noble Lass which 1536, in the Province of Bogota,
slew five Spaniards with arrows shot from her own hands, before she fell dead
at their feet, will for ever be renowned. And those goodly and great women,
which presented themselves armed on the head of the Americans, upon the Bank of
the great Amazone, near to Coruris (as we have related before) gave much credit
to the first opinion of these Amazones of the new-world. This is not yet enough
for us to persuade our selves of the truth of these valiant and warlick Ladies:
the royal audience also of Kito, has sometimes received considerable
informations of it. That audience a long time applied its cares to have sound
out the knowledge of these Amazones; and the depositions that to them were made
thereof at sundry times, agree all in this point: That in the vast fields of
this America, there was one Region peopled with warrioresse women, which living
and maintaining themselves without men, had no communication with them, but on
some certain days of the year, to have by them children, or daughters like
unto themselves. And in the Town of Pasto subject to the same audience, an
Indian woman gave assurance, that she her self had been in their Country; and
by her other Relations agreed with the precedent circumstances. But the most
singular testimonies of it, that have been given to the Spaniards, or
Portugalls, was 1639 in descending the great River, and in the great habitation
of the Topinambes, and East-point of their famous Isle. This Nation as generous
as valiant, was never wearied with reciting the wonders of these Amazones. They
spoke of their policy, and of their valor, much like what the Grecians and
Latins have sung of the policy and valor of the Amazones of Asia. And not to
stay longer on this discourse, be it true, or be it fabulous, I will conclude
it with this renowned name of the Comapoyares, under which the Amazones of
America are every where known only.

CHAP. L. Of the qualities of the Air and grounds of the great Amazone.
BUt can one thus put an end to this work, without doing incomparable wrong to
the River of the Amazones? Can one pass with silence, and without reproach the
rest of so many wonderful advantages, and prerogatives; or without injustice
the admirable effects, wherewith prodigal nature honors and glorifies it? No
certainly; and contrary to my first purpose, I consent to pass lightly over
again these matters, howsoever pleasant and provoking to stay more upon them;
referring to the weak curiosity of an ability limited and given to such things,
the vain research of Animals, Fruits, and Plants, of this unmeasurable
Country. In which neither does the heat ever choke; nor the cold ever seize
it; the Air is always alike, because its Winter (as in the rest of America)
proceeds of no other occasion, but from inundations, which hinder the
productions of the earth, or retard them for some Months: and not from any
recesse or withdrawing of the Sun, which every day there rises, and sets at
the same hour. What marvels should not one be persuaded of, from an heaven so
benign and favorable? Let none after this wonder, to know that the consecrated
Hosties of the Father Jesuits for their Mass, are kept fresh and sound during
so long a voyage, on the waters (which comes not so to pass elsewhere) and let
none refuse any longer to believe, that Flies and other such troublesome
Beasts, are not met with in these places, as in others under the torride Zone,
where they are so ordinary, and every where so many, that the abode in those
places would be much happier, were it not for the inconveniences that these
very Beasts infest them with. But what ought the land and grounds then of so
noble a climate to be? Does not this also agree to all the other prerogatives
of this admirable River? And as the base and foundation of the happinesses of
all these Provinces, must not this also be equally goodly and rich in all its
parts? All its banks are enriched and crowned with fair trees always green,
and of incomparable greatness. The field and champany grounds are large, and
all covered with flowers diverse and variable. Every where its Valleys are
enameled with green, and always moist. Its hills and mountains are all loaded
with woods and forests pleasant to behold. Plants and Simples are every where
in great abundance; also honey of Bees, that serves both for nourishment and
for medicine: and which is yet more mavelous, a sort of oil so excellent,
that it no ways gives place to the balm, and that the most precious of the
ancient world, for all sorts of hurts.

CHAP. LI. Of the fertility of the earth, and of the waters, for food to men.
AS to the most ordinary aliments, that serve for nourishing innumerable
Nations, and infinite peoples, that labor the unmeasurable fields of the Realm
of the great Amazone; the first in order of nature are diverse and various
fruits, which the happy and rich grounds of those Countries bring forth; like
indeed for kind to those of all the rest of America; but more excellent,
ingreater plenty, and of better substance. After them, follow Fish, in so great
abundance and multitude, not only in the great River, and others less, but also
in an infinite of Lakes, which the ordinary debordments and overflowings of
their Rivers, make in the neighboring plains; that one needs never fail to
take them with their hands only; and yet more easily, when by retreat of the
Rivers, the Lakes are dried up by the heat of the Sun. In the great diversity
of so many Fishes, as in the rest of the new world, the Sea-Veal, or Seal, and
the Tortoise, are not the least considerable, whether for greatness, substance,
or delicacy. And the fishing of them is wonderful, and prodigious, as also the
way to keep them both, long time alive. Lastly comes the hunting of Venison, as
of all other lesser prey, or game, whether with Hair, or Feather, in the same
abundance, and with the same ease, that in all other parts of America. But the
Partridges, and the Hens of it, came from Peru, whither the Spaniards had at
first carried them. And for a witness infallible of all these admirable
circumstances, we need but to allege the example of the Camp of the
Portugalls: which lodging every day on land, during so long a voyage, as well
in going up, as coming down the great Amazon, never failed to send presently
the half of their men, some of them to hunt with dogs; some of them to fish
with arrows (the other half remaining to set up their hutts, and draw their
trenches) whence they returned in a few hours so loaded with fish, and lesser
beasts of prey of all sorts, that all the Camp had sufficient, and in
abundance. But as we have spoken enough of the bread, and of the meal made in
those parts, of the Yoka, of Mays, and of the Mandioka, as in the rest of
America; we shall add only here, that their drinks are likewise made of them,
which serve them as well ordinarily, as in the common rejoycings of all those
peoples.

CHAP. LII. Of the richness of Trade for strangers.
FInally to shut up and make an end of this work, by recital of the great
riches, which will one day make the commerce of the great Amazone considerable
to all Europe; we shall begin (without speaking more of gold and silver, or of
its Rivers and Mountains to the same purpose) from the abundance, and quality
of its woods, and trees, the most excellent in all the world, and the best to
build whole Fleets with, and Ships as great, as any have been in the Ocean;
because all the Banks, as well of the great, as of other lesser Rivers, are all
covered with Cedars so fair, and great, that they surprise the sight of such as
consider them; Father d'Acogna having measured himself one of the greatest of
them, of more than six else in circumference. Next to them we shall mention
Ebeny, and the wood of Brasile, both so precious, and so much sought after;
which are so perfect there, and in so great multitude in all these fields, that
they can never be spent. In the third place, we shall mention the Cocos tree,
so thick along all those Banks, that the very Hutts of the Camp of the
Portugalls, were made of no other than of the fair branches of these. They bear
the best fruit of any in all the Indies; and with a little travail they can
yield each of them, seven or eight crowns every year. After these comes
Tobacco, which would be better, and more abundant in all those Provinces, than
in all the rest of the world, if it were followed here with a happy culture.
After this Canes the Sugar, whereof more excellent comes, and more abundant
than elsewhere, would never fail, nor dry up, because of the inundations, which
keep the fields always fresh, by the number of Lakes, which are there made
thereby; and whereby milles and other engines to that purpose, might easily be
made, by the convenience of the woods, and of the running waters of so many
Rivers; whence it would come to pass, that the work about it would be less
expensive, and the revenue by it would be greater than ordinary. Finally comes
the Cotton to be spoken of, which is here every where in extreme great
abundance. Then the Orock, which dies Scarlet of a prefect good color. Lastly
the Pity, whereof Thread or Yarn most excellent is made, exceeding fine and
delicate, yet very common in all the Provinces of the great Amazone. And for
conclusion, here are the Fistulecane, the Salsaparilla, the Oils like to the
most precious Baumes; the Gums, and odoriferous Rozins, and other like riches,
which will be discovered in time coming, in these happy Countries, to make this
renowned commerce always greater, and more considerable.

FINIS.
A first Advertisement to Geographers, upon the Longitudes of America.

FOrasmuch as the knowledge of the Longitudes of the Globe of the Earth, is as
important, as necessary, in the Theory, and practice of Geography, of the
Sphere, of Astronomy, of Navigation, of Astrology; it must not be thought
strange, if so many excellent persons, and knowing men have ever bended
themselves to establish these the most perfectly; or, to say better, the least
imperfectly, that was possible to them. But as the difficulties of it have
never been well overcome, at least to the Use and Application; so I cannot now
consent to the last Cart, and recentest Topography of South- America, touching
this Longitude: in which Cart there is but fifty eight degrees, and twenty
minutes of difference between Port Vieux (or old) and Cape St. Augustine, where
South- America is broadest, and longest. For as before, the Spaniards made its
breadth but of fifty one degrees, and the Portugalls, of fifty five, (both the
one, and the other being moved thereto by reasons of State and policy, because
of the debate about the Moluccoes) and after them, the moderner observers of
this difference of Longitudes, extend it to fifty eight, as we have said: so
this change could not have been made, but by observation of Eclipses made under
diverse Meridians. Whence it follows also, that this new Longitude of the
West-coasts of America, is not yet exact enough, because of the differences,
that are ordinarily found in such astronomicall Observations; whether through
the fault and littleness of the instruments, or the negligence of the
Observers, who seek the hours and minutes of them, by Astrolabes, and not by
the way of Sphericall Triangles: to say nothing of the difficulties about
Parallaxes in the Eclipses of the Sun, and of the Phenombres in the Eclipse of
the Moon, which hinder the taking exactly of the time of her immersion, and
emersion, under and out of the shadow of the Earth.

But to let it be seen, that I am not the only man, that take to my self this
license, to suspect and give little trust to the exactness of these
Observations, so as thereby definitively to regulate Longitudes, with neglect
of itinerary distances, which (being well managed) often supply in some sort
the others too great incertitude: I shall here set down the examples, which
John Kepler; that famous Astronomer, thought good himself to set down at the
end of the Catalogue of the Towns, of the Rodolphine Tables, that he might show
the varieties of the difference of Longitudes, found out by diverse
Observations of the same Eclipses, between the Meridians of Rome, and
Norimberg, as follows. Regiomontanus makes it of thirty six minutes of an
hour, or of nine degrees of the equator; and with him, many more. Stafler, and
Verner of eighteen minutes of an hour, or of font degrees, and an half. Shoner,
Mercator, and Hondius, regulate it to twelve minutes of an hour, or to three
degrees. And leaving others, Kepler himself has reduced it to four minutes of
an hour, or to one degree only. So that the varieties of the difference of
these two Meridians, in so little a distance, as they stand in, coming to eight
whole degrees; with how much more reason may we doubt of the true Longitude of
the West-coasts of the South and North- America? Now these diversities are no
less frequent every where else, as may be verified by the difference of the
Meridians of the same Rome, and of Toledo in Spain, set down in Authors of
Astronomy, and Geography. For Kepler the last and painfullest of all, reduces
it to sixteen degrees; and according to others, it amounts often to thirty.
Which notwithstanding we have made an essay to remedy (as much as the matter
does permit) in our Geographicall Tables, by more exact cares and researches,
than those of this curious Author Kepler himself; which being not yet Printed,
yet Monsieur Morin the Kings professor of the Mathematics, has not thought
ill to draw out of them, that which he has set at the beginning of his
Abridgement of the Rodolphine Tables, as preferable to any other Catalogue of
Towns, that he could then meet with to serve his purpose.

After these Reasons brought, I would now willingly consent, that the Longitude
of the West-coast of America were made shorter by ten degrees at least, that
the difference of the Longitudes of the Town of Kito, and of the Point of
Zaparara were made of forty seven degrees, and so the distance from the one to
the other, in a straight Line, of nine hundred forty Geometrical Leagues. And
this would agree better, and not be so far different from the total number of
measures observed in the navigation of the great River of the Amazones, as is
to be seen in the eighth Chapter of this Book; through all which (that we might
change nothing, out of our own opinion) we have set down the Longitudes,
according to the ordinary and recentest Carts of South- America. But surely it
ought to be made broader by Geographers, that shall go over it again, to find
place there for all that we faithfully relate unto them in this work, that so
the great Amazone, and so many other Rivers, that run unto him, and Provinces,
that are discovered upon them, may commodiously be lodged, and in their own
natural extent. In which case the East-coast of this same America to the turn
of the Cape of St. Augustine, should be kept in the same degrees and minutes of
its longitude; and all the rest from thence toward the West, augmented unto
ten degrees, and compassed in the just and fitting Geometrical proportions, as
well in regard to Meridians, as to the Longitudes. And the same ampliation
being made over North- America, you will find his East-coast drawn back by four
or five degrees, conformably to the assurances that the first English gave,
that sailed to Virginia; and to the report of John Laet in his third Book of
America. Whereunto I offer my self willingly to contribute my cares and
studies, in favors of such, as will undertake it; making use, and serving my
self, in all these Geographicall procedures, with the precepts of the true, and
new doctrine of the eighth Book of my Geometrical Theorems, Printed 1654, as
well for the Longitudes, as itenerary distances: which I there show, that they
ought always to be in great Circles, and not in parallells, reduced to certain
proportions. Which last is a Rule altogether contrary to the truths of
Geometry, however Mathematicians, and Geographers, that preceeded the
impression of that Book, have generally taught the Maxim of it, without
adverting, or considering so notable an error; That the shortest distance from
one point to another, on the Globe of the Earth, is always described, or led
by a great Circle, etc. See the eighth Book of my foresaid Theorems.

A second Advertisement to Geographers about the restitution of Longitudes.
BUt to get a perfecter knowledge as well of the Longitudes, that fit America,
as those that concern the East- Indies; we have resolved to set down here a
method to find them easily by the motion of the Moon, upon firm land, in this
manner. 1. Draw on a right horizontall Plain, that is very smooth and white, a
very exact meridian Line: and with the same exactness observe the height of the
Pole, by a quadrant that can mark minutes, and if possible, half minutes; as it
is easy now to get such an one, by the new inventions of dividing the
Alhidades of it. 2. On the night of the full Moon, take the horizontall height
of a fixed Star, until the shadow of a Plummet hung, made by the Moon, shall be
just upon the Meridian; but with this caution, that the height of the Star
observed, be at least of thirty degrees, to avoid refractions; and that the
same Stars distance from the Meridian be reasonable enough for a greater
exactness. 3. Seek the true distance of the foresaid Star from the Meridian of
your Hemisphere by this Rule. As the Rectangle contained in the Sinuses of the
complement of the elevation of the Pole, and of the complement of the
declination of the Star, is to the quadrat-side of the whole Sinuse; so the
Rectangle contained in the Sinuses of the sum or total, and of the
difference of the half of the complement of the observed height of the Star;
and of the half of the difference of the complement of the declination of the
Star, and of the complement of the elevation of the Pole, is unto the
quadrat-side of the Sinuse of the half of the true distance of the Star from
the Meridian. But if the declination and right ascension of the Star, which you
make use of for this astronomicall Observation, be not set down to your hand,
in the same Table of its longitudes and latitudes; you shall find it by the
Rules of my sixth Book of Geometrical Theorems aforesaid, whither I refer you.
4. Double the foregoing half of the distance found, and substract that from the
right ascension of the Star observed, if it be in the Eastern part of the
heavens; but add it to its right ascension, if the Star be in the West part of
the heavens: and the sum of the addition, or the residue after the
substraction, will be the true right ascension of the Meridian of the Moon, in
degrees, minutes, and seconds of the equator. 5. In the Ephemerids, or in the
Astronomicall Tables, take the Node of the Moon ascendant, or descendant, in
signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds of the Ecliptic according to the hour of
your observation after your best esteem: to wit, that which is nearest to that
right ascension of the Moon, or of the midst of heaven, which is all one. But
in the Rule of the precedent Article, if the Pole be North, the declination
also of the fixed Star must be Northern; and contrarily. 6. With the same right
ascension of the Moon and of the Meridian, take also in the same Tables, (or by
the sixth Book of my Theorems) the midst of heaven, in signs, degrees, minutes,
and seconds in the Ecliptic; and the Angle of the Meridian and of the
Ecliptic only in degrees, minutes, and seconds; which we shall always
hereafter call the midst of heaven, to shun a longer title, or repetition. 7.
Substract from the midst of heaven, the Node of the Moon; or from the Node of
the Moon, the midst of heaven, that you may find always less residue than
ninety degrees: and this distance of the Node of the Moon from the midst of
heaven, will be the base of a Sphericall Triangle-Obliquangle, whereof the
lesser Angle will always be of five degrees, and no minutes; and the greater
Angle always the Angle of the Meridian, and of the Ecliptic of the foregoing
Article, according to the seventh Book of my Theorems. 8. Seek the Arch of the
Meridian contained between the Orbite of the Moon and the Ecliptic Circle, by
this Rule. As the total Sinuse, or Sine, is to the Sine of the distance of the
Node of the Moon in the midst of heaven; so is the Sine of the Angle of five
degrees, to the Sine of the perpendicular. And as the total Sine, is to the
Sine of the complement of the preceding distance; so is the tangent of the
Angle of five degrees, to the tangent of the complement of the Angle sought
for. 9. Take the difference of this Angle sought for, and of the Angle of the
midst of heaven, and you shall have the second Angle sought for, in degrees,
minutes, and seconds. Then as the total Sine is to the Sine of the complement
of the second Angle required; so the tangent of the complement of the precedent
perpendicular, is to the tangent of the complement of the Arch of the Meridian,
contained between the midst of heaven, and the center of the Moon. 10. Finally,
as the Sine of the Angle of five degrees, is to the Sine of the precedent Arch
of the Meridian; so the Sine of the Angle of the midst of heaven, is to the
Sine of the argument of the latitude of the Moon: which argument, you must
substract or add to the Node of the Moon, according to the disposal of the
problem, for getting in signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds, the place of the
Moon in her Orbite, 11. With the precedent argument of the latitude of the
Moon, take in the astronomick Tables its reduction to the Ecliptic in minutes
and seconds, that you may either substract, or add the same (according to the
title of the same Tables) to the place of the Moon in her Orbite; and you shall
have the true longitude, or the true place of the Moon in the Ecliptic, in
signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds. As also in the same Tables, her true
latitude, (if you desire it) with the same argument; seeing in all these
observations, the Moon is always near her copulations. 12. Compare the two
longitudes of the Moon, found out in this manner, on the same night, but in
diverse Meridians, and take the difference of them: as also her hourly motion,
at the time of both the observations, because the hours, minutes, and seconds
of hours, that shall agree to the degrees, minutes and seconds of the Ecliptic
of that difference, being turned into degrees and minutes of the Equator, will
give the true difference of the Longitudes contained between the two Towns,
where the two observations have been made.

Now all the secret of this easy and new method, consists in this, that the
center of the body of the Moon is necessarily in the Circle of the Meridian,
when she is full, or very near her opposition, the shadow of the Plummet-Line,
coming just upon the true Meridian-Line of the place, where the observation is
made: and in this; that nothing more being required to be added, but the plain
height of one fixed Star, and without Parallax, the operation may be made in
any Month of the year, without staying for a tedious restitution of Astronomy,
and without being put to the charges of great Instruments Horizontall and
Vertical, which are otherwise necessary to the practice of this Science of
finding out longitudes, which Nonius, Horoncius, Frisius, Kepler, and Morinus
the perfectlyest of them all, have painfully traveled in. But this is enough
for the Geographers, and Mathematicians, that are dispersed over the world, and
ought to labor in the restitution of Geography: to whom notwithstanding I
could wish an exacter knowledge of Astronomy, and of Trigonometry, that they
might the more easily arrive at the glory of perfecting this goodly science, no
less pleasant, than necessary.

And for conclusion, we shall in favors of an Astronomer, that will make this
observation of the Moon in his own particular, that he may compare it, with
that of the Rodolphine Tables; tell him, that the longitude of the Town of Rome
on the globe of the earth, is forty degrees; and that its Meridian is the
same, that it has in the Rodolphine Tables, which are the best of all other
astronomick ones, if you correct but the equations of the Center, and the
intervalls of the Planets, by the fifth Book of our Geometrical Theorems. As
also for the choice of the equation of the time, if you use that equation,
which proceeds from the difference of the two right ascensions, to wit, of the
middle place, and of the true place of the Sun, in the Ecliptic; because that
amongst so many diverse and various equations of the time, that the most
excellent Authors have yet given, or established, that alone seems to me
Geometrical and exact; as we have said elsewhere; and that the errors of
other ways will amount sometimes to four of five degrees, in longitudes upon
the earth. But as the foundation of that doctrine depends on the equal motion
of the Sun in the Ecliptic, and not at all in the equator, the opinion that we
have of it, is more from the appearances of truth, than from any design we have
to contradict.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. OF the greatness of the River of the Amazones. page 1 CHAP. II. Of
the great Kingdom of this Amazone, if reduced to one by conquest. 3 CHAP. III.
Of the Nations of this great Kingdom. 6 CHAP. IV. Of their Arms, and of their
Commerce. 8 CHAP. V. Of their Customs and Religion. 9 CHAP. VI. Of the great
Cordeliere. 11 CHAP. VII. Of the sources of the great River of the Amazones. 13
CHAP. VIII. Of the length, and of the course of this River. 15 CHAP. IX. Of the
longitudes, latitudes, and measures of Leagues and Distances observed in this
great River. 18 CHAP. X. Of the same, continued upon the same River, unto the
Atlantique-Sea. 23 CHAP. XI. Of the breadth, and of the Islands of this River.
26 CHAP. XII. Of its depth, and of its portableness or navigation. 28 CHAP.
XIII. Of the Bosphore or Strait of the Amazone. 31 CHAP. XIIII. Of the three
first Rivers that enter into that of the Amazones. 33 CHAP. XV. Of the Agarick,
and of the Putomaya. 36 CHAP. XVI. Of the great Caketa, a considerable River.
39 CHAP. XVII. Of the River of Maragnon. 43 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Amarumaya, and
of the Madera. 46 CHAP. XIX. Of the other Rivers; and of the 'Province of the
Kixes. 49 CHAP. XX. Of the Province of the long-hairs, and of that of the
Homagues. 52 CHAP. XXI. Of the condition of slaves, and of the
neighbour-Nrtions. 55 CHAP. XXII. Of the Province of Corosirara, and other
neighbour-Nations. 57 CHAP. XXIII. Of the Gold-mine of the Swanes, and of the
Neighbor-nations. 60 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Province of Yoriman. 62 CHAP. XXV.
Of the Province of Surina, and of the Neighbor-nations. 65 CHAP. XXVI. Of
the Province of Caribane. 68 CHAP. XXVII. Of Rio-negro, and of the Province of
Camsware. 71 CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Province of Cayana, and of the
Neighbor-nations. 73 CHAP. XXIX. Of the Isle of the Topinambes. 76 CHAP.
XXX. Of the Bosphore of the Amazone, and of the Neighbor-nations. 79 CHAP.
XXXI. Of the Province and River of Tapayse. 81 CHAP. XXXII. Of the rich and
great Province of Coropa. 84 CHAP. XXXIII. Of the great mouth of the River of
the Amazones. 86 CHAP. XXXIV. Of the great Province of Guyana. 89 CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Province of Maragnon, and of the Town of Para. 91 CHAP. XXXVI. Of the
Entries into the River of the Amazones. 94 CHAP. XXXVII. Of the first discovery
of this River. 96 CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the second Expedition of Areillana on the
same River. 99 CHAP. XXXIX. Of Pedro d'Orsua, and of the Tyrant Lope de
Aguirre. 101 CHAP. XL. Of the unfortunate Expedition of Maldonado. 104 CHAP.
XLI. Of other designs for discovery of this River. 108 CHAP. XLII. Of the
Friars of St. Francis, that went down all this River. 111 CHAP. XLIII. Of the
departure of Peter Texeira for the discovery of it. 114 CHAP. XLIV. Of the
aarivall of the Fleet at Peru. 117 CHAP. XLV. Of the Orders of the Viceroy for
the return of the Portugal Fleet. 120 CHAP. XLVI. Of the Camp of the
Portugalls in the Province of the long-haired, or Chevelues. 122 CHAP. XLVII.
Of the return of the Portugal Fleet. 125 CHAP. XLVIII. Of the arrival of the
Fleet at Brasile. 127 CHAP XLIX. Of the Amazones of America. 129 CHAP. L Of the
qualities of the Air, and of the Land of the great Amazone. 132 CHAP. LI. Of
the fertileness of the land and the waters for nourishment of men. 135 CHAP.
LII. Of the riches of Commerce for strangers. 137. 1. Advertisement to
Geographers on the longitudes of America. 140 2. Advertisement to Geographers
on the restitution of longitudes. 146
FINIS.

