THE PETITION AND PROtestation of twelve Bishops for which they were accused of
High Treason by the House of Commons and Committed by the Lords to the Black
Rod.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called upon by several, and respective
writs, under great penalties to attend in Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitable right to vote in Bills, and all other matters whatsoever debated
in Parliament, by the ancient customs, laws and Statutes of this Realm, and
are to be protected by your Majesty quietly to attend that great service.

They humbly remonstrate and protest before God, your Majesty and the noble
Peers now assembled in Parliament, that as they have an indubitable right to
sit and vote in the House of Lords, so they, if they may be protected from
force and violence, are most ready and willing to perform that duty
accordingly, and that they do abhominate all actions and opinions tending to
Popery, or any inclination to the Malignant party, or any other side and party
whatsoever, to the which their own reasons and consciences shall not adhere.
But whereas they have been at several times violently menaced, afronted, and
assaulted by multitudes of people, in coming to perform their service to that
Honorable House, and lately chased away and put in danger of their lives, and
can find no redress or protection upon sundry complalnts made to both Houses
in that particular. They likewise protest before your Majesty and that noble
House of Peers, and saving to themselves all their rights and interests of
sitting and voting in your house at other times, they dare not sit to vote in
the House of Peers unless your Majesty shall further them from all affronts,
indignities and danger in the premises.

Lastly, whereas their fears are not built upon fancies and conceits, but
upon such grounds and objects as may well terrify men of great resolution and
much constancy, they do in all humillity and duty protest before your Majesty
and the Peers of this most honorable House of Parliament, against all votes,
resolutions and determinations, and that they are in themselves null, and of no
effect, which in their absince the twenty seven of December 1641. have already
passed, and likewise against all such as shall hereafter pass in that most
Honorable assembly, during such time of their forced and violented absence
from the said most honorable House.

Not denying, but if their absenting of themselves were wilful and voluntary,
that most noble House might proceed in all these premises, their absence and
Protestation notwithstanding.

And humbly beseeches your most excellent Majesty to Command the Lords of the
House of Peers to enter this their Petition and protestation in their Records.

They will ever pray God to bless and preserve etc.
Printed for T. Banks 1641.

FJNIS.

