THE CASE OF Mr. Hugh Peter's, Impartially Communicated to the View and Censure
Of the Whole World: Written by his own hand.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Speed, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign
of the Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard.

THE CASE OF Mr. Hugh Peter's, etc.
THey which think to Vindicate themselves to the World by writing Apologies,
rarely reach their ends, because their Game is an After-game: prejudice is
strong, and the Plaster can hardly be made broad enough, nor Apologies put
into all hands who have pre-judged and received the first tincture. And
therefore our blessed Savior is slow in that work; only clears the great
question of that age, by proving himself the Messiah, (Joh. 5.) by four
witnesses, but not forward to answer expectations of the World otherwise.

And yet so much of his example there is; yea, so much of St. Paul's, and
others, that there seems to be a necessity of saying something, though hard to
wipe off so much dirt as is thrown on my self. Yet at this distance and
leisure, hearing by printed papers what my Lot is in England, my native
Country; Therefore I do in the Name and fear of God, and before his holy
Majesty, Angels and Men, profess that I never had head nor hand in contriving
or managing the late Kings death, as is basely and scandalously suggested by
black mouths: was all that day (he dyed) sick and sad in my Chamber; which I
prove by two substantial witnesses. And for what is in that Pamphlet June 19.
about my confessing in my sickness, landing at Plymouth from Ireland, it is
most untrue and mistaken: for I never was sick at Plymouth, nor landed there
from Ireland: nor any of that information colorable; and this I avouch in the
truth of my soul; and would in presence justify, if weakness, and lameness,
and this distance did not hinder; yea, many years being upon me, and an utter
inability to do my self right in these things, if the Lord do not make my way
in the hearts of men.

I shall briefly give an account of my coming into England, my behavior since
I came, and my present condition in this Juncture.

A Colony going to settle in New England, by his late Majesty's Patent, I went
thither; who by my birth in Cornwel, was not a mere stranger to that place, and
fishing-trade: and thither, invited often, I say, went, and was with another
sent into England by the Magistrates there, for ease in Excise and Custom, and
some supplies for Learning, etc. because I had been witness to the Indians
receiving the Gospel there in Faith and Practice; they having the Bible
translated by us into their Language, and part thereof printed, and hundreds of
them professing the Gospel, and teaching each other the knowledge of the true
God; and the rather, from the example of the English there: when in seven years
among thousands there dwelling, I never saw any drunk, nor heard an Oath, nor
any begging, nor Sabbath broken: all which invited me over to England: but
coming, found the Nation imbroyled in troubles and War; the Preaching was,
Curse ye Meroz, from Scotland to England; the best Ministers going into the
field: in which (not without urging) I was imbarqued in time; and by force upon
me here, failed of my promise of returning home: which was and is my sad
affliction.

My first work was, with the first to go for Ireland; which I did with many
hazards; then was at Sea with my old Patron the Earl of Warwick, to whom I owed
my life; then was employed by the City; then by the Earl of Essex, my Lord Say,
and others; and my return stopped by the Power that was; and so was in the last
Army in several places, but never in the North: In all which affairs I did
labor to persuade the Army to their duty.

My Principles in Religion guided me to those Orthodox truths expressed in the
Confessions of Faith in England; and am known to join with the Protestants who
are sound in the Faith, in Germany upper and ^ower, France, etc. I have and do
hereby witness against all Errors of all kinds. For the War, I thought the
Undertakers knew their Work; I was inconsiderable, yea, heartily sorry for
mistakes about me. For my Carriage, I challenge all the Kings party to speak if
I were uncivil; nay, many of them had my Purse, Hand, Help every way, and are
ready to witness it; yea, his present Majesty's servants preserved by me
through hazards. I was never privy to the Armies transactions about the late
King at Holmby or elsewhere, or of any Juncto, Council or Cabal. But when his
Majesty sent for me, I went to him, with whom I dealt about my New England
business, and was three or four times with him, and had his special acceptance,
and served him to my utmost, and used all my little skill for his and the
Nations good more then twice: for which I have witness; though it be hard to
cut my way through so many Rocks. But God is good.

It is true, I was of a Party, when I acted zealously, but not with malice or
mischief: it has been accounted honorable, Et Caesare in host probat, to
keep to principles of honor and honesty. I never quarrelled others for their
judgment in Conscience. It is received, that Religio docenda est, non
coercenda. I saw Reformation growing, Laws made, and some against debauchery
and evil (which I was glad to read in his Majesty's late Proclamation.) I saw a
very learned, godly, able Ministry as any the world, well provided for: I saw
the Universities reformed, and flourishing; and such things much encouraged me
in my Endeavors. I studied the 13 of the Romans and was tender; but found the
best of Scotland and England of the Ministry engaged, and so satisfied me, that
I understand the first undertaking is still maintained good. By the War, I
never enriched my self: I have often offered my personal Estate for 200 l. and
for Lands, I never had any but that part of a Noble man's, which I never laid up
penny of; nor never urged the Lord Gray, or others, to buy, nor knew not of the
sale, till done; nor justify any unworthy thing in it. I never plundered nor
cheated, never made penny over the Sea, nor hoarded or hid any in England.

I never was guilty of secluding the Members in 48. nor knew it, till done, and
sent by my Lord Fairfax to fetch off two of them, and to know who they were
that were secluded.

I never had Jewels, nor any thing of Court or State, more then before,
directly nor indirectly. Never had any Ecclesiastical Promotion in my life in
the Nation to enrich me; but lived on my own when I had any thing: nor have
been a lover of money.

The many scandals upon me for uncleanness, etc. I abhor as vile and false,
being kept from that and those aspersions cast; and such I make my protest
against as before. I know how low my name runs, how Titleless, how contemned.
David knew* why Shemei cursed him

For the Laws of England, I know no place has better: only having lived where
things are more expedite and cheap, I have showed my folly so to say: and
having no evil intention, a very worthy Lawyer took exception at something of
mine or my friends, which was never intended in his sense by either, and crave
his excuse; I can charge my self with evil enough, as any excentrick motion of
mine from my own Calling, want of a solemn spirit in slight times, with
unbelief, if I have gone about to reach Religious ends by trampling upon civil
duties, breaking of any Covenants, or slighting them; and do fear Gospel, and
the Spirit also may be undervalued by mine, and others unworthy dealing with
them. Much to these I might add, who have seen many vanities under the Sun; and
the World hung with Nets and Snares: Alas, there is nothing to Christ.

And lastly, I understand what exception is upon me for Life and Estate in the
House of Commons. I have taken hold of the Kings Majesty's gracious Pardon, as
others did; and know not truly where this exception lies grounded. I wish I had
been with their Honors to have cleared it. I hope a Vagrant report or Airy
noise takes no place with them: for I challenge all the World for my innocence
for these suggestions; and appeal to their Honors, and the Noble Lords, for a
review of the Charge or Information; and crave no favor if any sober man can
charge me; otherwise I most heartily beg just favor, unless my evil be only
for acting with such a party, I must have it: For I know before whom my Cause
is, and may not despair.

I must again profess, were I not a Christian, I am a Gentleman by birth, and
from that extract do scorn to engage in the vile things suggested, and that by
one creditless witness, that only supposes, but asserts nothing.

I wish from my heart that our present Prince may be, and the Nation by him
more happy then any; and that the true ends of GOVERNMENT may be had and
communicated fully; that every honest heart may have cause to rejoice in God,
the King, and their Laws. And for my self (through Grace) I resolve to be quiet
in a corner (if I may) to let God alone with ruling the World, to whose Wisdom
and Power we ought to submit yea, to mind ^ine tow(...) though never so small;
to (...) under Authority, rather then impatient; to procure the quiet and peace
of the Nation to my utmost; to mind things invisible, and of a better
consistence then these below; and to pray, when I can do no more.

Hugh Peter's.

FINIS.

