A Persuasive TO ALL DISSENTERS TO Unity in Religion, As it is Established in
the Church of England.
THe wisest of Kings has told us, That there is a time, and a season for all
things; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; and certainly now, if
ever, the last time is not only convenient, but absolutely necessary: And
should man hold his Peace and neglect this Duty, even the Stone should cry out
of the Wall, and the Beam of the Timber shall answer it: I direct this my
Discourse and Persuasive to Unity in Religion to all in general; But more
particularly to those, who are Dissenters from the Church of England, and who
seem to make a breach in the Conformity, and happy Unity of the Church; and
over-nice Scruples, cause a Schism and rent in its seamless Garment. It Is to
You that I now speak; as a Friend, as a Brother, for so we ought to be one to
another, and not as Wolves and Dogs, snarling and snapping one at the other,
but with gentleness and freedom admonish one another; with all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love: It Is the command
of Christ, who is Love it self, That we Love one another; by It we are known to
be his true Disciples, and followers of him. And there can be no greater sign
of his Love, than friendly to admonish one another of Errors, and straying from
the Truth; and to assist the weak, to raise up those that fall; to call to
Unity and Concord, and to stir up to Peace and Amity: That we may be all of one
mind, having compassion one of another, loving as Brethren, being pitiful,
being courteous; not rendering evil for evil, and railing for railing, 1 Pet.
3.8, 9.

Since Separation and Division among Brethren proceeds from the cunning and
malice of Satan, why should it continue any longer in our Israel? why should
not every man put to his helping hand, to build up the walls of Unity? Are we
not Brethren? Have we not one Father, God? One Head, Jesus Christ? Is he not
our common Shepherd? Have we not one Faith, Salvation by Christ? Do we not
believe him come in the Flesh? Do not we confess his Name? Are we not all
Christians? And indeed are we not also of one Mother the Church? Why then this
Separation? This Division? This drawing several ways? Why cannot, or why do not
you Unite as you ought to do? And that this may be effected, and that our happy
Unity may be lasting and perpetual.

You must leave off to interpret the whole scope of Scripture, as if framed to
maintain your own form of Government, presenting your followers with false
Glosses, whereby they read only as you would have them, and pervert Scripture
to maintain the false Ideas of sickly Imaginations; and thus every Sect makes
the Scripture to speak in favor of their way and false Opinions, to maintain
their Schism and Separation; calling all Samaria and Babylon that are not of
themselves, and their own Congregations, Sion and Jerusalem. You must also
leave off those Names of Separation and distinguishment, calling your selves
the Godly, the Brethren, the Good People, Gods Children, the Sanctified; Others
the Ungodly, Reprobates, Wordlings, Time servers, Menpleasers, Moralists, and
Latitudinarians, Arminians, and the like. You must also cease to cry out
against Magistrates and Rulers, Kings and Governors, as Severe, Cruel and
Tyrannical upon the least restraint of your Liberties; as if you were thereby
become Martyrs for the Cause of Christ: Also you must not speak contemptibly of
Bishops, (as some too frequently do,) giving them scurrillous Names, as
Usurpers, Spiritual Tyrants, Lordly Bishops, etc. And-calling the Ministers of
the Gospel in contempt Priests, nay Baal's Priests, Timeservers, State Divines,
Dumb Dogs, Vain Bablers, with such like Language; Those whom the Scriptures
Dignifie and Honor with the Titles of Christ's Ambassadors, Gods Stewards, and
the like.

Open then your Eyes at last, and look not so a squint on this Form of
Government; and more particularly as it is here Established in the Church of
England, which certainly is the most like, and comes nearest to the Primitive
Institution of the Apostles, and the next Ages of any Church in the World, both
for the Purity of its Doctrine, and the Order of its Government; its Ceremonies
being both few and Decent, and its Power regulated by Just Laws.

And as one says, The Church of England is a Body of so firm a Constitution,
and so excellently Tempered, and so well Shaped, Vind. of the Conforming
Clergy. p. 50.
and of so clear a strength and vigor in all its Limbs that no outward force
is able to injure it; nothing but some inward Corruption and decay in the Vital
parts that can possibly bring it to the ground.

Indeed some had trip'd up its Heels and laid it all along, but it was but a
Foil, you see how soon it arose again; and in that little Interspace or
Inter-regnum, as I may term it, what horrid Confusions were amongst us?
Methinks this little Trial might convince you of the weakness and Imbecility of
the one, and the Firmness and excellent Temper of the other Government; by
which this Land has so long flourished, and which is so fitted not only to
Monarchy, making that Maxim good, as we by experience saw, No Bishop, No King;
and among the rest the Learned Mr. Hooker in his Pref. Sect. 1. has these
words, which he sets down as his full persuasion, Surely the present Form of
Church Government, which the Laws of this Land have Established, is such as no
Law of God, nor Reason of Man has hitherto been alleged of force sufficient
to prove they do ill, who to the uttermost of their power withstand the
alteration thereof. And contrariwise, the other, which instead of It, we are
required to accept, is only by Error and Misconceit, named the Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, no one proof as yet brought forth whereby it may clearly appear
to be in very deed. And those two Assertions he has so fully and unanswerably
maintained in his excellent Book of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity, that
methinks you should lay your Finger on your Mouths, and no longer speak against
this Form of Church Government, nor remain at this distance, and in this state
of Separation, till you have found out better Arguments for to justify your so
doing, than those you have yet made known to the World.

Therefore, as the Form of Divine Service, contained in the Book of Common
Prayer, which is now used in the Church of England, conduces so much to the
Edifying those that use it, and it agrees exactly with the Rules of the
Apostles, and is performed in English, the Vulgar and common Language of the
Nation, which every one understands: But in the Church of Rome, the common
People are made incapable of being Edified by the Prayers of the Church, in
that they are all made in Latin, a Language which they do not all understand.
So that when they meet to Worship God, there are seldom any in the Congregation
that knows what is said there, except the Priest that read it: But Blessed be
God for it, it is not so with Us; for Ours is truly Common Prayer, for it is
written and read in that Language which is common to all the Congregations in
the Kingdom; So that no man that frequents our Public Congregations, where the
Common Prayer is used, can ever plead Ignorance of any one Duty whatsoever: For
if it be not his own fault, he may there be instructed in every thing which he
that made him, requires of him.

And seeing it has pleased the most high God to comprise his whole Will, (and
by consequence our Duty,) in the Ten Commandments; hence we read them
constantly every Sunday and Holy day throughout the whole year; by which means
every one that does not wilfully shut his Eyes may clearly fee, and fully
understand his whole Duty both to God and Man; especially, considering, that in
the Prayers themselves also there is frequent mention made of all those Vices,
which ought to be avoided, and all those good works which ought to be performed
by us: So that we can never come to Church, but we are still put in mind, both
of what we ought, and what we ought not not to do that we may be saved. Whereas
if all and every person in the Congregation, would always be upon their Knees,
while they put up their Petitions to the most high God, what a mighty advantage
would this be, not only to every one in particular, but to the whole
Congregation in general? For as every one would by this means keep his heart
more steadfast in the true fear and dread of God, and likewise more certainly
obtain the good things he Prays for; and by this means we should excite and
inflame each others Devotions, confirm and strengthen one another Faith, and
convince both our selves and all that see us, that Religion is a serious thing;
and that we believe it to be so, by our serving God with so much Reverence and
Godly fear, as this humble Posture represents; for it is lamentable to think
what absurd things are done in the time of Divine Service; for I have seen some
People sitting in the time of Common Prayer, if we did but consider we are in
that Holy place, where Gods Majesty is represented, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge us all at the last day; and therefore as you tender the Love of
God, the Credit of Religion, or the Salvation of your own Souls, I beseech you
all in the Name of him that made you, that whenever you come hither to Pray
unto Him, you do it in that Awful, Lowly, and Solemn manner, which our Church
commands, and as becomes Creatures, when you speak to your Great and Almighty
Creator; that so you may give true Worship and Honor unto Him, and also
receive that Benefit and Edification of your selves, which he has Promised,
and you expect from Public Prayers: This being certainly the most edifying
Posture that you can possibly use upon such occasions.

Therefore great Blessings do we lose by neglecting to come to the Public
Prayers of the Church on the Week days, when we have so great opportunity, and
our Churches so near us, and Prayers Morning and Evening in a great many
places; and yet how many do neglect coming, and what a poor Congregation do we
see in many great Parishes? Is not this a shame to Christian Religion: We find
time for every thing else, and shall we not find time for this great Concern of
our Souls; for with what Conscience can we expect a Blessing from our Heavenly
Father, without asking it? And what an ungrateful thing it is to receive
Blessings at Gods hands daily; and not as daily to acknowledge and give him
Thanks for it in public every day, as well as private? For by the public we
let the World see we are not ashamed of our Religion.

For my Charity prompts me to believe, that all the zeal that some express
against the Common Prayer, and all that indifferency that is in others for it,
proceeds from their Ignorance of what it is, or at least from their want of an
Experimental knowledge of it. For let any man that seriously minds the Worship
of God, and the Salvation of his Soul before all things else, let such a one, I
say, set himself in good earnest to use the Common Prayer as he ought to do for
some considerable time, and I do not doubt (but that by the Blessing of God,)
he will find that benefit and edification by it, that his own experience shall
convince him of all that I have now said, more than all the Arguments that I
have, or any man in the World can ever produce to him.

Lay aside now your Passions I beseech you, put off your former Conversation,
and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind: Speak every man Truth with his
Neighbor, for we are Members one of another, Christ is our Head: There is but
one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all. O do but consider the Beauty of Unity, let it allure you, let it break
your stifness, let it move you to run into the open Arms of your Mother, and to
be knit in the Bands of Amity with your Brethren. Confider how good and how
pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity. And Psalm. 133.

How Happy and Blessed then would the Nation be! The Nations round about us
would Tremble, and our Adversaries would be Confounded. O that there were a
full Assent and Consent among you both in Spirituals as well as Temporals! It
is not enough that you Live together, that you Trade together, that you
Converse one with another; but to complete your Happiness, you must Pray
together, and Worship together, that compleats the Friendship. We have been too
long assunder, why should there be any difference between Benjamin and Judah?
(...), I say, at last as Brethren; come with wi^^ing Hearts and ^inds. The
Goliath of Opposition may be easily slain; one single Stone will sink that
Philistine. Let some among you set an Example, others will follow. Consider the
Peace of Israel more than your own Interest, and think how you will strengthen
the Hands of your Brethren by this so much desired Unity and Happy Conformity.
Let at last the great Mercy that is shown you, be a motive to bring you to this
desired and Happy Unity. Let Love draw you to rest no longer; meet with
Kindness and Submission.

The Benevolence and Tender-heartedness of so Gracious a Prince toward you.
How then can you Answer your contempt of the Laws and Commands, not only of a
Christian Prince, but of our own Church too: One that Commands nothing but
Lawful things; it is not enough that you think otherwise of them, and that you
pretend Scruples of Conscience, there is no such exception in the Rule laid
down by the the Apostle. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers: Submit
to every Ordinance of Man, etc. Rebellion is as the sin of Witcheraft, and
Stubborness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. Let us consider that Caesar is our
King, Caesar is the Lords Anointed; Caesar is our Nursing Father; Caesar is the
Breath of our Nostrils; Caesar is the Son of such a Caesar who was a Martyr,
who laid down his Life to preserve us from Slavery. Our Caesar has been
Miraculously Preserved, and Miraculously Restored; nothing can be too Much,
nothing can be too Dear for such a Caesar.

Certainly Obedience to such a Prince, and to his Lawful Commands, would be
more acceptable than all your long Prayers and frequent Preaching which is
become your Idol, and which you set up in the room of the Crosses you have
pulled down. Speak out, and tell us whether an Act for Uniformity and
Conformity made by the three States of the Land, be a Legal Act or no; If it
be, why do you not Obey? Why do you trouble the Waters with your needless
Scruples of little weight and value, and about Trifles only, as you call them?
Is not the Word truly dispensed in our Public Churches? Are not the Sacraments
rightly Administered? Are not our Prayers free from Scandal and Irreverence? Are
not our Doctrines clear of Error and Falsity? Why then do you deny to Hear,
Receive and Communicate together? But in spite (as I may say) both of the
Commands of God and Man, separate your selves, and run into Disobedience? I
verily believe those of the Church of England would never run into that
contempt of the King and his Laws; I am persuaded that for Conscience sake they
would submit, should the King and Parliament by their Authority take away those
Ceremonies about which you contend; they have learned better than to Rebel, and
the Doctrine of our Church has endued us with sounder and better Principles.

O that I could but make you senfible of the Blessing of this Unity; How much
Glory it would add to the Nation! How much Scandal it would take from Religion!
How much Security it would give to three Kingdoms! How much Content and
Satisfaction to your Prince, and how much Joy and Gladness to the Hearts of all
your Brethren; what Peace should we enjoy at Home! What Esteem and Awe should
we purchase Abroad! What Love would be begotten between one another! And what
Happiness and Prosperity would it bring to all! You would then see again those
Happy days of Queen Elizabeth, our Armies to Prosper, our Citizens to Flourish,
Conquest Abroad, and Peace at Home; Charity to increase, and Contention to
cease; Love to abound, and Strife to wax less. The Golden Age would seem to be
returned again, and Righteousness would run down like a stream; there would
then be a general rejoicing in our Streets, and we should all cry out, This is
the Lords doing; it is marvelous in our Eyes. At last therefore endeavor to
satisfy your Consciences, go about it in earnest, lay aside all Stubbornness of
Heart, all Spiritual Pride, all Self-Interest. Let the Case be stated truly
betwixt you: There are those that will not think much to convince you, if
Scripture and Reason will do it. But you must then come with willing minds, you
must not be so stiff as you have hitherto been, rather than comply o^e jot, you
will Break, you cannot Bow; you will not yield in what you may, in those things
that you cannot Condemn; you will not so much as Read the Chapters appointed
for the Day, because Commanded; you will not repeat the Creed and the Ten
Commandments; you will but rarely admit of the Lords Trayer, because by us so
often used,) a Prayer composed by Wisdom it self, and therefore it must needs
be the most perfect and Divine Prayer that was ever made. And those who have
thus far complied and set you a good Example, have been reproached for it, and
have been looked upon as Backsliders. But this is not the way to Unity and
Peace, you must bring willing and yielding Hearts with you: you must not be
Obstinate and Opiniative; you must not be Resolved beforehand; you must have
Desires and Longings for Unity; you must hear without Passion and interest, and
with a desire not of Disputing and showing your Parts, but of satisfying your
Minds and Consciences, and then no doubt but your Scruples may be all resolved,
and you may Conform with satisfaction.

Lay these things seriously to your Heart, pass them not slightly over, think
not these words only a little vain Air, God may call you by a weak instrument,
by a small Voice. Resist not the Spirit, Harden not your Hearts. This God that
Calls, he would have you return, remember the Womb wherein you were Born, and
the Paps that gave you Suck. Think of the Peace and Unity of Israel, be
Dutiful as Children, Love as Brethren, Obey the King, Submit to Ordinances, be
Subject to Rulers, Honor the Magistrate, Yield to Governors, be United in
Mind, be of one Heart, Worship together, Separate no longer, and God will build
you up: Then God will be known in Judah, and his Name will be great in Israel.
You shall then be United like Israel and Judah, you shall have but one King,
you shall be no more two Nations. What Nation will there be so Great, who has
God so nigh unto them: Then you shall be his People and he will be your God; he
will give you one Heart, and one Way, that you may Fear him for ever; for the
good of you and your Children after you. Then will ye with one Mind and one
Voice glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Printed and Sold by N. Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross, 1684.


