A PETITION OF Citizens of London. Presented to the Common Council for their
Concurrence with, and thankfulness and submission to the Parliament; And that
nothing may be done, tending to disturb the PARLIAMENT. To the Honorable the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON, in Common Council
assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City.
SHOWS;
THat with all humble thankfulness to Almighty God we take notice of the good
hopes He has given Us, of putting an end to the great troubles of this
miserable Kingdom: In which blessed Work, God has highly honored this present
Parliament, who by their constant courage and wisdom have (under God) been the
happy Instruments of preserving us from extreme Ruin, And whose indefatigable
pains have been beyond all Examples of former Parliaments and Ages. And in the
next place we do acknowledge, that this famous City has been very useful, in
contributing their help to the saving the Kingdom, more then any other part of
it has done.

It is therefore humbly prayed, That you would still continue forward in all
expressions, upon all occasions, to acknowledge Gods blessing upon us by the
Parliament. And in particular (we being informed of a Remonstrance or Petition,
about to be presented to them, by this Honorable Court) that you would therein
renew the testimony of your affections to them, and encourage them now in the
end of their Work: And that nothing may be presented by you, which may tend to
their disturbance, or declare this City short in thankfulness, or submission
to them; who have often declared, and hitherto really performed, to venture their
lives, and fortunes, for our good, and the Kingdoms safety, etc.

This Petition was delivered May 22. 1646. Subscribed by many Citizens, and
assented unto by many more.
Printed according to Order, for Henry Overton, dwelling in Pope's Head Alley.
1646.


