THE PERSECUTION Of them PEOPLE They call QUAKERS, In several places in
LANCHASHIRE.
FIrst upon Thomas Butler in the beginning of the Fifth month, 1655. We being
met together peaceably ^o wait upon the Lord, and to worship him in his own
Spirit. The meeting was at Richard Johnsons house of Lunt in Sefton Parish;
there came a man (who goes by the name of Cornet Hikton) rudely into the house,
amongst the Lords people, and gave forth many threatening words, which within
short space was brought forth into actions, by hayling and pushing with much
violence against the said people, by bearing them, and cutting some with the
edge of the sword, one very dangerously with other cruelty, as cutting bridles,
stirrup-leathers and pillions into pi^ces, yet did not this harmless people so
much as say, why have thou done so to us? but prayed to the Lord freely to
forgive them. And this I was an eye witness of.

William Addamson.

UPon the five and twentieth day of the ninth Month, being the first day of the
Week, two of those people called Quakers, came into the Town of Blackburn in
Lanchashire, and going to the Steeple-house, and standing there peaceably
before him (whom they call their Minister) and spoke not a word till he had
done. And then one of them said unto him, Friend do not thou know, that he
that adds or diminishes is accursed, and then the fruits of the Priests
Ministry appeared: some pulled him by the hair of the head, others beating him
with the palms of their hands, and ^ne took him by the hair of his head, and
haled him forth, and did no let him go, till he came into the street, and
hu^led him against a wall, and so he returned back again toward the
Steeple-house, and did meet the Priest, and did declare against the fruits of
his Ministry, but the deaf Adder stopped his ear, so he came toward the
Steeple-house again, and the rude multitude did beat him again, some wit^ the
palms of their hands, some with their Bibles pushing him violently, and did
not let him stay till they had driven him into a F^iends house, where the
meeting was appointed that day. And the other of them called Quakers standing
peaceably, and not speaking any word, three of them took hold of the hair of
his head, and h^led and pulled him down under their feet, and some cried kill
him, and others said they w^ll kill him; and some punched him with their f^et,
and scratched his face with their hands, till the blood came down his cheeks.
And when shame began to strike some of them, they pulled them off him, and did
let him rise up; and when he stood up he declared against their persecution, as
being the fruits of their Priests Ministry, and they cried, away with him, and
he said unto them, to whom have we offered any violence, or whom have we
wronged? and they cried away with him, and did not leave pushing him till they
came at the door of the house where the meeting was. And the next day
following, being the second day of the week, came to him, he whom they call
their Clerk, and asked him how he did, and he answered w^ll, and he said, he
thought they had killed me, and said he was sorry they should so abuse me.

William Simpson, Leonard Addison, Who by the wo^ld are called Quakers.

TO all ye the Inhabitants of Berry, and the Priests thereon, this I am moved
of the Lord to write, that all the people may see the fruits that proceeds from
the two Priests of Burryes Ministry, We whom the world in scorn calls Quakers,
being c me to a me^ting at Henry Woods of Tottington, upon the 26. day of the
tenth month, and being set pea^e^b y down in the house, and some people being
met together, which no Law that is now in force in the Not on, does forbid. And
one whose name is Isaac Yeat, being speaking (as he was moved of the Lord) to
the people. There came ^n violently a deal of rude people from the town of
B^rry, who did not stand to hear what was spoken, and according to the
Scriptures to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is good. But
violently pulled the said Isaac by the hair of the head, from off the place
where he was sitting, very likely to have murdered him, and ha^ing him ^orth
of the door, they said we spoke against their Ministers. O shameless Ministers
who have such Members in your Church as these, who are fighters, swearers, and
drunkard, are these the fruits of your Ministry and Members of your Church,
who came violently with slave^ to pers cute the innocent? When we desired to
have Moderation, that the Ministers of Christ might have been tried who they
had been, according to the Scripture. O ye Priest of Berry, are you not ashamed
to have your names recorded, who sends forth such brawlers, fighters,
contentious ones? Is this the order and custom in your Church? This is
contrary to the Apostle, who said, If any man seem to be contentious, we have
none such custom in the Church of God. So from the Apostles example, and the
Church of God, ye have cleared your selves, who are contending for hire, and
for the fleece at this present time, But feed not the flock, who runs, but the
Lord never sent you, and therefore you do not profit the people at all, who
seek for your gain from your Quarter. Now all people honestly consider, whether
these two Priests be in the Doctrine of Christ, yea or nay? who are contending
about their wages (the Parsonage of Berry) as they call it. They are here found
in the way of Baalam, who erred from the spirit, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, who feed themselves with the fat, and cloth with the wool,
but feed not the flock of my pasture, says the Lord. Give over professing your
selves to be Ministers of Christ, and of the Gospel, who are found out of the
Doctrine of Christ, and own your selves to be hirelings, which the Lord sent
his true Prophets to cry against. And all people take warning, and uphold not
these Deceivers any longer, but return to the light in your conscience which
convinces you of sin, which lets you see you should not lie, nor swear, nor be
drunk, nor envy, for such go in Cains way from the command of God, and example
of the Churches of the Saints. Read whose example ye follow in the Scriptures,
the Priests go in the way of Balaam for gifts and rewards; shame may cover your
fac^s, to see your names recorded; for hirelings who prosess to be Ministers of
Christ, as William Alt, and John Lightfoot of Berry do. And you who own them to
be Ministers, who are going in the way of Cain, to envy and murder, as you
whose names are here written, Tho. Banister, Henry Banister, Richard Overy,
Richard Tailor, Edward Hunt, Thomas Battersby and diverse others, who may be
ashamed to profess to be Christians, and practice such things as never was
practiced by Christ, nor the Church in God. Therefore all people fear the
living God, and depart from the evil of your doings, partake not of their
doings, least you partake of their plagues.

From us who witness the promise of the Lord fulfilled, that he would teach his
people himself, John Branthwait, Isaac Yeats.

ANd at Manchester, one William Barret (who is a teaching Elder, so called) at
Stopford having formerly had some words with some of them called Quakers,
challenged a meeting to be at the house of John Maddocke in Manchester, and in
writing gave forth these words as follows.

By the assistance of God, I shall undertake to prove, that whosoever does
entertain the Opinions of the Quakers, and do live and dye in those Opinions
without repentance, cannot be saved. Provided that I may have fourteen days
warning before the meeting, and that the Conference may be orderly managed
according to what was proposed to Tho. Tailor in Manchester, in the presence of
Mr. Wiggin, and diverse others.

Or thus.

That whereas the said Persons do pretend to be guided by the Spirit, I shall
undertake to prove, that it is not the Spirit of God, but the Spirit of the
Devil. November. 9. 1655.

By me William Barret.

The day may be, if God permit, upon Teusday forthnight, at the house of John
Maddocke in Manchestor, in case the said persons be pleased to give the
meeting. Thus far Barrets words.

And according to this time which he appointed, one Leonard Fell, and several
others of them called Quakers, came to the said place which he had appointed,
and demanded of him what he had to charge them with. Then the said Barret spoke
the words before mentioned in his paper which he had given forth. And L^onard
Fell bade him prove what he had spoken, which was that the Spirit which we are
guided by, is not the spirit of God, but the spirit of the Devil, but nothing
he could prove against any that was there present, but did accuse one that was
not then present, whom he named Thomas Holme of something that he had written a
year ago. And Leonard Fell and the rest said he witnessed Christ manifested in
them, and that Scripture, receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation
of your souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. to be true. And Leonard Fell said further, that if
Thomas Holme did witness the end of his faith, even the salvation of his soul;
the Scripture does testify of the same. And then Barret replied, I utterly
denied that the Scriptures speaks any thing to this purpose. Now le^ all judge
whether this be not the spirit of a Devil that spoke in Barret, that denies
plain Scripture, as in 1 Pet. 1.9. and this was taken from his own mouth, by
his own writer, with much more vain empty words, not worth mentioning, which
passed from him at that meeting. Then another meeting was sent for by him in
writing, and the day he appointed to meet upon, was the tenth day of the
eleventh month to be at Manchester; and he in that paper engaged to prove what
he had formerly given under his hand; and when we came to the place that Barret
and John Wiggin had appointed to meet in, and so soon as the said Barret and
Wiggin. with some others with them came, and went into a certain place called
the College Garden, and when we came to them, there came in certain rude
persons, and thrust into the Company, and before many woe ds were spoken, they
laid violent hands upon several of them called Quakers, with many blows, and so
in a rude manner haled some of them over the bridge out of the town; and being
demanded the reason why they were so rude and cruel; they answered and said,
the Constable (whose name is Arthur Buckley, a w^olen Dr^per) had sent them so
to do; and many of the people so haled forth, told them they had horses in the
town, and some other business to do in it; But they replied and said, they
should not come into the town again, and so for a certain space they kept them
forth of the town, and some others of them being at a friends house in the town
peaceably met, waiting upon the Lord, the said Constable hearing of it, he with
a rude compan^ went to the said house, and the said Constable himself laid
hands on first, and drew one forth, and then the rude persons which he brought
with him laid hands upon the rest, and violently thrust them forth with many
b^ows. And one of the Inhabitants of the town (of their own party) seeing their
cruelty, asked why they d d so use them, and one of the rude persons answered
and said, he did nothing but what the Constable had given him order to do. And
after so doing, some friends were taken and haled before the Magistrate, and
for some time kept in hold, till the Magistrate could have time to examine the
thing. And then being brought before the Magistrate again, and many false
accusations and slanders laid against them by the Constable (Arthur Buckley) as
that they were Vagabons and Wanderers. Then one of them answered (before the
Magistrate) that he was no Vagabond, for he had ninty pounds by the year in
Land in one place, so they were as prisoners that night, that they might appear
the next day before the Magistrate. And other friends being at their lodging at
an Inn in the town, the said Constable went and took their names. and gave
command to the woman of the house where they were, that they should not d^p^r
till the next day. And they being the next day brought before the Magistrate,
and both the Priests Richard Hollinworth, and Richard Herricke (Priests of
Manchester) being pr^^^nt, after many confused words passing from the said
Priests, which are not worth mentioning. Priest Herricke did affirm before the
Magistrate and many others, that the body of Christ is not spiritual; and when
he was (by William Addamson) challenged with his blasphemy, he said he would
prove it by Scripture, and he produced these words to prove it, that Christ
said, I am not a spirit; And then he was by him charged with a lie, for there
was no such words in that Scripture. Many things being laid against them before
the Magistrate, but nothing proved; they were set free by the Magistrate, only
Tho. Holme, and John Hall were stayed, and the said Priests there labored to
ensnare the said Tho. Holm, by pu^ting the Magistrate on to give him the Oath
of Abjuration. And Priest Herricke gave it forth, that he sought to bring the
said Tho. Holme into Prison, And the Constable pretended that they had some
other witnesses to examine. So the said Tho. Holme did stand till the witness
came; and the Magistrate examining the witness, and finding that they could not
prove any thing against him, set him free. So here all the people in and about
Manchester, who has made such great profession of God and Christ, and of the
Scriptures to be your rule, see the fruits of your profession, and of your
Ministry which you run after. Some for the Presbyterians, and some for the
Independents, some looking for Christ's coming in the clouds ^f the sky without
you, and in their minds imagine a personal reign. And thus you are confused,
and divided in your vain thoughts and imaginations, which makes you manifest
that you know him not come at all, nor cannot confess him come in the flesh.
And so you are proved by the Scripture to be the Antichrist which John speaks
of, which should be in the last times. Where the Apostle says, little Children
i^ is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
are there many Antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time, 1 John
2.18. And the Apostle says farther, hereby know ye the spirit of God; every
Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God; and
every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not
of God. And this is that spirit of Antichrist. whereof ye have heard that it
should come, and even now already is it in the world, 1 John 4.2, 3. Now all
people try your Teachers by the Scriptures, and their practice, and let their
own words try them who looks for a Christ yet to come, as some of them said,
what will you Quake^s do, who says Christ is within you, when Christ comes in
the Clouds. Here now all people, do but honestly examine and see wheth^r these
spirits confess Christ come, who looks for him yet to come. And let the light
of Christ Jesus in your consciences examine, search you, and try you, whether
you dare b l^eve that which the Apostle spoke so to be truth, who says, every
Spirit who does not confess Christ Jesus come in the flesh is not of God: or
these D^ceivers who lo^ks for him yet to come. And thus you are divided, some
for a personal reign, and some for the Independent way, and some for the
Presbyterian way, and some of you utterly denies the Scripture, as Wiliam
Barret did, who denied that any should witness the receiving the end of their
Faith, the Salvation of their souls, as it is in 1 Pet. 1.9. And others denied
that Christ's body is spiritual, as Richard Herricke lately did at Manchester,
and so thus you are in your contention, and striving about the body of Jesus,
as the Devil did about the body of Moses, which makes you clearly manifested to
all that have their eyes opened in the least measure; to be those filthy
dreamers which defiles the flesh, which Jude speaks of. And ye are plainly
manifested that ye are they which eats and drinks unworthily, and so eats
and drinks your own damnation, not discerning the Lords body. And here let
all poor people about Manchester, who are betrayed and deceived with you,
seriously consider what you are leading them into, who knows not the body yet,
whereof Christ Jesus is the head, but are at variance about the body of Christ.
Therefore consider of what bodi^s ye are members of, seeing your leaders knows
not the body of Christ. And beware of d^ceiving your own souls; and being
bet^ay^d by these deceivers, who leads them in the dark: and so is the blind
leaders of the blind, and so both falls into the pit. For they can lead none
but who are blind. For any who has their minds turned in the least measure to
the light, sees them, and discerns them to be the Ministers of Antichrist, and
the Deceivers and false Prophets which John speak of, which are gone out into
the world from the light which is this worlds condemnation, and denies the
light by which the Lord God teaches his people. As some of them said, that the
Scripture is a more seemly Oracle then the light within, when as Christ Jesus
says, the light of the body is the eye, and if the eye be single, the whole
body is full of light. And so these deceivers that denies the light of the
body, were not like to know the body, but makes images in their dark vain
minds; one imagining one way, and another another way, and so betrays poor
people, and keeps their souls in death. But the Lord God is risen, who is the
Father of light, and he who is the light of the whole body, is redeeming his
people from under the devourers mouths. Therefore all people who desire to know
the living God, and the Lords body, turn your minds within, to the light which
shines in your conscienc^s, which shows you sin and evil, and checks you when
you do amiss; and lets you see your vain thoughts and your deceitful hearts:
this will rip you up, and lay you open, and makes all things manifest, This
convinces of sin, and brings all things to remembrance, which all the Doctrine
which your hirelings preached never did. Therefore give over going after them,
and search into the Scriptures, and you will see them the deceivers of your
souls. The Scriptures witnesses against them and their practices, even in
th^i^ manner of their worship. For nothing that they act in that which they
call their worship, is according to the Scriptures. And all the Saints in light
which gave forth the Scriptures witnessed against these practices they live in.
Do but honestly consider, and you will see, that all them that were at variance
amongst themselves, as Wiggin, and Eaton, and Herricke, and Barret, and
Hollingworth, all these agree together in opposing and persecuting the truth.
And although that some of them were the men that appointed the meet ng, yet had
they not so much power over the people, as to have the meeting kept peaceable,
but all was in an uproar. So let all people see what order and g^vernment is in
these Churches, and several opinions, which makes them manifest they (who are
so d^v^ded amongst themselves) are all divided from the living God, and from
the living Truth, from Christ Jesus, who is the way, the truth, and the life,
and this is but one. Therefore al^ people a warning, a warning from the Lord
God to you, as you will answer it before him, who is a consuming fire to the
wicked, turn to the light of Jesus Christ which will xamine, and search, and
try you, and bring you to know Christ's will in you, and so bring you out of the
repr^ba^e faith. This will let you see the Mystery, which ^s Christ within, and
this will bring you to know him come in the flesh: and it will let you see
these Antichrists who are in the world striving amongst their many opinions:
and therefore are they condemned with the light which is the worlds
condemnation; for ^he light is the condemnation of the world, and all the
A^tichrists that are in the world. And so now see whether you will turn to the
light of Jesus Christ, who is the way, the truth and the life, which is but
one; or you will continue amongst them who are of the many opinions, who denies
the light, and Christ come in the flesh, and so are found to be Antichrists,
deceivers of your souls: and so here is life and death set before you, light
and darkness, truth and error, the strait way and the broad way, there is but
these two. So now see what ye will take now, and th^s ye shall eternally
witness to be truth, whether ye will hear or forb^ar.

And thus the people in Lanchashire goes on, breathing fo th their persecution;
three of those people called Quak rs has been sent to Lanchaster to prison
since the Sessions. One of them b cause he would not be a Churchwarden (as
they call it) and another because he would have meetings at his house, and the
third for speaking to the Priest. So let all the wise hearted judge what Law
these men act by. So that now there is in Lanchaster Castle eighteen, besides
one who is dissolved out of the outward body (who was imp isoned for Tithes)
whose blood will be required of some. So here is the fruit of your profession:
therefore blush and be ashamed for never none of the Saints of God was found in
such persecution and cruelty which is acted by this generation, against the
innocent and harmless people of God, as is at this day manifested by the cruel
mockings, buffettings, haling before Magistrates, stocking, scourging,
imprisoning; this is the riches of the Saints, and here they follow the Captain
of their Salvation, who is made perfect through sufferings; Glory be to the
living God, who is their strength and arm, that will carry them through.

Leonard Fell, Will. Addamson.

To Holmes Answer to Barret.
William Barret,
WHereas thou did undertake to prove that such as do entertain the opinions
of the Quakers, and do live and dye in those opinions without repentance,
cannot be saved.

I prove it thus, that such as are of opinion that faith is seized with such
when e Christ is manifested, are of such an opinion, that if ye live and dye in
it without repentance cannot be saved; but of such an opinion is Tho. Holms.

Ans. Opinions I do deny and for holding opinion that faith is ceased that I do
deny; and if any such word be there writ, that faith is ceased, I do it
condemn, and upon thee do it return, it being thy own word; for I live by the
Faith of the Son of God; which Faith the world knows not: and if this be thy
ground that thou have against the people called Quakers, if I do remove and do
it condemn, and do own that Faith which purifieth the heart, which is held in a
pure conscience, and that Scripture I own in Heb. 11. which faith, without
Faith it is impossible to please God, and my desire is, that all may come to
faith, and to receive the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls, 1
Pet. 1.9. which thing was there intended however it was writ, and the writer of
it I was not, but that paper I left in the County of Chester to be copied over,
and into another Country I went, and if any thing in it be contrary to the
Scriptures, it I do condemn; so concerning this thing let thy mouth bo stopped,
and accuse not the people called Quakers, with that they are not guilty of, for
from such an opinion do I them clear, and for what thou have writ against them,
from under it can thou not get, but under shame and condemnation must come.
And for that Scripture in 1 Pet. 1.5. It I do own, and it a witness stands a
witness against thee, and a witness for us it stands, who are and have been
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation: and for the Scriptures
which is here writ, them I do own, and this may serve in answer to thy first
paper.

And whereas thou say, for as much as I said, whereas the said persons do
pretend to be gu ded by the Spirit, I will undertake to prove that it is not
the spirit of God but of the Devil.

I prove it thus, first he that does so enquire what difference can be betwixt
God, Christ and Saints, that does imply there is no difference amongst them is
not in that guided by the spirit of God, but by the spirit of the Devil.

Answ, What spirit is that, that accuses persons of that which was writ by one
person, and what spirit is that which crosses Scriptures, and would put a
difference amongst them, who are of one; for the Apostle says, he that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, Heb. 11. so that
spirit which makes a difference is contrary to the Scriptures, and is not the
spirit of God, but the spirit of the Devil; for it is written, that the Father
might be one as we are one, Joh. 4.17. and it is written, as he is so are ye in
this present world; so that spirit which divides God, Christ, and Saints, and
would make them at ods, is not the spirit of God bu the spirit of the Devil,
and with the spirit of God it is judged.

And thou said he (said Tho. Holm) affirmed in the presence of diverse persons
thus, I am equal with God.

Answ. that is false and a lie, it was not so spoken by Tho. Holme and to this
thou was fully answered, and Tho. Holms was denied to be equal with God, but
thou have made lies thy refuge, as thy forefathers did which went before, and
he that lies is of the Devil, for there is no lie of the truth.

And thou say he that says it is so, what is due to God it due to a Saint,
is not in this guided by the spirit of God but by the spirit of the Devil.

Answ. What is due to God thou give him not, and what is due unto Saints thou
know not, but what is due to the wicked thou first must know, and judgment
is committed to God, to the Son, and to the Saints, and their judgment is one,
for the Saints shall judge the world, and Angels, 1 Cor. 6.23. and this honor
have all the Saints, they bind the Kings in chains, and Lords in iron bands,
Ps. 149.7, 8, 9. verses; and the Saints are heirs, and co heirs with the Son,
and the Son thought it no robbery to be equal with the father, and ye all one
one inheritance. (And the Son prayed) that the Father might be one, even as we
are one, Joh 17.11. And thou who would divide Father, Son, and Saints, is not
guided by the spirit of God, but by the spirit of the Devil, which crosses and
is contrary to the Scriptures, and for the Scriptures thou have brought in,
them I do own, but thy end in bringing them in I do deny, who brings in
Scriptures for thy own ends, which makes not for thy purpose.

So this may serve in Answer to thy papers, and may certify all that reads
this, that faith we do own, which is the gift of God, and do not it deny,
neither it destroy, though we witness to him bear, who is the end of our faith,
the salvation of the soul, 1 Pet. 1.9. So now upon thee do I lay all thy
boasting words, which from the pride and envy of thy heart was given forth to
prove and make good what thou have written, else all the country which have
seen thy paper will witness against thee, and thy shame and condemnation, they
must own, which thy due and portion is for thy envy against the truth.

Thomas Holme.

FINIS.

