Jus Fratrum, THE Law of Brethren. Touching the power of Parents, to dispose of
their Estates to their Children, or to others. The Prerogative of the Eldest,
and the Rights and Privileges of the younger Brothers. Showing the variety of
Customs in several Counties, and the preservation of Families, collected out
of the Common, Cannon, Civil, and Statute Laws of England.

By John Page, late Master in Chancery, and Dr. of the Civil Law.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Henry Fletcher, at the three gilt Cups, near to
the West end of S. Paul's, 1658.

To the Reader:
DIscordia fratrum inter se Amarissima, woeful and long continued experience
tells us with what bitterness enmity amongst brethren is carried on, if we cast
the least glance of our eye amongst the many violent Lawsuits, daily
prosecuted by brother against brother; so that we see the saying of the Poet,
complaining of the Iron age, near two thousand years ago, verified in the
superlative degree in our age, Concordia fratrum
Rara est --
Filius ante diem patris inquirit in annos.
Love amongst brethren (says he) is rare to be found, and the son goes to the
Oracle to enquire how long his father shall live, that he may inherit his
estate.

The eldest would have all to be his, and the younger thinks the elder has too
much; and while they strive who gets most use of his fathers estate, commonly a
third person carrles all from them both.

This Treatise will discover the Rights of both Elder and Younger, if they will
be contented with their portion, fully answering the Apologer, for the younger
brother, or the younger brothers Plea. This book called the Apology or Plea for
the younger brother (being a Treatise so entitled) was Printed at Oxford in
the year 1636.

Hereby brethren may learn to know their Right, and that being known and
obtained, I could wish them to be therewith content, and observe the Apostles
divine command, Let brotherly love continue.

The fathers power and Prerogative in disposing his estate.
A Fathers free power disputed, as that he may dispose of his Lands, or other
his Fortunes; to his son, sons, or any of them, as right, reason, the Laws of
God and man, the civil, cannon, and municipal Laws of this kingdom do command.

2, I will prove by the Laws of God and man, that a fathers freedom is such
that he may lawfully and religiously, give his lands, or goods, or other his
fortunes, to any of his children, for the preservation of his name, and comfort
of his posterity: as right, reason, or the better deserts of a son, shall
persuade him.

3. Nature never set it down, as a Law, that the estate should be left to the
elder brother or younger, or to any one in particular, or to all, but to whom
the father (being true and free Lord thereof) should best devise by will,
guided by reason.

4. Neither is there in Scripture, nor in any other written Law under heaven,
any command, to restrain the fathers power, but rather the contrary: for such
is the Law of Nature, that they who are ex aequo, one man's children, should, if
not ex aequo, yet not ex iniquo, be provided for.

5. Children during their fathers lives, have only jus ad rem, not jus in re,
to a fathers goods, whereupon the Law calls them, quasi bonorum patris
dominos, which their right only takes effect after their fathers death, for
during life, he has power to alter, alien, sell, and give, as it shall please
him.

6. The Cannon, and civil Laws, give no precedence or superiority of right to
eldest sons, but command it as a thing in equity, the father, either to divide
his inheritance amongst his sons, or to give to one more then to another, as it
shall please him; yet, with this proviso, that he who has the least has his
child's part, except on just cause he disinherit him.

7. The Common Laws of our Realm, allow every father to give his land in fee,
either by deed in his life, or will at his death, to any of his children, yea,
to a stranger, without rendering a reason why he does so.

8. The Imperial or Civil Laws, gave Parents at the first a power of life and
death over their children; and the Jews had the same power given them by the
divine Laws.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
YOu may see here, with what a merciless immanity, this wild Apologer falls
upon elder Brothers; for no Laws, either divine or humane, allow them (as he
says) any right of inheritance at all above other sons, nor any other sons can
claim any thing of their Parents (as of right) but what is their Parents
pleasure to bestow of them: and daughters are in the same, or in a worse
taking, for he insers, that they may lawfully be disinherited, and the estate
conferred by the father (if he has no sons) to any one of the same name,
because the name of the family is extinct in the daughter, and the Hebrew word
Zacar, which signifies a male child, does signify also a memorial, because
the fathers memory is preserved, in the son, But this is not all, for it is not
enought that Parents have a free power to make their children beggars, unless
they have also a free power over their childrens lives. It is strange that the
Apologer, who pretends so much learning and honesty, should be so fair in his
Epistle, and so fowl in his Treatise, (which thanks be to God) is no Gospel,
for there he protests, that it was not upon any the least presumption of a
self-sufficiency, to confront thereby any received custom; nor to diminish the
natural reverence due by younger brothers to their eider, nor to enkindle
emulation in families, nor to innovate any thing to the prejudice of public or
private quiet, that he made public his Treatise; but his principal motive or
aim was, the singular respect, which (as a Patriot) he bears to the glory of
Gentlemen's houses, and to the general good of great Britain; which, how well
he has performed, or whether he had any such intention or no, let any man
judge who shall read his Treatise: And though he seems in some places, a little
to confine the parental power, by saying, that Fathers are to dispose of their
estates, as right reason, and the better deserts of a son shall persuade them,
or chiefly for the preservation of their families, (which every wise, and good
man, must and will have a care of) yet this is but a seeming restriction, for
all is left to the fathers there is affection and will; and the eldest son has no
more right to inherit then the youngest, and either of them none at all, but at
the courtesy of the Parental Monarch.

As for his vain suppositions, that if the eldest son be a natural fool, or
madman, or turns Turk, or be extremely and desperately vicious; they shall have
no serious part of my Answer, because they are no material parts of the charge
of his Tratise. The questions, upon which I shall chiefly ground my Answer, are
these two:

The first is, Whether eldest sons have a superior right, above other sons, to
inherit the greatest part of the fathers estate.

The second is, Whether fathers may lawfully, and religiously give their lands
and goods, to which of their children they please, or to whom they will: But, I
will now take a view of his proofs, and be so bold as to examine his invincible
reasons, and arguments, for so he calls them.

The younger brothers Prerogative.
Proof I. Out of the Law of Nature for the younger brother.
THat all communicable things were common amongst men, for many ages after the
Creation: in all which time, no man laid proper claim to any thing, as due to
himself alone, whereby it well appears, that hereditary succession, or title to
a fathers lands, or goods, could not be then in use; or so much as thought of.

Answer. It ir more then the Apologer; or any man can prove, that all things
were enjoyed in common, for so many ages as he surmises. But the contrary is
manifest; for we find, that immediately after the Creation, and for many ages
together, the generations of Seth and Cain, did neither communicate, nor so
much as marry the one with the other; and it is not unprobable to think, that
Cain and Abel, (the first Sons of our first Parents) as they had several
vocation, so they had (as a curse for sin) a several propriety in their goods,
because they agreed no better.

But admit all things were enjoyed in common, for many ages after the Creation,
what is this to purpose; for if there were no proprieties or estates, there
could be no inheritance then in use; though (questionless) the right of
inheritance was then in eldest sons, as now it is: unto whom (as the Apologer
says) there is a natural reverence due from his younger brothers; and if there
be a natural reverence due, there ought also to be a natural right to inherit
the greatest part of the fathers estate, for how else should that natural
reverence be maintained, with such a due respect as it ought to be.

Proof 2. That all sorts of people, as well Christians as others, who have
perfection in natural society, or a perfect and religious life, in a natural or
wordly conversation of men, have, and do daily embrace, this natural and
blessed community.

Answ. This blessedness of community, which the Apologer so much contemplates,
takes away his pretended free power of Parents, for if there were no estates,
they would have nothing to dispose. And it is the Anabaptists and Eamelists so
much admire, and profanely practice, for they enjoy all things in common, even
as much as their wives, and in that are more beasts then many of the
unreasonable creatures: for amongst many of them there is a kind of conjugal
contract, and a constancy observed between the males and females. It is true,
that all good Christians should so live, and love, and help one another, as
though they enjoyed all things in common: But I would fain know, what other
people besides Christians, the Apologer means, who have, and do, (as he says)
daily embrace this blessed community, and in the way of a perfect and religious
life.

Proof 3. That the Law of God is never contrary to the Law of Nature, and that
fathers have, by the Law of Nature, a free power to dispose of their estates
and children.

Answ. It is true, that there is no Law of God, against the Law of undepraved
Nature, or as Nature was in her first purity; yet (as our nature now is) there
are many things in the Law of God, which are seemingly against Nature, or
merely preternatural as is the loving of our enemies, the doing of good to them
that hate and hurt us, Matthew. 5. Luke 6. 1 Pet. 2. But as there is no Law of
God, contrary to the Law of Nature; so there can be no good or warrantable Law
of Nature, which does not agree with all the divine admonitions, and precepts,
both of the Old and New Testament; and therefore the pretended free power of
Parents, cannot be grounded upon the Law of Nature, for it is directly against
the divine precepts, as appears, Numb. 27. Deuteronomy. 21.

Proof 4. That the happy Law of Nature, which endured so many ages and, without
doubt had longer continued, had not sin, which breaks all union, and depraves
all natural perfection, gotten such dominion in the minds of men, that in
natural equity all things could not longer be used in common: for as some men,
being possessed with an insatiate desire to get rule, and reign, sought the
oppression of others, by taking from them that freedom which Nature had given
them; so others given to sensuality, and idleness, sought to live of other men's
labors, whereas by Natures Law, every one ought to live by his proper
industry, within the rules of justice and honesty: whereupon Natural reason
persuaded, that all things being divided, every man should know his own,
otherwise no peace or concord could be maintained in humane society.

Answ. The Apologer is so transported, with the imagination of the happiness of
community, that he flutters up and down, and even loses himself in impertinent
discourses, to what he undertook to treat on. But admit sin were the cause of
dividing lands, and making laws, he will not say (I hope) though he seems to
infer it, that it is a sin to observe the laws, because sin was a cause of
making laws.

Proof 5. That Nature never set it down as a law, that the estate should be
left to the elder brother, or younger, or to any one in particular, or to all;
but to whom, the father (being true and free Lord thereof) should best devise
by will, guided by reason.

Answ. Neither the Apologer, nor any man whosoever, can prove (or so much as
make it probable) that Parents have that free and absolute power, by the Law of
Nature, as is pretended; neither can they prove that the right of inheritance,
in eldest sons, is not grounded upon the Law of Nature: But if the Apologer
would have fathers to have that free power, by the Law of Nature, as is
pretended, he must first prove how fathers are become the true and absolute
Lords, and masters of their estates by the Laws of Nature: for it is absurd to
say, that Nature gives a power to dispose of that which the her self gives not,
and this is more, I believe, then the Apologer, or any man else can prove.

It is true, that every man has his several way of understanding, which is
unto him, his natural reason, though the thing conceived be never so absurd and
foolish. The Apologer says, that fathers have such a free power by the Law of
Nature, and that eldest sons have no right of inheritance by the Law of Nature:
and this is the dictamen of his nature, or his natural reason, for which he
gives no reason, nor can allege any convincing or satisfying authority to
prove it.

And that you may see, how unnatural, and unreasonable, his pretended free
power of Parents is, I pray you consider a little, and tell me whether any
thing can be more unprobable, then that a father should be more free; and
absolute then Adam was, when he was in Paradise, and in the state of Innocence:
for Adam, was under a command or Law, but the Apologer would make fathers
lawless, Stat pro ratione voluntas.

And what I pray you can be more reasonable and necessary, then that there
should be a chief son, or heir, amongst our children: for there must
necessarily be an order and subordination in all things, otherwise there will
be a confusion in all things, and what follows confusion, may easily be
conceived in any understanding, for it is indeed the mark of hell, or rather
hell it self, where no good order, but an everlasting horror does inhabitate,
Job. 10.

And it is no less necessary, for the preservation of peace and concord,
amongst Brethren, that this cbief son or heir should be generally known, by a
native, natural, and undoubted right; for otherwise, all the other sons would
malign, and envy that son, who should be preferred to the inheritance, unless
the son so preferred, had an undoubted and native right thereunto, and had his
right also confirmed (as is now in the case of eldest sons) by the general
practice of all good Parents, which general consent and practice, can proceed
from no other cause or ground then from the instinct of nature, and
consequently, from the will, providence, and ordinance of Almighty God.

Proof out of the Common Law and Civil Law, for the younger brothers right.
THat divine precepts are not so absolutely binding, but that they may in some
cases lawfully be broken; for though the commandment is, Thou shall not steal,
nor, Thou shall not kill; yet one may, in extreme want of food, steal, or
violently take from another man, and may lawfully kill any man in defense of
his own life, and goods: so though there were a divine precept (as there is
none) that eldest sons should inherit, it could not intend that such eldest
sons, who are natural fools, or madmen, should inherit.

Answ. It is true, that natural fools and madmen (though eldest sons) do not
deserve to inherit: but what does this make against the rights of eldest sons,
who are no fools or madmen. Surely it concerns the pretended free power of
Parents, as much as the disinheritance of eldest sons: for if the father,
(according to the Apologer) turn idiot, or madman, the Apologer will not deny,
but that he is made thereby incapable of the management and disposure of his
estate.

Proof 7. That if the effect of eldership, were such by the Law of God, as some
passionately defend; that is, that the whole inheritance should of right
pertain to the eldest son, then it follows by good consequence, that there
should, nor ever could have been, but one temporal Lord of all the world, for
of necessity Adams inheritance should have gone still to the next in blood.

Answ. It is absurd, and no consequence at all, that there should be any such
temporal Lord, for the eldest son is not to inherit all the estate, but only
the greatest part of it, fathers being to provide for all their children; and
the Apologer knows, though Adam had the whole world to himself before he had
his wife and children (who were partners with him by a coequal right) though he
had a kind of superiority and sovereignty over them) yet he had it not by way
of inheritance.

Proof 8. That it was never yet averred by any sound divine Philosopher, or
Lawyer, that nature makes immediately heirs, but men: They talk idly who say,
that God and nature make heirs, upon which ground our Common Lawyers say, that
no heirs are born, but men and Law make them.

Answ. It is more then the Apologer, or any man can prove, that eldest sons are
not born heirs: eldest sons, as soon as born, are heirs apparent by the laws:
King James was born a King, and crowned in his cradle, and is there a native
and natural right in Kings, and not in others: howsoever it cannot be denied,
but that Esau had a native, and therefore a natural right, as appears by the
word Birthright: and the Apologer cannot but know, that it is God only, who
gives and makes heirs, which heirs are the eldest sons, as plainly appears by
his divine precepts, Deuternom. 21. etc.

Proof 9. That God, requiring obedience of children to Parents, promised a
reward; saying, Honor thy father and mother, that thy days may be long in the
land, which the Lord shall give thee; which surely was not spoken to one, but
to all the sons of men, for with God there is no exception of persons, but as a
just and pious father, he gives to every one according to his deserts, terram
autem dedit filiis hominum.

Answ. I know not what the Apologer should intend hereby, unless he would have
it thought, that as all children are equally commanded to honor their Parents,
so all children who equally honor their Parents, should be equally rewarded by
their Parents, though the Laws, both divine, and humane, give a superior right
of inheritance to eldest sons: and concerning his terram dedit, I know what he
should mean thereby, unless he would have every man to be thought an unnatural
tyrant, and an usurper. who has a particular and proper estate unto himself,
because the words are terram dedit filiis hominum, God gave the whole earth to
the sons of men: that is, not to any one in particular, but to all in general.
You may see here, how bold he is with the Laws, for he strikes at the very root
of them; and you may see what a boundless and liberal mind he has, for he
would have every man a freeholder, and no less then the whole world his
inheritance; But Mr. Apologer, if this should be so, what would become of your
pretended free power of Parents, for they would have nothing to dispose of.

Proof 10. That there is no divine precept, that eldest sons should inherit,
that it is well known to all Divines, that holy Writ has not prescribed any
direct form to the children of God, whereby they are bound in conscience to
dispose of their lands and goods, but has absolutely left them to the customs
of their country, where any act of that kind shall be executed; that there is
neither in Scripture, nor in any other written Law under Heaven, any command to
restrain the fathers power, but rather the contrary.

Answ. The Apologer cannot but know, that there are diverse plain, and divine
precepts, concerning the inheritance of eldest sons, one of which he himself
does often cite, but never fully relate, and these are the divine words: if a
man have two wives, one beloved, and the other hated; and they have born him
children, both the beloved and hated, and if the first born be hers that was
hated, then shall it be, when he makes his sons to inherit that which he has,
that he may not make the son of the beloved the firstborn, and prefer him
before the son of the hated, which is indeed the first born, but he shall
acknowledge the son of the hated, the first born, by giving him a double
portion of all that he has; for he is the beginning of his strength, the right
hand of the firstborn is his, Deuteronomy. 21. Parents therefore are not to think
themselves so absolute, as that they may make choice of what heir they will,
according as the wind of their affection shall blow; for affection is here
excluded, we live under a Law grounded upon Divine Ordinances, which we are
bound in conscience to observe, and inviolably keep: and though the letter of
the law is, that eldest sons should have a double portion above their younger
brothers; it is no where said, that eldest sons should have but a double
portion, as though Parents should be concluded from giving them more: for so we
should condemn our national Laws, and the general practice of all good Parents,
who usually leave the greatest part of their estates to their eldest sons.

But says the Apologer (or seems to infer it) neither this, nor any other
divine precept, does any way restrain a fathers free power: for the words are,
when he makes, or is to make, his sons inherit: that is, when he is disposed,
or minded so to do; and if he be not so minded, he may choose, for he has a
lawful power and freedom to do otherwise. But Mr. Apologer, shall I in answer
propose a question to you, and concerning your own profession, (for they say,
you are a learned Divine) suppose there were this saying in Scripture, that
when a minister makes, or is to make his prayers or a Sermon, he is to demean
himself in a zealous and sober manner; will you say that a minister, is not
obliged at all, but may choose whether he will pray or preach, or demean himself
soberly; indeed, I could wish (being your self, as you say, a younger brother,)
that you would demean your self a little more soberly, and mannerly, toward
elder Brothers, who are your masters; and not to question their ever yet
undeniable rights, but rather to conform your self to the admonition of the
Apostle, Tit. 3. Stultas autem quoestiones and Geneologias, and pugnas legis
deuita, sunt enim inutiles and vanae.

Preof. 11. That the prodigal son mentioned in the Gospel, Luke 15. being weary
of his fathers house, came to his father and boldly said, pater da mihi
portionem substantiae meae, quae me contingit; this child, of which the Gospel
speaks was the younger brother, yet you see how boldly he said, Give me that
portion of goods, which belongs to me: by which words it is evident, that a
devision or partition of a fathers goods was then in use; and that any child,
as well younger as elder, had power by law to demand his Legitimate, or child's
part, according to the nature of thd Civil and Cannon Laws; for the words
following in the sacred Text are these, and divisit substantiam illis; and he
divided unto them his living. thus we see that the privilege of eldership was
then excluded, which now in our country, by custom only, is gotten to be of
such force.

Answ. The parable of the Prodigal, so much advanced by the Apologer, makes
nothing against the rights of eldest sons, for though the words are, and pater
divisit, and the father divided; yet it was movable goods, or money, and not
lands which he divided; and it cannot be understood that the father gave half
the estate to the younger son; for then he should leave but one half for
himself, his wife, and eldest son.

But this parable clearly overthrows the pretended free power of Parents; for
the prodigal demanded his portion of his father, as of right, (which the
Apologer says, all children may do) and had it paid him.

Proof 12. That it is invincibly proved out of the book of Job, who was
contemporary with Moses, by attestation of judicious Theologians, that there
was in those times, and countries, no such Law, or custom, that the eldest son
should play at sweepstake, and all the rest left to the mercy of the four
winds, for it is expressly recorded in the last chapter and fourteenth verse,
that Job gave his daughters inheritance among their brethren, which comes home
to the point in question, and irrepliably evinces a fathers power and right to
make partition of his estate among his children.

Answ. The Apologer says, he is now home to the point in question; but I know
not what can be further off from the matter in question; if he be no better an
archer, then an arguer, the safest place for a man to stand in when he shoots,
would be at the mark, as Diogenes was said to do to, one who used to rove at
random; for the question he is here come home to, is, that Job gave some
inheritance to all his sons and daughters; and he did well, and as all good
Parents ought to do: for neither the Levitical law, nor any other good law,
does allow fathers to leave their whole estates to their eldest sons, but only
the greatest part of it, for they are with Job, to provide for all their
children: this, I grant, is a question without question, but Mr. Apologer, if
it please you to remember the main question, which appears in the mighty charge
of your Treatise, is, whether eldest sons have a superior right to inherit
above other sons, or rather have any right at all; and whether fathers may
lawfully and religiously, give their lands, and goods, to which of their
children they please, or to whom they will.

The younger Brothers rights, by the Cannon and Civil Law.
Proofs out of the Cannon and Civil Law.
THat God in his commandments, did but second his former Ordinances given by
nature; for so long as mankind lived, in a sort, after the innocence, which
Gods grace in his first creation had wrought in him: God gave him no other Law,
but when as by sin, those sparks which remained, after his fall, were quite
extinguished, God gave him new Laws, yet agreeable to nature; and Laws, which
ever had but the name and credit of Law, do derive their Original from the Law
of Nature, whereupon Cicero, many hundred years since, said, that the ground of
all Law-making, is to be taken from the chief Law, which was made before any
Law was written, or City builded

Answ. The Apologer, to gain the more credit, does flyly cover himself with the
Law of Nature; and would persuade his easy Readers, that all the Laws, he
alleges, are grounded upon that Law. I deny not, but that the same was in the
Law of Nature, as is delivered in the holy Tables of the Law; but neither the
Apologer, nor any man can know, which were all the Laws of Nature, nor what
Laws are grounded upon that primary Law; it is the duty of every good
Christian, and good subject, to conform himself to the Laws he lives under; and
not to wretch and stretch them to wicked ends, by their false constructions,
nor yet too curiously to search into them, which is always an argument of a
proud and rebellious spirit: So, that in all this fair flourish, the Apologer
has proved nothing to purpose, but only showed the antiquity of Cicero, who
lived (he says) many hundred years ago.

Proof 14. That by the Civil Law Parents had at first, a power of life and
death given them over their children: and a free disposition of all their
fortunes to any of them in his life, but if he died intestate, then the estate
was to be divided among the children egually, as well sons as daughters.

Answ. I might here answer him with his own two sayings, Cessante ratione,
cessat lex, and summu^ jus, est summa injuria; and he also says, that it is no
Law, but tyranny, which wholly disagrees with the Law of Nature, and what can
be more against Nature and natural equity, then that Parents should have a
power to destroy their own flesh and blood, which are their children: and he
says, that these Laws were first invented and practiced by the Romans when
they were heathens, and he needs no other answer then this: that it was very
heathenishly done of them; but why should the Apologer urge this, himself
saying, that this Law was rigorous, and afterward altered upon good grounds.
And concerning the division of the estate equally amongst the children, for so,
says he, the Civil Laws ordain; It is well known, that the practice is much
otherwise where the Civil Laws are in most force; as in Spain, France, Germany,
Italy, etc. for there the chief house and the greatest part of the inheritance
is usually conferred upon the eldest son, and it is a Maxim amongst them,
Seniores, honores, juniores labores; the Arts, Arms, A munities, and the more
noble trades, as Merchandise, and the like, and not lands of inheritance are
the more proper portions for younger brothers.

Proof 15. That in natural justice, children, during their fathers lives, have
jus ad rem, not jus in re, to their fathers goods: Whereupon the Law calls
them quasi bonorum, patris dominos, which their right only takes effect after
their fathers death; for during life, he has power to alter, alien, sell, and
give, as it shall please him, according to form of Law, but being dead without
will or disposition thereof, they fall upon his children according to the Law
of Nations; hat the Cannon and Civil Laws command it, as a thing in equity, the
father either to divide his inheritance amongst his children, or allow his
children according to his affection, by giving to one more then unto another,
as it shall please him.

Answ. The Apologer speeks generally, and cites neither authority nor Author,
and so deserves to be neither credited nor answered; but I will not deal so
unkindly with him. There is no question, but that children have not only jus ad
rem, but jus in re, to their fathers goods in his life time, as plainly
appears, by the claim which Esau made, and by the parable of the prodigal; for
the prodigal came to his father, and boldly said, Pater da mihi portionem,
substantiae meae -- give me that portion of goods which belongs to me; and
pater divisit, and the father gave him his portion: and Esau came as boldly to
his father, and demanded the due of his Birthright, because he was the eldest
son.

And for all the large sovereignty, which (as the Apologer says) the Civil
Laws give Parents over the children, the Apologer confesses, that fathers
(unless they can give a just cause to the contrary) are bound by the Civil
Laws, to leave every child a portion, called a Legitimate, or Patrimony, which
makes clearly against his so absolute a power of Parents, for if they are
bound, how can they be said to be free?

Proof 16. That even to this present day, the engrossing all by primogeniture,
has not been so much as heard of, or at leastwise never admitted in the Civil
Law, as by many Text in the same Law, it well appears.

Answ. The Apologer is still upon his generalities, and gives neither reasons
nor authority, but the best is we may believe him as we list; I confess that no
good Law, either Civil or Cannon, or any other Law whatsoever, allows the
engrossing all by Primogeniture; as that the eldest son should have all the
estate, and the other children nothing; but it is false that there is no
mention at all in the Civil Law of the rights of Primogeniture: for the great
Lawyer Baldus, in his Book De justitia, and jure, faith, semper fuit, and
semper erit, it always has been, and always shall be, that the firstborn
does succeed and inherit.

And the arcient Historian Herodotus, in his Polihim, thus says, it is the
general custom amongst all men, that the first born does succeed and inherit.
And if we will believe Sir John Heywood, a late, and learned Doctor of the
same Laws; he tells us, that all the best, and most approved interpreters of
the Civil, and Cannon Laws, do jointly hold, that Parents have no lawful power
to invert, or pervert, the due course of inheritance, unless there be some such
great cause, as was in the case of Ruben, and the word Senior (say they) which
signifies priority of birth, is often times taken for Lord; and not without
cause, for says on Apostle 1 Timoth. 5. Seniorem ne increpaveris, sed obs^cra
ut patrem, Do not disrespect thy elder, but honor him and treat with him, as
if he were thy father; and indeed the Senior, or eldest of our sons (as is
manifest, Genesis 27.49. Gal. 4. etc.) is to be as a Lord over the rest of his
brethren.

But the Apologer it may be (being himself a Divine cannot relish any other
authority, but from Divines; I will therefore, for his better instruction, and
satisfaction (if it can be) present him with the opinions of two very
authentic Divines, and of great antiquity S. Chrysostom, and S. Jerome. S.
Chrysostom, in his fifth Sermon against Julian, says, that the firstborn is
is to be esteemed more honorable then the other children; and S. Jerome, in his
Epistle to Onogron, and upon the 49. Genesis says, that the right of inheritance
is only due to the first begotten, or eldest son living.

Proof out of the Common Law.
THat our Common Laws give power to a father, and free will to dispose of his
own, as far as reason shall guide his will, without all obligation to his heir;
all Lawyers agree, that such Parents who have estates in Fee simple, may alien,
sell, and give, by power of our Law, their lands to whom they will, without
respect of person, or Eldership: for it is lawful for every man to dispose his
own, as far as the Law shall permit him.

Answ. You see here how the Apologer lays down the Law against elder brothers,
and indeed against all children; for fathers may (as he says) do what they
will with their own, for so the Laws permit. I might here answer him with his
own two sayings; that Laws without reason are no Laws at all, and that extreme
Law is extreme injury; but he shall have a fair answer, and I hope, a full one.

It is well known, that it is impossible for any Law (though there were a
thousand Solons to compose it, and the wisdom of a Solomon to assist them)
that could prevent all inconveniences, and those are the best Laws politic,
that prevent most. And I am so far from thinking the Laws to be faulty herein,
that I must ever approve the goodness and wisdom of them, in allowing Parents
so absolute a sovereignty over their estates and children: for it is most
necessary and just, that Parents should have this free power permitted them,
because it is a great means to keep their sons in a due obedience, and make
them strive, by a noble emulation, who should best deserve their fathers love.

And the Apologer knows that usury is permitted by the Laws, and usury (as
himself says) is as grievous a sin in the eye of Heaven, as theft is; and he
may as soon prove, that usury or theft is lawful, as he can prove, that an
eldest son, who is wise and dutiful, may lawfully and religiously be
disinherited; for he cannot deny, but that the intention, justice, and equity
of the Law is, that eldest sons should inherit; so, that upon the matter,
fathers are but Feoffees in trust of their estates and children, and this great
power is only lent them to prevent inconveniences:

Proof 18. That the Common Laws are of most force, to sway the point in
question, which I have therefore purposely reserved to treat on in the last
place. That by the Common Laws, a man may give his lands in Fee, either by deed
in his life, or will at his death, to any of his sons; yea, to a stranger,
without rendering a reason why he does so: That it is no offense to part an
inheritance amongst children, or to disinherit an eldest son, upon just and
evident cause of incapacity, if it be done according to course of Law.

Answ. If the Apologer supposes by his just and evident cause of incapacity,
that the eldest son be a natural fool, or madman, we will not much dispute the
matter; but if he means, as he every where pretends, that the want of the
fathers affection and will, is a just and evident cause of incapacity, he is in
a gross and shameful error; and I cannot but marvel, why the Apologer should
so much urge the authority and force of our Laws, on the behalf of his younger
Brothers: for there is nothing so sacred in our Laws, as are the rights and
privileges of Primogeniture or eldership: old Bracton, and diverse others of
our greatest Lawyers, do plainly aver, and prove, that our Laws are herein
divinely grounded, and they give their Text, Numb. 27. A perpetual Law, as the
Lord commanded Moses.

And though the eldest son should be a natural fool, or madman; yet if the
father do not otherwise dispose of the estate in his life time (and it may be a
question whether he may lawfully and religiously so do, for it would be a wrong
to all the succeeding posterity) yet this natural fool or madman, and his
eldest son after him, or the next in blood who should succed him, is by the
power and ordinance of our Laws to inherit.

And such is the indulgence of our Laws, toward eldest sons and their rights,
that the Law takes even natural fools, and madmen, (if eldest sons) into its
bosom and protection; and the estates are preserved that they may run in the
right course of inheritance, which is, to the next in blood, or from one eldest
son unto another. And surely Mr. Apologer, I know not why you should be much
commended for your integrity, in persuading Parents, that all is well done
which is done by the power and permission of the Laws; if you had aimed (as you
say in your Epistle) at the general good of great Britain, you would have told
Parents, what they might lawfully do, and not what they could do; but suppose
there were so absolute a power in Parents as you would have them believe, what
would your younger brothers get thereby, for whom you apologize: why forsooth,
nothing at all, but what pleases the Parental Monarch, for fathers may give
their lands, and goods, to a stranger, or to whom they will, with rendering a
reason why they do so; I would fain know, whether any thing can be more
inhumane and monstrous, and whether there was ever such a desperate John an
oaks as this wild man: for though he would a little hide himself under the
words of a just and evident cause of incapacity; yet he confidently avers, or
seems to infer it, that it is a sufficient warrant for any man's conscience to
do, as the Laws shall enable him; currat lex, valeat quantum valere potest.

Proof 29. That though the use and custom be, that eldest sons inherit; yet
the breach of this custom is no sin, for it is such a customs, which rather
invites then commands or binds; that customs against Law are void by the Civil
Law, and that it was never yet heard that custom was of such force, that it
should be deemed a sin, not to follow a custom, especially when the Law is
more pious and natural then the custom is.

Answ. It is true, that no good Christian ought to observe any bad custom, and
no custom is to be kept, which is against the Laws; if the Law be more pious
and natural then the custom is; but that it is against Law and Christian piety
for eldest sons, who are wise and honest, to inherit the greatest part of their
fathers estates, or that a father may lawfully, and religiously, disinherit
such a son: I cannot think him a wise or honest man who can believe it.

And whereas the Apologer says, that it is but by way of custom that eldest
sons inherit; he cannot but know, that next to the Divine commands) there is
not any thing can more bind the conscience, or more satisfy and settle the
judgment, then a general practice or custom, if the custom be good and just,
as it is in this case of inheritance.

And he knows also, that our Laws are divided into three parts, Statute Law,
Common Law, and Custom Law: and Custom is a second Nature: the Apologer
says, that it is the more general practice, or custom, for eldest sons to
inherit; and how can we better repose our consciences and judgments, then in a
general practice, or custom; and how can any man think otherwise, but that
Parents do thus, and have done thus, even from all antiquity, moved only by
right reason, and out of conscience, in obedience to to the Laws.

Proof. Of the Law of Nature.
THat many younger brothers and sifters, for want of due means from their
fathers and elder brothers, are forced to shift, which, as these times shape,
is either to live lewdly, or miserable. That the trade of Merchandise, the
Military profession, the Courtiers life, the service of Noble men, and the
like; have advanced more in former times then now they do: and this kind of
life, is not so grateful to our English Gentlemen's natures, as anciently it
has been: Ergo, fathers are to allow, and leave more largely to their younger
children.

Answ. The Apologer having used the Laws at his pleasure, begins to tax the
times: for, says he, younger brothers for want of means, are forced to live,
either lewdly, or miserable, as the times shape. He next falls upon the Camp,
Court, and City; for, says he, neither Merchandise, Soldiery, nor service of
the King, will serve now adays to prefer, and help younger brothers; and he
gives this reason, and very wisely, because such courses of life are not so
grateful to our English Gentlemen's natures, as anciently they have been; and
younger brothers being careless to increase their small Patrimonies, by thrift,
and honest industry, do by his own reasons deserve no Patrimony at all: for
(says he) interest Reipublicae, ut quilibet re sua been utatur, it concerns
the Commonwealth, that men be good husbands, and employ their goods in such a
manner as shall make most for the good of the Commonwealth.

Yet I deny not, but that it is a great error in Parents who have great
estates, to leave so little as they usually do to younger sons: for such
younger sons, who have small Amunities, and have never been inured to labor,
nor have any other means to get their living by, when their necessities make
them say with the Steward, in Matthew. I cannot dig, and I am ashamed to beg: it
does often force them to dishonest courses, and is a cause of numberless
mischiefs; and no marvel, for it is a hell to the minds of most men to decline
to more inferior courses, then those have been bred up with: and therefore it
were much better that Parents themselves would have a better respect to their
younger children, and not leave them (as too many do) to the courtesy of their
eldest son, whom they endeavor to advance, by making the rest of their
children beggars; or by leaving them so little, that they are not able to
maintain the place and credit of their Birth. I heartily wish it were
otherwise, and that Parents would be better advised: But Mr. Apologer, you are
clean beside the matter in question, for you undertook to prove a fathers free
power, in disposing of the estate at his pleasure, and that eldest sons, have
no superior right to inherit above other sons.

Proof 21. That the custom of eldest sons to inherit, has rather been the
overthrow, then the preservation of Families: for, when such custom was not in
use, we find in Livy, that three hundred of the Fabii, all of one name and
Family, issued out of Rome gates, at one time, on their own cost, for the
defense of their City, who were all slain: In Scotland also, three hundred of
the name and Family of the Frazers, all Gentlemen, were at one time slain in
fight by their enemies; and no less then an hundred and forty Gentlemen, of
one name in Yorkshire, waited on the chief, or principal man of their house, at
that time high Sheriff.

Answ. It is true indeed, that the Fabii issue out of Rome gates, on their
cost, and to their cost, for it cost them their lives, Vna dies Fabios, ad
bellum miserat omnes, says Ovid: And if the Apologer would have it thought,
that the custom was then to divide the estate amongst the sons equally, for
the enlarging and preservation of Families; the best he can make of it, is,
that it was but a heathenish custom, for the Romans were then heathens. And
concerning his story of the Frazers, I know why he should make any mention of
it, unless he would have his Reader to consider how much the Fabii and the
Frazers did sympathize, because their names began both with a letter; as also,
because they were both of a number, and both of a fortune, for they were all
slain by their enemies: and the Yorkshire Sheriff (as himself says) was the
chiefest or principal man of that House, that is, that he was of the eldest, or
noblest House; and therefore by his own saying, there was no such custom then
in use as he speaks of.

Proof 22. That the custom of eldest sons to inherit, has been in use but of
late times; for how else could it come to pass, that in this Kingdom there
were at one time so many great and honorable Families of one blood, disjoined
in their seats, and distinguished in their Armories, by different arguments; or
who is so meanly seen in our Antiquities and Stories, as not to know it was so:
and that many renowned Houses (to speak as de magis notis) Plantaginates,
Mortimers, Beaufords, Beau^hamps, De la Poles, Nevils, Grays, and the like,
have grown and flourished from one common Ancestour, it cannot be refelled. But
in these our times, we find so great a decay of ancient families, that if there
be one Family in a shire of three hundred years continuance, very many others
are scarce five descents in blood.

Answ. The Apologer needs not think it so strange, that there should be so
great a decay of Families, for being so well versed in History, as he would
seem to be, he must needs know, that many great Nations and Peoples, are not
only decayed, but have utterly lost their names: what I pray you is become of
the twelve Tribes of Israel, who were a thousand times more glorious then then
the Families he recites? and our very next neighbors the French, do not know
where their Germane Ancestors called Franci did inhabit; only our
Cambro-Britanni can derive their descent from the Moon, but other Nations are
not so happy.

And concerning those honorable names mentioned by the Apologer, as
Plantaginets, Mortimers, Beaufords, etc. it cannot be thought (as the Apologer
would have it) that the custom was then to divide the estate amongst the sons
equally; for when a Family is gotten to an eminent height and power, it is an
easy matter to advance younger sons, by making some of them Bishops (as the
use then was) who should help the rest, or by preferring them to offices and
employments of state; or by marrying them to heirs general, and we see at this
^ day, that the honorable name of Howard, is as largely spread into as many
several branches, as any of the rest were then, and yet I never heard of any
disinheritance practiced by them, or that they used to make an equal division
of the estate amongst their children.

It is true, I think, that there are not many Families in one shire of three
hundred years descent, though (doubtless) some are of much greater continuance;
but the cause is not (as the Apologer would have it supposed) because eldest
sons inherit; but it is rather the mere act, and ordinance of God; for it is
only God who gives children, and if there be no children, the Family must needs
extinguish; and we find in Mr. Camden, and in our ancient records and deeds of
conveyance, that many hundreds of names, of noble and ancient Gentry, are
either lost for want of children; or by marrying of the heirs general, and the
Apologer knows, that the Civil wars, treasons, manslaughters, felonies, and the
like: have been the ruin of many noble houses, which could not have been
prevented with all the Apologers natural reason; or by any free power, or care
of fathers.

Proof 23. That it is far from the Law of Nature, or Paternal piety; the father
dying intestate, the eldest son to become Lord Paramount of the estate, and not
to be bound by Law to provide for brother, or sister, but at his own good
liking, aliud tempus alios mores postulat; when we have a wiser age, we shall
have better customs: and men both of learning and virtue, have broke this
custom upon good considerations, and just causes, not upon spleen, by leaving
their fortunes to strangers, or to a lustful issue, as some have done.

Answ. The Apologer cannot be ignorant, that if the father dies intestate
(which the Laws suppose he will not do) being so much bound in conscience to
provide for all his children) our Courts of equity do rectify, and regulate
the Laws in such cases: and the Civil Laws (as says he) ordain, that every son
and daughter, shall have a legitimate or child's part, whether the father dies
intestate or no. And surely, I cannot think, but the Law does well, in leaving
such a large and absolute right in eldest sons; for were the estate (as the
Apologer would have it) to be equally divided amongst all the children, and the
Lawyers and Neighbors should be called upon to make the division: every of the
children would think his own part least, and trouble the Courts for a new and
better division, until they had divided and brought the estate to nothing.

But I pray you mark the uprightness of the man: it is, he says, against
natural reason, and paternal piety, that eldest sons should inherit the estate;
but he no where says, that it is against natural reason, and paternal piety,
for fathers to disinherit their lawful children, and give their estates to
strangers and Bastards: Nay, he seems to encourage them what he can; for they
shall (says he) not want presidents, nor do any more then others have done
before them, and will do after them.

Proof 24. That it is against natural reason (which is the grandmother of all
Laws) that the temperate should be subject to the intemperate, the sober and
wise to fools and franticks: That servitude proceeds not from the Law of
Nature, but from Nature corrupted: That it is against natural equity, and
against Nature her self, that men should be subject to beasts, or insensible
creatures: whereupon Aristotle disputing the nature of rule and subjection,
says, that none are born slaves, but such as Nature has abridged of the use
of reason; who being truly slaves, are utterly unfit to govern: upon which
ground the same great Philosopher prefers that form of policy, where the
wisest, and best, are admitted to the manage of state affairs; and therefore
if it be Natures intent (as it is) to make all mankind reasonable: how
reasonable is it, that they who are unreasonable ought to be deprived of all
right, and claim to any thing (more then to sustain nature) and debarred all
superiority, or seniority, which by Law, or custom, might otherwise have fallen
on them; because according to divine ahd humane Laws, man ought not to be
governed by beast, such as Idiots, and Franticks seem to be.

Answ. Here is a note beyond Elah, but he cannot want his answer, for he has
it already: the effect of all this fair flourish, being but this; that such
eldest sons, or any sons, who are natural fools and madmen, or extremely and
desperately vicious, are not fit nor worthy to inherit.

But I know not what the Apologer should mean by his alleging Aristotle; that
none are born slaves, but such as nature has abridged of the use of reason;
and that servitude proceeds not from the Law of Nature, but from Nature
corrupted: if by the word servitude he means subjection, he grossly errs: for it
as natural for a son to obey his father, as it is natural and pious for a
father, to relieve, to instruct, and govern his son; but the words slave and
slavery, are of so ill a sound, and bad a sense, that as no man is born a
slave, so no man (methinks) should either be, or be made a slave. Natural
subjection does well, both in son and subject; but slavery is unnatural, and
monstrous, both in him that forcibly, and undeservedly, inflicts it; and in him
that suffers it, unless it be for the cause of religion, and then it is an
honor.

But, says he, it is against natural reason (which is the grandmother of all
Laws) that the temperate should be subject to the intemperate, the wise to the
foolish: and therefore in natural reason, that son who is the wisest and
worthiest ought to be heir, if it so please the father: for he is Lord
paramount, and he must be the Oracle. But, Mr. Apologer, what if this your
Oracle, the father (which is no very strange thing) should be foolish: for
fools can get children as well as wise men; there is little difference betwixt
either of them that way. Suppose, I say, that the father himself be foolish:
why? what if he be? may the Apologer answer, fools are Christians as well as
other folks; and he may (by chance) for all that, make as good a choice of an
heir, as a wiser man; and this answer of his would be as solid, and as much
weighty, as any other authority, or reason, he has yet alleged, for his
pretended free power of Parents, or against the rights of eldest sons.

Proof 25. That it is no sin, nor offense for a father, who has estate in Fee
simple, to disinherit his eldest son, or any of his sons, for he has a lawful
power so to do: Ergo, fathers may with a good conscience.

Answ. It is a hard matter to persuade some men what is sin: our precise
Separatists, and new Anglians, will acknowledge no sin but infidelity: and some
others there are of the Diabolical Sect, of ede, bibe, and lude. who think
there is no sin at all: but the Apologer is none of these; for he honestly
says, Natura Divinitatis fulgor, that Nature is a bright beam, or shining lamp
of the Divinity: and he says also, Omne peccatum est Divinitati injuria; that
every sin is a wrong, or an affront to God himself. And what can be more
against Nature, then that a father should disinherit his own flesh and blood,
which are his children, and give his estate to strangers: and what can be a
greater affront to God, then that a father should disaffect and reject his
children? whom God has not only given him, but given them for his honor: for
it is said, Eccl. 3. and Prove. 17. that fathers are honored in their children.
and that the Crown, or glory of old men, are their childrens children.

The Apologer says, that it is a monstrous immanity in any man, not to have
care to preserve his Species, that is, not to have care to preserve, and
provide for his children: and can it be a monstrous immanity, and not a sin? he
also says, that every act in it self, or by circumstance, evil; is before God
and man a sin, and no way to be executed by a Christian: That an act of it self
lawful, done against Law, is sin; and that no Law is valid, where the thing it
self is unlawful and a sin: and is it not then a sin to disinherit an eldest
son, unto whom, the Laws, both Divine and humane, give the right of
inheritance, and which we also see confirmed by the general practice of all
good Parents.

Proof 26. That we cannot in conscience sell, or give a weapon, to one whom we
know intends to murder. Excommunications are imposed on them who sell armours
or weapons to Turks. The rule of conscience, not only commands a man to use
well those fortunes, which God has bestowed on him; but forbids him, either
for affection or gain, to part with them to others who will abuse them, lest he
partake of others sin, which a Parent may do after his death, who parts from
his estate, to a desperate unthrift.

Answ. It is true, that if we can assuredly know, that our goods will be spent
to the dishonor of God, the harm of the Commonwealth, or to the hurt, or wrong
of any man, we are neither to sell nor give them to such persons as will so use
them; and if an heir be desperately vicious, there is no question but his
father may lawfully and religiously disinherit him; but how can a desperate
sinner, or unthrift, be known? We are divinely commanded, not to judge any man,
Romans 14. which is so to judge him, but by Gods grace he may be otherwise, and
be hereafter a glorious Saint in heaven: when he that judges him (for ought as
he knows, or can know) may himself be an abhorred reprobate; qui stat, videat
ne cadat, he who presumes most of his sure footing, is in most danger of
falling.

And though a son be vicious and an unthrift, does it necessarily follow, that
he that is once an unthrift musty always be so: We have daily experience to
the contrary; many unthrifts prove the best husbands, for such men commonly run
out of one extreme into another, and from prodigallity, fall to penury.

But if the eldest son be a natural fool, or mad man, he is not capable to
manage the estate; or, if (according to the Apologer) he turns Turk, and
tramples upon all Laws, divine, and humane; I will say with the Apologer, that
he is so unfit to inherit, that he is not worthy to live: but I cannot conceive
how in conscience an eldest son can be disinherited, merely for his
unthriftinesse: for we may so estate our land (and yet suffer him and his heirs
to inherit) that it shall not be in his power to hurt, or to overthrow his
family.

Proof 27. That if in conscience the whole inheritance of the father, is to
come, without control, to the eldest son; then must it of necessity be
inferred, that the father, without his consent, cannot give to pious uses, or
set out for his other children after his death. So, that if God should bless a
father with many children, and cross him with as many misfortunes, his other
children, and all his other charitable intentions, should be provided for,
only, at his sons or heirs courtesy: for thereupon all donations to pious
uses, and to younger brothers for their portions, may be called in question.

Answ. Eldest sons are not to inherit all the estate, but only the greatest
part of it, fathers being to provide for all their children. And I deny not,
but that every man is bound in his Christian duty, to do what good he well can
to his neighbor, or Christian brother: for says an Apostle, Romans 14. No man
is born to himself; and the Apologer has a good saying, Da quae non potes
retinere, ut consequaris ea quae non potes amittere. Give of those things which
thou can not keep, that thou may gain such things as cannot be taken from
thee.

But Mr. Apologer, I must tell you, charity begins at home: Proximus quisque
sibi, we must first look upon our selves and children, and then upon our
neighbor, or Christian brother; but i will come nearer to you: put the case,
that a father were to make the Church, or Commonwealth, or children his heir;
which of all these may he the more lawfully do?

The Apologer it may be would be on the Commonwealths side, for then the estate
would be divided, and he might chance to have a share amongst the rest; but I
must ever be on the childrens part, and will give a plain Text for it: S. Paul,
in his fifth Epistle to Timothy, says, that he who has not care to provide
for his family, does deny the faith, and is worse then an Infidel; but it is no
where said, that he who has not care to build Churches, Colleges, and
Hospitals, does deny the faith, and is worse then an Infidel.

Proof 28. That it plainly appears out of the sacred Text it self, that fathers
had a power amongst the Jews, to cause their children, for riot, disorder, and
unthriftinesse, to be stoned to death: Ergo, they had power to disinherit, for
the greater ever includes the less; and that I may not seem to speak without
book, I will set down Moses words, which are as follow: If a man have a
stubborn and rebellious son, that will not obey the command of his father; and
being chastised shall be unreclaimable, they shall apprehend and bring him to
the Seniors of the city, and to the place of justice, and shall say to them,
This our son is incorrigible, and disobedient: contemns or monitions, abandons
himself to riotous excess, and is a drunkard. The citizens shall then overwhelm
him with stones, and he shall die: That you may take evil from among you, and
that all Israel hearing it may fear, Deuteronomy. 21.

Whence we may collect how odious a crime unthriftinesse, and riot, was among
the people of God, and what ample power the father had, to punish the same in
his child: for if we observe well the manner of the process, between the
father and the child in this case, we shall find, that the father was witness,
accuser, and judge of his own cause: for we read not that the Senators of the
city did give sentence, or further examined the proofs of the fathers
accusation; but their presence, giving as it were allowance to a fathers power
and intention to punish his son; the people might, without more inquiry, stone
to death, so evil a deserving child; which being well considered, my hope is,
that it will never hereafter seem unlawful, or against conscience, that a
father should disinherit his eldest, or any of his sons, for the cause only of
unthriftinesse and riot.

Answ. It is (they say) a shame to belly the devil, then much more to belly Gods
chosen people; for had the Israelites been so much merciless, as the Apologer
would make them: would Moses himself (and from the immediate mouth of God
himself) would he have said, Deuteronomy. 8. that as a father disciplineth his
children, so does God discipline his people: and would the royal Prophet (who
was a man according to Gods own heart) would he have said, Psalm. 102. and 118.
that the mercies of God are infinite, and far above all his works: and that as
a father has compassion of his children, so has God compassion of them that
fear him.

And would he have done so to his traitorous and inhumane son Absolon, whose
villainies were so transcendent, that they have out gone all example. Would he
have pardoned and compassionated such a son; and wished he could have died for
him, if the Law and practice of the Israelites had been put to death their
riotous and unthrifty children, which are offenses so mean, that in respect of
Absalons inhumanities they deserve no mention.

It is true, the Jews had a power permitted them to bring their riotous and
rebellious sons to the Seniors of the city, and to the place of judgment; but
these Senators were not to take the bare word of the father, and so to proceed
to judgment: for what can be more unnatural and impious, then that a person
accused should not be heard speak: and that Judges, upon a bare allegation,
without and examination or proof, should immediately give sentence of death.

And surely, we may well believe, that this Law was only permitted the Jews (as
was their Law of divorce, Matthew. 19.) or rather that it was made in terrorem,
for terror, and not for execution; for the words are, that all Israel hearing
it might be afraid; and we find not that any son, merely for his riot and
obstinacy to his father, and by the procurement of his father, did ever yet
suffer death.

And we may piously believe, that our blessed Savior had himself some
reference to this stoning Law, when he said (speaking to the Jews) Matthew. 7.
Luke 11. Which of you is it? of whom, if his child shall ask bread, will he
reach him a stone? Which of you is it? as if that Divine mouth should say, is
there any such man amongst you? or, if there be such a man, what man is he? or
is he, or may he be called a man? who can find in his heart to reach stones,
wherewith to kill his own children.

And concerning his inference, that fathers have a free power to disinherit
their eldest sons for unthriftiness and riot; because by this Law, Deuteronomy. 21.
the Jews had a free power over their childrens lives, and the greater includes
the less: his reason is to as much purpose, as his was, who being asked,
whether great heads or little heads had the more wit; made answer little heads:
because, omne majus continet in se minus: meaning, Omne majus caput continet,
in se minus ingenim.

For the Apologer cannot but know, that disinheriting, and putting to death,
are two distinct things; and if they be unjustly done, it is hard to say
whether is the greater injustice or wrong: for it is said, Ecccl. 34. He that
takes away his neighbors living, kills him: And surely it is much more foul
and sinful, for a father to disinherit and undo his children, then for one
neighbor to defraud and undo another; and especially to disinherit his eldest
son, whom the Laws, both divine and humane, have made the heir, or the chief
Lord and Governor of the family.

Proof 29. That because examples in all controversies of fact, are the best
fortifications, I will therefore in illustration of the premises, add some few
to the former; drawn as well from royal presidents (by whose patterns, totus
componitur orbis) as from inferior persons, whose qualities best fit the
condition of our present subject: and if Kingdoms and Commonwealths have
favored it, then certainly by all arguments, a majori ad minus, it may much
rather be done, and ought to be suffered in private Families.

The offering of Abel, was better accepted of God, then the offering of Cain.
Japhet the youngest son of Noah, had Europe allotted to him for his
inheritance, which in all arts and uses of life, far excels Afric and Asia,
and all the rest of the earth.

Answ. Examples are, indeed, the light and life of natural reason; experientia
docet, has ever been, and will ever be, the most sure rule of rational
judgment. And surely, Mr. Apologer, your examples will want both in weight and
number: if you will go that way to work for your younger brothers, we shall be
able to out-vy you, at a thousand to one.

The sacrifice of Abel, says he, was better accepted of God, then the
sacrifice of Cain: he confesses that it is not fit to urge this, and I confess
it is to no purpose: for it concerns neither inheriting nor disinheriting,
there being then, and for many ages after (as himself says) no ptoprieties, or
estates in the world at all.

And concerning Japhets large portion, which was no less then Europe; for so
(says he) all authentic Histories do witness: he will have much ado, to get
any man of authentic reason to believe him; for he must first prove, whether
Europe were then known by that name or no; and whethet it was then so divided,
and bounded, as now it is: as also, which of his sons had America. It may be he
will say the eldest son, which if he had, having a third part of the world
beside (whereof Europe is the least) and therefore the fittest for the youngest
son: he had no reason to find fault with his father; for (next to Adam and
Noah) he was the greatest Monarch for territory, and one of the least for
dominion, or people, that the world ever had.

Proof 30. That the disinheritance of Ismael, the eldest son of Abraham, and of
Reuben the eldest son of Jacob, are invincible arguments of a Fathers free
power.

Answ. It is true, that Ismael, who was the eldest son, did not inherit; and
the reason was, because he was begotten on a handmaid, and not on a wife: and
if the Apologer would make this an invincible argument (as he calls it) of a
fathers free power; he must get new Laws made, and remove lawful issues, to
make room for bastards: though Ismael, (as the Law then was) is not to be
reputed illegitimate.

Reuben did deservedly forfeit his birthright, for he dishonored his fathers
bed; which had he not done, he had not been disinherited: for his father termed
him, prior in donis, and mayor in imperio; as also, his dignity, his power, and
his strength.

Proof 31. That the examples of Esau and Jacob, and of Ephraim and Manasses,
where the younger brothers were by divine election preferred before the elder,
are unanswerable proofs of a fathers freedom in disposing of his estate.

Answ. These examples of Jacob and Ephraim, so much and often advanced by the
Apologer, make more for the advantage of eldest sons, then for the pretended
free power of Parents: for Esau demanded the prime blessing of his father (and
his father intended to give him the blessing) because he was the eldest son:
which his right, he freely and willingly (and volenti non fit injuria) had
before sold to his brother.

And when Jacob had put his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, intending to
give him the prime blessing; their father Joseph was much troubled, that his
father should do so unjust a thing; and thinking that Jacob was mistaken, by
reason of his blindness, he endeavored to remove his hand to the head of
Manasses, saying, this is my eldest son, put therefore thy right hand upon his
head; but Jacob refused saying, I know my son, I know: and therefore unless
fathers can infallibly know the divine will, by divine revelation (as Jacob
did) or have such as Jacob had, concerning his eldest son Ruben, they ought not
to disinherit their eldest sons at all.

To conclude, these examples so much urged by the Apologer, do plainly show an
apparent and undeniable right, belonging to eldest sons: and make nothing at
all for the pretended free power of Parents; but do, indeed, chiefly concern
the divine providence, and eternal predestination, and did prefigure the
conversion of our forefathers the Gentiles, according to the divine word, and
divine Ordinance, Genesis 25. Malaoh. 1. The elder shall serve the younger: and
will not the Apologer give God leave to dispose of his gifts and graces, as
himself best pleases.

Proof 32. That it appears by Solomon, his succeeding his father David, that
David had power both of the Laws of God and man, to give his kingdom to the
worthiest, which he deeming to be Solomon, did (upon the entreaty of his wife)
give him the Kingdom, though he was the youngest son.

Answ. The preferring of Solomon to the crown, does no way impeach the rights
of eldest sons: for as David was himself divinely chosen, being the youngest
son; so we may assuredly believe that he elected Solomon, who was his youngest
son, to succeed him, moved only (thereunto by divine revelation, for it cannot
be thought (being as he was) a man according to Gods own heart) that he would
otherwise have done it. And this good King had more reason, and more freedom
to dispose of the Kingdom, then any other King has since had: for there had
been no succession of Kings before him to establish a right, nor any Laws made
by the general votes of the people, to erect a course of inheritance,
concerning the Crown; and David himself did not inherit, but was divinely
elected and created King.

But I would have the Apologer tell us, how many other Kings there were of
Israel or Juda, who were younger brothers; and if he would make this an
argument of disinheritance, he shall much abate his pretended free powers of
fathers, and leave it in wives (for David was entreated by his wife) which will
make more work for women, who are already too busy and such actions, and
others that belong not to them.

Proof 33. That Augustus Caesar did not settle the imperial succession upon his
Grandson Agrippa Posthumus; but upon Tiberius, who was no kin to him; because
he thought him more fit to govern. Chosros, King of Persia made Medarses his
younger son consort with him in the Empire, leaving out Sinochius who was his
eldest son.

The Emperor Ferdinand left the Empire, with Austria and the Kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, to Maximilian his eldest son: unto his second son Stiria
and Carinthia; and to his third son, the Earldome of Tirol. Philip King of
Spain, gave unto his daughter the seventeen Provinces.

Answ. The Apologer, having done with his divine, and (as he calls them)
invincible examples; bestows upon us some other presidents, as little
invincible as the former, which also shall be answered.

Augustus came in by conquest, and therefore might the better appoint his
Successor; and he made so good a choice of one, that instead of Tiberius, Nero:
he was for his intemperance called Biberius mero.

Chosros, the Persian King, made his younger son consort with him in the
Empire, but it cost him dear: for the people detesting so unjust an act, took
arms against him, expelled both him and his usurping consort; and put the
Scepter into the hands of Sinochius, who was the eldest son.

The Emperor Ferdinand did well, in leaving his younger sons so well; but he
did better, in leaving his Kingdoms and Empire unto Maximilian his eldest son.

And Philip King of Spain, rather lent then gave the seventeen Provinces unto
his daughter, the late Arch Duchess; for she was not then likely to have
children, being so far in years; and his gifts were no less prodigal then
politic: for he gave her more then he had to give, or was able to keep.

But does this make any thing against the rights of eldest sons, or for the
pretended free power of Parents: It is well known, that no heriditary King can
(as merely of himself) disinherit his eldest son, the Prince; nor (as I have
credibly heard) do any act, (as merely of himself) which can impeach the rights
and prerogatives of the Crown: by which it is clearly evident, that eldest sons
have the only right to inherit; and that fathers cannot have such a free power,
that they may at their pleasure, lawfully, and religiously, disinherit them:
for, Regis ad exemplum -- Subjects should follow the examples of their
Sovereigns.

Proof 34. That our Proto-parent Brute, divided this Island amongst his three
sons: Loegria, or England: to Locrinus, Albania, or Scotland, to Albanact; and
Cambria, or Wales, to Camber. King Leir gave his kingdom to his youngest
daughter Cordeilla: and King Roderic divided Wales amongst his three sons,
which divisions are still called to this day, North Wales, South Wales, and
Powes-Land.

Answ. The Apologer may do well to make it first appear there was such a man as
that noble Trojan: The times are grown incredulous and critical, and bare words
gain little credit; and our grand Historian, Mr. Camden, whom the Apologer
terms the singular ornament of England, is almost an Infidel concerning this
History.

As for King Leir, the story declares that his elder daughters were rebellious
and undutiful, and (as Rebels) were fit to be deposed and disinherited, and the
story also tells, that the youngest daughter, who was the Queen, was a most
unfortunate Princess: for her Nephew Morgan, who was the eldest son of her
eldest sister, took arms against her, discomfited her, and forced her to kill
her self.

And for the divisions of King Roderic, it is alleged to as little purpose as
the other: for neither Bruce nor Roderic did disinherit their eldest sons; but
gave them a better and greater part then unto the rest: and surely, no man can
think they did well; to make such divisions, because their actions did not
prosper; but now (God be thanked) they are again reunited into one glorious
Monarchy; and may they ever so continue (as long as the world shall continue)
in the Koyal Line of our Gracious Sovereign, who is descended to his Imperial
Diadem, by the most noble, and only rightful way of inheritance: which is, from
the next of blood, to the next of blood; or from one eldest son unto another.

Proof 35. That there is a Law, or custom in Ireland, called Tanistrie: by
which the land, and Chiefty of a name after the Predecessors death, is not
awarded to the eldest son, but to the worthiest: the judgment whereof is left
to the people, and such Tennants as have interest and right of suffrage; as
Alexander the great (though as it is apparent in the Macchabees) very falsely
said to have left his Empire: And that the tenure or custom of Gavell kind,
allows every son to have an equal share in the estate.

Answ. It is marvel that the Apologer will acknowledge the Book of the
Machabees to be Apocrypha, because it seems to make something for his pretended
free power of Parents: and it is marvel he does not condemn this Irish custom
to be Apocrypha; for there is nothing can make more against his power, because
upon the matter, the futhers authority, and the fortunes of the family, are in
the power of the Tennants: he says, that all customs which are against Law,
are void by the civil Law; and he knows also, that a great part of this prople
are still called the wild Irish; and surely, such customs are fitter for wild
Savages, then for civil Christians:

And concerning the tenure, or custom of Gavell kind; it is true, that it
gives an equal share of the estate to every son: but, as I take it, this
custom was chiefly, and I think only, in Kent: and the Apologer grants, that
some have altered it in their private Families, by Act of Parliament; and
(doubtless) the cause has been for the preservation of their Families, which,
by such divisions, could not choose but come in short time to nothing; and level
the best and greatest of our Gentry, to the degree of the meanest Vulgars.

Proof 36. That Briand Lyle, or Fitzt earl, Lord of Abergavenny, having two
sons, both leaprous, built for them a Lazaretto or Spittle; and gave to, Miles,
Earl of Hereford, the greater part of his Patrimony from his children.

Jane, daughter of Hugh Courtney, and heir to her Mother, wife of, Nicholas,
Lord Carew, disinherited her eldest son Thomas; quoniam, minus reverenter
matrem haberet: and parted her lands, which were goodly among her three younger
sons, of whom are sp^ng three worshipful Families of the Carews, called
Haccomb, Ancony, and Bury: So, that God by the success crowned the fact, and
confirmed the lawfulness of partage.

Answ. The Lord Abergavenny did well in giving away a great part of his lands
away from his two sons: for a Spittle was more fit for such sons then an
inheritance; yet he left them a great part of his lands, and (doubtless) would
have left them all, had they not been leprous and unfit.

And the Lady Carew did well in giving her lands to her younger sons: her
eldest son being heir to his father, and having (as may be thought) a
sufficient competency of estate; but the true cause was, because he was
undutiful, which had he not been, it is likely she had given him the greatest
part, if not all of her inherited lands.

And you know Mr. Apologer, there is a different case betwixt an eldest son,
who inherits an estate from his father, and a daughter, who is an inheritrix:
for the son is to do that which has been done to him; and as he received an
inheritance from his father, because he was the eldest son: so is he bound
conscience not to disinherit his eldest son, because he would have been loath to
have been disinherited himself; and that which we would not that others should
do to us, we are not to do to any other, Matthew: 7. Luke 6.

This is the very corner stone (as I may well call it) of the Law of Nature,
and of the Law of Grace: especially, for so much as concerns morality and
distributive justice; but women (who are no fit presidents for men) have a
greater freedom then men in this case: for they inherit by way of Parcenary,
and every daughter has an equal share in the estate, though the eldest, by
reason of her Seniority, has the privilege to choose first. and an inheritrix
has the name of her Family extinct in her self; and therefore may at her
pleasure disperse her lands amongst her sons, the better to preserve the memory
of her self, and Ancestors, from whom she is descended: and no marvel, though
God did bless with good success the good acts of this Lady, for she did both
justly and wisely.

But who has known an estate long prosper, where a dutiful and deserving
eldest son was disinherited by his father; I must confess, I never did: such
unrightful and lawless heirs, may be likened to the Bastard plants (which the
Wise man speaks of, Wisd. 3. and 4.) that cannot take deep root, nor lay sure
foundation: So that all these examples, by the Apologer alleged, are like his
other arguments; they either make against himself, or serve to no purpose.

To the Reader:
I Have here answered (as well as I can) all the Apologers proofs and reasons,
on the behalf of his younger Brothers; and I confess, that (according to the
best of my poor judgment) I have not found any one firm, or sinewy argument,
which may satisfy any reasonable understanding, in proof of his so absolute a
free power of Parents; or against the impregnable rights and prerogatives of
eldest sons.

But I must not usurp upon another right; the censure belongs to the impartial
and judicious Reader, unto whom I humbly commend it.

THE Second Part: Wherein is Treated of, The preservation of Families.

The free power of Parents.

The Rights of eldest sons.

Printed for H. Fletcher, 1548.

The preservation of Families.
ELder Brothers (says the Apologer) either seated in their fathers wealth, or
possessions, or having more then hopes to enjoy their fortunes, do sometimes
love truly neither themselves nor any body else, but abusing that, which indeed
might gain the love of God and man, and easily maintain their hereditary
honor, lose themselves in vanity and most idle courses; yea, in their fathers
lives, so strangely carry themselves, presuming rather on precedence of birth,
then worth; as though the Law of God and Nature, and all other Cannon, Civil,
and National Laws, and constitutions, and customs, sprung from them, could not
either in reason, or religion, bar them of that which they expect, or give to a
well deserving younger brother, any little hope, lawfully to share with them,
the least part of their fathers inheritance.

Their harsh and malevolent disposition, is graphically delineated by our
Savior, Luke 12. and 15. where our Savior was willed by one, to require his
brother to divide the inheritance with him, which was the suit of a younger
brother, aggrieved at the churlish iniquity of the elder.

In former ages elder brothers were generally of better temper in spending, and
if they had no humor to get, yet had they a care to keep that was left them,
and ever held themselves bound by Religion to provide for their younger
brothers and sisters, left to their dispose, which now is far otherwise; for
some elder brothers are found to spend more in a year idly, then would prefer
or maintain a whole Family nobly; and to suffer their brothers and sisters to
shift, which (as these times shape) is oftentimes, to live either lewdly or
miserably.

Who sees not in these our times many unbridled youths? so violently carried
away with the humor of spending, that they neglect brother and sister; yea,
bring to extreme misery their natural mothers, after their fathers death, by
their unthriftinesse and riot: and many a hopeful and well-deserving brother,
is left to the mercy of this whirlwind.

It is well known to all the wise and temperate, whose judgments passion does
not oversway, how great an enemy prodigallity and unthriftinesse is to all
manner of goodness, and how cunningly she hinders the increase of all virtues,
in those whom she raigns; for unthriftinesse is one known name of many hidden
sins.

A debauched heir, wallowing in riot, is likely in his shroud to bury the
memory of all his Ancestors virtues, which should live in him and his progeny,
as his progenitors did in theirs; and it is no less dishonor to play away
our Predecessors labors, then to piss in our Parents ashes, or raze their
monuments.

Surely it is clear, that all unthrifty courses are displeasing to God, and
contrary to his honor: And how can he be able to serve his Country, who in
short time will not be able to serve himself with necessaries wherewith to
live; but must of force be maintained, like a drone in a Commonwealth, out of
others labor.

And for his Family, what greater dishonor can it have, then an absolute
overthrow; whereby the noble acts and honor gotten to it, by virtuous
Predecessors, are buried in oblivion; and the present, and future hopes of all
worldly and lawful honors (virtues temporal reward) are quite taken away.

Can there a greater sin be committed against the honor and essence of a
Family, then to be spoiled of its honor, and life it self: for in these our
times, well gotten goods, and used as they ought, are the only soul, by which a
Family, and all the virtuous acts which it has done, may live.

Nature teaches the silly Bees, in their Commonwealth, to do to death their
Drones, who live of others labors; and shall it be thought unlawful for a
father, so to punish an incorrigible unthrift, who will not only live of others
labors, but also subvert the honorable endeavors of his noble Ancestors.

To conclude, what punishment can be thought sufficient for that reasonable
creature, born in a civil society of men, to whom Nature has not been a
stepdame in bestowing her blessings, and whose name and Family has been
enobled, and enriched, by the virtue and industry of many worthy Predecessors,
who shall through disorder, and inordinate desires, habituated in him by
custom, and evil conversation, become an unreasonable, and unmeasurable
sinful, and shameful creature; a debauched Bedlum, a wild American, a most
intolerable madman, a thing unworthy the name of a man; a prodigal shall I
say, or a prodigy? who contrary to all rule or orders of the most barbarous
society of men, takes away, by his outrageous impiety the soul, as I said, of
all his Ancestors virtues, who being dead, yet long might live in their
posterity, and consumes the womb of his family, (viper like) wherein he was
born. And without all remembrance of his obligement to the dead (whom as having
his being from he ought to honor) or respect to the living (to whom he should,
be a comfort) devours in some fort, them of his own Species Society and blood,
all which the Cannibals do not: for though they feed on their Species, which
are men like themselves; yet they hunt after strangers, and nourish themselves
with others flesh, observing still some Law of Society amongst themselves,
which our civil Monster does not: for he contrary to all course of Nature,
sucks often times the blood of his nearest and dearest friends; namely his
children, brothers, and sisters; yea, some of these furious feinds, have
brought their all tender Parents, to the greatest of all woes, beggary in their
old age; and all this to maintain, by fraud or force, a damned crew of roaring
devils, in the shapes of men, of each of whom, we may say dividually; Talis
Bacchus erat, talis
Gorgontua vultu;
Tale triplex mentum,
Pantagruelis erat.
So did old Bacchus, and
Gorgontua swell;
And such a Bulchin was
Pantagruel.


And of the whole madcap, fraternity; for they will be sworn brothers,
fraterimi aut fratres in malo, we may well say. Pestis, qua gelidum, Boreae,
violentius axem;
Nulla vel infecit nulla
vel inficiet.
A greater plague, to this
our Northern clime;
Never yet came nor can
in after time.


Moral Lawmakers, in ancient times pretermitted to make Laws against offenders
of this Nature; and being asked why? they answered that no man could be so
impiously ingrate, or inhumane; whereby it is evidenced how transcendently
heinous the offense was adjuged by them, and how severe punishment (were they
to make Laws in these our corrupt times) they would prescribe for such cardinal
Criminals.

To the Reader.
I Have here collected the best fruits of the Apologers Treatise on the behalf
of younger brothers; for indeed, I can find no other goodness in it, but only
these bitter (though not unwholesome) invectives against unthriftiness and riot.
And I could wish they had been expressed in a more clear and genuine manner;
for he has delivered them in such a ruffling way, as though he were to conjure
the spirit of unthriftiness out of the Prodigal himself, when he was in the
heat or midst of riots: But though they cannot so well charm and please the
overcuriousnesse of some men's fancies, who can relish nothing, but pathetical
and dainty deliveries: yet they may serve well enough to inform and satisfy
the understanding and judgment; for they plainly and truly declare the
infinite miseries and mischiefs, which are ever the inseparable concomitants of
unthriftiness and riot.

I need not say how much impertinent to the matter in question these invectives
are: and how little the matter of unthriftinesse would be amended, if younger
brothers were to inherit. But though he chiefly personates elder brothers; the
instruction may also serve for younger brothers, and all men who are prodigal:
and especially prodigal fathers, whom he terms (and not unworthily) to be worse
then Cannibals: and it is pity the Laws have no better execution, concerning
this great and too general a vice: for, says he, the Civil Laws appoint
Curatours for prodigals (as for madmen) and guardians likewise of their
estates, the want whereof is the ruin of many great houses in England.

The Apologers Epistle examined.
THe Apologer says in his Epistle, that he published his said Treatise for the
general good of great Britain; and out of a singular respect, which as a
Patriot, he bears to Gentlemen's houses: good motives, I confess, if his
intention or performance had been accordng; but how can it be to the general
good of great Britain; when eldest sons, who are a great part of Britain must
suffer in it: for he would have it thought (and has done what he can to prove
it) that they have no more right to inherit then other sons: all is as pleases
the father, for he is the free and absolute Lord of the estate, and may
lawfully and religiously dispose thereof at his pleasure.

But is this the way to preserve Families? it is (says he) the best and only
way, especially, if fathers conform themselves to these two rules.

The first rule or way is, that they divide the estate amongst the sons
equally, according as the Civil Laws ordain, and as was the practice of the
primitive Church.

The other way or rule is (and this he thinks to be the more rational and
better way) that the wisest and worthiest son does inherit.

As concerning the first, he needs no other confuting then his own words: for
he says, I must confess, that the custom of leaving the child estate to the
eldest son, has of later times been much embraced by our gentry for the
preservation of their Families, for which it was invented; and that they did
this, led with an ambition at the example of Princes.

And he also says, that the more general practice of our time among Parents
is, to leave either all or most part of their estates unto their eldest sons:
this (questionless was first devised in former ages for the preservation of a
Family; and to raise one who might be a comfort to his brothers, sisters, and
Family, and in whom his progenitors virtues might live to the world, and I
will not deny but that the partition of lands, may reduce in the end, a goodly
estate to nothing, or to so little, that it may be compared unto an attome in
the Sun: and how I pray you can an estate be preserved it, will in time, and in
a short time, bring it unto the degree of an attome.

And concerning his other rule or way, which is, that the wisest and worthiest
son should inherit; I deny not, but that wisdom is a great means to preserve a
Family, and that wisest sons are the fittest to be employed in a Body politic,
or state general: but it is not so fit that younger brothers, because they are
a little wiser then their elder brothers, or because their fathers think them
the wiser, should therefore inherit the greatest part of the fathers estate,
for it would be an apparent injustice, and wrong to the eldest son; unto whom
the right of inheritance does chiefly and only belong.

But admit the wisest sons were to inherit; who I pray you should be the judge
and chooser of these wise sons? Why? who, will the Apologer say, but they that
got them, for they have a free and absolute power to dispose of the estate: but
what if the father be not wise himself, or have not a wise son at all, both
which do often happen: Why then, perhaps, will the Apologer say, that the
Commonwealth is to inherit, for says he, interest Reipublicae, ut quilibet re
sua been utatur; it belongs to the Commonwealth that estates be managed in such
a manner, as may make most for the good of the Commonwealth: it would require a
volume to show all the absurdities and inconveniences which would necessarily
arise out of this absolute power in Parents, but I will instance only two.

The first inconvenience or mischief is, that were there such a power in
Parents, to make choice of what heirs they would; and were accordingly fully
persuaded that they might lawfully and religiously so do: they would not only
be in danger to be blindly led by their own affections and will; but would ly
open to the advantage of every cunning Sycophant, and ill-minded man, who under
color of friendship, would persuade them to effect some of their sons, and
reject other some, and to give one son more then to another, that so they might
fall into dissension and discord, which could to no other, then an utter
subversion of the Family: for an house in it self divided cannot stand. And
that which would most move these Sycophants and sowers of dissension, would be
their own private ends, and self interest, a motive which bears too great a
sway all the world over. But the greatest peril of Parents would arise from the
sly practices of their wives, who would be sure to labor hard for the
unworthiest son; for women's affections are commonly as blind as they are, and
they use to swallow flatterers for friends: and if the wife be wanton (which is
no great wonder now adays) she would be sure to endeavor what she could, to
prefer such a son whom she thought her husband had least part in: and second
wives (as having more cause then any other) would be sure to labor hard for
their own children, without any respect to the rightful course of inheritance,
or to their husbands other children by former wives; and there is no doubt to
be made, but that all wives would be as busy this way as Bees, if their
husbands should permit them; and their husbands could not hinder them, if they
should have such a ground to work upon as is the pretended free power of
Parents; for when there was no such thing dreamed of (as is that monstrous
power) yet wives were then so bold to negotiate with their husbands of this
matter, as in the examples of Sara, Rebecca, and Cethsabee, the wives of
Abraham, Isaac, and David, but these wives were moved to do as they did, by
divine revelation, and it pleased even God himself to make them his agents, and
instruments of his divine Ordinances; but that which would most move most of
our wives, would be a violent spleen, and blind affection, without any respect
to justice or order, which could not choose but draw on an utter subversion of
innumerable Families.

The second inconvenience or mischief would be, that were there such a power in
Parents, that they might lawfully and religiously make choice of what heir they
would, there would be a perpetual diffention amongst the sons, and
consequently, a confusion and overthrow of the Families: for every other of the
sons would be sure to malign, and envy that son, who should be preferred to the
inheritance, unless the son so preferred, had a native, natural, and undoubted
right thereunto; and that there were also, a general practice of all good
Parents, concurring (as it is in the case of eldest sons) to confirm it: and
and this appears by daily and infinite presidents; some whereof the Apologer
himself recites: as that of Chosroes King of Persia, Leir King of Britain, and
that great example so much urged by him, of the disinherited Esau: For Esau,
though he sold his brother the Birthright (and volenti non fit injuria) yet
being disinherited, he purposed to kill his said brother, and (doubtless) had
done it, if Jacob had not fled, and banished himself for many years, from his
own father and country; or rather indeed, if God himself had not relented, and
mollified the obdurate and resolved heart, of this fierce and offended brother:
And if Esau, would for this have killed his own brother, and a good brother who
never wronged him in this, or any thing else; for Esau had before freely and
willingly sold him the birthright; how much more willingly and readily would he
have revenged himself upon others nothing allied unto him, who should have
procured his disinheritance, which is indeed the greatest injury that can be
done to man in this world; for our estate and birthright is as our life, and
whosoever takes away the one, does endeavor (as much as in him lies) to kill
the other; nay he does kill, and more then kill the other, for it is said,
Eccl. 34. and 40. He that takes away his neighbors living kills him; and
that it is better to die then to want.

You may see here, how much the Apologer does err in his zealous care, which
(as a Patriot) he bears to the glory and good of Gentlemen's houses, by
alleging, that that for a reason, or cause of their preservation, which would
be their undoubted overthrow.

That indeed which does most preserve a Family, are these two things.

The first is children, and chiefly good children, and if there be no children,
the other collateral heirs, who are the next in blood, whom the divine, and all
good humane Laws have ordained to inherit.

The second is, lands and goods well gotten, or honestly descended, and as
honestly employed, during the possessours life, and so to descend again in that
right way of inheritance which God has commanded, and all good Laws
established: and it cannot be doubted, but that the blessing of God will
accompany so good endeavors; for it is promised; Psalm. 1.24.91.101.127, etc.
that the just shall be as an everlasting foundation, and shall not be removed:
That he shall spring as a green leaf, and his house be permanent: whereas after
a while, the sinner shall not be, and thou may look his place, but thou shall
not find it.

The free power of Parents.
FAthers are so far from being such such absolute Lords and masters of their
estates and children (as the Apologer pretends) that they are not so much as
quarter masters of themselves: for, says an Apostle, Romans 14. No man is born
to himself: and the very Heathens say, Cic. de offic. Partem patria, partem
parents: our Parents and our country, which is also our Parent, do claim a
great part of us; and can we think there is nothing due to our children? are we
commanded, Matthew. 2. and 5. Luke 6.1. Pet. 2. To love our neighbors as our
selves, nay even to love our enemies, and to do good to them that hate and hurt
us; and has a father such free and absolute power over his estate and
children, that he may lawfully disinherit his children, and give his estate to
strangers, or to whom he will, and if a father be so far from being master of
himself, that his country, Parents, kindred, friends, neighbors; nay, every
man who is a member with him of the same Commonwealth, has some right unto
him, or a part in him, how can any man be so shameless to say, or so foolish to
think, that a father, or any man whosoever, can be an absolute master of his
estate, when he is not so much as quarter master of himself.

And concerning that absolute and monstrous power of Parents, in disposing of
the estate at their pleasure: The Apologer says, that many ages were numbered
from the worlds beginning, before any man laid any proper claim to any thing,
as due to himself alone; and he says also, that with God there is no exception
of persons, and that God gave the whole earth to the sons of men: terram autem
dedit filiis hominum: that is, not to any one in particular, but to all in
general; by which reasons and grounds, there is not any man can absolutely say,
this is mine, or that is mine, by the Laws of God and Nature.

But have men therefore no right at all to their lands and goods? Yes
(doubtless) but it is a conditional, not an absolute right: for says the
Apologer, a Family is a civil society; yea the only Commonwealth, which God and
Nature first ordained, from which, all Societies, Republiques, and Species of
Regiment, took their Original: and it is true, for there can be no doubt, but
that the first Commonwealths, were at the first but so many great Families; and
that all Commonwealths sprung first from Families: and when there was a
Commonwealth established (or rather begun) and a proportion of lands allotted
to every one in particular, they then bound themselves by Laws, which Laws they
enacted by an unanimous consent amongst themselves, for the quiet enjoying, and
well ordering of such their particular estates; for their peaceable and
amicable living one with another: for punishment of transgressors, or repelling
unjust violence amongst themselves, and for their general defense against
foreign invasion, or for what else soever, that shall make most for the
general good; always including an inviolable right and power in the
Republique, or General state, according to necessity of times and occasions to
alter some of the said Laws; as also, to dispose and command (as they found
cause) every man's person, and every man's particular estate: And this the
Apologer acknowledges (though it be against his free power) saying, the world
of men is grown to that greatness, that it is necessary one general father, or
politic head, should be in a kingdom or state, which may justly abate a
fathers free power, all fathers being children to the father of their country,
their Lord and King, under God.

And the Apologer knows that fathers are so far from being such absolute Lords,
and masters of their estates, that if a father, or any man else, do wilfully
fling away some of his money, or other his goods, into the Sea, or into any
place where it cannot be had again, he shall be begged for an Idiot, and have
his estate taken from him: and he gives this reason, and as good a reason as
can be given; interest Reipublicae -- it belongs to the Commonwealth, that men
so dispose of their estates, as shall make most for the good of the
Commonwealth.

And can there be a worse prodigal then a prodigal father? for he falsifies the
trust which the Commonwealth (our general Parent) does repose in him, by
wasting those his lands and goods, wherewith he should relieve and provide for
his children; which was the greatest, if not the only cause, for which lands
were at first given, and are now permitted to be enjoyed: for only upon
children depends the whole frame and propagation of mankind; and upon the
care and love of Parents in the good instructing of their children, and in the
relieving and providing for their children, depends the civil order and
Society of mankind.

And children have a native, and (as we may well call it) a divine right to
their fathers lands and goods in his life time: for, says the Apologer, the
prodigal son being weary of his fathers house, came to his father, and boldly
said; Pater dae mihi portionem, Give me that portion of goods which belongs to
me: and the words following are, and pater divisit, and the father gave him his
portion; and he says also, that fathers are bound by the Civil Law, to leave
every one of their children, a legitimate, or child's part; and if they be
bound, how can they be said to be free? But should I here recount the many and
great obligations wherewith we are bound, in our Christian duty, or charity,
toward our neighbors or Christian brother: Qui habet duas turni^cas det non
habenti, and qui habet escas similiter faciat, Luke 6. He that has two coats,
let him give one of them to him that has none, and he that has meat to spare,
let him do the same: And especially the infinite obligations wherewith we are
bound to our children: for says an Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. Whosoever provides not
for his family (then much more he that provides not for his children) does deny
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. These things well considered, it will
easily appear to any pious understanding, that the private, or self-interest,
which any man has in his estate, is so small a thing, that it may be compared
unto an attome in the Sun: for indeed, we have no estates all which we can
properly call our own; that which we call an estate, we hold it but at the
courtesy and permission of others, and should employ it to the benefit of
others; and we are at the most but stewards of it for a while, and (like
stewards) must account unto a farthing, Matthew. 5.

And concerning the large Sovereignty of Parents over their children, there is
no question but that fathers are as far from being absolute Lords and masters
of their children, as they are from being absolute Lords and masters of their
estates, of which I will only give two reasons.

The first reason is, that children are the tender plants of the Commonwealth;
and that Parents are entrusted, by the Commonwealth, with the good education of
their children; which is a thing of that high and necessary consequence, that
it is in effect the cyment, or bond, which ties and holds together the whole
frame and body of mankind. The consideration whereof, moved the wise,
Lacedaemonians to make this brave and pious answer to Antipater, who demanded
many of their children in hostage: for they said (as Plutarch relates it) that
they would first choose to die, before they would yield him their children,
fearing their children would be corrupted, and spoiled in their education: nay,
they, had Laws to punish such Parents, whose children were ill conditioned or
wicked, supposing it proceeded for want of good care in their education; and
they had cause: for (says the wise Charron) there cannot come so much evil to
a Commonwealth, by the ingratitude of children toward their Parents, as by the
carelessness of Parents in the instruction of their children. So, that upon the
matter, children are but the Pupils of the Commonwealth, and Parents their
Tutours: and this the Apologer acknowledges, though it be as much against his
pretended free power as can be, saying, that all fathers are children to the
father of their country; and that a father is not only bound to nourish his
children in his life, but by Natures Law, must provide to his power, that they
live in his life, and after his death, to the honor of God, the service of
their Country, and comfort of their family; which were the only ends for which
God created man a civil, or rational creature.

But there is another reason, and that transcends this as far as heaven does
earth, for our children are not only our children, but the children also and
creatures of God; adorned by him, with the same faculties of Soul and Body as
their Parents are, and so become both our brothers and children; for we have
all one father, which is in heaven* Matthew. 6. Luke 11.

Certainly, there cannot any thing be more consolable unto a truly religious
heart then seriously to contemplate the infinite goodness of God; as also to
consider, in what a sweet manner it has pleased even God himself, to treat
with his dear creature, Man. All his ways (says the royal Psalmist, Psalm.
24.) are mercy and truth; and says the Divine Majesty himself, Deuteronomy. 8. I will
be a father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters: and how often are
we called children, throughout the whole current of the Divine Word; nay, we
are called, 1 Cor. 6. the temples of the holy Ghost, that is, the Palace, or
Court-Royal of God himself, for such indeed is every pious soul; and can it be
supposed, that God, who only gives children, and calls them his children,
and the temples of his holy Spirit, would give any other power to Parents over
their children, but as governors under him, to instruct: and, if need be,
gently to correct them; for we had no sooner a Law from the Omnipotent hand;
but Parents were commanded Deuteronomy. 6.2. to teach that Law diligently to their
children, and so diligently; that they were to speak of it as they sat in their
house, as they walked by the way, when they lay down, and when they rose up,
that is at all times, and upon all occasions; and if they are any way negligent
herein, or in the due relieving or providing for their children, an Apostle
tells them, 1. Tim. 5. That they have denied the faith, and are worse then
Infidels. So that if we either consider the great duties which we ow unto our
general father the Commonwealth, unto whom we are but Feoffees in trust of our
estates and children; or chiefly those infinite duties which we ow unto our
heavenly father; we shall find our selves so much inferior to the Apologers
pretended free power, that no man of any common understanding (unless he will
accuse himself for an Atheist, or most gross Idiot) can think himself an
absolute Lord, or master, either of himself his estate or children.

The Rights of eldest Sons.
THe Apologer has done what he can to prove that eldest sons have no more
right to inherit then other sons: all is as pleases the father; for he is the
supreme and absolute Lord of the estate, and may lawfully and religiously
dispose thereof at his pleasure.

He tells us, that he never read any Author of this Subject: and why then
should he so much presume of his self-sufficiency, and extraordinary spirit,
that he should think he may deserve credit, himself telling us, that he is the
singularis homo, the only man who first disputed hereof, or ever brought the
matter in question. Marry, I Will tell you, but then you must take his own words
for it: he says, that he believes he has spoken according to dialectical
reason; and that there has been nothing spoken of it heretofore truly, which
reason has not dictated to all Authors pens; and you shall now see what a
mess of reason he does serve in for his purpose.

He says in his Epistle, that there is a natural reverence due unto the eldest
sons, from their younger brothers: he says, that it was the use of the
Israelites to prefer their eldest sons to the better part of their possessions;
and that it is now the more general practice of Christian Parents, to leave
either all, or the most part, of their lands to their eldest sons: and he
honestly gives these two reasons, why it should so be.

The first is, because there is a natural reverence due unto the elder brothers.

The second is, because this custom had its original from the imitation of
Princes, and for the preservation of Families, and that an equal division of
the lands and goods amongst all the children; will bring an estate to nothing,
or to so little, that it may be compared unto an attome in the Sun.

He says, that at first, fathers and then first born after them, were as Kings
and Priests in their own houses.

He says, that our Common Laws give the right of inheritance to eldest sons.

He cites a Divine Precept, Deuteronomy. 21. which plainly proves the rights of eldest
sons.

He says that we find in holy Writ, great respect was had of the first
begotten, and a blessing was held to come to Parents thereby.

You may see here, how sufficiently the Apologer has argued on the behalf of
his younger brothers; for I know not what he can say more, that can more
advance the rights of eldest sons.

But, leaving the Apologer, I will a little more dilate my self (not so much in
proof) as in illustration of the premises.

The very vegetables, and unreasonable creatures, are no mean arguments of the
excellency of Primogeniture: How grateful to the Planter, and indeed, how much
more vigorous and excellent are the first fruits of plants, more then other
productions: and how fully do the first fruits of a new broken up ground,
content and satisfy the longing hopes of the honest husbandman; and after some
few crops, how poorly does the same earth discharge it self of its burdens;
and this was the reason why the first fruits, were in the old Law, reserved
for the most sacred uses; and so it was meet* for God, who is the giver of all
good things, should be served with the best of those things which himself has
given.

The very beasts and birds do no less declare the excellency of Primogeniture:
for it is generally observed, that the Parent birds do use to feed their young
ones, as their young ones are in seniority; yielding, as it were, a kind of
right, or a natural and lawful precedence unto the eldest; and the very nest
gull, or the youngest of the young feathered creatures, does plainly
demonstrate, how much more perfect and excellent the senior birds are above
their younger.

Salvianus, lib. 4. de gubern. Dei, Aristotle, and diverse others, do make
excellent Discourses concerning the seeming prudence and piety of the Storks
and Bees; and shall the Bees yield to order, and have a Commonwealth amongst
them; and shall 'the reasonable creature called Man, be more unreasonable then
they, and have no rule or order of inheritance in their own Families, but at
the fathers affection and will.

They also deliver, that the young of all creatures do observe a kind of
reverence, and obedience to their elder young: and that the eldest young does
use to suck at the uppermost teat, and the younger young will not so much as
presume to usurp upon the rights of the eldest, nor their Parents suffer it.

These things (if rightly weighed) are of no mean consideration, concerning the
excellency of Primogeniture, and consequently of the rights and prerogatives of
eldest sons; and the saying of Job, chap. 12. is no insufficient answer to any
one, who would disparage the rights of eldest sons: Interrogato jumenta; ask
the beasts and they will teach you.

But that which is most considerable (next to the Divine Precepts) is the
sacred esteem of Primogeniture, amongst the elected people of God: for with
them, as appears, Exodus 13. and 34. Numb. 38. etc. the first born of the very
beasts were exempted from work; and fathers, and their first born after them,
were as Kings, and Priests in their own houses.

And it has pleased the Divine Majesty (to the infinite glory of
Primogeniture) to sanctify unto himself all the first born of the male-kind,
calling them his: and to call his Church triumphant* the Church of the first
born, Hebr. 12. Nay even to call his Divine self (who has been from all
eternity, unbegotten) his first begotten son, Coloss. 3.

But these are no precepts, that fathers should endow their eldest sons with
the greatest part of the estate. It is true, yet are they good motives, and
great instructions, and may be taken for no less then precepts in any pious
understanding: for we are to elect and love, whom God electeth and loves; and
since it has pleased God to elect and prefer our eldest sons, in a higher
degree of excellency then any other our children; we are therefore to elect and
prefer our eldest sons in a higher degree of inheritance then any other our
children.

And can it be supposed, that God would leave us in suspense, concerning so
high a point as is inheritance; which is indeed the main ground and foundation
of all humane Laws: and therefore it has pleased the Divine Majesty, to impose
this his great command upon his elected people; which was, that if any one of
them died without a son, his inheritance should go to his daughters; and if he
had no daughters, to his brethren: and if he had no brethren, to his fathers
brethren, etc. and that this should be a perpetual Law as the Lord commanded
Moses, Numb. 27. By which it is evident, that one son in particular, and not
sons in general, ought to be heir, and be endowed with the prime Blessing, or
Patrimony: unto which accords an Apostle, saying, Gal. 4. as long as the heir
is a little one, he differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all,
and the Apostle meant only the first begotten, or eldest son living: for he
calls Esau a profane person, because for a dish of meat he sold his first
birthrights; and in his dreadful denouncement against unnatural and neglectful
Parents, 1 Timothy 5. which is, that they are worse then Infidels. He says in the
same chapter, Seniorem ne increpaveris -- Do not disrespect thy elder, etc.
giving a fine, and full instruction thereby, who it is that should be the right
heir, or chief Lord and master of the Family.

But here it may be some will object, that this Law was only spoken to the
Jews, and therefore did only concern the Jews: they may as well say, that the
holy Tables of the Law, did only concern the Jews; for they also were delivered
to the Jews: and surely I cannot conceive what can be more moral and necessary,
then that there should be a chief son, or heir, amongst our children and
generally known, by a native and undoubted right: for there must necessarily be
an order and subordination in all things; and what can be more natural and
just, then that Parents should be bound to relieve and provide for their
children: And had this Law only concerned the Jews, wou^d S. Paul have
commended Seniority, and condemned Esau for selling his birthright: and would
the ancient Fathers (who are the best of humane testimony) as S. Chrysostom,
in his fifth Sermon against Julian; and S. Jerome, in his Epistle to Onogron, and
upon the 49. Genesis (with diverse others) would they have averred, that the first
born, or eldest sons, are more honorable then other children; and that the
right of inheritance, is only due to the first begotten, or eldest son living:
and had this Law only bound the Jews, would it have been denounced from the
immediate mouth of God himself; and delivered in these words, a perpetual Law,
as the Lord commanded Moses.

But there is a plainer Precept, Deuteronomy. 21, and these are the divine words,

If a man have two wives, one beloved and the other hated, and they have both
children by him. If the first son be hers that was hated, he may not make the
son of the beloved the first born, and prefer him before the son of the hated;
but he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the first born, by giving him
a double portion of all that he has: for he is the beginning of his strength,
the right of the first born is his.

Now though the litteral expression be, that eldest sons are to have a double
part of the estate, and the other part to be divided amongst the children
equally, as well sons as daughters, we are to consider that the son here
mentioned, is an unbeloved son, or the son of a wife not beloved, which does
utterly exclude the affection and free will of Parents, in disposing of the
estate at their pleasure: and it is not here said, nor any where else, through
the Divine Writ, that we are to give but a double part or portion to our eldest
sons, for the practice of the Israelites was much otherwise: the fathers, and
their eldest sons after them, being as Kings and Priests in their own houses:
Neither are we to believe, that we may lawfully and religiously so do: for so,
we shall condemn the justice of the Cannon and Civil Laws, and our Common Laws,
and all other good Laws, which (as I have already showed) do all concur with
the Divine Laws, to erect an impregnable right of inheritance in eldest sons.
And we shall condemn the general practice of all good Parents, who usually
leave the greatest part of their estates to their eldest sons: which general
consent and custom, can proceed from no other cause or ground, then from the
instinct of nature; and consequently, from the Will, Providence, and Ordinance
of God himself; but that which is most observable and considerable, is, that
God gives no long blessing to any other course of inheritance: Whence we may
collect, how odious a crime, and how great an injury it is to disinherit a
rightful heir; and it is no less: for he that would dispalce the right heir
from the due of his birthright; and such a right, as is enacted by God himself;
established by all good Laws, and generally practiced by all good Parents: he
is no pidler, for he strikes at the root, and does what he can to overthrow all
Laws and order, and bring into the world a Chaos of confusion. Mistake me not,
I do not conceive, nor dare not say, that the rights of eldest sons, are so
absolute, as that they will brook no exception: for the great Law or Precept,
Matthew. Upon which all the rest have their main dependence, which is. to love
and honor God above all things does abrogate and disanul (as we piously
believe) all the other Precepts, which do not concur with the love and honor
of God. And whereas we are commanded to honor our Parents, and the words are
absolute; yet if Parents should be Idolators, or Blasphemers, or Atheists, or
Infidels, or (which as bad as any of these) unnatural: I cannot conceive, but
that children are freely, discharged, from their obligation of honoring such
Parents: for how can we love and honor God, if we love and honor Gods
greatest enemies. So on the contrary side, if eldest sons be Atheists, or
Infidels, or extremely and desperately vicious; there is no question but that
their fathers may lawfully and religiously disinherit them; for they are so
unworthy to inherit, that they are not worthy to live.

To conclude (good Reader) if what I have here delivered, may redound to thy
benefit, and better instruction (for which it was intended) I shall rejoice in
my labors, I will give God the praise.

FINIS.

