THE PETITION OF THE Kingdom of SCOTLAND, To the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council of that Kingdom: Declaring their loyalty to His
Majesty, and sincere affection and love to their brethren of England, And the
Parliament now assembled.
Presented by two Earls, two Knights, two Burgesses, and two Ministers; in
behalf of themselves, and the well affected of the whole Kingdom.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S Privy Council: the humble
Petition of many Noblemen, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Ministers occasionally
meeting at Edenbourgh.
Most humbly showing,
WHereas they upon the report and sight of great Convocations suddenly
endeavored and unexpectedly brought into this great Counsel day, for the most
part by these who have been esteemed by the Country and challenged by the
Parliament, as Incendiaries, plotters, and enemies to the peace of this
Kingdom, have occasionally conveened at Edinburgh. And having heard of Letters
from His Majesty, and Declaration from the Parliament of England anent the
present distractions of that Kingdom: They have reason from bygon experience,
and present presumptions to fear the intentions and endeavors of these evil
affected persons and their adherents, least by their convocations and
solicitations they take occasion of these differences to raise jealousies and
divisions betwixt these Kingdoms. And considering the common interest of all
the Subjects of this Kingdom to preserve the late peace, so happily concluded
betwixt these Nations, by the providence of God, his Majesty's goodness and
wisdom, and the moderation of the Parliament of England, and so solemnly
established by the late treaty, oath of Parliament, public faith, and the
great Seals of these Kingdoms. As in all other points, so especially in these
Articles (whereunto the rest are called but prefaces) for settling and
entertaining a solid peace betwixt these Nations in true union; lest upon any
pretense they should be dashed one against another. Wherein it is declared the
duty of the estates yea o^ every subject for to conveene and suppress any
evil affected persons who would raise Arms against the Subjects of the other
Kingdom without consent of Parliament as traitors to the estate, much more to
Petition against it, and wherein there is appointed a Commission of the estates
for the conservation of this peace in the interim betwixt Parliaments. All
which the Petitioners amongst the rest of the good Subjects of this Kingdom,
did hazard their lives and estates, to obtain: And did demand in the Treaty
upon their dangerous experience of the Council of England there meddling in the
affairs betwixt His Majesty and this Kingdom; to the engaging of the Nations
in War, which is so often condemned by the estates of this Kingdom in their
Remonstrances, pressing that common rule of Equity, To do as you would be done
unto; which now is and may be retorted on this Kingdom. Like as desiring
earnestly, that your Lordships in these public resolutions of so great
consequences to these Kingdoms, may carry along with you the hearts and
consciences of the body of this Kingdom, and prevent that the breaches grow
not wider by false confidences grounded upon sudden undertakings of any
persons, as also their natural affection and duty to their gracious Sovereign
according to their manifold obligations, and brotherly affection to the
Kingdom of England, forcing them to pray to God, and to desire all men
according to their stations to use all lawful means, to breed and intertaine a
good understanding betwixt His Majesty and His Parliament, the surest
foundation of greatness to His Majesty, and happiness to these Kingdoms.
Likewise taking to heart the dangerous consequences to His Majesty, and to his
Dominions if your Lordships answer by tendering the offer of your service to
His Majesty against the demands, or upon the differences betwixt His Majesty
and His Parliament of England or any other manner of way import (which God
forbid) any engaging of your selves, or these Nations in war, or any thing
that may tend thereunto.

Therefore in their own names, and in the name of the rest of the Noblemen,
Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Ministers whose hearts do, and hands would go along
with this petition for preservation of peace betwixt these Kingdoms, They do
in all humility, and earnestness petition your Lordships, in the depth of your
wisdoms, seriously to ponder the consequences, of your answer to his Majesty,
and the Parliament of England at this time, so that thereby, neither the
confidence betwixt his Majesty and good Subjects here, nor amongst themselves,
nor betwixt the Kingdoms (these unions tending ever to his Majesty's
geatnesse, and these disunions to his prejudice) may be any ways weakened, or
their peace endangered. And to that end, that as your Lorships would leave no
lawful means, according to your vocation, and interest unassayed for
begetting a good unerstanding betwixt his Majesty, and his Parliament, being
his greatest and most unparshall Council representing the body, whereof his
Majesty is the Head; and so removing these distractions (the continuance whereof
will sure trouble the peace of the Kingdom,) according to your Lordships last
answer, so also seeing his Majesty requires not that your Lordships should,
neither can your Lordships judge, of the Laws and proceedings of another
independent Kingdom; and the Parliament of England offers to give all
satifaction, concerning any messages or papers sent to your Lordships anent
their proceedings, that your Lordships would be pleased carefully, to shun all
offers of verbal or real engagements, either directly or by way of inference,
without consent of the Parliament conform to the treaty, which either may give
any just occasion of offense, to your gracious sovereign, or of jealously to
your brethren in England, or of discourse unto any, as if your Lordships did
not observe that former rule of equity presced by themselves during your
troubles. To do to others as they will be done to themselves. But did fall in
the same faults, which your Lordships, and the rest of the estates of this
Kingdom, had condemned in the Council of England; And for this effect they
cannot but remember your Lordships that according to an Article of the
Treatise, there was appointed a Commission as independent as any other, of so
many of every estate representing the whole Kingdom, to prevent all occasion
of division betwixt these Kingdoms, in the interim betwixt Parliaments. All
which they humbly representing to your Lordships wise considerations, and
expect from your Lordships, so gracious an answer, as may satisfy their present
fears, and secure from those dangers in the interim betwixt Parliaments, and
thereby prevent all necessity of petitions in this kind.

Presented 31. May 1642. To the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, By E.
Haddington
E. Elcho.
Earls. Scotis-craig.
Niddrie.
Knights. John Binny.
Thomas Paterson.
Burgesses. M. Andrew Ramsey.
M. John Montcreiff.
Ministers.
LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Henry Overton, in Popes-head-Alley. 1642.


