THE SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF Hugh Peter's, Close Prisoner in the Tower of
London; And His Horrible Expressions and Doctrine* when Our Glorious Sovereign
was led to Martyrdom.

With the manner how he was taken on Sunday Night last in Southwark; who to
save himself, crept into bed to one Mrs. Peach a Quaker, which had lain in
Childbed two days.

And afterward escaped to the house of Mrs Mun, where he was taken, with
diverse pieces of Gold, and Silver Medals, sewed in his Skirts; And a strange
Almanac taken out of his Pocket.

London, Printed for George Horton, 165^.

THE SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF Hugh Peter's, Close Prisoner in the Tower of
LONDON.
IT has seemed good to the Divine Providence, which we may truly call
wonderful, so to overruled of late, the Counsels of our former Oppressors, (who
by strange success, and almost incredible dexterity in villainy, had almost
involved both our Church and State in unavoidable ruin; grinding without
compassion, these (once free) but at length woefully enthralled Nations,
fastening on their neck, an Iron, uneasy yoke of servitude, making them (with
Sampson) basely to grind, and abide captivity and curbing them with rigor, who
before repined at, grew weary of, and rejected the milder Scepter, and so to
ensnare them in their contrivances, that their Plots (like Potters Vessels)
were broken upon the Wheel, nor produced any thing but confusion and
distraction to themselves together with unsetlednesse in the Nation; whence
arose Discontent, loss of Trade, and Poverty; and by means of the last of
these, the wasted Peoples Whisperings* Murmurings, and Repinings on all hands
were so many and urgent, that the Master Builders of our new Babel by their own
Jealousies, Misunderstandings, and Animosities, were in short time dispiersed
hither and thither, through the good hand of God, blessed be that happy Gale.

What he^ght of fury, and desperate resolution was on their side, God knew, and
took notice of, nor was it unknown to most of those, who desired, and prayed
for such a composure, and settlement of affairs, as we now see, through his
great Goodness, and undeserved kindn^sse to Us, who considering the
preparations and contrivances to hinder what We now happily enjoy, could not
expect this redemption, but as a purchase, and with the loss of the lives of
thousands, the shedding much blood, and exposing our hopes to extreme hazard.

The oppressed City, and groaning Countries were resolved, either to shake off
the Arbitrary Yo^k of Usurpation and Tyranny, or to perish in the Attempt.

On the other hand, the fatal Causers of our long-past Calamities, animated
with guilt and despair, were resolved to make good their Ground, or expire like
Cateline; that is, sell their life as dear as possible, and cover the place,
they maintained fighting in life, with their breathless Carkases after death;
or like Zimry, rather than lose (by surrender) their Power and Estates, fire
the whole Nation first, then se^ some Cities and Castles on flame over their
Heads, and perish together.

Yet it pleased the Lord of Hoasts, to dissipate their Armed Powers, frustrate
their Designs, and leave the Ringleaders, stripped of all Succor, to the
Scourge of Justice. It stood with the Honor and Wisdom of the Most High, to
restrain the Rage and Fury of Man; to glorify Himself, by delivering up these
great Midianitish Oppressors, insulting Moabites, Philistim Lords, (with other
their Confederates, who grew like Melons out of Dunghils) to the Divine Hand of
Justice.

Amongst the rest, their Baalam-like Prophet and Southsayer Hugh Peter's, is
close prisoner in the Tower of London. Some difficulty there was in the
discovery of him; but upon Intelligence, that he privily lurked about
Southwark, two Messengers were sent on Friday last to apprehend him; And
entering the house of Mr. Broad a Quaker, in St. Thomas Parish, whose daughter
then lay in, they searched, but missed him, he being (according to his custom)
crept* into bed to the young woman, where the Messengers modesty forbad their
search, she having bin delivered b^t two days before; And while they were
searching at one Day a Cobbler, Hugh the Firebrand escaped from Childbed,
leaving behind him his Cane with a Rapier in it, a Bible, and gray cloak. But
on Sunday night they found him at one Mr. Muns in the Maze, who denied himself
to be Peter's, and said his name was Thompson, threatening the Messengers with an
Action at Law for offering to affirm he was Hugh Peter's, and therefore refused
to go with them, till at last (being assisted by the Constable and others) they
forced him; which he perceiving, desired he might speak privately with Mrs. Mun,
which they denied, unless he would speak in their hearing; after which he
said, I will go, but I beg for the Lords sake that you will not call me ^r.
Peter's; for, said he, if it be known that I am Hugh Peter's, the people in the
street will stone me. But forcing him away, there was some tugging; and feeling
his Skir^s hard, they unript them, and found 5 pieces of Gold, some silver
Medals, and out of his Pocket they took his Almanac, which he was very much
troubled at* After which, they brought him to the Tower, and delivered him into
the custody of the worthy Lieutenant Sir John Robi^son, still avering his name
was Thomson; till at last in private to Sir John he confessed who he was. This
is St. Hugh, who when our Glorious Sovereign was led to Martyrdom, fell so
heavy upon his righteous Soul, blaspheming him upon his then Text, (Psalm 149.
To bind their Kings in Chains etc) and many other sordid Notions; too wicked
and profane to be here recited.

FINIS.

