GALLIAE FLAGELLUM: OR, THE Reduction of France Made EASY: WITH A Scheme
thereof. IN A LETTER TO A Member of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR 1696.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
SIR,
BOth the Foreign and Domestic Prints making such a noise and rattle with the
vast Preparations of France by Sea and Land, without taking equal notice of the
much greater of the Allies, who will be too strong and too early for the
French, I have adventured to give you my Sentiments upon a Method (in my
Opinion) the most rational to reduce France to an absolute and speedy Necessity
of making, or rather taking a Peace from the Allies; and knowing your Merit and
Judgment, and the Figure you make in this Kingdom, and particularly in the
Great Council of which you are an Honorable Member: And being bound in
gratitude to make you some return for the great Favors received at your band,
I have resolved to this way, and beg your kind but not severe Censure; and hope
you will accept my Zeal to the Public, and Respect to your self, and Pardon

Your most humble and Obedient Servant, W. Perron.

GALLIAE FLAGELLUM: OR, THE Reduction of France, etc.
THAT France has been upon the Defensive, both by Sea and Land these two Years
last past, I hope no Body will deny: That her Carreer was stopped in the
Campaign of 1694, and that she lost Ground every where, ( Germany excepted,
where she got none,) viz. in Flanders, Italia, and Catalonia, in the Campaign
of 1695, is well known to all the World: That she sneaked behind her Lines last
Summer, and that she is making new ones between Dinant and Chastelet, having
fortified her Frontiers, and re-inforc'd those Garrisons, we are all very
sensible: That ever since the fatal Blow at La-Hogue, the Navy-Royal of France
has been disarmed and laid up, nay and blocked up too in her own Ports, by her
Enemies, not daring to peep out to Sea, must be acknowledged by all: That this
way of Defending her self by Lines is purely new to her, and a certain Effect
of her Declension, is not capable of the least Doubt or Dispute; for, having
Armies more numerous, and Magazines better filled than her Foes, she always
acted upon the Offensive, till, for want of Money, Magazines could not be
amassed, nor Forces augmented, nay Recruits hardly made. That the Necessities
of France are pressing and pinching we shall clearly evince, by her Commerce
being entirely destroyed; (for what little remains, is by stealth sent out,
which bears no Proportion to that in the Freedom of Trade:) That the Revenues
of France are fallen short above forty Millions of Sterling Money, of what they
amounted to about thirty Years ago, I have made out plainly in a Treatise I
writ, and which was lately published in France, entitled Les Detailes de
France, in which it appears (above Contradiction) that France was in her most
exalted State, and most flourishing Condition, just before she began the
Persecution of those of the Holy Reformed Religion, and her Declension may
thence take Date: That her Traders and Artificers are fled, her Towns and
Villages depopulated, her Manufactures (her richest Mine) abandoned, her very
native Products neglected, is no piece of News, but rather too stale to be now
broached: That the Fertility of the late Years have made Bread (the Staff of
Life) abundantly plentiful in most Parts of that Kingdom is very certain, which
yet hinders not Multitudes of People from starving, (which is not Report, or
Fancy, or Conjecture, but occular Demonstration,) three Hungarian Gentlemen
who lately obtained Passes, and made the Tour of France have declared, that in
riding a few Miles they saw and told above a hundred dead with Hunger in the
Roads as they past; besides, many other Gentlemen lately come from thence
affirm it: And this Misery increases daily, for the Taxes are every where
doubled upon the poor Rogues, who being insolent, their necessary Movables are
seized, (which never was done before) and sold to the King's Use, who knows
nothing of this barbarous Treatment; no Body (no, not the tenderhearted
Clergy) durst tell him; he sees no Scarcity, feels no Want, great Trains, and
great Tables are still in his view; Monsieur Pont Chartrain with his his
Janissaries manages this Matter, first Projects, and then raises Money, being
assisted by the King's Absolute and Arbitrary Power. And now to revive the
drooping Spirits, and languishing Senses of my poor, slavish, and drowsy
Countrymen, they are told often, and frequently tickled with the hopes of
Peace, which our August and Invincible Monarch, (as the Court Parasites call
him) assures them he will have, either by Force, or fair Means: And such is the
Vanity and Credulity of my dear Compatriots, that they yet believe him,
(although they have been so often deceived by him,) and to that end, all
Instruments are made use of, no Stone unturned, Sea and Land compassed, all
Methods attempted to bring this about; but finding Peace is not to be gain
(even by his new and late Concessions, which are much more reasonable,) but
with Sword in Hand, his Gallick Majesty, is resolved to try one Effort more,
(and that, he says, shall be a very extraordinary one) (and, I say, will be his
last,) by augmenting his Troops, and making an early Campaign of the next, and
(as is pretended) by equipping both his Fleets, in the Mediterranean, and
Ocean, and joining them to make Head against the united Force of England and
Holland, to preserve their Coasts from being Insulted, and their Towns and
Ports from Bombs and Fireships, and to reinforce their Armies with the Regular
Troops, and the Garrisons with the Militia that guarded their Coasts; but all
this is Rhodomantade, mere Huff, and Splutter, being impracticable, and almost
impossible, for the Charge of setting out their Fleet will be superior to that
of augmenting their Armies by new Levies in lieu of the Troops on the Coasts;
besides, it is absolutely impossible for them to Man 'em, (though they call in
every individual Privateer,) and surely they are not yet so mad to pretend to
meet the English and Dutch at Sea, without a Force superior, or at least equal
to them, (which is what the Allies desire;) besides, the French Exchequer is
exhausted, the Branches of the Revenue anticipated, the Credit of the Court
clogged, and the Reputation of the Kingdom already mortgaged; the King's Lands
would be made Cautionary, but no Body durst open their Purses for that purpose.
That there is Money left in France we will not deny, and that if his Majesty
can come at it, he will have it to the last Farthing we know, but care is taken
to hide it from his Officers, by burying it deep in the Earth, and find it if
they can. This is the State of France at this present Juncture, she will be
ruined even by the bare continuance of the War, without a Blow, or the loss of
a Town; but, to effect this speedily, and to prevent a deluge of Blood, and to
accelerate a Peace (which is now only talked of) which will be perfected as
soon as agitated, I say, will even be concluded without any Preliminaries,
which often take up a great deal of time. I propose the following Scheme, with
all humility and deference, and wholly submit it to the Pleasure and Discretion
of the Allies, whose Interest I shall endeavor to prove it to be to put it in
timely execution; and that this Project may not savor of Pride, or
Self-Esteem, or any sinister or private Design, I do declare it is the pure
result of Zeal and Gratitude for my Religion, and Bread, which I enjoy, and
eat, with Liberty and Satiety; from the Arms and Charity of the Allies, now in
Confederacy against my native Country, (France) which denies me both.

First, That the Allies furnish each his Quota to a new Levy of Fifty or sixty
thousand Men, this Winter, to be put in Garrisons during the next Campaign,
which shall begin very early: That out of the Veteran Troops there be detached
Forty thousand chosen Men, (whereof ten thousand Horse and Dragoons) under
experienced Officers, with a good Train of Artilery, conducted by the best
Engineers, with Ammunition and Provision suitable, spare Arms, and all
Necessaries for such Service, all ready to be embarked from their several Ports
in England and Holland, as soon as ever the Armies on both Sides shall have
taken the Field.

That a real and actual Descent be made with this complete Army of Forty
thousand Men upon France, there being several Places (well known) on the Coasts
of Picardy, Normandy, and Britany, favorable to such a Design.

That they may land Safely, and with little or no Opposition from the French
Troops, is not to be doubted; and that they may march far up into the Country
(which lies open enough for 'em) is certain: That no Inland Towns of France, on
that side, are capable of resisting such a Force, is also well known.

That by the appearing of such an Army, [of Friends] among them, the Reformed,
all the new Converts, (nay, and many Papists too, having been also oppressed)
would resume their Courage, and take Arms to recover their Laws, Liberty, and
Religion: And thus would the Invading Army be soon doubled, nay trebled, and be
able by this Means to give to, or receive Battle from the united Force of
France; who, in this great and (almost) resistless Distress, would first detach
a great Body from her Army in Flanders, (which by this means would be so
weakened, that Villeroy could not defend the Lines, which would then be
penetrated, and the Country that way entered) being nearest, which in
conjunction with the few Regular Troops, and more Militia on the Coasts, would
be sent to make Head against this Army in their Bowels, which in all
probability would defeat 'em, or, at the worst, have a drawn Battle, and then
repair to their Ships, always ready to receive them: This would more distract
and confound the French, Court and Councils, and break all their Measures, than
all other Attempts whatever, nay than Two hundred thousand Men in Arms in
Flanders against 'em, though each besieged and took a good Town or two every
Campaign.

The Terror the landed Army would give them, the universal Consternation they
would be exposed to, would overwhelm 'em, and destroy 'em. The Allies might
have what Terms they pleased to insist upon, for nothing would be denied 'em;
no Disputes would be made, but all granted that should be demanded: For any one
of the Allie's Armies, once got into France, would produce this happy Effect
immediately; and if all Things did not succeed according to expectation in the
Descent, yet the French Forces in Flanders (as I said before) could not make
Head against the mighty Army of the Allies there, always in full view of them,
ready to attack them, upon the first march of the Detachment they would be
forced to make, to complete the Army intended to repel the new Invaders.

We want not Examples of mighty Victories obtained over the French by handfuls
of Men, even when their Armies were seven or eight to one; and by the English
alone, after a glorious Compaign made, and their Forces fatigued and almost
disabled. The same Courage resides in the brave, and impenitrable Hearts of the
same Nation; and if it be objected, The French are now better Soldiers, and
have better Officers; so are, and have the Allies, whose Soldiers were always
as good as (or better than) the French, and their Officers now much better; of
which they gave Proof beyond contradiction, in their Conduct all the last
Campaign, which their very Enemies cannot deny, and particularly in the
celebrated Retreat by Prince Vaudemont; and the stupendous Siege and
successful Reduction of Namur by the King of Great Britain, in view of the
united Power, nay, and Flower of France. If it should be urged, That Money
would be wanting to put this great and glorious Design in execution, it is
answered, No; for the Quota to each of the Allies would not be vastly great,
and if it did strain 'em, they had better do so than linger on in a long,
tedious, and consumptive War; the English Nation would be forwardest, and give
the Example, (though they have suffered most already by the War,) for all being
now convinced of the Necessity of prosecuting this common Quarrel against an
Invader, and Oppressor, they willingly contribute to the Charge of it, and
would more, and more cheerfully, if they had a Prospect of its sudden
Conclusion; which this very Enterprise would most infallibly produce.

Nor would there be wanting Shipping, or Seamen, for this Service, the English
and Dutch can furnish both; though we are sensible so great and well-appointed an
Army would take up abundance of Ships, and employ a great many Mariners; but
the Horse and Dragoons only would require the greatest Number of both, for the
Foot might embark on board the Men of War of both Nations, who must spare their
Seamen to man the Vessels of Transport, Provisions, etc. It Is but a short Cut
to France; the English formerly knew the Way very readily thither, and liked
the Country so well, that they not only wintered, (as well as summer'd,) but
also conquered it all for themselves: And though this is not now pretended, nor
intended, being against the true Interest of Europe, wholly to ruin France, or
to canton her out into Provinces, and so each share the Spoil: No, all that is
designed, and aimed at, is to reduce her within due Bounds, France may be
France still, and Lewis the Fourteenth King thereof, but he must be stripped from
those Dominions he is now possessed of, which he got by Fraud, or Stealth; he
is pretty well weakened already, he is very sick of the War, and wishes it were
at an End, and would come to pretty good Terms, but is mightily loath to part
with those fine Morsels he has swallowed, he thinks he could digest 'em, but
they lie too crude and heavy at his Stomach, he is unwilling to disgorge, but
he must, for his natural Heat abates, and his radical Moisture is exhausted, (I
mean his Coin and Power) so that they must come up again: His Appetite is good
yet, and Ostrich-like he can swallow, but not (like them) digest (as it is
reported) Iron, especially if there be any Steel in it, of which he is like to
have his Belly full; and pray God he may, that a speedy End may be put to these
bloody, merciless, destructive and unmanly Wars; these Bombs and red-hot Balls,
this Burning, and Bombarding, which (I am sorry I must say it) France began,
though now she repents of it, as she will soon of all her great and glorious
Achievements, (as she vainly and falsely called her barbarous Invasions,
Usurpations, and Oppressions,) she must ever long tamely submit to a Peace,
because she can no longer do Mischief; her Will is good, but her Power dwindles
apparently and visibly, she must be reduced to Reason, and brought to so low an
Ebb, that it shall not be in her Reach, to hurt, or in the least to offend her
honest, quiet, and peaceful Neighbors, who being contented with their own,
never covet other Folks Goods, or Lands; and happy for France had she been so
too, it is she that has thinn'd Europe, (as well as her self) of People;
Millions have bled to gratify her boundless Ambition, have fallen Sacrifices
to her matchless Cruelty, and to merit the empty Name of Great, which her
present Prince has obtained, at the vast Expense of Blood, Treasure, Time, and
Application: But great what? Great Monster! Great Murderer! Great Tyrant! Great
Oppressor! Perfidious! Base! And Perjurious to his Subjects and Neighbors.
Hated by both, but feared by neither, but by them humbled, and exposed to the
Contempt of all the World; and at his Death this will be said of him; He lived
unbelov'd, and died unlamented. He will stink and putrify in the Grave; his
Name and Memory will be Nauseous to Posterity, and instead of embellishing,
(like good Kings and Patriots) will sully History.

FINIS.

