PHILADELPHIA, OR BROTHERLY LOVE To the STUDIOUS In the HERMETICK ART.

Wherein is discovered the Principles of HERMETICK PHILOSOPHY, with much Candor
and Plainness.

Written by Eyreneus Philoctetes

And God said let the Earth bring forth grass; the herb yielding Seed, and the
Fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind whose seed is in it self upon the
Earth: and it was so,

GEN, 1 11. If thou do desire to exalt a thing beyond what nature has done,
consider well in what, and by what it is bettered, and let it always be done in
its own kind,

Sendivo. Trea. 1. Printed and sold by T. Soul at the Crooked Billet in
Holy-well-lane in Shoreditch. 1694.

To the STUDIOUS READER.
IN making the following Tract and Letter in which it was enclosed, that
precedes it, thine, thy Obligation to me will bear some proportion with mine to
my Friend that communicated them; neither art thou excusable without a degree
of acknowledgement to him also: for, doubtless, next to the Authors of such
Tracts, our Obligations are greatest to the Publishers and Communicators. For
indeed there have not been wanting some ignoble minds, who, when such Tracts
have fallen into their Hands, have presumed to Censure the world not worthy the
same, contrary to the sense and intent of the Authors, and by this means have
confined their Love and Candor, as much as in them lay, to their own private
Closets: Who notwithstanding are not wanting to accuse the Philosophers of
Envy, in concealing the Matter and Means of the Art, whilst they manifest their
own to the Studious in that which is less. I cannot reflect on the Complaint of
a Modern and Candid Author, without an Indignation to the Practice, who after
he had written an Enchyridion of Experiments, together with a Diurnal of
Meditations, wherein were many Philosophical Rece^ts declaring the whole
Secret, etc. It fell into such hands he conceived would never restore it. No
less happenned to the Comment on Sir George Ripleys Last Six Gates. This very
unworthy a generous mind, and very prejudicial to the Studious, as well as
Discouraging to the Authors. Let therefore such possess Ignorance with their
envy; want of Ability with their Ingratitude; whilst the Generous, grateful and
abhorrers of such Practices, enjoy the Benefit, and Reap the Advantage of such
Candor and Help even to the attainment of their hearts desire.

For me to say any thing of the Author of Philadelphia, would be a Presumption,
since he has chosen secrecy: Nor of the Tract it self since (thou may think)
it surmounts my understanding; therefore I prefer its self to any thing of mine
to proclaim its Authors praise as well as Ability and Candor: knowing it is too
common for Publishers to presume to Comment on that they understand not; by
which the Readers are abused, and their own Ignorance and ambition discovered;
if not to every Reader, yet to many, and to every Master at least.

For my Part, Rather then spend time and Paper to no more purpose either to my
self or Reader in such Commentations, I should think it better Spent in
Humility to Address the Sages of our Time, that they themselves would be
pleased to Illustrate the obscure part of Medical Practice to the young and
Laborious Students in the Physical. Art. No doubt but some such there are whom
Nature has blessed with a cracking of the Shell, through great Labor and
Study, tho Striplings, to whom a helping hand would prove acceptable, which
might conduct them by the nearest way to the Center. Who would it serve, and
what would it merit? If the production of their Red Lead, and Reductioon into
Potability were familiarly taught, tho the first water, and its Preparation
were wholly concealed. Would not the sick be helped, and the happy attainer of
the first water be made early serviceable.

Also the Discovery of the peculiar Operation that is partly Mechanical on the
universal Mercury, would make the possessor capable of spending his time and
Matter to a more early advantage, and further step in Practice; Few arriving
here without a sufficient share of the loss of both to Entitle them to such a
degree of help: These together with the Arbor vitae, or permissible Oil, etc.
being the Joy and Reward of every A^eptist, and desire of the least attainer.

No less profitable to the attainer of Principles, would the Practice of that
highly serviceable, and much desired Liquor by the Physical and Sedulous
Students, which Crowned Paracelsus, and gave Honor to Helmont in the Cure of
Diseases, whose Practice is asserted, and no doubt truly, by a knowing Master,
to be a hundred times more difficult then the Elixir it self.

What Reader, If I show thee my Opinion wherein? not as one Knowing, but
DESIROUS TO LEARN, and with submission to Correction, if my conception be
Wrong. The Elixir is produced Naturally; and by Natural Principles; therefore
the Difficulty seems to be in the attainment of Principles (rather than
Practice) which are artificial to find.

But the Alkahest is produced Artificially or Mechanically from Natural
Principles; and Art being more intricate than Nature (for "she is true, plain,
patient, constant, etc.) and the Artist more inconstant, impatient and
consequently irregular, must necessarily be more subject to err, and
consequently the more difficult to Effect. Art in all Natural Productions, tho
absolutely necessary for help, must go Natures pace and way, or else more
injurious then helpful, but in Artificials a greater Latitude is given to the
Artists to vary many ways as seems most proper to every ones Cogitations.

An Example we may find in this; Art in its help to Nature in the production of
an Herb, Tree, or Flower, is obliged to Natures pace and way, without laying on
of hands, only preventing accidents and extremes of Heat and Cold; but Art in
the Mannual or Mechanical separation, and union of the Natural Principles, viz.
Spirit, Oil, and Salt (which indeed are in a true sense all one, but
diversisied by Art, for the more Spirit the less Oil and Salt (yea they both
may be made Spirit too) so also the more Oil the less Spirit and Salt, and the
more Salt the less Spirit or Oil; for indeed they are convertable) of that
Herb or Flower is certainly left to a Wide Field of Practice and seeming
Probabilities whereby the Artist is abundantly more liable to err. In short I
can find many artificial ways to destroy a Natural Life, but, but one way to
manifest or Maintain it: Which is according to Natures own Procedure: No other.

Thus Reader accept my love, both in showing my Opinion and soliciting help for
the studious. And least the first should be chargeable with folly, and the last
with boldness, by those I so much value, I take leave to conceal my Name, that
by that means their dipleasure may fall more general on the studious, for whose
sake I make the attempt. Who am a real admirer of Divine and Natural Verity, a
lover of God, my Neighbor and Enemy.

Philomathes.

TO HIS Respected and Worthy FRIEND,
THy early Love to Hermetick Philosophy, sincere Respects to the Masters of it,
and long perseverance in the Study were sufficient motives to Communicate what
might fall into my hands that was rare and valuable, tho the Obligations of
Friendship were less numerous.

The Enclosed Manuscript I have had by me for some time, but for some Reasons
could not communicate it so soon as my respects to thy self and it, would have
prompt me. I have not seen, nor heard of many Copies, therefore for its Novelty
may presume, and for its worth speak what I think, That it is a compendious and
plain Theory of the Principles of Nature in general, and of Hermetick Practice
in particular: Not Phantastically talked of, but fundamentally evinced from the
necessity thereof, and Authority of the Ancient Philosophers: Fully manifesting
the impossibility of the contrary through the uniformity and Regularity of
Natures Actions in the Production of the several Species of Natural and perfect
Bodies.

For the Author I shall nor presume to give any judgment since he is pleased
to conceal his Name and Circumstances, and there by lie obscure (the practice
of Hermetick Writers) But this we may learn, that his Candor and Brotherly Love
to the Studious and Religious style, Entitles him to Christianity as well as
his Matter and Method does to Knowledge and Practice in the School of Hermes
and Nature; whether he be old or young, Native or Stranger. And since he has
been thus solicitous and even studious to prevent Errors in all, and to direct
the feet of the worthy in the way of Truth, we must reasonably believe he has
taken the best method to effect it, which is to inculcate the knowledge of true
Principles and possibility of Nature. And indeed I have long conceived the
Multitude of Errors in Practice, that have happened to the searchers of Art,
has been most owing to the Ignorance in Principles, and the want of a Previous
understanding in the Law of Nature.

Nature no doubt, has a Law she cannot transgress, let us therefore study to
know that, and we shall not attempt it neither; Art or Accidents may frustrate
her end and cause Abortion, but neither carry her to or beyond her usual
Perfection, but in her own way.

This small Tract, worthy Friend, Concisely teaches what the Fire and water, or
Agent and Patient, that are active or living are; how they are said to be
living; what their life; and how understood: and indeed the Nature and Reason
of the Hermetick Art very much Illustrated thereby.

Neither is it barren of so much Divinity, and some peculiar Hints, (that may
afford pleasure and profit to one so intent thereon) as becomes so deep
Philosophy; which doubtless is the shadow of Divinity, or Younger Sister.

And indeed I could wish the contemplation of Gods Works in Nature were less
omitted by the Christian professors of our Age, and the Lucre of Gain more;
seeing it tends to the honor of God, good of our Neighbor, and satisfaction of
our selves every way, except our satisfaction be in much Riches and Honor,
purchased with our most precious time, and possessed with Ignorance and Folly;
which is very short of the Nobility of our Intulect and end of Creation; and
for which we must surely give an Account.

Is not the Christian enabled to ascribe the Attributes of Wisdom and Power to
God, in the Consideration and Contemplation of the Number and Magnitude, Order
and Beauty of the Works of Creation, as he is those of his goodness and Mercy,
which is over all his Works, in manifesting the same word by which they were
made, to redeem and restore them; the last absolutely necessary, the first
altogether becoming and adorning a virtuous and pious mind, and Christian
Profession.

Doubtless the Natural and Mechanic knowledge acquired by Solomon, no way
unfitted but qualified him for a Divine: Who when he had erected that glorious
Edifice, and beautified it with the choicest Products of Nature and Art, as a
Naturalist and Mechanic, Dedicated the same in great wisdom as a Divine. We
have Reason to believe the Psalmist no less filled with the consideration of
the Attributes that are Manifest in the Creation, which even compelled him to
celebrate the same almost continually. And indeed nothing less is to be thought
than that a mind thus possessed with admiration should continually fear so
great, love so good, and adore so glorious a Being, incomprehensible Power and
Majesty: Neither has indeed the Holy Apostles and followers of Christ fallen
short but rather excelled in this. And truly, respected Friend, the Characters
of Nature are preferable to those of Men, since they are Gods, and such our
Lord himself chose to show forth the greatest Mysteries by. Therefore if
ignorant of them how shall we understand his Sermons and Doctrine aright. Much
might be said, but in as much, worthy Friend, there is no need of Arguments to
covince, tho this may encourage one so fully satisfied of its Utility,
innocence and profit, to prosecute the same with diligence and Judgment, and
to prefer it to the Mean and unbecoming practices of our Age, that solicit
nothing but Gain or Greatness, and miserably live in this world without the
knowledge of Gods greatness and Wisdom, love and Mercy, made manifest in his
Creation and its Redemption.

But least I should Transgress my intended Limits, and detain too long from the
Enclosed, I shall refer what might otherwise have been here offered in Relation
to the Secret Art of Hermes, to another Opportunity more convenient, and in the
mean while continue to desire thy Prosperity and happiness every way, as I have
hitherto done who am thy Friend in Sincerity and Affection.

PHILETAEROS.

Philadelphia, OR BROTHERLY LOVE To the Studious in the Hermetick ART.
IT is real matter of Lamentation to see so many pressing after Knowledge, and
so few taking the right Path; or making a true Estimation thereof. I could
indeed make known my Zeal on this occasion with pleasure, did I not know by
Experience, that most that are Studious in this Science pass over such lines
with impatience and great neglect; for their minds be solicitous only about the
practice of Alchymy, they reject almost every Line that treats not thereof.

I must indeed Confess that the Arcanum of this Art is not only defirable but
truly Excellent; and also that thereby Divine Truths are adumbrated, yet also
do affirm it gives not the possession thereof, which is alone Entailed upon
that Divine excellency that never fails; Charity. For surely whether there be
Prophesies they shall fail; or Tongues they shall Cease; or Knowledge it shall
vanish away; but the word of the Lord (which is Christ the Charity or gift of
God to the World) abides for ever. Therefore let me admonish the Studious to
pursue knowledge in the Path thereof; who then will make a true Estimation, and
will perceive that it is not the ultimate Attainment but only a Link of the
Divine Chain: And as there are steps to knowledge, so likewise there are steps
beyond it; as the Holy ManDivinely sets forth and admonishes, that Faith and
Virtue precede Knowledge; then to add to Knowledge Temperance; to Temperance
Patience; to Patience Godliness; to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to
Brotherly Kindness Charity. O happy Attainment! O Divine Chain of Perfection!
Therefore we must say with the Inspired Apostle, That although we should
understand all Mysteries and all Knowledge and had not Charity, it would avail
nothing. Far hence, therefore ye ungodly; ye profane and Covetous, for
neither these Divine nor Natural Mysteries are your Portion.

But for the Virtuous, Prudent and well Accomplished Students and Lovers of
Chemical Philosophy, I have written this short Tract in Brotherly Love: not
indeed by way of Invitation to the Art, (though its truth and excellency would
warrant it) there being too many rashly Concerned therein already, but to
Instruct those rightly seeking; and also if possible to prevent all from
attempting to effect our Magestery by fruitless and vain Operations, by which
they not only bring Disgrace to the Art, but Poverty to themselves.

And I may assure the Ingenious, that it is the very desire of those that have
obtained a reward of their Labor and study, to be helpful. But I hope such are
not ignorant of the Difficulty of the Task; for as nothing Gratifies us more
then being understood in our own Philosophical Sense, so nothing is more
regretting then the thoughts of Introducing wicked and blocking Men.

Hence is required a peculiar Method in Writing that we may Instruct the one,
and conceal from the other; and indeed many weighty Reasons persuades us to
perform the Latter with what skill we can: Yet considering that we necessarily
must, for the Instruction of Tyroes, Heartily Write the Truth, and that every
Treatise when published, is liable to be perused by all; we conclude therefore
on good Grounds, that the Event is more owing to Providence then our Cunning.
But indeed the Writings of the Envious, together with those of the Ignorant
(which are not a few) have proved a sufficient Bulwark against the rash and
confident Approachers; and they have also yielded an occasion and opportunity
to the more Candid and Knowing, to Write the more plain and Familiar. And
indeed the first Care of a Tyro ought to be the Distinguishing of Writers; that
he may not only shun the false, but envious, and Converse with those only that
are knowing and Candid.

And therefore for the Instruction of those that are not capable to make a true
distinction between the true and false Writings, it being indeed difficult for
Tyroes, for they have Written equal in their Promises both of their Candor and
the Readers Reward, or rather the latter have excelled, I shall recommend the
more Candid as well as knowing Masters in this Science, with advice to the
Studious, they need not doubt their Sufficiency to Instruct them in all things
necessary without consulting any others, tho'true ones, by which they may not
only shun the false, but envious Writings. I dare affirm there is nothing more
tends to to bring the Searchers of this Art to the knowledge thereof, then only
to read Candid and knowing Authors; nor nothing more confounding than the
reading true and false Books with equal Credit.

I shall therefore recommend the Writings of Hermes, Artesius, Flammel, Riply,
Trevesan, Sendivogius, the Author of the Hermetick Secrets, which are all
Candid Authors, and to shorten the reckoning, all others that are quoted by
these: But above any I must recommend one of our Moderns, who styles himself
Eironaeus Philalethes Cosmopolita, whose Writings are the best Piece of
Chemical Philosophy extant, and indeed has performed that for the Lovers of
Art, that Challenges the Garland of Praise from all others; for whereas he,
with many more, were fain to acquire the knowledge of the Secret of the
Philosophers Magnes from one; of their Magical Chalibs from another; the use of
Diana's Doves from a third; the Air or rather Chamelian of the Philosophers
from another; the gross Preparation of their Menstruum in another; the number
of Eagles in another; all which, together with Internal Fires and Proportions;
secret and Manual operation with their Circumstances; he has Philosophically
and Methodically taught, with more Candor and freedom then those before him.

Let Tyroes therefore rely upon this, the Authors mentioned are abundantly
sufficient; others may be read to confirm the studious, but such that cannot
conceive the truth from these; would never from all others they can read, reap
the Knowledge of our Secrets. And for the Instruction of the Studious I will
Inform them what is requisite to be known in the reading these Authors
mentioned, and what must be acquired before they conclude they are understood.
For it is not sufficient if a word or two in one and another seem to harmonize,
and all the rest seem superfluous, and of no value; no, have no such mean
thoughts of the knowing Adepts, as though either their Subjects were so mean, or
they so Barren: I can assure you their Writings abound with requisite Matter,
and Concurring Truths; and unless they are so read and understood, as an Egg is
eaten, viz. throwing away only the shell (which is a small proportion) they are
not comprehended nor understood aright, notwithstanding any Conceit to the
Contrary. Therefore, till they are thus understood, go not to practice any
Theory with expectation of Success. In order therefore to a right
understanding, I shall lay a sound Foundation for the studious Tyroes, and
whosoever Builds thereon according to Art, shall find it sure and the
foundation of all Philosophers.

Nature therefore forbidding all Generation and Multiplication of Species out
of kind, let none foolishly endeavor to effect it; for as in it self it is
impossible, so also it is against that unanimous admonition of all
Philosophers; apply all things to the possibility of Nature.

Know therefore the Generation and Multiplication of all things is effected no
other way than by their own Seeds and proper Matters, not from the Commixtion
of four Elements, as some fondly Imagine. The Seed of Animals Rests in their
Reins; the Seeds of Vegitables are produced into the Air; the Seed of Metals
rests in their Profundity, but is only to be found in the Perfect: for until
any thing bearing Seed be come to a degree of Perfection, it cannot emit its
Seed; as is seen in an Aple or Pear, if plucked from the Tree before its time,
it cannot yield Seed; likewise the same is known in Humane Youth; no more can
imperfect or unripe Metalls, tho'as in the other, the potentiality truly exist.
How foolish then do many act who not only forsake the perfect, (which alone can
yield seed) but even seek a Metaline seed from an Animal or Vegitable? O Gross
Ignorance exceeding the Vulgar, who never expect Wheat without the Seed of
Wheat, nor a Horse but by a Horse! Leave off therefore you foolish and vain
Operators, seeing the meanest Capacity is able to Arraign your Philosophy, and
charge it with absurdity.

So then as every thing to be Generated must have its own Seed, so must also
every Seed have its proper Matter; for the first Matter of things is not their
Seeds, but that by which the Seed and Species is Multiplied. The first Matter
of Vegitables is water, without a sufficient quantity of which, no Vegitable
can increase; nor out of one Load of Corn sowed could ten be reaped: So also,
if we had never so much Matter and not Seed, the Generation is impossible. The
like also may be observed in the Generation of Man; for although the Seed may be
plentifully. cast into its proper Matrix and that Matrix barren of matter, viz.
Menstruum, no Generation follows: So on the contrary in those Matrix's where is
plenty of matter and not Seed, the hopes of Generation ceases.

All this is applicable to Metals, the first matter of which is Mercury as also
of all Minerals that are of Metallic imposition; for until it be Mercury it
is not the first matter of Metals, but may be otherways disposed, but when once
Mercury, it tends only to Metals in a generative way. hence may be learned the
folly and Ignorance of those that seek after, or brag of the first matter of
Mercury, yea of all things, which admit they had the very matter of which
Nature makes Mercury they could by no art effect it, and consequently avail
them nothing, as being neither seed nor matter. Leave off therefore such vain
attempts, and follow simple Nature, whose daily Operations would better
Instruct were they Contemplated rightly; and learn to multiply a Metallic
Species, with a Metallic Seed and matter; for certainly it is possible by no
other means to effect it.

And that I may evince to all, for the prevention of Erroneous Attempts, that
Crude Mercury is the matter of all Metals, Learn and understand. First, that
all may be reduced into Mercury and according to the purity or impurity of the
Metals is the quantity thereof; Gold and Silver, are wholly reduced, others
abounding with the Heterogeneous Superfluities not: Hence is learned the purity
and impurity of these Bodies: This should teach all they proceeded from this
Mercurial Root. Also it being certain that our Crysopoetick Arcanum, is Capable
of making Gold of no other matter in the World; for so much as any Metal has of
Mercurial matter, so much only is transmutable into Gold; neither does it
differ in quality, when effected, though projected upon one, two, or more of
them, but only quantity: hence it comes to pass that a greater quantity of
Mercury is transmuted then any other imperfect Metal, it being joined with less
extraneous matter, though not wholly without. Also, from hence may be gathered
what the matter of our Arcanum must of necessity be; for those curious in their
Inspections know, that between things assimilated by Transmutation, there must
intercede precedent likeness, or no industry can cause 2 Union.

And now if what have been said, be not sufficient to Establish a Tyro, reclaim
the rash, and inform the Ignorant, I know not what would. Though indeed it is no
more then has been said by many Philosophers, whose sayings would better
Instruct their Readers, and would prevent those absurdities they run into, were
they better observed. How often has this truth been inculcated (though heeded by
few) that no dissolvent ought to differ from the dissolvend in matter but
Proportion and Digestion: also, that no Water Dissolves Bodies in a Generative
way, but that which is of the same Species, and can be Inspissated in them:
what can be better spoken, or in so few words comprehends more?

But notwithstanding what is said, I expect many will persevere in vain
Attempts, For when I have Discoursed the Reason and possibility of the Art to
some with all the skill and plainness I was able, they could not conceive it,
being prepossessed with a Conceited knowledge of true Principles: Hence the
studious may learn that the Ignorance of the ignorant is more owing to their
own folly then the remoteness of truth. And truly when we see so many wise men,
capable of effecting any thing that falls within the bounds of Wit and
Learning, Confounded in an Art so Natural, easy and true; so fully treated of,
and so desirably sought after, cannot but admire the protection thereof: which
among others is one Reason the Philosophers have unanimously declared it to be
the Gift of God: Therefore, seeing it is thus, with what shame ought those
Sophisters to be Clothed who pretend to dispense the knowledge thereof at
their Pleasure; of such beware, and with all diligence shun, and seek it alone
at the Hand of the true Giver, to whom be praise alone.

Now therefore, let me further admonish the studious, that they wittily
understand the Philosophers, not carelessly pass over those things that not only
would prevent Errors, but introduce knowledge: and in the first place learn the
effects of our dissolving Water, by which a true estimation may be made
thereof, and of the Dissolvents of the vulgar. Gold is dissolved in our
Humidity, like Ice in warm Water; observe the example, and consider the
Identity of matter between Ice and Water, and apply it to our Principles: Ice
is Water congealed, therefore Naturally resolves into Water, and when mixed
with Water becomes one inseperably with it: therefore such an humidity which
dissolves Gold like the Example, must be that out of which Gold is produced by
Nature, otherways the union will be impossible, and the Reduction not Natural.
The Author of the New Light has heartily written the same thing. Seek (says
he) such an humidity or moisture which does dissolve Gold without noise or
Violence, yea so sweetly and naturally as Ice does melt in warm water; if you
find out this, you have that thing out of which Gold is produced by nature.
Again, Our Argent Vive does dissolve Gold or Silver so, that it cannot be
separated from them, but is as water mixed with water. And truly let me add (to
show you fully) our Humidity can by an easy art be actually made into Gold or
Silver, whence may be learned its Pondus, which at once throws off all that are
short of Metalick weight, yea it exceeds somewhat that of Common Argent Vive;
therefore let all beware of seeking any other for our intent.

And now, if any be ignorant of the Matter, or arrogantly oppose what has been
said, their ingratitude on the one hand, and ignorance on the other will
exclude them the Kings Palace, and we must leave them groping for the Door,
whilst the true Artists Triumphs in their Victory, and are splendidly
Entertained therein.

But to as many as conceive I will add this, that if the part of an Artist be
performed, to make the water that is cold, warm; they shall perform our
Solution according to the Example.

And that I may prevent a Common Error, Viz. The Counfounding our natural
dissolvent with our Circulated Salt, or Alkahest some Ignorant Boasters, that
neither knew the one nor the other, having taught that they are both the same,
shall so far show their Difference, that no Tyro but may effectually
distinguish them in his Theory. Know therefore, and note well this short
Distinction; there is no Affinity between them either in Matter or Operation;
they Differ in Matter as much as one Species does from another, the one being
Metalline, the other Saline: They Differ in their Operations, as much as Love
and Wrath, the one in Love preserving, the other in Wrath destroying, Life and
Motion.

I cannot but admire, notwithstanding the real Care and great Labor of many
knowing and candid Philosophers to prevent Errors in admonishing the Studious
to beware of Subtilty, Sequestring the Art from the many Sophisms, and Calling
their Principles by their proper Names, to see men studious in this Art so
foolish in their Conclusions and operations; some proposing to make our Secret
and great Elixir, which is a Fire-abiding Purrity, and perfect Tincture from
impure and Combustible Matters as Ordure, Wine, Urine, Nitre, Blood, Dew,
Rainwater, Earth, Vitriol, and many others too tedious to reckon, being led
thereto by their own sordid Fancy, or having read perhaps thereof in the
Writings of the wise men (for they have by Analogy called their matters almost
every thing) hence no Sophister no Ignorant Worker, but pretends to Justify
his Proceedings, though upon these fordid Subjects, from their Writings, but
their End will be Disappointment, if not Disgrace and Poverty. These indeed go
on in Errors with this Comfort, that many of the Adepts do say they erred often,
and one particularly two hundred times, but though they should err the same
Number, yet not being supported by a true Theory, nor understanding the nature
of the thing desired, are Choosing as many Matters almost as Operations, and so
find the possibility of the Multiplication of Errors, ad infinitum, though not of
Tincture truly perfect and Permanent; Oh miserable Blindness! O inextricable
Laborinth! whose miserable state take from Geber (subtle witted indeed enough
but of his Candor be jealous most miserable and unhappy is he who after the end
of his Work God denies to see the Truth, for he ends his Life in Error: who
being surrounded with all manner of misfortune and infelicity, constituted in
perpetual labor, loses all the comfort and joy of this World, and spends his
life in sorrow without any benesit or reward. I will add my own Opinion, their
reward is just, who provoke God, endeavor to force Nature, abuse the Adepts,
and abound in ignorance and folly.

Therefore as many as expect better fare, let them seek rightly; first call
upon God and know your hearts to be purged from Impurity, and Faith to have
possession, by which you may attain to Virtue then pursue Knowledge; also be
sure to attempt nothing contrary to Nature, and with great respect acknowledge
the Love and Care of the Adept Brothers that have communicated their Experience
and hinted the way; then pursue our Diana with great Industry, whose Beauty is
singular and qualitys excellent; she is more fair, more grave, and yet lively
and more fit for Generation then any other; Marry her to the Sun, and their
Offspring shall be your Reward.

And for your Instruction know, and note it well, that our water or Mercury is
a Compound-Simple, Compound in respect to quality, simple in respect to Matter
and Homogeneity: The Matter is Watery, the Quality Fiery, which are reconciled
by Air (according to the Doctrine of Elements) but according to the Principles
thus, the Matter is Mercurial, the Quality Sulphurous, Reconciled by Salt;
which also may be, and sometimes are, called the Water, the Spirit, and the
Blood, or Body, Soul and Spirit; take it either way, but be sure to understand
them Scientificially or Practically, the necessity of which learn from this
following Discovery. Salt prepares Sulphur, Salt and Sulphur prepares Mercury,
Mercury preserves them: So that without Salt, Sulphur cannot be prepared or set
at liberty from his Prison, it being the only Key thereto; without Salt and
Sulphur Mercury cannot be qualified, and without Mercury, Salt and Sulphur can
effect nothing, it being their proper Vessel or Matrix: But be sure all be
Homogeneal, or the Mercurial simplicity will be impossible; therefore make the
latter Judge of the two former, for all Metaline things are tried in a
Mercurial Balance. First learn these things Theoretically, and see the same
confirmed by many Philosophers before you enter upon Practice, this is safe and
delightful: And then, although Errors should happen (which expect) yet being
supported by a true Theory, they will Instruct, but till then confound and
Distract. Believe me and take this candid Advice.

Therefore, as many as sets about this Work, let them first know what they
seek, and what they would effect. It is no small thing to be capable to inform
matter, and that in an instant; consider who it imitates; did not our Lord
effect this at the Marriage in Canaan on the Water, which was the matter of
Wine. Think not therefore it is attained without a Blessing from him, profound
Meditation, Herculean Labor and Cost.

Diligently therefore attend, and note well what I say. Matter is informed by
Light; of which matter and form all created Concrets consists, Light being the
form in all Concretes and life of all Beings, which Light is ineffable and not
known abstract from matter, as we see in the most beautiful Creature either
humane or other, as also in the curious Flowers of the Earth, how through the
withdrawing of an invisible fire or Spirit they become dead, Opake and fit only
for Corruption, that Nature may again react and communicate form; such are her
viscissitudes; but she also has her Darling and last perfection, wherein she
has firmly united form with pure matter, yea so firmly that without the help of
Art she can hardly alter the same; and seeing the perfection of matter is Form,
why should any studious in Philosophy neglect to Contemplate the perfection of
Gold, which is thus perfected by Nature. And truly if its Permanancy and Beauty
be not sufficient to Captivate his Thoughts and Hands from working on things
impure and fading, I must tell him his offspring will not be long lived, for
such as the Tree is, such is the Fruit, such as the Father is, such is the Son.

This Form is called Sulphur by the Author of the new Light, and in his
Dialogue thereof thus Writes, He is the Maker of a thousand things, he knows
how to make Metals better, and Correct Minerals; and is the heart of all
things, he teaches Animals understanding, knows how to make all kinds of
Flowers in Herbs and Trees, and is Chief over them, Corrupts the Air which he
amends again; he is maker of all Odours, and Painter of all Colors. Again,
Know that Sulphur is the Virtue of all things.

Here let the studious in Alchymy open their Eyes and behold what Reason we
have to Proclaim our Principles or Subjects universal, viz. Matter and Form,
and to be in all places, but understand such as seek Sulphur for our Intent,
must conceive that it is nearer in somethings then in others, and without they
apply themselves to those Palaces where Sulphur gives Audience to the
Philosopers, they may for ever seek but not find him.

Arise therefore you sons of Hermes, and contemplate on the Light, the
Corporification of which is the utmost bound of Nature, yea what is it else but
the Sun it self? who that goes about to seek it in things fading and impure
finds it, though truly there? but of too swift foot for the nimblest pursuers,
and seeing it is invisible in the Concretes, and known only by effect; and can
in no wise be attained abstract from matter, and consequently matter must enter
into the work, what man would be so foolish to expect a Fire abiding purity
from impure Matters, neither a strict union of the form therewith. Therefore
seeing the matter to which the form is intimately united, must necessarily
excel in purity and permanency, and also that the form in such a matter is
Corporified, and does abound, where should an Artist seek for form but in such
a matter, now Gold being such is found to be the only subject capable of
answering the desires of the Artist; who begins where Nature left, and through
her assistance, and an Homogeneous Agent, proceeds to let loose the form in a
Natural way; which form reacting on the matter enobles it, and brings it nearer
its own Nature: so that every time the form is thus set at Liberty, or stirred
up to action, it goes on to its end, viz. to inform matter, and when the end of
its Action is come rests; thus it is reiterated till the matter be swallowed
up in the form, which then becomes corporified form, and according to its
perfection informs more or less matter on which it is projected. Hence also may
be learned how it becomes universal, seeing it passes from specification
thither; and the nearer the matter is brought to the form, the farther off
specification, yea so far therefrom may it pass, that it will not be applicable
to Metals in respect to Transmutation, but will perpetually shine and excel
the Nature of tangible Bodies. This is our whole Philosophy, comprehended in
this short Theory.

But in order to set the form at Liberty, that it may thus react upon the
matter, the Body must be reduced into its first matter, or water Homogeneal, in
a natural way, whereby the Species is preserved; and seeing this can be done by
no other means then by the first matter thereof, let none be either so rash or
foolish to attempt it.

I have abundantly shown already the difference of first matters, and that they
differ so sar in each Species, that the first matter of an Animal, or
Vegitable, is heterogeneous to a Metal, and so on the contrary; and
consequently can neither Generate nor increase a Metal, which is Generated or
multipled by no other matter then its own, as I have Philosophically and
plainly shown; which is also attested by all Philosophers. The noble Polonian
speaking of the Gold found between the Teeth of a dead man, takes occasion thus
to express himself, That unless Mineral Mercury (which is the matter of Gold)
had been brought in thither, there could never have been Gold produced. We may
say with him, many the like accidents fall out, which being not well considered
by the Writer, occasions the Reader to err. But the honest searcher must apply
all things to the Possibility of Nature, if they agree not with her, they must
be let alone, who Generates and multiplys all things by their own Seeds and
proper matters.

A further proof of the difference of the first matters of each Species is
learned from the action of our noble Circulated Salt or Alkahest upon them, by
which they are reduced into their first matters, and in their reduction give
certain testimony of their diversity, as Metals into Sulphur, and Mercury,
Pearls, etc. into a milky juice. So that the vanity of endeavoring to Generate
or multiply one Species by the seed and matter of another, is deservedly
rewarded with the loss both of money and time: but that it may be prevented for
the future, I have heartily shown the studious the Law of Nature and Art, which
strictly forbids, and most certainly punishes such absurd Practices.

Also I would admonish such that presume they understand us, not to be too
gross, nor to apply this our plain Writings to this or the other subtle
device, that perhaps we never thought of; for I have often known the
soolithness of many on this wise, who having read often that Mercury is the
matter of Metals, presently conclude it to be the subject of our Work, and with
great confidence and equal assurance of their success go to work, and perhaps
endeavor to dissolve it into water, because the Philosophers say their matter
must be dissolved, or to impregnate it with Air, because they say it must be
impregnated with Air, or to Calcine it, they having so read, others to sublime,
Distill, putrify, separate the Elements, and many other foolish endeavors, not
in the least agreeable, but destructive to Nature. Yet seem to justify their
proceedings by our Writings.

Being therefore moved with respect to truth and Love to the sons of Hermetick
Learning; as also with indignation of Error, I will show you wherein you err,
and where you miss the way by thus conceiving. You foolishly and Blindly apply
these Natural Operations of our Work to the preparation of our matters (of
which many Philosophers have Writ but little, making the first the subject of
their Discourse, for their Excellency, as indeed they have been those of their
admiration) and also inconsideratly apprehending the one for the other err most
grossly. For if any attempt that mannually which can only be performed
Naturally, no wonder if they miss of their designed end. Behold I have
faithfully showed you the Truth: and let me assure you, till this one skill be
performed, that is, to distinguish between our natural and manual Operations,
you will be confounded in the writings of the Adepts do what you can. It is
this alone that can enable a Tyro to go on in the pursuit of Diana with courage
and delight, yea it is the very shroud that covers her and hinders the eyes of
the vulgar from beholding her Doves (which are so anxiously sought) and her
beauty that allures the Sun. And truly we cannot but admire the Considence of
some boasting Sophisters, who know not Nature in the least of her Operations,
yet presume to be conversant in the knowledge of this secret Pair; and do
imagine to themselves, and confidently affirm to others they are this or the
other thing, and thus prepared. But remember what the Philosopher said, who
speaks as fully concerning them as any, That no eye but a true Philosophers
ever saw them, but when seen and known this is the effect, according to the
same Philosopher, This one skill performs the Mastery of Theory, enobles a
Philosopher, and unfolds to the knower all our Secrets. By which all may know
whether they conceive aright, for all pretenses or Conceits of the knowledge
thereof, that has not this effect is certainly of no value. And indeed the
secret Doves of our secret Dyana are truly remote from every vulgar eye, her
Fountain and Wood must first be known where they ascend and descend before you
attempt to catch them. Seek then wisely, and when their nest is found, enclose
them with a transparent Wall, so high and close that they cannot escape by
flight, then stir them up, but at first expect only the female who is more
watchful then her Mate, but she will return and bring him also. But know also
that as Art imitates Nature, so do Manual and preparatory work bear great
Analogy with natural and perfect Operations; but that which is effected in the
one Mechanically is lively Acted in the other naturally, even to the
astonishment of the Artist. Therefore once more let me assure the Ingenious
that Philosophers have so jointly spoken of these, which alone covers our
Secrets, that a distinction cannot be made without profound Meditation and
segacious Wit; which no sooner is performed but the Mastery of Theory is
acquired; but till this be attained all Practice is uncertain and to be
shunned; for nothing is more easy then to misinterpret and consequently
misapply our sayings. And although we do say, and that truly and properly,
Distill, Sublime, Calcine, Putrify, Separate and Reconjoyn the Elements, etc.
yet also admonish that our Operations are not vulgar, but secret and truly
Natural, and prrformed in one only Vessel. Therefore let none persuade
themselves, or be persuaded by Roguish Sophisters, (which abounds) contrary to
this.

And truly as our Operations are secret, so are our Agents by which they are
carried on without intermission to their End. For as was said by a knowing
Master, Our Instrument that brings the matter into motion in the first,
second and third work, is not the fire of a Bath, nor Dung nor Ashes, etc.

And therefore, as there are in our Work three Periods or terminations, which
are three Calcinations or Fixations; so likewise every one of them is effected
by its proper Agent, every Termination or Fixation terminating the Action of
its Agent, having performed its Work, as one to kill, another to make alive,
etc. Also these works differ in their Perfections; the first producing
imperfect Saturn, black and foul; the second perfect Luna, white and pure; the
third Ripe Sol, red and permanent.

These things being premised presume I may speak somewhat of our Operations
themselves, without yielding an occasion to any foolishly to endeavor the same
by any vulgar means.

As many therefore as would attain the mastery of our universal Mercury, that
does possess the Virtues of Superior and Inferior, which is the one only
Subject of our Secrets, let them thus proceed.

R. The Venerable matter of Philosophers, called by many Names, Adapt a fit
Vessel, Furnace and Fire according to its necessity; then proceed to
Calcination, which opens the Pores of the Body, being effected by a moist Fire,
or Bath, and not only preserves, but increases radical or natural Moisture, by
which means the Calx is made unctuous, and fit for dissolution; (hence may be
learned the difference between the Operations of the vulgar and ours; for which
of them that vulgarly Operate makes Calcination with a moist Fire, or reduces
the Body or Calx into Attoms as it were impalpable, abounding with humidity,
and therefore easily flowing. We exclude from hence all Corrosive Waters, and
strange Humidities, which the ignorant call moist Fires, being altogether
foreign to our intent) putrify this Calx in a Fire of wet Ashes for forty
days and nights, but let the fire be such that nothing sublime; then Distill it
gently, and according to Hermes separate the subtle from the gross, the Water
from the Earth with great discretion, and thou shall obtain a water of great
force and value, which we call Virgins Milk and Whitening Spirit, and in the
bottom will reside a black earth which is called the Earth that remains;
Cohabate this water so often till Leton is washed, and also dissolved and
become one inseparable with the water, then is the whole compound turned into
Purity without any manual Separation, according to the Philosopher. He that
separates any thing from the subject thinking it to be necessary knows nothing
in Philosophy: For that which is superfluous, unclean, silthy, and feculent, in
sum the whole substance of the subject is perfected into a fixed spiritual body;
and this the wise Men never revealed, therefore few comes to the Art, thinking
that to be some such superfluous and unclean thing. Another also thus Writes,
Wash away the blackness from Leton, not with thy hand, but with the stone or
fire, etc. for this separation of the pure from the impure is not made with
hands but nature her self alone, by working it circularly to perfection brings
it to pass. This Operation is not only called Separation, but also Conversion
of Elements, whereby the Quadrangle is made a Circle, and all truly conjoined,
which indeed is our so much concealed Conjunction, and subject of Wonders,
which now has attained the Superior and Inferior Virtues, of which says
Pontanus Hermes, speak obscurely. Hence forward the work is more easy and
delightful, and the Reward bountiful, if according to Hermes it be made
complete, for, vis ejus est integra si versa fuerit in terram. But this
Operation of Congealation is also Natural which is effected without any
imposition of hands: Therefore let all beware of any other pretense or
Endeavor Contrary to this.

Having taken sufficient care already, and provided against me understanding
these things grossly, need say no more, a word to the wise being sufficient: yet
for the further instruction of a Tyro, let me admonish, that they seek not to
gather Grapes off Thorns, nor Figgs from Thistles, but employ their whole Study
to understand these things Radically. For most certain it is, every Effect has
its Cause, which Cause being unknown, the consequence will be the means to
bring to pass such an effect will be unknown, though the Effect should be
actually seen. For what would any be the wiser should they see the Effect of
our Arcanum upon imperfect Metals, and not apprehend the Cause, they were no
more able to effect it then before. Hence the necessity of understanding the
Generation of this Secret and powerful Agent in the Radix of its Nativity.
Having therefore a desire to benefit the Studious (having already showed above,
that all Generation is, and indeed must be effected by an Homogeneous Agent and
Patient, Seed and Matter, betwixt which a ferment is begot through a special
appetite in them, and through this ferment an offspring is produced according
to the nature of the Seed, etc.) shall for a conclusion descend to the prime
principles of our work. Which Principles indeed are no other then those that
constitute, and every way complete a Metaline Body, viz. Sulphur and Argent
Vive, in both which is a special Appetite. For a pure Mercury greedily coveteth
a pure Sulphur, and a pure Sulphur the Mercury, for the perfection of Mercury
is Sulphur, and the Rest of Sulphur is in Mercury. But be not ignorant that
such a Mercury is only fit for our work, which is really female (void of
Sulphur) otherways the Appetite will be wanting, which (let me persuade) is the
very foundation of our Art. But this appetite is wanting in Common Mercury, as
having a sufficient proportion of Metaline Sulphur, though unactive, by reason of
its being pluct from its Root, and thereby become dead, and therefore not fit
for the stirring up this first Ferment, tho when the Ferment is once stirred
up, it is then capable of being fermented. Also our Sulphur is a pure active
Sulphur (when a pure Mercury is the subject of its action) Capable to effect
what is desired by Mercury. And truly where things are thus qualified, their
embraces are effectual, and their Union easy and speedy. But beware of common
Sulphur, which in no wise is fit for our intent, being an Enemy to Metaline
love; capable indeed of viciating, but not really marrying a Virgin Mercury;
but being ambitious and powerful enough to compel, usurpes the Throne, and
truly possesses the same in peace, till the right Heir comes, which is
stronger then he, who dispossesseth and casts him out, and takes possession
himself. Let thy first work therefore in practice be to assist the right Heir,
who when he possesses his Throne will recompense thee with the gift of
Harmonia.

Hence with ease and advantage may be learned, not only how our subjects are
said to be living, but how they become so, and also what good reason
Philosophers have so to call them: not that they are matters taken from any
Animal (as some grossly think much to their own, and those they persuades
damage) but are become such through the Ferment their appetite have produced
and Created. No other life is found in Metals, Minerals and Vegitables; Neither
is it possible to communicate the Life or Ferment of one to the other, by
reason, as is showed above, of their difference in matter, all true Ferments
requiring an Homogeneity between Agent and Patient. Whosoever therefore shall
Meditate well on these, and see their Harmony with true men's Writings, shall
certainly gain this, viz. be preserved from the absurd and chargeable
Experiments daily practiced by the foolish and inconsiderate Operators; and
also from being imposed on by ignorant and deceitful men; who propose to make
this our so highly prized Arcanum from almost every thing, yea such things that
have no unity with Metals, yet nothing less then a perfect Metaline Tincture is
to be produced. O deep ignorance! O vain attempts! justly rewarded by nature
with scorn, and by her sons detested with the highest Derision. Could they but
remember by whom it was said, such as men Sow, such usust they Reap: and as God
will not be mocked, so neither will Nature. Wherefore if thy intention be to
exalt a Metal in virtue beyond what nature has done, thou must take a Metaline
nature, both in male and female, or thy endeavor will be vain, and the end
Fruitless.

Seek therefore with all thy Industry, this secret fermental Virtue, which is
begot between our secret active sulphur (which is our Fire) and our Air, yea
our congealed Air, which is the covering of this secret spirit, which is better
then all the Earth; this is our green Lion and Sal Armoniack, which alone is
able to warm, purge, and enliven the Water of our Balneum.

How this does accord with the Operations of Nature may easily be learned, if
we take an Observation of her procedure therein. Does not the heavenly
influences impregnate the Air with a secret Spirit of Life, which then is
communicated to the Water which brings them to the Earth, by which the secret
Life of Seeds, contained in the Matrix thereof through Putrefaction are set at
Liberty, and by their fermental virtue Coagulates the Water into its own Nature
multiplying its Species thereby, it being its proper matter. This is our whole
Work, this our whole Philosophy, which furnishes the Possessor with health and
Riches.

But the Wise men make not these things (though truly excellent) the bound of
their search, but with Solomon say, how much better it is to get wisdom then
Gold, and understanding rather then fine silver. For what would it profit in
the end if a man should obtain the knowledge of the Vein for Silver, and know
also the place where they fine Gold; and that out of the Earth comes bread,
and under it is turned up, as it were fire; and that the stones of it are as
Sapphire, and that it has dust of Gold; together with all the mysteries
thereof, and yet not know the place of understanding; and remain ignorant of
the Wisdom of God, surely the same dumbness that possessed Job, (after he had
gone thus far) would fall upon that Tongue when God shall plead; and when the
great Creator of every thing, and knower of every secret Corner shall Reason?

Therefore above all get understanding, and wisdom pursue with all thy power:
But the heart is not capable to possess wisdom, nor the breast to Treasure up
understanding, till the Cup of Water colloured with Fire be received from the
hand of God. My heart truly is moved with these things, and my spirit beats in
my Breast with which I magnify the great Creator; Yea let all the people
Praise him, and all the Host of Heaven magnify his holy strength; yea praise
ye him, Sun, Moon and Stars, Fire, Hail and Snow; for his Mercy endures for
ever, and is over all his works; who was, is, and is to come.

And now let me take my leave of the studious sons of Hermes, having showed my
Brotherly love in thus Heartily writing; which will be justified by the
knowing, and serviceable to the honest and ingenuous, but to the foolish who
will apply our plain Discourse to their own whimsies and foolish conceptions,
unprofitable. If any inquire who I am, be thus Answered I am too public to be
known, too private to be inquired after and too quick footed to be pursued: Yet
also so near as to behold, with pity as well as admiration, the foolish
endeavors and conceited knowledge of many; for whose Instruction and
Information I have written this short and candid Piece; and thus held forth my
Brotherly hand of help.

As many therefore, as expect a Reward of their Labor and study in this
Science, I shall Recommend to the Teachings of the great Master, and strict Law
of nature; without which ^o approaching this Mystery.

Farewell.

EYRENAEUS PHILOCTETES.
Written in the Year 1691.

