The Picture of the Good Old Cause drawn to the Life In the Effigies of Master
PRAIS-GOD BAREBONE. Several Examples of Gods Judgments on some Eminent
Engagers against Kingly Government.
The Portraiture of Mr Praise God Barebone



1. Dorislaus, one that had a great hand in the Kings murder, was stabbed at
the Hague in March 1649. when he was sent to treat with the Dutch in the name
of the Free State or Commonwealth of England.

2. Anthony Ascham served in the like manner at Madrid in Spain, near the same
time, being sent from the Rump on the like errand.

3. Milton that writ two Books against the Kings, and Salmasius his Defense of
Kings, struck totally blind, he being not much above 40. years old.

4. Alderman Hoyle of York, one of the Juncto, and high Court of Justice, and
(though he signed not the Kings Sentence) the same day twelve month, the King
was murdered, hanged himself in his Chamber at Westminster.

5. Sir Gregory Norton died raving mad, which by his Physicians was not imputed
to the distemper of his body, but a troubled, disquieted mind; He was one of
the Kings Judges.

6. Lockier, once an Agitator in the Army, at his late Majesty's pretended
Trial, spit Jew-like in the Kings Face, and likewise blew Tobacco-Ashes upon
him; Afterward turned Leveller, and was shot to death by his Fellow-Rogues in
Saint Paul's Churchyard.

7. Colonel Ven, a Citizen of London, formerly a great Professor of Religion,
but turned with the Times, was a Member of the Rump, a great Engager against
Kingly Government, on July the 7. 1650. He going to bed as perfectly well and
in health, as ever in his life, his Wife lying by him, he fell asleep by her
immediately, and slept soundly without complaint of the least distemper, but
the next morning about 6 a Clock, his Wife found him stark dead by her, never
having made the least groan, or spoken one word to her since the day before;
and thus God banished him first out of the Land of the Living.

Many more instances may be given, but I am loath to be too tedious.

OUr late modern Saints (as if Guy Fawkes stood for a Lubber in our English
Calender) have canonized themselves in such a Rebrick of blood, that the very
Enemies of Christian Religion would have relented at, and meet humanity
regretted: such an universal quarrel against Government, Order, all Divine
Institution, such impudent affront and bold contempt of Authority, and the
Sacred Majesty of Kings was never before heard of. Nor did the most desperate
Heretics, (no not that accursed Munster crew,) or the most savage Heathen
ever design or attempt the quarter of the Villainies committed by our godly
party within this 20. years: Insomuch, that they have brought not only the
Protestant Catholic Religion, but the very Christian Faith, Divine Truth it
self, to contempt and derision.

Neither have they palliated only these audacious facinorous Practices under
the disguise of religion, but avowedly maintained their destructive Principles
to be consistent and agreeable with it, and entitled God and his Providence to
all their most Horrid and execrable actions, daring the Face of the Sun with
their Egyptian darkness, and crying liberty and reformation, when there was
nothing but slavery and confusion.

The praeludium of these mischeifs, was begun by the zealous Puritans, they
quarrel at the Bishops Surplices, and Lawn-sleeves, and their sacrilegious
brood strip them of their very shirts, and rob God and the Church of its
revenue, and his Ministers of all manner of subsistence. From hence came the
Title of gifted Brethren; when a prevailing corrupt party of the late long
parliament divided the spoils of the Church among their Corahs and Abirams: it
was the corban of Religion that furnished our Holders forth with canting and
juggling Doctrines and Uses.

We had also some of a higher form, the Brethren that were above Ordinances,
people inspired as full of devilish Revelations as any blown bladder; this was
the seventh Son, the lastand worst Devil, the very express image and picture of
a Nonconformist, that could do miracles, all but blowing wind in the Rump to
have preserved it from perishing.

The Person presented here to your view, is one, or rather all of these sorts,
that have so much infested and infamed our Age and Country, was a dispenser
during the persecution of the Bishops, (as they called it) when Truth ran into
their corners, and could never be seen again among them, and Satan learnt them
Profession was as convenient. Yea verily beloved, this is he, although he look
like a simple skin, he is a Wolf in sheeps clothing, a hide bound covetous
Leatherseller, but has a Conscience as wide as his windows, when it raind
stones into them at the funeral Pile of the Rump. You would take his cloudy
face for a vizard if you knew not his black soul within him, and that Nature
did her best in it to express him to the life. I cannot better pourtrait his
mind then by the ensuing Petition, where you will find the substance and
abridgement of Puritanisme in its natural and complete dress, and this was the
Embrio and base issue of his Traiterous design.

Mr. PRAISE-GOD BAREBONE his Petition, as it was presented to the
Rump-Parliament, Thursday the ninth of February, 1659. In behalf of himself and
many Thousands. With their Answer thereunto.
To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. The Representation and
address of the Well-affected Persons, Inhabitants of the Cities of London and
Westminster, and places adjacent, being faithful and constant Adherers to this
Parliament, who are resolved (by the assistance of Almighty God) to stand by,
assert and maintain their Authority, against all Opposers, notwithstanding the
present confidence and bold attempts of the Promoters of Regal Interest, by the
declared Enemies of their Cause and Authority.
WHereas the good Old Cause was for Civil and Christian Liberty against
Oppression and Persecution; the Oppressors and Persecutors were chiefly the
King, his Lords, and Clergy, and their Adherents; who to effect their Designs,
raised War against the Parliament: whereupon the Parliament in defense of Civil
and Christian Liberty, call the oppressed and persecuted to their aid, by whose
assistance the oppressors and persecutors have been subdued, Kingship and
Peerage abolished, and Persecution checked; by which, the number of
conscientious friends to the Parliament have been so exceedingly increased,
that they are now (by Gods assistance) in a far more able capacity of keeping
down their Enemies, then they were in those times when they subdued them.

Nevertheless, so watchful has the restless Enemy been to make advantage, that
what (time after time) he has lost in the Field, he has endeavored to
regain, even in the Parliaments Council. Where, because they had not the Face
openly to bring in the King, with the former Oppressions and persecutions, they
Shrouded and Veiled themselves, one while under a Personal Treaty; Another
while, under a Cloak of Zeal against Blasphemy and Heresy; their endeavor
being to bring in the King upon any terms; to cherish the persecuting Party,
and to Brow-beat their most conscientious Opposers.

Upon which pretenses, nevertheless they have through tract of Time, and the
unsettledness of Government, prevailed so far, as under the Notion of a
Moderate party, to get the subtillest of their Friends into many places of
Trust and Command both Civil and Military; through whose countenance and
encouragement, albeit the Parliament upon good grounds Voted the Government by
Kings and Lords, useless, burdensome and dangerous, and declare very largely
for Liberty of Conscience; yet of late, a general boldness has bin taken to
plead a necessity of returning to the Government of King and Lords, a taking in
of the Kings Son, or which is all one, for a return of the justly secluded
Members, or a Free Parliament, without due Qualifications, whereby the good Old
Cause of Liberty and Freedom (so long contended for, against Regal Interest,
with the expense of much blood and Treasure) and the Assertors thereof will be
prostituted to satisfy the Lusts of the Enemies of the Commonwealth; wherein
they have prevailed) so far, that unless all conscientious persons in
Parliament, Army, Navy, and Commonwealth, do speedily unite, and watchfully
look about them; as the Sword will certainly (though secretly and silently) be
stolen out of their hands, so also will they find all Civil Authority fall
suddenly into the hands of their enraged Enemies, and a return of all those
Violences, Oppressions and Persecutions, which have cost so much Blood and
Treasure to extirpate.

The serious apprehensions whereof has stirred up your cordial Friends to
desire you to use all possible endeavors to prevent the Commonwealths
Adversaries in this their most dangerous Stratagem; And as the most effectual
means thereunto. We pray,

1. That you will admit no person or persons to sit or Vote in this, or any
future Parliament or Council of State, or to be in any Office or Judicatory, or
any public Trust in the Commonwealth, or Command in the Army, Navy, or
Garrisons, or to be a public Preacher to the people at Sea or Land, or any
Instructor of Youth except such only as shall abjure, or by Solemn Engagement
renounce the pretended Title or Titles of Charles Stuart, and the whole Line of
the late King James and of every other person as a single person pretending, or
which shall pretend to the Crown or Government of these Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, or any of them, and the Dominions and Territories
belonging to them, or any of them, or any other single person, Kingship
Peerage, or any power coordinate with the peoples Representives in Parliament;
And all coercive power in matter of Religion, according to a Vote of a Grand
Committee of the 11. of September, 1659.

2. We further pray, that it may be Enacted. That whosoever shall move, offer,
or propound in Parliament, Council or in any other Court or Public Meeting,
any matter or thing in order to the introducing of Charles Stuarts, or any of
that Family, as aforesaid; or any other single Person, House of Lords coercive
power in matter of Religion, or any power coordinate are with the peoples
Representatatives in Parliament, may be deemed and adjudged guilty of high
Treason, and many suffer the pains and penalty thereof. And that whosoever
shall in Parliament, Council, or any other public Court, or Meeting, move
for, or propose the Revocation of this Law (when by you enacted) may be deemed
and judged guilty of high Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties thereof.

In prosection whereof, we shall stand by you with our Estates and Lives, to
assert and maintain your Authority against all Oppositions whatsoever,
notwithstanding the present Confidence and bold Attempts of yours and our
Enemies.

Signed Praise-God Barebone, with the promise of the Subscriptions of many
Thousands.

Resolved by the Parliament, that the Petitioners have the Thanks of the House
for uheir Expressions of their good Affections to the Parliament.

The Petitioners being again called in, M. Speaker gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen, The House have read your Petition, and they do find that you have
been such as have constantly born them good Affections, and that your
Affections are the same still: and for the Expressions of your good Affections,
the House has commanded me to give you Thanks, in their Names I do give you
Thanks, accordingly.

It is desired, That all such as are Lovers of the Good Old Cause, do send in
their Subscriptions to this Petition, unto the place appointed in those Papers
that come to their Hands: Yea, and with all the speed that may be, to testify
their Zeal to the Good Old Cause, by their being in readiness to assert it.

See here the Quintessence of Treason not to be paralleled in any times or
persons, but this did King James prophetically intimate in that usual Saying of
his no Bishop, no King, as also is to be seen in his (...) directed to his Son
Hen. Prince of Wales. In King James's Basileon Doron, in these words he advises
his Son, p. 41. 42. Take heed therefore my Son of these Puritans, the very
Pests in the Church and Commonwealth, whom no deserts can oblige, neither
Oaths nor promises bind, breathing nothing but Sedition and Calumnies, aspiring
without measure, railing without reason, and making their own imaginations
(without any warrant of the word,) the Square of their Conscience.

I protest before the great God (and since I am here, as upon my Testament, it
is no place for me to lie in) that you shall never find with any High-land or
Border-Theeves greater ingratitude, and more lies and viler perjuries, then
among these PHANATICK Spirits, and suffer not the Principals of them to brook
your Land, if you list to sit at rest, except you would keep them for trying
your patience, as Socrates did an evil wise, and in p. 40. He says, I was
often calumniated in their popular Sermons: Not for any vice or evil that was
in me, But because I was a King, which to them is the highest evil.

It Is not to be doubted, that any the most specious Pretenses of Religion, any
seeming extraordinary piety shall ever be able to shake our Allegiance; or that
late posterity will not with Horror and Amazement read the History of our Age,
and yet it is questionable whether they will wonder more at these men's
Treasons, and detestable Impieies, or his most Sacred Majesty's Mercy and
Clemency afforded in his General Pardon, to which this wretch has already
betaken himself.

London, Printed, And are to be sold at diverse Booksellers Shops, 1660.


