This may be Printed.

Aug. 13. 1687.

R. P.

A New Fairing FOR The Merrily Disposed: Or, the Comical HISTORY Of the Famous
MERRY ANDREW, W. PHILL --. GIVING AN ACCOUNT OF HIS Pleasant Humors, Various
Adventures, Cheats, Frolicks, and Cunning Designs


Both in City and Country.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wallis, and Sold by most Booksellers. 1688.

THE INTRODUCTION TO THE READER.
IF Merriment and Good Humor have their share in thy Composition, I here
present thee with an Entertainment whol^y J^cose, which will tickle thy Spleen,
yet raise no rebellious Passions with the most passionate Expressions; but lest
the biting of this Tarantula should make thee Dye with Laughter, I have
introduced a Crowder whose Harmonious Phancies are able to allay thy most
Extravegant Mirth. The Subject of this Discourse was a Person who had Mercury
for his Ascendant in Conjunction with Venus, which rendered him Witty and
Amorous, whose Power influenced his whole Life with the constant Intrigues of
Love and Design.

He was the famous DROLL of his Time, whose Reputation since has given Name to
all his Successors, and will Flourish in the World till Shows are out of date,
and Bartholomew-Fair it self swallowed up in Oblivion. His part was to Act,
whilst they who thought themselves wiser Men, only played the Fool. His Name is
called Merry Andrew, I here give no Account of his Genealogy ^^r do I know what
Relation he had to a Saint of that Name, more than that as you find in the
following Account, he never quitted a Place but he left a Cross behind him.

As to the other Excellencies of his parts, besides his Wit, I can say little
to 'em, though I believe him not unskilful in Politics, by the several Doubles
he makes through the whole Course of his Adventures; and had he Lived in the
Age when Caligula made bis Horse a Consul, he could not have missed of
Secretary of State.

I must Confess here are no eminent displayes of bis Courage, though I believe
it was keen as Mustard, of which we should not have wanted some proofs, had he
lived in a Country as fertile in Giants as other Regions are faim'd: For he was
a Tarlton upon the Stage, Roscius in his Mimicks, in his plots a Guzman, and if
the first Inventor of a Rat-Trap by the Cathinthians, had an Obelesk erected to
his memory, his great Efforts of Wit deserved a Pyramid for his Monument. In
short, he was a Person of (...) those prodigious Parts that I question whether
the Wit of Ten Men could compose a Fool like him.

I shall be no longer thy Remora from Enjoying this great Cargoe of Wit and
Humor, but take Leave in his Common Phrase of Invitation:

Pray Gentlemen walk in, for now we are ready to begin.

A New Fairing for the Merrily Disposed, etc.
WILLIAM the Subject of this Discourse was Born in a Dark Entry, near Rose
Mary-Lane, the House being obscure his Birth was no ways Remarkable, more than
that his Mother lost a Father for her Child before he came into the World; But
to avoid mistakes, he was got in the state of Wedlock. Nature ripened in him
apace, for he was a Man of Art at Twelve Years Old, and could mend the
Seam-rips of any man's habiliments: but that was but a Cloud to his inward
Virtues, and soon was blown off. Now he is clim'd up to a Man, and only wants
Business to show himself, so that one Day being encumbered with Idleness, he
resolves to Divert his vacant Hours, but by what means he was doubtful, at last
his thoughts running the Summerset, he jumpt upon this Conceit, which was to go
take the Air, or as the Old Wife says, walk a making Loyter-Pins, and Tempt
Fortune for some Lucky Adventure, but could not pitch upon any particular
place; by which you may guess he had no State Affairs in his head, yet at last
he thought of St. James's Park, Gray's Inn Walks, Lambs-Counduit Fields, being
places where Gentlemen sometimes pass o'r their idle hours, yet none of these
did agree with his Inclination, but shapes his Course for another part of the
Town more remote, concluding with himself that the Borough of Southwark is the
most proper Scene for a new Design, because not far from the Bear-Garden, yet
too near the Marshalsey's. All Difficulties laid aside, ever the Bridge he
stalked, and with twenty gasings and some few stops, he weathers the point of
St. Margarets Hill, where on a sudded tossing up his Eyes, they were caught by
a M^untebanks Stage, surrounded by a Regiment of such Volunteers as himself,
though they were of all sorts Male and Female, amongst which Crowd stood an Old
Fish Wife, looking attentively toward the Stage, her Mouth as wide open as a
gaping Oyster barrel. William seeing her, stoops down and picks up two or three
Oyster-shells, then taking his opportunity, chucks them into her Mouth, well
plumpt Cries the by-standing boys: she starts shutting her mouth, the shells
set her Chops a bleeding, and before she could put her tongue in a posture to
scold, he slips into another part of the Throng, but as he past along he spies
a gouty Shopkeeper, being a Crimpling Spectator, and very careful of his Feet,
yet William without any remorse makes a false step upon his Toes, at which he
roars out, down tumbles Will. and shoots himself into a fresh quarter of the
People, at that instant one comes Jack Pudding, roaring in his party colored
Clothes, and his Flat Cap like a pyde Bull with his Horns sawed off, where
after a quarter of an hours impudent ignorance, spoken in all the absurd and
balderdash ways that could be, the famous Operator appears, after twenty sower
Faces and Iousie shrugs, he begins to accost the Mobile: Good People, and so
runs on in a large Lying Oration; but when he came to the second repeating of
his Destructives Remedy, says he, I come for all your Goods, that is a Lie, says
William, for half of us don't believe you. The Doctor replies, Friend where do
you Live, that thus dares to interrupt me, why says William, I live in Whore
and Bastard Lane, next door to your Mothers, Sirrah, replied the Quack, your
Manners is worn out, and cannot be mended but at the Carts-Arse; nor your
Honesty and Skill known says William, till you look through a wooden-hole
Casement for a Cheat, Sirrah, Sirrah, cries Jack Pudding, I Will silence you
strait; with that William steps to a Woman that sold Dumplings, Mother says he,
Mr. Pudding sent me for a Dumpling, how shall I know that says she? you shall
see me deliver it says William; she gives him one, he goes to the corner of the
Stage, and when the Fool was in the height of his Ribbaldry, William hits him
in the Mouth with a Dumpling, some of the hot Liquor flying in his Eyes; he
howled, the Doctor stamped, there was Mirth and Vexation mixed to the general
Satisfaction of the Spectators; when the Rabble had laughed till their Follies
were weary; the Fool swore, the Quack fretted, and both wished themselves a
hundred miles off: William in a by-corner had made a party of two-leg'd Brutes,
such as frequent those Meetings, and came to the front of the Stage, where he
demanded money for the Dumpling: The soberer sort expected to have seen him
been beaten, or seized by a Constable but when the Mountebank threatened,
Williams Crew bawled out, down with the Stage, down with the Stage, which the
Doctor hearing, commanded them to keep Peace: At last, after several
Extravagancies more between William and them, the Doctor came to a parley and
entreated a fair Accommodation, which after various Disputes on either side was
agreed to: William asked leave to mount the Bank, to be a Spectator there,
which was willingly allowed. He behaved himself so wittily amongst them, with
his sly Tricks and blunt Jokes, that the Mountebank courted him to come and
serve him; William stood not much upon Punctilio's, considering his present
Condition: A Bargain was struck for seven shillings a week, and by that time
seven weeks were run away, William had made himself famous, insomuch that his
Master parts with his old Fool, for a new Knave, and quitting that Station,
betakes himself to the Country; where William is expected to unfold his most
taking and waggish Parts, to make Robin and Joan bepiss themselves, all which
he did; and to add to their Delight, he made a Christning, and invited all
there present, and as many more as they could draggle along with them the next
Market Day to it. The day came, a great Concourse of Country Hicks and Megs
appear, in the Crowd William espied the Hangman and a Sergeant of the
Corporation not far from the Stage, he sets a fellow or two and some of the
Boys together by the Ears, then comes running out, and craves their help to
part them, which they very readily did; for which kindness he invited them upon
the Stage, where also was the Jaylors Wife, to see a strange Operation on a
Child's Naturals. So they being all together, he standing between them; takes
one in one hand, and another in the other, and told the People that he had
lived an Anabaptist ever since he came to his Master, and now being able to
Answer for himself, made bold with these Friends to be his Gossips, and the
Name I take is Merry Andrew. With that there was a Shout, the Sergeant bit his
Nails, the Hangman stormed, the Jaylors Wife exalted her Voice, which the
Rabble perceiving, they fell a pelting. William slipped behind the Cloth, the
Gossips tumbled off the Stage to escape the showrs of Turnip Tops, Stones,
Dirt, and what they could find to let them fly at them; the Fray being ended,
William told them as they liked this, they might come the next day to the
Gossipping, and so took his leave of them.

Now you have seen William transformed into Andrew. By the way of digression, I
am to tell you, the Doctor being a Man of Frailties, contracted a Friendship,
or Marriage with a handsome accepting Sinner; it was as Tying and Religious as
Andrews Christ'ning, but you know Friendship's a strange Obligation. This she
Partner was Argously watched by our Mountebank, and for his farther Security,
he enjoined her, whenever he was on the Stage (his Lodging being opposite to
it) to stand at her window with a Vizard on, which she performed with
diligence: Yet she was not so warm to him, as to be Ice to all others; for I
must give you to understand, that Andrews many conceited Pranks had begot in
her a likeing to his Person, as well as Parts, nor was he so dull or blind, but
he could look through the Longings and Likeings of his titular Mistress; nor
did he intend to let the Game pass by him, when he might stand in the Gap and
stop it for his own Pleasure. So without any further Circumstance, he puts his
Intentions in Execution, and in few days found his Design take. She was
absolutely willing, and nothing but Convenience of time and place wanting,
which he undertook to compass. On a day when Andrew by his Officiousness and
Jollity of Humor, had drawn a vast Audience before him, taking the advantage of
the Doctors being busy in delivering out his Medecines, he whispers in one of
the fellows Ears, I Am troubled with the Gripes, if the Doctor ask for me, tell
him so; when stepping home he met the Maid of the house, being one whom he use
to toy with, I Will lay thee a Shilling Doll, says he, that you don't stand a
quarter of an hour looking out of our Window, with this Mask on; Done, cries
Doll. not guessing at his purpose: Up he brings her, and when he saw his Master
turn about to take a Packet, he gives his Mistress a pull, and thrust Doll to
the Casement. You may imagine the Came was not long a playing, they having so
few Cards to deal. When done, Andrew repairs to the Bank with many a Crab-look,
how now Andrew' says the Doctor, are thy Gripes off? Oh! Sir, said Andrew, I
thought one of my Puddings had been coming out, qut afer half a dozen strains
it shrunk back again into my Belly. I believe Nature was over charged, it is
well Andrew, said the Dr. it went off so quick. Now eave we them, and go back
to Doll. she being intent of winning her Weager, never minded what they did;
when Andrew was gone, the Mistress pulls Doll away, Oh! cries she, I will not
loose my Shilling, are these your Tricks to save Andrew's Money? this is foul
play, I will be judged by the Doctor else, which startled the Lady so much,
that she flung the Maid a Shilling, and bid her pay Andrew if he claimed it, if
not, keep it for her self. Doll hearing this, went away very well pleased.

You have seen what a Progcess Andrew has made at his first Entrance on the
Stage of the World, Extravagance was his Introduction, and as wildly he pursued
it through the continued Course of his adventurous Life; for having debauched
his Mistress, his Appetite grew dull, fresh matter must be found for his
changeable Genius to work upon. It so fell out, that the Landlady where they
lay had a Daughter tempting enough, yet not over laded with Virtue, as it was
imagined by Andrew, her Name is Isabel. To her Andrew lays Siege to her, but it
was beat off with much loss of time: Then, as Envy enters old Women, and so
they become Witches: so Revenge steps in, with his new slighted Passions; he
casts about how to put a Trick upon her, that the Town might ring of her
Miscarriage. And as he was meditating in a low Room about the Project, Isbel
passed by the Window, whom he calls to him, and very gravely entreated her to
fasten his Crevat-string: she came to the Window, putting in her hands on each
side the Bar, he caught fast hold of her Arms, and with a Napkin he had in his
Hand, tied them together within; then putting his hand over her, plucked up her
Coats, and pinned them to her Back, she struggling to get loose discovered bare
both fore and aft. Away got he, and in comes a Stage-Coach with Travelers, who
lighting and seeing Isbel stand so, thought she was to have suffered the Lash:
One of the Maids coming out, espied her, and runs and hides her Posteriors,
whilst another within set her at Liberty. The Boys grinn'd, the Women smiled
with a cast-down look, the men as you may guess laughed out aloud, and you may
easily imagine that all the Effects of Rage and Fury reigned in our thus
affronted Isabel: But the first Effects are brought forth in Tears, the common
Expressions of women's Grief; in this Flood of Dolor, her Sweetheart coming
in, was surpised at the running over of the Springs, her Eyes; whom she
perceiving through her watery Prospect, nothing but Death could be her Comfort.
Andrew standing privately above in the Gallery, saw their Meeting, and throws
down a Chamber Pot upon them both, and then conveys himself away so
clandestinely, that he was not discovered. They immediately wiping themselves,
begin to enquire who it was that had served them so: No body was suspected, nor
any one owning it, it showed that one Cross was the forerunner of another; they
withdrew into a by Room, to have a full Hearing of their former Misfortunes,
and to consider who this was that had watered them with the Piss-pot; after
many Arguments between them, they vow a Secret Revenge to Andrew; for you must
know, the Lover was Valiant in nothing but in Protestation of his Affections to
her, and that he might the better apply some Comfort to her afflicted Spirits,
he (with a bundle of Oaths to be true) obtains a Grant of Enjoying that Trifle,
which ignorant young Folks think a Blessing, but find a Cross all their life
time after; an hour hence in the Hen-Roost is thougth the most convenient time
and place, where the Battle of Love and Lust may be fought, besides it would be
then dark, for they durst not trust themselves in the House. Andrew having been
smartly employed with a Country Fellow about the Toothache, and finding the
dull Clod of Earth softened for any Impression; first pulls out the Tooth, then
tells him to be sure never to have it again, is to have a hole bored through
his left Ear: The Dunce contented to have it done on the Stage for a famous
Operation. Andrew to make the People merry, and do the Fool not much hurt,
whips a hot Iron through his Ear, washes it a little, then puts as big a
Padlock on it as he could get the Hasps in; telling he must appear with it six
Market Days, and never leave it till the time's expired, which he promised to
do accordingly, and so Andrew dismissed him. Being afterward invited to a
Jovial Dames House, to meet some mad Wenches at a Supper; he to increase the
Feast, comes home, and thinking of his Landladies Poultrey, resolves to make
more room in the Roost, by picking out a Couple of fat Pullets, which he
thought would be acceptable to the Company he was to meet: Making an Excuse to
go to the House of Evacuation, in order to his being more near to the Covey he
was to plunder; a small time it was, but enough for him who wanted a Load, more
than to lighten himself. He was forced to mount a Ladder at the end of a Barn
joining to the Garden, to accomplish his Ends: up he creeps, and goes,
carefully and softly in, lays hold of a Fowl, and jerks off her head, and
crossing over to feel for another, tumbles down; the first thing he felt was a
bare Thigh of Isabells, she durst not Cry out, nor Andrew make a Noise fearing
he should lose his Hen, he groaping, found that the Beast with two Backs had
been made there; and by the mutter of their Voices knew 'twas Isabell and her
Enamorado. Down got he and removes the Ladder, and away he highs to the Gang
that waited his coming, leaving the Affrighted Couple to perch there till
Morning; but by the help of the Ostler coming for Hay they got down; and stole
into their Lodging undiscovered; the Secret remaining in his Discretion which
for that time did not come out.

Andrew has now forgot where he left his frighted Isabel, and is wholly intent
to the present frolicks. The Music played, the Lasses are tugged, the Men
drunk, and the Married Women jolly, all turned into a Chaos and Confusion of
Humors. At last the dreadful sound comes, What Is to Pay? Andrew starts up, Not
a Man pays a farthing here but me. A Loving Soul crowds half a Crown into his
hand, a Half-Seas man's Wife treads on his Toes and palms him Two Shillings,
Another beckons him into a Corner, where he gives her a Token of his Kindness,
and she pop for pop, pops him a George, She being the only sweet Soul amongst
them all. The Men scorning to suffer him to Treat them and their Wifes, throw
down the Reckoning.

Friends (Cried he) you may come to repent of this hasty parting with your
Money; No not they, they Answered with an Oath. Andrew gathers up all the
Money, Well Friends (says he) I Will have the honor of paying the House, with
all their hearts, he put a health about, and goes down Stayrs, and marches off
with all the Money. They beginning to be Cloyd with Drink, Enquire for Andrew,
but he is not to be found, Well, come, let us go then, Who pays? (says the
Hostess) Mr. Andrew, replied the Women, He is gone (says she) and not paid a
Penny: At that word there was a general silence through the whole Assembly; a
thing to be wondered at considering what was done, and what they had been doing.
But after diverse angry postures amongst the Men, Women, and Maids, of
scratching their Elbows, Buttocks and Flancks; a smart Lass that had a Violent
Itching for Andrew, broke out of the Dumb Astonishment, and says, this is a
Device of his, to make us Laugh another Time, let us free our selves now, and
cry quittance with him when we next get him at advantage. The motion took, by
reason the Women were too Drunk to scold, and the Men besotted with the
Surprise. So a Common-Purse was made, the Hostess Discharged, and they went
staggering home to Sleep, and never Dreamt how they should come by their Money
again.

Andrew went to his Quarters, the Ostler being his great Crony, he up and told
him what he had done; and they were both pleased with the Slur which he had put
upon them.

In return of Andrew's Relation, the Ostler acquaints him with the Condition he
found Isabel and her Unfortunate Friend in, and what Room he lay: The Devil
straight enters Andrew, and out he goes; At the Gate lived a Butcher who had
killed some Sheep for the Market four miles off, and had hung One up by the
Gambrells at his Door. Andrew fetched a Trunk which he used to shoot Pease with
at the Boys, puts that through a hole into the Shop, and blows out the Candle;
then takes the whole Sheep on his back, and carries it softly up into the young
man's Chamber; where he was fast a-sleep in his Bed, he lays the dead Sheep by
him, and goes his way into the next Room, where the Ostler and he sit down to
watch what would become of the Mutton. The Spark waking finds something lies
heavy by him, Jostles it, but could not make it stir, putting out his hand to
feel what it was, feels the cold skin of the flead Sheep, when whipping in his
hand again he falls to Prayers, shivering and shaking, but turning about to
cover his Head, hits his hand against the Nose; Ah Lord! cries he, stark Dead!
and fell a Groaning most Dreadfully. Over joy'd with this Account, away goes
Andrew and the Ostler, and leaves him in this pitious Condition.

At Break of Day Andrew goes down, where he heard the Butcher Cursing and
Swearing, That some Damned Rogue had stolen a whole Sheep from him. Andrew
putting his Face into the most dissembling Figure he could, seemingly Pitties
him, though inwardly tickled with this Exploit, Neighbor (says he) come along
with me, I had a certain Vision in my Sleep, and me thoughts I saw your Mutton
lie on a Bed in our Inn. Let Us go see up Stayrs, they went, where without any
difficulty the lost sheep was found; the Merchant half stewed in his own Liquor
was examind'd, the Fright keeping him shaking, rendered him the more suspected;
upon which in down right terms he was charged with the Theft. Andrew upbraids
him, the Ostler carries a double Face, and both sweetens and pinches. Before
this was all made out and cleared the Doctor removes his Station to the Borders
of Scotland, where Andrew's Familiarity with his Mistress and many other
Rogueries were discovered, for which he was turned away, and left to juggle
himself to London again if he could.

His Master and he being parted, the Northern Air being somewhat too cold for
his Constitution, he was resolved to change the Climate, preparing to Steer his
Course Eastward, to the Metropolitan City of London; which had been the place
of his Nativity, and former abode: and accordingly over night took leave of his
Landlady, intending next morning to be making forward on his Journey. Sitting
by the Fire and casting his Eyes downwards upon his Carriers, he spies a poor
fleeting Sole which by violent Storms and foul weather was just wrackt from the
upper Leather; with that, fetching a deep sigh, and considering the many weary
steps he had to make before he should arrive at his wished for Post, he thought
it fit that such Faults should be amended; with that after having desired his
Landlady to fetch a Flagon of Ale, he prays the Maid of the House to carry his
Shoe to the Cobblers, which accordingly was done, she speaking to him to under
lay it, which he very decently performed.

Having taken leave of his Landlady, and paid for his Drink, he retires to his
Chamber to consult with his Pillow, what course he should take for money to
defray his Traveling Charges; having now but ten pence half penny left. Coming
into his Chamber he begins to pack up all his Impliments, which indeed neither
required Trunk nor Box to hold them; since a large Pocket, or a sheet of Paper
would have enclosed all: he having little else, but some small Pots of
Medicines which he had pilfred from his Master, thinking that at one time or
another in his Travels he might with them deceive some ignorant Country Boor.
He then going to Bed, where lying all night and dreaming of his Pilgrimage: In
the Morning he wakes, and getting up, prepares himself for a March: In comes
the Cobblers Boy, desiring Money for his Master for mending his Shoes; Prithee,
says he to the Boy, tell me what is it that thy Master has done for me? Indeed
Sir says the Boy, I cannot tell, then pray go back to thy Master, and desire if
he intends to be paid, to fend me a Bill for what; the the Cobbler immediately
hearing of his Answer, posts to the Clerk of the Town, and tells him that Merry
Andrew was going from his Master, and would not pay him for his Work, unless he
sent him in a Bill; therefore humbly entreats him, to be so kind to draw it up
for him. which the Clerk as willingly performed. The Bill immediately was sent
to Merry Andrew, who reading over, found it to be to this Effect.

Mr. Andrews Bill.
l s d For an Underlay 00 00 01 For Sprigs to fasten the Heel 00 00 00 In all
00 00 01

Andrew considering with himself, and smiling, Orders the Boy to bid his Master
come to him, for he did not use to pay Money without an Acquittance and
Discharge in full, which before he paid it he would have: The Boy presently
fetches his Master, who got the Clerk to accompany him: no sooner did Andrew
see him, but he tendered down the three half Pence on a Table, and demanded a
Discharge in full, which the Clerk writ, and the Cobbler signed; now, says
Merry Andrew let us have Cobblers Law, he that has received money call for his
Pot, at which the Clerk and all the People fell a laughing, that the Cobbler was
beaten at his own Weapen: the Cobbler did generously call for his half dozen,
and the Clerk likewise, for the merry Conceit, where Merry Andrew got a large
Mornings Draught for his Three half Pence, and so set forward on his Journey.

The Day proving fair, the Sun displayed his Beams, which made Merry Andrew
glad the Cares of his Journey being pretty well thrown out of his Head by the
Cobblers large mornings Draught; he put on a pace, where coming down a Hill into
a pleasant Vale, he over took a Man, whom he no sooner spyed, but he made up to
him with full Sail: Merry Andrew accosts him after the old Phrase, Well over
taken Frinend, how far Travel you, Toward York replies he, at which Merry
Andrew was Glad, that he had so luckily met with a Companion, who steered the
same Course with him. They marched on about a Mile further, where on the side
of a Hill, stood a very pleasant Seat, which no sooner the Man espied, but he
quickened his pace, and moved on faster than ordinary, when coming to a Lane
which turned up to the House, he made a stop, and putting his hand under his
Coat, unbuckled, and took off a Green Bag, which Merry Andrew supposed to have
been Writings; but he no sooner had opened it, but out peeps the head of an old
decayed Fiddle, which no sooner Merry Andrew saw, but his Heart Caper'd in his
Belly. Merry Andrew made up to the Fiddler, and demanded of him whether he
intended to stay at that House; yes, replied the Fiddler, I intend to hazard
here, and it may be I may make a penny to bear my Nights Charges; and if you
will stay with me, I shall be glad to Accompany you to your Journeys end:
Agreed, says Merry Andrew, and moving forwards, the Fiddler began to tune up his
Instrument; which was no sooner heard, but out comes the Servants of the House;
with that, Merry Andrew brisks up, Gentlemen, says he, will you have a Lesson
of good Music, or see any Agility of Body, Gentlemen Flipflaps or Summersets?
No replied the Servants, our Master is not at home, but if you will give us a
Tune or two, we will give what the house will afford, Victuals and Drink;
content cries Merry Andrew, Rub up your Guts Fiddler, whilst I show them a
Trick for Love. Merry Andrew having showed them some Tricks which caused their
Laughter, they rewarded him both with Meat and Money, which the Fiddler seeing,
grew angry, and repented he had taken a Partner more taking than himself; but
as they walked forward, Merry Andrew gave him an equal Dividend of what he had
got, which made up the Breach.

Their Stay here having retarded their Journey, Night was drawing on, when they
came to a small Thatched Village, and and inquired if there were ever an
Alehouse; the People answered that was it five Mile to any house or Town.* Say
you so replied Merry Andrew to his Comrade, who indeed was almost tired: Come
let us walk as far as we can. They had not Traveled above two Miles, but the
Night came on so fast, that they grew fearful of loosing their way: Merry
Andrew looking about, by chance spies a large hay Stack, situated hard by a
house, he considers with himself whether he should venture to make that his
Habitation, and sleep like a Pig in Pease Straw, or Travel on till they found
some Inn; but the poor Fiddler being weary with his days March, persuaded him
to stay, and embrace that Airy Tenement.

Being both agreed, they began to undermine the Stack, and there tumbled in
like Swine into a Sty: They had not lain above an hour, but Merry Andrew hears
a Door clap, and a great Dog bark, which put the poor Fiddler and he into a
breathing Sweat, thinking that if they should be found there, they would
opprehend them for Rogues designed to rob the House; with that Merry Andrew
peeping from under his fringed Canopy, espied a Maid Servant, who was
sprinkling the G^ass with Natures watring Pot; which no sooner she had ended,
but turning her round* she met her Fellow Servants and Sweet Heart, who taking
her about the Neck, after his Rustic manner of Salutation, tumbles her upon
the Grass, where finishing the work of Generation, He made poor Andrew a Pimp
in his own Defense. The Wench being well pleased with what she had then
rereiv'd, invites her Friend into the Dairy, which was a little way from the
House, where she makes him to partake of a Bowl of Curds and Cream, having
provided Sack, Sugar, and several other Toys to heighten the Appetite of her
Amorus Lover. Merry Andrew over hearing of this nightly Banquet, resolves to
partake of their Cheer, and accordingly creeps from the Eaves of his Castle,
and moving ge^l^y toward the Dairy; spies a Sheets which he thought very
convenient for his Design j and accordingly made use of it, tying the Top with
a Strieg in the fashion of a Shroud, he put in upon his Head, and thinking with
himself that his Physiognomy was not altogether suitable, he remembered a piece
of Chalk he had in his Pocket, to prevent the slipping of his Dancing Pumps;
having taken it out, and rubbed his Face with it, he go's easily to the Milk
house Door, where he found them Laughing and in a Height of Merriment: when of
a sudden he and the Fiddler made a hideous Noise, which done, Merry Andeew
immediately enters, whom they no looner saw, but the one Scriek'd, the other
Trembled, and flying to the House in this Astonishment, left Merry Andrew in
full Possession of all the Dainties, where having filled his B^lly, he repaired
to his Thatched Chamber. Daylight coming on, and casting his Eyes about, he
sees the House which appeared to belong to a Person of no small Quality.
Immediately he posts the Fiddler to the Door, who after a Lesson, giving good
Morrow to the Worshipful, he had balf a Crown thrown down out of the Window,
which they lovingly embraced, and so marched onwards of their Journey, leaving
the Lovers with Fear and Trembling.

They had not Traveled above six or seven Miles, but Merry Andrew began to be
troubled with a grumbling in his Guts, whether with Cold got in his Lodging, or
over loading his Stomach with Cheese Curds, I know not; but he resolves with
his Comrade, that the next Alehouse they came to, should supply them with
Brandy or some warm Liquor to ease his Grief: Whilst they were thus discoursing
and walking leasurely over a Common, they discerned a House, which they made up
to, imagining it must be an Alehouse by the May Pole standing at the Door, and
even as they thought so it proved; for when they came at it, they found both
Meat and Drink. Entering the House, they found none but a lone Woman, whom Merry
Andrew asked if she had any Brandy in the House, she replied yes; having called
for a Gill of Brandy, they sat them down by the Fire, Andrew casteng his Eyes
up to a hanging Shelf, he saw a Pie well fregiht with Beef, Pork, and such
other Delicacies as the Country did afford: his Brandy having warmed his
Stomach, and eased him of the Gripes, he begins to consider with himself, that
the Brandy and the Walk together had got him an Appetite, and therefore
Contrives how, or which way he might supplant the Woman of her Pie, and not
have it found out till his departure.

After having tossed off two or three Gills Betwixt his Comrade and himself,
with the Civil Assistance of his Hostess, he desired her to fetch him a Flagon
of Beer, saying, too much Brandy was naught, though indeed he did not think so,
only to get her out of the Room, till he could manage his Ingenious
Contrivance. The Woman being gone into the Yard to wash her Pot, Merry Andrew
whips out his Knife, calling to the Fiddler, Uncase, Uncase, The Fiddler drawing
his Fiddle out of the Case, holds the Case under the hanging Shelf, whilst
Andrew with his Knife cuts all the bottom Crust round, and lets the Meat drop
into the Case. The Hostess coming hastily up Stairs from drawing the Beer,
Merry Andrew hearing her, runs hastily to the Door, where making a false Step
at the Threshold, tumbles the old Woman over, breaks the Jug, spills all the
Drink, and breaks the Old Woman's Shins into the Bargain. Whilst that he and the
Hostess were lamenting each others Misfortune, the Fiddler had planted his Case
under his Coat, having cleared the Magazeen, and lest the bare Walls of the
Crusty Castle standing upon the Shelf. The old Woman howled, Andrew looked sad,
down went her Stockins to look of her Shins, up goes Merry Andrews Sleeves, to
look of his Elbows: At length, Merry Andrew pulling out some old Relics of his
Masters shop, applies a Plaster ta the Old Woman's Shins, and so pretendingly
another to his own Elbows. The old Hostels being glad that she had so luckily
met with Medicines for her Cure, agrees with Andrew for what he would have to
leave Salve to Cure the Wounds he had wilfully made. At length they comply,
where the Shot is paid with old decayed Drugs, with that Andrew calls for a Pot
to drink his Hostesses good Health, the Fiddler plays, Andrew Sings, when ending
their Liquor, they bid Adieu to their Hostess, leaving her to Plaster up all
her Grievances. The Remainder of the Day following they spent in pleasantly
Laughing at each others Contrivance, and their late excellent Humors, with
which they they had so neatly gulled their Hostess.

The Sun growing low, they drew nigh unto a Town, which Merry Andrew inquiring
what place it was, found it to be a Copporation, where they had formerly had a
Stage; with that applying himself to an Inn where his Master had lodged, the
Tapster Greets him kindly, and they fell to drinking smartly; in the interim,
in a Parson comes riding into the Inn, whom the Tapster showed into a fair
Room, and acccording to the usual Custom, asked him what he would be pleased to
drink, or what he would have to Supper: but he proving to be one who loved
Eating better than Drinking, bids the Tapster bring him a Single Mug of Ale,
and get a Shoulder of Mutton for his Supper. The Tapster hasted to the Kitchen
and tells them his Pleasure, which was accordingly fulfilled.

The Mutton being laid to the fire, the Tapster returned to his old
Acquaintance Andrew, where they sat drinking and discoursing of former
Passages, till the Tapster was called to lay the Cloth, which he readily did.
Supper being brought up, the Parson with ut the tedious Ceremony of a large
Grace, falls to famously. The Tapster standing behind, wished him half Choked,
fearing he should have none left to Accomodate his old Acquaintance. The Raging
of his Stomach is at length appeased, and Meat enough left to have satisfied
his Desire: But the Parson forgetting the Scripture Phrase, takes as well care
for his Breakefast to Morrow, as his Supper to Night; and orders the Tapster to
set the Meat upon the Cupboards head in his Chamber, over which bung a very
Large Looking-Glass. The Tapster would fain have made an Excuse that he might
in some Measure oblige his Traveling Friend Andrew, telling the Parson that
the Room was haunted with Cats and Rats, and that if the Meat stood there he
would not have a bit left by Morning: But the Parson grew more mistrustful,
believing nothing could be safe out of his sight, and orders it to be set
there, which was accordingly performed; and speaks to the Tapter to bring him
up another Mug of Bear, and then he would prepare for Bed.

The Tapster makes haste to his old Friend Andrew, and acquaints him with the
Business, Pox on it, cries Andrew, I have a Trick at fingers ends shall help us
out, take a long piece of Pack-Thread and make a slip Noose, and when you go in
with the Drink slip it about the Knuckle Bone, and draw the String out of Doors
after you: The Tapster took his Frinds Advice, and earrying in the Beer made an
Excuse to the Cupboard, where fixing the Project, he goes out of the Chamber,
leaving the Parson to take his Natural Rest. Down he goes to his Friend, where
they Laugh and Drink, the Music playing till toward Midnight; At length,
thinking of the Supper they had laid a Trap for, they went softly to the
Parsons Door, where Andrew pulls the String gently, Rattle goes the Dish, Cat,
Cat Whore! cries the Parson, which caused them to Laugh extremely. At length
Merry Andrew gives the other Pull, down comes the Meat and Dish and all; which
the Parson hearing, takes the Bed-Staff and flings it furiously at the Cat as
he Imagined; Rattle goes the Looking Glass, he hearing the Glass broke, creeps
into Bed, where he lay as quietly as a Man without a Soul. The Tapster and
Andrew fell to the Meat, when having Eaten what they would, they know the Bones
and lay them at the Door. Daylight coming on, the Tapster hastens to the
Parsons Chamber, when coming to the Door, he cries, hey day what work is here
now? I. I, replys the Parson; Tapster had I taken thy Counsel all had been
well: When coming into the Room he spies the Looking-Glass broke, hey day why
how comes this? Indeed good Tapster I did it; prithee know of thy Mistress the
Reckoning, and what she must have for the Glass, which the Tapster as readidid;
and brought this Account. A Shoulder of Mutton and a Looking Glass; with Bread
and Beer; Twenty nine Shillings. The Parson paid the Reckoning, and called for
his Horse; but never staid to drink. The Master Laughed, the Mistress smiled
that her old fashioned Glass was turned into a new one; the Tapster Applauded
Andrews Contrivance, and gave him Money at parting; to help to his Journeys end.

Andrrw and his Friend Crowder go on their Progress in search of new
Adventures; and it happened on a Sundays Evening, (for they made no scruple of
times or Seasons) that they met upon a Green a merry Company of Lads and
Lasses, and a Fellow playing on a Fiddle, made of the Shoulder Been of a Horse:
You cannot imagine, it sounded as well as a Cremonia Violin; bet much better
than a Frying Pan which they used to settle Bees with: When Andrew had viewed
the Gamballing Medly of Cat and long-Tail, he thought it proper to put in for a
Snack of this voluntary Mirth, and customary Vagaries. So throwing himself on
his Hands walks into the Forest of Ignoramus; they seeing a Reversed Mortal
were struck with Admiration, but when they heard his strilling Companion to
exalt his Trehble, they were then absolutely weather bound; and could not tell
what point of the Compass they should put their Leg forward in. The Scraper of
the Village was then of no use, their old pleasure was now a pain; and with all
possible Celerity they begin to tune their Legs to those new Harmonious Notes
they were surprised with. As the Minstril was charming, so was* Andrew no less
taking with his Frolicksome Demeanor. A she Animal of a Dairy Maid was
unresistably captivated, she pursued him through all the Hops and Jumps of his
Antic Postures, and at last prostrates her Affection; by consenting that he
should that Night not only take part of her Bed, but take possession of her
Tenement of Flesh; so ready a Compliance he willingly embraced: So home he
Accompanies her, and to bed they go: No body need trouble their heads to know
what they did there, but may expect what will come forty weeks after, though a
shorter time will determine this Matter; for before Morning, he Glutted with
what he had never sought, took the Advantage of Wakefulness, and dressing
himself, seized all her Holy Day Furniture as free Prize, leaving her naked to
cover her Shame with the Apron of Repentance. His Companion in the mean while
had played himself into a considerable Fortune, and was much troubled for Andrew
to come and participate. It was not long before he had his Wish, and then they
consulted their future Safety, which was lodged in the most expeditious Escape
they could make: It was resolved to change the Country, as well as the Air of
that narrow Village.

It Is a general reciv'd Opinion, that Men indisposed have their Intervals of
Ease and Pain; and so have these Travelers the Mutability of Time and Chance,
for what they have irregularly got: we shall see it as extravagantly spent in
pleasing their own Humors. In few days all is expended in Brandy, and the
worst Evil Women; so that a new World, or a new Trade, must presently be found
out to stop the Raging Furies of their intolerable Wants: But though Andrew wants
Subsistence, he wants no Confidence; especially when he is thrust on by the
Extremity of Want, nor is it long before he meets with a Convenience to improve
his Talent in a small Village. In their way, as nothing could be a wrong Rode
to them but the Gallows, or the Whipping Post; he chopped into the company of
some Country Excise Men, who were much taken with his Gay and Drolling
Humors, with whom he attained Admittance at a Town Dinner. In the beginning of
their Tooth Combat, his Associate, the Crowder being pinched by that cursed
Vulture Hunger, lays his Wits abroad, and boldly ventures upon this Design.
There was a Window to the Room they eat in, which looked into a Garden, where
one had hung his Cloak, Crowder gets a Ladder, thinking if he could not carry
the Cloak off Smoothly, it should pass for a Jest; so [up he ascends to the
Window, at his first Approach Andrew spies him; you damned Rogue cries he, will
you still haunt me? So he took a Shoulder of Lamb and threw at his Head, and
after that a penny Loaf, then starting from the Table, snatches a Bottle of
Wine, and threw that too: the Fiddler fell down and pulled the Cloak after him:
The Company busied to appease Andrew, minded not any Thing that past, whilst
the Fellow posted away with what he had got.

You must know this Tool of Music was pawned to his Landlord for paying the
Tailor for mending his tattered Breeches, which he instantly redeems; and
hastens back again to the House: by the way be turns his Coat, and smuts his
Face, and as soon as he Enters, strikes up a Flourish: and cries, Gentlemen,
will you have any Music? Andrew glad of this Opportunity falls a shaking of
his Heels, the Company growing pretty warm, were easily induced to the Matter;
and admire the many merry and unlucky Pranks of these two unknown Companions.
Amongst other Frolicks they contrive a New Way of drinking a Health, with
taking a Table a little bigger than a Joint Stool, and turing up the Frame, the
Fiddler was to begin: Andrew seeing a bundle of Pitchforks makes ready for Hay
Season; takes four of them, and by the help of four more in the Company, fixes
the Forks at the four Corners of the Frame, and so lifts up the Table with the
Fiddler in it like a Pulpit; the Glass went about, and every Man was mounted in
his Turn: This Sport produced great Laughter, at which the Landlady of the
House having a mind to know the Cause of it, came in, Andrew had it presently
in his Head, Oh Mistress I says he, you are come to Crown the Invention; up you
must go, she Laughs and refuses; but the Guests being high Flown nothing will
excuse her Compliance with them in that Frolic. In she is put, and then
hoysted up, the Crowder begins a Health with a stamp, she was to end it; so
when it came to her (she being a Sociable Hostess) did as they did, gave a
strong stamp, at which the Lid of the Table came off, and she slipped through
with Coats up to her Armpits, and though she made great speed to acquit her self,
yet there was a plain Discovery. Now he is the Only Man who can show the most
Extravagant Fancy; Hats, Periwigs and Coats are thrown about, at the same time
the Music is very generously rewarded, who in return of Thanks will show them
one Trick more: he takes ones Hat, another Perriwig, a thirds Coat, and so
fantastically Accouters Himself, but when he had Mimict or Scharamoucht as long
as he thought fit, he very smoothly played himself down Stairs, and then goes
the back Way to his Lodging, where he undisguised himself, and by turning his
Coat the right side outward, is become in all Appearance another Man. The
Blades he left are full of Expectation what the Event of his Conceit will be;
at last weary with expecting of his Return, Inquiry was made, but no such Man
could be heard of. Andrew Rants, they Curse, none suspecting That they knew one
another. Night coming on Every one betook himself to his Journey home, The
Catastrophy proving not agreeable to the first part of their Jollity.

The next Project is to disincomber themselves of the Goods they have got by
slight of hand and foot, their Landlord hearing them grumble; I cannot carry the
Cloak: Says one, Nor I the Cote says the other, Would we had Money for them, say
they both, proffers to buy them, if they would part with 'em upon reasonable
Terms. Their Demands are accepted and the money laid down. Early in the Morning
they left the Town, and the great Road; venturing upon a byway to prevent any
pursuit after them, and as they met with various Paths they changed their way,
and after an hour or two's labor in sweat and dirt, and often wishing and
looking for any house where they might refresh their Craving Stomachs, they
could discover none, but the nearest thing that Humane Creatures frequent is a
Windmill, to which they repair with all the Vigor their fainting Spirits would
allow them; Groaning, Puffing and Cursing, they arrive at the Thiefs Castle,
expecting no Succor there more than to be instructed in their way to the
nearest Village. At the foot of the Ladder or payr of Stayrs, they called
Miller, and then honest Friend, though at the same time they knew 'twas a Lie,
yet adding Dissimulation, their constant Companion, and what all the World
knows is a proper and useful Partner to the Cheating Trade of a Miller, they
Repeated Hey from above there! Good Man! but all in vain, says Andrew it may be
the Thief's run away from his Castle; so by joined Consent they Ascend the
Lader, where upon the Platform they find the Governor of the Windy Meal Box
asleep on his Back, they 'jogg'd him, pulled him, spoke to him, no Answer was
made, nor sign of Waking; but prying nearer into the Business he proves to be
knocked down by some potent Liquor, and there lies like a Hogshead of dead
Beer. Let him Snore on says Crowdero, I am for making a privy Search what his
Whirligigg house affords and in walks he: Peeping about, he first sees a
Housewifes Cake brought there by some who gave him Toll of her Corpse, and he
excused them of their Meal: And now finding a Stone Bottle, to which he claps
his Nose, took a lusty Draught of Brandy; the other lays his Hand on a Wooden
Can, upon whose Lid lay a slice of boiled Bacon, they both fell to, and with a
ravenous Dexterity devoured all Eatable, or fit to Drink, and between them fill
the emptied, Bottle with Piss; but their Roguery could not end here. A new
Consultation is held what is to be done with the intranced Beast; Mischief
never wants quick Invention, they take a Sack and draw under his Back, then tie
the two Ends together, and fasten them to a Rope, which hangs down on purpose
to draw up Sacks of Corn to Grind, or let down the Meal; they pull him a good
way from the Stairs, then turning the Beam they lower him within Eight or Nine
Foot of the Ground, and post away, leaving him to swing himself awake.

You may think it was not the easiest Lodging that ever he had, therefore could
not remain there long asleep. In a short time he awakes, and cannot tell what
he should be a doing, he could not call it Riding nor going on Foot; in a
little space he found out what Posture he was in, but how he came so, was his
greatest Wonder; he can see no body to call to, nor did expect any body to come
there that Day, by Reason he had in the Morning taken his Work in for the
Morrow: his Truss began to hurt and he thinks, that his hanging by another part
would be now his best Remedy. Something mush be done and that quickly, the Knot
could not be untyed, wherefore he puts his Hand into his Pocket, and draws his
Knife, and without further Consideration cuts the Rope, down comes he Neck and
Shoulders, and but that he was reserved for a worse Fate, must undoubtedly have
broke his Crag, where we leave him crawling up the Ladder of his Destiny, and
return to our Travelers, who are falling out about what they should have for
Dinner, before they knew where to have it. By and by they reach a Town, and
into a House goes Andrew, conceals his Animosity till his Belly was full, and
they gone to Bed: His Companion falls fast asleep whose Pocket he Ransackt, and
in the Morning with the Truckle Bed-Cord, ties him down in the Bed, takes out
his Fidle, cuts out the Belly piece and Shits in it, so macrches away resolving
now to set up once more for himself.

Merry Andrew being parted from his crowding Companion, takes hearty Courage,
resolving with himself no longer to loose his time in hunting the Wild-Goose
Chase; bethinks himself doing something Meritorious, whereby his Name may
become famous to Posterity. In pursuit of which, he resolves with himself that
at the next Country Town he should arrive at, to take upon him to be a Man of
Learning, Resolving all manner of Astrological Questions whatsoever: when
climbing up to the High Rope of Invention, to find some lofty Title suitable and
and agreeing with his new Profession, his Brains running the Maze, for some
far-fetched Pedigree; at length he styles himself by the Name of Andreugio
Guillielmo Philippo the Italian Fortune Teller. Being come to the easy Top of
a Neighboring Hill, looking earnestly about, he descries a pleasant Village,
Situated by a Rivers side not many Furlongs distance, when sitting down upon a
Bank, he cleaned his Shoes, and combed his Hair, intending that as he had
changed his Name; to change his Countenance too, and so put on Gravity.

Being come into the Town, and entered his Hostesses Acquaintance, he breaks to
her his Intentions, desiring to know of her, whether a Stranger and a
Traveller, might find a Reception suitable to his Art and Parts; she heartily
delivered her Mind, telling him, that a Man of his Worth and Knowledge, could
not miss of Practice answerable to dignity of Quality; and withal thinking it
might prove very Advantageous to her self, to promote his Interest. Our new
made Fortune Teller, finding himself so kindly Entertained by his Landlady, and
that he had so fair a Prospect of Success in his new Intrigue, calls for Liquor
plentifully, knowing the only way to get Esteem amongst the Country people, is
to show himself Liberal in his Quarters. Having drunk himself to a reasonable
pitch, he begins to grow Amorous, pretending a more than ordinary Kindness to
one Isabella, with whom he was Kissing and Toying all the Evening, till such
time as the Hour grew seasonable for Rest. Having overperswaded the Wench with
his Canting Rhetoric, to make promise that she would come to bed to him,
as soon as the House was cleared of all the Guests, and het Aunt and the rest of
the Servants were in bed if he would leave the Door upon the Latch; upon which
our new Conjurer quietly betook himself to his Apartment, and is with eager
Expectation waiting for his Mistress.

But his Brains being somewhat stupefied, partly with Drink, and partly with
his Days Travel, he had not been in Bed long before he fell into a Slumber; the
young Buxom Lass who was earnest for the Enjoyment of her new Lover, lifts
gently up the Latch, and prving into the Room perceived him to be asleep, and
immediately returns to listen if her Aunt and the rest of the Family were in
Bed: She leaving open the Door, thinking then she might enter with less Noise
or Suspicion, in the interim, a great Greyhound, whose Custom was to make use
of Chairs, Stools, Beds, or any easy Lodging, rather than lay his thin gutted
Carcass on the Floor, walks softly into the Room: Our Friend being between
sleeping and waking calls to mind his Mistresses Promise, and cries out, Ah my
Dear! and Addressing himself to the Bed side, the loving Cur according to his
natural Kindness does Lick and Tongue this hot Braind Lover, when clasping his
Arms about his Neck, he cries, My Dear! my Delight! let me Embrace thee once in
my Arms, to Bed, to Bed my Love, lose now no time; the fawning Beast expected
not all this Courtship to his wonted Lodging, but leaping upon the Bed, he
Embraced him fast about the Middle, when finding his Tallons scratched his
Posteriors, he Shrieked out, and upon the Noise, the Dog left the Chamber,
having taken down the Courage of his Leacherous Bedfellow. Andrew trembles and
quakes, and thinks it is a Judgment upon him for pretending to that he
understood not; but the Noise hearing, Alarmed the House, up comes the Maid
with a Candle, Where? Where? Looking to the Door he sees his frighted Companion
shaking his Tail, the Maid demanded the Cause of all the Noise, nothing replys
the Conjurer, but a Familiar that I used to have converse with me about things
that are lost grew a little troublesome to me; the harmless Maid departs to
bed, Levuing him and his hrt Zeal to be finished some other time.

Next Morning the Landlady begins to publish and applaud the Art and Learning
of her Guest; his Name was no sooner spread through the Town, but a Gentleman
coming to bait at that Inn, as he was Traveling the Rode, had stolen from him a
neat Setting Dog, who making his Complaint to the Landlady, telling her he did
not care what it cost him, so he could but recover him; gave present order to
have him Cried throughout the Town, but could hear no Tidings of him.

Our Astrologer having been in the Yard to Ease himself and returning up a back
pair of Stairs to his Chamber, he heard a Bustle in an adjoining Closet,
peeping through a hole, he saw something shagged, but what sort of Creature he
could not plainly discern. Going into his Chamber, he could not discern any way
into the Closet, till casting his Eye under the Bed, he perceived the Bottom of
a Door, where removing the Bed, he found an old Trunk, wherein lay muffled this
lost Setter; which he no sooner saw, but posts down Stairs, where he found the
Landlady and her Traveling Guest hot in Dispute about the Dog, and which was
the most probable way to retrieve him: The good Woman Recollecting her Memory,
calls to mind her New Lodger, informing the Gentleman of his great Art and
Skill in Astrology, and discovering of things lost, immediately he was called,
and after the Gentleman had paid his Respects to him in a Glass of Wine, he
told him that if by his Art he could discovet where his Dog Tray was, he should
be Nobly Rewarded: he embraced the Offer, and going into his Chamber with Pen,
Ink and Paper he presently erected a Scheme, and making a Circle in the Room,
he Thrice waved his Wand round his Head; speaking some hard words he had stolen
from the Bowels of an old Play; which no sooner was performed, but Elevating
his Voice, he calls out, Canis; Canis, Canis, being so well learned to
understand what was Latin for a Dog; this long Ceremony was ended, he desires
the Gentleman to withdraw, telling him in few Hours the Dog would come flying
into the House. When Releasing the Dog from his close Confinement, having taken
good notice of the Room whereto the Gentleman was withdrawn, he crept up to the
Top of the House, and finding the Chimney of the Apartment, having provided a
large Cracker for this his Lofty Design, whilst the Gentleman sat below in the
Height of Merriment, over^ov'd he should once more behold his dear Game
Companion, he gave fire to the Cracker, which he had tied to his Tail, and
tumbled him howling down the Chimney; his shaggy Carcass beat down all the soot
into the Room, which struck such a Terror into the Beholders, that they all
Cried out, believing he had raised a Devil he could not lay again. The poor
Gentleman being a man of no Extraordinary Courage, through Panick fear let his
Brains fall into his breeches, that, what with the stinking of the Soot, and
the Excremental favor from the Gentleman's short hose, they thought the Dog had
come from Pluto's Territories.

The Storm being allayed, and the smoky Clouds vanished, the Gentleman
departed, rewarding liberally, and highly applauding this ingenious Artist.

His Fame now rung loud in the Ears of all the Inhabitants, the young Fry came
tumbling far and near, some for loft Spoons, Bodkins and Thimbles, Butlers for
Plates and Napkins, stolen at Festivals; Young silly Maids to know their
Sweethearts, Widows for Husbands, Batchellours for Wives, which they expected
could be done by this famous Negromancer.

He being in the height of his New-Preferment, hears of a Quack or Mountebank,
Who was coming to invade his Territories, which set his Brains to work, running
to flip flap one over another, to invent some Stratagem whereby he might Expose
this New Imposter to the Scorn and Contempt of the Rout.

The next Market Day appears the Stroling Doctor, who had ordered a Stage to be
Erected, which was supported by Two Buffet-Stools, which our Conjuring Artist
no sooner saw, but he went immediately to the Tapster, desiring him to help him
to an Ingenious Lad, that would attend him that day for his Credit sake, he
being resolved to Face that New Vpstart; who recommended to him a witty
pregnant Boy, who was not long in learning his Lesson, and fit to undertake
such an Enterprise.

The famed Astrologer being Mounted on a Steed, borrowed of his Landlord, rode
into the Market place, attended by his Servant, when approaching the Stage,
where he beheld his Rival with Eyes full of Indignation, thus deliver himself
to the People.

I am Gentlemen a Traveller, Born in the Country of Hungaria.

Yes replies our Astrologer you look like a Hungarian Fellow indeed. What saucy
Jack are you? answers the Doctor, who dare Affront me, knowing neither my
Learning nor Authority. I am that famous Artist who Cured the Bishop of Munster
of the Toothach, and by Virtue of this my rare Elixer, the Great Cham of
Tartary of the Cramp in his Tongue.

As for your Learning and Authority I knew not replies Andrew, how I should
understand them, by reason you never had any, and as for your Medicines they
are all a Cheat, and you a Quack; And that I will prove, for know Gentlemen
That I am that rare Artist which I will make good before you all. For if he be
that famous Artist which he says he is, Behold I will fall down and Worship
him, but if that honor does belong to me, he then shall fall before me.

His new Servant having performed his part, and fixed a Rope to the Doctors
stall, ties the other end to his Master's Horses Leg, and gives the sign. The
Conjurer rides round, down comes the Stage with the Doctor, at which the People
shouted, the Boys hollowed, and with a loud Applause Extolled the Conjurer,
whilst they pelted the other into his Inn with Carrets and Turnip Tops. Andrew
is thus become publicly Eminent, with the Ruin of his Competitor, and though
highly Extolled in the Opinion of the People, an After-Clap from cross Fate
fell upon him, to the utter Discredit of his Misterious Art of Fortune-Telling.

A Person passing through the Town at the same time, discovered him to the
Multitude for a Nototorious Cheat, many Laughed at the ingenious Prank he
played the Doctor, but finding out his Roguery, the Countenance of their
Pleasure was quickly changed, and he forced to fly the Town.

As it is impossible for a Man to live without Food, so it was for him to live
without Invention: As he was Traveling the Rode, he met with a good Country
House-Wife having upon her Arm a Basket of Apple Pyes, Custards, and such like
Things as please Children; he very jocondly steps to her, and says, Good Woman
what have you in your Basket? Pyes Sir says she, with that turning up the Cloth
he handles the Woman's Commodities, and by Slight of Hand conveys one into his
Pocket, then pretends to the Woman her Pyes were not good, saying to her, they
are Tuff, and hot well baked: I Will show you a Pie I bought at the last Towns
End, and with that falls a Eating the pilfer'd Pie, giving her to bite, to see
if she liked it.

The Woman being too Credulous, was easily persuaded to allow what he said; he
seeing her a good likely Woman, was resolved his Design should-not end so, but
taking her by the Hand, tells her that if she would go to the next House to
drink, he would take a Taste of her Things. The Woman being willing to vend her
Goods, goes with him, when coming to the House, he finds it well furnished with
Children, taking hold of the Basket, he gave every Child one, saying, I will
be your Chapman, thank you Sir, cries the Woman, this is a Lucky Morning, show
us a Room, and cries Andrew, and bring us in two Pots.

The Woman of the House being mightily taken with the Good Nature of her Guest,
brings them a Rasher of Bacon also; He by his Insinuation got an absolute
Conquest over their Good Opinions, and tippling to a pitch he taking the
Advantage of his Landladies blind side, wriggles himself into her Acquaintance,
and whilst she stepped into the Pantry to carry away the Bread, he follows his
Project, making the Pie Woman measure his Rolling Pin. The Loving Landlady
coming in, he pretends to make water, where going forth of the Doors, he leaves
the poor Pie woman, and his Landlady equal Partners in the Reckoning. So
hasting away he got that Night ^o London, where he could not long want a New
Subject for his unwearied Fancy to work upon.

Being Arrived at London, it is not to be disputed but that he continues as
much a Vagabond as ever, and Rambles into all Quarters of the Town to find an
Anvil to Forge some new Roguery upon; and very opportunely a Stratagem offered
it self, which was, he casting his Eyes upon a Fellow who stood peeping behind
a Porch; began to consider what was his Business, he was not long in
Apprehending what his watchful Posture meant, but without any more ado, in his
Thoughts pronounced him a Bailiff, as he really was. He did not take much time
to deliberate what wrs to be done, but steps to him, and says Friend, you have
lost; what? replies the Setter, your Man, says Andrew, through the Backside of
the -- and there paused, what through the Miter? cries the fellow, I, says
Andrew, his Master is gone with him, Not Mr. Hedgley, Yes, yes, says Andrew,
and I know where they are gone, pray (says the Dog) go Friend with me to the
Plaintiff and tell him what you know, and saw; wirhal my heart says he, I want
Employment and consequently Money, you shall be rewarded then says the Setter.

Away they go to a Tavern hard by, and there the Bailiffs Man tells what Andrew
had said, the Plaintiff tells him, if he will assist the Officer in taking this
Man, he shall have half a Piece; Andrew told him, it was but a small price for
Bone-setting and Plalsters, for that must be Expected, the Persons being
Dangerous Men. Ther'es a Crown says the Plaintiff, and when you have finished I
will not be ungrateful.

O but Sir, says Andrew, a Whore and a Bailiff are Callings alike; and neither
of 'em is well performed if they have not Money in hand; it is the Legs of their
Calling, for Souls they have none. Upon this the Plaintiff advanced the other
Crown, Well Sir, says Andrew I Will pledge you -- a mouthful of food would do
well in the End.

After he had well liquor'd his Throat, away they Trance about their
Man-Eating. Andrew was an Exact Geographer of all the By-Alleys, and secret
passages in that part of the Town; so leading them through many intricate
Turnings, he plants them in an Alehouse, with telling them he will make private
inspection, and if yon doubt me, see what House I enter: though they are
naturally Credulous, they believe him with so much Caution that a Sentinel is
placed upon him, which he is not insensible of, which made him more Circumspect
and quick in his dispatch.

Through the Yard they were to pass ran a deep Common-Shore, the Sink of the
Neighboring Houses of Office: He unprops the Door which lay over it, and when
he had done, gets over on a post that lay cross, and comes out again, They are
safe lodged says Andrew, and when you see me in again, and give the Sign by
pulling off my hat two or three times, ran in with all speed, the quicker and
thicker you come the more sure it will be. With that away goes he, and no
sooner is he over but the Signal is given: they bolt out of the House, striving
who should get first in. Coming in that have and fury all at once on the Brink
they all fell in: Andrew steps through the House, leaving them to disengage
themselves of the Common Shore, and their stinking Unguent.

Tho he has Thrived in this Enterprise, it is to be believed That he is not
Infallible, but may miscarey some other time, as the Sequel of the Action to
come will demonstrate. The Bailiffs are Cross bit, but now comes his part upon
the Stage.

Crossing the Fields he met a willing Pinace her Rigging Fresh and Serviceable,
and the boat seemed to swim finely without crying; So ho, to the boats Crew: he
grapples with her; she willing to stand the same Course as he stood, tacks and
Sayls with him; they put into the most convenient Port for their Traffic;
resolving to make but a short Voyage.

They are now in Harbor, where he intends to give himself to dalliance, whilst
his Accomplice is as ready as he is urgent. Several indearing expressions pass,
they Embrace (only the outward way) in this loving Conflict you will find that
they like water Men, looked the way they were not a going: To be brief, she
fathomed the bottom of his Pocket Wealth, for what he then had was his All.

After this she could deny him nothing, and that which he took for a Singular
Favor, and more particular Expression of her warm Affections, was only to
conceal the Cheat she had put upon him, and prevent his enquiring into the
Strength of his Pock^^. When Andrew had drank her as he thought a Note beyond
Discretion, he was then to play the latter part of the Game, which was to leave
her for the Reckoning; and to render his Escape less suspicious he wanted not
Excuse to go out, nor was she unwilling, who thought it would be a lucky
Minute; wherein she should hear that her Gallant was run away from her, and his
Purse; which he accordingly did. She no sooner found him gone but the house is
paid, and she betakes her self to Shelter. He had not been as he Imagined long
in Security, but having an Occasion to consult his Pockets, with Grief and
Amazement he found that his Money was all gone; which put him into such a
frantic Fit, that he runs over all places as a Wild Bull, that thinks himself
robbed of his dear Mulls.

At Nine of the Clock at Night he stumbles into a Church Yard, where going into
the Porch to rest himself, he sits down on a Drunken Sea Man, who had lately
received his Ticket-money; he was something startled at first, but being
Fearless by Despair, he dives into the then dead Man's Treasure, which was no
less at that Instant; but because it was no Jest without doubling his Mischief,
he took the debauched Salt water Fith on his Back, and carried him to the
Church Gate, where stood a pair of Stocks, and putting his Legs into the Holes,
claps down the Top piece, and leaves him, to sleep himself into Freedom, and
another Voyage.

Having thus cleared himself of his debauched Companion, he resolves once more
to take the Air, and make a Visit to an old Acquaintance of his a Joyners Wife,
who h^d formerly been his Intimate and familiar Friend, she living not above
ten Miles from the City. Setting forth at break of Day, that he might have the
Pleasure of the Morning, he marched till he came within four Miles of the
place, when drawing near to a House of Entertainment he calls for Drink, but
there being no body up in the House but a little Girl, she was loath to let him
in: So he travels forward, and having passed the bounds of a Warren, it was not
long e're he came to a Thatched Tenement, where in the Confines of a little
Orchard, his hawks Eye discovered a parcel of Poultrey; his Stomach craving for
Food he resolves to have a hollow Bit, when taking up a Stone, and making
Advantage of the Hedge, he turned up the Heels of a she Cackler, and sitting
down in the bottom of the Ditch he pulled forth his Knife, and for have fleas
off both the Skin and Feathers, throwing away all Superfluities, he dissects
every par and ties it up in an old Handkerchief. Comeing into the same House,
he enquires after his familiar way, how their Neighborr Handsaw, the Joyners
Wife did, and whether they thought she might be at home? Yes, says the Good
Woman; having sent a Messenger to speak with her, he calls for Drink, telling
his silly Hostess that Traveling over the Warren he had bought a Rabit,
desiring her to lend him her Pan to fry it. The woman would willingly have
cooked it her self, but he desirous to do it his own way, tells her he intended
a Frigacy; which the good Country Soul understood not: As Soon as the Fricacy
was ready; in came his old Acquaintance, whom he saluted by the Name of Cousin;
the Hostess little thinking how she was cousened by him, they sit down at the
Table where having fed lustily he drinks to his Hostess, Asking of her how she
like'^ his way of dressing a Rabbit; very well Answers the good Wife, I have
not Eaten a sweeter bit. He finding no Opportunity there to renew his former
Acquaintance with his Cozen, discharges die Reckoning and goes home with her to
her own house, Carrying a Pitcher of Liquor with them that they might have no
Occasion to send out. Being merrily disposed and their Appetites heightened by
the late stolen Collation, they begin to make use of what Nature gave them,
The Good Man her Husband who was hard at Work abroad, little thought that his
Wife was Cornuting him at home, but it being now Twelve returns to Dinner; and
knocking earnestly at the Door put the Lovers into a Fit of an Ague, She
neither knowing where to Conceal him, or he how to Escape. As a Woman's Wit is
always good at a Pinch, she claps him up the Chimney, and goes to the door,
where she receives her Husband with a flattering Smile, whilst he posts to the
Cupboard, and finding some Porridge resolves to heat 'em for his Dinner,
Scolding and Cursing his Wife for not making a Fire. Hasting to his Work house,
he brings an Arm full of Shavings, and with the Candle set them a blazeing.
Andrew finding his Shoes begin to fry and his Legs scorch, considers it was
better to be well Cudgelled for his Lecherous Designs, than stay there and be
burned. Thus resolved, he jumps down, and not seeing which way he went, fell
with one Leg into the Porridge. The poor Man seeing this party Colored Ghost,
flies out of the Doors, his Wife after him, telling him it was a just Judgmen
upon him for Cursing and Swearing. Whilst these Two were Arguing, Merry Andrew
made his Escape at the Backdoor, over joyed at his so happy Deliverance. Where
I shall now leave him to pursue his Rambling Fancy.

FINIS.

