The Petition rejected by the Parliament, being tendered to them in behalf of
Lievt. Col. John Lilburn, and in behalf of the Liberties of all the people of
England, highly violated by their unjust Act made for his banishment,
confiscation of his estate, and in rendering him a Felon if he should return,
now published: he being peaceably returned, and casting himself in all humility
upon the justice of his cause, and the conscience of these knowing times, the
Parliament who unjustly banished him, and sought his life, being dissolved. And
most especially intended to satisfy, and truly inform all ingenious and
conscionable people of the injustice and cruelty of the Parliaments proceedings
against him, whose life for many years has been eagerly sought, and thirsted
after, as was most remarkably evident by his Trial at Guild-Hal, London, October.
24. 1649. where God through the consciences of his Jury wonderfully delivered
him. And by which rejected Petition (if rightly and truly weighed) it will
appear, that the said Act of Parliament is an unlawful and bloody Act, and is
null and void in it self, in being contrary to the known Fundamental Law of
the Land; and therefore every one that shall have any hand in taking away his
life, by force of that Act, is by the true Law of England no less then a
murderer, and no murderer can escape the judgment and vengeance of God; but
with his own draws a curse upon his Family and posterity, from which the
Lord preserve every well-meaning honest man. Read this refused Petition with
the same feeling and affection, as if his case were yours, for so indeed it is,
if you rightly consider that you are all Englishmen, and do for his
preservation as you would be done for in his condition.

To the supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; The
humble Petition of diverse well-affected People inhabiting the Cities of London,
Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, and places adjacent, being their second
Petition in behalf of Lievt. Col. John Lilburn, and the Liberties of the
Commonwealth.
Humbly showing,
THat inasmuch as during this life, experience of all ages proves, That the
wisest of men and Counsels are liable to error, and that not only former
Parliaments in many things have been very much mistaken, but that even this
Parliament also (in its several times) has not been exempted from humane
frailties, doing at one time upon a sudden misapprehension, what at another
time they have so far disapproved, as to cause the same, with all its
circumstances, to be razed out of all remembrance.

Which we mention not any ways to reflect immodestly upon any, but our most
humble thoughts are, to incline you to a readiness of condescension in all
cases, to hear the reasonings of those for whom you are trusted, and at this
time seriously and patiently to consider, what in our last we offered, or what
in this our humble address we shall offer, in behalf of Lievt. Col. John
Lilburn, and our fundamental Native Rights, highly concerned in your
proceedings against him.

And likewise to induce you meekly to inquire, whether as all the errors and
inconveniences of all other authority, so also those which Parliaments have at
any time unhappily incurred, have not arose from their deviation from that
certain rule the Fundamental Law of the Land, which this Parliament in its
first estate, and first Remonstrance, declared to be the common birthright of
the people of England.

And when through long continuance in power, and sway of corrupt interests the
major part thereof by numerous oppressions, discerned (though too late) their
own deviation; they also acknowledge in their Declaration of the 17. April
1646. that nothing ought to be done that is inconsistent with our fundamental
Laws, and that although the necessity of war had given some disturbance to
legal proceedings, stopped the usual course of Justice, enforced the
Parliament for preservation of this State, to impose and require many great and
unusual payments from the people, and to take extraordinary ways to procure
moneys for their pressing occasions, it having (as they there say) pleased God
to reduce our affairs into a more hopeful condition then heretofore we do
declare, That we will not, nor any by color of any authority from us, shall
interrupt the ordinary course of Justice in the several Courts of Indicatories
in this Nation, nor intermeddle in cases of private interest, otherwise
determinable, unless it be in case of male administration of Justice, wherein
we shall see and provide that right be done, and punishment inflicted, as there
shall be occasion, According to the Laws of the Land, and the trust reposed in
us.

And when notwithstanding all these excellent expressions, they proceeded in
their former evil ways, multiplying oppression upon oppression, still contrary
to those Fundamentalls, as they did near the time of the expiration of Hollis
and Stapteton, and their corrupt faction, and that to so great a fright, as
enforced the Army to appear in opposition to their evil practices.

The worthy Army, by their Declaration the 14. June 1647. undertook then in
these worthy expressions, That the complete settlement of the Liberties, and
peace of the Nation, is that blessing of God, then of which all worldly things,
nothing is more dear or precious in their thoughts, having hitherto thought all
present enjoyments (whether of life, or livelihood, or nearest relations) a
price but sufficient to the purchase of so rich a blessing, that we, and all
the free-born-people of this Nation, may sit down in quiet under our Vines,
under the glorious administration of justice and righteousness, and in full
possession of those Fundamental Rights and Liberties, without which we can
have little hopes to enjoy any comforts of life, or so much as life it self,
but at the pleasures of some men ruling merely by will and power; and declaring
further, that they were not a mere Mercenary Army, hired to serve any arbitrary
power of a State, but called forth, and conjured by the several Declarations
of Parliament, to the defense of our own and the peoples just Rights and
Liberties, and so we took up arms in judgment and conscience to those ends.

So as all things duly weighed, we humbly conceive that nothing is more
manifest, then that there is belonging to us and the Nation, Fundamental
Liberties, which are our birthrights, and the chief inheritance of the people
of England: And that their restoration was the only justifiable ground of the
late war against the King, and of all the extraordinary motions and proceedings
of the Army against the secluded Members of Parliament, and that successive
Parliaments are but a principal part of those Rights, instituted for
conservation of public peace, and for defense and preservation of those
Fundamentalls, and that they have not authority to the contrary.

And we do also humbly conceive it to be an essential and Fundamental Right,
that no freeman of England ought to be adjudged of life, limb, liberty, or
estate, but only by Juries, according to the known Law of the Land, and that it
is of right, that no man ought to be fined or amerced to the destruction of his
quality, whether Gentleman, Merchant, Countrymen, etc. and those fines to be
amerced by Juries also, and not otherwise: And as we are confirmed in the
former, by Declarations of Parliament and Army, so in the later by the Petition
of Right, and your own Declarations stiling the same, That most excellent Law,
wherein trialls by Juries are only principally minded; and if it be observed
how tender that Law is of the just right, even of loose and dissolute persons
(therein mentioned) to trialls by Juries, (if they had offended) surely we
shall not seem blameworthy, to insist for the same way of trial as due to
Lievt. Col. John Lilburn, in any case whatsoever, a person that through many
afflictions has been approved, upon legal trialls acquitted, and who has
been many ways serviceable to Parliament and Commonwealth.

And if also it be laid to heart, how that worthy Parliament in that Petition
of Right, made even those loose and dissolute persons cases (who had been
adjudged without Juries) their own and every man's case, as truly seeing the
public right violated upon them; we thought it would appear neither
presumption, nor indiscretion in us, in making his case ours; and truly we know
not any thing in the world that would so dant and perplex our spirits, as that
after all these wars and miseries endured for restitution of our Fundamental
Laws, and all those fervent promises and Declararions both of Parliament and
Army in behalf thereof, (which God forbid should be all in vain) we should
nevertheless every one of us, as Mr. Lilburn, and indeed in him especially,
who has stood in defense of them as he has done, be rendered liable to be
judged of life, limb, liberty, and estate, without Juries, by any standing
power or men whatsoever.

And therefore if we seem importunate in this case, we beseech you impute it
not to restlessenesse of spirit, or to any blinded affection to Mr. Lilburn, it
being from judgment and conscience, and in faithfulness to our Native Rights,
for which (upon call from you and the Army) we have adventured all we could,
which makes us thus to press upon your weighty occasions, and if possible, to
prevent your further engagement in this way of judging him, begging and
beseeching you, not to pass by these our former addresses, but patiently and
deeply to weigh the reasons and arguments therein contained, and to deem it
your honor to condescend to our humble weakness in things that appear to be
evidently just.

1. And in love and tenderness to the Nations Liberties, and to the
faithfulness of all that have adhered unto you in all extremities, That you
will be pleased yet before he put from the English shore, to recall your
sentence of fine and banishment against Mr. Lilburn, that so himself, his wife,
and small children, may be preserved from imminent destruction.

2. If it be conceived, that he has in any measure offended against the
Public, that he may be called to a public trial, by way of Indictment and
Juries, that so he may have the benefit of legal challenges, and that none who
for past differences may be presumed to bear him grudge, as M. Attorney
General, and other Lawyers for his intrusion (as they are like to deem it)
into their profession; and others for other occasions or relations to Sir
Arthur Haslorig (may be supposed to do) may be his trayers, as in this censure
it is feared they have been, it being a sad thing, and directly contrary to the
Law of England, that a man's Adversaries should be his Judges.

3. That Sir Arthur Haslerig may be referred to take his course at Law for
whatsoever he conceives himself damnified by M. Lilburn, as was done in Mr.
Musgraves ease, against whom as yet he has commenced no suit, notwithstanding
Mr. Musgraves printing of many Articles against him, and that Mr. Lilburn, or
any other, may have the like liberty of Law against Sir Arthur.

4. That Mr. Primate may be at liberty to plead his possession and title at
Law, to the Colliery in question, and to make use of what Council he judges
convenient.

5. And lastly, That you will restore us unto those our Native Rights and
Trialls by Juries, and neither to interpose by your own immediate authority, in
cases of life, limb, liberty, or estate, but to permit the Law to have its due
course, as well upon your own members, as any others; and to suffer none by any
authority, from you to innovate upon them.

That so tasting the true, sweet, and proper fruit of Parliaments in the
indisturbed enjoyment of true Native English Liberty, we with all the freeborn
people of England, may have just cause to bless God for the same, and for the
happy instruments of its restoration.

And as in duty bound, shall pray, etc.

