His Royal Highness Prince GEORGE. Brother to Christian, the 5th the Present
King of Denmark Etate sue 30. 1683



THE Present State OF DENMARK, AND REFLECTIONS UPON THE Ancient State thereof.

Together with a particular Account of the Birth, Education, Martial
Achievements, and brave Performances of his Royal Highness Prince GEORGE, Only
Brother to His present Majesty of Denmark.

By G. Pierreville Gent. Secretary to the King's Minister at the Court of
Denmark.

LONDON, Printed for William Benbridg in Huggins Alley in Woodstreet. 1683.

To His Grace Charles Seamour, Duke of Somerset, etc.
May it please your Grace,
HAving been some years Secretary to the King's Minister at the Court of
Denmark, and brought some Memoirs from thence relating both to the Ancient and
Modern State of that Kingdom, I was prevailed with, through the Importunities
of some Friends, to commit them to the Press. For the Northern Regions not
lying in the usual Road of our Travelers, and not being thought to have any
thing sufficiently inviting as to engage them to undergo the inconveniences
and hardships that attend all Voyages into those Parts, nor to make such a stay
as is requisite for the rendering their Observations worthy of the Curiosity of
the Age. We are generally very much in the Dark as to the Government and
Manners of those People. This has made me liable, since my return from those
Climats, to daily Questions about them, especially of late, since the
Discourses of the Match between my Lady Ann, and Prince George; People
beginning to accuse themselves for entertaining so slender an Opinion of these
Countries, that can produce a Prince every way so great, and endued with such
Royal Qualities, as is His Royal Highness.

Though these Considerations made me give way to the instancy of my
Acquaintance, yet I could not resolve upon the making them public, without
imploring the Patronage of your Graces Illustrious Name. And though I ought to
have curbed my Presumption from offering you up so unpolisht, and so imperfect
an Oblation, yet hoping that some things in it might merit your Graces
Speculation, I flattered my self that your Grace abounding with so much
goodness, would pardon in me the Ambition I had to declare the profound Zeal,
Respect and Submission wherewith I am,

My Lord, Your Graces Most humble and most obedient Servant, G. PIERREVILLE.

THE Present State OF DENMARK.
THE Kingdom of Denmark, containing that part of the Cimbrick, Chersonese,
called Juitland, Holstein, a great Shoal of Islands, the Principal whereof are
Zealand, Funen, and many more, but of less Note, with the great continent of
Norway, and the Isles thereof, is Bounded on the West with the Main Western
Ocean, on the East with the Baltic Sea, on the North-East with part of
Sweedland, Full-North with the Main Frozen Ocean, and on the South with
Germany, from which it is separated on the South-west by the River Albis, and
on the South-East by the Trave, a small Isthmus or Neck of Land Uniting it to
that Continent.

It had its Name from the People of those many Islands which lie together in
the Bay or Gulf, called Sinus Codanus, (Now the Baltic Sea,) who took upon
them the Name of Danes, Extending their Name afterward as they did their
Conquest, and not from Dan a Fabulous King thereof, above a Thousand years
before the Birth of our Savior.

As for its Position in regard of the Heavens, part of it lies within the
Northern temperate Zone, and part within the Artict Circle; reaching from the
middle Parallel of the 10th Clime, or 55 Degree of Latitude, where it Joyneth
with Germany as far as the 71 Degree, where the Frozen Ocean is its only
Boundary, thus the longest Day in the Southern parts hereof, is 17 hours and a
quarter: But in the parts farthest North, they have no Night for two whole
Months, three Weeks, one day, and some Seven hours over; as on the Contrary,
no Day for the like space of time, when the Sun is farthest distant in the
other Tropic. Thus the Air would be very sharp and bitter, were it not
Temperated by the warm Vapors of the Sun, by which means in Juitland, Zealand,
and the Adjoining Islands, it is not so Cold as in places which lie much more
South.

Now tho the Land be Naturally Sterile, and affording little besides Woods and
Mountains, yet the Care and Industry of the Inhabitants have made it very
Fruitful.

Denmark abounds in Rich Pastures, which Feed such vast Numbers of Cattle, that
it has been some times known, that in one Year a Hundred-Thousand Cows and
Oxen, have been hence Exported into Germany and the Netherlands; which brings a
Vast Income to the Kingdom, nor do they want excellent Breeds of Horses, that
part of it called Oldenburg especially, Furnishing the best and finest
Coach-Horses of all Europe.

The Sea Coasts of Juitland, Zealand, and other parts of the Danish
Territories, are plied with such Vast Shoals of Herrings, Plaise, Whitings,
Cod, and other Fish, that they are almost capable of Hindering the Passage of
Boats and Ships.

Nor are their Forests less stocked with Venison, there being no less every
Hunting Season than Fifteen Hundred Bucks brought into the Kings Palaces,
besides Vast numbers of Wild Boars, Hares, and such like sort of Gaim.

Notwithstanding, the mean Opinion which the Romans had, and the Ill Character
they have given us of all the Northern Nations, yet they found themselves
constrained to Buckle under their Vigourous Attacks, and abandon their City and
Country as a Prey to the Pillage and Mercy of the Triumphing Cambrians, nor are
the other Northern Nations, insensible of the Mettle and keenness of the Danish
Swords; the Danes having Conquered Ireland no less than Eight several times,
Beaten, the English Ten times and who for a long while were Subject to the
Kings of Denmark; Scotland for some time Tributary to this Crown; Saxony has
paid Homage to several of the Danish Kings, and Sweeden frequently owned them
for their Sovereigns, nor is the Kingdom of Norway a small proof of the Danish
Courage, neither have their Women been Barren of Brave performances, their
Exploits being equally Glorious with those of the greatest Heroes of other
Nations. But Valor and Warlike Conduct are not the only qualities praise
worthy in the Danes, they are no less to be Commended for their. Hospitality
and Extraordinary Complaisance to all Strangers; and tho their Entertainments
do sometimes degenerate into Luxury and excess, yet without doubt the Crime is
much more Pardonable in them than those who live under a more happy Climate.
The Danes indeed are Haughty and Superstitiously Jealous of their Honor,
revenging the least outrage and contempt, and resenting to a High Degree all
things which give the least apprehension of an Affront, and as they are
Rigorous Prosecutors of Insults done to themselves, so are they no less severe
Punishers of Criminals of State, especially Thieves and Pirates. And as they
are Peremptory in their Executing of Justice upon Offenders, so are they most
Religious in doing and Distributing it where due, and Inviolable observers of
their Words and Contracts.

The Bulck and Stature of the Bodies of the Danes, does in somewise suit with
the Grandeur of their minds, and tho the Luxury of the Age has so far prevailed
in Denmark as to quash the growth of their Modern Danes in respect of their
Ancestors, yet they be still more Large, Strong, Vigorous, and long Lived than
most or any of their Neighbors. They are generally fair Complexion'd, their
Hair something inclined to Yellow.

Their common Food is on Corn, Fish, and all manner of Tame and Wild Beasts
that are Man's Meat, which they have in great abundance. And amongst their many
kind of Fowl, they have greater store of Wood-Cocks than any other Country
whatsoever. The Old Liquor of Denmark was Oel, ( Ale, or Beer,) made of Malt
and Water, and is still their common and most general Drink. And tho Wine has
now obtained much among them, yet perhaps their excess therein has Curtailed
much of their pristine Vigor, and that had they kept constant and solely to
their Oel, it might have spirited them to as great Actions as those of their
Predecessors.

As for the Danish Language, it is only a distinct Dialogue of the Teutonick,
the High Dutch, Sweedish, Norwegion, Flandrian, and English being no more, and
all Derived from one Mother Tongue.

As for the Government of Denmark, without dwelling upon the Fabulous stories
of King Dan, it is Evidently to be made out, that it was a Monarchy in the
Consultship of Catulus and Marius, near a hundred years before Christ, after
which we have an account of one Gothrick King of the Danes in the time of the
Emperor Charles Magne, from whom the present King of Denmark is Descended in a
Lineal Succession, though some Authors do affirm that the Ancient Line failed
in the Death of King Christopher the 3d.

The Crown of Denmark it self was Elective until the year 1660. Nevertheless
the Senators generally chose the Eldest Son of their Sovereign, who from that
time forth was Styled the Prince, and the other of the Kings Sons, the Dukes
and Heirs of Norway. Now their Election in former times was performed after a
very Solemn manner, for as many of the Nobles as were Senators, and had Power
of Voting and giving their suffrages, having pitched upon some Commodious place
in the Fields, where having placed themselves in a Circle, upon so many great
Stones they past their Votes, and having Seated their new Elected Sovereign in
the middle, upon a Stone Higher than the Rest, they Saluted Him King. There
being to this Day in Zealand such a company of Stones which bear the Name of
King-Seat. But after the Crown of Denmark had been thus Elective for above Two
Hundred years in the present Oldenburg Family, the chief Power of Election, as
I said being, in the Nobility, those Nobles took this means and occasion to
Capitulate advantages to themselves, as Previous and Preliminary Conditions to
the Election, which every succeeding King was forced to comply with, to the
Curtailing, Dispoiling, and Weakening of the Crown, and to the prejudice and
disadvantage of the other Orders of the Kingdom, insomuch that none but a Noble
Man could Buy, Purchase, or possess in his own Right any Seigniory or Manor.
A Citizen or Burgher was not capable of purchasing more than a House, and
perhaps a Guarden and an Orchard, or some such slender business. The Lands and
Revenues of the Crown were let our to Noble Men, it may be not to the Third,
often not to the Fourth part of what they were really worth, and yet the King
could not raise the Old Rents, tho the Nobles in the mean while kept the
under-tennents Chewing upon a rack Rent. The Pesants in the Danish Island were
Villains Reguardant to the Manors of Noble Men. All public Offices and
advancements were Monopolized by the Nobility. And mere merit without the
Circumstances of Nobility of Extraction and Grandeur of State, was excluded all
Countenance, Protection and Preferment. Thus the Crown of Denmark which shown
with so much Luster, Renown and Glory in former Ages, was Dwindled almost into
an Aristocrasie, and hardly the shadow of what it had been some Centuries
before. But upon the Occasion of a War between Carolus Gustavus King of
Sweeden, and Frederick the 3d. King of Denmark in the Year 1660. Great
Privileges were proposed and conferred upon the Burgers of Copenhagen, the
better to Encourage them to stand the more Valiantly in Defense of their King
and Country, least the Prospect of mending their Circumstances under a new
Master, should prevail with them to abandon their Old. Now the Privileges
Established in that juncture were an equal admission to Offices and Honors,
according to the Deserts and Capacities of them and their Children, a Power of
Purchasing Lands and Lordships with the same Rights as the Nobles. Copenhagen
to be one of the Estates of the Kingdom, and to have a Suffrage in all public
Councels and Resolves, and the Crown turned from Elective to Hereditary, and so
freed from the Guardianship of the Nobility. Thus that juncture, how Menacing
soever it seemed to the whole Realm of Denmark, yet proved of such advantage as
to rein-state the King in all that Power that was necessary for the Defending
of His Dominions against the Invasions and Insults of Foreigners, and the
Oppressions and Usurpations of one fellow Subject upon an other. Thus the
Complexion of that Government is much more Vigorous, and there is a better
Circulation of the Blessings to be Enjoyed under a happy Sway, since this
Reformation, than had been for some Ages before under several Reigns together.

The account of the Kings of Denmark before the Planting of Christianity in
that Country, will be found a difficult matter to be Stated, their Chronicles
before that time being for the most part feigned and fabulous, as well as that
of other Nations. But according to the most careful, Judicious and Modestest
Relations of that matter, we shall set down the following Catalogue.

1. Harald being forced to Fly his Kingdom by the Accomplices of his Brother
Reinferd, had recourse to the Emperor Ludowick for Succor, who Furnished him
with Forces for the Reinstating him in his Kingdom, but upon Condition he would
abandon his Heathenisme, and be Converted to Christianity. Accordingly he was
Baptized in the year 826, and was forthwith set again upon his Throne. But not
long after he turned Idolater again, adn so remained till he was prevailed with
to Renounce it by St. Angchar.

2. Eric Succeeded his Brother Harald, and though he had been Baptized with him
at the Emperors Court, yet he persecuted the Christians with the same Cruelty
as his Brother had done in the time of his Relapse. During his Reign, namely,
about the year 853. the Danes are said to have first Invaded France, under the
Conduct of their General Rollo, though others would have Gotfrid to have made
the first Eruption into that Kingdom, and that Rollo did not enter France till
the year 876. and was not Established peaceably in Normandy, till 889. or 890.

3. Eric Barn, or the Child being the only Male left alive of the Royal Family
after the Bloody Wars between Eric and Guthorn King of Norway. But he had not
been long upon the Throne, before he Renewed the Persecution upon the
Christians with more Cruelty then his Prodecessors had done, destroying more
Churches, Bishops, and Religious Houses, then all the other Danish Kings put
together; He Prosecuted his Wars in Germany with great Gallantry and Conduct,
Slaying with his own Hands Bruno Duke of Saxony, and Twelve Counts. He Departed
this Life in the year 902.

4. Canutus Lodneknut or the Hairy Succeeded his Father Eric. In his time every
Third Man in Denmark went to seek his Fortune, and those who went away thus
upon these Expeditions overrun all Prusia, Courland, Semgal, and other
Countries, where they Established themselves, and where their Posterity remain
unto this day, He Dyed a Pagan in the year 912. And was Succeeded by

5. Frotho his Son, though some say Sueno his Brother Reigned Nine years. He
was twenty years King of England and Denmark, being Converted to Christianity
in England, and Dyed a zealous Christian, his next Successors was,

6. Gormo, Gormund, or Guthram (Surnaned Hartesnute, and Engelander, because
Born in England: He with his Attendants was Baptized at Aal^e in Somersetshire,
our Learned and Pious King Alfred being his Godfather, and gave him the Name of
Athelstanes, and the Kingdom of the East Angles.

7. Harald Surnamed Blaat and Succeeded his Father Gormo. In his days did the
Danes make that Famous Trench between Gottorp and Sleswick called Dannewerk.

8. Sueno or Suenotho, Surnamed Tuiskeg (that is Fork'd Beard,) Succeeded
Harald. At his first coming to the Crown he was a Pagan, and Exercised great
Cruelty upon the Christians, but was afterward Converted to Christianity, and
Erected three Bishoprics at Sleswick, Ripen, and Arhusen. He is by some said
to have Dyed in the year 1012. and was Buried at York, Others in 1014. and
Intombed in Denmark.

9. Canutus the Great, (Son to Sueno) He was at once King of England, Denmark,
Sweeden, Norway, Slavonia, and Sambland, some say too, King or Duke of
Normandy. He was Buried at Winchester in the year 1036. after he had been
Seven and twenty years King of Denmark, twenty four of England, and Seven of
Norway, and was Suoceeded in the Crown of Denmark by his Son.

10. Hardi-Cnute, who within four years obtained the Kingdom of England upon
the Death of his Brother Harald. He Dyed in England in the year 1041. and was
Buried by his Father in the Cathedral of Winchester.

11. Magnus, King of Norway, possessed himself of the Crown of Denmark by main
force upon the Death of Hardi-Cnute, pretending a Contract that Entitled him
to it, but had it not long in possession. He Dyed in the year 1048. and left
the Crown to

12. Sueno Esthret, Son of one Vlf an English Earl. He Departed this Life in
the year 1074. and left behind him five Sons, who all of them Enjoyed
Successively their Fathers Crown.

13. Harald Sueno's Eldest Son, Swayed the Scepter no longer then two years,
being an easy efferninate, timorous Prince. So that the English laid hold of
the Juncture, shook off the Danish Yoke without any great trouble.

14. St. Canutus, the Second Son of King Swain in the year 1088. was Inhumanly
Murdered by his own Subject at St. Albans Church in Odensee (a City in the Isle
of Funen) which he had made his Sanctuary. Now his Brother Olaf longing for the
Crown, Fomented a Rebellion against Canutus, and effected his designs, by the
means of the Kings commanding his Subjects to pay Tyths, according to the
Custom of other Nations. And this Fomented the People into such a Rage by Olafs
practices, that nothing could appease but their Sovereigns Martyrdom.

15. Olaf the Third Son of Swain upon the Assassination of St. Canutus, was
Unanimously Declared King by his Partisans. But he and the whole Kingdom were
not long before they received their just Punishment for that Execrable Crime of
Murdering their Prince, for Heaven was pleased to send so great a Famine over
all Denmark, that the Kings own Family wanted Bread. Olaf well knowing his
Crimes had brought that Judgment upon the Realm, offered up his Prayers to God
that he would be pleased to divert the Stream of his Vengeance from off the
People, upon his Head that had offended; Whereupon the very same Night he Dyed
Hungry and Wretched in the year 1096, and the Famine forthwith abated.

16. Eric Swains Fourth Son, Surnamed the Good, for his Religious Zeal and
Piety, Dyed in his Pilgrimage toward Jerusalem, and was Buried in the Isle of
Cyprus, in the year 1106. during his Reign Lunden in Schonen was made an
Archbishops See, all the Danish Bishops being before that time under the
Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Brement.

17. Nicholas Suenos's youngest Son Succeeded his Brother, but was Slain in the
year 1135. by the Jutes in Revenge of the Death of Chute Duke of Flanders, whom
he had caused to be Assassinated in the Church.

18. Eric Emund a good Religious Prince, Succeeded his Uncle Nicarlus; and in
the year 1130. was in his own Palace Inhumanly Assassinated by one Plagsorte a
Nobleman of Juitland.

19. Eric Lamb Succeeded his Uncle Eric Emund. But after a while laid down his
Crown, and retired into a Monastry at Odensce in Funen, where he departed this
Life, in the year 1147.

20. Swain Gratenhede, Eric Emunds Son got the Crown upon the Death of his
Kinsman Eric. Lamb. Three Kings of Denmark were at the same time in this
Princes days. One part of the People being for Cnute, King Nicholas's
Grandchild, another for Waldemar, Son to Cnute Duke of Flanders. After some
Rancounters and Combats wherein both Swain and Cnute were Killed, the whole
Realm was Swayed by

21. Waldemar Surnamed the Great, who was Sovereign of all the Countries on the
North of the Elb, and Departed this Life in the year 1182. Leaving the Crown to
his Son.

22. Cnutes who showed great Conduct and Gallantry in his Wars with the German
Emperor, who demanded Homage of the Kings of Denmark. He Dyed at Ringsted in
the year 1202.

23. Waldemar the Second, Succeeded his Brother. He new Modelled the Danish
Government, Subdued Norway, overcame and put to Flight the Emperor Otto, who
meant to render himself Master of Holstein; and having Swayed the Scepter
Victoriously for Thirty Nine Years, he Dyed Anno Dom. 1241. and was Succeeded by

24. Eric Plog-penning his Son, who was taken at Sleswick and Slain by his
Brother

25. Abel, who having Reigned two years after a Wicked manner, was then
Assassinated by Rebels in the year 1252. and was Succeeded by his Brother

26. Christophers, who having Lived in a continual War with his own Rebellious
Subjects, is said to have been Poisoned in the year 1259. by Arnefast Bishop of
Arhusen, as the Emperor Henry the Seventh was afterward by Bernardine the
Monk with the Eucharist.

27. Eric Glipping, (the Son of King Christopher) being possessed of his
Fathers Scepter, Lived one of the most Leudest and Debauchest Lives Imaginable,
committing all manner of Sacriledges, Murders, Oppressions, and Whoredoms, till
he was Assassinated with Fifty six (some say Seventy,) Wounds, as he was
Sleeping one Night in a Barn at Findetorp; a small Vilage in the Bishopric of
Wiberg, by seven Ruffians hired to Kill him, by Andrew Soiget Marshal of
Denmark, whose Wife he had Ravished, and some others of the Nobility in the
year 1286. and was Succeeded by

28. Eric Menved, Glippings Son, who was as good and Pious a Prince, as his
Father was Impious and Wicked, being preserved by Providence, from the Death
and Murder which was Plotted by the Conspiraters against his Fathers Life. He
Dyed peaceably as he had Lived, in the year 1319. was Buried at Ringstad, and
Succeeded by his Brother

29. Christopher the Second, much unlike his Predecessor, being a Cruel,
Perfidious, Unfortunate, and Sloathful Prince, a Hater of all, and Hated by
all. Having lingered out a Reign of Thirteen years, in 1333, he Dyed at
Niccoping in the Isle of Falster, being forsaken of all, neglected and
unpittyed. After this Princes Death, there was an Inter-regnum of fifteen
years, but the Danes growing Sensible of the confusions they lay under for want
of a Head, resolved to Settle

30. Waldemar the Third King, King Christophers Son upon the Throne of his
Father. He pulled down the Usurpers, and Recollected the scattered Members of
the Realm, without much Molestation. He is said to have been a Prince endued
with all those Great Qualities that can adorn a Throne. When Pope Gregory the
11th threatened to Excommunicate him for his saucy Behavior, in the Style of
the Sea of Rome, he returned this Answer.

Waldemar King of Denmark, etc. To the Bishop of Rome, Sends Greeting. We
hold our Life from God, our Kingdom from our Subjects, our Riches from our
Parents, and our Faith from thy Predecessor, which if thou will not Grant us
any longer, We do by these Presents Resign, Farewell.

He Dyed in the year 1378. and was Buried by his Father at Sora, and Succeeded
by his Daughter

31. Margaret, who was Crowned Queen of Denmark upon the Death of her Father,
and Swayed the Scepter with more Prudence and Conduct than any of her
Predecessors, she taking in one Campaign Albert King of Sweeden, Rodulph
Archbishop of Scharen, the Duke of Mecklenburg, and the Earl of Holstein and
Reppin Prisoners. she Dyed a great Friend to Religion and Patroness to the
Clergy, and was Buried at Roschild in the year 1412. Her Father was used to
say, That Nature intended her for a Man, but Spoiled her in the making. She
left the Crown to

32. Eric, the Son of Vratislaw the Seventh Duke of Pomeren, her Great Nephew
who having Reigned many years like a cruel Tyrant, was at length constrained to
abandon his Throne, and Fly from the Fury of his Incensed Nobility into
Gothland, taking with him a vast Treasure, and one Cicilia his Miss, who by the
Influence she had over him, brought him to that wretched condition.

33. Christopher, Duke of Bavaria and Count Palatine of the Rhine, another of
King Waldemars great Grand Children, succeeding Eric in the Kingdoms of
Denmark, Norway and Sweeden, His sway was short, but Glorious and successful,
more especially prosperous in his Wars against the Rebels in Juitland, and
the Hans-Towns. He died without Issue at Helsingburg in the year 1447.

34. Christian 1. Theodoric Count of Oldenburgs Son, was chosen King of Denmark
upon the Death of King Christopher; he had all the Royal Quallities that can
Illustrate a Throne; He reduced the Sweeds to their Allegiance, who had
Revolted from the Crown of Denmark in the beginning of His Reign, added Holstein
to His Dominions, made Himself Duke of Dithmars and Stormar, and having swayed
the Scepter Three and Thirty years; He Died in Peace in the year 1481. and was
Buried a in Chapel of his own Building at Roschild, leaving his Scepture to

35. John his Son, who was a Generous, Valiant and Pious Prince, and very
prosperous in almost all His undertakings. He Died of the Plague at Olburg, in
the year 1513.

36. Christian the 2d. his Son succeeded Him, who was the greatest Tyrant, not
only that ever swayed the Scepter of Denmark, but perhaps that ever any other
Nation did produce. He is said (to have been Born with one Hand grasped, which
when the Midwife opened, she* found full of Blood. Thus, when by the Barbarity
and Cruelty of his Reign, He had been compelled to abandon the possession of
Three Kingdoms, and had underwent the Miseries of Banishment and Imprisonment
for six and Thirty years, He Died wretchedly in the Castle of Kallenburg in
Zealand in the year 1559. and was succeeded by his Uncle

37. Federic the 1. King John's Brother, Immediately after his Coronation, He
began to Introduce the Augsburg Confession into all the Churches of Denmark, He
swayed the Septer almost Ten years in Peace and quietness, and Died at Sleswig
in the year 1533.

38. Christian the Third Fredericks Son, Succeeded his Father. He completed
the Reformation which his Father had begun in the Church, is celebrated for all
the Christian and Royal Virtues that a Prince can stand possessed off; His
Reign having been exceeding Happy, both to himself and his Subjects, he left
the Scepter to his Son.

39. Frederick the II. who was a Religious Observer of the Steps of his Father,
and after a prosperous Reign of Nine and Twenty Years, Died in his Palace at
Anderscow in the year 1587. and had for his Successor

40. Christian the IV. who before his Fathers Burial was chosen, and soon after
Crowned King of Denmark; During his Reign Ferdinand the II. Emperor of
Germany, overrun the greatest part of the Cimbrian Chersonese, and had almost
Subdued the whole Kingdom of Denmark; but King Christian using his last
efforts, constrained the Imperalists to retire, and made an Honorable Peace,
he Died in the year 1648. and was Succeeded by

41. Frederick the Third his Son; About the middle of this Princes Reign, his
Crown had like to have been taken of his Head by the Victorious Charles Gustave
King of Sweeden, who had reduced him to that Extremity, as that he had nothing
more left then his Town of Copenhaguen, but the Emperonr, King of Poland, and
other Nothern Princes, confederating together, the King of Sweeden was
compelled to the Treaty at Roschild, which nevertheless stripped Denmark of
many of it is best holds and Provinces; Yet the Crown received this advantage as
to be made Heriditary in the present Family, and the People, instead of many
Tyrants which they had in the Nobles no more one Master. He Dyed of a Fever
the twenty fifth day of February 1669. and that Night the Nobility Swore
Allegiance to the New King.

42. Chrstian Fifth now Reigning Anactive and Valiant Prince, was Born on the
18th of April 1646. Elected King of Denmark, and acknowledged Heir of that
Crown on the 12 of June 1650, Married on the 10 of May 1667 Charlotta,
Landgrave of Hesse Castle, the Daughter of the Landgrave William, and of
Hedwige, Sophina Electoral Princess of Brandenburg, the Ceremony of their
Marriage was performed at Niccoping in the Isle of Falster, in the Month of
July in the same year, with all the Splendor and magnificence Imaginable; by
this Princess, the King has a numerous Issue. But before I proceed to give an
Account of the Royal Family, it is convenient I first set down, some
Circumstances relating to the present King of Denmarks Person, his Title, Arms,
Dominions, Patrimony, Revenue, and Strength, his Power, Prerogatives,
Supremacy, Sovereignty, and Respect. And then I shall proceed to the giving an
Account of the Nobility and Orders of the Knighthood of that Kingdom, with
several other particulars, ending with a Geographical, or rather Topographical,
Descriptions of the several Provinces and Places belonging to that Crown. And
now first, as to his Person, having already mentioned his Birth, Marriage, and
Coronation; Than that he is possessed of all the advantages which Nature or
Education could afford, which have been so well Seconded by Fortune in several
Expeditions into Schonen and Germany, and the engagements of his Fleets, that
he is become the Darling of his People, and the Terror and Admiration of his
Enemies.

The King of Denmarks Title now is King of Denmark, Norway, of the Goths and
Vandales; Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, and Ditmarsh; Count of
Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst. It was much more pompous formerly, when he Swelled
out the Catalogue of his Dominions, with England, Sweeden, and other Provinces.

The Ancient Cimbrians are said to have had their Shields and Helmets Painted
with the Shapes of several sorts of Wild Beasts, and sometimes used to set a
Brazen-Bull upon the top of their Standard, as a token of Strength and Valor.
But at this time the King of Denmark's Coat is a Complication of Fourteen
several Coats, thus ordered.

In a Field Gules, He bears a Cross Argent (the Arms of the House of
Oldenburgh) which quarters the upper part of the Coat into four Cantons; The
First of these gives (the Arms of Denmark,) Or, Six half Hearts Gules, three
Lions Passant, Guardant Azure, with Crowns of the First. This Coat is parted
with (the Arms of Norway) Gules, a Lion Crowned Or, holding in his paws an
Hatchet Argent, with an haft of the Second. The Second Canton carries Gules, a
Leopard in Chief Or, the Field Sown with nine Hearts of the Second, which are
the Arms of Gothland; these are parted with Gules, a Dragon Crowned Or, the
Ancient Coat of the Vandals or Slavonians; the Third Canton gives Azure, Three
Crowns Or, to Denote the Union of the Three Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and
Sweeden. This Coat is parted with Gules, a Paschal-Lamb Argent, holding a Cross
Or, at which hangs a Streamer of the Second, charged with a small Cross of the
First. The first Original of this Coat, is said to have been this, In the Year
1218. when King Waldemar the Second Engaged in a Sharp and Bloody War with the
Lifelanders, the Danish Troops having lost their Standard, began to be
disheartened to that Degree, that they gave Ground, and were ready to fling down
their Arms, out of despair, and yield the Victory to the Heathens. When a new
Standard of a sudden fell from Heaven, Displaying a White Cross in a
Bloody-Flag; At the sight whereof the Danes forthwith Rallyed their Forces that
were Dispersed, with that Vigor and Courage, as rendered them in a short time
Masters of the Field. The Kings of Denmark kept the Holy Flag in Remembrance of
so Miraculous a Deliverance, with all the care and Veneration imaginable;
Believing their Future Success did in a high Degree depend upon the Safety of
so Sacred a Banner. But though the Danish Historians do Assert this to be the
source of this part of the Arms of their Kings, yet it is much more reasonable
to believe that this Banner was bestowed by the Pope upon their King, when he
undertook that expedition into Lifeland, since the main Design of that War was
the Conversion of those Infidels. But to proceed, the Fourth Canton, bears Or,
two Lions Passant Azure, which are the Arms of Sleswic, these are parted with
Gules, an headless Fish, stuck on a Stake, and Crowned Argent: which is the
Coat of Iseland. In the Center of these four Cantons, and the middle of the
great Cross hangs a Scutcheon bearing Azure, a Horseman in complete Armor
Argent, holding a Sword in his Right Hand of the same, with the Hilt Or, his
Horse covered with a Cloth of the Second; which are the Arms of Dithmarse: The
lower part of the Arms contains four Coats more; Whereof the First is Gules,
three Pinks, (some call them Nails of our Saviors Passion) and three Leaves of
Nettles, which are intermixed, and meet in Angles at the Heart of the Coat;
which is charged with a small Scutcheon Argent, for Holstein. The Second (which
is the Coat of Stormaria) is Axure, a Swan Argent, with a Coronet round her
Neck Or. The Third (belonging to the County of Delmenhorst) is Or, two Bars
Gules. The Fourth and last Coat (which belongs to Jutland) is Azure, a Cross
Patty, at the bottom of it Achet Or, below the Arms is usually hung in a Chain
Or, the Scutcheon of the Order of the Elephant.

The Helmet Or, Embroidered and Damasked, the sights covered and wanting Bars;
above with a Crown Or, encircled with four Circles, and Adorned with precious
Stones: On the top of this a Globe Or, and above all a Cross Patty Argent.

The Crest is a Leopard, Passant over the Crown Or, eight Streamers Azure, a
plain Cross Argent; four Spears bending to the Dexter side, and as many to the
Sinister Or.

Supported by two Savages, Crowned and girt with Ivy Proper, Armed with two
pointed Clubs.

The Mantle Or, Sown, with Hearts Gules and Lions Azure, doubled Ermine.

The Ancient Dominions of the King of Denmark, were of a much Vaster extent
than they are at this day, that Crown possessing in the time of Canutus the
Great, England, Denmark, Sweeden, Norway, Slavonia, Sambland, and Normandy,
with several Islands: Whereas now his swayreaches only over Juitland, Holstein
Zealand, Norway, Iseland, Freezland, Greenland, the Feroe and some other
Islands of small Note, with the Counties of Oldenburg, Stormaria, and
Dithmarsh, and alternatively Slezwick, as shall be shown more at large
hereafter, besides some Fortresses and Colonies, in the East and West Indies,
and upon the Coast of Africa.

The Kings of Denmark have certain Lands Annexed to the Crown, which are
inalienable, and in case upon the Necessities of some Junctures, any of them be
alienated for the Public Weal, yet the same Prince, or any of his successors
may reunite them again let the consideration be what it will of their
Alienation.

But it is no easy matter to State the account of the yearly Revenue of the
King of Denmark, which arises from the Rents of Crown Lands, Customs, and
Custom Money, Tiths, and other Contingencies some guess may be made of it
from the Customs which are paid by the Merchant-Ships which pass the Sound
every day. Every Ship that passes by Elseneur must pay a Rose-Noble or Four
Rix-Dollars for every Mast. And it has been observed, that commonly Two hundred
Ships, often Four hundred, nay Six hundred pass in one day. Now allowing only
200 to pass daily, and each pay two Rose Nobles or eight Rix-Dollars for two
Masts, the Sum will Amount to about Four hundred Pounds of our Money, for every
day in the year round, and for the whole year to about 134400 Pounds. And the
Tax which is paid for such Cattle as are Exported, does not fall much short of
this; the Customers Exacting a Rix-Dollar for every Beast that goes out of
their Kings Dominions.

The chief strength of the King of Denmark, consists in the Number and goodness
of his Ships and Seamen. And indeed the Danish Mariners may vye with the best
of Europe, which formerly Rendered them not only particularly succesful by Sea,
but also in their Engagements with the Sweeds in the last Wars. The Naval
Forces of the Crown of Denmark, were even formerly so considerable; as that
Christian the Second fitted out a hundred good Men of War for the Succor of
Henry the Second, the French King against the English: Nevertheless this
present King has a much larger Fleet of his own always ready for Action. And
here I cannot forbear taking Notice of the Bravery and Vigor of our Nation,
that was able to carry on a War with Glory, and Fight with success three such
Powers confederated together as his most Christian Majesty, the King of
Denmark, and the States General of the United Provinces, nay in so Mortifying a
Conjuncture, as when the Burning of London and the Desolation of the Plague
would have enervated any other than English Courages, disconcerted their
measures, and constrained 'em to have complied with dishonorable Terms. But to
return; I will here insert a List of such Men of War of the King of Denmark, as
I could get the List off.

Guns. Men. Sophia Amalia. 106. 650. Prince Christian. 80. 600. Droning
Charlotte. 60. 500. Prince Charlotte. 60. 500. Prince George. 80. 550. Fur.
Prince. 80. 500. Princess Amalies. 60. 500. Three Crowns. 80. 500. Northern
Lion. 60. 400. Three Foldigherds. 60. 450. Swan. 60. 450. Three Lions. 70. 400.
Victory. 54. 350. Lindworm. 48. 300. Nettle Leave. 54. 300. Oldenburg. 48. 250.
Spen. 50. 300. Black Horseman. 50. 300. Guldenlieu. 54. 300. Hope. 48. 250.
Delmenhorst. 44. 250. Copenhagen. 40. 250. Black Bear. 36. 200. Feroe. 40. 200.
Christianus Quartus. 54. 300. Frederick. 3 d. 54. 300. Venus. 36. 200. Lobster.
36. 200. Goldenfish. 20. 100. The Virgin. 28. 100. Wildman. 18. 20. Flyin^
Heart. 20. 100. Lubeck. The Hunter. 20. 100.

With many others, whereof I cannot at present call to mind the Names. The
Danish Men of War now are Built much fitter for Service than they were
formerly, being neither so Large, so Bulky, nor so unweildy as they were in the
foregoing Ages, but readier either to Attack, Fly, or Pursue. No Prince in
Christendom is better Furnished with all things necessary for the fitting out a
Fleet, Norway and his other Territories; affording him all the Equipage
requisite for that purpose. He is also pretty well stored with Seamen, and
indeed all his Dominions being Islands, or Maritime Provinces, the Inhabitants
are almost Naturally Mariners. Nevertheless this Monarch is sometimes forced to
have recourse to strangers for Recruits of Men; the Northern Countries not
abounding so in People as they did in former times, when they Spawned and
poured forth such shoales as over ran not only most parts of Europe, but
continued their Incursions into Asia; But whether this be imputed to the
Abolishing of Poligamy, which the Introducing Christianity did reform, or that
the prevailing of Luxury has debilitated their pristine Vigor, and rendered
them the less fit for generation, certain it is, that no parts of Europe are
now so thin of Inhabitants, as these Northern Regions, and that the King of
Denmark has not People enough to Man out so many Ships He would be otherwise
capable to fit out: For without Exhausting or Impoverishing his Coffers, He is
able to Build Twelve Men of War every year. And considering the Scarcity of
Men, His Land Forces are much more considerable and better Martialized than
they have been under some of His latest Predecessors. But before I proceed to
particularize them, it will be convenient to set down the Names of the
Principal Officers of the Fleet.

Henery Bielek, Lord High Admiral. Niels Juel, General Admiral. Monsieur
Vlgerwindt, Vice Admiral. Monsieur Rodenstein Rere-Admiral. Mr. Seastidt, also
Rere-Admiral, and Commissioner General of the Holm.
The standing Army of the King of Denmark, consists of the Guards du Corpse of
the Kings, Queens, and Queen Mother, and of a Company of reformed Officers, all
Gentlemen, who in Buff-Coats, with Embroidered Sleeves, attend upon the King at
Court, and upon all great Solemnities with gilt Partisans, Feathers in their
Hats, resembling much the Band of our Gentlemen Pensioners. Of the following
Regiments, with the Officers and Major-Generals, having their Quarters as is
here set down.

Zealand.
Schack Governor of Copenhagen, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot. Marsaack of
Horse. Van Osten Colonel of a Regiment of Foot.
Funen.
Van Asken Infantry.
Juitland.
Leventzo Cavalry.
Laland.
Merherin. Cavalry.
Norway.
Duncam Cavalry. Degenfelt Infantry. Leyenhielm. Infantry. Baron Wallis,
Colonel of the Kings Regiment. Schonburg of the Queens. Meldrum Prince
Fredericks. Fox Prince Christians. Major Genereral Schack. Prince Georges.
General Weddell. Jutland. Petto Zealand. Rissel Funen. Frizen. Holstein.
With some others, whereof we have not the Names, there being daily Changes
made in reforming some, and raising others, making up in all a Body of about
30000 Men.

The Kingdom of Denmark, since the Reformation made in that State, in the year
1660 has a Perogative of as large extent as any Monarch in Christendom, having
Power without consulting the States, or his Senate to Declare War, make Peace,
send and receive Ambassadors, make Leagues and Treaties with any Foreign
States, Issue out Commissions for the Raising of Men both by Sea and Land,
dispose of all Castles, Fortresses, Ports, Havens, Ships of War, Magazines,
Ammunition, and public Moneys; appoint the Metal, Weight, Purity and Value
thereof, and by His Order can make any Foreign Coin, to be the current Money of
Denmark.

He can by his Letters Patent, Erect New Districts, Bishoprics, Universities,
Cities, Buroughs, Colleges, Hospitals, Schools, Fairs, Markets, Courts of
Justice, Forests, Chases, Free-Warrens, He can Enfranchise an Alien, and
render him a Denison, Enabling him to purchase Houses and Lands, and bear
Offices. He can also lay what Taxes he thinks fitting, upon ihs Subjects
without the previous consent of the States or Senate, Rating it District Town
or Person at his Pleasure. He can at his Will and Pleasure, Convene, Adjourn,
Prorogue, Remove the States and the Senate; Grant safe Conduct, Letters of Mart
and Reprizal with all the other Perogatives of an Independent Prince, nay, of
one whose Will is a Law.

The King of Denmark has all such things as are proper To a Monarch, as Crowns,
Scepters, Purple Robe, and Holy Unction, and acknowledges no Superior but
God, nor holds his Kingdom in Vassalage, nor receives his Investiture or
Instalment from another. Thus at the congress of Nimeguen, there being a
dispute between the French and Danish Ambassadors, about the Language they were
to Treat in, the French Insisting to Love both Parties, use French, the Danes
Replied, that if the French used the French, they would use Danish; Being well
assured that their Master yielded in nothing to the French King, either as to
the extent of his Perogative or of his Dominions. And since the Introduction
and Establishment in Denmark of the Augsbourg Confession, there lies no Appeal
from the King to the Pope, as there does in the Catholic Princes Dominions,
but He is Supreme Head and Governor, in all matters as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil; so that none of his Subjects whatsoever are exempt from his Jurisdiction
and Justice.

Hardly any Prince in Europe is looked upon with more Veneration and Respect
than this Monarch is by his Subjects, they paying him all those Respectuous
Duties, Devoirs and Reverence that a Sovereign can Receive.

But before I proceed any further, I shall give an account of the Royal Family
as it Stands at this day, as also of the Nobility and other Orders of the
Kingdom. And having already said that the King Married Charlotra Amalia, the
Daughter of William the Sixth Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, in the year 1669, He
has had by that Princess, the following Issue.

Frederick the Heir apparent Born on the 21st. of October, 1671.

Christianus Wilhelmus, Born on the 21st. of November 1672. Dyed on the 25 of
January 1673.

Christian Born on the 25th. of March, 1678.

Sophia Hedwig Bom on the 28. of August, 1677.

Since that Princess a younger Daughter.

Carolus, Born in the Year 1682. or the Queen Mother, Sophia Amalia.

Prince George the present Kings Brother, was Born in the year 1653. a Prince
of extraordinary Virtues and Qualifications, and all the Actions of whose Life,
both in Peace and War, have shown Wisdom, Valor, and Conduct, and more
particularly he gave extraordinary Testimonies of his Gallantry and Courage, in
the Battle of Lunden, when that the King his Brother being taken Prisoner by
the Sweeds, notwithstanding that the Enemies far Surpassed 'em in number, that
his Men were disheartened and overpowered; Nevertheless he rushed in amongst
them, cut his way through all Opposition, and Slew those Persons with his own
Hand, who had dared to lay hold on his Royal Brother; And thus delivered the
King from his Enemies.

Anna Sophia the King of Denmark's Eldest Sister, was born on the first of
September, in the year 1647. and was Married in September 1663. to John George
the Third of the Name, Prince Electoral of Saxony, the Son of the Elector John
George, and of Magdelena Sibyla Marchioness of Brandenbourg. And their Marriage
was consummated at Copenhagen, on the 16 of October, 1666.

Frederica Amalia, Born 1648. was Married at Gluckstadt on the 3d. of November
1667. to Christian Adolph, the Duke of Holstein Sunderbourg, the Son of the
Duke John Christian, and of Dorothea Johanna Countess of Swarthenbourg.

Wilhelmina Ernestina, Born on the 20 of June 1650. and Married to the present
Elector Palatine in the year 1671.

Vlrica Eleonora Sabina the Third Daughter, Born in the year -- and Married to
the present King of Sweeden in 1680. of the Ceremonies and Solemnization of
whose Marriage more hereafter.

Frederick Guldenlieu, Vice Roy of Norway the late Kings Natural Son.

Having thus spoken of the Kings Children and Brothers. I shall now proceed to
set down the Princes of the Blood, and other Branches of the Royal Family,
which form Sire Branches.

All these Princes are Issued from Christian the 3d. King of Denmark, except
the Branches of Oytin and of Golterp, which come from Adolph Duke of Heswick,
that same Kings Brother.

Sunderbourg.

Christian Adilphe of Denmark, Heir of Norway. Duke of Heswick, of Hostein
Sunderbourg, of Stormaria and Dithmarsh, was Born the 3d. of June 1641. of Duke
John Christian, (who Died the 20th. of August 1659.) Married at Geluckstadt the
3d. of November in the year 1667. Frederices Emilia Princess of Denmark, the
2d. Daughter of King Frederick the 3d. and of Sophia Amalia, Duchess of
Lunenburg his Wife. He has two Sisters.

Dorothea Augusta Born on the 12th. of September 1636. and Christina Elizabetha
Born on the 9th. of June, 1638. Married in the year 1656. with John Ernest,
Duke of Sax-Weymar.

Alexander Henry, the Uncle of Duke Christian Adolphus Born 1608. Ernest
Gunther, Alexanders Brother, Born 1609. Married Augusta of Holstein
Glucksbourg, the Daughter of Duke Philip, and of Sophia Hedwig of
Sax-Sawenbourg without Children.

George Frederick, Born in the year, 1611.

Augustus Philip likewise, Brother of Alexander, Born in the year 1612. Married
in 1645. Calrai Countess of Oldenbourg, the Daughter of Count Anthony, who Died
1647. and in Second Nuptials, Sidonia her Sister, (who Died 1650) and in the
Third Maria Sibylla, Countess of Nassaw; the Daughter of Count William Lewis:
Of which Marriages, He has not hitherto had any Children.

Philip Lewis, Duke of Holstein Sunderbourg, the Brother of those Princes,
Colonel of a Regiment of Foot against the Turk in the year 1662. was Born on
the 27 of October 1620. and had for his first Wife on the 15th of November
1643. Catharina Countess of Waldeck the Widow of Simon Lewis Count de Lip,
the Daughter of Count Christian, who departed this Life 1649. and was a Second
time Married in the year 1650. to Anna Margarita, Langravinne of Hess-Hombourg,
and of Margarita Elizabetha Countess of Leiningen from whom Issued two Sons and
three Daughters. Sophia Catharina their Sister born in the year 1617. Married
in the year 1635. to Anthony Gunther, Died without Children.

Norbourg.

Frederick Duke of Holstein Norbourg, the Uncle of the Duke of Sunderbourg, was
Born on the 26th of November 1581. of Duke John, and of his first Wife,
Elizabeth Duchess of Brunswick: the first Wife he Married in the year 1627.
was Juliana Duchess of Saxe-Lawenbourg, the Daughter of Duke Francis; and of
Mary Duchess of Brunswick, his Second Wife, who Died 1630. and he again
Married in 1632. Eleonora, Princess of Anhalt, the Daughter of Prince Rodolph
Zerbst, and of Dorothy Hedwige Duchess of Brunswick his first Wife. He died
1658. First Bed.

John Bugislas, Duke of Holspein Norbourg Born 1629. on the 30th. of September.
Second Bed.

Elizabeth Juliana, Born 1634. Married 1656. Anthony Vlrick Duke of Brunswick,
the Son of Augustus Duke of Brunswick, Wolphembuttel, and of Dorothy Princess
of Anhalt his Second Wife.

Dorothea Hedwig, Born 1636. Doyene of Gandersheim.

Christian Augustus, Born 1639.

Ludorica Amalia, Born 1642.

Rodolphus Frederick, Born 1645.

Gluckbourg.

Philip Duke of Holstein Gluckbourg, the Grand Uncle of Duke Christian
Augustus, was Born 1584. and died 1663. being the Brother of Duke Frederick
above mentioned, Born of the first Bed. Married in the year 1624. Sophia
Hedwig, Duchess of Saxe-Lawenbourg, the Daughter of Duke Frareis, and of Mary
Duchess of Brunswick his Second Wife, of which Marriage are Born.

Christian Born in 1627. and dyed 1671.

Mary-Elizabeth, Born in the year 1628. Married 1651. to George Albert Marquess
of Brandenbourg, and dyed 1664.

Adolphe, Born 1631.

Augusta, Born 1633. Married in 1651. to Ernest Gunther Duke of Holstein
Sunderbourg her Cousin, the Son of Duke Alexander and of the Duchess Dorothey
Countess of Schwartrenbourg.

Christina Born 1634. Married 1650.

Christian Duke of Saxony.

Dorothy, Born 1636. Married for the first time in the year 1653. Christian
Lewis Duke of Lunenbourg, and the Second on the 25th. of June 1668. Frederick
William Marquess of Brandenbourg Elector.

Hedwig, Born 1643.

Eleonor Duchess of Holstein, Sister of Philip, Born 1590.

Second Bed.

Hedwig the Sister of Dorothy, Born 1643.

Anna Sabina, the Duchess of Holstein, Born in the year 1593. of the Second
Bed of Duke John, of his Second Wise, Agnes-Hedwig, Princess of Anhalt, Married
School. Julius Frederick, Duke of Wirtembourg the Son of Duke Frederick, Count of
Montbeliard who left her a Widow. and died 1659.

Arnsbeck.

Joachim Ernest Duke of Holstein-Arnsbeck, Born in the year 1595. of John Duke
of Sleswick and of Holstein Sunderbourg, and of his Second Wife Agnes Hedwig
Princess of Anhalt, Born in the year 1595. Married in 1633. Dorothea Augusta
Duchess of Holstein leswick his Cousin, the Daughter of Duke John Adolphus,
and of the Princess Augusta of Denmark, He Dyed 1671. but had by that Princess
John Adolphus, in 1634. General Major of the Imperial Cavalry against the Turks
in 1664.

Augustus, Born in 1639. Ernestina in 1636. Joachim Ernest, 1637. Bernard,
1639. Agnes Hedwig, 1640. Sophia Eleonor, 1644.

Eleonor Sophia, the Sister of Joachim Ernest, Born 1603. of the Second Bed:
Married in the year 1625. Christian the young Prince of Anhalt, the Son of
Christian, Prince of Anhalt Barnbourg, whose Widow she is.

Gottorp.

Frederick Duke of Sleswick, of Holstein Gottorp, of Stormaria, of Dithmars,
Cousin German, of Duke Joachim Ernest, Born 1697. of Duke John Adolphus, and of
Augusta Princess of Denmark, Married in the year 1630. Mary-Elizabeth, Duchess
of Saxony, the Daughter of the Elector, John George, and of Magdalena Sibila of
Brandenbourg Prussia of which Alliance are Born the following Children. In the
year 1633. this Prince sent a signal Embassy into Muscovy and into Persia for
the Establishment of the Commerce by Land. He Alternates with the King of
Denmark, in the Admistration of Justice, in the Session at the Dyets of the
Empire, and in all the Rights of the Regale. He Died the 10 of Aug. 1659.

Sophia Augusta, Born 1630. Married, 1649. with John Prince of Anhalt Zerbst,
the Son of Prince Rodolphus.

Magdalena Sibila, Born 1631. Married in the year 1654. to Gustavus Adolphus,
Duke of Mecklembourg, the Son of Duke John Albert.

Mary Elizabeth, Born 1634. Married in the year 1650, to Lewis Landgrave of
Hesse Darmstadt, the Son of the Landgrave George the Second.

Hedwig Eleonor, Born 1636. on the 23 of October, Married in the year 1654. on
the 24 of October, Carolus Gustavus King of Sweeden, the Son of John Casimir
Count Palatine of the Rhine, and of Katharina Princess of Sweeden, Sister of
King Gustavus Adolphus.

Anna Dorothea, Born 1640. Augustus Frederick, Born 1646. Augusta Maria, 1649.

Ottingen or Oyten.

John Augustus Duke of Holstein Ottingen, Nephew of Duke Frederick Gottorp,
Born 1647. on the third of August, the Son of John Duke of Holstein Ottingen,
or Oyten, and of Juliana Felecita Duchess of Wirtembourg.

Dorothea Augusta, Sister of Duke Frederick Gottorp, Born 1602. Married in
1633. Joachim Ernest Duke of Holstein Arnsbourg, Her Cousin the Son of Duke
John, and of his Second Wife Agnes Hedwig, Princess of Anhalt.

Hedwig Sister of Dorothea, Born in 1603. Married in 1620. with Augustus Count
Palatine of Sultzbach, the Son of Philip Lewis, Count Palatine, Duke of
Newbourg, and Ann of Cleves, and of Juliers, Died in 1656.

And I shall pass on to the Nobles, who never Claim, nor pretend to the Titles
of Dukes, Earls, or Barons, but are such as have had a single Coat of Arms
belonging to their Family for many Ages. Denmark is said to have at this day,
some Families of that Nobility, of that antiquity as VVren and others, as to
have been present, at the Signing of a Treaty of Peace between Charles Magne
and the Danish King Hemmines on the Eider.

Out of this Body of the Nobility, are drawn the Senators of the Kingdom, or
the Members of the Council of State, who are Elected to the Number of 28. All a
Noblemans Goods, moveable and immovable are at his Death divided amongst his
Children, the Son having two Moities, and a Daughter only one. The King cannot
by the Laws of Denmark, purchase any part of a Noble-Mans Estate, neither can
the Nobles buy any of the Crown Lands, some Officers of the Crown, Knights of
the Order of the Elephant; Viceroys and Governors of Provinces and Places,
were formerly chosen out of the Body of the Nobility, and nominated by the
Election of the Senators, bating the Knights of the Order: But at present,
since the Reformation of that Kingdom, half of those Officers are drawn out of
the Body of the Burgery, the King being willing to consider, and Reward that
part of the State, which served with so much Courage and fidelity at the Siege
of Copenhagen, when that Capital of the Kingdom, was almost the only place
which sustained almost all Efforts of the Sweedish Army, which had taken in all
the rest of the Kingdom. But here I will Insert a Catalogue of the Principal
Families of the Nobility now in Denmark, in the following Alphabetical Order.

A
Achsel. Appelgard. Alefeld. Andersem.
B
Bielke. Banner. Brache. Bilig. Below. Bilde. Brokenhusem. Biorn. Beck. Blick.
Bassi. Bax. Baselich. Bille. Bilde. Bockowlt. Budde. Baggen. Bammelbourg.
Brune. Blom. Brocktorp. Breiden
D
Dreslelberch. Daac. Dune. Duram. Dam.
F
Freze. Fassi. Falster. Faleke.
G
Gulderstern. Grubbe. Goce. Green. Gelschut. Galle. Gram. Gris. Goss.
Gadendorp. Grahow.
H
Hardenberg. Holke. Hoken. Hiderstorper. Hiderstorper. Hube. Hesten. Hager.
Holer. Haeken. Hoier. Hacken. Harberger.
I
Jul. Jensen. Juenan. Juensen. Johensen.
K
Korwitz. Krabbe. Kaas. Krusen. Kragge. Krumpen. Kramdick. Kerckberg.
Karssenbrock. Kaelet. Kutzen.
L
Lange. Lindeman. Lunge. Lutkem. Laxman. Lancken. Leven. Luck. Lindow. Lutken.
M
Munck. Matiessen. Marizer. Must. Matre. Meinstorf. Maeten. Magnussen.
N
Negil. Narbu. Norman.
O
Ofrin. Otten.
P
Pasberg. Podessen. Podebussen. Papenheimb. Pogwisch. Plessen. Pe^sen. Paisen.
Petersen.
Q
Qualem. Quittow.
R
Rantzaw. Rosentkrantz. Rastorp. Ruthede. Reuter. Ruten. Rosenpart. Rosengard.
Roanow. Reventlow. Ratlow. Ritzerow.
S
Schram. Schefeldt. Schelen. Seestede. Stuege. Swron. Stantbeke. Split. Solle.
Swaben. Santbarch. Spar. Spegel. Sturen. Suinen. Staken. Stove. Siversersen.
T
Trolle. Tolten.
W
Wlefeld. Walkendorp. Wipfert. Witfelt. Wogersen. Wenflterman. Would. Worm.
Walstorp. Wensin. Wiltorp. Whrup. Vonsflet. Vartinnen. Wken. Voien. Vlstandt.
Vren.
Tho till some of late Creation, the Danish Nobles had neither the Titles of
Dutchies, Marquissates, Counties, nor Barrony, as other States; nor do they
Quarter their Arms, yet it is Customary for many of them to be Dubbed Knights,
upon any Signal piece of Service rendered to their Prince or Country.

Two Orders of Knighthood they have in Denmark, that of the Elephant and that
of Dancbrogh.

That of the Elephant was first instituted upon the occasion of King Christian
the first going in a kind of Pilgrimage to Rome, when as he was invested by
Pope Sixtus the Fourth with this Order, in Remembrance of our Lord and Savior,
and at the same time it was Ordained that the Succeeding Kings of Denmark,
should have a Successive Right to be Sovereigns of this Order. Whereupon the
foresaid King Christian, Built the Stately Chapel of the three Kings, in the
Cathedral at Roschildt where the solemnities of the Order were to be held, and
the Knights obliged to Assemble, for the choosing a new Member upon the Death
of any of their Fraternity. Into the Number whereof several Kings, Princes and
Noble Men have been Admitted. The chief Ensign of the Order, was the Figure of
an Elephant, on whose side (within a Rundle) was represented a Crown of Thorns,
with three Nails all Bloody; in Honor and Memory of the Passion of our Blessed
Savior. The Knights were obliged to the performance of Acts of Piety,
Alms-deeds, and certain Ceremonies particularly on those days on which they
wore the Ensigns of their Order. Some of the Kings of Denmark have been very
Zealous to raise the Honor of this Order to the Highest Esteem, and especially
their King John, who wore the Ensigns of it on every Solemn Festival, and so
promoted its value, that our King Henry the Eight, and King James the Fifth of
Scotland, were content to be of the Fraternity. Some Danish Writers are not of
Opinion, that it re eived its first Institution, when Christian the First had
those many Honors conferred on him by Pope Sixtus the Fourth, but that the
Badge was a mere Millitary Ensign, formerly bestowed as a Memorial and
Incitement to the Danish Princes, for the Defense and promoting of Christianity
against the Infidels. Heretofore the Knights wore a Collar of Gold, Composed of
Elephants and Crosses, fashioned somewhat like Crosses Ancrees, at which Hung
the Picture of the Virgin Mary to the middle holding Christ in Her Arms, and
surrounded with a Glory of Sun Beams. But at this day they only wear a Blew
Ribbond, at which hangs an Elephant Enameled white, Adorned with four large
Diamonds set in the middle. Those Elephants worn by the Knights, in the days of
Christian the Fourth, had in the same place within a Circle the Letter C. and
in the Heart thereof the figure of 4. made to signify Christianus Quartus. The
Kings of Denmark have Generally conferred this Honor on the days of their
Coronation, both upon the Nobles and Senators of the Kingdom. Frederick the
Third, brought into use an Embroidered Glory of Silver Purl, wrought upon the
left side of their Cloak or Vest, on which was Embroidered two Crowns within a
Rundle, bearing this Motto, Deus Providebit. But the Motto has changed with the
Sovereign, for that of the present King is Pietate (...) justitia; and this the
Knights of his Creation now Wear in the middle of the Circle; B^ all the
Knights of his Fathers making, a^ obliged to continue still the former Mott^^

The Order of Danebroge, or the Knight of the Holy Cross, was instituted in
remembrance of the Cross, which is said miraculously to have fallen into, and
preserved King Waldemar the Second's Army when that having lost their Standard,
his Forces were going to yield, and give themselves up a Prey to the Fury of
their Pagan Enemies the Lifelanders, with whom they were then Combating. This
Order* was Continued till the Relic was lost it solfe in Ditmarsh, after
which it was for a long while wholly laid aside, until revived again in the
year 1673. by the present King Christian the Fifth. This Prince ordained that
the Knights of this Order, of which Himself is one, should Wear an Enameled
Cross Edged round with Red, hung in a string of the same Color, reaching from
the Right Shoulder to the Left side.

Out of the Nobility, and the Knights, the Senators of the Kingdom were
formerly chosen, who anciently seldom exceeded the Numbers of Eight, but now
are a far greater Number. As long as they continued in their places, they were
maintained by the Country; They had Castles allowed to dwell in (by the King)
paid no Taxes, were only obliged to keep a certain number of Light Horse ready
for Service upon all Occasions, and attend upon the King at his Sunimous, upon
their own Charges, though not Bound so to do, if he went out of his Dominions,
and if sent upon Embassy's, had an Allowance out of the Treasury.

Besides these, were Pensioners, who (...) good Services Rendered the Crown,
had certain Lands for Life or a set number of Years Assigned them by the King
for their Maintenance; In consideration of which, they were to provide so many
Light Horse as the King thought fitting, and pay in Annually a certain Sum of
Money into the Exchequer. But since the Reformation of the Government in the
year 1660. The number of them is very much Retrenched.

The Principal Officers of the Crown of Denmark, are chosen from out amongst
the Nobility and Senators.

The First is the Grand-Master of the Kingdom, who is as the Kings Lieutenant.

The Second Holger Windt, the Lord High Treasurer, who receives in, and gives
Acquittances for all Sums paid into the Kings Exchequer, and has under him two
Secretaries of the Nobility, and a great Number of Inferior Clarks.

The Third the Lord High Chancellor, Henry Alefelt Count of Exingen and
Langland, whose Office is much the same as in other Kingdoms.

The Fourth the Grand Marshal, who provides necessaries for all manner of
dispatches, in the times of War and Peace. This Office is now enjoyed by J^^an
Christopher Corbitz.

The Lord High Admiral Henry Bielek. Knight of the Order of the Elephant; who
take; care of the Building and Reparing of all sorts of Ships belonging to the
Crown. He had under him a Vice Admiral, Niel Juel, who Acts by his Commission,
with Baron Jens Juel, and Mounsieur Rodenstein Rear Admirals; And Mounsieur
Seastede Commissary General of the Holm.

The Grand-Master of the Artillery.

The Master of the Horse, Mounsieur Axhuisen.

The Great Cup Bearer.

Mounsieur Knoel the First Gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber.

Mess. Sebulter and Bierman
Secretaries of State.

Mess. Sehuller and Jessen.
Secretaries to the King.

In the year 1660. the King of Denmark Established Seven Councils: The First of
State, wherein their Great-Master the King presides, and which Sits-once a
Year. The Second of the Finances, wherein the Lord High Treasurer Sits as
President. The Third the Chancery, wherein the Chancellor Presides. The Fourth
of the Militia wherein the Lord High Marshal Presides. The Fifth of Justice,
wherein Presides. N. The Sixth of the Admiralty, wherein Presides the Admiral;
And the Seventh of the Commerce.

Under the Viceroy of Norway, Frederick Count Guldenlew, Knight of the Order
of the Elephant, and Natural Son of the late King of Denmark, there be Five
particular Governments.

1. That of Bahus, the most Southern Government, but now under the Sweed 2. Of
Argerhus, Seaten in the Gulf of Ansloo or Opslo^, a Bishops See. 3. Of
Berghen, a Bishops See. 4. Of Drunthecim or Tronthecim an Archbishopric. 5.
Of Wardhus, the last place of Norway and of Christendom, Lying toward the
North, Scated in the Isle of Ward.
The Governments of the Provinces and Places of the Kingdom of Denmark.
Of Juitland, Mounsieur Lavenzo. Of Holstein N. Of Copenhaghen, Mounsieur
Sehack. Of Cronenburg Mounsieur Osten. Of the County N. N. Of Pinnenburg. N. N.
Of Dithmarse N. N. Of Starmaria N. N. Of Wagerland or Wagria. Of Finmark. Of
the Isle of Funen, M. G. Van Asken. Of the Isle of Bornholm. Of the Isle of
Island. Of the Isle of Greenland. Of Spitzbergen.
There are only Seven Bishoprics in Denmark; which are all in the Kings
disposal.

1. Copenhaghen, Whereof the Bishop has Arch-Piscopal Rights, but not the
Title. 2. Ripen. and both in the Nor. Juitland. 3. Arhusen. both in the Nor.
Juitland. 4. Odensee in the Isle of Funen. 5. Wiburg. 6. Arhusen. 7. Sleswick.
The Arch Bishop of Trunthein or Dronthein in the North of the Kingdom of
Norway, where is still seen the remains of the most Magnificent Church of the
North, Dedicated to S. Olaus. This Arch Bishop had the following Suffragan
Bishops.

1. Bergen the Metropolis of the Kingdom upon the Sea. 2. Staffanger upon the
Shore of the Western Ocean. 3. Hammar Reunited to the Bishopric of Ansloo. 4.
Ansloo or Opsloo above Bahuys. 5. Sodre an Island. 6. Greenland an Island. 7.
Schalholt an Island. 8. Hola or Kola, in the most Northern part of Norway.
But at this day the Bishoprics of Norway are reduced to Four, Namely,

1. Bergen. 2. Steinamanger. 3. Dronthein. 4. Christiana, under whose
Jurisdiction the rest are brought, unless some under Copenhaghen.

Denmark has produced many Men Famous for their Learning, and besides the Bards
or Druids, we have accounts of many other kinds of Poets and Learned Persons
amongst the ancient Danes. Some Authors tell us the several sorts of Verses
composed by the Scialdrae and Runae are innumerable; but may be at least the
best of them, Reduced to 36 Heads. It was formerly the custom of all the
Northern Nations, to have the Genealogies and Famous, Deeds of their Ancestors,
put into Doggerell, that being daily chanted over by the Parents to their
Children, they might be the easier Remembered and Transmitted to Posterity. The
Composers of these Ballads were the Grandees of the Nation, and looked upon as
the Princes Wisest Counselors. Nay, some for the Reward of a Song, or an
Epitaph have been presented with the Crown of Denmark. But as it would be an
endless matter to set down all the Danish Authors, we shall content our selves
with Inserting the following Catalogue.

Saxo Grammaticus, who Writ the History of Denmark, in a most Elegant Style,
and Lived in the Twelsth Centuary.

2. Erasmus Latus, Professor of Divinity in the University of Copenhaghen.

3. Nicolaus Hemmingius noted for his Ingenious Commentaries upon the Scripture.

4. Tycho Brahe, a Danish Nobleman, Famous for his Admirable Observations in
Astronomy.

King Frederick the Second, gave him the Island Ween, where Tycho built his
Vranibourg, about the year 1575 being an observatory* in the form of a Castle,
and Fenced round with regular Fortifications, and which he finding a place
remote from all troubles, and a fit retirement for a Student, he Adorned it
with a Collection of the most exact Mathematical Instruments that could be
procured.

5. Christianus severini Longomontanus was Bred up in the Science of Astronomy,
by Tycho Brahe, and has written several Ingenious pieces thereof.

6. Arrild Witfield, Lord of Ordersberch reduced, Saxo's History to a
Chronological method and Composed an accurate Chronicle of the Kings of Denmark
and Norway, in the Danish Tongue.

7. Stephanus Stephanius, Professor of History in the University of Sor has
Illustrated Saxo Gramaticus with Ingenious Annotations, and writ an Account of
the State of Denmark during the Reign of Christian the Third.

8. Olaus Wormius has made a Rare Collection of Natural Curiosities, and great
discoveries into the Misterious Runick Learning.

9. Petrus Johannes Resenius, a great Antiquary, as may be seen by His Edda
Islandorum, and other Curious pieces.

To these may be added, Petrus Severinus, Borrichius, the two Bartholins, the
one of whom Gasper Bartholinis supposed to have made the Dial of the Cathedral
of Lunden in Schonen, which Dial shows the Year, Month, Week, Day, and Hour of
the Day, all at the same time; with all Feasts both Moveable and fixed, as also
the Motions of the Sun and Moon, and their Progress through every Degree of the
Zodiac. This Clock is so Ordered by Artificial Engines, that when ever it
strikes, two Horsemen come forth and Encounter each other, the one giving the
other just so many Blows as the Hammer is to strike upon the Bell: at what time
a Door opening, the Virgin Mary appears, sitting upon a Throne with Christ in
Her Arms, and the Magi doing him Reverence, and two Trumpets Sounding all the
while.

And this Register I suppose, is sufficient to show, how much Denmark has
Contributed toward the Advancement of Learning.

The Citizens and Merchants form the Third Order of the Kingdom, and the
Peasants or Rustis, the Fourth, who are either Freeholders: such as have
Hereditary Estates, paying only some small quit Rent to their Landlords or
Wornede Villains, absolutely in the Power of their Lords.

The Cities are Governed by their distinct Corporations. And the Citizens enjoy
peculiar Privileges, and Charters, as in other States of Europe. Out of these
two last Orders are Elected, the Archbishops, the Bishops, the Canons,
Pastors, and Senators of Cities and other: lesser Officers.

Whilst the Kingdom of Denmark lay confused and broken into several parts, all
the Provinces had not all the same Law, but were Governed by peculiar Statutes.
Whence we read of Leges Scanicae, Leges Sialandice, and the like. But when they
came to be reunited under on Head, they became all Subject to the same Law. The
Laws now in use were compiled into one Body, which they call the Iydse Lowbog,
or the Book of the Laws of Juitland, and Established by King Waldemar the
Second. But nevertheless sometimes changed according to the Circumstances of
the juncture. Thus Murder was formerly punished, only with a pecuniary Mulct,
but now with Death. The Ancient Danes were so Zealous, to have their Estates
enjoyed by the right Heirs, that they punished Adultery with Death; which Law
is still in force in Sweeden, Saxony, and many other Parts of Germany.

The Danes used formerly, and do still, in some parts of Juitland, to Assemble
every Parish by themselves once a Year in the Fields, to Determine all
Controversies by Twelve Select Men, from whom an Appeal lay to the Judge of the
Province, upon the inreconciliation of the Parties, and thence to the Supreme
Court of Justices, and this custom of a Jury of Twelve Men, was undoubtedly
derived to the English from the Danes.

But the Heathen Danes, did likewise determine Controversies by Duels, wherein
the Justice of the Cause was Demonstrated by the success. But Christianity
Abolished this Custom, when one Loppo upon its first Planting, for the
confirming the truth of His Doctrine, took up with his bare Hands, Glowing-Hot
Bars of Iron, without the least Harm to the Admiration of all the Beholders.
This Miracle wrought a change both in the Religion and Laws of the Realm, for
King Sweno Ordered that thence forward, all Persons accused of any Heinous
Crime, should clear themselves by carrying in their Hands a Glowing Plowshare,
or some other piece of Hot Iron.

This kind of purging is called by some of the Danish Writers Jerntegn, i. e.
Irontoken; by others Ordale. Our Saxon Ancestors borrowed from the Danes
several kinds of Ordale, as by carrying a Bar of Hot Iron up to the High Alter
Bare-Hand; by Treading Barefoot and Blindfold over a certain number of Glowing
Bars, laid on the ground at unequal distance; by thrusting the Naked Arm into
a pot of Boiling Water; and lastly as they use to try Witches, by throwing the
accused Party into a River or deep Vessel of cold Water. The First that
thoroughly Abolished all kinds of Ordale in Denmark, was King Waldemar the
Second, about the year 1240. at the request of Pope Innocent the Third.

The Coins in use in Denmark are Duccates of Gold, of the value of two
Rixdollers, or Crowns of Gold, of the value either of Eighteen or Nineteen
Marks, or, the double of these. The lesser Danish Coyns are 1. Huide, whereof
three make one of their Shillings. 2. Soslinger, whereof two make one Shilling.
3. Shilling whereof sixteen make a Mark. 4. A mark which is the fourth part of
a Slet Dollar. 5. A Rix-Dollar, which is Six Marks, or, ninety fix Shillings.

At the Solemnization of Weddings, Christnings, and Buryals in Denmark, they
spare no expenses to seem Noble and Magnificent, sometimes rather than want a
Splendid Funeral for their Relations, they keep the (...) Corpse for several
years, and in the mean while scrape and heap up as much Money as will maintain
the pomp of its Funeral.

And now I shall proceed to the Topographical Description of each particular
Place and Province of the King of Denmarks Dominions.

The Cimbrick Chersonese has on the East the Baltic Sea, on the West, the
main German Ocean, on the North a part of the bending into the narrow Straight,
called the Dealt, on the South, with the great River of Albis, on the
South-East, with the small River of Trave, it was so called from the Kempers,
Men of Vast Bodies and Strength, and whom the Romans called Cimbri, the Greeks
Cimmeri, and their Country Chersonesus Cimbrica, which Name was given to the
whole Tract of Land beyond the Elb; the latter Historians confine it to that
part only, which now goes under the Name of Juitland.

It is in length about 100 Italian Miles, and 80 in Breadth, and comprehends
in that extent of Ground, 33 Walled Towns, six Episcopal Sees, (besides those
of Hamburg and Lubeck) which are under the Arch Bishops of Bremen, and 20 Royal
Castles and Palaces. It is at present divided into the Dukedom of Holstein and
the Province of Juitland.

The Dukedom of Holstein went under the General Name of Nortablingia, or, the
Country beyond the Elb, Northwards, and contains those four Provinces, 1.
Wagerland. 2. Di^marse. 3. Stormar. 4. Holest or Holstein; Specially so called
from the Dutch word Holst, which signifies a Wood or Forest, according to the
Nature of the Country.

Wagerland is that part of Holstein which lies on the South-East of this
Chersonesus, and so called from the Wagriane a Tribe or Nation of the Selaves,
who possessed this tract The Chief Towns are, 1. Lubeck pleasantly Seated on
the Confluence of the Trave, and the Billow, the River being capable of Ships
of a Thousand Tun; This is an Imperial and Hanse Town, driving a vast Trade,
being Reckoned to have about 600 Ships of all sorts, some of a Thousand Tun and
upwards, it is one of the best Built and most Beautiful Cities of all Germany,
being in compass about six Miles, Fortified with a double Wall, deep Ditches,
and unfordable Rivers. It was made so Headstrong by the Privileges conferred
upon it, by the Dukes of Holstein, that it bid defiance to its Sovereign, and
became a Dukedom of its self; Tho the Kings of Denmark have ever continued
their Claim, and it is thought the present Prince has now a design of
Vigorously Executing his Pretentions. 2. Segeburg, on the River Trave, four
Dutch Miles from Lubeck, and near the Head of that River. 3. Oldeslo, on the
same River in the midst betwixt both. 4. Gronneberg, and 5. Newkirk, on the
Baltick-Shore: And 6. Stendorp, more within the Land, near the Edge of a Lake,
out of which runs the River Suentin. 7. Ploen an Ancient City exceedingly well
fortified.

In the furthest Corner of Wagerland lies the Ancient and Famous County of
Oldenburg; divided from the rest of this Province by the River Brochaw. It Is
principal City Oldenburg, was formerly the Metropolis of the Wagrians, and
Venedi a Town of great Trade, and exceeding Populous, but since the Port was
stopped up by the command of Queen Margaret, its Splendor has daily lessened,
and by the late dreadful Desolation, caused by Thunder and Lightning, which
laid wast the best and greatest part of the City, it is become now much less
considerable than it was before: from the Princes of this Country is derived
the Present Royal Family of Denmark.

The Province of Ditmarsh lies along the German Ocean, Inhabited by People of
the Saxon Race, who never could be brought under the Dukes of Holstein, until
Holstein it self was annexed to the Crown of Denmark. The Chief Towns are
Meldorp upon the Ocean, the chief of the Province. 2. Lunden, opposite to
Tonningen near the mouth of the Eyder. 3. Heyde, a large but poor City.

Stormar, so called from the Marshy Ground lying along the River Stoer. The
Principal Cities are Hamburg, upon the Bille, where it falls into the Elb, an
Ancient Town Built in the time of the Saxons, being one of the largest, best
Built, most Beautiful and Richest Cities of Europe. Upon the Right the Dukes of
Holstein had to this City, it Swore Allegiance to Christian the First, King of
Denmark, which pretentions have upon all occasions been renewed by those
Princes, and more particularly after the conclusion of the late Peace with
Sweeden, when the present King drew his Army about that Town, which though not
sufficient to force such a City, yet coming at first as near it as he pleased,
by means of the Neighborhood of Altena, raised Batteries for his Artillery and
Bombes, with which he might have easily Incommoded the Town. Whereupon several
Princes Vigorously Interposing for an accommodation, it was provisionally
concluded on the First of November 1679. The Rights of the King of Denmark, and
of the City of Hamburg, Remaining as they were, until that the point of Homage,
and the other differences, which depended betwixt his Danish Majesty and that
Town, should in an amicable way be decided by course of Law. Now the chief
condition of that accommodation, was an obligation by the Town of Hamburg to
pay, at five Terms, to his Danish Majesty, the Sum of two hundred and twenty
thousand Crowns; In consideration whereof that King Remitted the Indignation he
had conceived against that Town, Renounced the Pretentions that he had to the
Land Jointly possessed by Hambourg and Lubeck; and promised to restore the
Ships, Goods, Commodities, and Inhabitants of Hambourg, which had been Seized
upon the account of these pretentions.

Other Towns of Note are 1. Gluckstadt, Built and well Fortified by King
Christian the Fourth, and much improved by His Successors. It commands the
passage of the Elb; so that it highly concerns the Hamburgers to be at Peace
with the King of Denmark. 2: Crempe, seated on a small River of the same Name,
and is one of the Keys of the Kingdom of Denmark, 3. Litzehoa. 4. Bredenbourg,
one of the Neatest little Towns in all the King of Denmark's Territories.

As for Holstein it self, it takes up the Inland parts between Stormar and
Juitland save that it has an Outlet into the Baltic, on the South-VVest of
VVagerland, the chief Towns are Kiel, seated upon a Navigable Arm of the
Baltic. 2. Rensbourg the best fortified Town in the Dukedom. 3. VVilstor, a
Neat and well Built City. 4. Niew-Munster, on the North-VVest of the Stor, and
not far from the Head of it.

And now for Juitland, it comprehends all that part of the Cimbrick
Chersonese that is divided from the Dukedom of Holstein, by the River Eyder,
the Ancient boundary betwixt the Saxons and the Danes but principally by a long
Trench and Wall from one Sea to the other, of such breadth, that a Chariot, or
two Horsemen a Breast, might Ride upon it. Godfrey King of Denmark, first
Building this Trench in the time of Charlemain, or Charles the Great, in
Immitation of the Picts Wall in England, for hindering the Incursions of the
Saxons, or stopping the Carrier of the said Emperors Victories. The Tract of
this Wall being still manifest to be seen, is call d Dennewark (or the Danes
work) to this very day.

Juitland was so called from the Juites, who, together with the Angli and
Neighboring Saxons made a Conquest of the best part of Britain. But the
Ancient Inhabitants of this Province in the time of Prolomy and before, were
the Cobandi, Chaly, Phundusi, Charudes, and in the most Northern Tracts the
Cimbri, of whom the four first were but Tribes or Nations Upon that great
expedition against Spain made by the Vandals on the Roman Empire, the Juits and
Angli though fit to Enlarge and shift their Habitations, each taking possession
of such quarters as lay nearest to them; Those Juites or Getae being a People
of Scandia or Schonen, and there placed by Ptolomy; for he went up the Northern
parts of the Cimbrick Charsonese, and gave it the Name of Juitland; the other
being a People of the Suevi, dwelling on the South of the Elb, possessed
themselves of those parts which lay next their old Friends and Confederates the
Saxons, their chief Town being Sleswick, where Angelen, now an obscure Village,
but of great note in former times, does preserve their memory. Upon the Angli's
joining with the Saxons in the Conquest of Britain, the Danes took that
opportunity of Invading it in the absence of the Natives; and having Conquered
it as far as the River Eyder, they planted it with Colonies of their own
Nation, and made it a part of that Kingdom.

The Air of this Country is much more mild than that of the other Provinces of
these Northern Parts, being temperated by the warm vapors of the Sea.

The Soil of Juitland is extremely rich, producing and affording all things
necessary for the life of man. The Country being for the most part plain,
little swelled with Mountains, the Inhabitants reaping this double advantage
from their Fields, in that they yield interchangeably both Fish and Corn; for,
during one three years they plough the Land, and constantly reap the Fruits of
it; and for the next three, let the Pools overflow the Land, to the end the
Fish may eat up the Grass (whom they catch as often as they please) and the Mud
which is left behind enriches the Soil.

Juitland too abounds so in Cattle; that sends yearly into Germany 50000
Oxen, besides great store of Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Horses and Swine,
having such plenty of excellent Hams, that most of those which pass here in
England under the name of Westphalia's, come from thence. It has all manner of
Game Fowl, either for diversion, necessaries, or luxury. It Is Pools, Lakes and
Rivers are furnished with all sorts of fresh Fish, especially most excellent
Salmons, and in great abundance. It Is commodious Bays provide with plenty all
sorts of Foraign Commodities, as well as the Sea does Whitings, Soles,
Herrings, Mackeril, Pilchards, Oysters, Smelts, Sprats, Shrimps, Lobsters,
Crabs, Thornback, Rusfes, Muscles, Prawns, Cockles, Conge, Turbots, Mades,
Scute, Escalops, Cod, etc. Neither is it wanting of good Fruits. It has
excellent Timber, both for building, for Shipping and for Firing. In short,
hardly any Country furnishes more toward the necessities, nay, and the
amuzement, and the diversions too of life, than this does.

In regard of the Climate, it cannot be expected that its Vines should come to
any perfection, they being only to be ripened by the heat of the Sun; but its
own Commodities procure it the best Wines of all Countries, which nevertheless
it does not stand in need of, it producing vast plenty and most excellent
Barley, whereof they make their Ale and other Liquors, which if not more
toothsome, yet perhaps more natural to their bodies and constitutions.

It likewise Transports into other Countries great Stores of Equipage for
Shipping, Armors, Ox-hides, Buck-skins, Wainscot, Fir-wood, and the like.

Juitland is divided into North and South, the latter contains many
considerable Towns; as first, Flensbourch, a deep, safe and commodious Port;
Halem upon the German Ocean, near the mouth of the River Eyder; Itadersleeve, a
Bishops See; Sondenberg, in the Peninsula, called Eyderstede, over against the
Strandt, an Island of the German Ocean; Sternberg, the ordinary Residence of
the King of Denmark's Governor Gottorp, a strong Castle of the Duke of
Slyvicks at the end of a large Inlet of the Baltic, remarkable for the
Toll-Booth; at which Toll is paid one year with another for 50000 Oxen
transported out of North Juitland into Germany; Seswick the principal Town of
this Province, an Episcopal See, and the Head of a Dukedom.

When Christian Earl of Oldenburgh was chosen King of Denmark, the Dukedom of
Holstein became part of that Kingdom. Yet so that the Kings of Denmark were
reckoned Princes of the Empire, as Dukes of Holstein, tho not obliged to repair
to any Diet. Afterward the title of Duke of Holstein, with a considerable part
of the Country, was given to Adolph Christian the third brother, who Governed
it interchangeably with his Brother by turns. Upon the decease of this Duke and
his Issue-Male; the title was conferred on Vlric King Christian the Fourth's
Brother. Since his days there have been several Houses of the Dukes of
Holstein, as has been before shown; amongst whom the Duke of Holstein Gottorp
is chief, and challenges the same power in governing and administering of
Justice, as was at first conferred upon Duke Adolph, King Christian the 3's
Brother. In the late Wars, the King of Denmark forced the present Duke of
Gottorp to quit his Dukedom, and abandon all Holstein to his Majesty's
possession. But at the signing of the Treaty between the Kings of France,
Denmark and Sweden at Fontainbleu, Sept. 2. 1679. the Danish Ministers promised
their Master should at the desire of his most Christian Majesty, restore to the
said Duke all his Countries, Towns and Places, in the same State they were at
the signing of the Treaty, with all the Sovereignty that belonged to him, by
virtue of the Treaties of Rosehild, Copenhagen and Westphalia. The Duke
expected, besides being restored to his Countries, some recompense for the
damage his Territories had suffered during the War, by the vast sums of Money
which the King of Denmark had raised therein, as being one of the best
Countries in all the North, or at least to have had back the Cannon (being 100
excellent brass pieces.) But his expectations in this point were not answered.

North Juitland has on the South the Dukedom of Sleswick but surrounded by all
other parts by the Sea, is divided into 4 Diocesses or Districts: that of Rip
or Ripen, containing 30 Prefectures or Here (as they use to call them) seven
Cities (...) walled Towns, and ten Castles.

2. That of Arhusen lying on the North of Ripen, and more toward the Baltic
containing 31 Herets or Prefectures, 7 Cities or walled Towns, 5 Castles, and
the Islands of Sumsoe, Hiolim, Tuecen, Hiance^ Hilgenes and others.

3. That of Wiburg on the North of Arhusen, containing 16 Herets, the Islands
of Jegen. 2. Hansholm. 3. Ostholm. 4. Cisland. 5. Egholm. 6. Bodum. Three Citys
or walled Towns, and as many Castles, the principal whereof is Wiborch an
Episcopal See; the ordinary seat of Judicature, for both the Juitlands.

4. That of Alburg or Vandalia, which is subdivided into four parts, as 1.
Thyland, whose chief Town is Alborch the Bishop of Vandalia's usual Seat and
Residence. 2. Morsce containing three Herets, the Town of Nicoping, the Castle
of Lunsted, and the Isle of Ageroe. 3. Hanheret containing four Herets, the
Town of Thystad, a kind of University, the Castle of Orum, and the Islands of
Oland and Oxholm. In this District stands the Rock called Skaringclint,
serving for a Sea Mark to prevent Mariners running against the Quicksands
which lie about this Coast. 4. Wensyssel, Vensilia or Wenslie contains six
Herets or Prefectures. The Islands of Grosholm of Hertshorn, and Tidesholm, one
Castle and three Towns; the most remarkable of which is Scagen, standing at the
utmost Promontory, or most Northerly Point of all this Chersonese, being
notorious for the Shipwreck of many Ships of all Nations.

Zealand the largest, fairest, and most fertile Island in the Baltic Sea, lies
East of Juitland, from which separated by an arm of the Sea, called the Belt
and West of Schonen, from which it is parted by a fresh River not above a Dutch
Mile in breadth, commonly called by the name of the Sund or Sound. This Island
being about twelve German Miles broad, and eighteen long.

It was anciently called Codanonia, which signifies the same thing as the
modern words Danes or Denmark. Many of the Danish Etymologists derive Seeland
from Sordland or Seedland from the abundance of Corn which this Country
affords. Others with greater Probability make the word signify no more than an
Island or parcel of Ground encompassed with the Sea.

This Island contains 15 Cities or Walled Towns, the principal whereof are
Copenhagen (the Metropolis of this Island and of the whole Kingdom of Denmark,
which is seated on the East Part of Zealand upon the Sea shore. The Danes call
it Kiobenhaun, and the Germans Copenharen, both which words are corruptions of
Kiobm inshaven, or the Kaven of Merchants. The Town is of an Orbicular form,
and very well fortified since the War in 1659. with the Swedes, having an
Arcenal which perhaps excels any thing of that kind in Europe; In the Arcenal
is kept a Coach with springs, by which means it goes as if it were of it self,
and of its own movement; but the Artifice of this Work depends on two men
hidden under a covering in the Coach, of whom the one turned the Wheels, which
pushed it on, and the other guided it by the means of a Rudder in the Head. Its
Cathedral Church dedicated to St. Mary, is beautified with a noble Copper
Spire, built at the charges of King Christian the Fourth. The Advowsance of
this Church belongs to the Professors in the Universitie which was founded by
Ericus the Ninth, but perfected by King Christian the First: by him and the
succeeding Princes liberally endowed. The City is Governed by four
Burgo-masters, one whereof is Regent or President for his life. This Honor is
conferred at present on that deserving and learned Person P. John Resenius
Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University at Copenhagen, and Counselor
to the present King of Denmark. Amongst the Ornaments of the Town are the
Marketplace, which is exceeding spacious; the King's Palace all covered with
Copper, standing in an Island, wherein is kept a Ship of Ivory, wholly fitted,
whereof the Tackling, Sails and Cannons were entirely of Ivory being an
extraordinary fine piece of Manufacture. The Observatory, or Runde Toorn which
is very remarkable, and especially for the fashion of its Staircase, if we may
call it so, which is nothing but a Pavement which mount singeniously without
Steps; and it is so very broad a Coach may easily go up to the top, and there
too it has room enough to turn in. This Tower was built on purpose for the use
of Astronomers, and out of it you go into a fine Library which stands on the
side of the Tower. There is Marks of the Siege to be seen, which the Swedes
laid to this City; amongst others, a Bell made so full of holes by Cannon
Bullets, that the King has thought fitting the marks thereof should remain
visible by causing all the places that were pierced to be guilt. The Exchange
is richly worth the seeing, and will merit a more ample Description than this
Compendium of the whole Kingdom will admit. The Citizens Houses, till within
these few years were very mean and low, most of them patcht up of Wood and
Mortar; indeed the first rise of this City was but very mean, for about the
year 1168. Axil Wide surnamed Snare Archbishop of Denmark, built a considerable
Fortification in this Island, wherein now stands the Castle. This was called
after his Name Axel-huys; and was a good defense to the whole Island against
the daily incursions of Pirates. Under the protection of this Fort several
Fishermen, and others that Traded this way, used to Harbor their Ships in
security; this caused a continual concourse of the Natives, who resorted hither
to furnish the Vessels with such Provisions as their Country afforded; and in a
short time laid the first rude Draughts of a City, which at this day for
Strength, Trade, Beauty and Bulk is not surpassed by many in Europe; for of
late the Citizens are grown more curious, and experienced in Architecture, and
few of their Streets are without a considerable number of stately brick
Buildings. Its Haven also being one of the best in Europe.

Amaga Amagri is Amagra or Ammak, is a small Island on the East of Copenhagen,
about six English Miles in length and four in breadth; it abounds wonderfully
in all manner of Fowl and Venison, has in it plenty of Corn, and furnishes the
Market at Copenhagen with weekly supplies of Milk, Butter, Cheese, etc. This
Isle of Ammak contains four or five Villages, and has two Parish Churches. But
before we leave this Island, it will not perhaps be ungrateful to relate an
Encounter which happened in it at the Siege of Copenhagen in 1660. which was so
much the more considerable, because both the Northern Kings were personally
engaged in the action. The Swede observing that the Dane daily fetched
Provisions from the aforementioned Isle, the Ammak was resolved to make a
Descent in order to burn the Villages, and destroy whatever might afford
sustenance or relief to the besieged; for which purpose he put aboard about
1200 Foot, and 400 Horse; and the King himself would needs be of the Party,
thinking nothing so well done as where he was present, as well as naturally
ambitious of sharing personally in the glory of every brave action. Coming to
the height of the Draker, he forced his Landing upon the Point of the Isle, and
constrained them upon the Guard to abandon their Post. He marches up the Isle,
and destroys all before him; and the Danes fearing he came to fortify some
Post on that side, set fire to the Village next adjacent to the Town, as the
Swede had done to the rest. Having done this work, the Swede retreats to his
Boats too securely: some scattered from the Body, others encumbred with
Plunder. Mean while the Danish King Sallies out in person with three hundred
Horse, and two hundred Dragoons, besides some few Commanded Foot mounted
behind, falls in upon the Swedish Rear, flew several of them, and put the rest
in disorder. The Swedish King mounted upon an unruly Horse, bounding and
curveting with him, ran great hazard of falling that day into the Danish hands.
But the Dane either not knowing all his advantages, or not willing to be drawn
too far from his Town, by an over eager pressing upon an Enemy who out numbered
him, sounded a seasonable retreat.

The next place of Note is Roschild, which takes its name from a River running
by the Town, which drives scaven Mills; It was formerly the Metropolis of the
whole Kingdom, fortified with a Wall, Ditch and Bulwark, and contained no less
than 27 fair Churches. This Town was made a Bishop's See by Suenotho King of
England, Denmark, Sweden and Norway about the year 1012. who gave the
Bishopric of Roschild (which is now swallowed up by Copenhagen) to Gerebrand a
Monk. In the Cathedral Church of this Town, are to be seen very fair and
sumptuous Tombs of many of the Danish Kings.

Elseneur, the chief Ornament and Strength of which Town lies in Cronenburg, is
seated on that neck of the Sea called Orisundt or the Sound, which parts
Sealand from Schonen. Cronenburgh is built of hewn Freestone, brought hither
out of Scotland, and this undertaken with incredible pains and charge by King
Fredrick the Second, without a penny Subsidy from the Subjects, tho he covered
it with Coper; the Foundation of it being laid on huge Stone sunk into the Sea,
and so fastened together, that no Storm or Tempest, how violent soever, is able
to shake it; well fortified as well as founded, and mixed of a Palace and of a
Fort, having for many years been the Seat of the Danish Kings, who had from
hence one of the most pleasant and profitable prospects of the whole Kingdom:
every Ship that passes this Straight, being obliged to strike Sail to
Croneburg; and that done, the Master is to come to a Composition in the City
for Custom, upon the pain of the Confiscation and Loading.

Fredericksberg seated amongst pleasant Woods of Beech, and about the middle
way between Elseneur and Copenhagen; this Fabric was first began by one Harlef
a Danish Nobleman, who sold it to King Fredrick the Second, who fell upon
enlarging and beautifying it to a high degree. After this King's death, his Son
Christian the Fourth spared no charges in completing what his Father left
unfinished, adorning it with the richest Pictures, Statues, Hangings, the Locks
and bars in the Windows being all of beaten Silver, so as it not only surpasses
all that is in the North: but the World can hardly parallel this piece. The
adjoining Park has amongst other Foreign Beasts a Stock of Foreign Deer
transported hither out of England in the 24 of Q. Eliz.

Ringstede, a Town of the greatest Antiquity of any except Roschild in Denmark;
many of the Danish Kings lying buried in the place, particularly King Waldemar
the First, and Eric the Godly; its situation being in the very Center of the
Land; its want of Trade, makes it daily decay.

Sora of old being beautified with a goodly Monastery, the Revenues whereof, at
the alteration of Religion, were converted to the maintenance of a Free School
built here by Fredrick the First. But in the year 1623. Christiern the fourth
adding hereunto the Revenues of two other dissolved Monasteries, the one of the
Isle of Laland, and the other in Juitland, founded here a new University for
the maintenance of several learned men, who were to be employed in writing and
publishing the History of the Acts and Monuments of the Kings, and other
Heroes, of Denmark; and for the better supply of Learned Ministers for the
Churches of Denmark and Norway (which before could not be provided for out of
Copenhagen, and furnished it with men of eminence in all Arts and Sciences for
its first Professors. Besides, he annexed an Academy with fit Masters, to teach
perfectly all Gentile and Marshal Exercises, as Dancing, Vaultings, Riding the
Great Horse, etc.

Anderskaw or Andershauw, formerly a great Monastery, now a strong Castle about
an English Mile from Slagen. It is is seated in a level Champaign Country, and
delicately well built.

Kallenburg was formerly a small Village inhabited by none but Fishermen, but
about the year 1158. or I as some, 117. it was turned into a City, and
beautified with a Castle, Church and several other public Buildings. It Is at
present a Town of good Trade, having the convenience of as safe an Harbor for
Ships as any Haven in Denmark.

Korsor, so called from the Multitude of Crosses erected formerly in the places
out of the abundance of superstitious zeal in the Inhabitants.

Koge, a small but very rich and populous City; about sixteen English Miles
from Copenhagen. It is a place much thronged with Corn Merchants, and
Fishmongers, driving a considerable Trade, and being in a pleasant situation.

FVNEN.
FVnen is Situated betwixt Seeland and Juitland, from which last it is parted
by a Straight, called Middlefar-sundt, about one German Mile in breadth, and
separated from Seeland by the Beltis sundt, or Baltic Bay, which is so narrow
and small a Frith, that the Island and the Chersonese seem joined together.

The length of this Island from East to West is Ten German Miles, and the
breadth Eight: It is looked upon as the Pleasantest piece of Ground in the King
of Denmark's Dominions; abounding besides with all manner of Corn, especially
Wheat and Rye, which is hence Yearly Transported in great Quantities unto other
Nations. Besides, the Natives have generally great Herds of Cattle, and good
Breeds of Horses. The Woods, which overspread almost the whole Island, are
exceeding well stored with Deer, Hares, and Foxes. This Island contains Four
and Twenty Herets or Prefectures, Sixteen Towns, and Six Royal Castles, besides
many goodly Villages and Gentlemen's Houses.

The Chief City of Funen is Ottensee, seated in the very center of the Island,
and therefore a fit place for the Sessions of the Nobility and Magistracy,
which are Yearly held in this place; as were likewise the General Assemblies of
the Kingdom of Denmark, before the Year 1660. The Buildings in this Town are
generally well Built, and the Streets Uniform. Besides other Public
Structures, there are in it two fair Churches, whereof one is Dedicated to St.
Cnuts, the other to St. Francis. Not far from the former of these stands a
stately Town Hall upon a very spacious Marketplace, where King Fredrick the
Second renewed the Ancient League between the Crown of Denmark and the Dukes of
Holstein and Sleswick, in the Year 1575. When the Quires of St. Cnut's Church
was Repaired in the Year 1582, the Work men found in a Vaulta Copper Coffin,
gilded and adorned with Precious Stones, upon which was writ the following
Inscription in Old Latine-Gothic Characters.

Jam Coelo tutus summo cum Rege Canutus
Martyr in aurata Rex atque reconditur arca:
Et pro justitiae factis occisus inique;
Vt Christum vitae sic morte fatetur in ipsa.
Traditur a proprio sicut Deus ipse, Ministro.
A. D. MLXXXVI. Other Towns of Note in Funen, are, 1. Bowens, a Port Town of
good Trade on the West side of the Island, at the North end of Medelfar sund.
2. Middlefar, seated on the Common Passage from this Island to Kolding in
Juitland. On the thirteenth of January, in the Year 1658, Carolus Gustavus,
King of Sweden, led his Army over the Ice to this place, and having Routed the
Danish Forces which Opposed him, made himself Master of the whole Island of
Funen. 3. Ascens, not far from the Mountains of Ossenburg, memorable only for a
Victory gained near it by John Rantzaw, King Christian the Third's General, who
levelled the City to the ground. 4. Foborg, upon the Southern Coast of the
Island: It was once Burnt by the unruly Soldiers of Christian the Third,
whilst Odensee (adhering to the Captive Prince, Christian the Second, who at
that time was kept close Prisoner at Sunderburg) Redeemed it self from the like
Fate by a large Sum of Money. 5. Swynburg, over against the Isle of Langland;
from this place Carolus Gustavus led his Army over the Ice into Seeland in the
Year 1658. 6. Nyburg, the usual Passage from Funen into Seeland. This City was
first Fortified with a Moat and Bullwarks by King Christian the Third: It is
very Memorable for the Battle fought by the Confederates of the Empire,
Brandenburgh, Poland, and the Low Countries, in the Year 1659. against the
Swedes, who were beaten in that Rencounter, and utterly Routed out of Schonen.

In Funen there are reckoned up no less than Two Hundred Sixty four Parish
Churches.

ZALAND.
LAland, or Lawland, so called from its low Situation, is disjoined from
Seeland by a little narrow Straight, called Gronesendt, and is about Thirty two
English Miles in length, and two in breadth. This is a very Fruitful Country,
has good store of Rich Pasturage, and affords such great Plenty of Corn and
Chestnuts, that Ships full Freighted with them are sent Yearly hence.

It contains four Herets or Lordships, and as many Cities. The great Towns or
Cities are, 1. Naschaw, or Nashscouw; which (together with the adjoining
Monastery) was Stormed, Taken, and Burnt by the Lubeckers in the Year 1510. 2.
Sascoping. 3. Newstadt, once Famous for a Noble Monastery Built there A. D.
1286. 4. Lavingscoping. Besides these, the Nunnery of Marioebo or Mariboane,
was as Considerable and Remarkable a Place as any in the whole Island.

The other Islands in the Baltique now belonging to the Dane, worth the taking
Notice of, are,

1. Falster, a considerable Island, adjoining to Laland. It is not above
Sixteen English Miles in length, but affords Plenty of Corn Yearly to some
Neighboring Islands, and to the very Continent. The Principal Towns of this
Isle are, 1. Nicoping, which, for the Elegancy of the Place, and the
Pleasantness of the Situation, is by Dr. Heylin styled, The NAPLES of Denmark.
2. Stubcopen, or Stabcoping, has some Trade upon the Account of its being the
Ordinary Passage between Seeland and Germany. 2. Langeland, a narrow Island
betwixt Funen and Laland, seven Dutch Miles in length; in which, besides many
Villages and Gentlemen's Houses, and sixteen Parish Churches, is the Town of
Rudcoping, and the Impregnable Castle of Traneker, which is admirably well
provided with all manner of Military Ammunition. 3. Mona, or Meun, a Chalky
Island to the North-East of Falster: It serves for a good Landmark to the
German Vessels that Trade in those Seas. The only Town of Consequence in it is
Stege, which bravely withstood the Lubeckers in the Year 1510, and forced them
at last to Retreat. 4. Alsen, another little Island, called in Latin, Elysia,
opposite to the Gulf or Bay of Flensburg, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, of which
it is a part, and therefore only Subject to the King of Denmark as Dukes of
Sleswick. Some Danish Antiquaries do think the Elesii, Arii, and Manimi,
mentioned by Tacitus, were the Ancient Inhabitants of this Island Ar and Meun;
and that these three Isles have the same Names at this day (with some small
alteration) which they had when Tacitus writ his Annals. It is well stored with
Beasts for Profit, and Game for Pleasure; and so Populous, that several
Thousands of stout Fighting Men have been Raised in a very short time out of
its four Towns and Thirteen Parishes. The Principal place of the Island, is the
Town and Castle of Sunderburg, was heretofore one of the Ordinary Residences of
the Dukes of Sleswick, and Honored with the Birth of many of their Princes of
the Royal Family, and is at this day one of the strongest Holds which the King
of Denmark stands possessed of. 5. Femeren, or Fimbriu, is a small Island on
the Coast of Wagerland, from which it is separated by a very narrow Channel.
This Plot of Ground has ever been looked upon as one of the most Considerable
Keys of Denmark. This Crown thinking it of that Importance; as to suffer the
Germans to run over all Holstein, and both Juitlands, rather than they should
possess themselves of this Isle. And therefore in the Year 1628, King Christian
the Fourth took care to put strong Garrisons into every place of Moment in it,
and to Fortify the Old Castles and Towns which his Predecessors had suffered
to decay and slighted. Towns of any Note in it, are Derborch, Stabul, and
Pittersdorp. 6. Hucen, or Wcen, commonly called by the English the Scarlet
Island, as is said upon the account of a Bargain between Queen Elizabeth and
the King of Denmark, she being to have the Island for as much Scarlet Cloth as
would cover it. In this Island did Tycho Brache, a Danish Nobleman, make most
of his Admirable Observations in Astronomy. King Frederick the Second giving
him it as a place remote from all Troubles, and fit for a Students Retirement.
Here Tycho about the Year 1575 Built his Vraniburg, (an Observatory Built like
a Castle, and Fenced round with Regular Fortifications) which he Adorned with a
Collection of the most exact Mathematical Instruments that could possibly be
made or procured. This Tycho, amongst other his Admirers, had the Honor of a
Visit from King James, in his return from the Consummation of his Marriage with
Queen Ann.


As for the other little inconsiderable Islands, they are not worth the trouble
of Describing, nor of the Readers Consideration. Wherefore we will pass on to
the Kingdom of Norway.

NORWAY.
NORWAY is bounded in the South with the Baltic Straits, which separate it
from Juitland; on the East with Poland and Sweden, from which it is parted by a
perpetual Ridge of rough and wild Mountains, called the Dofrine Hills; in the
North and West with the Northern Ocean: the whole length of it, from the
Baltic Sea as far as Finmark, is reckoned to be about Eight hundred and forty
English Miles.

As for the Derivation of its Name Norway (or Norweg as the Germans write it;
whence the Latin word Norwegia) is only Via seutractus septentrionalis; i.e. A
Country situated toward the North. Hence in the Danish, Swedish, and
Norwegian Tongues, it is to this day called Norrike, or the Northern Kingdom;
and we find that anciently all the Northern Kingdoms were called Regna Norica.

As for its Position, in regard of the Heavens, it reaches from the first
Parallel, of the Twelfth Clime, where the Pole is elevated 58 Degrees, 20
Minutes, as far as to 71 of Latitude, by which account the longest day in the
Southern Point is but 10 Hours: Whereas at Wardbuy's, being situate farthest
North of all this Country, they have no Night for almost Three Months together.

The Eastern Part of Norway is very thinly inhabited, being a Country of
nothing but inaccessible Craggy Mountains; toward the South it is better
peopled, the Inhabitants dwelling in pleasant Valleys incircled with delightful
Hills; the rest of the Country is overspread with Woods, which afford most
part of Europe Deal Boards and Masts for Ships.

The Dofrine Hills which divide this Realm from Sweden, are perpetually covered
with Snow; and send down intolerable bitter Winds into the Valleys beneath,
which renders 'em desolate and unfruitful. But the Air of the more Western
Coasts of this Kingdom is much more milder and temperate, and would be
healthful too, were not the Country troubled with certain little Beasts which
they call Lemmers: they are about the the bigness of a Field-Mouse, and are by
the Inhabitants said to drop out of the Clouds in bad Weather; they devour like
the Locust every green thing on the Earth; and at a certain time die all in
heaps (as it were) together, and with their stench and putrefaction so
poisonthe Air, that the poor people are long after troubled with the Jaundice,
and a Giddiness in the Head, which is most especially apt to seize on Strangers
unacquainted with the danger, and unprepared against the Distemper: But the
Lemmers do not more frequently infest the Land, than the Whales do terrify and
molest the Sho res; yet the Mariners and Inhabitants of the Seacoasts have
found out a Remedy against their Violence and Fury, for they mingle some Water
with the Oil of Castor, the smell whereof does force 'em to retire immediately;
had not this help and expedient been found out, there would be no Fishing upon
the Coasts of Norway: which with Materials for Shipping is the greatest staple
Commodity of the Country.

Their Valleys are well stocked with good Breeds of Cattle, which enable the
Inhabitants to Export every year great abundance of Butter, Tallow, Hides, and
Cheese; Barley is their chief Grain. Their Woods furnish Timber, Pitch, Tar,
Rich Furs, and vast plenty of Filbirds: They also drive a great Trade with
their Train-Oyl and Stock Fish, which is vended over all Europe.

In the Year 1623. Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, put several Artists
upon the search of some Gold and Silver Mines, and they are said to have found
some Lumps of the Ore of both those Metals, which they Presented to that
Prince. But whether the Ores lying so deep, it would not quit Costs, or that
the thinness or ignorance of the Inhabitants, in refining of Minerals
themselves, with their jealousy and unwillingness to admit any Foreigners
skilled in that way into their Country; this Diicovery never turned to any
considerable Account.

The Norwegians jump much with the Danes in their Complexion and Humor, but
are generally more effeminate and lazy; yet not naturally so, but through want of
Employment and Exercise. The Policy of the Crown of Denmark not thinking fit to
employ this Nation in any Wars, for fear of enuring 'em, and making them expert
in Arms. And through this Umbrage, takes all the Courses imaginable to Cow and
dispirit them. Now tho the ancient Norwegians are said to have been notorious
Pirates; yet at this day hardly any Seas are less infested with Pyracy than
those of Norway. Not that the Modern Inhabitants are blessed with more Honesty
than their Ancestors, but the Danish sway is so rigorous, as not to allow them
any Shipping, nor any other means to pamper, grow resty, and head strong, but
on the contrary fleeces, squeezes, and keeps them in the lowest servitude.

Their Diet is what they Export to other Countries, principally Stock Fish, and
a course kind of Butter and Cheese, Their usual Drink Rostock Ale, their manner
being commonly to drink three Draughts; one in remembrance of God, the second
to the Kings Health, and the third to the Queens.

As the Towns in Norway are very thin, so the Buildings for the most part are
very poor and miserable; generally patched up of dirt and hurdles, somewhat
resembling our Cotrage Houses in the Fen Countries.

As for the Government of this Country, it is still reckoned a distinct
Kingdom from that of Denmark; and had formerly Independent Kings of its own,
who sometimes domineered over the very Kings of Sweden and Denmark. But the
last King of the Norwegian Race, who Reigned in their Kingdom, was Haguin; who
in the year 1363 Married Margaret Eldest Daughter of Waldemar the third, King
of Denmark, and so united the two Crowns. Now tho this King had only one Son by
Queen Margaret, who died without Issue, yet the Danes having once got footing
in, and possession of this Kingdom, were resolved not to abandon such an
advantage, nor part from their Station; and to secure it, immediately clapped
strong Garrisons into all the Cities and Fortresses of moment in the Nation.
For the better Management of the Government, it is divided into five
Prefectures answerable to the five Castles which command them.

Now 1. The Prefecture of Masterland or Maestrandt is situated most toward the
South, and is commanded by the Castle of Bahuy's, now in the hands of the King
of Sweden. That Castle was first Built by Haguin the IV. King of Norway, about
the year 1309, upon a steep Rock on the Bank of the River Srollet, and then
esteemed the best Fort the King had in his Dominions; and a sufficient Barrier
against the frequent Attacks and Inroads of the Swedes and Westro-Goths:
Besides the City of Maestrandt noted for the infinite quantity of Herrings
caught thereabout, there is two more of less note, Congal and Oldawalt.

The 2. Prefecture contains the Bishoprics of Anslo and Staffenger, with the
Province of Aggerhuys, having under its Command, first the Towns of Anslo,
Opslo, or Asloia, possess of most repute, as being an Episcopal See, and the
place where the Courts of Judicature are kept for all Norway. All Causes and
Suits at Law being heard and determined before the Governor, who acts as Vice
Roy of the Kingdom. The Cathedral of this Town is dedicated to Alward, who took
great pains to Convert the Norwegian Pagans. This Church has to show the Sword
of Haquin, one of their most Primitive Kings, being a signal Instance and Proof
of the Strength and admirable Art of some Norwegians of former Ages. The Hilt
of it is made of Crystal curiously wrought and polished; whence some have
inferred that the use of Crystal was anciently much more ordinary in Norway,
than it is at this day in any part of Europe.

Not far from Opslo on the opposite side of the Bay stands the Castle of
Aggerhuysen; famous for the brave resistance it made the Swedish Army in the
Year 1567, which laid a close and brisk Seige to it for Eighteen Weeks
together; but was at last beat off and forced to a shameful Retreat. Tonsberg
formerly a place of Retreat of the Kings of Norway, Hammer in former times a
Bishops See, but now united to that of Opslo. Some Authors do affirm that near
unto Hammer a huge and monstrous Serpent does constantly appear before any
great Change in the State or Government of the Kingdom of Norway. Saltzburg,
Frederikstadt and Scheene, driving all a considerable Trade from the Copper and
Iron Mines, which abound more hereabouts than in any other part of the Kingdom.
In this Province were the Silver Mines abovementioned first discovered, and
some of the adjoining Hills, are by the Neighborhood to this day called Silver
Bergen, or the Mountains of Silver. Now Norway is indebted for the greatest
part, if not all its Trade, to those Mines, and the mighty Woods of Fir and
Pinetrees which overspread this part of the Country.

The City of Staffenger lies in 59 degrees. (some reckon 60, and a great many odd
min.) of Latitude, being seated upon a Demy-Island upon a great Bay of the
Northern Ocean, full of small Islands, and guarded by the strong Castle of
Doeswick, which stands about two English Miles from the Town; this City is a
Bishops See, and is divided into several Districts, tho in civil Affairs it is
under the Jurisdiction of the Governor of Aggerhuysen.

Beyond the Bay is seen the Island Schutenes, Twelve English Miles in length,
but scarce two in breadth: This Island contains several Villages, and between
it and the Continent runs a narrow Frith to Berghen, which the Dutch Merchants
call the Liedt van Berghen.

The Province of Tillemarch or Thylemarch, appertains to the Bishopric of
Staffenger. The Parish or Hollen, in this Parish is very remarkable for a
Churchyard or Burying Place, on the top of a Church, Dedicated to St. Michael,
which is cut out of a great high Rock, called by the Neighborhood Vear, upon
the Lake Nordsce, half a Mile distant from Scheen; it is thought by some to have
been formerla a Heathenish Temple, but converted to Christian uses upon the
first planting of the Gospel in this Kingdom.

Bergenhuis is the third Castle of Command in Norway: This Prefecture and
Bishopric, being the most fruitful and pleasant part of all Norway, lying in
the middle or heart of the Kingdom, to the North of Aggerhuysen. It has its
Name from the Stately and Noble Mart Town of Berghen; or else from the strong
Castle of Bergenhuysen, the usual Seat of the Viceroy of Norway, at a small
distance to the North of Berghen.

Berghen is the Granary and Magazine of the whole Kingdom of Norway, for
Bahuys, it is distant about Forty hundred English Miles by Sea, and Two
hundred and forty by Land; from Trunthein as many; from Scagen, the outmost
Promontory of Juis Island, almost Three hundred and twenty. Some Etymologists
have derived its Name from the Norwegian Verb Berghen, which signifies to hide
or conceal; because the Haven being surrounded with Hills, seems to be a kind
of Sculking place for Ships, where Vessels of Two hundred Tun and upwards, ride
in a spacious and most secure Harbor, free from any danger of Wind and
Weather. But the true derivation of the word is this, Berghen in the Norwegian
Tongues also signifies Mountains, and Bergenhuysen a Company of Houses among
the Hills. The Buildings of this Town till of late were but very mean and
despiseble, for the most part of Wood covered with green Turf, and so often
burnt down. But the Foreigners that have traded thither, within these few
years have adorned the Town with an Exchange, and many goodly private Houses;
the principal Commodity which Berghen Trades in, is Stockfish, which they catch
upon those Coasts in Winter, commonly in January, for the convenience of drying
it in the cold and sharp Air, besides all sorts of Furrs, and vast quantities
of dried Fish, Butter, Tallow, Hides, etc. are brought hither from all parts of
Norway to be Imported into For^^^ (...)

The Governor of Berghen has under his Jurisdiction the Prefectures of
Leehornleen, Nordhornleen, Soghue, Sudfiord Nord, and Sundmerleen.

The Prefecture and Bishopric of Trunthein is reckoned the fourth Government
in Norway, and its City anciently called Nidrosia, was formerly the Metropolis
of the whole Kingdom, and the Seat of the King and Archbishop of Norway. It was
in former times a beautiful City, but being burnt down in the year 1522, and
kept in such subjection and oppression by the Danes, it has been so far from
being able to receive its primitive Splendour, that it seems more like a Village
than a City. Yet something of the ancient Grandeur still appears in the
Cathedral dedicated to St. Ilaus, which (though almost consumed by Fire) by the
Ruins, shows it self to have been one of the most Magnificent and largest
Fabrics in the World. In this Church the Huntsmen were wont to make a yearly
Offering of the Skins of the largest and stoutest White Bears which they
killed, for the Priests to tread upon at Divine Service. Greenland and Iseland,
were formerly Districts of the Diocese of Truntheim, but this Bishopric is now
confined within narrower bounds: Most part of this Country having no Wood at
all growing in it, make use of Fish bones for Fuel, for Timber to build their
Houses, and for several Implements of Household Stuff: And with the fat of those
same fish they feed their Lamps in Winter.

The fifth and last Prefecture commanding this Country, is that of Wardhuyse,
its Castle has its Name from the Island Warda wherein it stands, and is about
Eight English Miles from the main Land of Finmark, and near Twelve in Compass;
the Food of the Inhabitants of this and the Neighboring Island is only
Stock Fish, which they dry in the Frost. No manner of Bread nor Drink have
they, but what is Imported from Foreign Countries; some Cattle they have, yet
none but such as can live on dried Fish their Masters Diet. The Governor
retires in the Winter more Southerly within the Land, by reason of the
extremity of the Cold, and the long absence of the Sun for some Months
together, the Town lying within the Artick Circle. It is much improved of late,
since the removal of the English Trading from Novogrod to St. Nicholas, not far
from hence, and is both profitable and useful to the Crown of Denmark in regard
of its strength, the Dutch and English being obliged to touch at it in their
way to Moscovy.

On the North of Norway lies Finmark, or as the Natives call it, Taakemark,
which is not divided as all other Countries generally are, into distinct
Lordships and Inheritances, but every Man pretends a Right and Title to every
part of the Land, and the strength of the Arm is the only Judge of
Controversies. when the Fishing Season comes in they throng to the Sea Coasts,
and when that is over retire again into the Laplands. Fixed habitations they
have none, but remove their Dwellings according to the Seasons for Hunting;
their Houses are made only to secure them against the Injury of the Weather,
and the assaults of wild Beasts; and for that purpose they first erect Four
Posts in the Figure of a Square, which they bind together with cross Girders,
and rear to them smaller pieces, fastening all with Wythes; these except the
door places, the poorer sort wholly cover with boughs of Trees or such like
stuff, the richer with a course sort of Woollen Cloth, or an ordinary sort of
Canvas. Two doors have they in these Houses, the fore door, which is of common
use and entrance for the whole Family, and the back door, through which the Men
pass, and that only when they go a Hunting, Fishing, etc. but all Women are
forbid it, either because that Sex is thought to be very inauspicious to those
Exercises, for if any (when he is a going a Hunting or the like,) do but meet a
Woman, he presently returns back and leaves his design for that day; or because
the Image of their God Thor was commonly placed near their back door, from
whose Sacrifices and Presence all Women are wholly excluded. These Houses are
distinguished into several Partitions, not by any Wall, but only by great Posts
or Loggs of Wood laid upon the Ground; their Fire place is in the middle, about
which the whole Family lies, either upon the bare Earth or upon the Skins of
Rein Deer, Bears, etc. When they have a mind to change their Habitation, which
they do constantly twice a Year, they unty this their Tent, take it away with
them, and pitch it in a more convenient place. Another Sort of Houses among
them, are their Granaries and Store Houses; which that they may the better
secure their Provision from wild beasts and vermin, they do not build upon the
Ground, but at some distance from it, upon the bole or stump of a large Tree.

The Ordinary Diet of the Laplanders, is either of Fish or the Flesh of their
Rein Deer, etc. Which they eat sometimes raw, sometimes boiled, but for the
most part dried in the air. Bread and Salt are unknown to them, instead of
Bread they make use of their dried Fish, groun'd small like Meal: And for Salt
they take the inward of the Pine Trees, which they dry in the Sun, and putting
it into Boxes bury it a small depth in the Ground, then after it has lain
there a competent time, they kindle a fire upon the place and so dry it;
whereby it becomes of a redish color, a pleasant taste, and gives a good gust
and relish to their courser Food.

Their general Drink is pure Water, which in the Winter time they keep in their
Houses continually hot, and so drink it. Of late they are grown acquainted with
Brandy and Liquors of that nature, which are in great vogue with them, and
which they drink only on their Holy Days and at their Weddings. Their Dining
Room is commonly in the middle of their Tent about the Fire, without Tables,
Dishes, Spoons or Trenchers, and such sort of Implements; each lays his Commons
upon his Mittens, and when he has eat it, says Grace, shakes his Camrades by
the right Hand, which is their Charity Cup; and so every one trudges about his
business.

Their Garments are very course and mean, made either of the Skins of Wild
Beasts, (frequently in use amongst them) or the worst of our English Cloth,
which they wear only on Holy Days and at their Public Fairs. They alter them
according to the Season of the Year; and each Suit for distinction sake, has a
several Mode and Fashion: The Men use a Long Garment reaching down from their
Middle to their Ankles, which serves them for Breeches and Stockings; above
this they have a sort of Woollen Coat called Mudd, which they tie about them
with a Leathern Thong. Their Shoes, as the the rest of their ordinary Garments,
are made of the shins of rein Deer, Elks, etc. with the hair outward, the toe
bending somewhat upward, and according to the ancient Custom, ending with a
sharp point: On their Heads they have a Cap made of the Skin of some Fowl, as
Geese, Ducks, or the like, but particularly make choice of the Loom for that
purpose, and like the ancient Germans taking the Feathers, Head and Wings along
with it. The Garb proper to Women is a large vvide Govvn, made either of Cloth
or Skins, according to the Persons Condition and Estate: this Govvn is gathered
close in the middle, and decked with several Figures of Birds, Beasts, and the
like, which they work very prettily and with great art.

As for their Religion, before the planting of Christianity in that Country,
which nevertheless has made but little progress among 'em, and would be
entirely abandoned, were it not for the strictness of the Government; they had
their Deities public and common to the whole Nation, and others belonging
only to a Family, a Division, a Neighborhood; their greater Gods were the Sun
and Fire, their lesser was Wira Accha, represented by an old stump of a Tree:
they also pay Adoration to the Ghosts of Men departed, especially of their
Relations and Friends, whom they consider as Divinities; they worship also
Specter and Demons, which they fancy wander among the Rocks, Woods, Rivers and
Lakes; they do the like to their Genius's good or bad, whom they say fly in the
air about Christmas.

Their Gods common to the whole Country be Thor or Thiermes, that is,
Thunderer or Noise-maker, they honor him with endearing and lofty Titles, as,
Great-Grand-Father and the like; they fancy his abode to be in the Clouds, and
that he disposes of Wind, Rain, Thunder, good and bad Weather, as he thinks
fitting: He it is they think gives Life or Death, Health or Sickness, Blessings
or Sufferings: They make his Image of Beech-Tree, easily turning the stoops
which shoot out from the root into the likeness of a Man's Head, Arms, Feet, and
the rest, laying by him a Bow, Arrows, and a Hammer to kill the mischievous
Demons. They place their Images upon a Table in a piece of Ground dedicated to
that Service, not far from their Habitations, the Table serves them for an
Altar, and the Boughs of Birch and Pine for a Temple. They suffer not their
Women to be present at the Sacrifices they offer to him, looking upon that as
very Criminal. But they never offer Sacrifice till they have enquired of their
God whether he will accept it or no: And this they do with a certain Instrument
which they call Kannees, resembling much the old fashioned Drums, on which they
picture several of their Gods: The whole manner of the Ceremony being as
follows, They pull off some of the hair at the bottom of the Beasts Neck
which is to be sacrificed, and bind it to a Ring which is fastened to the Drum,
then one of them beats the Drum, and all the rest sing these words, What say
thou, O great and sacred god, does thou accept this Sacrifice whic we design to
offer unto thee? And while some Chant these Words, others repeat the Name of
the Mountain where they are; then if the Ring rests on that part of the Drum
where the God is pictured, they take it for granted the God is pleased; and so
proceed to the Ceremony; or else carry the Sacrifice to Storejunkar or some
other God, using the like Form of words, Father god will you have my sacrifice?
Their usual Sacrifices are Rein-Deers, Cats, Lambs and Hens. The usual time of
their offering up their Sacrifices is in Autumn, because that Winter and Nights
approaching, they think they have the more need of their Gods assistance: Their
way of Consecrating is in this manner, First they Sacrifice the Reindeer, then
taking out his Bones they anoint the Idol with the Blood and Fat, and bury the
Flesh and Bones under ground, but this they do not till the God has approved of
the Sacrifice, after which they bind the Reindeer behind the house, then with
a sharp knife they run him through the heart, and gather the heart blood,
wherewith they anoint the Idol, into a Vessel. After that having placed the
Images right, making a new one every time they sacrifice, and setting them in
order behind one another, the last always hindmost, they approach with
reverence to it, anoint the Head and Back all over with the blood, but on his
Breast they only draw several crosses, behind him they place the Skull, Feet
and Horns of the sacrificed Deer; before him they place a Coffer made of the
bark of Birch, into whic they put a bit of every Member of the Rein Deer,
withsome of the Fat; and the rest of the Flesh they convert to their private
uses.

The next of their Principal Gods is Storejunkar, that is, Great Commander, he
they say presides peculiarly over all Beasts and Cattle; this Gods Name they
reverence with the highest respect, and pay him frequenter, if not greater
Devotion than other Gods, for they suppose him to be their Thor or Thiermes
Lieutenant, and worship him because that they think they receive all their
Blessings through his hands, and that all Beasts and Cattle are subject to his
Will, and he governs them as Thiermes does Men and Spirits; wherefore he can
give them to whom he will, and none can receive them without his pleasure:
Thus, Thiermes and Storejunkar are the two peculiar Gods of the Laplanders, the
one having the Dominion over the Men, the other over Beasts; one bestows life,
the other all things necessary for the sustenance of it. When they offer
Sacrifice to Storejunkar, which is likewise a Male Deer, they firstrun a Red
Thread through his Right Ear, and bind Him, and sacrifice Him in the place where
they did the like to Thor, preserving the blood also in a Vessel; then he who
performs the Ceremony takes the Horns and the Bones of the Head and Neck, with
the Feet and Hoofes, and caries them to the Mountain of that Storejunkar, for
whom the Sacrifice was designed: When he comes near the sacred stone he
reverently uncovers his head and bows his body, paying all the Ceremonies of
Respect and Honor, then he anoints the Stone with the Fat and Blood, and
places the Horns behind it; unto the right Horn they fasten the Rein-Deers
Yard, and to the left some red Thread wrought upon Tin with a little piece of
Silver.

The third and last of their Principal Gods is the Sun, whom they call Baiw,
and worship him chiefly for his Light and Heat; also because they believe him
to be the Author of Generation, and that all things are made by his means,
especially their Rein-Deers, of whom and their Young, they think he has a
peculiar care to cherish by his Heat, and bring suddenly to Strength and
Maturity. And being they live in a cold Country, where their heat is diminished
and often wholly extinguished, being they have nothing to sustain themselves
with but the flesh of Rein Deer; they think it very fit to pay the Sun very
great Honors; who is the Author of so great Blessings to them, and who at his
return restores them that Light which they lost by his departure, and that not
for a day or two, but for several Weeks, which being paid, the new days seems
welcome to them, by reason of long absence. Now the Sacrifices they use to the
Sun are young Rein Deers, and those not Bucks, but Does, the Rites being much
the same with those beforementioned, except only instead of a red String through
the right Ear of Storejunkars Sacrifice, they run a white one through the Suns;
then they make a Garland, not of Birch but Willow, about as big as the Hoop of
an Hogshead. This they place upon a Table behind the Hut, where they Sacrifice
to Thor; not upon the same Table, but one like it. And this Sacrifice differs
from the Other, in that there are neither Images erected here, nor Horns, the
Beasts not being come to their growth. But that there may be some rissemblance
of the Sun, they place their chief Bones of the Sacrifice upon the Table in a
Circle.

But the Laplanders are not more nototorious for their Idolatry than for their
Witchcraft; ancient and modern Writers asserting that they have attained to so
great a skill in Enchantments and Magic, as that among several other strange
Effects of their Art, they could stop Ships when under full Sail, nay and could
either by their looks, words, or some other wicked Artifice, to ensnare and
bewitch Men, as to deprive them of the use of Limbs and Reason, and very often
bring them into extreme peril of their lives. Now one of the main Reasons and
Motives of their so doing, is, that every one thinks it the safest way to
defend himself from the injurious and malicious designs of others; for they
commonly profess that their knowledge in these things is absolutley necessary,
for their own security. Wherefore they have Teachers, Professors in this
Science; and Parents in their last Will bequeath to their Children as the
great part of their Estate, those Spirits and Devils that have been any ways
serviceable to them in their life time. Now as to the bequeathing their
Familiars to their Children, they consider it as the only means to raise their
Family, so that they excel one another in this Art, according to the largeness
of the Legacies they receive. By which it is apparent that every Family has
peculiar Spirits, and of different and quite contrary Natures from those of
others; and as each house, so has each single person his particular Spirits,
sometimes one, two or more; but there are a set number of obsequious Spirits,
beyond which none has. Nevertheless some of these Spirits will not engage
themselves without great Solicitation and earnest Entreaties, whereas others
will readily offer themselves to little Children, when they find them
capacitated for their turn, so that several of the Inhabitants are almost
naturally Magicians; for when the Devil takes a liking to any person in his
Infancy, as a fit Instrument for his purposes, he presently seizes on him by a
Disease, in which he haunts him with several Apparitions, from whence according
to the Capacity of his Years and Understanding, he knows what belongs to the
Art. Those who are thus taken a second time see more Visions, and gain far
greater knowledge. If they are seized a third time, which is seldom without
great torment or utmost danger of their life, the Devil appears to them in all
his shapes, by which they arrive to the very Perfection of his Art, and become
so knowing, that without a Drum they can see things at greatest Distances, and
are so possessed by the Devil, that they see them even against their will. And
a certain Swedish Author tells a strange Story of a Laplander, who upon
complaint made against him for keeping a Drum, brought it, and delivered it up
to him, and with Tears confessed, that tho he thus willingly parted with it, and
never intended to provide another, yet he should still be tormented with the
same fearful and troublesome Visions about future Events, which (though his Eyes
were shut) were always present to his imagination, giving him a true and
particular Relation of whatever had happened to him in his Journey to Lapland.

As for the Art it self, it is according to the diversity of Instruments used
in it, divided into two parts, one comprehends all that to which the Drum
belongs; the other, those things to which Knots, Darts, Spells, Conjurations,
and the like refer: The Drum is peculiar to the Laplanders, and called by them
Kannus or Quochdas, made of a hollow piece of Wood, and must be either of Pine,
Fir, or Birch Tree, which grows to such a particular place, and turns directly
according to the Suns Course; which is when the Grain of the Wood running from
the bottom to the top of the Tree; winds it self from the right hand to the
left. It is made hollow on one side, upon which they stretch a Skin, fastening
it with wooden Pegs; on the other they make two holes to hold it by; the shape
of the upper part is Oval, about half an Ell in Diameter; upon the Skin they
paint several Pictures in red, stained with the Bark of an Aldertree; and
through the middle they draw some cross Lines in every Quarter, of which they
place their Attendants; neither do they always observe the same Gods, and the
same Methods. But this is observable, that they commonly paint the Sun in the
middle, their Gods above, and the earthly things under him. And since
Christianity was introduced among them, many of them do place upon their Drum
the Image of Christ, and his Apostles, owning him to be, or to have the power
of one of their Gods. Moreover, they alter their figures according to the
occasion of the inquiry, retaining the general Notions the Heathens had of
their Deity, that several of them had peculiar Offices and Employments. But
now, though in many places they have been forced to abandon their Drums, yet do
they practice all their knots, have their familiars in the shape of Flies,
Bees, etc. But chiefly their black Cats (whom they not only Consult at home
about their Domestic affairs, but take with them also in their huntings; tho
in the depths of Snow;) and their Diabolical Exercises, which are performed
sometimes with, sometimes without a Drum: If with a Drum, the Sorcerer kreels
down, and having a bunch of Rings, and other pieces of Brass laid in the middle
of the Drum, he beats with a Consecrated Hammer, so strongly, that the Rings
dance upon it, by the resting of which upon such a figure, they draw forth an
answer to what they would desire to know; but if this be not satisfactory, then
the Drummer puts himself by dancing and howling into a violent motion, till he
falls down, which he chooses to do upon his Drum; and then he lies without
motion and disturbance, and without sense, till he voluntarily rise again, and
gives answer to what is desired. This kind of Divination is chiefly used, when
something at a great distance is desired to be known. The Stories are so
frequent, and from persons not over credulous, that there is no room left to
doubt of what they say concerning these Sorceries. Amongst other Instances
thereof, this is related by a Person of worth and understanding; who being one
time at Dinner with his Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, etc. his Fathers knife
was missing upon the sudden, and could not be found, till two years after a
Counsin of his returning from being Factor in, or near Lapland, brought it with
him, telling them, that out of curiosity he had employed a Laplander, a
pretender to great skill in this Art, to bring him notice of the health and
condition of that Family; who after he had lain sometime in this now described
manner, brought him news, that they were all well, that he found them at
Dinner; and that to confirm his Relation, he brought away that knife, which he
delivered to the Merchant, and the Merchant brought home now to his Uncle.

As I said before, they sometimes practice these Sorceries without the Drum,
using instead of it commonly Strings or Darts, by which they advantage their
friends, or injure their enemies at their pleasure. The strings they make use
of to raise or quell the Winds, which they sell to Mariners for that purpose.
They consist commonly of three knots; the first of which being untied, affords
a favorable Wind; the second a brisk Gale; and the third a violent Storm; as
has been approved to the great peril and loss of several Seafaring persons,
that have given account of it in public. By their Darts, which are short
Cylinders of Lead; they wound any one who has done them an injury, or their
malice puts them upon to assault: These are said to be the most powerful Charms
of any, and upon occasion to have split Rocks, levelled Mountains, and such like
incredible Exploits.

They have Matrimony in great veneration, it being seldom known they commit
Adultery, but if such a crime be once discovered, it is severely punished. Now,
when ever any man purposes to marry, his first business is, to make inquiry
after a Maid well stocked with Rain-Deers; for the Laplanders have a Custom of
bestowing upon their Children soon after their Birth, some certain number of
those Rain Deers, and their Increase is accounted of not as the Parents Estate,
but the Child's Portion. Thus she, who has the greatest number of them, is in
the fairest way to have a Husband. Nor have they regard to any thing else, not
minding either good Breeding or Beauty, or other the common allurements of
Wooers. Now the Spark having pitched upon a Mistress, informs one of his
nearest friends of his Intentions, and desires him to be his Spokes-man: This
Kinsman of his sollicits the business with her Father, Mother, and Kindred,
presenting and cajoling them with Brandy and Tobacco, or what else is most in
request in order to the purchasing their Consent. After this the Suitor has an
Invitation to the Hut where the Bride dwells, where he agrees to certain
Articles offered by her friends, and then lists himself for a whole year in her
Fathers service; though first presenting the Father with a Silver Cup, and
Kettle of either Copper or Alchimy, and a Bed, or at least handsome Bedding. To
the Mother he gives a Girdle of Silver, a Robe of Honor, and a Whisk, which
they wear about their neck, and let it hang down to their breast, interlaced
all about with Bosses of Silver. Besides, he bestows upon the Brothers and
Sisters, and all the Kindred, Silver Spoons, Silver Bosses, and some other such
knick knacks of Silver; for each of them must be presented with some gifts by
the Bridegroom, if he mean to obtain his Bride. But the time of his years
Service being expired, he takes to him his Wife, and proceeds to the
Solemnizing the Marriage, which is ever performed with great Pomp and Ceremony,
according to their abilities. The Bride is spruc'd up with the Choicest
Ornaments they can get, as pieces of Tin and Alchimy, with several Rings of
Fish Bones and Brass; though a Bride of the Richer sort first looses her hair,
and the Fillet wherewith she bound it up together before, she gives to the
Virgin that is next akin to her: Afterward on her bare head and loose hair she
puts a kind of Silver Fillet, guilt over, or two, such as is the women's Custom
to wear at other times, instead of a Garland or Coronet, which is practiced in
Denmark, Sweden, and other Northern Countries, so that by how much this Fillet
is looser then to environ only her head; so much it hangs down the more behind.
Likewise about the middle they put on a Silver Girdle, the Bridegroom too is as
spruice as possible he can be, having the best clothes on he can get at his own
charges, and those girded with a Silver Girdle. Thus adorned is the Bride
dragged to Church, or to the Priest, seeming to go with much reluctance, and
there is married according to the usual Forms. In former times Matrimony was
solemnized by the Parents and Friends (the Father supplying the place of the
Priest, by striking of Flint and Steel, the pa^test Emblem, as they thought, of
a married life; for as the Flint conceals within it Fire, which by concussion
breaks forth; so in both Sexes there is life hid, which by the mutual coupling
of Marriage, is propagated at last to be a living Offspring. Poligamy is not
allowed of among them, a man being suffered to have but one Wife at a time. Nor
do they contract Wedlock without the consent of their friends, to whom they
refer themselves wholly as to that matter. Thus a stolen Wedding is never heard
of among them, neither are they suffered to trade for themselves, until they
have served as Bondsmen their Father-in-law for a certain time, which Custom
does seem to be derived from the most Primitive Times and Nations.

Pestilential Distempers are very rarely known in this Country, the pureness of
the Air still correcting the malignity of them, when they happen to be
introduced. Plurisies, Inflammations, and Soreness of the Eyes, they are
sometimes troubled with, which last they cure by drinking a Decoction of the
Root of Moss, or the Stalk of Angelica, in the Whey of the Milk of their
Rain-Deer. They cure wounds with no other Ointments or Plaster than that of
Rosin, which the Trees sweat out: If a Member be benumbed with cold, the the
Cheese made of Rain-Deers Milk, affords the presentest Remedy to it; they
thrust a red hot Iron into it, and with the Fat of the Cheese that instantly
disti^^ from it, they anoint the part affected, with incredible success; and
when troubled with any Pains or Aches in their Joints, or Body, as the Gout;
Cramp, Sciatica, or the like, they ease and cure them by applying a Caustic of
the flame of any Chips to the affected place. Diseases being thus rare among
them, and the Remedies so easy, they live to an extreme old Age: many being
known to live to above a hundred years old, and most usually attain to Seventy,
Eighty, and Ninety years, and at this Age are still sufficiently brisk and
lively, able to manage their business with expedition, to take a Journey, to
Course through Woods and Mountains, and perform other such toil and labor,
with great vigor; seldom do they grow gray, and that not till the very last
declension of their Age; and it is found, that more of them are dispatched by
old Age, than Diseases.

But when they perceive any one near Death, they send either for the Priest, if
near at hand, to prepare him for his Dissolution, or else for a Magician, who
is said to be able to resolve them by his Drums, of the very hour and manner of
any man's Death. In case he dies, they fancy his Soul is restless till his Body
be buried, which for that reason they do with all possible have, commonly
carrying him to the nearest Wood or Cave which they pitch upon for a
burying-place, seldom interring them in Churchyards, by reason of their
remoteness. The dead Corpse they carry upon a Sledge, the person who conducts
being particularly entreated to undertake the Employment, and must receive of
the nearest kinsman of the Deceased Person a Ring of Alchimy, and wear it
fastened to his Right Arm; the reason of which is, because they believe it a
preservative against the mischief the Manes of the Deceased Person may bring
upon them and therefore is fain to wear this same Ring till the Burial be over.
When they come with the Body to the Cave, they cast it in, and the Sledge after
it, or else cover it with great Logs of Wood, to defend it from wild Beasts,
never failing to lay by it a Hatchet, a Flint and Steel, that if ever they come
to rise again in the darkness, they shall have great need of springing a light;
to which the Flint and Steel may help them; as likewise there will be occasion
for a ready way wherein they may travel to Heaven, to which purpose their
Hatchet may stand them instead, them especially that are buried in thick Woods,
that if any Trees obstruct their passage, they may cut them down. When they
come home from the burial, they make ready a Funeral-banquet, or rather indeed
a Sacrifice to the Ghost of the Deceased Person, which they perform, by taking
those Rain-Deer, who drew the Corpse to the Grave, and offer them in Sacrifice
to the Manes, revelling upon the flesh with Brandy and Tobacco, and quaffing
round a Health to the Deceased Person, calling the Brandy which they use for
that purpose the Wine of the Blessed, meaning that they drink it to the memory
of him, that is happy by his departure from Earth. At this Feast they take
special care not to lose the Bones of the sacrificed Rain-Deer, but gather them
all up diligently, and lay them in a Coffer, and bury them under ground; but
first fasten upon the Coffer wherein they shut up the Rain-Deers Bones, the
Image of a Man fashioned out of Wood, bigger or less in proportion to the
Deceased Person.

But the Scepter of Denmark extending over but a small part of Lapland, it is
not necessary to enlarge upon the other Topics, which the Description of that
Country does afford; wherefore we will leave it, and steer our Course toward.

The Islands of Fero.
THE Islands of Fero are only many high Rocks and Mountains covered with thin
Earth, of about two foot deep, and divided from each other by rapid streams of
deep water: Part of them are inhabited, and part stocked with Cattle; the
Account whereof, with their Havens, Creeks, Inlets, and other Circumstances,
take as follows.

They are Seventeen in number; Fugloe, or Fowle-Island, about two English Miles
in breadth, and three in length. 2. Swino, in which is a pleasant Valley of a
mile is length. 3. Vederoe, six Miles long, and three broad. 4. Bordoe, six
Miles in length 5. Kunoe is a long and narrow Island, much of the same bigness
as Bordoe. 6. Kalsoe (...) seven Miles long, and near two Miles broad, 7.
Osteroe is almost twenty Miles in length, but unequal in breadth; for some
places are two miles broad, others four or six Miles broad, according as the
points stretch themselves far out. 8. Fromoe twenty four Miles long, and eight
broad, being the largest of the Feroe Islands, and contains the Town of
Thorshaven, the Metropolis and place of greatest Trade of them all* 9. Wagoe, a
round piece of ground of about eight miles in Diameter. 19. Miggeness, three
miles long, and one and a had broad, having a high Territory, with high
Promontories round about it, there being but one place to come on Land. 11.
Kolter, a small Island, a Mile in length, and half a Mile in breadth. Betwixt
twenty and thirty years ago, there was found on the highest top of the Mountain
of Kolter, the quantity of many Tonnes of Herrings spread along; the Mountain
where the Herrings were found is above two hundred fathoms high, being carried
thither by a Whirlwind. 12. Sandoe eight Miles long, and four Miles broad. 13.
Skuo three Miles long, and one broad. 14. Forcdiemen, or Great Dam, is almost
round, being a good Mile in Diameter, with a high Territory, for the most part
flat and green, above with great Clefis round about. 13. Lille-Diemen, a small
Island, whereon feed a vast number of wild Sheep* 16. Suderoi, twenty Miles
long, and eight broad, having a very good little harbor fiord, having a bowed
Creek, where there is one of the best. Havens in Fero, called called Punthaven.
And lastly, 17. Vaages-Lebroc. Besides, four little Isles, or Holmes, namely,
Tintholm, Muggenesholm, Trolehofred, and Lilly-Diemen, which afford only
Pasture for wild Sheep, with several other smaller Holms, whereof the most
necessary to be known by Mariners are Hoffrigsholm, Kirckbockholm, and
Combocholm.

The Air of these Islands is temperate in all seasons, not over-hot in Summer,
nor so violent cold in Winter, as to cause Ice in any of the Bays, and withal
wholesome, and free from all Contagious Diseases* unless introduced by Strangers;
so that the Inhabitants generally attain to a very long life: Yet the Scurvey,
the Leprosy, and a sort of Feverish Distemper, by the Inhabitants called
Landsarforo, are Epidemical Diseases, which reign in most of these Islands, but
rarely prove mortal. Besides, the Inhabitants are exceedingly subject to
Rheums, which occasion Coughs and Head-achs, which they nevertheless cure by
drinking some Whey, as hot as they can bear it. Thunder they never hear in
Summer, but often in Winter, Spring and Autumn, and that too attended with
violent Storms.

The Fertility of these Islands is not over great, they affording hardly any
other grain than Barley, whereof, nevertheless a Tun of Seed will commonly
yield twenty or thirty Tun of grain. But their Pasture-grounds abound in good
and sweet Grass, and those stockt with as large and fat Oxen, as shall be seen
in any other part of Europe.

These Islands do likewise abound in all sorts of Medicinal herbs, as
Scurvey-grass, Watercresses, Sorrel, angelica; as also Radix Rhodia, which is
no where met with in such abundance, as upon the Banks of Running Streams and
Lakes in these Islands. Thus they want nothing requisie for the cure of such
Distempers as the Natives are most subject to.

Great plenty, and variety of Fowl is here to be found, as doves, Stares, Owls,
Sparrow-Hawks, Crows, Grillins, and Ravens, as well white, as others. The
Sea-Fowl with them in most request is a kind of Teal, about the bigness of a
Crow, with a long, round, and yellow Bill. The Eyder (a sort of Duck, which
yields the Eyder Down) is a Bird peculiar to these Islands, and which usually
pulls the Down from her own Breast to make her Nest withal. When her young one
are fledged and fled, the Natives take away the Down, and change it for use.
But if the Feathers be pulled off by man, they rot away forthwith, and are of
no use. Another remarkable Fowl they have by them, called Imbrim, with a long
Neck and Beak, the Back gray, and checkered with white spots, with a white Ring
about the Neck: This Bird has two holes under her Wings, each large enough to
hold an Egg; here it is thought she hatches two Eggs at once, being never seen
with above two young ones at a time, nor known to come ashore.

The neighboring Seas do provide the Natives with God, Whiting, large
Flounders, Marts a kind of Pilchards, of which such store, that the Havens and
Creeks are filled with them, besides, Seals, Grind Whales, Morsses, and
Dogfish, though their fishing Trade is much decayed of late years to what it
was formerly.

These Islands were first inhabited by Norwegians about the year 840. and so
the Norwegian tongue was for a long while generally spoke, though of late years
the Danish Dialect has much prevailed.

The people are humble and civil to one another, and especially Courteous to
Strangers; Loyal, and liberal in their Contributions to the Government, and
Charitable to the Poor: they are moderate and frugal in their Diet, which is
chiefly on Milk, Fish, Gruel, and Flesh. They dry both their Flesh and Fish in
the Wind, having Wind houses for that purpose, when the flesh is dried, they
boil it in Water, and thicken the Broth with Barley Meal; which is reckoned one
of their greatest Delicacies.

As for their Apparel, the Men wear woollen shirts, flannel Trowces, and
Wastcoats, with short loose Coats of the same. The Women rich and poor, go all
alike, in strait Growns without skirts. Their Stomachers are commonly large,
and adorned with thin gingling guilt plates of Tin. Their Shoes have no soles,
but have pieces of leather drawn together at the Heels and Toes, and fastened
with a string, or ribband about the Ancle, and are of Sheep-skin for the Women,
and tanned Neats leather for the Men. They lie on Beds of Hay, overspread with
pieces of flannel.

These People were first Converted to Christianity in the year 1000. by
Sigismoad Bristyon, a Native of Fero, who was sent by the King of Denmark into
his own Country for that purpose, Immediately after the Augsbourg Confession
was received in Denmark, and Norway, it was established in Fero, these Islands
containing at this day thirty nine Parishes, which are all officiated by
Ministers of the Lutheran Religion. Besides Sundays, Holy Days, and the usual
days of Prayer, as in other places, they annually observe six peculiar days of
Prayer, three in Ascension week, and three in Michaelmas week. They have one
public School endowed by King Christian the 4. and Nichilas Trolls,
Vice Admiral of Denmark.

As to the Government of these Islands, it is divided into the six Districts of
Norderoe, Ostaroe, Stromoe, Waaegoe, Sandoe, and Sanorce. Each of these
Districts has a Sheriff, who sits as Judge, and determines all Causes and
Controversies of less moment. The Laws of Norway are the Laws of these Islands.
They having none peculiar of their own.

The Ecclesiastical affairs are governed by a Synod of the Priests and
Ministers, who meet and fit once a year. Out of the whole Synod one is Elected
to preside over the rest, with the title of Provost.

The Principal Commodities these Islands afford, are Skins, Feathers, Tallow,
Trainoyl, and Stockings; upon all which there is a particular price set.
Stockins are the chief staple Commodity they have, in the making of which, all
the Inhabitants of all Conditions are constrained to employ themselves for the
getting a livelihood, which the smallness of their Incomes, their slender
possessions, and inconsiderable stipends, would hardly otherwise afford.

As for the Isle of Schetland, which many will have to be the Ancient Thule, it
lies about sixty Degrees, and a few odd Minutes of Northern latitude, and has
nothing very observable, the manners of its Inhabitants, the natuae of its
Soil, the temperature of its Air etc. being much the same as in Iseland.

Of Iseland.
Iseland is an Isle in the Deucalidonian Seas, situate under the Artick
Circle, at 13 Degrees, and 30 min. of longitude, and 65 degrees. and 44 min. of
latitude; being bounded on the East with the Northern Ocean; on the South with
the Deucaledonian Sea; on the North and West, with the frozen Sea of Greeland.

The Discovery of this Island was first made by one Naddoc; who sailing near
the Coasts of the Fero Islands, was by a storm forced upon the Northern parts
of this Island, which by reason of the abundance of Snow, wherewith the Country
was then covered, he called Sneeland. After that, it was a second time
discovered by a Sweedish Mariner called Gardar, who called it Gardarsholm,
after his own name, and finally discovered by one Flocco a Norwegian Pyrate,
who called it Iseland, from the vast quantities of Ice in it, and about it;
being frozen continually for the space of eight months, and so vehemently
chilled with the Northern winds, that it yields neither Corn nor Trees,
except Juniper only.

Ingulph a Norwegian Baron, is said to have brought the first Inhabitants into
this Island, in the year 874. though there is reason to believe it was peopled
before that time, and known too, by the English and Irish, it being
acknowledged, that the Ancient Iselanders, called the Irish Papey, and the
Western part of their Isle, as most frequented by Irish Merchants Papey.
Besides, there is still several remains and monuments of Idolatry in this
Island, which show its ancient Inhabitants to have been Pagans, whereas the
Danes and Norwegians at the time of their first settling there were Christians.

The modern Natives are for the most part plain and simple, living on what is
given them by nature, without the help of Art, more then that of making Cheese
and Butter: the Mountains serving them for Towns, and the Rivers for Drink, and
they quarter with their Horses and their Oxen under one and the same roof. As
they do not stand in need of either Physic or Physician, so neither do they
use any, their temperance in meat and drink, and the naturally strong
constitution of their Bodies enabling many of them to attain to the age of 150
years, and more, Nay, Olaus Magnus affirms they commonly live to the age of
three hundred years, and Blykenius reports, that he saw a man in Iseland, who
told him that he had then lived two hundred years.

Their habitations are for the most part of timber, roofed with slags or turfs,
with a hole on the side of the roof to let in their light; though in their
Cities of Hola and Shalholt, instead of Tiles, they make use of fir-boards. But
in their Hurts scattered up and down the Country, the Iselanders and their
Cattle have the same lodging for the poorer sort of the Inhabitants, being
destitute of Wood and Turf, and not able to purchase fuel from abroad, are
forced in the extremity of Winter to betake themselves to a corner of their
Ox-stalls, and there borrow warmth from their Cattle.

The food of the Iselanders is upon Beef, Mutton, and the like, with most sorts
of Foul, which they have in great abundance, the truth is, they have no variety
of Sauces, but the sharpness of the air furnishes them with stomachs which
need none. Fish they have great plenty of, and which dried, is indeed their
only bread, and their Ling is so excellent, that even with us it is counted one
of our greatest Dainties.

Their most common Drink is Whey, which is generally so good, that an ounce of
it will very well bear half an Ounce of Water. They have also a sort of Mead,
made of Barley flower, and a Honeycomb boiled in Water, and another liquor
squeezed out of a certain reddish Berry, peculiar to this Isle. But though they
have neither Ale, Bear, nor Wine, they can make a shift to be sumptuous, nay,
profuse in their Revels and Banquets, for we read that Theodore, and Thorwald
(Brethren and Citizens of Hialtedat in North Iseland) solemnizing the Funerals
of their Father Hialta, entertained twelve hundred Persons for fourteen days
together at a Banquer; and at the departure of his Guests made 'em all
presents, every one suitable to his quality; many more instances have they of
the same kind.

They have little money in Iseland, what they have is Danish, but that in very
small quantity; bartering one Commodity for another, being their method of
buying and selling, as it was of all other Nations in the Nonage of Commerce.

The principal Commodities of this Country are Whalebone, which they have in
such abundance, that many of 'em make Houses of it, and the only Bridge in the
Island is framed of the same matter, they also formerly exported vast
quantities of Beef, Mutton, Butter and the like, and do still, dried Fish, and
Brimstone, the great Veins whereof do feed and nourish the flames of Mount
Heela, which is one of the greatest Vulcanoes in the Universe, it belches forth
by fits such inundations of fire, as menace the whole Isle with a general
conflagration, vomiting not only flame and fiery Coals, but large torrents of
water, which burn like Brandy, or Aqua-vitae. At other times it casts forth
stupendous quantities of Cinders and pumice stones, insomuch that it darkneth
the Sun. The West wind occasions its greatest outrages; so that when the wind
blows moderately from that quarter, the People of the adjacent Plains, knowing
the safest passages to the Mountain, crow'd up to the mouth of the furnace,
where they find their Diversion by throwing great stones into the flames, which
return them with as great violence as a barrel of Gunpowder blows up the slates
of a House. Whereby a man runs great danger in approaching the flames who is
not perfectly acquainted with every part of the mountain, for he not only runs
the risque of being knocked on the head with some of those stones which
frequently comes to pass, but also the ground does surprizingly open, and the
flames swallow up men alive. Of this and two other Mountains in this Island
called Helga and la Croix, more strange circumstances are related, than what
are said of Aetna, many of the silly superstitious Inhabitants believing that
underneath it is Hell, and the abode of the damned, and some do confidently
report that they have frequently seen whole Herds of Devils throng into the
mouth of the furnace with their Burdens of damned Souls, and having eased
their shoulders, return for a new leading. Nay, they will confidently pretend
to know the very day that any Battle is fought in any part of the world, by
observing the more than usual importation of Souls on such days. Another place
of Torments the Natives do imagine to be under the Rocks on the Sea Coasts, and
the clashing of the Ice against the shore, and banks, makes such a noise, as
they take for the howling of the damned. There is also said to be a Fountain in
Iseland, which petrefies immediately whatever is thrown into it; so that if a
man takes a long pole, and stick part of it into the bottom of the lake, that
part of the staff which sticks in the Earth, will presently be turned into
Iron, the middle into Stone, and the uppermost part remain Wood, which came not
into the water, the same Authors write of another lake there which sends forth
such pestiferous exhalations, as poison the Birds which fly that way.

The modern language of Iseland, is the true old Danish Tongue, used in ancient
inscriptions, and other monuments of Runick learning, which has been preserved
Chaste and pure to this day in Iseland, by reason of the little Commerce they
have had with other Nations.

Iseland was formerly divided into four Provinces, called East, West, North,
and South Iseland, from the four quarters of the World: Each of these Provinces
was subdivided into three lesser Districts, except North Iseland, being larger,
into four. Every Districk had in it three public Courts of Judicature, and ten
or more Vreppar, or Constable Wards, the Government of the Isle was
Aristocratical till the year 1260. when being brought under the Crown of
Norway, it since followed the fortunes of it in all Changes of Church and State
made subject with it to the Kings of Denmark, together with it reformed in
matters of Religion according to the Confession at Augsbourg, retaining still
their Bishops with a limited power, and turning the Revenues of their eight
Religious Houses of Pingore, Remestede, Modur, and Monkenire, under the
Government and jurisdictiion of the Bishop of Halar; and those of Videy,
Pernebar, Kirckebar, and Skiade, under the Bishop of Schalholt unto other uses,
according to the will and pleasure of their Lords of Denmark.

But their Gods in the time of their Paganism, were, 1. Thor, who is said to
have come out of Asia, with his Father Woden, and is answerable to Jupiter
among the Romans, and gave name to our Thursday, in Iseland called Thorsday,
and by the Germans Donderdag, that is, the Thunderers day, which signifies the
same thing. 2. Woden, or Oden; the Captain of the Asians, who first peopled
these Northern Countries. From him the Iselanders call the fourth day of the
week Odens dagur, and we Wednesday. Besides these two, we sometimes read of
Freyer, one of Wodens Companions, and Friga, Wodens Spouse (whence our Friday
with several others of less note.) They have but two Cities, and those no
better than our Ordinary Villages, yet the Seats of their two Bishops, the
first is Hogin, the second is Shalholt, their other places of any note are
Hattenfort, a Haven Town, where under ten^^ the Dutch Merchants barter their
Commodities, and beside a Castle, the ordinary Residence of the Governor for
the Kings of Denmark.

As for their Court of Judicature, it is held once a year in a pleasant Plain
in the middle of Iseland, where twelve men learned in the Laws of Iseland,
having heard all the Plaintiffs and Defendants have to say, pronounce sentence,
and decide the Controversies. And have power to determine all Civil Causes, and
pronounce Condemnation as they think convenient against all Criminals. Such as
receive sentence of Death, as Adulterers, Murderers, and Notorious Thieves, are
beheaded; less Misdemeanors and Offenses are marked in the Forehead with an
hot Iron.

Of Freezland, or Friseland.
FReezland so called from the continual frosts unto which it is subject, lies
South-west of Iseland in 60 degrees, more Westerly than any part of Europe; it
is said to be little less in extent than England; being a ragged and high sand,
its mountains covered with Snow, and the Coast so full of drift Ice, that it is
almost inaccessible. The longest day in Summer not exceeding 20 hours;
nevertheless the Soil is so cold and barren, that it produces neither Corn nor
fruit, Fish being the principal, and almost only Food of the Inhabitants, and
as it is their Food, so it is the chief Commodity the Country does afford,
there being good fishing every where upon the Coast. It was first discovered to
us by Nicolas and Antonio Zani, two Venetian Gentlemen that were here
Shipwrackt. Our Seamen in their soundings brought up a sort of Pale Coral, and
little stones clear as Crystal. They called it West-England, and one of the
highest Mountains Charing Cross. The chief Town is called Friezland by the name
of the Island; situate on the Eastern shore of it. Besides we find some others
in the Maps as Sanestol, Ocebar, Cabara, Sorand, and some more very
inconsiderable. And now let us proceed on to Greenland.

Of Greenland.
GReenland, so called, as some say, from the greenness of it in Summer, or as
others, by Antiphrasis, for that it is never green, by reason of the sharpness
of Winter, extends from 65. to 7 degrees of Northern latitude; so that the
longest day in the most Southern parts is 21 hours and a half; and in the most
Northern they have no night for three months and two weeks. The length of it is
not known, nor whether it be an Island or a Continent, being chiefly frequented
for the benefit of the Whale fishing. The chief commodities are Fish, white
Bears, wild Deer, and some store of Cattle there bred. The greatest part of the
people dwell in Caves, and delight to a high degree in Necromancy Other Lands
there be, but not of any note, nor hardly worth the Claiming of the Crown of
Denmark.

FINIS.

