The Divine Catastrophe OF The KINGLY Family Of the House of STVARTS: OR, A
SHORT HISTORY OF THE Rise, Reign, and Ruin Thereof.

Wherein the most secret and Chamber-abominations of the two last Kings are
discovered, Divine Justice in King Charles his overthrow vindicated, and the
Parliaments proceedings against him clearly justified,

By Sir Edward Peyton Knight and Baronet, a diligent observer of Those Times.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at the west end
of Paul's. 1652.

TO THE Supreme Authority of this Nation, Assembled in this present PARLIAMENT.
Right honorable Senators,
WAndering in the Circumference of my contemplations, to find out what was
most suitable to present to the Supremacy of Parliament, under such a Divine
revolution as God has brought to pass instrumentally by your wisdom and
direction, and his heavenly Providence; in this wide field, the Omnipotent
guided my thoughts to dedicate a Discourse to your honorable hands, concerning
the fatal Catastrophe of the last House had Superintendencie over us, to the
time the Almighty put the Stern of this Commonwealth into a Parliamentary
Power, which I most humbly wish our celestial Creator to continue, till a Snail
be able to creep over the whole Globe of the earth.

In the mean while, I crave your pardon that I have not so distinctly in order
laid down many remarkable passages worthy recite, my Papers being remote a
great distance from me: yet, by Gods grace, I have composed a little
Enchiridion of diverse remarkable events have happened out, to prove Gods just
revenging hand on the Family of the Kingly Stuarts of Scotland, and justified
your proceedings, and proved that the heavy weight of sin has given a downfall
justly imposed by Providence from above; my Observations reaching no higher
then from the King of Scots being taken prisoner at Muscleborough-field, in
Edward the sixth his Reign.

Now therefore I thrice humbly desire your Patronage, especially finding by
experience the composition and style of this present Narrative will incur the
displeasure and hatred of most in this State: yet I value it not, being prompt
by a higher power then that of Man, which points out by a Divine finger the
overthrow of all men exalted above all that is called God, whose ruin will be
the bridge to let into the Stage of the world the heavenly Government of
Christ, which shall continue for ever, maugre the malice of the Universe.

Wherefore I most humbly implore the thrice honorable Parliament to accept of
This, as a testimony of my fidelity to the present Government; which I pray God
to bless and maintain, to advance his glory, and bring the whole Nation to a
most happy condition, which now the present symptoms thereof show plainly a
new approach of a great tranquillity, not only to this, but to the three
Nations in general.

Edw. Peyton.

THE Rise, Reign and Ruin OF THE Kingly Family Of the STUARTS.
SInce Great Britain has been elevated all along the stems of Plantagenet,
Theodor or Tedor, and Stuart, to so high a Tree of Tyranny as she was before the
late wars; the Princes had designs proportionable to a way of making
themselves absolute Governors; which overture has appeared more or less,
according to the humor of times, and inclination of the Guiders of the Stern:
for some endued with ability and craftiness necessary to settle an usurped
ambition, whilst the people were willing to bear the load of that burden, have
made a progress so politickly to bring their aims to the mark shot at, that
they have so subtly dissembled the enterprise, as no notice or scandal
arrived at their doors, nor impatience to the three Countries of England,
Ireland, and (since the access of the Family of the Stuarts) to Scotland; until
King James, for hatred of his Mothers death, plotted the ruin of Parliaments,
which ratified Queen Mary's execution; and left it as his Testament for his
successor to follow; dictating, not long before his death, to Williams
Archbishop of York, the course he should steer to bring his counsel to
conclusion. This devilish advice thrust on this wilful Prince with an
inconsiderate fury; and, inflamed with that fire, to settle to himself and his
successors an unbridled power of dominion; which hurried him on with the
whirlwinde of passion, to discover the mystery which ought to have been
concealed till the design should be accomplished. Wherefore, of this number in
our days was Charles the first, who, from the beginning of his Government,
blaming the moderation of his predecessors, resolved to go a way contrary to
the stream of a pious Rule, and the command of God; and act, during his time,
that which God would not suffer to be done in many ages past. And because the
pretention is always encumbed, when the object cannot be attained; by wicked
advice perceiving he had not so well marched to accomplish his drifts, with the
just power of Parliaments, which might found a Trumpet in the behalf of a
Commonwealth, by advice of his Antecedent and his wicked adherents, labored to
raze out the memory, breaking up two Parliaments; and not satified therewith,
to practice Tyranny, kept the Nation near fourteen years without such most
lawful Assemblies, where the Rights of the Nation might be discovered, and true
Liberty appear. This he did, that the power of Law, and property of the
Subjects estates, might be enclosed in his sole Arbitrary breast. To that
purpose, he made his Sycophants of the Council Table, Judges of the Right of
his people, the Star Chamber the Executioners of his unbridled will, and the
High Commission the destroyers of Piery and Religion: which three though he
revoked by Acts, yet being angry with himself for so doing, he raised a War, to
make abortive all he had done, by an armed power, although he seemed willing to
affect it before: therefore, pursuing the former series of his will for a Law,
Charles quarrels first with the Gentry and People about Coat, Conduct, and
Shipmoney, and plotted with his wicked Council that a thousand Germane Horse,
in the nature of Trayle Battoun, should take every one denied to give him
money, or that would not subscribe to his endless will and easeless power, to
be hurried to Prison, there to end their days; (some of them being so
barbarously used.) This unjust resolution he took upon him, unless they yielded
to his unsatiable desires: by which means, the eyes of many of the triple
Nations were sealed, as pigeons are used for trains to devouring Hawks to
plume and prey on. This struck such a Pannick fear, that they imagined all
power consisted in the Diadem, to be at his mercy, because they were ignorant
of their Rights, which were usually discovered in Parliaments, by some
practiced in the Records. But behold! God raised up some Heroes within the
doors of the Representative, and without, to awaken the people from a dead
sleep; or rather, to cure them of a disease of lethargy: who rouzing like Lions
let loose out of a Den, opposed this most wicked Oppression; by which way, they
certainly fulfilled Gods determination upon the seventh Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter (being Sabbattical) since the beginning of the world, to bring down
the Mountain of Monarchy, which had continued more then five hundred years; to
depress the extortion practiced in Europe from Charlemain's Age; a Symptom and
Harbinger for France, Spain, Germany, Turkey, and Papacy, to change from an
unbridled power, to an Aristocratical, or Plebeian way of rule, which will
better advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ through the Universe: whereby it
appears, that England, (by Gods assistance) may be the elder brother, to bring
to pass so mighty an alteration on the the stage of Christendom.

By diverse ungodly Sophisms of State, for the space of ten years, King Charles
raised up innumerable Projectors and ungodly burdens, to enthral the Nations,
by an Arbitrary way; imposing Monopolies and many unlawful Taxes, under which
they remained without remedy of relief; the eyes and ears of all in high
authority being blind and deaf, not to hear nor see Petitions of just
complaints, insomuch that the people generally cried out, Where are our Laws?
and demanded if all Justice were banished out of their quarters; and, with eyes
lift up to Heaven, desired that those caterpillars might not swell too big,
like a Spleen, to bring a Consumption to the whole body; praying also that
their empty purses might not be filled with blood, although their eyes with
tears.

Now this miserable condition (perceived by the wrinkles sorrow made on the
brow of our disordered affairs, all wise counsels banished, and the reputation
of a pious State withered) was augmented by King Charles his imposing the
Common-Book of Prayer on the Scots (wherein God seemed to be deaf a time, for
the sins of this Nation, multiplied against the Divine Majesty; yet at last he
heard the prayers of the Saints, that the Scottish men could not endure this
imposition so Diametrically opposite to the Kirk, and disposition of the
Nation.)

This Stratagem was by the artifice of Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, to bring
into the Country Episcopal Government, to unite both Kingdoms in one form of
Church, in something agreeable with Rome, as a bridge over which he might bring
both people to Popery, to ingratiate himself with the Pope for a Cardinals Cap.

Lo, how Charles and Scotland differed in this wide field of behavior: the
interest of the King made Will a Law, and the other avoided such a Slavery: the
issue was, (growing by this Edict obstinate) they could not endure it. But King
Charles persisted in his wilful determination to find out this subject to work
the effects of his indignation upon; so that this occasion was fitly presented
to his wishes, to raise an Armed Power to subdue them to his unbridled
Pleasure. But when this War exenterated his Coffers for lack of Money, he was
constrained, nolens volens, to call a Parliament, by the advice of the fomer
wicked Counselor, who persuaded him to it; making the King believe that at his
pleasure he might on all accasions break the neck of such Assemblies. In the
mean while, the enterprise was hatched on the basis of a contrariety of
inclination, by which he might set a bone to divide and govern both; because
that Nation, by the immense bounty of King James, was grown exceeding rich;
which sowed seeds of envy in England to oppose the Scot. But by this
Parliament, God (who has sole power in sublunaries) turned this cross blow to
the good of both, to enlarge the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and for the Liberty of
England and Scotland.

But because the errand of my Discourse is not solely to show the abuses of
State, but rather by reckoning up a brief Catalogue of some, to demonstrate and
delineate the just Judgment of God on the Family of these Stuarts, for
Cruelties and Murders one of another; that we may raise up our praises to God,
who out of the ashes of intended ruin, has made the Source of so glorious a
State as now is planted on our English Stage, wherein God finds this
Commonwealth very consistent with his adequate glory in consummating the
fullness of the Gentiles, and calling home of the Jews, foretold in the
Scriptures, to be performed in the latter Ages of the World; to the intent
Promises and Prophecies should be accomplished, for the Dominion of Christ to
extend to the ends of the earth, that those who sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, may be brought into a more perspicuous light, to follow the
steps Christ has traced out for all to walk in; which the overgrown pride of
Kings and Emperors would not submit to.

Therefore to demonstrate and observe, how the Almighty hand of God has
determined the extirpation of the Royal Stock of the Stuarts, for murdering
one of another, for their profane Government, and wanton Lasciviousness of
those Imps ingrafted in that Stock; I am forced to raise the fabric of this
Relation higher by the fourth Story, and last staire of the great Grandfather
of Charles the first; who was slain at Muscle-borough-field by the English
Army, under the command of the Earl of Arundel and Surrey. This King, I say,
left a sole Daughter, Mary Suart, Inheritrix of that Realm; who, when she
attained of Viripotency, was sought for a consort to the Dolphin of France;
which title of right belongs to the first Son of the King of that Crown. This
Prince, after the Marriage, ended his days by a shiver of a Lance, at the
sport of Tourney in Paris. A Match contrived by the French, for the Scots to be
Goads in our sides, to hinder our invading of France, to which we had a just
Title.

But this Mary deprived of her mate by this sad accident, living some few years
in the French Court, where she was educated in the School of Venus, proved an
apt Scholar in that wanton Academy; and affecting in her inclination to be more
absolute in her passion of Love to choose without control a Paramour suitable,
when, how long, and who she pleased, grew weary of the delights of Paris,
desiring variety, returned into Scotland, where she had more power; she being
constant in nothing but in Inconstancy: A place where the amorous way was much
in esteem, though the Church Government somewhat hindered it; which was then
not of such force as since.

This Princess cast her glances everywhere about, to find a beauty fit for her
embrace; and at last fixed her liking on the Lord Darnel, of the House and
Family of the Stuarts of Boot in Scotland; whose Ancestors were there famous,
contesting long ago for the King with one Wallis in their homebred broiles,
who sided with the people. To say truth, this Lord was a goodly and amiable
person, fit for any Compeership, how great soever: but after some time, this
Princess (soon satiated) grew weary of the conjunction, by reason of a servant
she entertained, called David Ritsoe, an Italian Musician, who exceled in the
Airs of Italy above others in that Faculty: who enchanting the Queen with his
voice, made her think there was no happiness but in his approach into her
Cabinet (a place wherein she continually resided:) but from thence the Lord
Darnel was banished above nine months; divorced from her in joy, although he
sought diverse means in vain.

At last, for a medicine to remedy his discontent, one Douglas administered
Physic for his cure, to amove Ritsoe from the Queen, and put the Lord her
husband into her arms. So violent was the Ingredience, that Ritsoe was taken
from this Princess by twelve arrived Lords, and their retinue, who put her into
the Lords arms; killing Ritsoe, laid his dead body on the same trunk was his
bed the first night he arrived to the Queens service. But there was much ado,
before this Tragedy was acted. To understand this better, this Douglas, an Agent
for the twelve banished Lords out of Scotland to return, could not effect it,
unless the Lord Darnel undertook the accomplishment upon the former condition,
to dispatch Ritsoe from Court. But they being jealous of Darnels promise, not
fixed in other Puntilio's, would not believe him, till, pricking his fingers, he
wrote an assurance under his hand with blood, in a paper, really to effect it:
which was acted, when the Queen leaned on Ritsoes shoulder, at the game of
Primero with the Earl of Morton Chancellor of Scotland; who cherished this
unlawful familiarity: a verity justified on Oath by Darnel, and one of the
twelve Lords, the Lord Ruthin, at his execution on the Scaffold, a place where
dying men speak true.

This Lady very sorrowful, retiring to Sterlin Castle, shortly after was
brought abed of King James; but took no delight in her husbands company: for
the Lord Bothwel became a new Corrival in her affection; who both consented (as
Germanicus wife with Sejanus, after she had been lascivious with him) to blow
up her husbands body with Gunpowder; who was cast dead on a tree next morning:
a spectacle made Scotland amazed at so fearful a murder. By this most wicked
design, she grew so contemptible to her Realm, that she was fain to flee to
Queen Elizabeth for succor: but lo, some years before, several Treasons were
here discovered, that this Mary set the Traitors awork to take away our late
Queens life; who were before condemned for Traitors, and suffered death: for
this Mary was the next pretender to the Crown, from Henry the seventh: but God
prevented it, by her Privy Council (counted the wisest of all Europe) who
counseled Elizabeth to condemn her, to free England from Treasons against her
Person. But the sage Princess conjectured, if the death should be by her Edict,
it might raise the hatred of foreign Princes against her; and therefore caused
the sentence only to be ratified by Act of Parliament, the Vote of the whole
Realm, insomuch that a mock-Secretary (called Davison) was chosen to go to
Fotheringham, where she was rewarded with a Hatchet: a just Judgment of God on
her.

After this, King James (being about sixteen years old) was crowned, and had
for Tutor one Bohannon, called amongst us Buchanan; a learned Divine, and wise,
to train up young Princes; whose Books are famous through this part of the
world. This prudent Schoolmaster observing the young Prince's facility to sign
any Grant for his Servants without reading, by which means he had pardoned many
murders, and passed other Instruments of damnable consequence to the
Commonwealth; in which this Tutor imitated Theodosius's godly fraud, to
discern the hearts of his Courtiers soundness in Religion; who having taken
great pains with the King from his childhood, desired a boon, which King Iame
was willing to grant; therefore one morning the king going out early a hunting,
Buchanan brought an absolute resignation of his kingdom, with all Immunities to
it; which was signed without aspect. At night, returning from field-sports,
retiring usually before supper to read some profitable Author, which his
Schoolmaster chose; all shut out of the Cmhaber, Buchanan sat down in the
kings Chair, and told him that he was king, giving him the writing to peruse;
which reading, he shed tears for his folly; yet Buchanan after comforted him,
and charged his Scholar not to sign any Grant but what was just; and so threw
the Grant of all Scotland into the fire.

About this time, Queen Anne was brought out of Denmark for a match; a Lady of
a goodly presence, beautiful eyes, and strong to be joined with a Prince young,
and weak in constitution; an union unsuitable, for a Virago to couple with a
Spiny and thin Creature; a course made her fancy work as a Fat, for to further
a female content; and placed in her delight one Master Stuart, of the house the
Earl of Murry. His haunting her Chamber too sedulously, bred such a jealousy
in King James, for to impart his thoughts to Marquess Huntly, and get
dispatched this Stuart out of the way, burning his house, and himself in it.
After whose death, the Queen found others to satisfy her unruly appetite, as
namely the Earl of Gowry, a Lord of a comely visage, good stature, and of an
attracting allurement; who upon King James suspicion of often society with the
Queen, converted to the Poison of hatred the friendship and love of the Earl;
causing Ramsey, after Earl of Holderness, with others, to murder Gowry in his
own house; giving it out for a stale, that the Earl with others would have
killed him; And to make his falsehood appear odious in shape of truth, appointed
the fifth of August a solemn day of Thanksgiving for his supposed delivery;
and in this mocked the God of Heaven.

After this, the Queen entertained into her service one Mr. Beely a Dane, to
whom she bore an affection; this Gentleman came with her into England, and grew
more entire in her thoughts; with whom I had a familiarity, to be a
Commissioner for him in a Grant his Mistress procured for him of King James, of
felons goods in diverse Counties; who in great secrecy discovered to me, he was
natural Father of King Charles; but waxing old, the Queen took two proper
Gentlemen of the House of Bohannon to her service: these being partners in her
affection, fell out in a Duel, and killed one another for priority in her love.

Not long after Gowries death, Prince Henry was born at Edinburgh; whereupon,
Queen Elizabeth sent the Earl of Sussex Ambassador, to congratulate this
birth, and be Godfather, with a gallant retinue: but Scotland being poor, and
the king wanting money to discharge the glory of such a Royal entertainment,
the Earl of Orkney, a Bastard of the former king's, pawned his Estate in the
Islands of Scotland, to raise a great sum to discharge the Christening. Behold,
how King James did not only not disengage this Morgage, but suffered this
Earl to die in Prison at Blackness near Edinburgh-Castle: an ingratitude
indelible for after-ages to detest.

I omit the Murders, Enchantments, Witcheries, committed by his Predecessors,
of weight enough, without more, to pull down that House.

But Henry the fourth of France being informed of this congratulation, and
conceiving it to be a step to unite England and Scotland in one Government,
Elizabeth waxing old, sent a Letter of encouragement to King James, to join
with him in revenge of his Mothers death; who replied, (as the true Copy
expressed) that he would not fall at difference with Elizabeth, since he was
now more secure in his Throne, then in his Mothers time; intimating he was not
sorry for her amovall; for her life might have procured his ruin.

Elizabeth, after forty years Reign, was moved by her privy Council to settle
King James for successor: who said, she would not erect a Monument in her life,
for a follower to expect her end. She was a Lady adorned with Majesty,
Learning, Languages, Wisdom, and Piety; yet fearful of death; for she hated any
word tended to it; as shall be manifest by Roger Lord North, when carving one
Day at Dinner, the Queen asked what that covered dish was; he lifting up the
cover, replied, Madam, it is a Coffin; a word moved the Queen to anger: And are
you such a fool, said she, to give a Pie such a name? This gave warning to the
Courtiers not to use any word mentioned her death. But this prudent Prince died
after forty four years complete; and king James was proclaimed about the last
of March, 1602. king of England, by his privy Council, assisted by the Lord
Mayor of London, Sir Robert Lee. In May after, he entered, met with many Nobles
and Gentlemen; the Sheriffs attending him in every County from Berwick: so that
there was a general applause, and Royal entertainment, at his entrance into the
Charter House in London; yet ominously attended with a great Plague of three
thousand dying in a week in the City. This Union gave a grand expectation of
tranquillity to both kingdoms. To effect this better, he called a Parliament
lasted seven years, and raised many Subsidies, with great sums left by his
Predecessor; which vast treasure was all bestowed on the needy Scots, who, like
Horse-leeches, sucked the Exchequer dry; so that Honor and Offices were set to
sale, to fill the Scots purses, and empty the kingdoms treasure. This caused a
byword, That the Exchequer reached from London to Edinburgh. This was not
sufficient to gorge their insatiable requests, but many Monopolies likewise
were erected, my self after reporting thirty two Patents to the Parliament in
decimo octavo Iacobi.

The Queen deprived of the nightly Company of a husband, turned her delight to
the Prince, whom she respected above her other children: finding him too
serious, diverted him from so much intensiveness, to an amorous gesture, in
which the English Court took great pride. To that purpose, she initiated him in
the Court of Cupid; as one night she shut him under lock and key in a chamber
with a beautiful young Lady now dead; which showed her love to the sport:
indeed, morelikea Bawd; than a discreet Mother, who is bound to season her
children in virtue, while young, that they may hold the taste in age: whose
example, in virtue or vice, might draw a world to follow the pattern. But
after, Prince Henry fell mortally sick of a supposed Fever, but not without
suspicion of poison. A Prince, whom all Europe expected to be the promoter of
some great and famous action, because his inclination was bent to the Martial
art above his years, and also excelled in matters of State, both in discourse,
and choice of ablest company; which he much delighted in, for advice and
counsel. This ripeness in judgment, and dexterity in Soldiery to form Models
of any sort of Battles, stirred up king James to suspect the Prince might
depose him; especially knowing he was not begot of his body. This caused the
Lord Saintcleare, then Ambassador in Denmark, not to be ashamed to challenge
Prince Henry to be his own son, to English and Scots there arrived: so that by
some Pill or other the Prince came to his end. This was plainly showed, when he
was cut up to be imbalmed, his brain was Liver-hued and putrefied; an argument
of poison, as was affirmed by a most learned Physician, Butler of Cambridge.
Now king James, more addicted to love males then females, though for complement
he visited Queen Anne, yet never lodged with her a night for many years.
Whereupon, Gundamore observing how king James was addicted, told him that the
Lady Hatton would not suffer the Lord Cook her husband to come into her
fore-door, nor he himself to come into her backdoor. ( Hatton and Ely houses
joining together, where they dwelt; she denying him a passage backward to take
air.)

Now that the fruit of Mortality might declare humane frailty, Queen Anne, who
had trod so many stately footings in masks of Court, Beauty fading, strength
faling, and youth metamorphosed to years, health to sickness, being haunted
with a lingering sickness, which contracted her end. For Doctor Upton at his
death (not long before the Queen's) declared a Skeleton being in her womb,
proves she was with child, and that Physic had destroyed it, and so the
Skeleton remained; which was labored to be purged away, but all in vain,
rotted in her. Of this Docter there was a jealousy of revealing it, for which
his passage was made to another world, as his tongue to me at his death
uttered; who married my near kinswoman.

The Queen departed, the King sold his affections to Sir George Villiers, whom
he would tumble and kiss as a Mistress. This favorite had erected many
Monopolies; who finding Parliaments hindered his profit, caused his Master to
dissolve those Patents, and break up the Parliament of decimo octavo; raising a
number of Privy Seals, which were borrowed and never paid.

And to add to the iniquity of the times, diverse Incests were then pardoned:
insomuch as two Gentlemen who married two sisters one after another, got
License at Newmarket not to be molested in the High Commission. But above all,
a godly Minister in Lincolnshire was barbarously murdered by one Cartwright,
whom King James pardoned. The reason of this murder was, for rebuking him of
swearing, drunkenness, and whoring.

At this time were many pious Divines silenced by the Bishops, who inhibited
preaching in the afternoon; diverse Exercises in several Towns commanded down:
an occasion bred much profaneness in England; king lames allowing dancing about
May-poles, and so winked at breaking the Sabbath; a vice God curses everywhere
in Scripture.

What shall I say more? All impiety was encouraged in such a sort, that lawful
Marriages were divorced or nullified; as namely, the Countess of Essex from the
Earl of Essex, late General for the Parliament; alleging the Lord had a
defect, and was not able to perform the act of generation; (although the
contrary was after proved) to make a gap for Somerset's adultery, by a Nullity
which Bishop Bilson devised; a nickname being given for this to his son, who
was rewarded with Knighthood; and therefore styled by the people, Sir Nullity
Bilson. This Bishop maintained Christ's personal descention into hell: an
opinion disavowed by all Orthodox Divines. And many other false opinions were
maintained in that age; as, that Solomon was damned, an Amanuenses of the
Scripture.

The second example is the Lord Riches Lady, named Penelope; who was divorced,
to make way for the Lo. Montjoy's lust, Earl of Devonshire.

What shall I say more? Did not king James his minions and favorites rule the
kingdom in the person of the king, who were five in number, since his approach
upon English ground? to wit, Sir George Humes Earl of Dunbar, Sir Philip
Herbert after Earl of Montgomery and Pembrook, Sir James Hayes Earl of Carlisle,
and Sir Robert Car Earl of Sommerset, who defiled his hands in Overbury's
death; that wicked divorce ushering the murder. This Sommerset being elected
of the Council, furnished his Library only with twenty Play-books and wanton
Romances; and had no other in his Study. A Lord very like to give wise counsel!
This Lord, with his Lady, were questioned for the murder; and the Lieutenant
of the Tower, Sir George Elloways, was hanged, but for concealing of it: king
James being willing with this accusation, to make passage for another favorite,
which was Sir George Villiers, after Duke of Buckingham, who by his greatness
vitiated many gentile and noble virgins in birth, though vicious for yielding
to his lust; whose greatness opened the door to allure them more.

To please this favorite, King James gave way for the Duke to entice others to
his will. Two examples I will recite: first, the King entertained Sir John
Crafts, and his Daughter, a beautiful lass, at Newmarket, to sit at the Table
with the King. This he did then, to procure Buckingham the easier to vitiate
her. Secondly, Mrs Dorothy Gamay, being a rare creature; King James carried
Buckingham to Gulford, to have his will on that Beauty: but Sir Nicholas
Bacon's Sons conveyed her out of a window into a private chamber, over the
leads, and so disappointed the Duke of his wicked purpose. In which cleanly
conveyance, the Author had a hand, with the Knights Sons. Truly, that day a
sober man was hard to be seen, in King, Prince, and Nobles. Moreover, it was an
art King James used for these favorites, to be skreens to decline the hatred
of his People; when complained of in Parliament, and when questioned, they were
spunges to be squeezed to to fill his Coffers.

One story I will relate, more remarkable then the rest; the king very timorous
of death from the contrivings of Pope and Spain, wrote a Letter to the Pope
that he would tolerate Popery when he brought affairs to his bent in Great
Britain. The Letter discovered by a lucky chance, to the seven years
Parliament, and complained of in the Remonstrance to the king, he made the
Scottish Secretary own this act, and affirm it was his, and not the kings;
promising him to take him off at last with advancement: but contrary, it
occasioned the Secretaries ruin.

Here, by the way, I must play the Cook, to lard three several occurrences not
impertinent to the matter in hand. The first was, that Secretary Winnode took a
bribe of 20000 pound, to redeliver the four Cautionary Towns in Holland to the
Dutch; which we now may see might have curbed the States from prejudicing
England. Another was, king James his weakness, to give way to Gundamore to take
away Sir Walter Rawliegh's life; who might have vexed Philip the second of
Spain. A third was, to sell Iron Ordnance, and discover the art of their
Carriages; which all the world was ignorant of.

This last favorite, George Duke of Buckingham advanced to such power with his
Mother, rewarded the king with poison, by a poisoning water, and a plaster
made of the Oil of Toads.

This Duke, from a private Gentleman with an annuity of thirty pound a year for
life, was raised to such a mount of glory and power, to be Master of Horse,
Master of the Wards and Liveries, Admiral of England, and Lord Warden of the
Cinqports. A Lord tall of stature, amiable countenance; who, like a ravenous
kyte, engrossed all into his hands, to enrich and advance his kindred, and to
place and displace whom he listed: so that this Lord was grown so potent, his
Master stood in awe of him, in such sort, that when the king was sick of the
Gout, he would remove him from place to place at pleasure, against the kings
will: who, to work his ends, wrought into favor with the rifing Phoebus, king
Charles. The king prying into this way of his Successor, set a bold Courtier,
Doctor Turner, a float, to bring the Earl of Bristol (then out) to launch into
favou; but the Duke complying with Turner, perceived the plot against him,
wrought by a countermine, by Charles the chief Engineer: but the Dukes drift
was, after king James his death, to make himself king of Ireland; and therefore
he was styled Prince of Typeraria, an appendix to that Throne. This made the
Duke swell like a Toad, to such a monstrous proportion of greatness in vast
thoughts, as muitiplying to an ocean, from the rivers of pride, power, and
ambition, he sat as a Giant on the shoulders of king James, and drowned his
power; limiting no bounds to his overflowing will: whose virtue and good nature
being corrupted by so wicked a life, turned love into hatred, obedience into
rule: for after he had dispatched the Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hamilton, the
Earl of Southampton and his son, by poison, (as by Doctor Eglestons relation
plainly appeared to the Parliament; whom he caused to be killed in forr^ine
parts, for discovering the villainy;) Thus filled with venom of greatness, he
made no bones to send his Master packing to another world, as appeared plainly
in Parliament, by the witness of diverse Physicians, especially Doctor Ramsey,
in full hearing at a Committee. Wherefore, for this and other crimes, he was
impeached in the beginning of King Charles his Government: and though King
Charles was bound to prosecute King James and the other Lords death, committed
contrary to all the laws of God and Nations; yet King Charles, to save the
Duke, dissolved the Parliament, and never after had the truth tried, to clear
himself from confederacy, or the Duke from so heinous a scandal. Now let all
the world judge of Charles his carriage, whether he were not guilty of
conniving at so foul a sin, though not of the death: so that covering his
Lyon-like disposition with appearance of a Lamb, he proved like Nero the
Tyrant, that in the Parliament of the Petition of right, showing himself in his
lively colors: for displaying the Banner of Tyranny, he put an end to the
meeting, and imprisoned diverse members, so that Sir John Elliot dyed, and the
rest remained in durance, because they had been faithful to their Country;
and, to add to cruelty, he sent Sergeant Glanvile, Sir Peter Hayman, and
Colonel Purify, into foreign parts, to consume their fortunes, and hazard
their lives; calling not a Parliament long after.

By this time, Sycophants so enlarged the Monarchy without bounds, that there
were exactions too many to be repeated in so little a volume as this: and piety
being intombed so many years, and so many pious men silenced, caused Nobility,
Gentry, and all inferiors, more licentious; who by insensible steps grew
Atheistical. This was connived at by many debauched in Authority: so great a
current of profaneness was generally for want of Ordinances; which caused the
People to perish in Godliness. The fault proceeded in both Kings; but
especially from the first, governing by young Counselors, who had not virtue,
but vanity; this caused Gundamore (that cunning Machiavil) to scoff at the
Counselors of State, telling King James, he was the wisest and happiest Prince
of Christendom, to make privy Counselors sage at the age of twenty one, which
his Master (the King of Spain) could not till sixty. A jest pocketed up by
him, who loved commendation and flattery more then truth; by which he was
blinded, and saw not the hidden flout. This Prince (otherwise very much
knowing) mued in his English Reign favorites to the fifth Coat: these Nobles
being addicted more to pleasure and delights, then the School of prudence and
wisdom; looking more at their own Interest, then the common good, or piety of
life, gave so vast a liberty to their lives, as made an abordment of looseness
in many; insomuch that strictness of life (which our Savior requires) was
imputed a disgrace; and the vainest counted the wisest; the profanest, no
hypocrite; and a Puritan was styled a Devil: so that by this time it was
difficult to hear profitable Sermons; the Pulpits being stuffed more with
eloquence, then zeal to move the conscience; and the Preachers were fitter for
a Stage then a Pulpit. Thus begun goodness to dwindle, and vice to spread far
and near; vicious being counted the gallantest men. But God opened Pembrooks
heart to see the errors of youth.

But behold! the last was Sir George Villiers in number, but first in vice and
villainy, as by the former relation he appeared unmasked in his open colors;
who mounted the highest steps of honor, and profited most in the Academy of
Nicholaus the Florentine, accompanied with a juncto of Achitophel-advisers, who
spun the web of all his inhumane devices; and had none to intercept the
contriving, but Felton with a knife to take away their General; which hindered
further rallying his Diabolical plots. This man imbarqued us in an unnecessary
war, at the Island of Rees, where many brave Commanders ended their days, by
his unexperienced discipline in War; who, though advised by Burrows, guarded
not a Fort: which made the French Masters of that Island, after he had taken
it; and in his retreat from thence, placed his Ensigns in the muskets, not the
pikes.

Before this, king Charles sought to marry with Mary of the House of Bourboune;
and sent the Earl of Holland ordinary Ambassador to France; who, with the
assistance of the Extraordinary Buckingham there, dispatched that overture by
the aid of Queen Mother, with their alluring behavior, which drew on the
conclusion more then a team of horses or oxen could: a byword king James used,
to obtain ends by female creatures.

To Dover Mary was brought, and so to Canterbury; where king Charles bedded
her, without the ordinary religious form of uniting.

This Queen, some years after, showed great modesty, although there lay a pad
in the straw: for the Count of Soysons justified boldly and openly at the
Louvre in Paris, that he was contracted before to her with diverse witnesses;
and so challenged her for his lawful wife before God.

Holland of this advertised, sent Soysons a challenge to combat him; but
Soysons was deaf of that ear, and never met: a reason was, the Courtfaction
for the marriage was too strong, for him to maintain the truth with his sword:
an occasion demonstrated more his fear of ruin, then valor; and that his
enemies power abated the edge of his courage.

Whilst this match was a brewing, the Duke aslayed to defile Lewis the
thirteenth's bed by some accomplices; which then was found out by the
Parliament in Paris: a discovery instigated him to procure his Master to the
French War, inhibiting the Spanish marriage, because Count Olivares had foysted
into his bed a pocky Courtesan at Madrid, in stead of his Lady often solicited
by Buckingham; most of his wisdom consisting in such constuprations. So that
these bawdy transactions, in a prospective-glass, may bring nearer to our
memories the fashion of Charles his Reign, how sin was hatched from an egg to
a Dragon, to devour holiness of life; insomuch that the Masks and Plays at
Whitehal were used only for Incentives to lust: therefore the Courtiers
invited the Citizens wives to those shows, on purpose to defile them in such
sort. There is not a Lobby nor Chamber (if it could speak) but would verify
this.

King James dead, King Charles ascended the Throne, with a dismal plague of
5000 dying every week: God pointing to us, as with a Feseu, as a Scoolmaster,
to warn us to repent of our abominable sins; if no admonition would reform us,
he would scourge us with an Iron Rod. Yet, in show, King Charles gave good
hopes to his People of a virtuous Reign; but finding the sweetness of his
invasselling the People, king Charles paved his path by the steps of his
forerunner, who reigned twenty three years save one day: but Charles, instead
of pacing it, ran violently to destroy his subjects; following too hastily his
precedents direction; which brought him before his time to the block, the desert
of Tyrants.

Certainly those times differed much from these: for where it is falsely
objected, that these days are more heretical; I answer, By a general sale of
heretical books, then they sought to vitiate truth with greediness, the sole
endeavor in the Universities: now in these days, too curiously finding out
truth, they mistake it unwillingly, and run upon some points of error; which
this wise Parliament labors to suppress, by placing pious and learned Divines,
(as speedily as they can) men endued with the Spirit of God, through their
Dominions: there being a wide difference 't wixt those do wilfully maintain
against knowledge, falsehood; and the others, that mistake the truth. But in
those times they studied erroneous opinions, being encouraged by the Bishops;
so that the Students were ambitious to rake out of the ashes many heresies of
Rome, to maintain their Lordships; as namely, kneeling at the Sacrament: they
used arguments of the real presence of Christ, and so reverence Christ
corporally present, with the Papists; when our Savior used sitting, another
gesture. From this root sprang the Socinian damnable opinion, to make Christ's
death an imitation for all to follow, to bury in oblivion the great High
Priesthood of Christ, and to advance their Sacerdotal Tyranny, and insult over
the People by the power of spiritual Courts, which exalted them above others;
when Christ abased himself to be a Savior in his actions on earth; a carriage
they ought to have used, according to his example: by which means, the Clergy
were the eyes, ears, hands, legs, and above all, the brain, to support the
Kings insupportable Tyranny. To this head I will reduce their Idolatrous
cringing to the altar, bowing at the name of Jesus, and making Churches
Idolatrous; usually kneeling and praying in them, when no service of God was
used: and their (...), reverence at the Eucharist, was to no other purpose: but
to support Antichristian Episcopacy; what honor was done in the Church, was
placed on them; transferring the honor done, from the place, to the persons
administering service: a cause made King Charles take them into his intimacy, to
support his absolute Monarchy to do what he pleased with Subjects property,
real, personal, and vital; as also finding the Papacy conduced more to
Regality, he favored them more then Protestants: for when the Justices in all
parts persecuted the Papists upon the Statutes, they were disgraced, and
removed, and the Protestant persecuted and punished, and the Priests delivered
out of Prison. In which rout, amongst others, was Secretary Windebank, a
principal Agent to get in favor with Queen Mary; insomuch that I knew diverse
Papists brought out of Newgate, and their pursuers punished. This last-recited
Secretary was a Creature to Laud, both brothers in iniquity to accomplish such
matters.

Did not king Charles his Letter written in Spain to the Pope, show his
Inclination to set up Popery, if the Pope would grant him a dispensation to
marry the Infanta? yea certainly it cannot be denied by any rational man; if he
considers fully the bent of those times, he must be convinced by a truth I
shall utter. When the king came from Greenwich with the Queen on a Tuesday
morning, a little before the last Parliament, she landing at Sommerset-House,
where she lodged, the king arriving at Whitehall a day he used to hear a
Sermon, the Queen drew him from the Sermon to Sommerset-House; insomuch as a
Lord to whom I gave a visit, told me (when he came not to the preaching at
twelve of the clock, long expected) in anger, that the king was then at Mass,
and reconciled to the Pope; and so this Lord in haste went after Mass-time to
Sommerset-house, and there dined. It is therefore no marvel why the Almighty
sent so much misery upon these three Kingdoms, and wrought such a fatal
Catastrophe to turn the spoakes of the Wheel upside down, raising the humble
out of the dust, and abasing the proud and high-minded.

By this, as by a prospective glass, we may behold how king Charles erected the
Fabric of his potency, or rather the structure of his ill government. For it
will appear plainly, that king Charles negotiated with the Pope to reduce
England to Popery privately; therefore it is known to all, that king Charles
entertained three Nuncio's from the Pope, Gregorio Pansano, Signeur Con, and
another, under pretense to regulate the Popish Clergy under the Bishop of
Calcedon, appointed by Barbareno the Popes Nephew, protector of the English
Catholics; when the purpose was to reduce to any union the Protestant Clergy
with the Roman. And was not Arthur Bret appointed to go Ambassador to Rome from
king Charles? who dyed by the way: and after there was sent Sir James
Hambleton, of the House of Abercorn.

To make a step further, I will inform the Reader. After Buckingham's death,
the Earl of Holland was highest in favor with king Charles, who bestowed on
him near one hundred and fifty thousand pound in few years; and he was no less
esteemed of the Queen, being her Agent to receive moneys forfeited, and
compositions given her by her consort; as namely, to free Sir Giles Alington's
punishment for marrying his niece, twelve thousand pound was paid to Holland
for the use of the Queen; they sharing money and delights together.

This made the Kings love of Holland not always firm: for a suspicion arose,
as a Devil, to be the bane of friendship; which thus happened; such was the
intirety twixt the Queen and this Lord, she having sent Letters into France to
one Monsieur de Ierre then in prison, she enclosed a Letter unsealed in
Hollands Letter sealed; which was intercepted by the Ambassador the Lord Jerome
Weston resident in Franc, and sent to his Father the Lord Treasurer, by whom it
was shown to the king: a matter made him so passionately jealous of Holland, as
he was confined to Kensington. Whereupon, the Queen was so discontented, as she
bedded not with the King some nights; and was so enraged for Hollands
confinement, as, till the king released him, she would not entertain him to
her bed: But, as Nature is frail, so she flying embraces, made the husband more
earnest to pursue her fruition; so that at last, Hollands enemies are chid, and
he brought into favor. These are the devices of cunning Dames, when silly men,
being horn-beaten, oftentimes, are cured without a plaster: he had better have
put them into his pocket. After this, the Queen advertized of Charles his
lubricity with diverse Ladies his Mistresses; which appeared, because he was
jealous of a Lord handing a Countess he dearly loved through the court of
Whitehall, at which he showed much indignation for a great time. In the mean
time, there were not people wanting, who nourished each in suspicion; so that
both seeing themselves peccant, one had freedom of Mistresses, and the other
of Servants.

Now I must crave your pardon, if I have not observed so punctually the times;
this being rather a Rhapsody, then a continued History, and therefore I am
constrained to patch up the post with the prior; faults being all of one batch
of Tyranny; as Ben. Volington, Wist Stroud, and Eliot, Mr. Hambden, Sir John
Corbet, Sir John Hevingham, were confined, for being faithful in Parliament.
Moreover, for discovering the design of a thousand German horse, the Earl of
Sommerset, the Earl of Clare dead, Sir Robbert Cotton dead, my Lord Saint John,
Mr. Seldom, and Mr. James, were sent to the Tower. The occasion was this, as I
remember, Pickerni Master-Falconer, found the written project in the kings
Cabinet, it being open; who took it out, and brought it to Sommerset, and so it
came to the hands of Sir Robert, and the other four usually meeting: but Sir
Robert had a man would take his cups freely, and, at a Tavern, told it to a
false brother, who betrayed them all: for which cause, the five were brought
aurium tenus into the Star Chamber, because it was discovered before it was
acted.

But it is more memorable, how king Charles was angry with the Parliament of
the petitions of Right, as he was so far from punishing Sir Richard Plumly for
pulling a Knight Hubard out of a Coach, and beating him so that he dyed, and to
show his hatred to Hubard, who was one of them held the then Speaker of the
Parliament, Sir John Finch, in the Chair, that he advanced this Plumly to be
Admiral of the Irish Seas, and made him a Knight for his service for killing
Hubard, when justly he should have questioned him for his life.

And to sound King Charles his heart, it is probable King Charles was in his
heart a Papist, by the Queens persuasion, and her mother; for after going from
the Parliament, he sent Pardons for diverse Priests condemned; who ingeniously
finding this would make a rupture 'twixt King and Parliament, the Prisoners
petitioned the Houses, sending the Pardons to the House; and desired, rather
then there should be a breach between them, to suffer death: for which prudence
the Parliament would not let them die.

In both these kings times, swearing was in such esteem principally from king
James his example, cursing the People with all the plagues of Egypt; though
king Charles granted twelve pence an Oath through the Kingdom to Robin Lashly,
which was observed more to get money, then suppress swearing: for such a
negligence was in the Magistrates, seeing the great Courtiers garnished their
mouths with God-dammees, as if they desired Damnation rather then Salvation.

Bribery the nurse of Justice was so rife in those days, that right was not
distributed to the owner: a vice augmented by Knights of the Post, very
frequent in City and Country. And Lawyers would take sees, and never plead for
their Clients; and sometimes on both sides; insomuch as in a Suit depending
'twixt my self and my Son, we gave fees to one and the fame person. Wherefore
on these times God has brought on us a lamentable war.

Now let all the world behold how king Charles violated the rights of
Parliaments, coming into the House with great power, to carry away the five
members. To prove how great a breach of privilege of Parliament this was, the
Author hereof wrote a discourse against it, affixing his hand; it being taken
in his Wagon at Banbury by the kings party; for which he was condemned to die,
by Sir Robert Heath; and his Estate given away.

I will not repeat how much he has suffered for being faithful to Parliaments,
both before and since the access of this; only I will rehearse, that being
taken Prisoner by the Cavaliers, he lost four hundred pounds in money, apparel,
wagon, and forty horses: and likewise in Wiltshire at Broad Choke, in
housholdstuff, four hundred pounds; which was carried into Langford, after a
Garrison taken by Colonel Ludlow for the Parliament; which he had never
restored, although he often petitioned.

Another wrong long since he had: when Sir Robert Heath had enclosed two
thousand acres of Common, as Lord of Soham, one named Anne Dobbs was kept with
bread and wain Cambridge Castle, by a Justice of Peace, a Creature of Sir
Roberts, to confess the Author of this Discourse counseled her with others to
pull down the Enclosure taken from the Common; by that means to take away his
life as a Rebel; when it was well known he had no hand in it, but then was
sitting in Parliament as a member.

By this it appears, the king chose good Judges and Justices, which were so
corrupt. The reason was, that the Author being condemned, he might forfeit a
Manor next adjacent. This Justice of Peace was a mortal enemy of his, Sir
Robert Heath having bought four hundred pound a year of the Justice, where the
accused was Lord, that Sir Robert might beg it of the king.

And if we examine the king of Denmark, brother of Queen Anne; the first time
he was entertained into England, what debauchedness was exercised in his
welcome to king James, to add punishment to the family! who both were so drunk
at Theobalds, as our king was carried in the arms of the Courtiers, when one
cheated another of the Bedchamber, for getting a grant from king James, for
that he would give him the best Jewel in England for a Jewel of a hundred
pound, he promised him; and so put king James in his arms, and carried him to
his lodging, and defrauded the Bedchamber-man, who had much ado to get the king
into his Bed. And Denmark was so disguised, as he would have lain with the
Countess of Nottingham, making horns in derision at her husband the high
Admiral of England; which caused a deep discontent between them. And generally
the Courtiers were then so debauched in that beastly sin, as at that time, in
the wayters chamber at supper, a Courtier was found dead on the Table, the wine
foaming out of his mouth: a horrid sight to behold.

And it is worthy of observation to consider the carriage of the king of
Denmark and his Son usually in his own Country: for at my being there, I saw
the old king (as his custom was) to call for the Master of his household; when
he made a voyage or progress, wrote on a Pastboard what he should do, and so
took the wagon to go to his Boares houses, and eat Martlemas Beef, powdered
pork, bacon, or such like as they had ready; and after repast, took for a
collation the handsomest daughter, kinswoman, or servant in the house (al her
kindred adorning her with all sorts of wearing ornaments) whom the King carried
to one of his Guesthouses, where he had not above three or four Lodgings and a
Kitchen, and solaced himself with this jewel so long as he pleased; and after
brought her home. A fruition made her in much esteem with her friends, after so
adulterous a fact.

Likewise it was the custom of his Son to ride on a Sled drawn with horses,
bells fastened to them, which tingled as he passed through the Towns; the noise
caused the women to run out of doors: the Prince beholding one more amiable
then the rest, beckning to her with his finger, presently she came to the Sled,
and accompanied him to some Hostery, till he had satisfied fully his lust.

Also their usual course is to profane the Sabbath in such sort, as all the
Carpenters in the Kingdom that day work gratis, to make the Kings ships; and
the people go to Church in their worst clothes, making no difference 'twixt the
Lords day and other days; who, in stead of Godly exercises, use much
profaneness.

Give me leave to repeat, that this King ordinarily would be drunk, and namely
one time (Sir John Peoly being his Servant, after an Inhabiter at Wroungay in
Norfolk) he commanded Pooly to ask any gift, to the value of half his Kingdom,
and he should have it. But he finding his Master so beastly out of tune,
demanded a great pair of Stags horns; for which, after so moderate a request,
the king bestowed on him three thousand Dollars.

Is it not known to all Germany, that his drinking out of reason with his
Commanders, lost many battles to the Emperous General Wallestine, which proved
a disaster to the united Protestant Princes, so that he was feign to submit to
the Emperor, with much loss and disgrace, to the prejudice of the cause of
God? In which war his brother king James proved a Coward to back a religious
cause; for he would not raise men nor money; yet the Parliament incited and
urged him thereto: to whom he made this answer, He would not give so bad an
example to support his Son-in-law against the Emperor. Whereas the Laws of the
Empire were, If the Emperor did unjustly, the seven Electors might depose him:
for certainly the joining of Bohemia with the Count Palatine of Rhine, might
have been a chief prop to support the Protestant party; which by Denmarks
fault, and King James his wilfulness, the Emperor got the Mastery of: though
after God raised Gustavus Adolchus King of Sweden, to turn the scales to the
united Princes side, yet in conclusion, the Swedes have sought more their own
interest then Gods.

Behold, if we examine Queen Mary, she cannot clear her reputation with Harry
Jermine: for if king Charles had not been so blinded, it had been discovered
long ago, and she punished or divorced; but the king being guilty of the same
crime, winked at it; which made him purblind, and count it a venial sin, as the
Papists terms them; but swallowed the mortal; yet urged by an Earl much with
him, if he would not believe the unsuitable behavior between the Queen and
Jermine, if he would go into her Chamber, he might be satisfied, and behold
Jermine sitting upon the bed with the Queen; so the King and the Lord went in,
and found her and Jermine in that posture. The King presently, more ashamed of
the act, then blaming her, departed, without speaking a word; yet for all this,
the queen was very jealous of the King; insomuch as he loving a very great Lady
now alive, whom he had for a mistress, to the intent he might have more
freedom with her, sent her Lord into the Low Countries; in the mean while,
daily courts her at Oxford in her husbands and the queens absence: but the Lord
returning, the King diverted his affectionate thoughts to another married Lady,
of whom the queen was jealous at her return from France; so that on a time this
Lady being in queen Mary's presence, and dressed a la mode, the queen viewing
her round, told the Lady she would be a better Mistress for a king, then a wife
for a knight. The Lady replied, Madam, I had rather be Mistress to a King, then
any man's wife in the world. For which answer, she was constrained to absent her
self from Court a long time.

Now as all men and their affairs are subject to mutation by a heavenly
providence punishing sinners for sin, the wheel turns greatness from top to
bottom, of which I have given you a notable Lantskip in the frail condition
of the Imperial family of the Stuarts, who raised to a glittering glory by the
succession of many kings, are now tumbled from the mount of ambition and
highest authority over three kingdoms, and at last reduced not to be Lord of a
visible molehill; whose heat of fiery pride has consumed into ashes of ruin
their felicity. Let us mark the shipwreck of those, who will not veil the
sails of Tyranny and oppression; they shall not avoid a tempest of Gods anger
for precipitation.

In this revolution, God had a special hand, who, when he determined to bring
this family to destruction, accomplisheth it not only by poor and weak means,
but by his mightiest thunderbolts of vengeance. This truth manifests it self
perspicuously in this Tragical History, who have made the flourishing condition
of three kingdoms stumble, by advancing and giving ear to corrupt instruments
of State placed at the helm; who wept not for our common calamity, but in the
tears of inferiors; and therefore I demonstrate, that never shall justice be
so well done, as by Parliamentary proceedings, to settle this Commonwealth upon
a pious basis, where they proceed in justice to banish oppression, that
property may fall into the right channel, and holy men advanced and rewarded,
and wicked punished, to the end that the people may be lulled asleep in the
cradle of ease and tranquillity; so shall love of Governors be in such
estimation, as body and purse may be at command; for fear poisons a Nation with
distrust and hatred; the first makes firm and stable the foundation of any
State, the last brings it by insensible steps to fall and moulder away like a
crazie building. Provided always, until the State have a perfect cure, there
may be armed Surgeons to cut off the gangrened part, which might putrify
the head, resembled to wise Counselors, who will preserve the whole body; so
they endeavor that taxes be moderated, as the temper of the pulse and health
shall appear.

And therefore I beseech you give me leave to turn my pen out of the Road, with
a counsel from my heart not impertinent to my dear countrymen, to profit by the
storm past, reduced by Gods providence to a calm; to make a pious use of his
great miraculous deliverance. I being a man can speak by experience, who has
been most justly worryed by the hand of the Almighty for sins; therefore let
them consider that The chidings of a friend are better than the kiss of an
enemy; a proverb of Solomon; which if we shall confide in, we may be styled
children converted to good; if not, may be accounted despisers of the rod:
which maxim I illustrate the truth of, by the Grecian Alcibiades; by how much
his banishment was more cruel by the Athenian Ostracisme, by so much more his
qualities and worth were esteemed. The skill of the Mariner is not at all
observed in a calm, but in a Tempest; the wise Ulysses had perished, if he had
not been in danger of ruin: pleasures blunt and strangle piety; when adversity
moulds the will and humors to a by as of fearing God, inclines us to know our
selves, and understand the end of Creation and birth to the glory of God, and
good of our Country: we are not born for our selves: Our eyes are closed with
delights, open in chastisements; in the one, sin draws more punishment; in the
other, we see clearly our aberrations, as spots in a glass. We are here on a
Theater for every one to play his part; the tragical seems more difficult, by
hatred, envy, and jealousy, the slaves of Reason; yet in truth, are banished
in troubles, when God loves the afflicted better, who, as a Sovereign,
resembles the Ocean, which receives that it gives, to the end the revenging
justice of heaven turn not wrath against them; but the Devil, enemy of repose,
inchants us in Luxury, when affliction imitates nature by degrees from a little
to more, and from more proceeds to a humane perfection in piety.

I heartily desire you, take this advice above a humane, the command of God: Be
subject to the higher powers: for they are of God. Wherefore, I beseech you,
respect those set at the Helm, whom God has made instruments of our
happiness: for naturally we are hooded, and cannot see that God has done
miraculous works: look not upon them as men, but as Gods instruments, to
execute his will; brought out of the shop of his Almighty workhouse, to
accomplish his determination; and are not to be laid aside, till by Gods
appointment they turn into the tyring-house: for certainly we have great cause
to give thanks to God for the Parliaments valourous success of Army and Navy;
both for General, Lieutenant General, Sergeant-Major Generals, Colonels,
Officers, and Soldiers; as for the Admirals and Captains at Sea, whom God
has miraculously preserved, to prevail over the enemies of the State; and so
let God have the glory, and we tranquillity all our days.

But when I revolve in my thought the opinion most are possessed with, as with
a Devil, that Parliament and Army are a punishment for their sins, and
attribute so great Victories to chance; I may justly suspect their Atheism;
whose lives I never see more amended, by Gods immediate hand on us, to make the
omnipotent Father of spirits to have no hand in it; or if acknowledged in
words, return not from iniquity, and are not thankful for arriving to so safe a
harbor as they are in, nor see that God is about to mould the world in another
fashion, as he has declared by his Prophets of old; and so, like swine, look
down to the earth, and not to heaven, to see a divine cause of a mighty
alteration.

Now to show that the Parliament proceeded justly in this war, I will prove it
by arguments Divine and Humane, Reason and Law.

First, if we regard the Scripture, we shall find Rehoboam the son of Solomon
justly lost the ten tribes, because he laid such heavy burdens on the Jews, who
declared they had no share in David, wishing Israel to depart to their tents;
although God had made a Covenant with David, that his posterity should sit on
the throne for ever, on condition they continued to serve the Lord as they
ought; which Covenant Rehoboam broke by sins, in such sort as God punished sin
with sin, suffering him to oppress and impose more heavy taxes on the people,
then his father; a reason God dissuaded the children of Israel, refused God,
and would have kings to rule over them, to enthral them to his will; but they
persisted not to follow the Counsel of the Almighty, therefore it was just the
kingdom should be divided for their disobedience: or if King Rehoboam did
wickedly, he could not be styled Gods vicegerent over the twelve tribes; for
God, whom Governors represent, never oppresses his people but for sin. When
kings cease to imitate God, they cease to Govern or be Governers, and represent
not God; when they are not Gods Deputies, they insult over the people without
authority: for this is an infallible rule (not to be gain said) in Scripture,
that if the people sin against God, and the king do not oppose it, but yield to
it, they are punished; and if the king sin, and they concur with him, they are
punished: so that if the Parliament had not opposed king Charles, God would
have been revenged on them. Now when a father wrongfully injureth his children,
his love to them is at an end, and so is his paternal power; for children are
bound to be obedient to Parents, not to be ruined by them: so that subjects are
bound to obey the Sovereign, so long as he keeps himself in bounds of justice
and doing right; but if the king would destroy his people, they are no more his
subjects, nor are they bound to obey; but he is a Tyrant. God never punished a
pious king that used his people well; otherwise God should be unjust. If God
were Author of the conquest over king Charles is so many battles; who is the
God of Sabbaths, that is, of battles; if he were not the cause of our
Victories, he were not God of battles; in which belief they should give a Deity
to the Parliament forces, which is blasphemy; for they conquered over the
Cavaliers: By which it appears, God sent this as a punishment on the king, and
the Victory was not a punishment on the Parliament, who defended the people in
their rights. Kings are ordained for the good of their subjects, not for their
hurt; nor were people brought into the world to have kings over them, but to
honor and glorify God: God is not glorified, when inferiors are oppressed by
their superiors; a sin God highly punished in the Jews; God were the Author
of oppression, if kings had such a deputation from him.

This Prince committed a great fault, in adhering too much to his unbridled
will; preferring his passion above the good of his people: there may be excuses
in youth, for want of experience; in stealing, for the occasion; in killing,
for injuries offered; in adultery, for persuasions of love, and heat of youth;
in Rebellion, for defense: but for offenses against the Commonwealth, there is
not satisfaction but a block or a gibbet. For a shepherd to sheare the fleeces
off his flock, may be tolerable; but to flea them, and cut their throats, is
abominable before God and man. For kings should have the care of a Master, love
of a Father, tenderness of a Protector, diligence of a Shepherd, to preserve
their subjects from wrong: for without a Parliament, kings have no ears, nor
eyes to see the injuries of the public, but by their favorites; who, for to
increase Wealth (raised from nothing) are like bloodsuckers, to drain the
people, and make themselves rich. If every member of the commonwealth ought to
preserv the State above his own life, much more a King is chosen Gods
vicegerent on earth, to preserve his people committed to his charge in safety.

Therefore God took from Rehoboam and Belshazzar their kingdoms, by his
instruments the people; and Nebuchadnezzar and Sennacherib, both for pride, and
wronging the Jews; the one was reduced to grass with the beasts, and the other
was overthrown in battle with hundred thousands. The example of Attilius
Regulus is commendable; who, rather then the honor of the Roman Senate should
suffer prejudice, performed his promise, and returned to Carthage, to undergo
exquisite torments. If subjects, much more a King God has entrusted with his
people, should have care of his Parliament and People; then much more should be
take care of the lives of the people.

Wherefore the Parliament seeing King Charles did raise an Army to defend ill
counselors, and ruin his people, the Parliament; rather then the king should
ruin the people, first they employed the Army to take away from him bad
Counselors, and bring them to condign punishment; but King Charles justified
their destructive advice by a war, to ruin the authority Parliaments; and by
this made himself an enemy of Commonwealth. Therefore it was just the
Parliament should defend themselves by a war, yea subdue the kings power, which
would destroy the Representative, which maintained the liberty of the subject
and property of their personal and real estates.

And though it may be objected, he had most of the gentry and Nobility; yet I
answer, They had the major part of the Electors sided with the Parliament, in
their purses.

Also some object, that the king had many Members of Parliament; but for
certain, if they would depart from the lawfully-called Parliament, to ruin
the people, the remainder in the house were the Representative, to adjourn the
Parliament from day to day; for otherwise it had been sine die, and ipso facto
dissolved the Parliament; then had the whole Nation remained slaves and vassals
for ever, at the kings mercy. And therefore it was most to subdue and put king
Charles to death, as a mortal enemy, who labored to destroy the Commonwealth
with all his power; for if a member, who has an inclusive right, ought to have
sentence of death; much more a king, who has an impositive care from God,
ought to have sentence of death: for kings now are not the anointed of God, as
David was; but by the Scripture, every Saint is anointed; which by the Popish
Clergy was usurped to them, and after by their policy attributed fasely to
kings, to maintain their Hierarchy.

Whrefore we may justly argue, that the Author of spirits had a long time
continued patient, in suffering three several families to be Superintendents
over three kingdoms five hundred years; when he raised the several houses to
the Throne, to make an essay of their behavior, to bring up the people in the
fear of God; whose time was long spent in Idolatry, and after reduced to a
prophanness, and then to a piece, and little part of a reformed way, and not to
a total; partly serving Baal, and partly God; which caused Gods arrows at last
to fly abroad, and shot the last Prince with a mortal blow: for it is
manifest, a king could not make a war with his Parliament, till it were ended;
and the king passed an Act not to end it till all the three Estates were
agreed: and when it ended, all he could do, should be to indict them by a Jury,
to find them guilty; but by making a War, he leaves them at liberty to defend
themselves; so that what he did amiss, should be complained of in the next
Parliament after.

In the war, the kings purpose could not be to make them obedient; which is too
harsh a way: for in so doing, he becomes their enemy; and then they are out of
his protection. Or if the subjects war with the king, and he oppose, they are
not subjects. A king is not a king, when he makes a war against his subjects,
but he is a Tyrant; and they are not Rebels, no more then when a king treats
with his subjects, are they not subjects: by such a war, he ratifieth them to
have a right and power to contest with him; as the fifteen Provinces were made
by the king of Spain, in a Negotiation, a free State: much more the reason
holds in a war.

How many times did the Parliament court the king, yea humbly petition him, and
treated with him by Commissioners, to do diverse things most necessary for the
good of the then kingdom! and he remained obdurate. If he were so obstinate
when he was under the power of the Parliament (as in the Isle of Wight) how
averse would he be, or rather, domineer over and ruin them, when they were in
his clutches! As if a Partridge (being near to a Faulcon) entangled with his
varvels, might peck and tach her, yet would not she yield to small a bird; what
could the Faulcon do when he had her trussed: surely plume on her, and at last
wring off her head.

How many times have the people in this Nation assumed the power to themselves,
for kings overflowing the rules of moderation! as in the times of Henry the
third, Edward the second; Richard the second, Henry the sixth, and after, upon
good behavior, they resigned the keys of Soveraignity to the entrusted
keepers; as namely in choosing the supreme Officers, which of right be longed
to the Parliament; and a long time since, by intrusion, kept in the hands of
the Diadem, but in a Parliamentary orb; wherein when the great Officers were
fixed, they kept their course from Retrogradation, by their Aromatical
influence upon the good of the people; but after they were at the devotion of
the chief, by that derivation they wronged the people, and augmented the power
of invassalage; as who in name of the Upper, insulted over the Inferior; that
all the English world was conformed to an incompatible subjection and
submission, too unjustly imposed.

Therefore it was impossible that Charles which had his hands in the blood of
hundred thousands, by his instruments, should after that carriage be free from
Cruelty, Indignation, and Injustice; no more then a Leper can be made pure, or
a Blackamore white, or a Leopard clear from spots. Therefore I will justly
conclude, the cup of Gods vengeance was filled to the blim, for king Charles
his family to drink the dregs.

Now if the war of France and Germany were just, especially the last, when the
Emperor transgressed the laws of the Empire, to make the united Princes to
raise an Host to defend themselves, and rectify what was amiss, by ingrafting
another Cion in the Empire; which continued too long in one house of Austria;
much more just is that of the Parliament, which has Legislative power, and
authority to draw Acts for the good of the Subject, to which the king is
always enjoined not to end the Assembly, till he had signed such Acts, and
reformed all abuses complained of. If the king should retire from the great
Counsel, and not sign Bills of Right, twelve of the Lords, and twenty four of
the others, were to repair to him, to know the cause of his absence; and urge
the king to sign such bills, and remove grievances. If he did not sign nor come
in the space of forty days, they ought to choose a Protector. And if he did
persist in his absence, they might justly depose him; as appears in the book of
the manner and fashion of holding Parliaments. And this was the reason of the
former kings removal.

If a master of a Family, who has wife, children, servants, stock, and cattle,
in a madness should go away from his house, and bring a force to destroy his
family, kill his children, take away his cattle off his own ground, and burn
his house, he were a mad man, and fitter for Bridewell, then to be a master of
a family; as likewise a Protector, who ought to protect his people, if he would
destroy them, because they would have a pious and virtuous government, he is to
be accounted a destroyer, no protector.

But some will say, The king had a number of his subjects, and the better part.

But they were such as supported a Power would take away the property of their
real, personal, and vital estates; which the King might do, if he conquered: if
there were not Parliaments, a check on the Sovereign, to protect inferiors,
such kingly power would grow to such a height, as no moderation might be 'twixt
Mercy and Tyranny.

I have often heard the Cavaliers say, They meant not to take away Parliaments,
knowing they were for their good and benefit.

But if the King had prevailed by their means, they should never have had
Parliaments after: then they would have been like Deer put in a toil, and
would have proved in the second degree after us slaves; of which slavery they
were principal authors.

Open your eyes, ye Cavaliers, and see what nooze you had prepared for your
own necks; when it had been too late to get your heads out, after the conquest,
and Parliament ruined. Look into France: when the Parliament Estates were
destroyed, they were no better then slaves. How many of the Nobility suffered!
as Montmorancy, Count of Soysons, Bouillon, and others; and the people
generally so miserable, as they can hardly live.

For Bills of Grace, I see no authority for it; a Prerogative intended only by
the power of kings; for people, (when they choose one to rule over them) would
justly be dealt with, and not harshly, when obedient; for then the Sovereign
ought to be loving to them, and a father to them. But when the king takes his
sword to fight with his subjects, they ought to defend themselves; especially
the Parliament, which is the highest appeal for any wrong offered by the king.

Therefore it was that our common Law allowed every one a plea upon a Writ,
justifying any against the Crown, for taking away of real and personal estate.
Also if Magna Charta forbids any free man to he imprisoned, and allows him an
Habeas Corpus; much more life may be preserved and defended by the sword; for
upon an Indictment of man slaughter in se defendendo, it is a good plea to save
his life in his defense, although he kill the other.

If any one defend his estate against the king, much more life may be defended,
by a Parliamentary power, which is of a higher nature: if every subject, then
the Parliament, which represents the whole body, may raise an army (if the
people be willing to undergo it) on purpose to defend their lives. All Warrants
of peace and good behavior were made in the kings name; so then if the king
raise an army to murder his subjects, he has lost to be a defender of them,
and has suspended, or rather lost his Perogative of Sovereignty; for every
subject may kill one another, when there is no power to restrain them; and the
king cannot defend, when he raises a power to kill them. The King had two
capacities; one as a King, another as proprietor of Lands, Honors, and
Seigniories: when he lost his first capacity, the Parliament, which is the
representative, in right of the people might justly assume the supreme
authority to themselves, to defend those the king would murder; for the people
first granted or suffered kings to have authority over them for their good; but
when the King abuses it, he ceases to be any longer their King, but becomes a
cruel Tyrant; and then he may be justly tried in his second capacity, as a
Subject, and lose his life, forfeit lands and goods by the Parliament the
supreme Judges.

And therefore it was, that Richard the third, before Henry the seventh
conquered him, was held a lawful king, and Henry the seventh attaint as a Rebel
by Parliament; but after the Conquest, Henry the seventh his Attainder was
reversed, and Richard the third affirmed to be a Tyrant. This declares
positively, that Parliaments have only power to ratify and annul kings, and
no other. For else, by power any one may be a Sovereign, without the
Parliaments approbation: but never any ascended the Throne, that was not
confirmed by Parliament; not only in way of Ceremony, but essentially and
really performed, by an Act to allow and ratify the present King, or else he
could not lawfully govern.

Besides, the King takes an oath at his Coronation, to maintain all the
privileges of the people: but when he brings them to oppression and Tyranny,
he is perjured, and loses the title of a father and protector of his people,
and is in the capacity of an enemy to the Commonwealth.

Many examples are in the world, that Kings, when they became Tyrants have been
deposed and killed; as in Muscovy, among the Turks, Babylonians, Persians,
Greeks and Romanr; and he who is an enemy to the Commonwealth, deserves to die
by all Laws Humane and Divine.

Kings have augmented their prerogatives, and so by intrusion have tyrannized
over the Subject: for they have in the interim of Parliaments had prerogatives
to pardon Manslaughter, and such as are expressed in the Acts of Parliament;
and by their greatness they incroached their power: for Kings could not take
away the life of any Subject, but by Indictment and Arraignment, and that by a
Jury of twelve men, who must find the Delinquent guilty or not guilty; not in
Parliaments, but in the interim of them: wherefore King Charles his coming with
an armed power to take out the five members, was a high breach of privilege;
and for declaring he would break the neck of Parliaments, he deserved to be
dethroned: this was to destroy the right of his Subjects, so that they should
have no property in estate, real or personal, nor life: for while the
Parliament sat, he ought not to question any: and afterward he could not take
away the life and estate of any without a Jury, but it would be questioned the
next Parliament, as many Presidents in the Rolls of Parliament shows.

A Parliament is a free place, where every one ought to speak their mind
freely, for the good of their Country. Now it was the fashion of King James and
King Charles, when anyspoke for the good of the people, to corrupt them with
preferment, and make them Royalists who were before for the Commonwealth;
preferment drawing them opposite to the Commonwealth, as Sir Henry Yelverton,
Sir John Savill, Sergeant Glanvile, Sir Robert Heath, my Lord of Strafford, and
Master Noye; but Master Noye showed before his death a great remorse for it, to
some of his intimate friends. It was greatness so bewitched them, and increased
the kings power, to wit, by preferment and honors, insomuch as Sir Edward Hoby,
a factious Gentleman, at a Committee in the Parliament chosen to punish some
boys that abused old Master Jordans Gloves, certain boys being proved to be
the authors of that Roguery, the Committee debated what Schoolmasters should
correct them, whether Westminster or Paul's; Sir Edward Hoby (I say) told the
Comittee he had found out one would lash on both sides, meaning Master
Yelverton, Sir Henry being newly chosen Sollicitor-General for the king, to
sign Bills of Grace; which was only in Parliament to be done, when Lotds and
Commons had signed them before, but out of Parliaments the kings had no such
right. Its true, kings might in interim of Parliament, upon an invasion, raise
an Army, and impose monys upon many of the Subjects; but this was authorized by
Parliament; and if he did amiss, it was questioned the next Parliament. This
shows plainly, that the Parliament had the power, not the Royalty.

It is true, kings had a power to call Parliaments; so have the Beadles in the
Universities power of calling Assemblies, Stwards of Courts to send out
Warrants to keep Courts; and yet both are subject, one to the Chancellors of
the Universities, the other a servant upon the matter to the Lords of Manors.

We need not fear Darlings of the multitude in this State; every one will
labor to be a darling of the people; and none will make himself great, unless
he means to be ruined, and be an Ostracisme.

Certainly to prevent this, it were good to extinguish all the print and stamp
of Monarchy, not to give a provocation to raise power.

The Pretorian Cohorts advanced Emperors at their pleasure; the Janissaries the
great Turks; but our Army is so pious, there is no fear, especially being not
in body, but some in Irelana, some in Scotland, and dispersed in several
Countries: those who pay the Soldiers, shall have obedience; but as the
proverb is, No money, no Swiss: No money, no obedience.

While the Roman Senate was rich, none durst assail the Monarchy; but, as
Tacitus reports, when the greatness of the Senate and riches decayed, then
Caesar invaded, after he had conquered Pompey.

It is to be observed, that what overthrows Monarchy, the same overthrows a
Senatical government. The Majors of the Palace at Paris had power to raise and
depose kings at pleasure, till it was justly taken away; if there be any such
power in the City of London, it is to be taken away; for they may, by wealth,
potency and multitude, do the like to the Parliament: yet they deserve much to
be respected; for they have done as much for the good of the State, as any City
ever did in the whole world; and therefore are to be encouraged, to have
Immunities and Privileges bestowed on them by the Parliament.

I deny not that there were privileges belonging to the kings of England, but
those are due to him so long he is a defender of the people, and a good king:
but if he proves not Gods Vicegerent, but becomes an enemy to the
Commonwealth, his Regency is suspended, and he is but a common person:
otherwise, kings might destroy the people, and become an enemy. So that his
Title is annihilated, and made void; as a shepherd who ought to preserve his
sheep when he goes about to kill and slay them, he cannot be called a shepherd,
but a destroyer of his sheep.

The example of king Henry the eighth, who when the House of Commons would not
consent to pull down the Abbeys, sent for them, and kept them in a room all
night, and in the morning came to them, and persuaded them to pass the bil, who
in fear next day did it; this is no argument to show the power of Kings: it was
their obstinacy to oppose against the will of God, who determined to destroy
those wicked houses, which were erected in a blind zeal, thinking by their
erection to make their souls saved.

A king is compared to a father; if he would kill his own children, he ceiseth
to have care of them, and is to be justly styled a murder, and no parent, to
preserve the issue of his body.

Parliaments were to be called every two or three years, to reform abuses in
the Nation; but king James said they were assembled to supply his wants, and
raise money; and therefore he denied them any other discourse; whereas indeed
Parliaments were called for all the members to complain of their grievances,
which were always redressed there. And there were tryers of petitions within
the House to examine whether their complaints were just: and certainly if there
were some now appointed without the door of the Parliament to take petitions,
and examine whether they were fitly to be delivered to the house or no, it
would give great content to the people: for I am confident there have been many
petitions delivered, which ought not to be presented to interrupt the weighter
affairs there transacted: And upon this, the Parliament have unjustly been
charged that they would not hear them, when in reason they ought not to be
preferred; for many of them might have been redressed by Law, or some other way.

Now to show how the prerogative was advanced: and that was done by making
Lord-Lieutenants in every County, and so Deputy Lieutenants; a device invented
by the Earl of Leicester, when he returned from being Deputy-protector of the
Low-Countryes under Elizabeth Protectress; who wished the Qeen (from a form he
had observed in those parts, from whence he came, for a way that furthered the
opposing of Spain) to make such; for if there should be an Invasion or
Rebellion in England, it would be too long to send up to the Council; but it
might easily be suppressed by them; two of the Deputy Lieutenants having power
to suppress them, by rasing forces to oppose and subdue them,

Whereupon, I remember there was a Rising against the Enclosures of Commons (so
much irksome to the people) for in some places the people rose to pull them
down, and were suppressed by the power of the Deputy Lieutenants, and diverse
hanged up; but the Deputy Lieutenants were after feign to get pardons; it being
contrary to law. Likewise a Cutpurse being taken in Whitehall in the then
presence, King James commanded the Lord Garret, the Knight-Marshal, presently
to hang the Cutpurse; which was done instantly: but the Knight-Marshal was
feign to get a pardon under seal. This shows plainly that no King can takeaway
the life of any without a lawful trial by jury; ergo, he cannot murder his
Subjects, nor raise a war during the sitting of the Parliament; for there he is
to be in person; then the king is less, and the Parliament supreme. Now when
the king takes his sword into his hand, and departs from the Parliament, he
loses his privilege of king in Parliament, and becomes an enemy to the State;
and then justly his name as king ought to be put out in any Commission, and the
Parliaments authority is to be used only.

I am therefore persuaded, that the adoring of kings has wrought this
misprision and mistake of the power of kings, which by laws of God and man they
have not; so that idolizing them has ruined the right of the people much; The
Lawyers also for preferment and advancement, have given a greater prerogative
to the sovereignty then was due.

If we examine our Municipall laws, and all Civil Laws, they are no way
justifiable, but as they are correspondent to the Judicial Laws of the Jews,
which were set down by God, to be a pattern for all to be paterned by. I find
no such power given by God.

And where it may be objected, that God forewarned the Jews not to have a king
over them, and expressed what inconveniences would follow of having kings
according to the custom of Nations, what slavery they should be in; this was
not to show that it was just so to do, but that their power and tyranny would
force them to it.

Another thing that increased the prerogative, and diminished the right of the
people, was, that the printed Statutes were not according to the Records of
Parliament; sometime there was added to, and sometime diminished from what was
in the Roll of Parliament; and somewhat put in that might be advantageous to
the kings; and put out was for the benefit of the Subject; as I have observed,
by my comparing the printed book with the Record. And truly if there were a
Committee to examine the Records, it should be necessary to see the right of
the Subject.

And in decimo octavo Iacobi, king James sent and took what was done that
Parliament, from Master Wright Clerk of the Parliament.

So likewise the king by his power and the great Lords of Court, made Courtiers
Burgesses, and sometime knight of the Shire by letters; who hindered much the
proceedings in Parliament by their vote, it being the policy of the Dukes of
Cornwall in the Stannaries to have multitude of Burgesses, to make themselves
potent in Parliament; which now the Parliament will prevent, by providing that
the Representative may be equally chosen from all parts.

Likewise it was usual for king James and King Charles, if any did speak in the
behalf of the Commonalty in Parliament, against the prerogative, to make them
Sheriffs, or impose other burdensome Offices on them; as my self and Sir Guy
Palms were served, after that Parliament of 18 Iacobi; or to be revenged on
them some other way, for doing their duty in Parliament, as then was invented
by projectors, as I could recite diverse examples in my time.

The Courtiers also labored to make good patriots Courtiers, as Sir Dudley
Digs was made a Courtier, and Master of the Rolls, who was faithful to the
Parliament, and dyed before a Parliament came: this was to draw their affection
from the multitude to the Sovereignty; so that by those means Tyranny was
increased, and the right of the people waved; which now will be redressed and
reformed, by Gods blessing, and prudence of the State.

Now I will draw a short Lantskip, by way of Epitome, to examine what good king
James and King Charles have done since Anno Domini 1603.

The seven years Parliament was a sage and wise Parliament, and labored to do
much good for the then-kingdome: and as a new broom sweepeth clean at first,
king James granted some good Laws: but the Court of Wards they endeavored to
pull down, which had ruined infinite families, upon offer to give the king two
hundred thousand pound in deposito, and annually two hundred thousand pound;
but it was opposed by Robert Earl of Salisbury (otherwise a very good
Commonwealths-man) as too great a thing for the king to part with. And truly
that Parliament took great pains to reform abuses in Church and State; but not
much was done for the good of the Subject, but great sums granted, and a good
Government hoped for, rather then in fruition. For king James spent much time
in his pleasures, and much money in Embassies, to make himself great; so that
there was some good for the Merchants; but Tonnage and poundage given by
Parliament, was for Guarding the Seas, which was employed to the Royal purse
only; so that although complained of, the Merchants were at a double charge in
wafting their goods.

After, king James wronged the fishermen and us much, by granting to his
brother Henry the fourth, king of France, for his month to fish on our coast;
who under that color took away the very earth and spawn of the fish of
Rotchet, Gurnet, Cunger, and Hadduck, to Deep; where they have abundance, and
we want.

King James granted the Hollanders to fish on our coasts; and for a small petty
rate, the Island of Lewis in Scotland, and other Isles of Ireland, to dry their
fish; by which they have enriched themselves above forty millions Sterling.

In that Parliament of seven years, they labored to reform abuses in Church
and Commonwealth, and that the pious Ministers might not be tied to subscribe
to the unlawful Ceremonies of the Bishops; which was not granted; but in nono
Iacobi at Hampton Court were diverse pious men, as Reynolds, Kniwstabs, Clerk,
and other reverend Divines, to dispute about ceremonies: but that the Divines
had not freedom of speech; for all went on the Bishops sides; a cause England
in all parts after were deprived of pious men, which were silenced, imprisoned,
and put out of their Lectures and livings; so that want of teaching caused
profaneness to get the pre-eminence.

The Parliament of duodecimo Iacobi was only for undertakers to raise money
for king James: some Bishops were questioned, as Bilson, and others; but the
Parliament dissolved without doing any thing.

Then was the Parliament of 18 Iacobi, where Heath was for the Commons; Sir
Thomas Wentworth, and Christopher Wansford, and others, were for the kings
side; where also Sir John Bennet, Sir Giles Mumpesson, and Sir John Mitchel,
were condemned; and the Parliament so dissolved; in which Parliament, Sergeant
Grimston called me out of the house, to the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of
Westmorland, and Sir Francis Vane dead, to the little Room in the Lobby, where
they offered me ten thousand pound, or 500. a year, which I would choose, not
to oppose the bill of the Fens in the house. I answered, no money nor estate
would make me betray the country. This Parliament was made void, and 32
patents called in by king James, and so he pleased the people with a toy.

Many and diverse were convented by the Councel-table to pay certain sums, or to
be imprisoned; whereof I was one, being brought before the Council when Sir
Albert Morton waited.

Then came the Parliament of 21 Iacobi, a little before king James his end;
where were some good Laws enacted; the Lord Keeper Bacon and the Earl of
Middlesex condemned for bribery.

A little before this, I being Custos Rotulorum of the County of Cambridge, by
Buckingham was put out, and Sir John Cuts put in, when I had that Office under
the broad seal; which could not legally be taken away from me, unless I had
committed some fault, thereby to have forfeited the same.

Now there remains no more for the Parliament to do, but faithfully to keep
what they have justly gotten by Gods Divine providence, and his will, in a
valourous Conquest; to the end that when they have settled the building of the
State upon a right and firm Basis, they may further enlarge the kingdom of
the Lord Jesus, by their endeavors through Europe; which I am fully assured
God has appointed, and will certainly bring to pass, that all the world may
see Gods determination in every climate of this part of the world.

After this new State is put into the cradle of ease and tranquillity, to make
it have a full gtowth, there will be nothing to hinder the establishment
thereof; no titles upon marriage, as in Monarchy, because the power is in the
people, and they choose a Representative that shall govern, every two or three
years making an election of Members of Parliament; that every one may Govern by
vicissitude: and therefore there would be no need of a William the Conqueror
to interrupt the proceedings of the State, and dissettle it by establishing of
new Laws; there will be no William Rufus in a hunting voyage to be slain; no
king John to be poisoned at Swinsted Abbey by a Monk; nor there will be no
beautiful Rosamonds to hinder a pious government; no Mortimers to entice to his
bed and lust the wives of princes: there will be no unnatural mothers, like
that French Lady, who killed her own son Edward the second in Pomfret Castle by
the power of a French pride: there will be no Pearce Gaviston, nor Spencers, to
draw a mighty State into their own hands, by ruin of the people: there will be
no Alice Pearce who sat at the pillow of King Edward the third, and kept a
privy Council out, that should advise a king for the good of his people: there
will be no wanton Courtezan to pass by the Court-chambers, and loose her
garter, to be a means to settle an Order: there will be no John of Gant to deny
the inheritance of his first children, and settle it upon his second wives:
there will be no Richard the second, to send a number of the Nobility to be
murdered at Calice, to satisfy the unsatiable desires of Princes; nor striving
to ruin Parliaments, though it be to his own deposing; nor no Judges to
counsel the Sovereign to ruin his people: there will be no factions betwixt
the houses of York and Lancaster, to imbroyle the people in War; nor no Barons
wars, to make a distraction in the Nations: there will be no working to have
Burgesses in Stannaries by Dukes of Cornwall; nor no imprisonment of a Speaker
Thorpe out of Parliaments; nor factions for their private interests to ruin
the public: there will be no killing of Henry the sixth in a Chamber, as
Richard the third did; no alluring of Jane Shores to Princes lustful beds; no
murdering of Princes, and smothering them, as was in the Tower; no Empsons and
Dudleys to raise an Estate for kings, by the ruin of the people; no pretenses
to make a war to gather wealth, to peal and pole the subject, and after to
compose the war, and keep the money in his own purse, as Henry the seventh did;
nor pride to put down the right title of a wife, and set up his own first, that
was after it; no Perkin Warbeck to be an Impostor, to put by a right title; no
Henry the eighth to make void a Katherines bed, to make way for another wife;
no chopping off the heads of wives, to make way for other beauties for lust;
nor no terrifying of Parliament, if they do not give way to pass an Act to
enrich his Coffers, as Henry the eight did in the case of Abbeyes; no Cardinal
Woolseys to set up their Arms before their Masters, to make way for a Popedom,
and too too late repentance, that he had not served God so faithfully as his
Master, by which he came to a Tragical end, to poison himself; no poisoning of
Edward the sixth by great Northumberlands, to make way for the Diadem; no
Leicesters to grow so potent, as to set up a school to vitiate Ladies: nor no
drawing of Parliament men from their fidelity to their country, as has been
used in king James and king Charles his time; nor none so ambitious as to make
themselves Darlings of the multitude, to make way for their own interests above
the public; nor for kings to take favorites to overthrow their principals:
none unworthy without merit shall be employed; none shall grow lawless by
virtue of Princes humors.

Surely all kingdoms have a period, as the Babylonian, Medes and Persians,
Grecian and Reman: look in the history of all these, and you shall understand
that Ambition, oppression, Tyranny, and Injustice, have been the changers of
Government to some other way or persons.

It is probable that the determination of God is to destroy all Monarchy in
Christendom: for if we begin with France, we shall find they have always
adhered to the Romish Government, except a little handful of those they call
Reformed Protestants. How much have they wronged us in our title, which belongs
truly to us! and though they seem to be Governed by a Salique Law; yet
notwithstanding they have not kept the order thereof, which they ought to have
done, but have foisted in some males, which ought to have been last, before
others which ought to have been first: and the Majors of the Palace at Paris
have set up kings at their pleasure, and not respected the right of those that
ought to have had it. The persecuting of the holy men of Towers, and the
Albigenses, the true Apostolic descendants, who ever hated the Roman Heresies:
that horrible and unheard- of massacre at Paris in Henry the thirds time of
France, by the device of the house of Guise; and Queen Katherine, who was a
Witch, and made Julips of young children snatched up in the night, to maintain
her lust; as Comines does testify: and Hen. 4. turning his Religion from the
Protestant side, after God Almighty had blessed him with one and twenty
Victories over the Popish League, Lewis the thirteenths making a war against
the Protestants, to murder a number of them, though it was with the loss of
five thousand of the Nobility of Erance. The Duke of Bouillon, the Duke
Tremelly, and diverse others, changing their Religion; and Cardinal Richeliu
giving Authority and command in Arms, on purpose to destroy the Hugonots,
though God blessed them to be the best Commanders in France. All these, I say,
and many more I could repeat, will be a means to shower down Gods vengeance to
destroy that Monarchy.

Let us therefore cease from wondering at Gods works: for if a Sparrow falls not
to the ground without his special providence, then much less is it wanting in
turning topsyturvy principalities and kingdoms: Certainly if this vicissitude
were not, sin would have more abounded; piety, or at least morality, would be
banished; and men would forget the end of their Creation, and think there were
no God to punish sin, nor reward the righteous; but do as the great fishes,
devour one another.

This makes me affirm that it is not probable, that God can bless Charles the
now supposed King of Scots from his predecessors, if we examine the mothers
side: the Grandmother was proved by the Parliament of Paris to have made
abortive her sons bed eleven times, by help of a Spanish Emperick; as by Will.
Murreys Ambassie appeared; who returned this answer to King Charles: and
therefore it was not convenient to yield that she should return into France:
and also his Grandfather turned his Religion, and was killed like a Calf by
Ravilliac: his mother, for too much familiarity with Buckingham, Holland, and
Jermine; for the Duke, for fear the French Ladies should tell tales of George,
often mounted on his steed, sent them into France contrary to the Articles of
marriage; so that the Queen was shut up in the Chamber alone, not to behold
their departure; and cut her fingers with the Glass windows, as Duplex the
French Historiographer writes. And Charles the first, before his marriage, had
for a Mistress a great married Lady (it is probable the Prince would follow the
same course after marriage) by whom she had a boy; and when he was Prince of
Wales, bestowed on the Christening eight thousand pound: it is to be supposed
he being so good an husband, and wise, would not lay out so much cost for
nothing. When he kept a book, like Henry the seventh, what bribes that he
shared, he set down punctually; So much received for such an Office, Place, or
Honor; and would be displeased if he had not his part agreed for with his
servants. And likewise the French Queen, Grandmother of Charles the supposed
second King of Scots, was so familiar with Marquess d'Ancre, whom she advanced
to so high a command, that by his actions, and the government after in her
Regency, France was almost overthrown, and the prime Nobility; and by her
counsel to her daughter here, there was procured matters of dangerous
consequence to England, since her arriving; who persuaded her daughter to draw
King Charles to the Romish part (as by many affairs appeared) and got a Patent
to transport leather into France, most prejudicial; which was condemned by
this Parliament.

Wherefore, on all sides, Charles the second from them may justly expect not to
prosper, especially by his rebellious invading of England; for if he had any
right, yet his invasion, and the Conquest, has justly extinguished his title,
especially king Charles and his mother playing fast and loose so often, that no
issue from thence can either be legitimate or pious, from so ungodly a
derivative.

So that if the quantity of battles fought, so great a revolution of the State,
the several qualities and persons interested, or the long continuance of
broils, could render a war memorable, this the Parliament has undergone, and
the new General finished, is in the highest degree of Gods miraculous
deliverances; after more then twenty battles in three Nations, and above 300000
slain, and the State changed of face and Masters; multitudes of Forts taken
and surrendered; so that the Victorious are but losers, till the State be
brought to be (as the French proverb is) en bon point, in perfect health, after
a war that has continued almost nine years.

The Subject came from king Charles, leaving his Parliament in the suds, and
violently raising a destructive war to ruin three Nations. It had rather been
wisdom in the king to apply to the people lenitives not corrosives: great
wounds are to be fewed, not rent; which is the part of a good Surgeon;
Restoratives are to be given, not Purges, to the patient: so Kings ought to
amend what was amiss, and not oppose them with violence; appease their fury,
not exasperate them by a war: for this thunderbolt, by wicked Council was
contrived, to break forth in fiery flashes at an instant in the three Nations,
about the 23 of October 1642.

Wherefore the Parliament now assembled aims at this end, that as in Grammar
there can be no good construction nor coherence to make true Orthography,
without the Substantive and Adjective conjoined, which is resembled to the
Parliament the supreme authority, now settled by Gods assistance, appointing
the Council of State, who will bring mighty things to pass, and cause the
annual Officers to nourish all the members in their several callings, that
there may be a semblable endeavor of the well being of every good Citizen and
inhabitant, as well as those in authority; that piety may be exalted and
increased by the Lamps of the Sanctuary, endued with the Spirit of God; that
the whole body may be governed Apostolically, whereof Christ is the Head,
without whom nothing can be effected: for if Christ be not chiefest in our
thoughts, no State can be durable, but like a sandy foundation will moulder
away: That the Electors may love the Elected, and esteem and obey them, who
spend their spirits to advance the common good, keep and defend the weal
public in health and prosperity, that it be not hecticall, meager, nor lean;
nor too Saturnicall, nor too Jovial, but in a golden temper. These are wise
Physicians, who cure the maladies, fevers, and destempers, that blood may run
in every viene of the State to nourish the whole body, in justice, equity, and
right, through the cava vena, cava porta, and smaller veins; the great Cities
and Towns as well as the small; that the Officers and Magistrates have not a
dogs appetite, to turn Judicature to a bad chylos, but to an equal
distribution of right, that the heart, the courage of the People, may be
fostred in good actions, without respect of persons, but with regrad to the
right of the cause; that vice and sin may be punished, with a parenthesis of
mercy; that the Republic may have foraine and native commodities; that the
Land lie not freshforth, as the Lord terms it, but that there may be
importation and exportation; that Manufacture may be maintained, to keep from
the bane of idleness and debauchedness, that trade may dish out all things
necessary for use, seemly ornament, and lawful Pleasure; that the Merchant, the
Purveyors of the Nation, export and import all commodities for the good of the
State; that just Impositions, Impost, Subsidy, and Excise may be paid, without
corruption and defrauding the State; that Artificers may be able to maintain
their families; that laws may be kept within the chanel of Gods rule and
direction; that potency surround not the peoples property, nor wink at the
spoil of inferiors; that those in Authority regard more the public then
their private interest; that the Orphant, widows, and fatherless, be relieved,
the innocent freed, and the nocent escape not punishment; and that the Navy,
the walls and bulworks, may be maintained in good equippage, for the honor and
defense of the Nation.

By this means, the wise and sage Council of State will undermine the enemies
plots, so that their malice hurt us not, by intelligencers in Foreign parts,
employed to prevent mischief to the Commonwealth; wherein the Earl of Salisbury
(dead) was vigilant, at the annual expense of 2000 pounds. And therefore I am
confident the Parliament frames the State to this fashion, if time and repose,
the midwives of all affairs, would give them leave to bring forth to action
their contrived principles, in which hitherto they have been impeded, by the
plots of malcontents, and by procuring provisions for subjugating Ireland and
Scotland, the enemies of God and of this State.

Consider, therefore, O England, that they do as wise Physicians are
accustomed, before the perfect remedy of patients consumption, advise not to
action, employment, and troubles in affairs, till restored to strength and
vigor.

Wherefore now I come to observe how miraculous it is that my Lord General,
descended by his Mother by the male-stock of the Stuarts, should be a revenger,
under God and the Parliament, of so many horrible murders and adulteries,
oppressions, fearful and abominable wickedness, as I have raveled out the
pieces, to wind up this bottom, in some special points; but have omitted many
this Enchiridion is to able not contain; which, when God shall enable me, and
the State injoyne, I shall willingly undergo.

I observe likewise, by his Father, that this Conqueror is a male of that
great Crumwell, the sole contriver of the dissolution of the Abbeys (under
Cardinal Woolsey) those adulterous Seminaries of lust, gluttony, and idleness,
that I saw with mine own eyes, when I went to school at Bury, fifty four
years since, from a well brought up thousands of Childrens bones, which were
murdered and cast in it, that the inchastity of of the Nuns and Friars might
not be found out. And although Crumwell Earl of Essex by the malice of the
Popish Clergy, was contrived to die, yet he was a Lord of transcendent parts,
and a scourge to ruin those pestilent Abbeys; as if God would requite and
revenge his death, by giving such an honor to his name and family in
after-ages, to raise up a Crumwel to be Gods instrument to destroy such a
wicked stock, which nourished such irreligious houses, whose hands were imbrued
so often in blood; And that amongst the three Generals God raised up this last,
with a mind and body suitable to finish an absolute Conquest over the Royalty: a
work in which the heavens (Gods creatures) appointed him to be a principal
Coadjutor, under this present Parliamentary power; God dispensing so much
sufficiency of wisdom, piety, and prowess, out of the treasury of nature, for
an accomplishment; pointing with the finger to every one, Oliver Crumwell as a
prodigy, to perform what the great Creator resolved to bring to pass in this
Stuarticall Catastrophe; for which he is equal with Alexander the great;
leaving him to shine as a Star placed by God amongst all the military Forces of
Europe, under the Parliament and the supreme authority of the Commonwealth, to
be a glorious Sun and a Prometheus for to bring in a heavenly light for all
Europe to behold more clearly Gods will and determination, which will be more
sensibly and visibly known after the next years great Eclipse, to inlighten not
only the Cavaliers, but also Europe, what Gods purpose is to act in future
ages; in which course it is behoovefull for every Christian to observe, that he
may manage his affairs accordingly, to the glory of God and his own safety.
For so infallible is the will of God to take revenge of injuries done, not
observing the presence of times when they were committed, but transferrring
occasions from one season to another; he calls the sinners into reckoning,
when they have least memory of them: therefore God has appointed this thrice
honorable Parliament the instruments to punish all those Delinquents, who have
raised this storm against the Commonwealth, to bring them on their knees to
Petition for a composition for their estates personal and real, and others to
forfeit their estates for their insupportable malignancy; who now begin to
behold that peace is better then war, quietness then rebellion, and subjection
then opposition: for it is not sufficient that the supreme authority of Nation
do their duty; but as in the nourishing of the body, though the head be well
disposed, yet it is also necessary all the members do their office in obeying
the supreme authorities just Command with all possible diligence: so shall they
be by the States indulgence united, who were divided, and enjoy the same
privileges with us; and we all may sit under our vines, and glorify the God
of heaven, who will bless and prosper us.

To conclude, I humbly beseech the supreme authority of England assembled in
Parliament, to pardon my age, if I have not so punctually set them down in
order as I desired, being shortened by time, and wanting a faithful, able
Transcriber, to write cut this Remonstrance as I could wish: my intentions are
only to manifest Gods determination in abasing greatness which will not stoop
to the Government of our Savior Jesus Christ the second person in the Trinity,
to whom God has given all power in this sublunary world, for the good of his
elect; To which I add a gentle admonition to all Princes of Europe, to give
over tyranny, and submit to the power of the Redeemer and Savior, who has
sacrificed his life to save wicked sinners; and so prevent a shower of Gods
vengence impending, which is ready to dissolve and pour down upon their heads.

O Ye Princes of Europe, that persecute inferiors by Tyranny and oppression,
look on the works of God since the creation, and you shall see plainly the
great Creator will dismount your glory and pride usurped over others, yea a
power to hinder the Government of Christ, that the Kingdom of the Gentiles is
stopped in the election of the Saints, by adhering to the great Whore of
Babylon, and her Superstition; who takes upon her the Authority of the Son of
God, and hinders the conversion of souls: turn your eyes back, and see, as in
a glass, what great alteration God has brought to pass since he made the world.

The first great Change was in Enoch's time: when men were licentious, God
turned the stream, and they began to fear him.

The second was in the flood: when Noah had preached to the old world above an
hundred years, and they would not be warned, God sent a general Deluge and
destroyed all but eight persons.

The third was an odd number, in the miraculous deliverance of his Church the
Israelites out of Egypt.

The fourth was in Salmanassers time, when the Jews cried to God in their
banishment, and were reduced to Jerusalem from Captivity.

The fifth was more worthy admiration, in sending a Savior to save sinners.

The sixth was in Charlemain 's time, when Monarchy began to spread and
surround the earth to a potency, by priding it over the People.

But lo this last is Sabbattical, and gives a rest and quietness to all your
pride and ambition.

FINIS.

