THE RELIGIOUS CAVALIER.

Done out of French.

By Gideon Pierreville, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for John Cripps, at the Black Lion Post Office,
between the two Temple Gates in Fleetstreet. 1683.

TO THE Right Honorable KATHARINE Countess of KILDAKE.
Madam,
THE Ambition Writers have to flourish with some considerable personage in the
Head of their Productions, would be less liable to Censure, if this Conduct of
theirs were regulated by judgment, or influenced by good fortune. But we many
times see the Patronage they make Choice of, has no other desert than that of a
Glorious Title, nor no other Claim to their Eulogies than only Eminent
Extraction. But these addresses of mine howsoever blameworthy for their
presumption are at least authorized by the Contemplation of such Extraordinary
Qualities as create a veneration in all mankind for your Ladyship, and have
made me throng with this Offering to your Feet. My Design is only, Madam, your
Entertainment, which I thought this Religious Cavalier capable of affording,
and that the merits of his Story would obtain him the honor of Naturalization
from your Ladiship's hands. I will leave to others, Madam, the vanity of
endeavoring to give the world an Idea of so charming a Character as that of
your Ladyships; the vanity of pretending to draw and copy an Inimitable Beauty,
and of proclaiming Virtues which can never be better expressed than by their
effects, and which even outshine the Glories of your Birth, and the luster of
your alliance. All I aspire to is the having one Voice in the General Consort,
and leave to declare the profound respect and submission wherewith I am,

Madam, Your Ladyships Most Humble and Most obedient Servant; Gideon
Pierreville.


THE RELIGIOUS CAVALIER.
EVrope was in a Calm, Mars and Bellona weary of sowing slaughter and horror
had delivered up to the delights of a sedate and rural life one of their
Bravest Ministers. A Nobleman did pleasingly enjoy the satisfaction of the
Vintage of the most delicious Wines of France, which grew near his Castle in
the Province of Champagne; when that Heaven thought fit to recompense his
Heroic Labors by giving him in Placidia and Damis an accomplished Daughter and
a worthy Heir of his Great Heart: this last received an Education Conformable
to his Extraction, and Placidia, who shared deepest in the inclination of her
Parents, was brought up in all the Exercises of a person of her Rank. The Peace
did not last long, some Bickerings arising between Spain and France, the Count,
Placidia's Father, was recalled to Court while she took Lessons upon the Lute
and Guittar from an Italian Master who taught her to perfection the Italian
Tongue, to which she had a natural inclination. That Illustrious Cavalier had
order to march at the Head of a Regiment to the Siege of Lisle, where having
been wounded mortally by a Granado, he found in the Ditch of that Town the
usual Tomb of Great Men.

Placidia was then but twelve years old, when the Countess her Mother received
news of the Death of her Illustrious Husband. That Lady imparted the sad
tidings to her Daughter of the tragical end of the Count her Father, who though
in so tender an age had nevertheless sense enough to be infinitely grieved for
the loss: they both afforded for some time Tears to the Memory of the Deceased,
which were still trickling when the Countess took an Oath usual to young
Widows, never to think of a second Marriage.

They mourned for a season in the Country, where all the Nobility came to
Court to them, as to the Principal Family of the Province. Placidia being looked
upon as a rich Match had many Votaries, but as she was not only yet too young,
the Countess her Mother fancied she could no where so well receive the Breeding
of a person of her Quality as at Paris, which we may call the School of
politeness. Whereupon she took a resolution of going to spend the Winter there;
and some few days after, going thither accordingly, she took a House ready
furnished in the Fauxbourg de Saint Germain, which is the part of the Town most
frequented by Strangers who live at a great rate. The Countess made so great a
figure, and Placidia was so beautiful as to attract to their Lodging many
gallant Men. Their House became in a few months the Rendevous of an infinity of
Courtiers, who persuaded the Countess to allow of Gaming at her Lodgings. She
was of too great Quality to give occasion to any suspicions of self-interest
and libertinism. It seems as if persons who are distinguished by their
Extraction are incapable of giving of themselves any low sentiments, and it is
commonly only those who have neither much good nor ill fortune that Calumny
attacks.

Amongst that Crowd of young Sparks, who paid Visits of Complaisance to the
Countess, and assiduities to the blooming Charms of Placidia, two Cavaliers
distinguished themselves amongst the rest, insomuch that it seemed as if Colonel
Fragel and the Marquis de Phare, were born, the one as the older of the two for
the Countess, and the other for the Daughter, though indeed the Colonel and the
Marquis had only Eyes for Placidia. The Character of the genius of those two
Gentlemen was very different: the Colonel was a man naturally reserved, and did
not, like the Marquess, take a pride in proclaiming himself the Favorite of
Placidia though he really was so: the Marquis on the contrary gloried in being
thought the Lover of so beautiful a person; and that all the world might
flatter him with so fine a Conquest, he let no opportunity escape of promoting
the Opinion of his being her Gallant. He went neither to the Playhouse, Park,
nor any other public place, but in her Coach; he never stirred from her House,
and was always making her some considerable Present, which she accepted by her
Mothers leave, who would not have been sorry that a Young Man of that Quality
were entered into her alliance. The Colonel for his part being very much
persuaded, that how favorable soever Placidia's might be to the Marquis her
Heart belied her Eyes, and her complaisance did husband his addresses to her
with so much art and nicety, that he became the only object of her tender
Inclinations. He had indeed a Rival in appearance, but was convinced Placidia
had for that concurrent nothing beyond indifferency.

The Marquis having much of the indiscretion of the age, and reckoning the kind
looks of his pretended Mistress as certain Favors, having contracted some
acquaintance at the Countess's House with the Colonel, who came thither every
Evening, did without much scrutiny engage so far in friendship with him, as to
make him the Confident of all his secrets. Their commerce of friendship was
increased by Parties of Divertisement which they made together; the Colonel
appearing indifferent to the Marquis in all that concerned Placidia: the
Marquis did not think he ran any risque by unbosoming to him his disposition
for that lovely person. The Colonel, who was admirably perfect in the art of
dissimulation, did outwardly espouse his Cause, flattered him more and more
with his having insinuated himself into his Mistress's heart, and made use of
his weak side to promote his own affairs. And indeed the Countess, whom her
Daughter and the Marquis had prepossessed with the good intentions of the
Colonel, did willingly admit of his entering into something private
Conversations with Placidia; at his coming from which, the Colonel made the
Marquis a description of so tender a love, that this Cavalier fancied himself
passionately beloved. In the mean while the Colonel took advantage of the
liberty that was granted him of approaching Placidia. He found the secret to
surprise that young Heart, whereof he rendered himself so absolutely the Master,
that that Divine Creature only acted by him, and had no more motion than those
he inspired into her: the little inclination the Countess had for the Colonel,
at least in regard of all alliance, was sufficiently known by our two Lovers.

They vowed to one another an Eternal Fidelity, being resolved to wait a
seasonable opportunity, and contrived the means together of making a property
of the Marquis's easiness, and of diverting themselves at his Cost. It was but
too easy for them to render him their laughing stock, and the subject of their
pastime, he went very open to Placidia, and concealed nothing from the Colonel.

Some years passed in this innocent Commerce for the one, though not so for the
other.

Placidia with age became more cautious and rational, when Love, who is always
the Author of some disorder, and glories in keeping to himself the Subjects he
has once subdued to his Empire, came to disturb the pleasures our Lovers had
hardly tasted. A Member of the Parliament, who though a Gown-man, was not the
less amourously inclined, frequented the Countess's House, and had for some
months made Love to her; when time and occasion had worn out of the memory of
that beautiful Widow the Oath she had taken, if for his part he made known to
her his passion, she for hers did not prove insensible. A little thing does
revive those flames that are newly extinguished; the delights that are enjoyed
in the sacred bond of Marriage did renew their traces in the Countess's
imagination: The Gallant did so powerfully promote the recalling of those
tickling Idea's, that theirs would not have been deferred, so vehement was
their reciprocal passion, if her Lover had not represented to her, that it was
first of all convenient to secure themselves from the insults of the Family by
giving an account of Damis and Placidia's Estate, whose Guardian she had been.
He could have wished he might have rid himself of them both, by confining them
to a Cloister; but Damis being the only Heir of his Father's Name, it was
necessary he should continue in the world; and this made them agree to employ
their Friends to have him received as one of the King's Pages. They did not
think Placidia so necessary a Moveable in the world, how beautiful soever she
was in her Curls, they thought a Nuns dress would not unbecome her; whereupon
they condemned her to the obscurities of a Cloister with precipitation, and
conferred afterward seriously of the means to make her desirous of a
Monastical life.

The Deceased Earl had a Religious Sister in the Convent of Avenay, some
Leagues from the City of Rhemes, and very near his Castle. The Countess's
Gallant thought that Sanctuary very worthy of Placidia's Vows, and told the
Countess that without sounding her upon the business, it was requisite to steal
her away from the sight of her Adorers, and under a pretext of a return, carry
her to the Castle, and from thence cunningly deliver her to her Aunt. This
Resolution was accordingly taken, and the Gallant staid at Paris to solicit for
a considerable Place, and likewise that he might not be thought to have had any
hand in the matter, while the Countess took all the exactest measures possible
for the execution of her enterprise.

Placidia, who had not had the least hint of all these contrivances, was
extremely surprised that without having the time to take her leave of any body,
she saw her self obliged to take Coach with her Mother, who told her she took
that course to avoid the importunate civility of the taking leave of a hundred
persons who would have come to see them. Whereupon they took the Road to Rhemes
in order to their going to their own Castle, when the Colonel, whom they had
not seen in two days, and who had had notice of their sudden departure met them
as returning Post from Louvoy for particular affairs. The Countess fearing if
she should flatter him with a speedy return, it would engage him to wait on
them to the Castle, told the Colonel that some Domestic affairs called her for
a fortnight to her House, and that about that time her Daughter and she should
be returned to Paris. This Cavalier took this specious reason for a real truth,
and offered with so good a Grace to guard them at least as far as the Castle,
that this favor could not be refused him: whereupon he dismissed his Postboy,
and took place in the Coach, where he was so much master of his Eyes, that it
was impossible the Countess should perceive they kept any correspondence with
those of Placidia's. At their coming to the Castle, the Countess being taken up
with reviewing her House, the Colonel had the opportunity to take a turn in the
Garden with Placidia, going from Walk to Walk they at length came to an Alley
that was shaded and covered with Trees, and where no body could see or overhear
them; they seated themselves, and began to make the most tender declarations
imaginable, and renew their former Oaths of an inviolable fidelity, when the
discovery of a Footman's coming slowly to them, interrupted their Conversation,
and obliged them to go partake of a Collation. During all the Evening, and the
next Morning until eleven a clock that the Colonel departed, our Illustrious
Lovers had neither time nor opportunity to converse, the Mother undesignedly
proving to them a troublesome Argus. But what do not Lovers say when they are
necessitated to hold their peace, and what is more pathetical and expressive
than their silence? Before the Colonel took Horse, he told Placidia after a
gallant manner in her Mothers presence, Well! Queen of Beauties, when will the
Marquis have the pleasure of seeing you again? whereto that innocent Victim
replied ingenuously, My Mother gives me hopes it will be within fifteen days.
That time will not be over long if it be the term of your return, reassumed he,
But if your absence, fair Placidia, should last fifty days it would be uneasy
to you, and a mortification to your Lovers. On the morrow the Countess proposed
to her Daughter to go make a Visit to her Religious Aunt: Never having seen
her, she seemed very desirous to accompany her Mother to the Convent.
Immediately after their arrival there, the Aunt came into the Parlour, where
after some ghostly conversation the discourse became more free, at the end
whereof our Ladies were invited to a Collation which was prepared for them in
another Parlour. The good humor of both sides the Grate did partake in the
Entertainment, from which the Countess got up to discourse her Religious
Sister-in-law upon the design she had upon her Daughter. That voluntary
Captive, who according to the Cloister Maxims looked upon the most innocent
pleasures of the age as forbidden fruit, did applaud the Countess's
Dectaration, and promised her to do all that was possible to prevail with
Placidia to give her Mother the satisfaction she expected from her submission.
There remained now nothing more than to make the Daughter desirous to see the
innerside of the Convent, and to make her resolve to spend some days there. The
Nuns are but too ingenious at inspiring such kind of inclinations: they
proposed the matter so cunningly to the innocent Placidia, that the Doors were
not soon enough open. This Religious House being one of the finest of the
Province, upon the first proposition that was made to Placidia of spending some
days there she accepted the offer, and consented to stay a week; whereupon in
she went, and her Mother having passed her word to send for her back at the
time appointed, she took Coach and returned to the Castle. The honest Nun in
the mean while did dexterously try how her Niece stood affected, and made her
such fine descriptions of a retired life, that if she had not a natural horror
for solitude she would have immediately complied and demanded the Veil. As she
had not the least disposition to a retired life, following the facetiousness of
her gay humor, she did but make a jest on it when they proposed her renouncing
the world: Her free repertees which palled those who endeavored to reduce her,
did not discourage the Aunt, who daily seemed to insinuate to her that the
Countess her Sister-in-law had only left her with her that she might relish
the pleasure of a Cloister-life, and how easy it was to attain Heaven in that
retreat. This old piece of Continency one day seeing that all those rich Images
she laid before her Nieces eyes seemed to her hideous, and that she seemed to
be extremely disgusted with the little she had tasted of a Monastical life,
full of an indiscreet zeal, she told her, My dear Niece, I must at present open
my heart to you, and declare what is absolutely the will of your Lady Mother.
What is her will, interrupted Placidia laughing, is it that I change my Hood
into a Veil? Yes, replied the Aunt gravely, and she brought you hither for no
other purpose. Placidia who thought it was only a trick to try her made answer
after a drolling way, that she was yet too young, and incapable of judging of
the consequences of a choice of that importance; that she would take time to
think of it, and that if Heaven inspired her with a love of solitude she did
assure her that she was so well pleased with their Convent as that she should
prefer it before any other. The old one continued still to insist, and Placidia
to defend her self, till the next day when she expected a Coach to fetch her
home, she was much surprised to see a Servant of her Mothers enter the Court
with a Cart laden with all manner of things necessary for the furnishing a
Chamber neatly: As soon as the Servant saw her, he came up and delivered her
this Letter from the Countess.

I do not doubt, my dearest Daughter, but that the Convent of Avenay does
please you extremely, and that it will be joyful news to you that Heaven
destins you for that place: your Aunt will have informed you of my good
intentions, listen to the voice of the divine spirit which calls you in secret,
let not those holy ardours cool in your heart, and be assured that being a good
Mother, there shall be nothing wanting on my part for your spending a calm and
happy life in the land of the Saints, where you are at present. I send you
wherewith to furnish your Chamber; your Aunt will take care to provide you with
all the other little things you shall have occasion for. Be careful to write
to me from time to time, and be persuaded that I shall ever be your best friend.


Placidia was seized at the reading of this Letter with so great an
astonishment, that she had like to have fallen into a swoon; nevertheless she
made a great effort upon her self, and surpassing the sentiments of her age,
she turned toward her Aunt, and told her with tears in her Eyes, I perceive,
reverend Mother, I must be sacrificed to Family-interests, by burying me all
alive in a place, where for want of calling, I can never take delight in; but
no matter, no matter; God the revenger of oppressed innocence, will free me out
of the Captivity I am brought under by a criminal self-interest. I consent to
stay here till the Divine Providence shall otherwise order it. They unloaded
the Cart, and Placidia sent back the Coachman without giving him any answer for
the Countess her Mother.

All the Nuns, as soon as he was departed, assembled round Placidia, assured
her of their good will, and strove who should give her the most diversion. She
supported her self in that tribulation until the morrow, when grief got so
much the upper hand of her, that it cast her into a languishment, which was
followed by a Fever that lasted above four months.

In the mean while the Countess returned to Paris, gave an account to her
Lover, who had gotten a considerable Place at Court, of what had passed, and
told him she believed Heaven conspired with them, and that her Daughter was
really born for a Cloister-life. This Gallant, upon this testimony looking upon
Placidia's having professed her self a Nun as a thing certain, represented to
the Countess that nothing hindered their Marriage, to which he found that fair
Widow so ready disposed, that the Nuptial Ceremonies were completed, and the
Marriage consummated. She had changed her Lodgings, and having taken the House
of her new Husband in the Street called Richlieu, she went every day to Mass to
a Convent hard by; the Colonel being one day there, was extremely surprised to
see the Countess, whom he hardly knew again, for that she had changed her
Mourning into Cloth of Gold. He approached one of her Lacquayes who wore her
Husband's Livery, and inquired of him, without being perceived by the Lady,
after the health of Mademoiselle Placidia, and after the place where she was.
The Footman not having been forewarned, made presently answer, that they had
left her sick in the Convent of Avenay, where she did not seem to be overwell
pleased. The undiscreet easiness of this Fellow, making the Colonel pry farther
into the business, he was informed of the Countess's alliance with the
Courtier, and the place of their abode. Having heard too much for his repose,
he withdrew in a pensive humor, and went directly to his own House for the
taking Resolutions there becoming the fidelity of his Love.

In a moment he formed the design of taking Post to go to Avenay in all haste;
he arrived there the next morning. He asked for Mademoiselle Placidia at the
Grate, who came thither all languishing as she was in the company of an old
Matron, according to the Cloister custom. After some words purely of civility,
that poor Lover told his dear inclinations, with an air which bore the
character of indifferency. Well, Mademoiselle, the Divine Spirit is willing to
have you of the number of his well beloved Spouses. Since when have you
received such salutary inspirations? truly the conduct of Providence is
admirable upon the Elect. I cannot sufficiently admire how that in so short a
time a person could be prevailed with to leave the Court for a Desert, and such
a person as seemed naturally inclined to the splendor of the world. I can
hardly conceive the force of the motions that have prompted you to come bury
your self all alive in a House, which nevertheless we may with justice call the
Temple of Virtue. He would still have continued his witty descant upon this
Point, had not Placidia, who feared he would insensibly pass on to some matter
which might have given suspicion to her old Companion, interrupted him with a
sigh, and said, That indeed her Call had something impure, that she held it
from a secret intention of her Mothers, who had by artifice got her into the
Cloister; but that God who commonly makes use of the self-interested designs of
men for the working his will, made her daily more and more passionate for a
Religious life, for which she had then as much inclination, as she had in the
beginning hated its Maxims. Our Cavalier, partly guessing at the reason she
thus disguised her sentiments, made a show as if he had the same sense too. He
began to make a hideous description of the Age, and to extol the advantages of
a retired life with so much eloquence, as to say he himself designed to die in
a Convent, that the old Nun was disposed to leave them at liberty. And truly
that zealous Old one hearing him discourse after so religious a manner, fancied
this Gentleman was the person who had married the Countess, and that he came
thither only to inflame Placidia's passion for the Veil. Possessed with this
opinion, she thought convenient to leave them alone to converse together, and
retired under pretext of some regular exercise which demanded her appearance in
the Dormitory. She was no sooner out of the Parlour than that Placidia's Lover
seemed quite struck dumb, and she for her part could not speak to him a word.
They looked upon one another for some time without speaking, the Eyes alone
being the faithful Interpreters of the disposition of their Hearts. Placidia's
fears gave liberty to their mutual grief. She related to her Lover the
procedure and ill designs of her Mother, and conjured him to believe that she
had hot any inclination for a retired life, though she outwardly seemed to have
for the obtaining the liberty of the Parlour which otherwise she would have
been deprived of. Upon this declaration our Cavalier told Placidia with such a
tone of voice as insinuated to her the state of his passion. Do you then still
love me, charming Placidia? may I presume that the malice of the world has not
been capable to break those ties that Heaven has joined? Yon ought to be
persuaded, replied she, that I love you, and that what violences soever I may
be made to suffer, they shall never ravish from me a liberty which I have
engaged to you, and which if you do not enjoy, you your self shall be only to
blame. Her tears stifled the rest, and excited those of the Cavalier, who was
little accustomed to shed any. Nevertheless they held up at length, and the
Cavalier renewing the discourse, said to Placidia, What can I do, my dear
Demoiselle, in the present conjuncture? Command, I am ready to undertake all
things to the prejudice of my Interests, of my glory, and of my life. Continue
to love, resumed she, and that is sufficient. The advice you give me, added the
Colonel hereupon, is injurivous to my fidelity. I have made a vow to love you
eternally, and I do not believe that death can be capable of destroying my
inviolable passion. Does the business lie in hazarding my estate, my
employments, my honor and my life for the freeing you out of pain, I am ready
to expose all, and even to sacrifice my self for your satisfaction? Placidia
seemed to be persuaded that her Lover spoke sincerely, when she made him
answer, That it was not yet time to come to extremity, that they were to wait
the issue of things, that perhaps Heaven changing her Mothers heart, would
restore them to one another without their being obliged to run any hazard: she
added, that without doubt she should be forced to take the Veil, but in the
interval between the taking the Habit and the Profession they might take
measures and contrive her escape if it became necessary. The Colonel, who was
just a going into the Campaign, and had laid out all his money for the putting
himself in a fine equipage, what inclination soever he had for Placidia's
freedom, yet had not so much forgot his obligations, and his duty, but that he
was glad to see her disposed to take patience for some time. He engaged his
Faith for all she had a mind to, and took his leave of her, after having passed
his word to come and comfort her in a short time.

He was no sooner returned to Paris than that he met with the Marquis, more
passionate than ever for Placidia, whom he had been newly informed was detained
by her Mothers command, in the Abbey of the Benedictine Nuns at Avenay. This
young man having invited him to Supper, they went together into the Balcony,
when all their discourse was of Placidia's absence. I shall know the end of the
Intrigue, said the Marquis, I have spies abroad, and my Valet de Chamber, a
cunning fellow, has already got the length of the foot of one of the Countess's
Domestics, who has already told him several things. I shall he revenged, on
that unnatural Woman, and at the peril of my life, I will free that adorable
Creature from so disagreeable way of living: I intend to go Post three days
hence to the place where she is, and I shall he informed from her her self what
designs they have upon her: If you will be of the Party, I offer to be at the
charges of the Journey, and to spare nothing for your good diversion. The
Colonel pretending some business which tied him indispensably to the Court,
told him that he would not advise him to undertake that Journey, and that
undoubtedly the Mother, who had caused her Daughter to be confined, would have
so much wit as to forbid she should have the freedom of the Grate, and that
thus he might, perhaps, go very far to seek in a refusal a greater matter of
vexation. This remonstrance of the Nun did but irritate the Marquis's passion,
who bethought himself at that instant of an expedient which proved successful.
I will carry a Coat to be made like the Countess's Livery, said he, and I do
not doubt but that such a Casaque will procure me entrance into the Parlour.
This was the only expedient he could employ, that his design might have a
favorable issue. He executed what he had conceived, and under that disguise he
obtained a private conference with Placidia, though the Abbess had received
order but two days before not to suffer her to speak to any body, upon the
notice the Countess had had that a Cavalier had been to make a Visit to her
Daughter; but she could not nevertheless discover who he was by the imperfect
description that had been sent her of the person. The Abbess, not in the least
doubting but that this pretended Servant was a Domestic of the Countess's
Family, allowed Placidia to see and stay some time with him.

That charming person knew him immediately under that borrowed Habit, and like
to those who adrowning seize on all those they meet with, she made Caresses to
that travestied Cavalier, in hopes, that if the Colonel happened to fail in his
word, she might make use of the ministry of this Spark for the recovery of her
liberty. It is not to be conceived how much the Marquis's passion was increased
by this Interview; he spoke of nothing but of carrying her away at that very
time, and would have pusht on his indiscretion much farther, if Placidia had
not checked his furious fallies, by remonstrating to him, that precipitation in
a business of that nature was rather capable of spoiling things, than to
procure them success according to their desire. That Illustrious Captive knew
so well how to curb the boiling temper of the young Cavalier, that she prepared
him for all she had a mind to. They took together the same Resolutions that she
had taken with the Colonel, that is to say, they projected her escape m case
the issue of things constrained them to that extremity. This Conference which
would have lasted much longer, was interrupted by the coming in of the Abbess,
who inquired of the Marquis of the Countess's health. He understood himself
well enough to satisfy exactly to all her demands, and had likewise a moments
time to discourse Placidia, whom Supper deprived him of, after having received
from her a thousand protestations of an immortal fidelity.

This travestied Lover having taken Post again, in a few hours space got to
Paris, where impatient to impart to the Colonel the success of his Voyage, he
sought for him immediately after his arrival but sought for him; in vain; that
Officer had received Orders the Evening before to go incessantly to his
Regiment at Peronne, for to march elsewhere. The young Marquis, who had not yet
made a Campaign, and who had made his interest at Court for a Troup of Horse
obtained that very day the Commission, with Orders to go join the Troops near:
St. Quintin. This new Dignity did a little deface out of his mind the Ideas of
Placidia, and instead thereof, traced the image of glory, which made him depart
at that very instant.

In the Neighborhood of Arras was the Rendesvouz of the whole Army designed
for Flanders. Our young Captain met there with, the Colonel, Placidia's Lover,
to whom he gave an account of what had passed between him and his Mistress, and
of the design he had to procure her Escape, at his return, from the Campaign,
if they forced her to make her Vows. The Colonel, apprehending that the boiling
youth of this Officer might prevent his designs, contracted with him a greater
commerce of Friendship, and: destiny would have it that they often made use of
the same Ten^, ^^ir Regiments never separating. The Campaign was severe, and
gave not any repose to those Military Sparks, who had no sooner began to relish
the refreshments of the Winterquarters than the Marquis's passion was so
reinflamed, that he had nothing in his mouth but the lovely name of Placidia.
Our Colonel perceiving that this passion degenerated into fury, and fearing it
might make him attempt something to the prejudice of his own, besides
foreseeing that this young man was upon the point of obtaining three months
leave, which he solicited for the going to see Placidia, he fell out with him
upon a positive dispute that happened at play. He had also an inclination to
rid himself of this rash Rival, and for that purpose Challenged him to meet him
half a league from Peronne. The Mine was discovered; they were betrayed by one
of their Seconds, insomuch that they were taken into Custody when they were
upon the point of fighting, and by his Majesty's Order confined at Peronne.
They stayed there near two months, where they had time enough to be reconciled.

Placidia was in the mean while clothed with the Habit of the Novices, and the
time of her Profession grew near, which cast her into a mortal sadness, and her
grief did with so much the more reason augment, in that she received no tidings
of her Lovers. When that our two Cavaliers were set at liberty, the young
Officer obtained six weeks leave for to go settle some affairs, but he destined
it for the going to give Placidia assurances of the continuation of his flames.
The Colonel, whose passion was no less strong to go see the worthy object of
his Love, infinitely troubled to see that this young Man prevented him in a
Visit, which he had for above a year projected to pay Placidia, did not however
show the least concern to his Rival, and only conjured him To present his
humble Service to that charming Prisoner. The Livery Coat, whereof we have
already made mention, did the Marquis one good Office more: It gave him a free
access to the beautiful Novice, to whom, in the several Conversations they had
had together, he never spoke of the Colonel, but as of a Man who had for a long
time been confiscated into the Surgeons hands for the cure of a shameful
Disease. He enjoyed the Conversation of that illustrious Captive for above
fifteen days, always pretending that the Countess being, at the Castle, did
still give him in charge some new Commission for her Daughter, at the end of
which time fearing to give some occasion of distrust, he took leave of
Placidia, after having engaged by inviolable Oaths to steal her away though she
were professed Religious of twenty years standing. The impatience he was in
made him return with all speed to his Quarters, where he did not find the
Colonel, whom with grief he heard was gone to Paris. But as he did not think
him his Rival, his absence did not oblige him to entertain any such suspicion,
as to oblige him to quit his Post; but he impatiently expected the Colonel's
return.

The Colonel having never been but once at the Grate, being persuaded that he
could not be known by any of the Nuns, sent word to the Abbess, that the
Governor of his Majesty's Pages, who had Sister Placidia's Brother under his
Discipline, did on purpose alight there to make her a Visit, and that being
very much in haste, he desired my Lady Superior to have the goodness to allow
him to pay her and Sister Placidia his respects Our beautiful Novice was then
walking with the Abbess in the Garden, her Ladyship having taken Physic that
day, when that Sister Touriere accosted her. This good natured Abbess being
indisposed, and seeing Placidia just ready to make her Vows, would not deprive
her of this slight satisfaction. She sent her to the Parlour, charging her to
pay her civilities, and make her excuses to this Gentleman, and assigned her
the Sub-prioress for a Companion. Our cunning Cavalier imagining that she would
not come alone to the Parlour, had taken his measures, and had written a Letter
for to. slip into Placidia's hand, wherein he acquainted her with the true
disposition of his Heart, and his sincere sentiments.

Placidia conjecturing by the quality which the Colonel affected, that he was
not willing to be known, seemed very indifferent at his appearance, and hardly
raised her eyes upon him. A secret joy rendering her mute, the Sub-prioress, who
took her silence for an effect: of her modesty, entertained the Cavalier, whose
discourse was suited to her circumstances. This discreet Lover did not show any
motion of the impatience he was in to entertain Placidia in private, who for
her part did not in the least make appear how desirous she was of a particular
conversation. The old and troublesome Confident after an hours discourse got
up, having told the Novice that it was time to retire. She was forced to obey,
and all that she could do was, in drawing the Curtain before the Grate to
receive subtly her Lover's Letter, which contained what follows.

I am always the same, lovely Placidia, and though you should cease to love me,
I could not resolve to change. Let what will happen you are not bound to be
eternally unhappy, or fate shall involve me in the same misfortune. Obey still
for some time the caprichiousness of Destiny; you will suddenly triumph over
its malice, and will find the calm is very pleasing when it is ushered in by a
tempest. Your Captivity is near its period, venture all for all. Do not fear
that new Vows can weaken your first Promises. The God who knows that you have
given me your says in exchange with mine, does beforehand discharge you from
the performance of Promises which the inhumanity and passion of a Mother will
force you perhaps to make. There is great talk of a Peace, but whether
according to the good pleasure of God the King will bestow it upon Europe, or
that the War continues, I will take such a course that in the midst of a
general trouble we will enjoy the delights of a sedate life. You may promise
your self that in a short time you will recover your liberty, or at least will
see the most faithful of all Lovers perish in this Enterprise.


The reading of this Letter did something pacify Placidia's mind, who was very
desirous to have had a particular Conversation with her dear Colonel. He had
promised her before parting, that at his return from the Castle of Syllery,
whither he was going, he would come-take the Letter which she was desirous to
write to her Brother; an expedient which he had on purpose invented that she
might have time to make him an Answer. And indeed she made him a very kind one,
which she slipped into his hand instead of the Letter which with the Abbess's
leave she wrote to her Brother. He had no sooner received it than that
pretending to be very much in haste, he took his leave of Placidia and her too
faithful Companion. You may easily imagine he did not carry it sealed up to
his Garrison. A passionate love is always impatient. Now to read this precious
Letter with all the attention which its matter deserved, twenty paces from the
Village he alighted from his Horse, which he tied to a Tree, and after having
kissed the Interpreter of Placidia's sentiments, he read this Letter two or
three times, its Contents being as follows.

Would to God, my dear Colonel, that you were as invulnerable as you are
faithful to me, I should not then live thus in mortal apprehensions: there is
not an hour either day or night hut that I figure to my self that you are
brought back to your Tent full of a hundred glorious wounds. A true Lover ought
to be something a Coward: Pardon me for inspiring into you such base
sentiments. I am willing that you should follow the impetuosity of your great
heart, but I would willingly run with you to glory, and fall under the same
blow. You promise me my freedom: If it is at present in your power, who will be
security that the tragical end of Heroes with which you are threatened will not
to morrow ruin your good intentions? Steal from glory what you are owing to
Love, and be assured that there is nothing but your absence that renders me
unhappy.


This Letter very much moved our Cavalier, and made him make reflections which
cast him into some trouble. Placidia being got into the Belfrey of the Church
to follow him with her eyes as far as her sight could bear, observed that in
his resverie, he turned his eyes above twenty times toward the place from
whence he came, which showed that he did not part from her but with extreme
regret. He returned to Peronne, went to his Quarters, where he impatiently
expected the Spring, when that charming season calls to Arms. The Marquis lived
in very good understanding with him, and was always discoursing him of
Placidia, of the return of whose passion he flattered himself with very little
reason. The Army in the midst of March marched into Flanders and deprived our
Lovers both of their hopes, and convenience of seeing again, so soon as they
could have wished, the person by whom they were so diversely charmed.

Placidia, whose year of Noviciate being revolved, and having given her self up
as a prey to her profound sadness, because that she did not receive any news of
her Lovers, made a virtue of necessity: and animating her self still with
courageous hopes, consented to make her Vows. Her Father-in-law and the
Countess her Mother came to make her a Visit a fortnight before the Profession,
to whom she testified an extraordinary inclination for a Religious life. They
applauded her Resolution, and granted all she demanded of her Father's Estate
for the rendering her reception the more pompous, even to the giving her to the
value of two thousand Crowns in Jewels, which she said was to be employed for
the adding to the Ornaments of the Altar, but which she never parted with.
Nothing was wanting of all that could render the Ceremony the more solemn: the
Mother had brought with her an Abbot from Paris, a very eloquent man, who made
a Discourse very suitable to the occasion, and in whose hands Placidia made her
Vows. All these passed without the knowledge of that lovely Maids Lovers, who
nevertheless did expect this unvoluntary Sacrifice. The War being more than
ever re-inflamed, his Majesty made an express prohibition upon pain of being
Cashiered from the service to all Officers of what quality soever they were,
not to quit the Garrison upon any pretext, and this prohibition subsisted
during two Winter Quarters consecutively; for which reason neither the Marquis
nor the Colonel durst for two years budge from their Regiments to go comfort
the poor Placidia, who shed every night a torrent of tears upon the remembrance
of the Colonel her Lover. And indeed she could not persuade her self any thing
else, than that he and the Marquis had lost their lives, since after such
strong promises they kept so obstinate a silence. As she was one day conferring
with one of her most intimate Friends, of those who had formerly an esteem for
her, she spoke of the Colonel whom she imagined was kind, and the knowledge of
whose Destiny she would have purchased with half her life. This Consident not
wanting wit, though she had been from her infancy in the Cloister, remonstrated
to her that it was very easy to know what was become of him, and that there
needed no more than to write directly to him at the Army in Flanders. Placidia
following her counsel wrote a Love-letter with reproaches to the Colonel, and
found the means to have the Letter carried to the Post without being seen, for
that being now Professed she had more liberty. This Letter came safe to the
Colonel's hands, eight days before the Cassation of the Troops, which was made
upon the conclusion of the Peace. It was conceived in these terms.

Those who love but little, do not love at all. This is your vice, perjured
Lover, the ambition and glory whereof you are too greedy, make you forget what
you are owing to Love: you do not love at all, because you love but little. An
absence of above two years, assures me, that you have for me, if not contempt,
at least something more than indifference. I conjecture from so prodigious a
silence, that your heart has engaged it self to another. Be not surprised if I
call you perjured, for either you are so to me or to her, whom you are now
making Oaths to of fidelity. Oblige me to change my Opinion. Have I not waited
sufficiently? will it be seasonable, for we to give my self up to the sweets of
love, when with a declining age they will be become insipid to me? Will you be
sensible to the pleasures of happy Union, when Fatigues and military labors
shall have as much ruined your Body as they have hardened your Heart? If you
are still alive, my dear Colonel, come bring me the happy news your self, and
if you are not bold enough to undertake the freeing me from the Captivity I am
in, come at least and set at liberty the person who has loved you with the most
violent of all passions, and is the most constant and most faithful of her sex,

Placidia.


If ever man was surprised, our Colonel was so then when this Letter was
delivered him. He received it as a present come from Heaven, he read it over
and over, and it had such an effect upon his Soul that he departed immediately
for Paris, with a resolution to go think then seriously of the means of
bringing to pass the enterprise of stealing away his Mistress. The young
Marquis, over whom he had got great credit, and who seemed absolutely to depend
on his counsel, did not quit him. He accompanied him with his own Horses as far
as Paris, where nevertheless they lodged together. When they had reposed there
for eight days they got new Clothes, and the Colonel pretending to go a
Journey into the Country for three or four days, during which the Marquis, who
caused a Coat to be embroidered, was expecting its being finished that he might
go to Avenay in the equipage of a Courtlike Spark.

But the Colonel preceded him, attended only by one Servant, a robust man, who
had been a Soldier in his Regiment. Though he might have asked for the Reverend
Mother Placidia at the Parlour without apprehending being denied the sight of
her, he nevertheless still took the ancient quality of Governor of the Pages,
by which he was already known in the Abbey. Placidia had notice of his arrival,
which surprised her to that degree, that she could hardly go a step. She came
alone to the Grate, and expected there, almost without the Colonel, who had
mistaken one Parlour for another; when that having perceived him to enter into
that wherein she was, she was so seized with joy at the sight of him, that she
fell into a fainting fit, which deprived her of speech for above half a quarter
of an hour. Never was Lover in a greater perplexity than our Colonel, seeing
that young Maid without any motion, and without any sign of life extended after
a negligent manner, and in the posture her swoon had laid her upon a Chair. His
wishes to give her help were all in vain, a troublesome Grate not leaving it in
his power. He thought that in so mortifying an adventure there was no remedy
but patience, not thinking it convenient to call people, for fear of giving an
occasion to a suspicion which would have broke his measures. Placidia recovered
from her swoon, gave a great sigh, and said, addressing her self to the Colonel
with a languishing voice, Do you live still, my dear -- but was not able to
proceed any farther, a torrent of tears for joy stifling her speech. Her tears
excited those of the Colonel, and rendered him mute. They viewed one another for
some time, their eyes doing the office of the tongue; and the Colonel at
length, as being stronger than Placidia, replied, Yes, my lovely Child, I still
live for you more than for my self, and I am come hither to assure you that I
am ready to expose a thousand lives to free you from slavery. Do but suggest to
me the surest means for your delivery. Let us not lose time in useless
discourses, I impatiently long for those happy moments, and those Lands still
unknown, whither we will make a happy retreat. To which our young Religious
having made answer that she consented to all, and was resolved to run all
manner of hazards; it was concluded between them without any farther debate,
that on the Thursday come fortnight following, at eleven a clock in the evening
exactly, the Colonel should come within a hundred paces of the Abbey, near the
ruined of a little House, which stood upon the side of a High way, that from
thence he should send his Servant with a Suit of Men's Clothes to the Walls of
the Convent Garden, that she should dress her self by favor of the night, and
in that disguise come to him. And that they might not fail in this design, the
Colonel had on purpose brought his Servant with him, who was instructed with
what he had to do. They both parted after some soft and melting farewells, and
the Colonel made haste to Paris for the putting of all things in order. The
Marquis having notice of his return, came to take his leave of him, designing
to go visit Placidia, whose Mother he had seen at the Play the day before. The
Colonel in nowise fearing the conduct of this imaginary Rival, desired him that
he would present his most humble respects to that Fair one, and consult with
her the means of procuring her the satisfaction which he did not doubt but she
had a long time sighed for.

Our Marquis arrived at Avenay, discoursed Placidia, who seemed at first much
astonished, he made no mention of the Colonel. In that first interview, whether
that she thought the better to conceal the design she had contrived, or that
she really apprehended that the Colonel would fail his word, she agreed to be
stolen away by the Marquis, but appointed the time three days after that
projected with the Colonel. The Marquis at his return alighted from his Horse
at his secret Rival's Inn, gave him a description of Placidia's new charms, and
a relation of what had passed and was concluded between her and him. He spent
the Afternoon with that Friend, with whom he made a Debauch, wherein they drank
several times to the good success of his Enterprise.

While that they amused themselves after Supper in playing at Picquet, their
Servants drank liberally, and the Wine getting into their Noddles, they laid
open their hearts to one another. The Marquis's Man Embracing his Camrade told
him, Faith I am mad we must part so soon; to whom the other replied, and I am
so too, perhaps for all our lives. Yet it is commonly said that the mountains
never meet, but of men the contrary often happens. Whereupon he asked him where
his Master was going? Into Italy, replied he softly: And mine so too, replied
the Colonel's Servant, without doubt in the Company of -- pursued the other who
had a mind to pump him. In the company, added this indiscreet fellow, of young
Mother Placidia, whom he is to steal away on Thursday come sev'night, and for
whom he had already caused a Man's suit of Apparel to be made, which I make no
scruple to reveal to you, because I believe you capable of keeping it secret. I
am so, continued he, and god's death I had rather be hanged than obliged to betray
a secret.

This was sufficient for the Marquis's Servant, who as he put his Master to Bed
that Evening gave him the whole History of the Colonel's voyage into Italy. He
made him repeat it the next Morning, and enquired exactly of all the
circumstances he had learnt of the Colonel's enterprise, and of the time he was
to execute it, which having learnt conformably to the truth, he forbid this
fellow upon pain of being turned away, not to say a word to any body whomsoever
that he knew the intrigue, and ordered him to abstain from his Cronie's
company. This young Cavalier conversed with the Colonel since that time with as
much equality, though he looked upon him in his Soul as a perfidious Rival, as
if he had known nothing of his treachery. The day appointed being come, the
Colonel came to take his leave of him. The Marquis knew so well then how to
command his resentment, that he let not the least sign appear as might discover
his fatal resolution, but wished his friend a happy Journey. The Colonel
departed on a Spanish Horse for Rhemes, attended by his Servant, who rid on a
Mare loaded with a heavy Portmantoe. The Marquis outraged at the Colonel's
perfidiousness followed him at half a leagues distance attended by his Servant.
He so well observed the traces of him, who went before him, that he departed
from Rhemes a quarter of an hour after him. The Colonel not suspecting any
thing, being arrived at the place of the Rendesvouz, sent by his Servant the
Cavalier's apparel to Placidia, who had no sooner received it, than that she
gave order to the fellow to go rejoin his Master, and give him hopes he should
see her presently. This Servant being oh foot, had hardly got to the Chapel,
near which the Colonel his Master was expecting on Horseback, when he heard two
Cavaliers coming full gallop across the Field, of whom the one said to the
other, Here they are, here they are. He was opening his mouth to give notice to
the Colonel, when the Marquis, followed by his Man, fired a Pistol in the Air,
crying, It is thee, perfidious Rival, that I seek for. The Colonel surprised to
hear the Marquis's voice, was putting himself in a posture to Parry the insult;
when he received in his Stomach three Bullets from a Musqueton, which that
young Cavalier let fly at him before he had time to ward the danger. These
wounds felled him from his Horse, and he expired in a moment after.

These Assassinates had time to withdraw before that the Colonel's Servant,
being in a maze, did think of succouring his Master. He ran to him, and having
neither found in him breath nor sense, he reassembled all his strength to carry
him into the little Desert Chapel, where he laid him at length. Then went he,
out of his wits, to go meet Placidia, when he saw her coming toward him so
nimbly as did sufficiently speak the joy she had at her Deliverance. She asked
him immediately all transported, Where is my Lover? the fellow struck dumb, not
being able to give her an answer, took her by the hand, led her into the
Chapel, to contemplate there the most fatal of all spectacles. Placidia near
her Lover, whom she thought asleep, thuncht with her hand to wake him; but the
insensible, sleeping an eternal sleep, was without any motion. She put her hand
a second time upon him, as it were to tickle him, which she drew back all over
bloody, without conjecturing any thing of what had happened, turning toward
the Servant, she asked him if he had not killed his Master, and if he was
resolved to make her an accessory to the Murder? to which the poor fellow made
answer, No, Madam, I am not the Author of my Master's death, but the Marquis,
who has a long time sighed for you, was not able to suffer a Rival in a Friend.
At these words, Placidia giving a shriek, bid him hold her up, and then fainted
away in his Arms. She remained sometime in that condition, from which being
recovered, she cast her self upon the Body of her departed Lover, whom she
deified and embraced with fentiments of so mortal a regret, that she would
doubtless have expired upon him, if the Servant, who foresaw whither the
passion of this tender Maid would tend to, had he not forced her from the
Corpse, and had he not carried her with some violence out of the Chapel, into
which he would not suffer her to return until he saw her something recollected
from her first motions. A hundred cogitations agitated Placidia's mind in that
moment. She first designed to return into the Convent, which might have been
done without scandal, and a moment after changing her resolution, she turned
her thoughts toward a thousand places whither her destiny might conduct her.
She abandoned her self at length to blind fortune, and encouraging her self
against the tyranny of fate, she returned into the Chapel, commanded the
Servant to empty his Master's Pockets, and having taken his Table Book, wrote
therein by favor of the Moon these harsh lines which she addressed to the
Abbess, who was the Lady of the place.

Madam,
Your self-interested zeal has occasioned this Murder. You ought not in
concert with an unnatural Mother have put me in Chains. If you will take a just
revenge on me, tear out the Heart of this too faithful Lover, and plunge
therein a Poignard. It is the Heart of Placidia.


This energick Invective took up near four Pages of the Table Book. She laid
them open upon the dead man's Stomach; which being done, the Servant helped her
to get on Horseback, and followed her, after she had promised him, that to what
place soever they went, she would make his fortune. She went eight leagues
afterward without refreshing, after which, having taken a morsel, she took
Horse again, and continued by great days Journeys her way as far as Lions,
where she refreshed her self after incredible fatigues. She caused there very
magnificent Mourning Apparel to be made for her, and put her Servant in a good
equipage. As she went every Evening to take the divertisement of the
Playhouse, she could not but be taken notice of there. All people considered a
young Cavalier so well made as a man of high condition. The Quality of Count de
la Mark, which he took, fortified this belief. She lived at a high rate, which
made some Rogues resolve and agree together to rob her. For that purpose they
waited till about nine a Clock in the Evening that she came from the Comedy,
and attackt her upon a little Bridge. Her Servant stood stoutly to it, while
that Placidia, whom we will henceforward call the Count de la Mark, or plainly
the young Count, made her escape. This faithful Servant resisted these Robbers
the best he was able, until at length being surrounded by them, he was thrown
by those Rogues from off the Bridge into the River where he was drowned.

Our young Count lost a great deal in this Servant; he seemed for some days
extremely grieved for his misfortune, and inferred from all these accidents
that he was the mark of destiny, against which he took a resolution to
struggle. He took a Valet de Chamber who knew nothing of all his affairs, whom
he carried with him to the Court of Savoy, whither he went immediately after
his arrival at Turin to pay his respects to her Royal Highness. That August
Princess, charmed with the happy Physiognomy of this young Count, took an
affection for him, and ordered him not to quit the Court. He became very
assiduous there, appearing after a very gallant manner, which moved Madam Royal
to give him testimonies of her benign inclination. And indeed he had not been
at Court above two months when she gratified him with a Company of Foot; the
Orders being that the Officers should not abandon the Garrison: the Regiment
wherein the Count de la Mark had a Company being at Verceil, when that he wrent
to take leave of her Highness, she gave him leave to return to Court after 3
months residence. He employed that time in taking tinctures of all the
exercises becoming his Profession, both of Riding and Fencing. The three months
being expired, he returned to Court, where having passed several months without
that any Beauty being able to triumph over his indifference, Madam Royal told
him one day smiling: But, Count de la Mark, how long will you continue in an
indifference injurious to the fair Ladies? How, will you be all mays
insensible? or rather is this Court so barren in objects worthy any passion,
that there is not one capable of staggering your resolutions? This obliging way
of speaking from so Illustrious a Princess seemed to him to merit a just
answer, and as he had an infinite deal of wit, he told Madam Royal: Madam, the
Graces make their residence in this Court, and if I have so long deferred to
sacrifice to some one of those Divinities, the reason is, because I cannot
without rendering my self culpable of an injurious preference determine my self
to any one in particular, the most part of the Ladies, who have the honor to
approach your Royal Highness, having all I know not what that is singular to my
eyes; Insomuch, Madam, that I am all ready to love, and should not think my
self deceived in my choice, if I had the advantage of receiving an inclination
from the hands of your Royal Highness. This Disposition, reassumed Madam Royal,
is rather an indisposition to love, than the mark of a real passion. People
ought only to follow, in the choice of an object, the motions of a natural
inclination: sympathy is the mother of Love, and it is only from it that it
can take its rise. Nevertheless, if you can conceive a Love more than one of
complaisance for her I might propose to you, love Mademoiselle Berenice,
showing her to him, but love her sincerely, if it be possible, and you will
without doubt find how highly she does merit it.

As the sex of our young Count did not cause any greater emotion in him in the
presence of the one than of the other, he would needs show by dwelling upon
this election the esteem he had of her Royal Highness's choice. He turned
toward the beautiful Berenice, and made her a declaration of Love, with so
much wit that all the Court was surprised and charmed with its justness. And
indeed he laid to her a great many pretty things, and conjured her, through the
respect he had for Madam Royal, that she would accept of his Compliments for
the future. This young Lady, who had been born and bred at Court, and was no
less witty than handsome, repartie'd very ingeniously to the young Count, whom
she already loved by inclination, and told him very gallantly that he ought not
to amuse her to no purpose, but to listen to what her heart should say to him
of her, and to give her a faithful account of it. Thus the Conversation ended,
this new Mistress following Madam Royal, who withdrew into her Cabinet.

The Count de la Mark being thus engaged, when he least thought of courting a
Mistress, imagining that an amorous commerce which should take its rise from an
unforeseen occasion would only follow an ordinary train, and would not so
suddenly be terminated, returned the same evening to Court, where he had only
eyes for Berenice, and agreeable replies for the propositions of that facetious
Mistress. He told her that very moment so many nice and pleasant things, that
being charmed with his wit, she immediately grew familiar with him, which
rendered him afterward something more reserved. This illustrious Travesty
thinking himself obliged to live at something a higher rate, because since the
honor he had received from Madam Royal he was respected by all people, he
quitted his Inn to go take a Lodging in the principal place of the Town, and
where commonly all strangers of Quality lodge who travel to Turin. Sitting down
one day to Table at an Ordinary, he perceived the Marquis, the Colonel her
Lover's Murderer, who seated himself opposite to her. He was arrived some days
before at Turin from Germany, whither he retired after the assassination of his
Rival. He had there heard so advantageous an account of the Count's Qualities,
that he had a strong inclination to be of his acquaintance, and this was what
had invited him thither. Our young Count knew him immediately, but the Marquis
had not preserved any Idea of him, insomuch that during Dinner the discourse
was wholly upon indifferent things. The Marquis having observed by the Count's
conversation, that the delicacy of his wit was answerable to the pourtraict all
the Court made of it, courted his familiarity, and engaged with him in a
commerce of Friendship which outwardly seemed very intimate. The Count
nevertheless kept in the bottom of his heart sentiments of revenge which
suddenly broke forth by the death of that ambitious Rival, for see what
followed afterward.

Since the Marquis was arrived at Court, his young heart not being able to
remain in repose, he made visits to the lovely person, for whom the Count
seemed to sigh. He fancied himself very far in her esteem, though Berenice had
no inclinations but for our illustrious Travesty. He knew the Count visited
her, but never having met him at her apartment, he thought himself only
beloved, and it was this ridiculous opinion that cost him his life. The young
Count, who only made his vows to Berenice at Court, not presuming that
sentiments declared in public would be taken for sincere, upon her reproaching
him one day that he told all the world except her self that he was in love with
her, because he never went to give her assurances of it at her Chamber, he went
on the morrow morning and found her in Bed. There it was that he found himself
obliged to entertain her with soft and amarous Discourses, which had so
sensible an effect upon Berenice, that she told him gallantly after an hours
familiar conversation, Count, the rest to morrow. Though this manner of
assignation seemed to him something too libertine, he did believe that at
Court, where affairs are a long time before they come to consummation, in cases
of Love they were terminated (...) expedited so soon. He returned on the morrow
at the same hour, with a design to take his leave of Berenice for a month,
which he said he was to employ in reforming some abuses in his Company,
flattered with the hopes this space of time might stifle the flames of that
young Maid. But he was too tardy, and will have another sort of Journey to
take. Berenice, who had impatiently expected him in her Bed, had garnished her
head with Cornets of point of Venice, with gaudy Ribbons, mixed with Grisdelin,
white and blue, whose colors were as many symbols: she had, in short, decked
her self with all the ornaments that could render her agreeable in the state
she was. The Count seeing her in that posture did make but ill conjecture of
the success of his visit, made her a very Gentleman-like Compliment, and told
her though the company of two Officers would have engaged him to take Horse
that morning for Verseil, he was nevertheless unwilling to depart without
coming to pay her his civilities; that his friends waited for him with all
imaginable impatience, and that he desired her to give him leave to obey the
Orders of her Highness. Berenice at any others time would have contented her
self with a Compliment, but the amorous passion which ruled her put into her
mouth such engaging words, that our Count cruelly perplexed could not civilly
dispense from entertaining her for a moment. He approached her Bedside, near
which having found no Chair, because she had caused them all to be taken away
on purpose, she prevented him, and gave him the liberty to sit upon her Bed. If
ever Lover was in a consternation it was the Count, who seemed at that moment
without speech, motion or sense. Berenice perceiving the distraction he was
under, asked him what rendered him so pensive? to which this Lover against his
will made her no other answer than by a smile, which gave her occasion to
believe that he was burnt with the same amorous desire as her self. When she
saw him seated by her, her fire mounted into her face, she asked the Count with
a confidence which was but little allayed by modesty: Is it true, Count, that
you love me? you have sworn you do a thousand times, but the faith of a
Cavalier, having always been suspected by me, you may now unbosome your self to
me, and make me know if the force of your love is answerable to the vehemence
of mine. The Count put to his trumps by these advances, ready to obtain what
any other would have called the highest favor, pretended he would make her a
very soft and amorous answer. He said, Why has not Heaven, Madam -- when that
he got up hastily and went toward the Door, as if it were to surprise some
body who had the curiosity to listen to their discourse. He proceeded on as far
as the Staircase, from whence being returned, pretending anger to Berenice, he
cried, My God, Madam, your Servants are very curious, I hate such people like
the Pest. Whether that Berenice guessed he had really heard some body, or that
she was scandalized at his freedom, she seemed netled to the quick at this
disappointment of the Count's, whom from that time she treated with, the
greatest neglect and scorn. From that very moment she took an aversion to him,
and told him with a tone as did sufficiently speak her vexation, Without doubt,
my Lord, the thoughts of your being expected, took from you all other
application, and you fancied by preoccupation the arrival of some body:
besides, we said nothing but what might have been heard without scandal by all
the world, at least unless you were upon the point of beginning some silly idle
discourse. The Count de la Mark who was offended at the words, yet did seem to
take notice of the reasons which animated her to use them, to him. He asked her
pardon for die fault he had committed, and took his leave, of her, leaving her
in an alteration capable of framing designs of the most cruel revenge.

As she was deliberating in her self about the means of drawing satisfaction
for a contempt which passed in her mind for the most signal of all outrages,
the Marquis, who seldom failed to see her at her dressing, entered her Chamber,
where he remained some time without being able to get a word from her. It was
to no purpose for him to inquire of the state of her health, and of the
occasion which obliged her to sigh. She made him no answer but by redoubling of
sobs, which cast him into the like consternation. After having acted a long
time the part of a Woman, whom excess of grief had deprived of her senses,
having shed tears that had as it were restored her to her usual serenity, she
her self reanimated her displeasure, and asked the Marquis with such an accent
of voice as was the interpreter of her despair, if he loved her sincerely
enough to embrace her interests, and help her to stab a Poniard in the breast
of the most criminal of all men. Yes, Madam, replied the Marquis; those who
vex-you, or have the disadvantage of displeasing you, offend me mortally, and
there is nothing but what I would undertake and hazard for the drawing a just
satisfaction. Who is this perfidious person you complain of? tell me only his
name, without declaring to me his crime; he is culpable since you judge him so,
and he must either take away my life, with the tranquillity which he has
ravished from you, or wash in his blood the crime he has committed. The
disposition wherein Berenice saw the Marquis to revenge the insult which she
said had been done her, did sufficiently flatter her resentment so as to give
him liberty to continue speaking. That young Count de la Mark, added she, whose
insipid Courtship I never heard but at Court, being flattered with a vain
hopes, that one of my ways of saying things after a gallant manner did
yesterday inspire him with, came early this morning to make me a visit, entered
my Chamber, saluted me, sat familiarly upon my Bed, and after having
entertained me romantickly of the flames which devoured his heart, approached
his head to my Pillow, and by surprise kissed me, and his hands would have
taken other liberty if I had not vigorously repulsed them, and if the shriek
which I gave had not made him desist from his insolent enterprise. See, pursued
that malicious Maid, what has put me in the trouble you see me under; judge, my
dear Marquis, if I am without reason in a rage, and if it is not with justice,
that I demand satisfaction for so criminal a freedom. The Marquis, giving
credit to the words and tears of Berenice, took vigorously her part, declared
against the Count's temerity and insolence, which he judged worthy of being
checked, and which he offered to punish immediately. Berenice after having made
him promises capable of making him venture at all, remitted the interest of her
offended honor into his hands and management, conjuring him not to defer
taking a just satisfaction. This was sufficient to inflame the already boiling
blood of the Marquis, he left Berenice without saying to her a word more, and
flew to the Count's Lodging, who was at Breakfast with one of his Friends. He
invited him to partake with them; they drank some glasses of Wine together, and
then having taken the Count aside, he told him nevertheless aloud enough: You
know, my Lord, what has passed between Mademoiselle Berenice and you; if you
are as courageous as you are passionate you will meet me with your Friend, who
shall serve for a witness of the action, in the Wood behind the White House,
about eleven a clock, and there we will end the quarrel in which I am
concerned. The Count de la Mark, having a hundred times sought an occasion to
quarrel with the Marquis, in whom that beautiful Travesty had never been able
to resolve to pardon the murder of her Lover, did joyfully accept the
Challenge, gave him his hand, invited him to do the same, after which the
Marquis withdrew. The Cavalier who had been present at the Challenge, instead
of endeavoring a reconciliation, did still animate the Count the more, and
very luckily lent him a pair of Buffskin Gloves. The Marquis had waited some
time for the Count de la Mark, when he very luckily came to the Rendesvouz.
These two illustrious Combatants embraced one another, and immediately took
Sword in hand. This last having learnt but three months, and having not so
strong a hand as his Adversary, did not stand very stiff to it at first, which
made the Cavalier believe, who was present at the Combat, that they were not
equally matched, and made him resolve to strike down their Swords to part them,
when that of the Marquis pointed unluckily into the Buffglove, wherewith the
Count's left hand was armed and left this last time to run him in a mortal
wound which rendered the Marquis incapable of pursuing the fight. The Count de
la Mark having thus gained the Victory, bid the wounded man ask his life. The
Marquis begged it accordingly, but it was too late, he fell down upon the
ground, and lost insensibly his life with his blood, when our young Conqueror
told this unhappy dying man. I would I could restore it thee, though thou do
not deserve it. But since thy ill destiny does rather deprive thee of it than
my dexterity, know it is with delight that I deprive thee of it, and that it is
from Heaven that my Arm receives the force of revenging my Lover to day. If thy
agony leaves thee still any sense and knowledge, open thy eyes, look and know
Placidia under the just inclination which proves thy fall, and go tell my dear
Colonel, whose base and execrable assassinate thou were, that I love him still,
and that he is revenged.

At the name of Placidia the Marquis opened his eyes again; he recollected all
the strength he had left in that extremity and told this young Conqueror: Are
you Placidia? and exhaled with these words his last gasp. The last service
which our young Count could render to this unfortunate Cavalier was to lend him
his Arm to draw him something farther into the Wood, where he covered his Body
with Leaves. After an accident of this nature he did not think it safe for him
to tarry any longer at Turin. He went in all haste to the City, where he went
to declare what was done to Madam Royal, into whose hands he remitted his life.
That generous Princess, who honored him with her good will, ordered him to
absent from Court, and for a mark of her clemency caused Letters to be
dispatched in favor of him to her Resident at the Court of Rome. What
inclination soever he had to see that Court, he had the curiosity to know the
City of Genoa, and to make some abode there for that purpose. Whereupon he set
forwards for that Town, after having engaged the person by Oath, who had been
present at the Duel, and a witness of his Victory, not to engage his search.
And then he changed his Quality of Count de la Mark into that of Chevalier de
Saleuze, and arrived at Genoa. The destiny to which he had abandoned himself
entirely, furnished him with an opportunity of making acquaintance with one of
the principal inhabitants of the City whither he was going, whose wit and
humor were of a man of his Quality, and not of his Age of seventy years. In
speaking of several things, that venerable old man finding that this young
Cavalier, with whose conversation he was charmed, designed to make some stay at
Genoa for his diversion, and knowing the Town, he offered him his House, and
engaged to board him for three months. Our Chevalier having found that he was
no self-interested man, accepted his offer and alighted at his House, where he
found none but respectfull domestics clothed in mourning, by reason their
Master had been a Widower about six months. He had two Chambers appointed him
in the finest Apartment over those of the Daughter of the family, whom her
Father had newly carried to Turin to spend some time with a Lady a friend of
hers. The Chevalier de Saleuze did not abuse the familiarity of his Host, but
treated him always with the highest respect. These regards did extremely please
the Magistrate, who judged by the Gentile and civil carriage of his Pensionary
that he was a person of considerable extraction. He took an affection for him,
and without examining to the bottom who he was he fancied he should not be
dishonored by his alliance. As they one day came back from walking and entered
the House, Mademoiselle Scholastica being newly returned from Turin came to
embrace her Father, who commanded her to present her Cheek to the young
Chevalier. She executed this order with a very good grace, and afterward gave
an account to her Father of what she had done since their separation. Supper
was in the mean while prepared, which being served upon the Table, and the
Chevalier thinking he was obliged to show something more than indifference,
took a seat very near that of Mademoiselle Scholastica, who was a Maid of a
singular beauty, and though she had hardly attained the sixteenth year of her
age, was likewise very ingenious and witty. Amongst other things which she said
to have heard at Court, she said that a Cavalier had flattered her with being
capable of inspiring, and receiving the impressions of Love. Her Father
attributing this freedom of speaking her sentiments to her innocence, enquired
of her the name of the person from whom she had received this Compliment. From
a young Cavalier of this Gentleman's age, replied she, showing the Chevalier,
who added too that he wished he could be so happy as to make me in love.
Scholastica's Governess, who knew the Cavalier, spoke his name aloud, who being
very well known by the Father, he said that that young Spark was accustomed to
make Court to all young Women, and that credit was not to be given to all
gallantries. This old man took delight in observing the eyes of his Pensionary,
who held them almost always sixth upon Scholastica, to whom he thought it was
his devoir so to do out of policy. After some discourses which sufficiently
showed the character of his Daughter's simplicity, he asked the Chevalier, Well,
Sir, what do you think of this innocent Creature? Is she worthy to be looked
upon by a Cavalier? Whereupon our young Spark replied, That Mademoiselle
Scholastica was sovereignly amiable, and that there were Princes who should
esteem themselves perfectly happy to be in her favor. This answer flattered
the weak side that this old man had for his Daughter, and put the Chevalier
more into his mind than ever. During three months that our Chevalier spent in
Scholastica's familiarity and company, as a Brother with a Sister, the old man
having observed nothing in the conduct that merited the least reproach, he
conceived for him so extraordinary an esteem, that without knowing him
otherwise he designed him his Daughter. As he was very glad she should be
beloved, he took him one day aside, and sounded his disposition as to her. This
illustrious Travesty who could have wished to have been capable of so fine an
union? did modestly declare to Schostica's Father that he had always esteemed
Mademoiselle his Daughter worthy of being courted, and that if he had never
appeared passionate for her, the reason was not that her charms had left his
heart in repose, but because he knew the inviolable fidelity which was due to
hospitality. So wise and prudent an answer charmed the old man, who told the
Chevalier, that if he had any inclination for his Daughter, he might freely
declare to him his sentiments, and that he would prepare her to listen to him
favorably. Our Chevalier since this notice had all the complaisances
imaginable for Mademoiselle Scholastica, to whom he acquitted himself of all
the devoirs of a real Lover.

The Carnaval time being very near, the old man, who was of a strong
complexion, that had not yet loft the relish worldly pleasures, being
accustomed to go every year to Venice to take his share there in the public
Divertisements that are just before Lent, proposed the journey to his Boarder
whom he found disposed to all he had a mind.

Amongst the general debauches our Chevalier knew how to keep a temperament
between dissolution and too much reservedness, and his conduct seemed in all
things to the old man so full of wisdom, that he jud'gd he could not find a
more worthy Husband to his Daughter. As he was looked favorably upon by the
Great Duke, going one day to pay him his devoirs, that Prince asked him what was
become of his Daughter, and if she was married? to which the old man
repertie'd, that he was upon the point of giving her in marriage to a foreign
Gentleman, in whom he observed such fine qualities, that he guessed (...) at
the greatness of his extraction by the purity of his manners. The Prince
testified that he should be very glad to see him, which moved the old man to
engage him to come kiss his most serene Highnes's hands, which he had the
honor to do, and the Grand Duke seemed very well satisfied with him, and told
the Magistrate in his presence that he did not believe he would be deceived in
his choice, that he would be at the charge of the Wedding, and would honor
them with his presence. Such obliging offers from so great a Prince did quite
determine the resolution of Scholastica's Father, who promised her in the Grand
Duke's Chamber to our Chevalier, who found himself too much honored with so
ticklish a preference as not to give his consent to a Match so glorious for
him, which was projected for a certain day. As soon as our old man was returned
to his home, he called for his Daughter, and as he was the absolute Master of
her will, he commanded her to give her hand and faith to our Chevalier.
Scholastica obeyed her Father's orders with great satisfaction, and likewise
embraced very amorously the Chevalier, who for his part vowed to her an eternal
fidelity: the Nuptial Ceremonies were prepared without much hurry, and all was
made ready by orders from the Great Duke in one of his most stately Houses of
pleasure for the day of Marriage.

Destiny conducted things to such a term as gave a great deal of disquiet to
our illustrious Travesty. He sufficiently sought the occasion to steal away
during the hurry of the Ceremonies, but some or other of the Company never
leaving him hindered him for putting his designs in execution, insomuch that it
came to the Solemnities of the Marriage, which were celebrated in the Chapel of
the Castle, with all the pomp imaginable. Our Chevalier resolved against fate,
had not the time to dispute with himself, and saw himself constrained to pass
from the Church to the Banquets prepared in Services of the Prince's gilt
Vermillion. He lent his good humor to the Feast, which the Grand Duke honored
with his presence, and at the Desert drank to the happiness of the Bride and
Bridegroom. The Afternoon was spent in conversations, in sports and walks,
which were followed by a splendid Supper, and worthy of the Prince's
magnificence. The Ball came afterward, at which all the Court was present, and
wherein all the young Lords disputed who should present the hand to the young
Bride. Though that our uneasy Husband foresaw that the Company would Dance
till the morrow morning, he judged he had waited but too long, and that it was
time to make his Escape. Thus he vanished insensibly from the Hall under pretext
of some necessity, took his Servant at the Door, and so went out of the Castle
without having been distinguished by the Sentinel, amidst a crowd of persons,
who went in and out there every moment. He having informed his Servant of his
design, he had caused Horses to be ready hard by, which they mounted, after
having changed Clothes in the very place where they were expected. They
traveled all the Night, during which the Assembly of the invited, and the
Prince inquired for him, and had him sought for every where. It not being
possible to find him, all the Company thought that he might have found himself
indisposed through some excess, which might have obliged him to withdraw into
some private place. His absence was the cause that they put an end to their
mirth much earlier, and filled the Father and Daughter with cruel thoughts.
They were in hopes to see him again at least on the morrow, but their hopes
were deceived, for they met with no body who could give the least tidings of
him. In the mean while they were forced to digest their vexation. All the Town
went to comfort the old man for this mortifying adventure, at which Scholastica
was so concerned, that she asked and obtained from her Father the liberty of
going to deplore in a Cloister so surprising a Widowhood. True it is, that she
did not first put on the Nuns attire, and that she still expected very
impatiently her Husband's return.

Our Chevalier de Saleuze in the mean while arrived at Rome, where he called
himself plainly Monsieur de la Motte. He clothed himself there very modestly,
and went to pay a Visit to the Resident of Savoy, to whom he presented the
Letters that Madam Royal written in his favor, who in consideration of the
Princess made him all manner of good reception, and offered him his Table. He
enquired after his designs, if he was resolved to stay in that Court, and what
figure he intended to make there. The Sieur de la Motte having made him answer,
that he was not in a condition to be at any expense, the Resident told him,
that if he had a mind to subsist on some Benefice it lay in his power to
procure him one of some small consequence, until that an occasion of some more
considerable one was offered. Our illustrious Travesty listened to this
proportion, and thought that he ought to afford himself likewise this sort of
fortune, told him that he was shaved, and that he should have the highest
obligation to him if he would employ his credit to provide him the place of a
Canon. About a week afterward there fell one vacant. The Resident had notice
of it, requested it of his Holiness, who gratified the Sieur de la Motte with
it, whom he recommended very particularly to his Bishops. Whereupon he went to
take possession of his new Dignity, in a City twenty miles distance from Rome,
called Cesano, where he arrived at the time of a very famous Fair, which was
kept every year in that place, and which invited thither almost all Italy. Then
he went to the Cathedral, and assisted at Divine Service, which he recited with
the rest; when by the treachery of his ill Destiny which had brought
Scholastica's Father thither, he was known by him. The truth is, that this old
man looked upon him a long time before he could be persuaded that it was he,
and it was his blushing that did most betray him. All aided to the conviction
of his Father-in-law; for having inquired if he had been long a Canon, he
learnt that he had been so but one day, and that he had been received by the
Chapter upon the solicitation of the Resident of Savoy. No longer doubting but
that it was he, he enquired after his Lodging, from whence he caused him to be
taken by virtue of a Warrant, which he had obtained against him. The credit of
the Resident his Protector obtained his removal to Rome, where being put again
into Prison, two hours afterward our old man in the highest rage against him
went to render him a Visit. At first he fell into invectives against him,
called him Cheat and Deceiver, and swore he would make him suffer for the
affront with which he had tarnished the honor of his Family. Our Canon let him
say all that passion suggested to him, and after having seen him returned into
the state of his usual tranquillity he discoursed him in this manner. I do not
doubt. Sir, but that you have reason to complain of me, for having exposed you
to the becoming the May Game of the Country, and for having renounced the
alliance of the Person in the world who seemed the most to merit my affection:
But when I shall have acquainted you with the Reasons which moved me to so
precipitated a Retreat, I believe you too reasonable, not to, I will not say
applaud, but at least, not to something moderate your resentment. I had a
passionate love, pursued he, for Mademoiselle, your Daughter, and I thought her
sensible to my passion, flattered my self that I should alone enjoy the sweets
of her Embraces; and nevertheless my ears have acquainted me that I was not the
only Object of her Vows, and that she had a much greater inclination for
another. Toward the midst of the Ball, having observed that Mademoiselle
Scholastica entertained familiarly a young Lord, near whom she took a Seat:
after having danced, I had the Curiosity to hear what might be the subject of
so familiar a Discourse. I slipped, to satisfy my self upon that point, behind
the Hangings, and those two Lovers spoke very softly: I nevertheless heard
distinctly that they said to one another an hundred amorous things. I could
wish, for your repose, for her honor, and the half of my blood I had been deaf
in that occasion, or that the Vapors of Wine and Meats had not given them such
a longing to entertain one another so privately. But what is there more
indiscreet than a violent love! This young Lord said to Mademoiselle
Scholastica, That happy time is at length come, that we shall enjoy those
pleasures which the estate of Maiden forbid us the use of. Heaven does at
present favor our mutual flames, and it will only depend on that we may live
in the finest intelligence imaginable. To which Mademoiselle, your Daughter,
made answer: That he ought to be persuaded that she was wholly his; that how
great a horror soever she might always have had to marriage, she had only
consented to it, that it might serve for a cloak to their amorous Commerce, and
that they needed only to seek sure means to entertain it. The Sieur de la
Motte could not make this recital without shedding tears, which indeed melted
the old man, but did not render him entirely satisfied. They were at:this pass
when the Resident, Protector of Monsieur de la Motte arrived, who was fully
informed of the things, and created Arbitratour of the Dispute. This wise
Mediator seeing that the Canon confessed the desertion he was accused of, did
at first make him some remonstrances, and told him afterward that he must
absolutely resolve to return to Genoa, to live there in a perfect concord with
his dear Wife, and upon his observing that he had an extreme repugnance to
consent to this offer, he told the Father-in-law that he thought convenient for
the satisfaction of both Parties, that he should make a Settlement upon his
Daughter, and allow her to accompany her Husband into some other Town or City,
where, not being known, they might live in a happy Union. The old man
subscribed to the proposition, consented to the setting free of his Son-in-law,
whom the Resident engaged to re-deliver him when that things were in a
readiness. Whereupon he departed for Genoa, and our Canon went to lodge at the
Resident's House, who had commanded secretly to one of his Domestics, to have
always an eye upon him. The Sieur de la Motte counterfeited for some time, and
seemed to have no other design than of expecting with patience the arrival of
his Father-in-law, though he meditated his retraction to Portugal.

The old man at his return to Genoa went to see his Daughter, discoursed her
for the space of two hours, and put her an hundred times out of countenance,
and made her a hundred reproaches, which had like to have put that innocent
Creature into despair, though her Tears and her Candor, which was known to
him, and her Oaths did persuade him of the contrary of what he had learnt of
her: He made her resolve nevertheless to comply with the design of her Husband,
who intended to go pass with her at Venice the rest of his life; of whose
return he was assured, because he powerfully flattered himself with the hopes
of it. Thus she expected, without letting any thing be known of her design to
the Nuns and her Companions, the time of her change of State; But she learnt
with a redoublement of grief that proposition accepted by the Chevalier her
Husband had only been a slur by which her Father had suffered himself to be
surprised, which made her demand the habit of a Nun, which was not refused,
though that the year of the Noviciates being revolved, they would not receive
her vows. And indeed the Old man having settled his affairs, by Letters informed
the Resident of their disposition, who was upon the point of Communicating it
with the Sieur de la Motte, when word was brought him that he had made his
escape in the morning without any bodies knowing what was become of him.

He had abandoned Rome and the Quality of Sieur de la Motte, to take upon him
that of Chevalier, and went in all haste to Civita Vecchia, when he embarked in
a little Vessel which he found there ready to make sail for Lisbon. And indeed
as soon as he was got on board, they weighed Anchor; and when that he saw
himself at some distance from the Port, and free from all fears, he began to
breathe again, and accost a Portuguese Gentleman, called Don Alphonso, who took
a singular pleasure in his Conversation: they sailed with so fair a Wind, that
they were not long at Sea, and descended at the Port of Lisbon, where Don
Alphonso invited our young Traveller to take up his Quarters at his House,
until that he was something acquainted with the Town. He accepted the offer of
that officious Portugal, staid some days at Lisbon, and went in his Company to
pay his most humble respects to the Queen, whom he had the honor to acquaint
with the favors he had received from Madam Royal. Her Majesty took an
affection for him from that very moment, assured him of her Protection, and
recommended him to Don Alphonso, whose Father had the office of her Gentleman
of the Horse. The Family of this Nobleman dwelt commonly four Leagues from the
Town, and consisted in a Virtuous Lady, Mother of two Daughters, extremely
beautiful, of eighteen and seventeen years of age, and of a Child of eight,
Brother of Don Alphonso. This obliging family neglected nothing of all that
might serve to the Diversion of our Chevalier, who divided his time between
good Cheer, Walking, Hunting and Fishing. Though he had not in the bottom of
his Soul any greater inclination for the one, than for the other, of those two
lovely Ladies: He observed so much sweetness and conformity in the humor of
the youngest with him, that he conceived for her a Love of Sympathy, which he
made pass with her for a real passion. The eldest, whose Mother could have
wished to have been first provided* with a Husband, though the youngest was her
Darling, saw with a singular delight, that our Chevalier had an Esteem for her:
This eldest, I say, became jealous of their familiarity, to that degree, of not
allowing them the least convenience of being able to confer together. Her young
Sister, who was not very much in Love, but took a pride in being beloved,
perceiving that she bore her a grudge for the affection that the Chevalier
testified for her, Counseled her pretended Favorite to disguise his
Sentiments, to make Love to her Sister; and told him that she should take for
her self all that he should say to her Sister that was touching and tender, and
that thus they might divert themselves agreeably upon her jealousy. The
Chevalier consented to her request. But this young Lady was so indiscreet, as
to Confide this Amorous Cheat in her Chambermaid, who went and told it
immediately again to the eldest Sister; who conceived so furious a resentment
upon it, that she resolved not to prescribe bounds to her revenge, but to
assassinate him in his way to Lisbon, whither he was to go on the morrow to Don
Alphonso, whom some affairs had called thither some days before. She gave for
this execution a Ring of value, and Money, to a Peasant, formerly a Soldier,
and always of a cruel and barbarous temper, who was to have lain in Ambuscade,
and so have shot him dead. The Chevalier departed about five a Clock in the
morning, in the cool, for Lisbon, and was met upon the way by the hired
assassinate. This rusty fellow being on foot, let him pass by, and then fired a
Pistol very near him behind, but missed him. Our Chevalier being startled at
the noise, turned toward the Traitor, who had but one Bullet more to fire,
and him he threatened to kill if he charged again, and left him not, until by
the help of some Passengers he had seized on him, and made sure of his person.
When he saw him in his power, he questioned him, and learnt that the eldest
Sister of Don Alphonso had moved him to commit this Crime. He was not willing
to put this Mercenary Criminal into the hands of Justice, nor to sacrifice him
to a just resentment; he contented himself with giving him good remonstrances
without bitterness, and encharged him with a Letter for her, who would have
sacrificed him to the passion of a detestable jealousy. Now this Letter
contained only these lines.

Love will be extremely free in its choice. Your youngest Sister has Charms,
and I know not what, which you have not. A Maiden capable of so black and so
criminal a design as is that you have brewed against me does not merit my
esteem. Live for some other who shall have as wicked a soul as you have a base
one. Take again from this clumsey, though barbarous, wretch, a Ring which he
has not gained, it will reproach you eternally with your perfidiousness. Adieu.


This generous Conqueror of himself, who apprehended some other extremity, and
who besides found not any Charms in the Court of Portugal, went a walking upon
the Port; where having learnt that there was a Bark which weighed Anchor for
Marseiles, he went on Board after having written a Letter of Thanks and Excuses
for what had passed to Don Alphonso, whom he thought not convenient to see,
that so he might not be obliged to acquaint him with the enraged malice of his
Sister.

He stayed not long at Marseilles, but departed for Turin, where he went
immediately after his Arrival to make his Compliments to Madam Royal, who let
him know that she had been acquainted with the adventure of Genoa. Then it was
that our Illustrious Travesty being weary of the world, tired with acting so
many different parts, and inwardly inspired to return to God, and to her self,
gave the History of her Life to the Princess, whose piety she conjured to
favor the design she had of finishing her days in a Cloister. Then it was that
this August Princess shed tears for joy upon the return of this lovely person,
as the Angels of Peace upon the Conversion of a sinner; and that she made her
sensible of the effects of her goodness and her truly Royal Compassion. For
having caused her to be attired conformably to her Sex, and sutably to her
Condition, she proposed to her to enter into a famous Nunnery of her
nomination. Placidia testified all imaginable gratitude to Madam Royal, and
acquainted her with the inclination she had for another House of Religiouses,
where she had often assisted at Divine Service at the time of her abode at
Genoa. This August Princess very far from opposing her choice, gave her Letters
written with her own hand for the Abbess of the Place; to whom her Highness
recommended her, as if she had been her own Daughter, even to the engaging to
furnish her apartment. Placidia, blessed with such favorable Letters, was
received with an extraordinary and universal joy by the Abbess and the
Community, who looked upon her as a person of a peculiar merit. A strong reason
had moved her to choose this Sanctuary; she had learnt that the Daughter of the
Magistrate, whom she had played upon by her disguise was there in the rank of
Novices, that she had long demanded to make her vows, and that she could not
have the liberty granted her without a declaration of Nullity of Marriage, or
without certain Conjectures of the Death of her Husband; possessed with the
thought that she should free her out of pains, she made choice of that place,
where she took the Veil, and declared fifteen days before her profession, what
she had been in regard of the poor Scholastica, who had mistaken her till then,
that she hugged her with transports of joy, that are not to be expressed. She
was the Companion of her Sacrifice, as she is, at present, the Emulatrice of
her Virtues.

THE END.

