A Scripture-Rale TO THE LORDS TABLE; OR, OBSERVATIONS UPON M. Humphreys his
Treatise, Entitled, An Humble Vindication of Free Admission to the LORDS
SUPPER.

Tending to discover the loose and profane Principles therein suggested.

Published for the undeceiving the weak, and removing offenses occasioned by it
in the Practice of Reformation.

Being the result of the Discourses of some Preachers in the County of
Gloucester near Stow on the Would, at their weekly Meetings.

Digested by ANTHONY PALMER Paster of the Church of Christ at Bourton on the
Water.

2 Tita. 5.22, Keep thy self pure. Pro. 24.24. He that says to the wicked,
Thou art Righteous him shall the People curse. London, Printed by A. M. for E.
Brewster and G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, 1654.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IF thou have perused that ungodly Pamphlet of Mr Humfreys for Free Admission,
and taken notice in it of that mass of perverting the Scripture by malice or
ignorance, or both; of his striking hands with all the ignorant and profane
enemies of Reformation in the Land; Of his much self-condemning Sophistry,
tending to destroy all Church-Reformation; Of his carnal and little better
then profane reasoning; Of his pretendod love to the in bewitching thy
conscience into quietness in sin, that thy peaceable practices may help to
hold up that soul-damning practice of mixed communion, and thou securely
receive with wicked persons, till thy conscience awake, when the varnish of his
Sophistry is worn off; If thou have also observed how the devil and his Agents
have dispersed this Heterodox piece like lightning, and stirred up deluded
souls to hug it as Cleopatra did the Aspes, or Uriah the letter for his own
destruction; if thou have also observed how many Ministers through love of
ease, interest, pride, and ambition, have (O thrice horrid wickedness) been
active in spreading this abomination among their friends and acquaintance, to
the great scandal of their holy calling; Thou may think we are not sharp
enough in this our answer: But we considering that we have been our seves
ignorant in as plain matters as this, before God of his goodness enlightened
us, and not knowing Mr H. rentations, considering lest we our selves should be
tempted, and lastly in hopes of prevailing with him to be earnest with God for
blotting out his sin and his Book, that for the time to come he may do nothing
against the truth, but all for the truth, and the people of God may yet rejoice
in his labors, as now the ignorant, profane, formal; and superstitious do,
have resolved to deal with him in a brotherly way.

Blessed be God we can wash our hands from the guilt of any prejudice against
Mr H. person, for we know him not, neither have heard of any that did; and we
can with cheerfulness say, Had not the glory of God, the danger of infection by
the spreading this erroneous Pamphlet, the experience of the hurt it has
already done, the clearing of the Ministers of England from being all such
soul-murderers and pleaders for Baal, and lastly, had we not thought it our
duty to bear witness against this abomination, verily we had said nothing, but
in silence bewailed M. H. and the sad fruit of his labor against the purity of
Christ's worship; What we have done we commit to the hands of the Lord, that he
may glorify himself by it. And we did the rather in the strength of God
adventure to oppose the cheering up the enemies of Reformation in this
deplorable Apostasy, because the Lord laid it upon our hearts to tremble at
that word of his Eze. 13.22. Because with lies you have made the hearts of the
righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the
wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life,
therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations, for I will
deliver my people out of your hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; we
fear the sad Judgments of God upon the spreaders of this Pamphlet, when Christ
shall come to be revenged on the opposers of his Kingdom.

We have but few days before this our Answer want to the Press, seen an
Answer to this Pamphlet by Dr Drake (for which we bless God) more strict and
acute then ours (intended for our people) which may happily be more satisfactory
to some then ours may seem to be; lest any should say We have built upon him or
borrowed from him, we can profess we have not borrowed so much as a line from
him: And truly we can say with an honest heart unfeignedly, that we long to see
all the Godly Ministers declare against this piece, for we find, if men of
greater parts and much perspicuity labor not suddenly to dash this idol out of
countenance; these convictions in such a case (where so many cry Great is
Diana) will work in the profane wits of this Nation all manner of
concupiscense, Romans 7.8.

Do not then Christian Reader, (out of a vain fear that by this Answer thou
shall be drawn into separation from the godly) be so prejudiced as to forbear
to powder; neither think thou that we intend to be Scismaticall in not
complying with Godly Ministers in a work of real Reformation, according to the
Word of God. The thing herd pleaded for in the Preamble, is the necessity of
Reformation, as the case stands, to begin with the minor part, voluntarily
uniting together with their own Minister to submit to Discipline (the major
part being desperately overwhelmed with ignorance, profaneness, and
superstition, strangers to and forsakers of their Covenant with God in Baptism)
by conforming with their own mouths their part of the Covenant of God, a thing
as our first Reformers in the Rubric before confirmation, as also Calvin,
Bucer, Dr Fulk, and others affirm to be the practice of the Primitive Church,
and may be now much more needful. This is, blessed be God, in some of our
Parishes fruitfully embraced.

Reader, We wish thee in the Lord to take heed of striking hands with the
Abettors of Free Admission, lest thy end be worse then thy beginning, and we
commit thee to him who is able to keep his from partaking with other men's
sins and plagues.

July 15. 1653. Imprimatur, Joseph Caryl.

The Author being absent from the Press desires the Reader to correct these
Errata's for him, Viz.
IN the Epistle Page 3. lin. 13. before Ministers read Godly. In the Book Page
1. l. 4. for import r. impart. p. 4. l. 9. for obstructions v. abstractions. p.
14. l. 22. for from r. of. p. 39. l. 14. for on r. in. p. 72. l. 1. after
esteem r. others. p. 76. l. 20. for came r. come. l. 21. for least r. best. p.
81. l. 1. after expression r. unsavory. p. 84. l. 10. for acceptance r.
repentance. p. 94. for their r. your. p. 103. l. 7. for men r. me. p. 121. l.
17. for contrive r. continue. p. 156. l. 3. blot out as. p. 18. l. 13. for
souled r. found. l. 26. after commit r. iniquity. p. 182. l. 13. for him r.
them.

AN ANSWER to a Book of Mr HVMPHREYS, Entitled, A free Admission to the Lords
Supper.
BEfore we yet enter upon the subject it self, give us leave, Reader, further
to import unto thee, what has given us this encouragement, and indeed laid an
invincible engagement upon our spirits, as to the bearing witness against this
vile piece.

We the unworthiest of the servants of Christ, having with many others, long
waited for the practice of Reformation in the Parochial Congregations of this
Nation (as the fruit of the prayers, tears and blood of the Lords people.) And
though there have been expedients held forth, yet finding they lay dead upon
the spirits of too many, it pleased the Lord to stir us up, though the last
and least of our Brethren, to enquire after him in this matter, laboring (as
far as we were able) to lay aside all prejudices and prepossessions, as to the
different ways were held forth by holy men in the Nation, and so to pursue in
the Lords strength what he should please to clear unto us to be his will, and
to impress upon our hearts, and accordingly to practice it: Upon this we betook
our selves to public Humiliation in Fasting and Prayer in our respective
places, as also to private weekly seeking the Lord together, and conference, in
which duties we found the Lord greatly abasing our spirits before him, for the
great neglects which had been upon u as to this duty, and we were even afraid
to plead with our God, considering how greatly we had failed, and put off the
work of Reformation from our spirits, and the many sore and great evils the
Lord was pleased to discover upon our hearts, specially that great snare (which
we desire with all humility to declare to the praise of God, and the admonition
of our Brethren) in which we had been long held, viz.

That reforming our Congregations could not be attained, but by a Law from the
Supreme Magistrate, thereby exonerating our selves of the duties the Lord
required from us, and the laying the guilt at their door, which the Lord has
now showed us to be a very shift; and we consider it is a great mercy that we
have protection from the Magistrate in the peaceable practice of our
consciences.

2. We are convine'd and find that it is the power of the Gospel, the Spirit
working by it, that is the only expedient to bring a people to a more close and
holy fellowship together, by their willing and mutual subjection to the rule of
the Lord Jesus over them; We take it to be derogatory from him, for a people to
be forced by humane power into the full fellowship of the Church; suitable to
these convincements, we endeavored to clear unto our people, the nature of
Church Fellowship, and the way of it, and the necessity of Discipline, and so
to call upon them to join with us in the Lords work, that we might give up our
selves unto him, in a professed subjection to the Gospel, and to grow to a more
close fellowship together, that all Ordinances might be duly administered, to
the honor of Christ, and that formality and lukewarmness might be in some
measure broken. Accordingly an Expedient or Profession was drawn up, wherein we
acknowledging our former abominations in Worship, and professing our Repentance
before the Lord for them, do solemnly enter into, and renew our Covenant with
God, that he may be our God, and we his people, to own the Lord Jesus in his
Offices, to submit to godly Order and Discipline, to watch over one another, to
walk in mutual edification, knit together in love, and so receiving others as
the Lord shall overpower their hearts, some account of themselves being given,
and no just exception (in a charitable judgment) to be made against them; This
being the known duty of every complete member in a particular Church, as in
effect granted by both the godly parties, we conceived few or none who were for
purity would stick at it, the want of which practice we take to be the main
reason of such great corruptions in the mixed Congregations, which corruptions,
we humbly conceive, do put us inevitably upon this practice, if Reformation be
really effected; That the substance of this is practiced by the Presbyterian
Brethren, though differing in the expedient, is sufficiently clear by the
practice of the London Presbytery, who call upon all, and receive such as
freely tender themselves, and require an account of them, waiting for the
coming in of the rest, which are much the greater party in most Parishes,
without Excommunicating such as refuse upon what account soever, to our best
information, and so the minor party do withdraw from the greater, which the
corruption of the greater part (in their enmity to Reformation) does put them
and us upon, unless we will content our selves with the setting up a mere form
of Discipline, but indeed sit down again on the fame lees of formality, which
the Lord has in sore judgments so much witnessed against, and his soul
abhors. To take the boldness of a word more, as to our godly Brethren: We
humbly conceive, that if that our Principle agreed upon by the most of the
different ways ( viz. That every particular Congregation has power to reform
it self, and so Ministers to be helpful to each other in it) were really
practiced; the controversy of Appeals would quickly cease. And further (which
is also on both hands granted) that an Assembly of the Officers of several
Churches in the Name of Christ, is an Ordinance of Christ for the healing of
differences, the contest, Whether this power shall be styled Juridical or
Declarative, and whether this Assembly should actually excommunicate or declare
the fact to be excommunicable, would surely cease: It is very sad that a
controversy about Appeals, which happily in well-ordered Churches, may rarely
be needful, should hinder us in the practice of the first Principles which all
agree in for the substance of them, and should make us draw harsh consequences
from one another premises, which both disavow, and so lay stumbling blocks in
the ways of the weak, and hinder the hoped success of the Gospel and
Reformation in the Nation: Let us first have our Churches formed up and ordered
according to Gospel-rules, the ignorant and profane withdrawn from (since it is
clear they cannot be regularly cast out by Discipline) and then the way of
those Churches holding Communion together, would naturally fall in: To this
practice (by the good hand of the Lord) we have mutually given up our selves,
and engaged in the Lord to be helpful to each other, and to hold Communion
together, and a day of small things is wit us, yea we have had very precious
testimonies of the Lords presence with it, with some of us, for which we bless
him, and our eyes are upon him to bring his own work to pass, who is able to
work and none shall let it, Isa. 43.13.

The good Lord pardon us, if we are not cleansed according to the purifying of
the Sanctuary.

We shall yet for further satisfaction, briefly give an answer to the most
common objections to, and misunderstandings of our practice.

It is enquired in what relation do we conceive our selves to stand unto the
rest, and how do we esteem of them?

1. As to the weak (but not obstinate) that have not strength enough to come up
to this practice, we conceive it the Ministers duty to labor their
convincement in public and private, and the united Brethren to do their duty,
by praying for them, and to labor to draw them on to them, by all good ways
and means, and not to neglect them.

2. To such as peremptorily deny to subject to Christ's Discipline, upon indeed
a profane account, they do virtually excommunicate themselves (at least from
that particular Church) for being called upon to walk with them in the
subjection and fellowship of the Gospel, they utterly refuse so to do, but will
continue in that loose estate, and though they were baptized, yet by their
refusing to subject to Christ, they are as Vrsin speaks Deficientes a suo
Baptismo, Cap. de discip and excom.
such as for the present make void the fruit of their Baptism (though if they
are after called we do not assert a necessity of renewing it) and to admit such
to the Lords Supper, were, as that acute Author justly says, and is evident
from the Word, to confound and make one the Church of Christ and the Kingdom of
the devil, as we shall (God willing) demonstrate in this Discourse; and though
they pretend to profess and know God, yet factis negant foedus Dei, they deny
him and his Covenant in their works and lives, Tit. 1.16.
and so ought not to be admitted to the Seals of it.

So that such persons refusing to own the Covenant of God into which they were
tendered in Baptism, Jesus Christ in his Offices and Discipline, and the
fellowship of that particular Church, whereof he pretends to be a Member, being
called thereunto, or by their ignorance and profaneness not fit to be
received; what need any formal act of Excommunication pass upon them?

Specially first, Since there was never any such former orderly receiving them
into the complete Communion of the Church upon their professed faith and
obedience before the Church, nor did ever give their consents to submit to
Discipline.

Secondly, Neither is there any way how they should be rightly excommunicated,
for that the major part of the Church is corrupt (which we may well suppose in
most of the mixed Parothial Congregations in England) and so will not
excommunicate, nor are fit to do so, nor fit to choose Officers to do it.

Besides, as we have formerly hinted, we never heard that either the
Presbyterian or Congregational Brethren do excommunicate such as submit not;
and therefore we rather wonder the more why this should be kept up as a note of
difference between them, when practice confutes it.

3. It is objected, that we propose a Covenant: we answer for the satisfaction
of any, that we propose the Covenant established in Christ Jesus; The professing
to enter into which, we insist upon in order to a persons partaking the seal of
it; and those who require profession of repentance and faith in Christ before
the Presbytery do, in substance the same thing; for Knowledge, Faith, and
Obedience are the graces of the Covenant.

1. It is most evident that Faith and Repentance in Christ's and the Apostles
time were expected and required to be professed from the person to be baptized.

2. It Is manifest that backsliders from this profession were not to be admitted
to further Communion, as Simon Magus; And that those who brake bread, Act.
2.42. continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship. It is also evident
that in the purest times the Sacrament of Baptism was administered to the party
entering into Covenant, Credis? Credo, Abrenuncias? Abrenuncio; Do thou
believe? I believe. Do thou renounce? I renounce. Plainly, it will then
follow, that it is the duty of those who are baptized in Infancy, after they
have gladly heard and received the Word, to own, profess and enter into the
Covenant of God into which they were tendered in Baptism, and to join themselves
by a free expressed consent, to the Communion of the Church, that so they may
continue in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, etc.
This was appointed to be the practice of the Church of England, and other
Reformed Churches, to require this, and so none to be esteemed in the complete
Communion of the Church without it, and therefore not to be admitted to the
Lords Supper, till such a covenanting, submitting and joining: We find holy
Bucer much lamenting the want of this practice, in an Epistle to Calvin,
Vtinam, ficut istud foedus civil, hic aliquando redintegrassemus and
sanxissemus foedus vitae aeternae, quomodo vos conati soli praestitistis;
Calvin. epist. fol. p. 509.
Further, Martyrum Ecclesiae severa Disciplinae religione erant conjunctae etc.

Speaking further of the Churches there, Nisi Christo Domino sunt penitus
insiti, ejus quoque Disciplinam inter se restituant, de ipsis misere metuo; --
Non desunt in omnibus ordinibus, qui restitutioni solidae communionis and
Disciplinae Christi adversantur. Which we english for the weakest, that they
may observe the concurring judgments of holy men, as to our own practice.

Oh that we had renewed and established the Covenant of eternal life, as we have
done a civil Covenant. The Churches of the Martyrs were joined together by the
severe Religion of Discipline. I miserably fear what may become of our
Churches, unless they are more closely graffed into Christ, and that they
restore Discipline among themselves. There are some of all orders who are
against the restoring of solid fellowship and Discipline.

Now as that which is styled a ChurchCovenant, so much debated among the godly,
we take it to be no more, then such a mutual agreement and joining together
mentioned, that solid fellowship and Discipline may be set up, else how can
there be an unity and fellow-membership in a particular Church?

Say such even who dispute against this practice, This is implied in the very
principles of Christianity; We then apprehend it is not unlawfully but indeed
necessary, expressly to profess what flows from the principles of it; specially
in this case, where it is a man's own free act that constitutes him a member of a
particular Church.

Such a Profession and express consent to walk in fellowship, and to submit to
Discipline, we call for; and we believe without it it will hardly be set up,
unless a catechistical answer or two of a person examined (though never so
dead-hearted, and a close enemy to the power of godliness) shall be thought
enough, which will be to settle again where we were, in old ignorance,
lukewarmness, looseness and formality; in stead of such as fear the Lord,
walking in fellowship with the Father, and one with another in the Spirit.

Now that any that truly fear the Lord should stick at this, viz. to profess to
own the Covenant of Gods free grace, to give up themselves unto it, and to
Jesus Christ the Mediator of it in all his Offices, to walk under his
Discipline, and in fellowship with his people, we cannot but justly wonder, and
why any godly men of parts should frame and raise up bug-bears against it; The
Lord give them to believe, yea to taste the goodness and sweetness of it, and
they will be humbled before the Lord that they ever withstood it.

4. The Novelty of this practice, and from keeping any from the Sacrament, is
objected to us and others.

We could answer at large here, That it is as old as the Gospel for believers
to walk together in fellowship in the duties expressed, and for unworthy
persons to be kept from holy things.

We might moreover produce the testimony of the most eminent Divines, that have
been the Lords witnesses since, as the Church of God has been blessed with, as
Cyprian, Justin Martyr, Chrysostom, Ambrose, etc.

The abundant testimonies of all Reformed Divines, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger,
Hyperius, Bucer, Zanchy, etc. with the sad complaints they make in their
writings of the abuse of the Lords Supper, etc.

Says Calvin in one of his Epistles, speaking of the profane, Sine crass a Dei
injuria admitti nequeunt, Lib. Epist. page 438.
quam turpis and pudenda ista profanatio Saerorum? The profane cannot be
admitted without gross injury unto the Lord, How vile and shameful is the
profanation of these holy things?

Yea says Bishop Bilson, Not only the want of the Sacraments, but the abuse
of either hazards the weal of the whole Church, yea casting holy things to
dogs, procures a dreadful doom, as well to consenters as presumers, it being a
way to turn the house of God into a den of thieves, if profane ones be allowed
the Mysteries and Assemblies of the faithful.

5. It is objected, It is tyrannical; We answer, we wish that people would
first look to their own duty, To obey them, that have the rule over them, and
to submit themselves to them, Heb. 13.17. before they so peremptorily assert,
That the Minister doing his duty, in reference to the Lord, and the good of
their souls, is tyrannical; What tyranny for a Minister to make an universal
invitation to the people he preaches to, to own the Lord and one another in
holiness and love, and so to walk with them? This Objection proceeds from a
love of liberty and elbow-room in a carnal course, etc.

6. Separation is objected; What separation for a Minister coming to a people
settled upon the lees of ignorance and profaneness, and having much abused
Sacraments, to call upon all that fear the Lord, to profess Christ with their
mouths, and to give up themselves to him, and so to walk in mutual love and
comfort together? Separation from wickedness is not schism, but from the godly;
We profess to hold Communion with Ministers and Churches where Reformation is
in any measure practiced.

Lastly, A vulgar Objection that is in the mouths of most, that we take upon us
in this practice to judge the hearts of most.

We answer, though we cannot nor do we undertake directly to judge men's hearts,
yet we can argue out what is in men's heart, as the Wiseman speaks, Counsel in
the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of understanding draws it
cut.

And that first, by their words, for Christ teaches us so to know them, Mat.
12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: And verse. 35. An
evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things, as
by lying, swearing, hard speeches, bitter scoffs, and revilings at such as
profess godliness under the names of Pharisees and hypocrites, with such like
corrupt communications, any of which in their constant practice discover the
heart: How else did Simon Magus manifest himself in the gall of bitterness?

2. By their works, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, false witness, blasphemies, etc. By such fruits
we shall know them.

3. An humble Christian will be willing to have his heart tried, and to have
his Minister apply rules and evidences to discover whether it be sound and
right with the Lord or not?

4. Where none of these fruits do appear, we do not pretend to make a
judgment of men's hearts, so there be a willing subjection to the Lord and his
ways, to walk in fellowship with him and his people.

Thus have we taken liberty (we trust without offense to any of the Lords
people) with open-heartedness and plainness, to propose what we humbly conceive
we have learned of the Lord, and being deeply desirous to be ashamed of our
former abominations; Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.
we hope we have, or shall see the Pattern of the Lords house; so far as in
abundance of mercy, he shall please to use us; which the Lord (who will build
up and come into his Temple) will in his time reveal to all that love him; In
the mean time the Lord give unto us and all our Brethren, whose hearts are
truly after Reformation to pray more, and dispute less, and laying aside all
animosities, to do the work of our blessed God committed to us peaceably,
according to the light we have received in our generations.

Now we shall deliver some brief and plain observations upon this unhappy piece
of Mr Humfreys, aiming at the satisfaction of the people merely; conceiving
that judicious godly Ministers are not at all startled in their principles by
what he has vented; And so we have labored to frame such answers as are most
obvious to the people, and not puzzle them.

First, We take notice of this Parenthesis in the Title, viz. That his Treatise
was published for the ease, support and satisfaction of tender consciences
(otherwise remediless) in or mixed Congregations.

Answ. 1. By ease, it is plain he means by his Sophistry to delude their
understandings so far as that they may without scruple partake of the Lords
Table with the ignorant and profane; This is to make the conscience quiet, and
not good; as water cooling a fever for the present, but makes it return with
greater violence.

2. We are confident this has not eased, but more grieved and perplexed, the
most tender cohsciences in the Natton, as most of the godly bear witness, and
has made the hearts of the righteous sad; The burden of such mixed
communicating, which has been and is in the mixed Congregations of England,
has been and is the grief and sad complaint of the servants of God both
Ministers and people, and will be proved a snare.

3. Whereas he says, Tender consciences are otherwise remediless in our mixed
Congregations.

1. We offer it to consideration, Whether he does not imply that our
Congregations ought not to be continued so mixed with all manner of profaneness
and ignorance, as the most are? And whether he does not propose this as
satisfaction to tender consciences only in this exigency of time, when he
conceives no other remedy is to be had for want of a Discipline established,
and Elder'd Congregations, as he intimates in the close, and as he allows of
Excommunication all along his book, and so his arguments to satisfy tender
consciences in such an exigency, imply, that other remedies are desirable, and
to be looked after.

2. But we conceive and know, that tender consciences are not otherwise
remediless, if they do not submit to such a mixed Communion, we apprehend the
remedy laid down in the Preamble to be proper and good, and what others are
practiced by godly men in the Nation: Surely this evil is not so remediless, if
godly Ministers and people will do their duty. We desire with all submission to
remark, that many do hotly dispute against Erastianism, (viz.) Of Church Power
being in the Magistrate, and yet they say Discipline cannot be practiced
without a Law from them (though they will protect men peaceably doing their
duty) which we look upon as a very snare upon the spirits of good men.
Therefore (blessed be God) there are comfortable remedies, if applied, without
wallowing back again into that sea of dead blood, that corrupt, carnal,
dead-hearted, formal, profane, ignorant practice of worship we have been in.

We cannot but likewise take notice of an expression in the Epistle to the
Reader, as it seems penned by another, wherein he calls this practice of
freeadmission, precious light; We are sure it has by the holy people of this
and other Nations, been ever accounted gross darkness, born witness against by
most of the Confessions and Martyrs in all ages of the Church, yea hist at as a
profane principle, and has sent many of as eminent Saints as ever this Nation
was blessed with, to prisons and banishments: Oh horrid! that the liberty of all
ungodly persons, promiscuously to profane the holy things of God, should now be
styled precious light!

Now to take notice and examine how precious it is, yet with all due respect to
the Author.

His Text, Matthew. 26.27. They all drank of it: All the twelve without
exception; from whence, says he, I gather free Admission.

Answ. 1. But we are bold to say most inconsequently, as ever was Argument
drawn by a man of parts. Just the contrary will be thus argued, There were but
only twelve Apostles (though Christ had many other followers and hearers)
admitted by Christ to his Supper, therefore all of all sorts were not admitted
to come; this is sure more colourably argued.

2. Because only twelve Apostles, none being under scandal or ignorance, brake
bread with Christ, therefore ignorant, swearers, liars, drunkards, unclean
persons, covetous, revilers and haters of godly Preachers and people, such as
most Congregations, to speak out, do abound with, may now come to that holy
Communion of Saints.

3. Here is the force of his Argument, Christ took twelve with him, and all
those twelve drank of the Cup, therefore all might have come that would. Twelve
Aldermen are invited by a Major to a feast, and because all the twelve eat,
therefore all the beggars of the Town might have come.

If the stress of his Argument lie in Judas his partaking of it, he might have
been pleased so to have urged it, and not put such a fallacy upon weak people:

And if it do, we answer briefly here, (and more fully where he plainly urges
it) that it was irrational Judas should have been kept off before he had
committed the scandal, specially Christ acting in that as an ordinary Minister
and Past our to his Church.

In his stating the Question, he asserts, All in the visible Church are capable
of all Ordinances, but Infants, distracted persons, and excommunicated persons.

1. Let the Reader observe, that Mr Humfreys allows Excommunication: of whom?
of such as are detected for scandal, or unduly admitted into the Church
formerly, being grossly ignorant; How will free Admission and Excommunication
stand together? If it be every man's duty to come, why should any hinder him?

But says he, unless excommunicated: But what if they are excommunicable? Does
not that Pastor and Church sin before the Lord if they do not excommunicate
them? If the greater part be such, ought not the Pastor and such as fear God
with him (due means having been used for the conviction of the ignorant,
superstitious and scandalous) to withdraw from them, in the exercise of this
Ordinance, if Discipline cannot otherwise be taken up, as in a corrupt majority
how can it?

Page 3. says he, Though he questions the capacity of many people, because a
solemn preparation is required, yet he says, he humbly persuades himself that
for the Ministers and Churches part as to offering Christ freely, there is such
an universal capacity, that if any come in professing themselves ready to enter
into Covenant with Christ, and serve him in this Ordinance, we may encourage
him, from Rev. 22.17.

Answ. Here is the fallacy couched that runs through the whole Book.

But is not this a sad confounding of things?

1. It is most true, that sinners are freely to be invited to Christ? But must
it be presently to this Ordinance of the Supper? If they do indeed profess
themselves ready to enter into Covenant with Christ, and their lives do not
contradict this covenanting, the Church is to receive them, but ought not this
to be an explicit profession to the Church or Officers of it? Must a profane
person rushing upon the ordinance as formerly, be supposed to do so, merely
because he comes? Upon this score, who ever they be, Turks, Pagans, Jews, if
they hear a Sermon, and come and eat and drink at the Supper, it is to be
supposed they do implicitly enter into Covenant with Christ; how absurd would
this be, and makes the blood of the Covenant an unclean thing?

But secondly, his humble persuasion is not argument enough to prove, that the
Minister and Church is to be so remiss and slight in this matter, without a
former profession before the Lord and the Church, of every persons willingness
to covenant with Christ, and submit to Discipline, (especially in this lapsed
state we now are in) and the Church in a judgment of charity satisfied in
them; if he means such a precedent, explicit, open profession of every person,
we agree with him; but unless his Congregation be the Phoenix of all in
England, I believe he would have but a few Communicants upon such an account,
as trial has been made by many godly Ministers in this particular.

But as we have said, if he mean his mere coming, is such a profession, we take
it to be very delusory, indeed a very mocking of the Lord.

Besides Mr Humfreys well knows how unduly all sorts have been admitted to the
Communion of the Church formerly, and therefore now in times of Reformation the
case is distant; how few, alas to be found that know or have been ever truly
taught what it is to covenant with Christ?

This strange latitude that this latter sense implies, is far from the
Churches strictness in the purest times, in the admitting their Catechumeni
into the fellowship of the Church.

He goes on, Page 4. That he believes none unless excommunicated (ipso jure, or
facto) ought to be refused, etc.

If he means by excommunicated, ipso jure, such as of right ought to be
excommunicated by the Church, then the matter is ended; for it is most true,
that none but such as are already excommunicated, are to be kept from the
Supper, and such without question ought to be kept off, and if so, he grants
what we desire.

But let us examine his further proofs for free Admission.

His first Scripture is from Exodus 12. There was free admission to the
Passover, therefore to the Supper.

Answ. 1. If all came to the Passover, then there was no Excommunication in
the Jewish Church, which Scripture Erastus and his followers use to prove there
was none; And by this argument he will make void Excommunication now, (which as
he has stated the matter, will not be well consistent with his free
Admission.) All to come to the Lords Supper, as all did come to the Passover,
none kept back from the one, therefore none from the other.

2. But we deny that all were admitted to the Passover; he confesses himself,
from Numb. 9. that they were to be kept off for a month, for legal pollution
(which was a type of sin) supposing that they should cleanse themselves in
that month, otherwise they were longer to be kept off, as will necessarily
follow, the end of their keeping off for that time, being that they should be
cleansed, as Pareus, and others upon the place well observe.

We cannot here insist to enforce the many Scriptures and Arguments which have
been brought by others, to prove that the Jews were kept from the Passover
both for legal and moral uncleanness for scandalous sins, which we are
confident neither he nor all the world will be able to answer: Therefore we do
indeed the more wonder that he will urge this, and go about to impose it on
Ministers and people, so slightly passing over what so many learned and godly
men have wrote, specially the London Ministers, and Scotch Divines, and not
take notice of their weighty arguments.

But we will clear it from the Scriptures plainly. See, Reader, Numb. 15.30,
31. and Chap. 19. That there was a cutting off from the Congregation such as
did ought presumptuously against the Lord, that despised the word of the Lord,
that transgressed the Sabbath. So Ezra 10.8. Whosoever would not come to build
the Temple within the three days, should be separated from the Congregation.
And whosoever should confess Christ was to be put out of the Synagogue, John
9.22. Yea himself grants, that the Jews had their several degrees of
Excommunication, p. 84. of his Book. And is not the neglect of keeping of the
profane from the holy things charged upon the Priests as a great evil? Ezekiel.
22.26. Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my holy things, they
have put no difference between the holy and profane, etc. Yea further, Ezekiel. 44
7, 9. The uncircumcised in heart were not to enter into the Sanctuary to
pollute it, that is, such as did manifestly in their lives appear to be so,
though they had received outward Circumcision. And the Lord says, verse. 13.
That such of the Priests that thus transgressed the Covenant of the Lord should
bear their iniquity, and they should not come near unto him to do the Office of
a Priest any more. This also is typical of the spiritual Sanctuary the Church
of Christ in Gospel times.

From what has been said, it will easily appear, without troubling the Reader
with any more, that the Jews were kept off from the Passover for presumptuous
and scandalous sins; for if they were cut off from the Congregation, then they
came not at the Passover; and one end of their cutting off was, that they
might not defile the Passover, as has been proved; Therefore, Reader, thus
far it appears Mr Humfreys has deluded thee.

His next Scripture is, 1 Cor. 10.7. We being many are all partakers of one
bread, All at Corinth, etc.

Answ. True, All such who joined themselves to the Church by the preaching of
the Apostles did so, who came and professed subjection to the Lord Christ and
his Gospel, 2 Cor. 9.13. and became a chaste Spouse unto Christ, Chap. 11.2.
these did all partake it. But, Sir, were the Parochial Churches in England
(though we deny them not to be Churches in a large sense) so brought in? Will
you compare the obstinate ignorance of this age of people, to professing Saints
at Corinth? whom Paul styleth, Called to be Saints, and sanctified in Christ
Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. as we shall elsewhere urge.

Are not zealous Preachers of the Gospel, upon laying aside corrupt forms, and
superstitious usages in too many places, despised and reviled by the most, as
Novellists and Troublers of Israel? would, do you imagine, Paul write to such
as Saints and sanctified, and style the Churches the chaste Spouses of Christ,
where so much abetted profaneness and affected ignorance?

2. Besides the Apostles drift in that place is not to prove that all did
partake of the bread, but that those that did partake, were one bread together,
and therefore they should fly idolatrous seasts, lest they were made one body
with them, by eating with them.

Page 6. But faith Mr Humfreys, Many of these Corinths were ready to go to
their Idols, and to commit Idolatry.

Answ, It seems then they were but ready to go to their Idols, they did not
actually commit Idolatry. The truth is this, some of them through weakness, did
eat at their feasts, of meats sacrificed to Idols, which things the Apostle
severely warns them of, lest they should be tempted back to Idolatry, by the
example of the Jews, and the Lords judgments upon them; not as if these
Corinths did already commit Idolatry, but he warns them against it, and so in
the close of the Chapter states the eating of those meats, in it self an
indifferent action, so the snare to Idolatry be avoided, and offense to the
weak brother; which Interpretation is given by all sound Interpreters we meet
with.

Now to style the Corinths lukewarm Christians. as indifferent to Christianity
or Idolatry, and so to justify the Admission of such to the Lords Supper, is
more then this Scripture will allow.

3. By this Argument also he would prove, that such as are actual Idolaters may
be admitted to the Sacrament. This is free Admission to purpose.

But 1 Cor. 11.28. seems to him to strike further, These Corinths were mutinous
and drunken at the Supper, for this they were reproved and directed to examine
themselves, etc. but for their coming 'twas their duty.

Answ. 1. These Corinths being newly come out of Idolatry, as has been showed,
did in imitation of the idolatrous seasts keep their love feasts, Jude ver. 12.
when they came to the Lords Supper. At which feast there was excess among them,
not precisely at the Lords Supper, as verse. 21. of that Chapter, where it is
said, Every one took his own Supper, and so some were drunk, that is, some were
excessively feasted and filled, while others, the poorer sort, wanted: This
disorder the Apostle reproves, and rectifies their practice; but surely never
thought any Minister of the Gospel would plead this for an allowance, that
profane drunkards ought to come to the Lords Table.

Reader observe, that by this Argument, in perverting these Scriptures, he
pleads for impenitent Idolaters and drunkards to come to the Sacrament; Has
not this man a great care of the the Lords worship?

2. It does not appear, that this was an obstinate, constant practice of the
Corinths, but a weakness, they being newly come out of their Heathenism.

Now says he, For their coming nothing was said against it, that was their
duty.

Answ. Upon this distinction we presume the Author took up this judgment; we
shall further speak to it, where he more at large urges it.

For present, we deny there is any absolute command of coming to the Sacrament,
unless so qualified, as the word of God requires; worthiness being the very
formality of their coming. There Is a double worthiness, Real, the
sanctification of the person, without this no particular person ought to come
(at least begun upon him) for he eats and drinks damnation without it; And let
a man examine himself, and so let him eat, so, and not otherwise, without his
examination he ought not to come; this as to his own conscience.

Will not Mr Humfreys preach thus, Unless you examine your selves, that is, as
to your repentance and faith, you ought not to come to this holy Ordinance? Or
will he say thus, Though you do not, yet you ought to come, that is your duty?
For, says the Author, Nothing is or could be said against their coming:
Nothing? 1 Cor. 11.27, 29, 30.
Is eating and drinking judgment to themselves nothing? Be stricken with
sickness, weakness, death, Is this nothing? But he will say, This was for their
unworthiness; therefore they ought not to come, being under such unworthiness.
If a Master enjoin his servant not to come into his presence, unless so and so
habited upon pain of death; shall that person yet go, because he will say, he
ought to go to his Master, it is his duty? So says the Lord Christ by Paul, He
that comes to me in the Ordinance of my last Supper, ought to come with such
and such a worthiness, or he incurs death and judgment without his repentance:
Now will that person say, or will any say to him, It Is your duty however to
come? Nay, Is it not their duty to abstain? It Is his duty indeed to examine and
prepare himself, and so to come, but it is not his duty to come, if unworthiness
be upon him: It Is true, there is an indefinite mediate obligation of all flesh
to obey God the Creator in every command of his, and it is their sin and
condemnation in failing, but there are some duties of his worship, wherein he
has appointed that his Name shall be thus and thus sanctified by his own
people, and to approach him in these without it, is a greater sin then to
abstain from them, especially in this Ordinance. So much for real worthiness,
etc.

Secondly, There is visible worthiness. in reference to the Church; and this
the Church is to look to, in order to the right honoring of the name of God in
his worship, and its own purity. Now Paul in this Chapter does only admonish
the Corinths, and convince them, and so seems to hope their amendment in the
two last verses of the Chapter, and though he does not give order to the Church
here to excommunicate them, which it is not probable he should before reproof
and admonition (especially being newly brought over to the faith of the Gospel,
and so but tender) yet no question if they had continued in this sin, as the
people in the mixed Congregations do in theirs, the Church should have had
direction about it, as well as touching the incestuous person, and others in
the fifth Chapter; for he will grant these to be scandalous sins in the Church,
and if persisted in to merit Excommunication. That these corruptions so
witnessed against by such severe reproofs and judgments from heaven should be
pleaded as paterns of practice, is most absurd, especially comparing the Church
of Corinth, and our Parochial Churches, and so to draw a parallel practice,
styled Saints, and sanctified in Christ Jesus, the chaste Spouse of Christ,
converted by the preaching of Paul, a Church stored with rare spiritual gifts,
and ours for the most part trained up under a dead form of worship, and a
little heartless preaching (for a great part, to speak plainly against the
power of godliness, and such as do profess it) in ignorance of the way of life
and righteousness by the Lord Jesus, living in known, gross, moral sins, as
has been showed, and which cannot but be evident to the Author we deal with.

To proceed, The Achillean place is the next in the same page 7. 1 Cor. 10.4.
as if it were a new Discovery, when long since urged by Erastus and his
followers, the vanity of the Inference has been over and over confuted by many
godly men, which he is pleased to pass by. Now (says he) here is a clear
Scripture for free Admission; The Israelites that passed through the sea and
wilderness were baptized under the cloud, and drank of the same spiritual rock,
that is, admitted freely to both Sacraments, all scandalous ones without
exception.

Answ. 1. Sir, Why do you not speak out, but here and there mince in
Excommunication? When you plead for all scandalous persons to be admitted, and
by consequence received and continued in the Church: If the scope of all you
assert be in want of Discipline, why do you go about to prove it an absolute
duty?

2. Consider the scope of the Chapter, which is, first, to warn the Corinths of
eating with Idolaters, as has been opened, lest they should be tempted back,
and so fall into the same condemnation of the Jews, who were baptized, drank of
the same spiritual rock, ate manna, and yet for their sins, the wrath of God
came afterward upon them: also in the 5th verse it is said, With many of those
God was not wellpleased, which may be understood for their evil eating and
drinking, as well as the rest of their sins, as Mr. Trap on his Notes on the
place.

Now if we should allow the parallel of these types, which Beza will not allow
to Erastus, it will not in the least measure prove his design: For first, the
manna and the water of the rock were their ordinary food, though they had also
Evangelical significations; so that if scandalous sinners had been debarred of
these, they had been debarred of their ordinary food, which makes a vast
difference between their case in the wilderness, and ours at the Lords Table.

3. The Apostle speaks of such sins as were committed after the eating of the
manna, and drinking the water of the rock, for as soon as they fell to
Idolatries and whoredoms the wrath of God came upon them, Numb. 26.64, 65.
therefore they did not eat of the manna, and drink of the rock after the
committing these sins: Also these scandalous sinners were to be cast off by
death by the Law, except such of them as did repent, and so not to be admitted:
Hence we have this Argument from this place against Mr Humfreys, as given forth
by learned Mr Gillespy in his Aarons Rod, viz. If God himself did execute such
Discipline upon those who were tainted with Idolatry, fornication, and other
gross sins, etc. that he would not permit them to enjoy their former liberty of
eating of the manna, and drinking of that rock (as typifying Christ) until
they mourned, repented, confessed, and atonement was made for them; it is much
less the will of God that such scandalous sinners as are impenitent, and
manifestly irreconciled to God, should be admitted and received to the Lords
Supper. But the former is true, Therefore the latter. If he urge here, They
ought to be put back by Excommunication, why does he so positively and
peremptorily urge this Text to prove free Admission, when indeed the scope of
the Apostle is to prove the contrary, and to warn them of it, lest the same
judgments come upon them also?

It is sad to bring that for an example of allowance (let him have what
obstructions he please) which is left as an example of the fearful judgment
of God to be trembled at in all succeeding ages by all abusers of
Church Priviledges.

His next Scripture is, The Parable in Marth. 22. compared with Luke 14.16, 23.
that all were invited to the feast, and the servants brought in all both good
and bad; whence he infers free Admission.

1. We do not find any solid Divines understanding this feast of the
Sacrament, nor is there the least color so to do: But this Parable is to set
forth,

1. The tender of the Gospel to the Jews, who refusing it, it is sent to the
Gentiles, expressed by the highways and hedges, the remote corners of the
world; So that the calling of all in Luke is the call of the Gospel for all to
come in and accept of the terms of it; And all that come and profess subjection
to it are received by the Church, and so to partake of all the
Gospel Ordinances till by their conversations they shall discover themselves
hypocrites.

But says he, In Matthew, The servants of the Master of the feast, brought in
good and bad.

In answer hereunto, First, All both good and bad are invited freely by the
Gospel.

Secondly, Good and bad are gathered in, but by the bad is certainly meant
close hypocrites, for when they come in, they pretend subjection to the Gospel,
and so are put under Gospel-administrations: But Christ shows the danger of
that hypocrisy, and that if such as come unto the feast of the Gospel in
hypocrisy not having the wedding garment, the regeneration of the Spirit upon
them, shall be cast into utter darkness; That this is the plain scope of the
Parable, is the assent of most godly Interpreters.

Now that hypocrites shall be in the Church till the later day, who questions?
But that when their hypocrisy is visible, they shall be cast out of the
Church, and so not admitted to the Communion of the Church in the Supper, is
clear from the Discipline Christ has elsewhere instituted in Matthew. 18. and by
Mr Humfreys own concession in allowing the Ordinance of Excommunication; and
though the person without the wedding garment (representing all the close
hypocrites) was first admitted by the servants, yet he was not admitted as not
having a wedding garment, but supposed in a judgment of charity to have it,
because he professes to put on Christ in subjecting to him, but that he is
therefore to be continued and admitted to all Ordinances upon his scandal
appearing, as we have said, cannot in the least measure be gathered from this
Parable: But we need say no more, but that Mr Humfreys has perniciously
perverted the scope of the Parable, Jews and Gentiles must be called to faith
in Christ by the Ministry, Therefore ignorant and profane must be admitted to
the Lords Supper; it follows not.

But, says he, This person was compelled to come in (still understanding it of
the Sacrament, which is we conceive confuted) which, says he, was his duty,
and he had no mind to come in, if he could have helped it.

An. If he would not have come in if he could have helped it, and so was
compelled, what is this but a forcible compelling of men to the Sacrament? Sure
here is liberty and free Admission destroyed again, but by a worse principle,
viz. that people may be compelled to the Sacrament, though they have no mind
to come; for what else can be gathered from that expression? If he then do so
understand it of a forcible compelling to the Sacrament against men's wills, we
refer him for an answer to all solid Protestant Divines against the Papists,
urging this Scripture for forcible compelling to subject to the Church, and so
to make Churches by the sword; And likewise to what has been answered to the
practice of the Prelates in punishing persons if they came not once a year to
the Sacrament, which is now hist at by all the godly in the Nation, as a
practice most abominable.

But, says he, to come was not his sin (still unduly meaning the Sacrament)
but without his wedding garment.

It has been answered, that to come is not his duty unless he has his wedding
garment; it is his greater sin to come so, then to refrain, because it is an
abominable mocking of the Lord, who has laid upon men no absolute command to
come, but a conditional, therefore not to come according to the conditional
command is the sin.

By this compelling therefore is meant the free invitations and compellations
of the Gospel ( Evangelii inculcatione and hortationum instantia, as Bucer on
Mat. 22.) upon which the Gentiles shall come into it, and not of compelling men
against their wills to the Sacrament, a practice the soul of the Lord abhors.

His fourth Observation, Page 10. That our Savior explains his own Parable,
Many are called, few are chosen; That is, says he, the work of the Ministry,
we are freely to offer Christ in his Ordinances; but few are chosen, that is
the work of God, etc.

Answ. Very true, many are outwardly called by the Gospel, but few chosen, it is
only known to the Lord who are his chosen ones, and therefore the Church looks
to outward profession and calling, but if any deny their call, by contrary
walking to it, nothing is here gathered to the contrary, but the Church must
cast them out; Secret election belongs to God, but the electing of sitly
qualified persons to the Lords Supper, belongs to the Church; It is the work of
the Ministers to offer Christ freely in the Ordinances, but in Christ's own way
and method, to offer him first in the preaching Ordinance, and if any soul
profess to embrace him before the Lord and the Church, then to have the seal of
his love in the Supper, which things indeed he does confound and mix all the
way, and which being discovered the snare is broken.

Secondly, That few are chosen, that is the work of God, yea that the servant
brought in the man, it was the Lord only took upon him to judge and cast him
out.

Answ. Who doubts this, but it is the Lords work to choose? The Church meddles
not with men's election, but their calling and profession; it is his work to
cast out, his work alone to discover close hypocrites at the last day; But,
Sir, we beseech you, Is this exclusive of all other casting out by the Church,
why then do you speak of Excommunication? Your indeed continued contradiction:
Is not the Church to cast out open scandalous persons, or to withdraw from such
as scorn at Discipline, or have been unduly admitted as complete members into
the Church, being grossly ignorant? surely you will grant both.

He concludes this Argument as with a victory from Luke 12.42. Who is that
faithful steward that gives the household their portion in due season?

Answ. We answer (and may we do it with grief of heart) not such as give their
Masters bread to dogs, his enemies in their wicked lives; or such as refuse to
profess submission and subjection to him, being called thereunto; He is a
faithful steward who casts out his masters traitorous enemies, who dishonor
his family, and gives his bread, the seal of his love, to his household only; A
stronger Argument needed not be brought against him.

The Lord forbid the godly Ministers of this Nation should now, after all their
crying for Reformation be found such Stewards as free Admission would have them.

What he urges from Act. 20.28. is as impertinent, where Paul charge the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, to take heed, and to feed the Church of God,
etc. Ephesians. 2.22. and 4.16.
That Church which is described to be built up as an habitation of God through
the Spirit, fitly framed and compacted together, as brought into the order of
the Gospel, by the holy and powerful preaching of it by the Apostles.

Now, 1. What Is this to ignorant, corrupt, carnal, formal, profane,
superstitious and malicious Congregations, that they must still be fed with
this Ordinance, to the flattering of them in a miserable sinful state, and
send them with a cruel pity to hell with them?

2. Such are not fit to be fed with Sacraments, which have not feeding souls
for it.

His next place is, Mark 1.5. and Mat. 3. where he says, John baptizeth all
that come unto him for Baptism, though he calls them vipers, etc.

This he calls a strong place; But, Reader, see the weakness of it for his
purpose.

Answ. 1. It is questioned by many learned men, Whether these Pharisees were
baptized by John; but if we grant they were, we answer,

2. The Pharisees came to John's Baptism, John seeing them, deals roundly with
them, and calls them a generation of vipers, and pleads with them, Who had
warned them to fly from the wrath to come? seeing they were self-righteous
persons, and need no repentance in their own conceits; His Baptism was the
Baptism of repentance, and sinners, lost sinners, who saw their need of
repentance came to it; What made they in the number of them? Thus John labors
to convince them; now such of them as were wrought upon, and came to him,
casting off their own former self-conceitedness, and confessing their sins, and
so submitting to the Baptism of repentance and remission of sins, were baptized
of him, as it is clear Mark 1.5. They were baptized of him, confessing their
sins; so that it is not to be understood that John looked upon those as
continuing in their Pharisaism, and so a generation of vipers, when he
baptizeth them; but as repenting sinners, and so presses them to bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance; Now who denies such persons so confessing their
sins generally before the Preachers and Church, and so defiring to be received
into the fellowship of the Church, and the privilege of all Ordinances, but
that they ought to be received? What is this to such who either were never
called upon so to profess repentance and faith, or being so called upon, do
yet scornfully refuse to do it? as it is too evident where ever Reformation
has been set on foot in this Nation.

He makes such another instance in that of Acts 2.41. Where (says he) they
immediately communicate with them, distributing freely, not only the Word, but
Sacrament.

But what were these? Such as at the Apostles preaching were pricked at the
heart, crying out in deep conviction of conscience, Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? and professing openly their repentance.

What is this again, to such whose hearts rise up against the Gospel Ministry,
who cry up a Service Book above Gospel-preaching, full of obstinate ignorance?
The Author knows he need not go far to find such; which are those godly men
stick at as to Admission to the Lords Supper, and not poor, convinced,
repenting souls, who profess it before the Lord and his people.

His next Scripture is Acts 10.28. which he calls a peculiar place; Peter, says
he, Was very scrupulous of admitting Christian Communion With any but the Jews,
it being held pollution under the Law to partieipate in any thing with the
Gentiles, but after the vision God instructed him to call no man unclean.
Reader, observe this,

Because Peter had a vision that the Gospel was to come to the Gentiles, and
therefore he might have converst with them, therefore every Gentile, every
lewd, ignorant, profane person, is to be accounted so elean, as to be admitted
to the Lords Supper: For this is the whole force of the Argument: Every man
knows that by that vision nothing else is meant but the preaching of the Gospel
to the Gentiles; sure considerate unprejudiced persons will not be heightened
against Reformation by such kind of reasoning, when the nakedness of it is
discovered.

Now, says he further, I have learned to count no man unclean unless
excommunicated.

No? What if half or more of a Congregation be actually unclean persons, living
in known sins, and the Minister and the rest do not excommunicate or withdraw
from them, Does not sin lie upon them for the neglect of their duty? And are
not such persons to be accounted as unclean by them? Many do find a shift for
conscience this way; It had indeed more color, if the people had professed a
willing subjection to Discipline before, and Excommunication had been ever duly
administered in the Parochial Churches of England, but it will not be a salvo in
the corruptions they now lie under.

To these he adds the texts which set forth free grace, and so pleads; When the
Gospel freely offers Christ, when Christ offers himself and grace, which are
the things signified, How can any have the conscience to turn them away from
the signs?

This is a very confounding of things, and indeed a mere fallacy.

Answ. 1. Does not Christ freely offer himself to Jews, Turks and Pagans,
therefore have you so easy a conscience as to give them the Seals before they
profess to receive the grace offered unto them?

2. It is true, when Christ offers himself and grace, and so souls receive him,
and profess to do so, when they have (in the charitable judgment of the
Church) the substance, none ought to deny them the Signs; but when they refuse
to declare or profess this, and have all their days abused this Ordinance
through gross ignorance and profaneness, who can have so pitiless a conscience
as to suffer them to continue to do so, when they do not their duty to prevent
it? The Lord lay it not to the charge of any, etc.

Now we come to his Reasons: His first and chiefest, upon which he conceives
himself to stand upon a Rock, but Reader, observe how sandy it will appear, we
dare be bold to affirm, that his whole building will fall, if this be the only
Rock and support of it.

The Sacraments (says he) are verbum visibile, a visible Gospel; The
Sacraments set forth Christ to the eye, as the Gospel does to the ear,
therefore the same latitude in the Administration of both. This is the
substance of the Argument.

Answ. If there be the same latitude of administering the Gospel and the
Sacraments, then to whomsoever the Gospel is preached, the Sacraments are also
to be administered. The Gospel is preached to all the world, therefore all the
world to take the Sacrament. Sir, you know well enough that the Apostles
preached the Gospel to whole Cities, yea Nations, but administered the Sacraments
only to such as came and professed repentance and subjection to the Lord Jesus.
Upon this score, as many as hear the Gospel preached, professing to be
converted or not converted, may come and eat bread and wine with the Church at
pleasure. A monstrous profaneness.

But his reason is, Because this Sacrament shows forth the death of Christ, and
this is, says he, Paul's judgment of Christ's Institution.

But, Sir, To whom did it show forth the Lords death, and who were to use it
for that end? Were they not the professing Saints of Corinth, such that had
given up themselves to the Lord by the will of God.

Briefly, let it be showed, that Jesus Christ did institute Sacraments for any
other then professing believers, or make any promise to them for conversion, or
whether they were ever administered unto any but such as owned and submitted to
the Church: But he will not sure say, the Gospel is to be preached to no other,
therefore there is not the same latitude in the administration of both.

But he further urges, Gal. 3.2. for this, O ye Galathians, before whom Christ
has been set out, as crucified among you. This expression, says he, may well
be applied to the Sacraments.

True, it may be, but it is clear it was not the Apostles meaning there, but
the doctrine of Christ crucified, from the power of which they were revolting.

But grant it were, What does he gain by it? It only will prove, that the
Galatians (as a Church) received the Lords Supper, and that Christ was set out
to the eye of a believer; What Is this to prove the same latitude of preaching
the Gospel and administering Sacraments?

He is willing to prove it further by a Metaphor; A man covenants with a
Landlord about a purchase, the price being paid, the bargain established, he
comes and requires his Seal for confirmation; So Jesus Christ makes a purchase
for us, gives us the writing and seal in the Gospel and Sacrament. This is the
substance.

Very true, but must not the party for whom this purchase is made come first
and accept of the bargain upon its own terms, and so have it sealed to his use?
so must not every soul first profess to accept Jesus Christ on his own terms,
and so the Church in the name of Christ to give him the seal, the Sacrament?

So, says he, a Prince proclaims a pardon upon condition of laying down their
arms, and so gives forth a pardon and seal, etc. So Jesus Christ, etc.

Answ. But must not then the rebel first lay down his arms, and profess
subjection etc. so must not every soul profess laying down their sins, and to
subject to Christ?

Now, says he, will it not be plain, as We offer the conditions to any, so may
we the seal, etc.

1. True, we offer pardon of sin, the condition, as he calls it, but we are
not to apply the seal, unless there be a professed acceptance of it.

2. If a soul do first accept of the conditions, or do not break them by
continuing in sin, then he is to have the seal: But what does all this make
for his purpose? If he intend by this that all that submit to the Gospel-terms
and conditions, which are repentance, faith and obedience, that they ought to
have the Gospel-seal, the Sacrament, who will contend with him? This does not
sure prove the same latitude in preaching the Gospel and administering
Sacraments. The Gospel may be preached to thousands who may not accept of the
conditions of it.

We will here urge the Argument of that learned Divine Parcus on Vrsin, Catech.
de dis.
against this judgment; says he, The signs are to be administered to none but
to whom the promise belongs, but this belongs not to wicked impenitent persons;
Therefore; His reason he gives, is that which speaks just contrary to Mr
Humfreys assertion; If the Church should administer the signs of grace to such,
Verbo visibili absolveret, quos verbo audibili damnaret. The Church would
absolve in the visible Word, the Sacrament, whom He does condemn in the audible
Word, the Gospel, which declares no unbeliever, or wicked person, as such, to
have inheritance in the kingdom of God; If no inheritance, then not the seals
of that inheritance: But we have stood too long upon this, which we the rather
do to undeceive the weak.

But yet, there is so much stress laid upon this his Argument, that it is backed
with four considerations.

His first, The Gospel is to be preached to every creature, and a baptizing
them, therefore this Sacrament also, etc.

What is this but a repeating the same thing? But was every soul baptized that
had the Gospel preached to it? Does it not run, Mar. 16.15. He that believes
and is baptized, etc,

Why will men offer to stagger weak souls with such inconsequent reasoning?

2. His second consideration, That the Gospel offers Christ freely to all, etc.
without qualifications (so there be a present giving up himself sincerely to
him) And yet none but such as shall be qualified after their minds must come
to the Sacrament.

Answ. But would he have no qualifications upon a soul that comes to the
Sacrament, no repentance, no faith? etc.

Does not his sincere giving up himself unto the Lord as his Lord and Savior
imply these? But what if this soul should before the Minister and Church before
he comes to this Ordinance profess, that in sincerity (so far as he knows
his own heart) he does give up himself to the Lord and his people? Would this
take off from the free tender of Christ?

Further, says he, Is Christ offered as a free gift in the Word, and must we
not come Without our price and money to this Ordinance? etc.

Answ. The Authors ingenuity were desirable here; Do the Preachers when they
call for Repentance and faith in such as come to this Ordinance, and suitable
conversation, do they make this buying of Christ? Besides, The Word is to begin
and work faith; this Ordinance supposes faith; for it is supposed the
bargain's made before the conveyance is sealed; that a soul receives Christ,
before Christ seals his love to him.

His third consideration, That the Gospel way is the best way to bring souls to
Christ; Let, says he, a man's heart be fully convinced of the free grace of God
in Christ, his heart can stand it no longer out against his conversion.

Answ. This is true, but what to purpose in his Argument? Is every man's heart
so convinced that hears the Gospel? He must first profess to have his heart
convinced of the free grace of Christ, before he can rationally desire the
seal, or it can rationally be given unto him.

Aye but, says he, when the Word is preached, Covenant opened, Seal applied,
the Message of reconciliation comes in its full virtue to convince, etc.

But, Sir, keep to your rule, the Gospel way is the best way, etc. Was this
ever the Gospel way, or is it any where prescribed in it? Was not conviction
always professed before either Sacrament was administered? We are well assured he
cannot show any precept or example to the contrary in the Gospel. Therefore
this huddling of things will not pass.

4. His fourth consideration, sure a hasty one, is this, The Gospel is a
peaceable Gospel, an embassy of peace, now how shall this peace be kept if we
go to make separation at this Ordinance?

Answ. The truth is, a sufficiently worldly and carnal Argument; but, Reader
observe, may not the same reason be urged against the preaching of the Gospel
too? Does not this breed disturbance? etc.

Yea, is not this reasoning directly against what Christ himself delivers shall
be the effect of the preaching of the Gospel, Matthew. 10.33, 34. I came not to
send peace but a sword; I am come to set a man at variance against his father,
etc. And a man's foes shall be those of his own house, etc. And elsewhere, I will
gather you one of a family, and two of a City, etc. Jer. 3.14.

Now is not the Gospel a Gospel of peace (that is, to the soul which receives
it, in which sense it is an embassy of peace) because it will make such work
in the world, by the opposition of men against it? May it not as well be said,
O the Gospel will make disturbance? How shall the peace be kept? Whereas it is
on purpose to separate the kingdom of Christ from the world? The truth is, this
argument is of so little weight, that therefore such a separation as keeps off
ignorant and profane persons from the Supper, ought to be, because it will
disturb the consciences of such, and may (by grace) awaken them to a
consideration of their own condition, and not longer be flattered in the
customary carnal way they have been lulled asleep in: He next states the case
of a poor wounded sinner, as if it were meant any such should be kept off by
godly men who plead for the purity of this Ordinance; We plead against such as
are whole in their own opinions, ignorant, profane, revilers, and not wounded
sinners, if they declare themselves poor sinners and wounded, no doubt but they
will be received.

We shall not add any thing to the other part of this consideration, it being
but a repeating of what is before urged.

His second Reason is drawn from the nature of a visible Church, which (says
he) is a number of such as make profession of Jesus Christ, and so are Saints
by calling, whatsoever they are in truth, the essential marks whereof (whereby
it subsists as visible) is the preaching the Word, and administering Sacraments.

Answ. Not to dispute this, How far the preaching of the Word and
administration of Sacraments are essential marks: The Word may be preached to
those that are no Church, and the Sacraments administered to a false Church;
Ordinances are rather food and maintenance of the Church, then the marks of it.

There may be Churches in a large sense, that may have no right
Gospelconstitution, and yet have these Ordinances, as begun merely by the
command of the Magistrate to subject to such forms he prescribes, and not by
the preaching of the Gospel, and a voluntary submission of a people to it; and
such are not properly Saints by calling: It is possible there may be such
Congregations in England, etc.

Will you style affected-ignorant persons, scoffers at instruction and the
power of godliness, obstinate heretics, Saints by calling, though they make
profession of Jesus Christ? Surely this destroys their profession.

Therefore it may be added that a Church is coetus fidelium, a society of
believers that profess Christ and his Gospel, and practice answerably, and are
answerably united by mutual agreement, who submit freely to Christ's Discipline.

But he goes on, Now unless men will be so bold, as to divest our mixed
Congregations of the name of the visible Church, they cannot take away one
essential note, in the free use of this Ordinance.

Answ. But, Sir, there is much difference between the reforming of a Church,
that there may be a due and justifiable use of this Ordinance, and a taking of
it away, which we know none but fanatic persons who deny the use of this
Ordinance to do.

But he will prove, That our mixed Congregations ought to have the use of this
Ordinance, both from Christ's doctrine and example.

His Doctrine, In the Parables of the little and great fishes in one net, good
and bad called to one feast, the chaff and wheat in one barn, tares and wheat
in one field, Mat. 13. which must grow together till the day of Judgment, and
so no separation.

Answ. Briefly, Those tares we understand, with most reformed Expositours, to
be close hypocrites, and nor of open profane persons and revilers of the
Gospel Ministry, and of the power of godliness, else to what purpose does he
elsewhere speak of Excommunication, which is to cast such as pretend to be
Christ's friends, but walk as his enemies, out of the Church? And if under
pretense of this, all ungodly blasphemous wretches, gross ignorants, must be
admitted: What difference between the Church and the Kingdom of the devil?

We allow there is no separation from close hypocrites, De occultis non judicat
Ecclesia. But as to open, discovered, scandalous persons, the Church is to cast
them out; or if they are the greater part, to withdraw from them, as has been
showed.

If it be replied, That the servants knew them to be tares, therefore not close
hypocrites: We answer, That godly Ministers may discern hypocrites with a
knowledge of probability, and so these servants might discover the tares;
specially if by Zizania these tares are meant burnt ears of corn, as Mr Leigh,
M, Trap and Weems, etc.

2. It is also said, Matthew. 13.25. While men slept the enemy sowed tares; Where
Christ imputes it to the remisness and sleepiness of the servants, the
Ministers, that tares came into and were suffered in the Church.

3. By those tares, Christ does understand, such who are not openly and
notoriously scandalous, but such tares who are much like the wheat (as Hierom
says those kind of tares were) else he would contradict himself, in
commanding scandalous persons to be cast out of the Church, Matthew. 18.17. and
yet here to command them to let them alone.

To conclude his Argument he breaks out in Rhetoric, Who Lord dare anticipate
thy throne to separate? etc.

None, we hope, viz. to undertake to separate all close hypocrites out of the
Church, as has been said; but there are some who may and ought to be so bold
(whereof we believe Mr Humfreys, and his Church to be a part) to exercise that
power Christ has left them to preserve their Churches from ruin and
pollution; else all Christ's threatenings to the Churches of Asia for continuing
profaneness, blasphemy, lukewarmness among them, commending them that could not
bear the evil had been vain; What else indeed is the Church of Christ, but such
a separation of believers from the pollution and wickedness of the world?

Next he would prove it from Christ's example, Who conversed with Publicans and
sinners.

Answ. This will serve, as it has ever done, the turns of the profane people
to urge against the strict and reserved carriage of the godly, in not
frequently mixing in their companies, as they abuse this Scripture; but it is
sad to have it urged by a Minister.

2. Because Christ conversed with Publicans and sinners to convert them,
therefore did he admit them, as such, into his Family, and give them the seals
of his love, which must be the import of the Argument, if it pretend to prove
any thing; If you had Infidels dwelling near you, because you did sometime
converse with them, Would it be a good Argument for any to urge against you,
that you therefore gave them the Sacrament? Were Publicans and sinners admitted
for his Disciples, or to his Supper, till called and became followers of Christ?

But now comes in the invincible Argument, viz. That Christ ate the Passover
and his own Supper With Judas.

Answ. We shall for brevities sake avoid this contest, Whether Christ did give
the Supper to Judas. The Author passes by the many pressing Arguments that are
given to the contrary by many learned men, specially Mr Gillespy, etc.

Only this, It is not likely that the Lord Jesus should say to one who was
about to betray him, Take, eat my body, which was given for thee? for if Judas
received it, Christ spoke to him with the rest.

2. If it be replied, That Christ dealt as an ordinary Minister in this
administration, then it will help to fortify the answer we chiefly stick to
(supposing we grant him that Judas did receive, etc.) which is, That Christ
dealt as an ordinary Minister, and so Judas was admitted as a close hypocrite.
Besides, Judas had not committed the finne, as yet, and ordinary Ministers do
not use to keep any from the Sacrament for sins they fear they may hereafter
commit, but have not yet committed them.

Now all that will not admit of his aerie free Admission, are wilfully blind,
as he concludes, censoriously enough, against the judgment of most famous holy
Divines, both ancient, reformed and modern, as ever the world was blessed with
since the Apostles times. This may gain opinion with his Parishioners, but not
with the godly wise.

His third reason is, From the nature of Christian Communion and
Church Fellowship, which ought, says he, to be in charity and humility,
without judging, etc. to judge others better then themselves, specially in the
Minister, from 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

Answ. 1. As to Church Fellowship, The fellowship of Saints with the Father,
and with Jesus Christ, and one with another, by mutual union and free agreement
in the Lord. There Is sure but little footsteps of it in the most parochial
frames.

How were they united into such a holy fellowship? Is a coming together of
grossly ignorant, swearers, profaners of the Sabbath, abetting and pleading for
all ungodliness, haters of such as are godly, like a fellowship of Saints, as
the Primitive Churches were? We may boldly return this Argument upon Mr
Humfreys.

Church Fellowship, is a holy fellowship of Saints walking in the light, 1 John
1.3, 7. 1 John 3.6. Ephesians. 5.8, 9, 10, 11. It Is not a fellowship of Saints and
devils (appearing even to be so) of light and darkness; therefore all manner of
wretched persons, wallowing in all filthiness and profaneness; ought not to be
received into it.

But says he, It ought to be in humility and charity, yea men professing
Saintship ought so to walk together, and all for bearance as to one another
infirmities to be used. But what kind of charity is this to admit ungodly
persons, as the members of Jesus Christ, walking indeed as the members of
Satan: So the truth is, profane people cry out, Oh you-must have charity! The
reforming Ministers have no charity, and the like; when too many have
equivalently renounced every part and article of their Covenant made to God in
baptism, not minding to renew it; yet they blame us as uncharitable, because we
will not flatter them in their abominations with the precious seal of Christ's
love, when they walk as his enemies, and have their mouths open against all
goodness; That this is the temper of most, witness the preaching of all godly
Ministers.

Now what a kind of charity were this? Oh, merciless flattering pity!

Again, we beseech you to remember, that Church Fellowship must be as well in
holiness as in charity, here is no pleading for purity, but all for peace and
charity.

But says he, We ought to judge others better then our selves; but Sir, this
sure was ever pressed upon such as professed Saintship in the Churches of Christ,
not of such, who though they will be good Christians in their own and others
esteem, do yet hate the name of Saint, and revile it; such an humble Christian
is not in the greatest humility, to esteem better then himself, as the grace of
Christ has distinguished him.

But he puts an especially to the Minister for this excellent humility and
charity, he is to be patient, etc. from 2 Timothy 2.

Did ever any man understand that Scripture of administering Sacraments, but
himself?

Besides, though this is to be a Ministers carriage, yet one duty does not
clash with another, he ought to do his duty also, to keep Christ's Ordinances
pure, and to try the people he is sent to,

Oh, but says he, If we must go censuring one another worthiness, it is the
ready way to heart-burnings, etc.

We have before answered, that we take leave to call this but a very carnal
Argument, Christ came not to give such a kind of peace between Saints and the
wicked.

Besides, this strikes at all Discipline, which must not hence be exercised for
fear of heart-burnings. It may indeed make the Ministers many enemies; The Lord
grant this be not too great a snare upon many; free Admission makes much for
the ease, peace and interest of a Minister in the world: but it makes him an
unfaithful steward of the mysteries of God.

Now, to crown all, he is pleased to add, That it is but a rigid Pharisaism to
deny free Communion.

Sir, You have abundantly gratified profane people (into whose hand your Book
comes) and helps on the old accusation of godly Ministers and people, viz. That
all this strictness they pretend to, is but Pharisaism and hypocrisy; your
sin and doom is 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

We do not plead for rigidness truly so called; Godly Ministers invite the
weakest to profess repentance, and faith, etc. and so to be received into
Communion: but for the withholding of the holy things of Christ from stubborn
persons who scorn such profession, is no more then Christ commanded Mr Humfreys
and us to practice.

The comparison of the Pharisee and Publican is the old charge of the lukewarm
carnal party against Professors of godliness: Oh, say they, these will be holy,
they are so strict, just like the Pharisees; Why? because they will not partake
with them in the unfruitful works of darkness, and now would not be guilty of
their Sacrament-sins, which they are, if they do not their duty to keep them
off.

Next, he breaks out with a pathetical expostulation and prayer, Rebuke the
humor of these times, Oh my Savior! etc.

Reformation is but a humor, and superstition with Mr Humfreys; Lord Jesus
rebuke the profaneness of these times, and let not thy holy things be thus
prostituted! Rebuke them that call evil good, and good evil.

Another he follows with, That since Christ offered himself to sinners, and
never cast out any that came, Shall any take stomach he is offered in the
Sacrament?

Answ. This is the former confounding of things that ought to be distinguished;
If a soul profess to come to Christ, that is, to subject to him, and walk with
his people, who will deny him the Seal? Does it therefore follow that the Lords
Supper is to be given to those who do not come to him, and being called upon
will not profess to do so?

But let us enquire, Does the Author of free Admission conceive, that Jesus
Christ would have admitted Publicans and sinners to his Supper without any more
ado? Were they not first to be received as Disciples? Here Is his Argument,
Christ sometimes converst with Publicans and sinners, therefore all may come to
the Sacrament.

His next Scripture is John 8. about the adultresse woman, says Christ, He
that is without sin, cast a stone at her.

This was to check the proud Pharisaism of others, who scorned her out of
vainglory, when they themselves were guilty of as great sins; Must therefore
adulteresses without professed humiliation to the Church be received to the
Lords Supper? Though a believer finds the same corruption in himself, and is
abased in it, yet he sees himself distinguished through grace from an unhumbled
adultresse, from such that live in open scandalous sins, which he pleads for to
come to this holy Ordinance.

His fourth reason speaks high words, Which does arise from the vanity,
formality, impossibility of selecting people to this Ordinance.

To prove either of these distinctly, nothing is offered, only something in
the general; 1. Look but to the heart of these separations, and they come to
nothing. This is as slightly as uncharitably spoken.

Answ. If he means by separations, the uniting of such as profess repentance
and faith before the Lord and his people into a closer fellowship, that all
Ordinances may be rightly administered: We answer, These separations, blessed be
the name of the Lord, came to something, and the good hand of the Lord is with
them, and has gloriously appeared for them. But to speak plainly, we wonder
what the mixed Parochial Congregations for the most part came to, if we look
into the least of them, where no Church-Reformation is practiced, even the very
least of them is carnal, formal, deadhearted worship, no fellowship together,
nor mutual edification, but settled upon the dead lees of formality, and
flattered to their own destruction in such a condition by a continued enjoyment
of all Ordinances, without any discovery (but by mere coming to the Ordinances)
that they so much as pretend to Jesus Christ.

2. Besides, godly men do not select, but invite all upon profession of owning
the Lords Covenant, Repentance, etc.

He puts the case, You will have a gathered company, Whom would you admit, if
not all that make profession, as we do mixtly, then those only who have an
interest in Christ and true believers?

Answ. We know not well what he means by making profession as they do; What
profession he means; If he understands it of all people in the Nation making
profession, such as it is, an implicit profession, because they come to the
Ordinances; we do not account this a sufficient profession (and so the Brethren
of both ways call for explicit profession, and a conversation not denying
that profession) for Atheists and all profane persons come to Church, as he
styles it, who revile the preaching of the Gospel, if it be powerful,
searching, and wallow in all manner of wickedness, making no more of the name
of God and Lord in their mouths, then of the name of a beast, as is the most
common practice of much the greater part; and if they be called upon to profess
Christ, repentance, faith, before the Minister or others, they hate and scorn
it.

Now if he means by such a bare external profession, without any regard to
knowledge or conversation, we deny it to be enough, if this be all they mixtly
do.

But, says he, if in gathering a Church, you receive not all that make
profession mixtly, as they do (that is, as we conceive such as we have
described) then only such as are true believers.

Answ. Here lies a fallacy; Such as would gather companies, as he calls it, or
unite people into a closer communion, that the Churches may be purer, have a
middle way between his mixed profession and true believing, that is, an
explicit profession of repentance and faith, and confessing of Christ, and not
denying this in the tenor of their conversations: And of these indeed we do
not pretend to be able to know them who are true believers, and who are not.
What Reverend Mr Baxter says in this case, is most true, in his learned
Treatise of Baptism; The judgment may be false, but the rule of judging
infallible, which is by explicit profession and conversation.

In that Page 23. he seems to impose upon godly Ministers, as if they went
about to have Churches without hypocrites. No, sure they would have outward
visible purity, as much as may be, they would have their Churches like the
Communion of Saints, and not a den of thieves. They know that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. how much more danger of the Lords
displeasure, when even the whole lump is near leavened with ignorance,
profaneness, enmity to Godliness; They would not keep up such frames of
Churches, viz. lukewarm formality, which the Lord professes to abhor, and
spue out of his mouth from being Churches, Rev. 3.16.

He there further speaks of a formal purity. We contend, as much as may be for
a real purity, and power of godliness; but such as live in open and known
profaneness have not so much as a formal purity.

And as for separation upon separation, as in the peeling of his Onyon, which
may cause men to weep. We would not meddle with his jests in holy things; But
we hope and pray that the Lord will give Mr Humfreys a heart to weep in
private, and that bitterly for the grieving most of the godly of the Nation,
and laying a stumbling block in the ways of the Lords people, and making the
hearts of the wicked to rejoice; as we are sure this piece of his has
abundantly done.

His fourth reason, Is gathered from, the uniformity of the service of God;
That all other worship lies in common, then it is an entrenchment upon the
common liberty, to put an enclosure upon the Sacrament.

Answ. That uniformity of Gods worship in this matter, cost the holy Preachers
of this Nation dear under the Bishops. Oh! that it should be again pleaded for!

But, says he, all worship ought to lie in common.

Yet Christ calls his Church, Cant. 4.12. A garden enclosed; And a vineyard of
red wine, Isa. 27.2. and many the like expressions (to say no more) as any fell
from his pen; The Discipline of the Church has heen usually styled the hedge
and fence of the Church, to preserve it from ruin and pollution, and now must
all be in common?

It Is an entrenchment (says he) upon the Common Liberty; It Is indeed a
restraining of a cursed liberty, that ever we believe was pleaded for by a man
pretending to fear the Lord; All in common to Atheists, Drunkards, Swearers,
Revilers, ignorant persons, now, all in common, and yet he would make us
believe he is a friend to Discipline: But now we have a fetch, Are not says he
all the Commandments of God universal, why not Do this also?

Answ. Sir, We beseech you to whom was Do this, in the administration of the
Supper spoken to? Was it to all that ever heard Christ preach, or only to his
12 Apostles?

Further, He urges, If an unregenerate man can do nothing but sin in all
worship, why must he be kept from this more then other, why a more fear of his
sin here? This the substance.

Answ. Because the other Ordinances of the Word and prayer are for his
conversion, this supposes men converted in a judgment of charity, and so
rightly received and continued in the Church according to Christ's order. A
wicked man is absolutely forbidden to receive the Lords Supper, and none
commanded to come but he who has proved himself fit by examination, but there
lies an absolute command upon all men to hear and pray; As to his Grammar
Allegory to the Independents of Heteroclites and Syntaxis; That they allow a
Syntaxis in the whole worship of God, but make Hetoroclites at the Sacrament,

It Is likely it is because they would keep a true Syntaxis and godly order in
their Churches, and not admit of Heteroclites, viz. profane wretches and
despisers of holiness into it; what is Discipline but to keep off such
Heteroclites from the fellowship of the Church, and specially in this
Ordinance? As to the practice of such Presbyterians as baptize the Children of
all, but not admitting all to the Supper, we shall not say much of it: Learned
men conceive from 1 Cor. 12.23. We are all baptized into one Body whether Jews
or Gentiles, that Baptism is into the universal Church; It does not therefore
follow that such a one has privilege in a particular Church of all
Ordinances, unless his profession made in baptism be personally received, and
so he join himself to a particular Church; but have the people of England in
Parish Churches ever done so? specially such as are obstinately ignorant and
profane: But for such persons who cannot be judged either of these, as to the
baptizing of their Infants, we leave godly men to their own practice, as they
shall see it most conducing to real Reformation.

His sixth Reason is drawn [ from his own innocence in thus doing, in admitting
all to the Supper.]

Ans. We believe it will not be found his innocence (without deep repentance)
in the day of the Lord.

Says he [ I do but my duty] That Is but the Question begged; We deny it to be
so upon the terms he goes.

2. He has no power to turn away any; We will not dispute this with him,
because if he had power, by his own principles he ought not so to do, for he
argues all are to come, good and bad; Or if he would exercise Discipline it is
his own fault, he draws not on those who will submit to it with him, and so
practice it.

3. He says, He hopes the best of all, But Sir, Is the mere coming of a person
ground enough for hope without any discovery or trial of him? and when he
lives in known sins and never professes acceptance to the Church! How can he
call this ground enough for his hope? He will sure preach the contrary to his
people, that it is not ground enough to themselves, and why should they then be
flattered in such a hope by the Sacrament? which is indeed the great mischief
we apprehend comes by free admission; Oh that there were ground enough of
present hope upon the body of the people of this Nation? If Mr Humphreys
Congregation be not peerlesse, sure he may question his ground of hope upon too
many, etc.

He says, God can turn the most at his Ordinances.

Ans. But show us where he has promised he will, or any example of it; it is
not good arguing from Gods omnipotency to his ordinary way of dealing; if a
wicked man were in Gods way to conversion at the Lords Supper he might expect a
blessing, but he is out of Gods way, and therefore he has no ground to expect
conversion, or we to suppose it.

5. I endeavor (says he) my utmost that all come prepared.

Ans. For a Minister to do his utmost in this case, yea, what de jure of right
he ought to do is a great matter: we know not the Authors particular practice,
but we conceive if he does no more then what we can gather, he is far from
doing his utmost duty, unless he reprove, examine, exhort, even one by one, we
mean all that are admitted, as Paul did the Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.11. we
believe he is bound in this Corruption of times to call upon all to come and
own the Covenant of the Lord their God, and subjection to Christ, and to give
up themselves to the Lord in a fellowship together, or else we humbly conceive
he does not the utmost of his duty.

6. He confesses the sins of the Congregation.

Ans. But ought not every sinner upon a due receiving into the fellowship of
the Church to confess himself a sinner, and his lost condition in himself
before the Lord, and his people in some good measure? Mar. 1.5.

Lastly, He adds, He might further prove from the command and good of coming,
and from the evil of omitting it, the Sacrament is a means and a pledge, a
means to receive grace, and a pledge to assure. etc.

Ans. It Is a means of receiving more grace, but not the first grace; But (says
he) Suppose a poor Soul wants grace, whither shall he come but to the means of
receiving it? If he be a poor Soul in his own sight and appehension, and so
comes thirsting after grace, it supposes grace begun. Blessed are they that
thirst, etc. and so that proves nothing for his purpose.

The Ordinances (says he further) are the baths, there are many come to the
Bath that are never the better for it, and yet they are means of health, and
open toall, etc.

Ans. But Sir, Where do you find this Allegory in the Scriptures, That all men
may freely come to the Sacrament as to the Baths?

2. Such as come to the Bath come as sick and weak, and pained, and such coming
to Christ in his Ordinances shall find healing; what is this to the whole who
need not the Physician, as impenitent sinners and gross ignorant persons are?

But the Baths are open and free to all: That is the abuse of them, they are
meant only for the sick and pained, and so it is of Christ's healing Ordinance of
the Supper, it is the abuse and that a great one, if any but such as profess to
desire healing of Christ be admitted to them.

That it is a means of conveying grace, he says there is no great difficulty.

Ans. If he means the first grace, it is such a difficulty as he has not
unfolden in this Treatise; and to seek for the first grace from the use of the
Supper is not of Gods ordaining, and is indeed a piece of will worship; Faith
comes ordinarily only by the Word preached.

For the evil of omission, p. 26. he says, Those that neglected the Passover
were out off, etc.

Ans. He may also remember that such as had moral uncleanness upon them were
not to come, and if they did they were to be cut off from the Lords People.

He adds, In the Gospel those that came not to the Feast, Mat. 22. were
destroyed.

Ans. It has been answered, that it is to be understood of the general Call of
the Gospel, and not of the Lords Supper, specially of the Jews, who were
destroyed for not receiving the Lord Jesus.

But (says he) we are not to neglect a certain duty for fear of accidental
scandal.

Ans. We deny it to be a certain duty to every soul but only to the really fit,
as to themselves, and visibly fit as to the Church, to receive them. No
absolute command, no absolute duty.

His Admonition as to Presumption in coming, the Lord also set home upon his
own heart as to his presumption in admitting.

Now we come to his second Sermon, where he undertakes very cursorily to answer
many Objections that Learned and Godly men have made against his judgment.

Answer to the Second Sermon.
FIrst, As to his Preface, he says, He is forced to serve in more words then
enough.

We believe it true, for it were better we dare say he had said nothing; And
for his Prayer, That if his Book grieve any of the Lords little Ones (as we
believe it does thousands) that the Lord would blot out his Sermon and his sin.

Ans. Amen.

The first Objection he undertakes to answer, is, This doctrine will take the
use of the keys and leave us no discipline.

To this he answers, 1. By way of concession, He grants a Discipline, and that
the want of it is to be bewailed, and yet has a salvo a new one indeed, for
this by answering that the Objection goes upon false surmises about
excommunication.

It surmiseth (says he) Church Discipline to lie in a suspension from the
Sacrament, etc.

For if that be the end of it, what is this but to gratify a profane person
in keeping him from the Sacrament, who never intended or never cared to come
thither? To this purpose he speaks.

Ans. No, Will not profane Persons come? This is a large extension of charity;
there are we fear hundreds of Congregations, may we not say thousands? which
cohsist of little else, and yet through custom, if they have not the Communion
once a year, and so go to play in their best clothes afterward, they will
think themselves greatly wronged.

Briefly, That this is one end of Church Discipline, to preserve the honor of
Christ and purity of his Ordinances, we do with all godly Writers upon this
Subject, assent, and not only in reference to reforming the offender, as p. 32.
he himself implies; It excludes them from the fellowship of the Saints, whose
fellowship is chiefly in this Ordinance, and therefore called the Communion,
that so the fellowship of Saints may not be like the fellowship of the children
of the devil.

This insinuates also No profaning of this Ordinance more then the other, But
Sir, was not there more care taken to prevent the profaning the Passover under
the Law, then the other ordinary worship, the hearing of the Law expounded, etc.

Were not the Corinthians in a special manner punished for the profaning of
the Lords Supper; says Pareus on 1 Cor. 11.20. on these words, This is not to
eat the Lords Supper: Adeo tenera res est, Sacramentum; Non leviter adulterant,
sed destruuut, etc, (...) It is not to eat the Lords Supper; It Is to destroy
and make void the very nature of the Ordinance, when so polluted by a profane
regardlesse mixture.

Page 33. Says he [It supposes a near essential relation between this
Excommunication and communion;] And so goes on to refell it, which we need not
repeat.

Ans. There is no such thing supposed in the Objection, Excommunication has a
relation of subserviency to the communion, though not essential, but to the
well-being of it, that holy things be not prostituted nor given forth to such
as Christ never intended them, viz. his profane enemies, or such who refuse
his yoke, being called upon to profess subjection to it.

But he brings in one objecting: Is it not a heavy case that we have no
discipline? True, says he, yea, it is true, that when Jesus Christ has given
power to his Churches to reform and exercise discipline, they cast the want of
it upon the Magistrate, and do nothing toward it.

But what then, says he, Shall we have no worship?

Ans. No pure worship in this Ordinance, but such as God and his holy people
abhor.

The second Objection he undertakes to answer is, viz. That the most of men are
wholly unfit, and not capable of this Ordinance, and not able to prepare and
examine themselves, therefore no free Admission. There is (says he) a manifest
weakness in this arguing from men's disability to their duty: He conceits as to
the Churches part, who can but look to an outward capacity, and instanceth in
Judas, etc.

Ans. But Sir, as easily as you hush up this Argument, It Is more to be
considered and laid to heart, how unfit the most people are, having never had
the preaching of the Gospel with them in its power, in many places, nor were
ever rightly ordered and constituted into a Gospel-Church-state, by a professed
subjection to the Gospel, and giving up themselves to the Lord, and so joining
together to walk in the fellowship of the Gospel, as we have showed, which
however men may skin over, we verily believe the Lord will in his time manifest
to be a holy truth.

Now as to his answer, That it is a manifest weakness to argue from men's
unability to their duty.

This has been answered and cleared; It Is not every man's duty to come to the
Sacrament, as we have distinguished, unless so and so prepared and qualified;
Unability to prepare themselves is a sufficient reason to themselves to
refrain, and to the Church to keep them off: And whereas he says, The Church
is only to look to an outward capacity; Very true, if an outward capacity be
rightly defined: But gross ignorance and living in open known sins, and
reviling of godliness, is not an outward capacity; Which all along his Book
upon his grounds, the mere name of a Christian, though never so vile, is his
outward capacity.

Next as to the Peoples part he answers 3. things.

1. There Is no duty a natural man can do rightly, nor hear, nor pray,
therefore let him do nothing, let him have a Writ of ease for all, etc. This is
his first in substance.

Repl. First, Then it seems a natural man so understood to be by himself and
the Church, may come to the Lords Supper; Whereas Mr Humphreys well knows none
but professing Saints in a judgment of charity were ever admitted; if they be
rightfully within the pale of the Church, they ought to be so esteemed, nothing
to the contrary appearing; but to make the same latitude of Prayer and the
Word, with the Lords Supper, (the former for converting this of the Sacrament
only to such as are supposed to be converted in the Judgment of the Church) is
a monstrous Solcecisme, Mere Heathens are allowed and invited to come to the
one, never to the other; Now he is pleased to call this kind of arguing
against his judgment in this thing, Beating the air with a Feather.

Sir, Those pillars of truth, that holy men have erected by the good hand of
God against their loose aerie tenet will stand, and be glorious in the eyes of
the Lord and his people, when yours shall be for a hissing unto both. Is the
Ordinance of Parliament enumerating abundance of scandalous. crimes with advice
had with the Assembly of Divines to debar persons from the Lords Supper,
nothing but beating the air with a feather?

2. His second Answer, He would have every man do what he can, etc.

Answ. Right, If a poor soul tender up himself to the Lord and his people, and
complain of his weakness, and profess to do what by grace he is able, Who
doubts of such a man's fitness?

His third Answer is, Stating of a poor humbled sinner heavy laden with sin,
laying hold of the promise, etc. As if any body scrupled such a one, but
inviteth them with all tenderness; what is this to a stubborn, ignorant,
impenitent sinner, that comes customarily, and returns to his sin; and will not
come near his Minister to be instructed in private, but revileth him, if holy,
as the most do?

The third Objection, But is not the Ordinance taken in vain against the third
Commandment?

To this he Answers, He grants, on the Receivers part, but not on the
Admitters, he is to do his duty, and leave the success to God.

Answ. This is the Question begged, we deny it the Admitters duty, if the
persons are scandalous, they are to keep the Sanctuary of the Lord from
defiling; which duty being a minor Excommunication, is supposed in the greater
Excommunication put into the hands of Church Officers, being one of the Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven committed unto them.

2. This duty is supposed, in keeping our selves pure from the blood of all men.

3. In our duty of fidelity to the mysteries of God.

4. In duty of fidelity to the peoples souls. His instances in Christ's
preaching of the Gospel, inviting all, has been answered; He never invited all
to the Lords Supper, nor did the Apostles till in Church Fellowship; if he
account all the people of England fit in the condition they are, to be
continued in the Fellowship of the Church, and no need of Reformation and
drawing in such that will come under Discipline to a closer union and order in
the Gospel; then he not only pleads for this Free-Admission, but strikes indeed
at the very root of all Reformation, which the truth is, this licentious
principle sufficiently does.

The third Objection he would Answer is, Holy things to holy men.

Now the Answer he here gives discovers the mind of the Author more then any:

He distinguishes of holiness, Outward, Inward: He says, Outward holiness
consists in bare profession, and name of Christians, and so are Saints by
calling: That of inward holiness we need not mention.

Repl. We reply to him, That bare profession and name of Christian is not
enough to denominate Saints by Calling; even a whole Nation of people may take
up the Name of Christian, and profession, from the Magistrates severe Law: As
all the people of England did in the several former changes, and were commanded
to hear the Service Book, and to Receive once a year; these are not like Saints
by calling; which is, when upon the preaching of the Gospel to them, and the
Call of it, they willingly profess to answer the Call of the Gospel, and to
give obedience to it.

2. Such as are styled, 1 Cor. 1.2. Called to be Saints, or Saints by calling,
are also said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus. Paul in a judgment of charity,
esteemed the Church of Corinth to be such; for he writes to the Church of God
at Corinth. Now will Mr Humfreys dare in his most extensive charity to call
such who have taken up the Name of Christian, and profession upon a slender
account, the Lord knows, such as are men affectedly ignorant, common
swearers, unclean, revilers, prophaners of the Sabbath, to be sanctified in
Christ Jesus? Besides, Sir, Is not knowledge and conversation required to make
up visible Saints, as well as bare profession, and the Name of Christian? 2 Timothy 2.19.
Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. Romans 1.18
Is not this to hold the truth in unrighteousness? Tit. 1.16.
To profess to know God, but in works deny him? Oh how does this kind of
arguing nuzzle poor creatures in their woeful condition, and heighten the
wicked in their wickedness? say they, they are Saints by calling, they make
profession, and have the Name of Christians, and in hell they curse Ministers
eternally for thus deluding them: Nay do not the most of people hate, yea many
profess to hate the very name of Profession, and the very name of Saints, and
most will say They are not to be Saints on earth, but in heaven; Is this
sufficient outward holiness?

But says he, A visible Ordinance to a visible Church.

That Is true, If this visible Church be rightly constituted and ordered; but if
it be miserably corrupted, and abound with all iniquity, as the most do; If the
Lords servants shall labor to keep up such corruptions, as this opinion does,
we may tremble whether the Lord will not even root out this visible Church and
profession; as he threatens us often severely in his Word.

He further brings in an objection, viz. Do we not hereby make our selves one
with the wicked with whom we join; and can we have communion with Christ and
Belial?

He answers by way of concession, We do and must be one with all that join in
the same profession, as members of the same visible Church, we are not one with
them in their evil courses, we disclaim them wholly in the impiety of their
conversations, etc.

Answ. What kind of joining together in profession our Parochial Churches
have had, we will not now further debate: All come to Church, and, as he says,
we may go to Church with all (wherein he bath gratified the ignorant with a
corrupt notion) and few have any further notion of a Church, then the place
they went in, nor what duties are required of Church Members one to another,
and the Lord knows, and it is too apparent, there is no practice of them.

2. But Sir, for the sanctified ones of Christ Jesus to join as one body in
Church Fellowship with haters of godliness, the power of it, Is it not to make
themselves one body with the wicked and unclean? 1 Cor. 10.17, 18. though they
make profession, yet being wicked, Is not this to join as one body with the
wicked? Bare profession does not take away their wickedness; now is not this a
great abomination to make up such a body to Jesus Christ? Lord, these members
are good enough for thee, though corrupt and abominable: Besides, are not such
members to be cut off, even chiefly for this reason, that Christ's body should
not appear with the members of Satan?

3. Is not there a duty in Matthew. 18. charged upon every Churchmember to
reprove his brother, so upon all the Churches by Paul, and is not every
Churchmember guilty of his brothers sin, who does not his duty in this thing?
1 These. 5.14, etc. 2 These. 3.15.
specially when they are to come together in this great Ordinance? But that
indeed he pleads for, is for every one to look to himself (though a hint to the
contrary in the close) as he speaks before; for regard to othere he much
sleights it; no matter for Christ's honor in his worship or thy Brothers soul,
every body save one if he can: A true note of formality.

4. But, Sir, farther, are we not partakers of the impieties of the wicked in
this thing, in communicating with them? Is it not an impiety for men in
ungodliness to communicate? If then we communicate with them, we communicate in
their impieties, specially since a command of Christ lies upon every
Communicant to labor the preventing his impiety, which doing not, they come to
the Ordinance with sin upon their souls.

But, says he, I will go with the wickedest man alive to Church, but not to
the Alehouse.

Answ. His going to Church we have spoken to: But, Sir, if you allow the
wickededst man alive to be in your Church truly so called, whereof you are a
Pastor, and join with him, and give him this Ordinance without particular
admonition of him, not joining with the better to keep him off; we tremble to
conceive that the Lords hand will be upon you, and such that make so slight of
it.

As to what he urges out of Austin, his remisness (though otherwise a precious
witness of the Lord) in point of Church Censures, is not approved by the Godly
Learned; we will therefore take notice of his Scriptures.

The first Scripture is Joh. 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit;
he should add what follows, (...), he takes it away. Grant it be meant of
Christ's power at the last day, yet when such a branch shall bring forth cursed
fruit, or appear to bring forth no good fruit at all, and so appear not to be
of Christ's planting, he is to be cut off by the Church, as he allows by his
Excommunication; or else what will he make of that Ordinance?

2. Mr Goodwins Interpretation of this Scripture, in his Treatise of Growth,
will salve it, if there were any difficulty in it, who reads it thus. Every
branch that brings forth not fruit in men; and this, says he, the Syriack
Translation makes for also; though they do some good, yet it is not fruit,
because not in Jesus Christ; which may well allude to such Professors who bring
some kind of fruit in profession and moral conversation, but yet have no root
in Christ; and for such the Church proceeds not against, if they are duly taken
into the Church, till their unsoundness appears by outward practice; and though
Christ does not expressly give forth command to the Church, to cut off visibly
unsound branches here, it is enough he does in other places.

His second Scripture is 2 Pet. 2.1. There are some that deny the Lord that
bought them.

Answ. Yea such in the words immediately going before as bring in damnable
heresies: Now though such did thus apostatize, that were received into the
Church, as bought by Christ (which is meant by their denying the Lord that
bought them) must they be continued and admitted to the Lords Supper? then this
is the argument, Such as bring in damnable heresies, and deny Christ, may and
ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper: It seems Turcism and Christianity may
well enough mix with Mr Humfreys his good leave: We had thought at least
Heretics were to be rejected by 1 Titus 3.10.

His next Scripture is Heb. 10.29. compared with 2.9. and 2 Cor. 5.14. There
are some that are sanctified with the blood they trample upon, etc.

Answ. From hence he would argue, Tramplers on the blood of Christ may come;
How tender is Mr H. of his Saviors blood?

But, says he, they are said to be sanctified, though tramplers.

Answ. That is, they were externally sanctified or set apart in Baptism, but
now by their Apostasy and falling off from Christianity, they did slight and
scorn the blood of Christ, as a common thing, not worthy to be owned; Now
what is this to his purpose? It Is said, they had forsaken the Assemblies of the
Church, v. 25. therefore they did not come to the Lords Supper; but were,
indeed, such as had sinned against the holy Ghost.

But yet tender Mr Humfrey is pleased to style these branches of Christ, though
ungodly Professors: It seems with him, ungodly Professors, renouncers of the
faith, tramplers upon the blood of Christ, Apostates, damnable Heretics, must
be in a visible esteem, branches of Christ, and so admitted to all
Church Priviledges, even the choicest, the Seal of Christ's Supper; for Mr H.
puts up an absolute plea for them: What can a man more strongly plead for the
kingdom of the devil then this? We believe his profane party will be here
ashamed of him. Yet the confidence of the man is such, that he cries Victory to
himself and followers, upon this most absurd and abominable arguing, and
abusing the holy Word of God: Observe Reader, he puts the stresse of his cause
mainly upon it: If thou art so blind, senseless, and mad to believe him, he
tells thee the matter is ended on his side.

And further, That an outward historical faith gives an outward Church right to
the elements.

Answ. We deny it, if it appear to be but an historical faith, by an ungodly
life.

The fourth Objection he undertakes to answer is, The Seal is set to a blank,
if all be admitted.

He Answers first by opening how the Sacramentis a Seal, Not of our faith, but
of the Covenant on Gods part. Now, says he, the Covenant and Seal remain firm,
and all the unbelief in the world, cannot make it of no effect.

Answ. 1. The Scripture says, that Circumcision to Abraham was the Seal of the
righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.

2. If it be the Seal of the Covenant on Gods part, as of one party being
agreed, yet if a soul do not accept of, and agree to the terms of it, it is but
as a blank to him, there being not a mutual astipulation and agreement on both
parts, and so such a soul has no good by it: If by this he would encourage a
poor trembling soul, who doubts of his faith, he may make use of it, it is not
of such we here dispute of.

But he puts the Objection forward, viz. Were it not absurd for a man to set
his Seal, where there has been no agreement and transactions before? so do
unregenerate men, who come to the Sacrament without that solemn giving up the
soul to God, as he ought who enters into Covenant with him.

To this he Answers, That there are too many come absurdly and wickedly, etc.
Now, says he, Though the receiver fail on his part in his solemn mutual
engagement (whereof he is to repent) yet as for the Minister and Church there
is a true seal to a true Copy, etc.

Answ. Now we reply to him, There is a true Seal to a true Copy, but not to be
delivered to rebels, unless they come professing humbly to accept the terms of
it: Here is the thing we stick at, we require, and so we verily believe does
the Lord, that the Receiver ought solemnly to profess and give up himself to
God, and enter into Covenant with him before he be admitted by them to the Seal
of it, if the person do not this in sincerity, let him look to that; but that
he do it is the Churches part to require of him, without which we believe he
cannot fully acquit the Church as he undertake to do, p. 47. And without this,
instead of (nothing) being out of order (as he speaks) there is hardly any
thing in order: Now if the receiver do this, the Minister and Church receive
him in the judgment of Love, as a regenerate person; and so they do not sin in
offering the Sacrament as a Seal on Gods part.

But, says he, The Sacrament seals generally the truth of the Covenant freely
to all, engaging them unto it, and the interest and benefits of it to every
single person upon the terms, conditions, tenor of the Gospel.

Answ. With this notion, which he says has layn as an Embryon a long time, he
professes himself and another piercing Godly man to be converted with it: We
shall not judge them in this their conversion, but take boldness from the
deceit we have learned in our own hearts, That it is no hard matter to get
distinctions to pacify the conscience in a troublesome work, as the practice of
Reformation is: We answer, the blood of Christ seals the Covenant of God, but
when it is offered in the sign of it, the Sacrament, it is to such persons, who
accept of the Covenant upon the terms and conditions of it (as himself speaks)
and of the blood of Christ thereby signified, and it seals to none but to them
who have communion with the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. therefore it does
not generally seal to all. The Sacrament is not said to seal the Covenant to
all; it is the Seal of the Covenant, but it seals it to none but to the Believer,
who is to engage unto it, first, Sincerely, as to his own interest in it.
Secondly, Professedly and explicitly, as to the Churches satisfaction: To seal
any thing to a person, implies a reciprocal agreement. We humbly take leave to
say, that as he professes his greatest satisfaction in this argument, his
greatest mistake lies in it, in confounding of things that ought to be
distinguished.

We say, the tender of the Covenant is first in the preaching of the Gospel,
upon which believers profess to own and accept of, and enter into it, (not by
a mere tacit coming) which having done before the Lord and the Church, then, as
the Sacrament shall be administered, the Seal is annexed to it, and a believer
receives the blood of Christ Jesus as a Seal of Gods promises in the remission
of his sins, and so to every covenanting person (professing to do so) the
Covenant is offered and sealed to him, and to none other.

Now in stead of this, we conceive through the whole Treatise Mr H. would have
a Sacrament, which (being the Seal of the Covenant) is to be tendered to all,
be they what they will, without any previous act of the Receivers, either
confession, profession or covenanting with or before the Church, which was
never the way of the Gospel in admission of Church Members, and so it holds the
same in the use of the Supper, when though baptized they have never given any
account of themselves, or are profane in their lives.

Further, he urges his subtle Syllogism to analyze the whole argument,

The Covenant, says he, means thus, He that believes shall be saved: add, I
believe, ergo I shall be saved. Now, says he, the Sacrament seals to the
major, not to the minor, to Gods own Word, not to ours.

Answ. First, The major or first proposition is rather a conditional promise
of the Covenant, then the Covenant it self; and so the Sacrament seals
conditionally. But without these quirks, If the Sacrament seal to every
Believer, then if I add, But I am a Believer, then it seals to me: and though
the Scripture do not speak of any particular man, who is a Believer, yet in
such a Syllogism it it speaks as fully, and even as satisfyingly to a poor soul
as if it did: Sir, the Sacrament seals the truth of mercy and grace and life to
poor souls that come rightly to it, and not to abstracted propositions and
notions, with which you puzzle weak people.

Again, stick to the proposition as really applied, the Sacrament seals to
this, He that believes shall be saved, and the Sacrament confirms it to him,
then let none but such as shall be charitably judged Believers professing faith
and obedience be admitted to it.

Obj. 5. The fifth Objection he undertakes to Answer, Page 49.
viz. The Covenant belongs not to all, therefore the seals neither.

To this he Answers, by distinguishing of the Covenant, sometimes taken for the
absolute promises, etc. sometimes for the tenor of the Gospel in Gods revealed
will, and so it runs on these terms, Whosoever believes shall be saved, and
whether this belongs to all, it is no question.

Answ. It Is true, salvation belongs to all in the tender of it, as himself says
in the next page; The conditional Covenant is tendered in the word, and sealed
to in the Sacrament: Now as the Covenant is tendered in the Word, if souls
profess to accept of the tender of it, and to Covenant with him, then it is
sealed in the Sacrament. The Sacrament is a Seal between God and the Believer,
and supposes believing, intended to Seal mercy to professing covenanting
Believers, and upon that score the Church does administer it, receiving them as
such.

Next, he declares his own practice, That he shows his hearers the conditions
of the Covenant, such that accept of them, there the Seal of God is ready, let
them put to their hands and seals, etc. This the import.

But Sir, Is it not more proper, orderly, and satisfying, that such persons
upon the tender of the Covenant, should declare and profess to own and enter
into the Covenant of God? Must all be done in a huddle the same hour, and the
people be as mutes in this great concernment? Would it not be for the honor of
Jesus Christ, that people with their own mouths confess him, according to the
measure God has given them, more for the satisfaction of the Minister and
Church, yea, and for the comfort of the Professor, then thus hand over head to
deal in this weighty matter? Specially since this was never had from the people
of England, as we have before opened, who are so settled in a corrupt, formal,
customary way in the use of this Ordinance, for the most part, That talk you of
Covenant and Seal, and what you will, They must have the Communion, though to
the great prejudice of their souls; And it is from these sad corruptions, by the
iniquity of former and present times; As the London Ministers declare in their
Plea for Church Government; That such a Profession and trial is first to be
had of every person; seeing the abuse of this Ordinance was formerly and
horribly profane.

In the close (says he) This Sacrament does more properly belong to him who is
not yet in Covenant with God, supposing now he resolves to enter into Covenant
with him.

This is a strange doctrine, and we verily believe never started before, Here
is still the same confusion; But Sir, In this Ordinance does not the Church
(for here we deal with it upon this account, which is the Churches and
Ministers duty in this Ordinance) suppose every receiver in Covenant before,
first as tendered into it in Baptism, and secondly, as requiring a personal
owning and professing of the Covenant and the conditions of it (which was ever
the practice of the Primitive Churches, as has been urged) and so administer
the Lords Supper to them?

2. How does he here confound the order and even make void the care of the
Church in this matter.

Concerning the tender and offer of it, we have already spoken; We assert there
ought to be a previous profession of acceptance of the tender and offer by
every soul, before the seal is administered to him, or else all order and purity
will be destroyed.

And therefore we conclude this, that the Covenant belongs not to all, so as to
have it sealed unto them, unless they first visibly profess to own it and
accept of it before the Church; The former neglect of which causes now a
requiring of it of every person, or else godly men see not how Reformation will
be attained to.

But he produces a Reply to his former answer; viz. What right does this give
him to the Covenant?

He answers with the main scope of every Argument he produces; As the
Sacrament is a showing forth of Christ with a tender of the Covenant in his
blood, there is an open, free, general right to it for all that will come into
Christ.

We answer, The Sacrament is a showing forth of Christ with a tender, etc. But
to whom? To professing believers that have been orderly received into the
Church upon the Gospel preached to them? And for such as profess before to
come into Christ and subject to discipline, and whose conversations do not deny
it, at least professing serious repentance for the sins they have lived in;
which he grants to be the duty of every receiver, as to his own conscience, in
his former answer, p. 50. But this we assert to be needful to be professed as
to the satisfaction of the Church; Due respect and tenderness being had to the
modesty of any and to particulars.

But he further distinguishes of a right of coming, There Is a right of
obligation and a right of privilege; for the right of obligation in the
Ministers offer of Christ freely, and the Peoples receiving him on his own
terms, I do avouch an universal right.

Ans, This is true in a sense, so order be observed; If indeed a people receive
Christ on his own terms (as he speaks) and profess to do so, then an
obligation in the Minister to give the Sacrament; And the people being in their
own consciences, in some good measure satisfied, they came sincerely before the
Lord, having examined their own hearts, there is a right of obligation upon them
also to come.

But if he mean an absolute obligation of all to come, we deny it, unless he
is ahle to examine himielf, and does so; and professes to the Church to take
Christ on his own terms, and his conversation does not deny it.

Next he brings in an humble soul afraid of his own unworthiness, yet comes
resolving to give up himself to the Lord, etc.

We say, An humble soul will come to his or her Minister, and profess to do
so; And we wonder he should put the case of humbled souls who are to be invited
and encouraged; We here dispute against him concerning the obstinately
ignorant, superstitious Formalists, and the profane, who for the most part
scorn at Reformation and Discipline; Of such we say they have no right to come
till humbled, and profess to be so, nor is it the Ministers duty, but sin to
receive them, specially seeing he may prevent it if he will do his duty.

The Text he uses further to prove an universal right to every Ordinance, is
Isa. 66.23. viz. And it shall come to pass that from one new Moon to another,
and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before the
Lord.

Ans. Sure this is little for his purpose; We could answer, That many eminent
Divines do understand this New Heavens and Earth in this Chapter of the New
Jerusalem in Heaven: But we insist not upon it: Grant it be meant of worship
in the Church-Militant; What can be gathered from it but that All Flesh, that
is, some of all Nations shall subject to Gospel Worship, (for we presume he
does not understand it of every individual soul:) But sure it shall be in
Christ's order, specially in the later times, when Christ shall come as a
Refiner of of his worship and people, yea, of the sons of Levi in a special
manner, that they shall offer up pleasant offerings to the Lord, Mal. 3. That
all sorts of profane persons, no evidence of a change, shall come into the
Lords Temple, and profane the holy things of Christ, is not in the least
measure there meant, but the contrary; first orderly received into the
fellowship of the Church, and then, if not scandalous, the sealing Ordinance of
the Supper.

The sixth Objection he would refell is, viz. The Sacrament is not a converting
Ordinance; we preach to all to convert them, but we may administer only to the
regenerate to confirm them;

To this he answers, That he acknowledges Divines have usually so stated it;
Baptism for Initiation, the Supper for Confirmation, attributing our new birth
to the former, etc. Now (says he) I take a grant of the one to be a sufficient
medium to prove the other.

Ans. But Sir, you well know, that the Baptized in the Gospel declared visible
conversion before they were baptized; He that believes (that is of grown years)
shall be baptized; and the same reason of this Ordinance also in this respect.
How he takes the concession of one to be a grant of the other, we know not.

Page 55. Aye but (says he) it is true of the same persons, but as for others
not yet converted, and humbly coming hither for conversion, there is no
Scripture nor reason to the contrary, but he may be converted by it.

We answer, To come humbly for conversion to this Ordinance, supposes
conversion begun, and so that soul comes for further conversion, which is one
right use of this Ordinance; And whereas he says, there is no Scripture nor
reason to the contrary; We say there is both; It Is enough the Lord has made no
promise to it for conversion.

And that it was always used by such who were supposed to be converted; The
fellowship of the Saints; as we will presently show; and so ought it now only
to be used.

He repeats his former argument, that the Sacrament is a visible word holding
forth Christ and the Covenant to the sight, therefore converting, as the Gospel
doing the same to the hearing.

Ans. Which thing is only asserted, but not proved, but by improper allusins.

The Centurions believing by seeing Christ only on the Cross.

We answer, This was miraculous and extraordinary, not in the way of an
Ordinance, which is the thing in question; With this Argument the Papists
plead for Crucifixes.

2. Contemplation of the Creature-Sacrifices.

Ans. That rests to be proved; Besides, we deny not but any may be present to
see the celebration of the Supper, if that may do them good.

3. Sight of Miracles, etc.

Ans. These were ordained by Christ to work faith, He has not proved the
Sacrament is so: Ordinarily Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.14. and not by
seeing; It Is not good arguing what Christ is able to do, to what he has made
no promise to do. And to prostitute this holy Ordinance upon this account, and
so to go out of Christ's way and method (in reference to what he is able or may
do) is not warrautable.

This Argument was devised to cheer up such souls who are a little affected at
the Lords Supper, who know little what conversion means; By this Argument known
opposers of Truth and Purity ought to be invited to come for their conversion.

Besides, Mr Humphreys nor any other, we humbly conceive, ought to admit or
contrive any in the fellowship of his Church, but whom in a judgment of
charity he supposes converted, or has no reason to conclude the contrary.

But let us examine his Argument, which he calls all the world to answer, viz.
To show forth the death of Christ is the means of conversion, but the Sacrament
is a showing forth the death of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.26.

Ans. It Is true in the preaching of the Gospel, the showing forth of Christ's
death is a means of conversion, but not in the Lords Supper, where it is only
held forth, and showed forth to supposed Believers; If it be converting in this
Ordinance, the Apostles then did not use all the means of grace for conversion,
They should have celebrated the Supper at every Sermon, and have bid the
people, Come and eat, for here also the death of Christ is showed forth to
convert you, which he will never find practiced; If he say, The first Churches
did every Lords day celebrate the Supper; That was among such as were esteemed
Saints, already converted (as all within the Church are supposed in a
charitable judgment) and in Christ's order; Away with these Fallacies.

But this he would prove further from the words of Justitution, Take and eat,
[Take for such as have not Christ, and eat for such as have already received
him.

Ans. A been compositis ad male divisa; We take this very unsuitable to the
parts of the Author; We presume a distinction never heard of before; As it
has no appearance of ground, so we believe it not considerable with the
weakest.

If this had been the sense, why had not Christ and the Apostles said to
Unbeleevers Take, and to Believers Eat: This taking, is the putting forth and
exercising faiuh before wrought; which we still say this Ordinance supposes,
till he shall prove the contrary.

He puts two or three cases, A moral man coming and doing his best to prepare
himself, and so comes, Do we think to such a man this Ordinance is fruitless?
Then God help us.

But that is not enough to prove it is not, Yea (says he) shall not his
examination, Prayers, Confession, Meditation, be conducing?

Briefly, These are not like the acts of a moral man, Examination of
Repentance and Faith, supposes a beginning of both; And when Ministers call
upon moral men to examine themselves in point of Repentance, the Spirit works
by it if that soul really do it; yet we say, that if all these be but the acts
of a moral man, there is no promise for his receiving good by this Ordinance;
This is a good Argument to keep his rich Neighbors in peace: Hab. 1.15, 16.
shows it an old trade.

2. He puts the case of a poor humble Believer, that comes hither to meet with
Christ.

Ans. We wonder at this case, the Question being not about such, being out of
question by all, but such ought and are invited to come, to receive strength
and comfort by this Ordinance: so the two Disciples of Emmaus, which he
instanceth in, they were professing Disciples, and no question, converted
before, though but weak.

He brings in a reply of such as oppose him in this; Although a man may be
converted at, it is not by the Sacrament, it is occasionally, but not
intentionally a converting Ordinance.

To this he Answers, This being undeniably granted of our opposites, the matter
is upon the point yielded, All It may be's, all occasions must be taken for our
salvation.

Answ. When godly men say a man may be converted at the Lords Supper, but not
by it, etc. We conceive they mean specially by the Sermon or exhortation before
it, where all may be present; And if he be then converted, it will be meet for
him to stay till another opportunity, that he may have a more spiritual
discerning of that Ordinance: Mr Humfreys knows conversion usually begins with
conviction of sin, and though the seed of faith may be then sown, yet it acts
little at first; Christ not usually giving a view of himself in a promise at
the first conviction; In such a strait a poor trembling soul will scarce
venture to come.

But granting him as much as he would have, his It may be, the point is not
therefore yielded as he would persuade his Reader and himself: The question is
not, as has been alleged, What God can do, or what may be, but of the
revealed will of God, and the ordinary way of his dispensation of grace, which
must be our rule to walk by.

He would further back this argument with three considerations, wholly, as his
confidence leads him, To root out this subtlety, which the spirit of error
has insinuated.

Answ. This spirit of error as he vainly boasts, will appear a spirit of
truth and holiness in the Lords servants, when his delusions and profane
assertions will stink in the nostrils of the Saints, as it already, blessed be
God, does; The clouds of holy Witnesses we might allege against him, might
cause him to blush at such an arrogant passage.

But, Page 59.
says he, The Sacraments and all Ordinances are primarily means of grace, it
is but in a remote sense they are means of conversion or confirmation.

Ans. Now what a rooting out of this subtlety is here? Upon what Scripture does
he bottom his vain distinction? We say, All Ordinances are means of grace, but
according to Christ's order and institution, The Word for converting grace, The
Word and Sacrament also for confirming; and so they were ordained and ever used
by Christ and the Apostles.

Next, he distinguishes of conversion, 1. Outward, from heathenism to the
profession of Christ, we do not stand to say the Sacrament is such a converting
Ordinance. 2. True inward conversion wrought by the Word, not from any active
power it has in it self, but per modum objecti, etc. as an instrument used by
the Spirit, so the Sacrament, etc.

This is the substance of the second.

Ans. He intends by this to prove that if it may occasionally, though not
intentionally convert, then all may come to it.

1. To his distinction of conversion we Answer, That all that are converted by
the Word, and so received into the Church, are supposed to be truly converted,
and so have this Ordinance administered to them; and therefore this destroys
all he has said in this particular: If it may be instrumental to inward
effectual conversion, why may not his It may be, reach as well to Pagans, as
those Hypocrites in the Church? And to this he adds, We do not stand to say it
ought, and let it be imagined, etc. As if he had a mind to it; for indeed it
will as naturally follow, if he answer, No, it ought not, because Sacraments
are only for such as are within the Church; then sure he more fastens what he
pretends in this reason to root out, for none are to be received or continued
in the Church, but such as are visible Saints, supposed to be converted; as
himself has granted; and so by consequence it is not intended a converting
Ordinance, but for the Communion of Saints.

And whereas he says, The Spirit works by the Sacrament, as by the Word, by
way of an instrument: and so if the Sacrament do occasionally convert, it is
enough; It has been answered, that this conversion at the Sacrament, which
some godly men assert, is meant, not precisely of the Sacrament, but of Prayer,
Preaching, Exhortation, etc. Besidcs the word is intentionally, by the revealed
will of God, an instrument of conversion, and so an Institution of Christ, but
this of the Sacrament is not yet, nor we verily believe ever will, be proved to
be so.

3. He follows this, as if he had gained much by this concession of
Occasionally converting, wherein we fear he wilfully mistakes godly men; who
ever mean it only of the concomitant duties at it, etc. And so he frames to
himself a distinction of principal and subordinate intention of conversion;
The Sacrament has a subordinate intention, etc.

But, Sir, who grants you this distinction that are contrary to your judgment,
That the Sacrament has a subordinate intention of conversion, etc. We know of
none such who speak of it, as occasionally converting do not imply it,
occasionally and intentionally are not subordinate but distinct; besides, Godly
men, as has been showed, do not speak of the Sacrament precisely, when they so
speak; yet how the man pleases himself with his own creature and fancy, and
laughs upon it exceedingly! p. 61, 62.

He further urges, Prayer is not so primarily converting, therefore by this
rule prayer may also be exeluded.

Ans. We need answer no further to this, he frames a shadow and fights against
it; He takes that granted to him, which no judicious Divine we know allows him:
We say Prayer is subordinatly converting, but we deny and leave him to prove,
ad graecas Calendas, that the Sacrament is. We might here reenforce Mr
Gilespyes twenty Arguments to prove the Sacrament not converting, which he will
answer at the same time; but we intend briefness.

The next he Answers to is, But unregenerate men are dead in sin, shall we give
bread to the dead? men must be first born, living, before they can feed.

To this he Answers, If we could conceive any such bread as would fetch life in
a dead man, we would give it him; Now, says Christ, Joh. 6.33. I am the bread
of life, etc.

Ans. This is to beg the question, That the Sacrameut is ordained to fetch life
in a dead man; yea, says he, Christ is the Bread of Life, Here he gratifies
the Papists (as well as the poor, ignorant, and profane people of the Nation)
who understand that Bread in Joh. 6. to be of Sacramental bread, which sound
Divines still oppose; Christ as offered in the Sacrament is not Bread to beget
life, his bare assertion does not prove it; His parallel between Aqua vitae
and Calix vitae, is not worth notice; Or if it were, we believe M. Humphreys
does not know of any Aqua vitae that will beget life in a dead man, though it
may revive where life is remaining. The same we say of the Cup as an ordained
means where Christ is offered.

As to the matter of Judas which he again replys to, we have spoken already;
And we should be too tedious to urge all, What godly men have said for Judas
not receiving the Sacrament.

1. How unlikely it is that the Lord should say to Judas (whom he calls the Son
of Perdition, and a devil) This is my body which was broken for thee, and this
is my blood which was shed for the remission of thy sins, and Thou shall drink
with me in my Fathers Kingdom; All which he spoke to Judas as to the rest, if
he were one.

2. But should we grant he ate, sure Mr Humphreys gains little to his cause;
Judas was not yet convinced before the Church of the fact, having not yet
committed it; If he should have been kept off upon the fear that he might
commit it, Peter might have been as well kept off as he, for he in Christ's
knowledge was to commit a scandalous offense also.

3. Neither will it in the least measure warrant the admitting of all sorts
now; Judas was a person that preached and professed Christ, and for a time
forsook the world to follow him, was no scoffer or reviler at the power of
godliness, and had given no open scandal to his Brethren; We wish it could be
said so of all such as cry for Free Admission upon this ground.

The eighth Objection he would answer to, is, Unworthy Receivers are guilty of
Christ's blood, and eat their damnation, therefore we must not allow a Free
Admission.

To this he answers, 1. As to the Churches part. 2. As to the Receivers, etc.

For the Churches part, this cannot any way concern them. There is a general
Command, Do this, Every man is to examine himself, and he receives damnation
(...), to himself, they receive not ours.

Answ. 1. His verily believe does not prove it does not concern the Church; The
Church is concerned to keep her self from pollution and ruin, both which are
brought upon it by this vile practice; If the Church, both Officers and
Members, do not their utmost to prevent a manifestly impenitent sinner from
coming to this Ordinance, they are guilty of his sin, as has been proved; We
are (says Zanchy) violaters of charity and guilty of iniquity, Lib. 1. Ep. p.
26.
to suffer men to damn themselves with the Sacrament, which we might suspend
from them.

2. Such a levity is the way to bring upon Ministers the punishment of Eli, the
sin being much like it.

3. Is it nothing to a Minister to see a people he is sent to save, in Gods
hand, eating and drinking damnation to themselves? Chrysostom protested, he
had rather give his body to a Murderer, then the Sacrament to a scandalous
person; And Calvin, that he would rather put his hand into the fire, etc.

But to his reason, says he, There is a general command, Do this.

Ans. We wonder he will so inconsiderately call it a general command, when he
knows 'twas spoken only to the 12. that ate with him.

Oh but says he, Let him examine himself, and he damns himself, not another.

Ans. It does not follow, that because every person coming is bound to examine
himself, therefore no body else is, Though he receives damnation to himself,
yet it does not thence follow, that others have not a hand in forwarding his
damnation, if they do not their duty to prevent it; Though a man murdering
himself is chiefly guilty of the fact, yet it follows not but those are in a
measure guilty who prevent him not when it is in their power; Every man shall
give an account of himself to God, yet their blood will I require at thy hands,
says the Lord.

Why should God say, Be ready to give an account of the hope that is in thee,
if no body have power to require it of him?

We verlly believe Mr Humfreys himself does not conceive those words of
self-examining spoken exclusively; who doubts (unless such as are profane
scorners) but that a Minister is to take all occasions to examine the people he
is sent to, for their further edification, specially when they have been lulled
in ignorance before? It Is indeed a loose and profane assertion, That poor
ignorant creatures and profane wretches must come in a customary way to the
dishonor of Christ, to their own damnation, without repentance; And yet the
admitters no way, no, not any way, as he maintains, concerned in it.

It Is the note of a godly mind to urge Scripture to such ends for which God
ordained them, as this, to press self-examination, not as to make void all
private reproof, admonition, and discipline, contrary to other Scriptures; Woe
to the Land if all were of this loose judgment; Let all people damn themselves
at pleasure by Sacraments, it concerns no body, neither Ministers nor people.

What godly man does not see but this shift is put into the head of carnal
persons by the devil and his factors; to keep them in security, they never
intending to examine themselves, nor are indeed able, and so will not suffer
any man else to do it; It concerns none but himself, says Mr Humfreys.

2. This self-examination may have reference to others judgment of them, viz.
That though the Elders of Corinth did unduly admit them, they were not to rest
on their judgment of them, but to examine themselves; which only can prevent
that judgment of God spoken of 1 Corinthians. 11.31. And the judging of themselvos
there may also refer to the Churches judging, as good Authors conceive.

3. If Persons have been duly received and confirmed into the Church, then it is
supposed they give sufficient satisfaction in point of knowledge, and so that
part of examination by the Eldership or Church, which is now called for in our
times, as to knowledge, would cease; But it is the ignorance of people is now
most complained of, and so examination in this respect more required, because
there has been sufficient means of knowledge but in few places.

But Mr Humfreys would prevent what we have answered by fore-stalling the
Objection, If another should be taking a Cup of poison, shall not we be
partakers of his blood if we do not hinder or forbid him, etc.

Ans. But alas how poorly he wipes it of? What a rattle has he got to still
conscience?

Says he, We have no quum possit, that is, no power to hinder, etc.

Ans. What if he had?

1. Does he not absolutely plead that all are to come, and it concerns no
body, no way, to keep them off?

2. But suppose he would, this will not serve the turn; To whom are the Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven left, to keep off, and cast out primarily, but to a
particular Church? If your people will not submit to discipline, to Christ's
yoke, they are not fit for Sacraments; In a word, That Gospel which declares
their receiving to be a damnable sin, and enjoins all ministerial care to
prevent sin, and save men's souls, does eo ipso, command you to put them back,
and to put your Church into Christ's order that you may do it; No
Gospel-practise puts a necessity upon any man to sin.

Next, He wonders Any religious man should call the Sacrament a cup of poison
seeing it is a cup of blessing: If it prove death to any, it is sin takes an
occasion, etc.

Ans. Sir, What religious man does call it a Cup of poison, in any other sense
then you your self do, that is, as sin taking occasion makes it so? Why will
you gratify men of corrupt minds with such forgeries, to make them hate their
Ministers more?

He re-enforceth his constant Argument, God is able to make it a cup of
blessing, etc.

Ans. That Is not the Query what God is able to do (as has been answered) but
what God has ordained for such and such an end, and what he has promised to
do; And so he has not ordained nor promised this Sacrament to be a Cup of
blessing to an unbeleever, or the worst, as he styles it.

Let us act (says he) with charitable thoughts, and leave the success to God.

Ans. But Sir, you must have ground and rule for your charity; That profane
ignorant persons are Christ's Disciples, is a groundless charity; Besides, what
do you talk of charity in your apprehensions of all that come, seeing you
assert all are to come whether converted or not converted, and the Minister nor
Church is not to consider of it?

His comparison between Preaching the Word and administering the Sacrament, has
been refelled; It Is true Paul preached in every place, though the Word was a
savor of death to some; but Sir, he did not administer the Supper in every
place, but only to professing Saints joined together in the fellowship of the
Gospel; And to administer it to others is not to make this Ordinance a sweet
savor, but a loathing to the zealous and holy God.

2. He comes to the Receivers part, lessening the unworthy Receivers sin, when
'twere his duty to be aggravating and bewailing it: he says,

There is a double duty, A Principal, Do this; An Accessory, Examine; If he
fails in examining himself, and is not prepared, he is to come, etc.

Ans. 1. He well enough knows, but that he would blind poor souls, That Do
this was spoken to Disciples of Christ's Family, not to all; that as often as they
do it, they do it in remembrance of Christ's death, Does it follow therefore
that every one is to do it? A Master of a Feast bids all at his Table eat, all
that are present, does he therefore bid all the Town eat?

2. That which he calls an accessory duty, let a man Examine, is the ground of
his coming, A limitation of the duty, without which none ought to come; but he
urges further,

Those dreadful expressions of being guilty of Christ's blood, and eating
damnation, are not to affright any from coming, etc. No? Not any man? What not
an Idolater? an incestuous person, a hater of the godly with whom he pretends
to communicate as one body? Not one that keeps a Brothell-house, nor a witch,
nor a reviler, etc. Sir, In this your profane Proselytes are ashamed of you;
They will tell you this is larger then 'twas in their old free profane days;
Then the Minister was used to pronounce by way of threatening, If any of you he
a Blasphemer of God, a hinderer or slanderer of his Word, an Adulterer, or be
in malice or envy, or in any other grievous crime, bewail your sin, and come
not to this holy Table; Mark it Reader, Bewail it, and Come not: but says the
Patron of thy sin Mr H. However come.

But Sir, In earnest, Do you conceive those dreadful judgments threatened are
not to affright profane persons? When a profane person hears grievous
judgments threatened to such a practice, ought not that person to refrain it?
No, he says, he ought to prepare himself; That Is true, but the Question is, If
he find himself not prepared, yet hearing such judgments threatened, Whether
he ought to come, Mr H. says, He dare not say he ought not.

What Is this but to encourage poor creatures to rush boldly upon sin and
judgment, which the body of the people of this Nation have long done in a most
abominable manner?

And yet now they must be clapped on the back for it, and they are taught by Mr
H. they ought to come however, and it is the Ministers duty to receive them; How
little has he considered how the people of this Nation are hardened by custom
to come profanely? And let Ministers pronounce a thousand judgments to
unworthy coming, yet it has been their custom to come, to have a communion
and new clothes, and be merry at Easter, Therefore have it they will, or the
Minister shall rue it if it be in their power; specially since it is duty to
come though drunk in that moment; as Free Admission allows.

His assertion is backed with three Queries etc.

1. He distinguishes between the Act of receiving and the unworthiness of it,
the Act is good, though the manner be evil, etc.

Ans. So may the Act of murder be said to be good, as it is an action, or any
other vile action, because it has being, and so good in a Metaphyficall sense,
which we will not puzzle our Reader with, speaking chiefly to the deceived
people; Know Reader, the Scripture calls it damnable sin, to come unworthily,
and be not flattered into sin, by such unsound niceties; There Is no moral good
in the coming, God hates thee in thy coming, thou bring'st greater sin upon thy
soul if thou come unworthily. Ah how are poor ignorant souls strengthened by
this reason? they believe there is some good, and they do some good in coming,
and this makes amends for much profaneness.

He may indeed say as much for the foulest sin in the world, T he act is good,
as it has being, but the sin is in the manner; Eating and drinking simply
considered at the Sacrament is not sin, but ignorance and unworthiness makes
it so.

But, says he, There Is unworthiness upon a Person if he do not come, p. 71.

Answ. But not so great; To be unworthy and come in that unworthiness to a
holy action (which the Word styles damnable) is an aggravation of it, and a
greater sin, and an abominable mocking of God and defiling his Ordinances.

His second Query is, Whether receiving the Sacrament be otherwise damnable
then hearing and praying, which he concludes is not, etc.

Ans. Though to pray and hear in a carnal manner be great sins, yet
unworthiness of Receiving is greater; which those dreadful Expressions in 1
Cor. 11. do witness; beside there lie absolute commands upon every one to hear
and pray, Rev. 13.9. If any man have an ear to hear let him hear, Jer. 10.25.
The action of receiving is of a more tender and holy nature, and the sin of
profaning it greater: So that if a profane person refrains to come, he sins
less; though this does not at all excuse his continuing in profaneness.

But he helps himself with a distinction, whereby he pretends to salve all:
There Is a presumptuous profane way of coming to an Ordinance, or a Christian
coming in conformity to God, etc.

Ans. Here Is a skinning soul-flattering plaster for the Enemies of
Reformation; It Is a sweet bit for the devil to keep up rotten formality: Sir,
Does not he come in a profane presumptuous way, who comes but in an outward
Conformity? Does not the most profane wretch do so? and thinks he does enough,
and covers many sins by it, he will tell you he comes in a conformity to Gods
worship; How many Scriptures might we give him, and we presume not unknown to
him, where the Lord expresses his abhorrency of such worship; See Isa. 1.11.
and 66.5. Jer. 6.7. Chapt. etc. The people there came before God as his people,
in such ways of worship as he appointed; But they came but in an outward
conformity, therefore (says the Lord) it is an abomination to me, an iniquity,
my soul hates it, etc.

Therefore this is a distinction abhorred of the Lord; whoever comes in a mere
outward conformity, comes in a presumptuous profane way.

His third Query, Whether an unregenerate man conceiving himself not worthy,
must never come to the Sacrament, etc.

He answers, Herein my thoughts are apt to run comparatively on the word.

Ans. An unregenerate person finding himself such, is not, as such, to come,
'twas not ordained for his good; Not to sow the first seed of his new birth,
but to strengthen it; 2. We deny to be the same reason of coming to the Word
and Sacrament, for though he has been and is an unworthy hearer, yet he is to
go, because the Word preached is ordained for conversion, but not the
Sacrament, which is for the Communion of Saints; whereas he says, it is a means
of grace, it is a fallacy, it is not a means of the first grace.

He speaks in the close of a soul laying to heart the horror of his sin in
being guilty of Christ's Blood, and so to come.

This is true, and granted, If he does lay it to heart, and profess to do so,
then the Church does encourage him to come.

But we say, This horror of his sin is wrought by the preaching of the Word,
not by the Act of receiving; And we believe a soul made sensible of this
dreadful guilt in his frequent former comings, will tremble to come at that
instant, though he is afterward upon the profession of his sin to be
encouraged; 'twill not hurt him to lie under these humblings; yea, if a poor
creature shall doubt of his regeneration, and so open his condition to the
Minister or the godly people, he is to be encouraged if any appearance of
regeneration in a charitable judgment be upon him.

But says he: If coming unworthily makes a man guilty of Christ's blood, how
much more shall open refusing it, that tramples upon it in this Ordinance?

Ans. Briefly, By continuing in sin and coming to this Ordinance, there is a
more abominable trampling under foot the blood of Christ, because they make it
an unclean thing, Heb. 10.29. by continuing in their uncleanness, and so
trampling upon and despising the ends of Christ's blood, purity and holiness;
It matters not which is precisely the greater sin, it is enough to make a
profane wretch to tremble, that in coming unworthily he becomes guilty of the
Lords blood, etc. So to make him refrain.

The ninth Objection against his judgment, which he brings on to answer, is,
The Ordinance is polluted if all be admitted.

He grants it; To the unworthy Receivers, to whom all things are unclean, but
not to the Admitters unless the unworthy are convicted.

Ans. But Sir, What if the Minister and the rest of the Admitters do not their
duty to convict an ignorant or a profane person, but suffer him to come; When
they have power and command from Christ, as they are a Church, to do so, is it
not then both Ministers and Peoples sin? We dare aver, the Lord will require
it of them without their Repentance, or else Mat. 18. stands for a blank, and
Christ will never take an account of it.

But though this duty be not performed by them, yet they may come fearlesly, as
Mr Humfreys conceives, No more scruple, says he, then if the cloth be not
clean enough on the table.

Ans. Satis profane, an expression unworthy a Christian (that we may not
flatter him) and an abhorring to the Lords people: That a godly soul seeing a
company of profane wretches, enemies to godliness (as what Congregation abounds
not with such?) come to this holy mystery, and though he does not his duty by
private admonition and laboring their conviction, yet he is no more to be
troubled to see the blood of his Savior made an unclean thing, then for an
unclean cloth.

Now Reader, thou feast this Author in his own shape: His profane Proselytes
sure will say he has stretched conscience a little too much for them here.

But he will venture to prove it: In the Law, says he, there was a distinction
of the clean and unclean, which otherwise would defile their Saorifices, and
the Temple; But no such thing now in the Gospel, etc.

Answ. This is the substance of his answer; We Reply; It has been already
proved by us, that the Jews were kept off from the Sacrifices and Passover, as
well for Moral uncleanness, as Ceremonial, Joh. 9.22. and 12.42. Ezra 10.11.
and that the Ceremonial uncleanness was a type of the uncleanness of sin
under the Gospel.

Besides, Was God so zealous of his worship, and the profaning of it then,
that unclean persons were to be cut off, and is there no profaning the holy
mysteries of the Lord Jesus now? Nor no care to be taken that unclean persons
be not suffered to defile them? What a cursed prostitution of the holy things
of God is this? But, says he, There is nothing unclean to us now.

Answ. Aye but there are things that are too holy for the unclean now, as this
holy mystery is.

But to prove there is nothing unclean now, he urges To. 14.14. I know I am
persuaded there is nothing unclean of it self.

Ans. Sir, you know well enough that Paul speaks there of meats, to the
satisfaction of the weak Jews, who took some meats still to be accounted
unclean under the Gospel; But now he convinces them there is nothing, no meat to
be accounted unclean.

What Is this to his purpose to prove there is no polluting the holy Ordinance
of the Lords Supper? unless he will make no difference between common meat,
and the Lords Supper; which the truth is, his Free Admission does not; This is
his argument:

No meat is now unclean, legal uncleanness being taken off, therefore all may
come to the Lords Supper; no polluting of it, or at it.

That of Peter's vision is like it; Jews and Gentiles are to have the Gospel
preached, therefore no man is defiled by communicating with a wicked person,
though he take no care for the prevention of him.

He goes on and urges, Now in the Gospel All Is free, we are to have free
Ordinances.

Ans. But, Sir, In Christ's way, The Gospel preached freely to all, but the
seals of it to professing Saints.

He breaks off with a sharp exhortation to the godly Ministers and people,
thus; My Brethren, there are some touches of the Law and superstition on you,
you know what a sacred thing was made of the Communion Table when the rayl was
about it; Now I pray think how you refine and spiritualize your old
superstition, by putting a spiritual rayl about the Sacrament, when you debar
poor sinners for coming hither: Let us take heed, there will be something of
the Pharisee in these spiritual proud hearts of men.

Ans. The Lord rebuke him for this censorious sarcasm; We look upon this
discovery as the just hand of God upon him.

It Is the language of the formal, lukewarm, profane Ministers and people
against the godly party; Oh, say they, this is their spiritual pride and
Pharisaisme: This passage is nuts for them.

2. It Is very base (to say no more) for a Minister to cast such dirt upon the
fair unblemisht memories of self-denying Saints, who are now fallen asleep in
the Lord; who suffered deprivations, banishments, imprisonments, upon this very
score chiefly, that they would not administer Sacraments to all: And now, says
this Pamphleter, as their persecutors did, 'Twas their spiritual pride; As they
damnd the power of Religion to be such, and as the Lukewarm, Anti-reforming
party do: Yea does he not cast this upon the Wisdom of Parliament, the Reverend
Assembly of Divines, yea all the most Learned and Godly Reformers both Ancient
and Modern, as ever the Church of Christ has been blessed with: This censorious
man has written upon them all, Pharisaism, and spiritual Pride; because every
man's conscience is not so easy, large, and wide as his own, about the
sanctifying the Lords Name in this Ordinance.

Oh but says he, It Is superstition too, as bad as the rayl about the Communion
Table.

Ans. The truth is, he is fitter to be admonisht, to go weep and howl in
private all his days, for this and other (such) cursed assertions, then to
have an answer given to them; were not thousands of souls even like to perish
and be hardened in sin by them? Sir, Does that Idolatrous practice of erecting
Altars, and railing them about as holy, run parallel with the practice of a
conscientious Minister, who trembles that poor souls should eat damnation, and
he not labor to prevent it? And as to your rayl, The Discipline of Christ's
Churches was wont to be styled the rayl or fence of them, to preserve this holy
Ordinance from pollution: If you get not such a rayl Christ may root out you
and your Church (such as it is) ere you are aware.

Sir, Instead of this Caveat to the godly Ministers who plead for and practice
Reformation in the use of this Ordinance; May you tremble at a spirit of
Apostasy from it, which begins sadly to steal upon too too many who have
formerly with great zeal contended for it, and that you nor they be not given
up of God to greater delusions and abominations then these.

A little to salve the business, he brings in the reply of the godly to his
former argument, But are we not faulty and partake of other men's sins if we
do not our best to have the leaven purged out, etc.

He Answers, Page 79.
There are several duties of a Christian, To pray, receive, to admonish his, to
rebuke the faulty, to tell the Church, if it be in a capacity: if we neglect we
are guilty, and defiled; What then? we must labor after a
Church-Establishment, etc.

Ans. Is not this to grant in effect what we contend for, That it is every
Communicants sin if he do not admonish a person coming profanely to this
Ordinance, and he becomes guilty if he neglect it? If rebuking the faulty as to
all sin, be a duty, then it is so in this particular; for he that hinders not
another from sin according to his duty and power, is guilty of that sin, and
the duty Mr Humfreys has confessed, yea all commanders, commenders, consentors,
connivers, counselors, concealers, excusers of other men's sins, are guilty of
them, of which Mr Humfreys is one, and all that plead for Free Admission.

He limits the duty of telling the Church, says he, If the Church be in a
capacity to hear.

Then it is granted the Church ought to be in a capacity to hear: If he means by
this capacity, A Church enjoying all Officers, whose fault is it that you have
them not? Who is to choose them but your Church? If they be not fit to choose
they are not fit for Sacraments, as has been showed, we mean as to a good part
of them; but we conceive the Church it self, as distinguished from its Officers,
is in a capacity to hear, and ought to be told by a conscientious member, or
else he will not quit the guilt mentioned, say Mr Humfreys what he will.

3. He grants we should labor after a Church-establishment: This we trust will
justify our practice, in doing our duties in it (by Mr Humfreys own
principles) and so will stop the mouths of those of his mind against our
practice, which, with our selves, we cannot see, after much seeking the Lord
for direction, how it can be attained to, but by calling upon such as will
submit to the Discipline of Mat. 18. with us, and so being joined together, and
choosing Officers, there arises a Church-establishment by the power of the
Gospel: We wish Mr Humfreys had spent his time and paper he bestowed in
maintaining promiscuous Free Admission, in stirring up Ministers to press on to
such a Churchestablishment, and not in hardening people in sin and ignorance.

But he further urges, Must we in the mean while have no Sacrament?

Ans. Better sure, after a patient waiting upon souls for embracing the Gospel,
to begin with Church-establishment, and then to administer the Supper, without
so much dishonor to Jesus Christ, and endangering of souls, in promiscuous
admission.

2. Further, Mr Humfreys by his mean while, implies that in an exigency there
ought to be Free Admission, rather then no Sacraments: Though we conceive that
does not absolutely take away the guilt, yet we could wish that he had so
stated the question, and not to press his Free Admission absolutely upon
Ministers and people, and that it is their sin not to allow it.

But, says he, The neglect of this duty of admonition, is the sin by it self,
the coming is our duty.

Ans. Here is a fine nicety to skin over a sin: Sir, If a Godly man do not
admonish a wicked man coming, that so he may profess his repentance to the
Church, or be kept off, such a one comes to the Sacrament with guilt upon him,
for he has not performed a concomitant duty in coming; and so his want of
admonition is a sin in reference to his coming.

Aye but says he, Because the leaven is not purged out, must there be no lump?

Yea, but such a lump as is totally leavened and defiled for want of this duty,
and therefore ought to become a new lump, 1 Cor. 5.7.

The next reply brought against his argument is, Are not all ignorant and
scandalous persons swine and dogs, to be rejected, and so kept off from pearls,
etc.

1. He answers, I dare not say, though I see what interest lies at stake, which
may soon fancy a Christian convenience into a divine necessity.

Answ. What though you dare not say so? it is enough that Jesus Christ himself
says so, Mat. 7.6. he calls them dogs, and commands that holy things be not
given them, and this of the Lords Supper is to be esteemed the holiest. What
Interest he means we do not rightly know; but we well know Free Admission
stands well with the interest of carnal ease, friendship of ungodly men, and
profit; but keeping off does not.

And Sir, it is not only Christian convenience to keep off such, but a positive
command of Christ in that Scripture. To his five reasons,

1. We deny your proofs to assure the contrary, it is gratis dictum, as we hope
is cleared.

2. He places a great distance between unfitness to come unto the Sacrament,
and being excluded.

Answ. If a person be not fit to come, and his unfitness visible, he ought to
be excluded, and so kept from sin: Though you put a great distance between
them, they ought to go together.

3. He urges, The keeping off any cannot be pretended to in our un- Elder'd
Congregations.

Answ. This we believe gave the occasion to this Discourse; and upon this
score, we fear many go on to sin against light: But does not this imply that if
Congregations were Elderd then there ought to be keeping off, and so Free
Admission vanishes, and not to be peremptorily pressed?

2. But, Sir, still whose fault is it that these are not Elderd Congregations?
sure the Ministers and Churches own, as has been alleged: Who are to choose
the Elders? certainly the Church; or let it be proved the contrary; But the
major part, you will say, is corrupt and not fit to choose? Then sure not fit
to be admitted to sealing Ordinances, as has been hinted. People that fear the
Lord can discern of such persons who are most godly, grave, and wise, and so
fitted for Church Officers.

This is a most generally received truth, That every particular Congregation
has power in it self to reform it self according to what shall be practicable
by them.

There is nothing alleged against this but the expectation of a Civil
sanction; what weight or authority will that add to Christ's Ordinance? which
obliges the conscience without humane authority; such a sanction or humane law
may make men hypocritically submit, but will not add to real Reformation. Not
by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord by the Prophet, Zach.
9.6. We have spoke to this in the Preface: We will take leave to allege what
Dr Jewel in his Epistle concerning the Council of Trent, annexed in the close
of that History; which is applicable to the present case: Ministers alleging
there can be no Church-Reformation, without a Civil sanction and Law from
Authority, though they protect godly men in their duty.

The Council of Trent alleged, There was no Reformation to be attempted in
England without a General Council; To which the Doctor replies, page 858. Is it
not lawful for any of us to believe in Christ, to profess the Gospel, to
serve God aright, to fly superstition and Idolatry, except they will be pleased
to give us leave? etc. In the following page, Must we therefore sit idle,
expecting how these Fathers will handle the matter? Must we hold our hands
together and do nothing? Further, I will require, says the Lord, their blood
at thy hands: If any shall put his hand to the plough and look back, and be
solicitous what others think, and expect the authority of a General Council,
and hide the Lords treasure, in the mean while he shall hear this, Oh evil and
faithless servant, take him away and cast him into utter darkness. Suffer,
says Christ, the dead to bury the dead, but follow thou me. In humane Counsels
it is the part of a wise man to expect the judgment and consent of men, but in
matters divine, Gods Word is all in all, the which so soon as a godly man has
received, he presently yields and submits himself, he is not wavering nor
expecting others: He understands that he is not bound to give ear to the Pope
or Council, but to the will of God, whose voice is to be obeyed though all men
say nay. The Prophet Elias presently obeyed Gods voice, though he thought he
was alone. Abraham being warned of God went out of Chaldea. Lot went out of
Sodom, etc. Go, says the Angel, out of the midst of her, and partake not of
her sins, least you taste of her plagues: He says not, Expect a Synod of
Bishops. If at the first Christ and his Apostles had stayed for a Council, when
had their sound gone up unto all Lands? etc.

Page 860. For we know that the Spirit of God is tied neither to places nor to
numbers of men. Tell it to the Church, says Christ,
not to the whole Church spread over the whole world, but to a particular,
which may easily meet in one place: Wheresoever, says he, two or three shall
be gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them: When Paul
would reform the Churches of the Corinthians and of the Galatians, he did not
command them to expect a General Council, but only wrote unto them, that what
error soever or vice was among them, themselves should presently cut it off.

Now we humbly conceive what this Reverend Author says of a General Council,
is in this case applicable to Magistrates; As the Churches of Corinth and
Galatia were not to stay for a Council, as to the Reforming their Churches, so
neither for an Edict from the Magistrate; The Lord will require the blood of
such as perish for want of Reformation, at our hands. In matters divine, says
he, Gods Word must be obeyed, though All men say nay.

Now say some, If the Magistrate would give us authority, we would set about
this practice; Sure this will not serve the turn before the bar of the Lord,
however it may quiet conscience for a time. We verily believe, did we look more
to Christ, and less to men, the Gospel would have its course more freely.

But to return to Mr Humfreys, says he, Men may be Dogs and Swine either in
the course of their life, or in the public esteem of the Church, we look to
them as they are in the Churches esteem.

Ans. Briefly, This is but a rotten salve; As if 'twere to be satisfaction
enough to a godly Minister, what a company of ignorant and carnal people shall
think one of another; say they, We were all used to come at Easter, why be we
not all fit now?

2, If by the Church he mean the Officers, it does not come to his case; But
were it so, that a known scandalous person should be otherwise esteemed by
them, yet the Minister having used all other ways of remedy, be is not to sin
from other men's judgments.

5. Says he, To speak particularly concerning the ignorant, I dare not judge
so rigorously; the 5. of Heb. 2. comes near my heart, etc.

Answ. We wish other Scriptures did also, that concern his duty in this case:
It Is true, Jesus Christ can have compassion on the ignorant, and such as are
out of the way, as that Heb. 5. speaks; But then he teaches them, gives his
Spirit to them, and brings them into the way, as Prove. 1.22, 23. We allow his
distinction of ignorance, and that to the weakly ignorant instruction is to be
given; but how much affected obstinate ignorance is to be found with such as
rush upon Sacraments? And to admit such was far from Christ's mind in that
Scripture, being to encourage poor ignorant souls to come to be taught by him,
and after to tender themselves to Sacraments, and to be encouraged to do so.

Further he says, For the scandalous we know there must be admonition first
twice or thrice, Mat. 18.15, 16. and then if they continue obstinate, to be
excommunicated, etc.

Answ. Why is not this course taken? If it ought to be, why is not the best
expedient used for such an order? And if this ought to be, how will Free
Admission of all without exception (seeing this Ordinance, as he says, is
converting) stand with his Excommunication? Should any be kept from converting
Ordinances?

But, says he, I cannot find that this Excommunication is in reference merely
to this Sacrament.

Answ. Granted; There are other ends, but your merely implies this is one, viz.
to keep scandalous persons from the Sacrament; If from Christian communion in
general, as you speak, then from the choicest part of it, which consists in the
Communion of Saints in this Ordinance.

The last Objection he undertakes to answer, is raised from the Texts that are
alleged for a separation from wicked persons, etc.

To these he answers, first in the general, That there ought to be a separation
from the sins and evil courses of wicked men, and from their common
familiarity, but not from the Sacrament, unless in case of Excommunication,
etc.

Ans. To this we Answer,

1. As to a particular person, suppose I am of such a Congregation (and that
too only by habitation, never by any express joining in such a communion)
where such corruptions do abound, that it is even impossible for men to
admonish all, or if I tell it to the Minister or Church, I shall be reproached
for it, (as we need not travel far to find such cases) and I have with
great patience waited for Reformation and a Church-Establishment according to
God, what obligation is upon me from God or man, but that I may separate from
the Congregation, for the ease and comfort of my own Conscience?

2. What if a Congregation be so leavend with customary ignorance and
profaneness, and scoffing at holiness (as it is too too easy to find such,
nay where may one find better in the state they are now in) and a godly
Preacher comes to this people, and a few godly own him; Must this Preacher and
few godly be enforced to communicate with such (after due means used for the
instruction of the rest) or may they not withdraw from the rest who are
scoffers at godliness? sure we believe God and Angels, and Saints will justify
such a separation in this Ordinance, and to draw into a closer communion to
practice discipline among themselves; specially when such a Congregation was
never orderly united and joynted together by a free submission to the Gospel;
having in most places never enjoyed it in the power of it, which consideration,
indeed, wipes off many objections.

Now to his Scriptures, he first says that Ephesians. 5.11. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. are
meant only of separation from sinful courses and common familiarity.

Answ. To that of the Ephesians, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, but rather reprove them.

Now therefore if we must not be partakers with wicked men in a wicked action,
as v. 7. and must have no fellowship with them, then not Church Fellowship, if
I can help it; specially in this Ordinance of the Supper, in which a wicked man
is conversant, as to himself, in an unfruitful work; and if I by my partaking
with him encourage him (as I do) I have fellowship with a wicked man in an
unfruitful work of his, specially if I do not reprove him. Can Mr Humfreys
conceive, that Paul forbidding any fellowship with wicked men, gave them an
allowance to let them profane the Sacrament with them? It founds harsh and
incongruous.

To that of the 1 Corinthians. 10.21, 22. I would not ye should have fellowship
with devils, ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils.

Ans. Grant it, Paul reproves their eating at Idol feasts, as has been showed,
yet if wicked men come to the Lords Supper in a profane manner, demonstrating
themselves to be but of Satan's kingdom, and presently after receiving, they
return to Satan's worship in sports and plays, and abetted profanness, sure it
is justifiable for such as fear God to separate from them, specially when they
long resist and scoff at the power of the word; and if the godly continue to
communicate with such, it is little better then fellowship with devils, etc. The
same may be said of 2 Cor. 7. Though the wife is to abide with her husband, it
does not follow but that she may separate from him as to Church Communion.

He conceives three more Scriptures may, happily, as he speaks, he understood
only of separating from men's evil courses; he says but happily, first as to Jer.
15.19. If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shall stand
before me; and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as
my mouth: let them return unto thee, etc.

We assert this is meant of Church-Reformation, and not only of separating from
sinful courses in their lives. Jeremiah was sent to convince, preach down, and
reform public abuses in Gods worship; The wicked scorned and persecuted him,
therefore Jeremiah (as every zealous Preacher ought) was commanded to be as
Gods mouth unto them, and those he did convert he was to separate them as the
precious from the vile; which very fully points at and warrants such a
separation we plead for: For any to say, that the precious is meant of words or
things, and not of persons, is very weak; for the Lord says, Let them return,
which must be meant of persons.

The next of 2 These. 3.6. Withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly,
etc. is also meant of withdrawing as to Church Communion, as is clear by the
following words: At v. 12. Paul commands and exhorts the disorderly: At the
14th, he exhorts the Church, that if such disorderly persons will not obey,
then the Church is to have no company with them, that they may be ashamed;
which Learned men generally understand as to Church-society: Excommunicating or
withdrawing being both for that end, as one, that the disorderly person may be
ashamed and humbled, etc.

So of Rev. 2.6. The hating of the deeds of the Nicolaitans, no question
implies, separation from them in Communion: Sure Mr Humfreys will not allow
Christianity and their heresies to consist.

There are other Scriptures which he says do only respect common familiarity,
and not a separation as to Church Communion.

The first is, 1 Cor. 5.9. Have no company with fornicators, etc. which Mr
Humfreys will have to be only of common familiarity, not as to Church Communion.

No? Must not known fornicatours (for of such it must be meant) be cast out of
the Church, if they continue obstinate? Who then must be cast out? The same
rule he gives of Covetous, Idolaters, Railers, Drunkards, Extortioners; where
the force of the argument, as Learned Mr Dickson on the place well observes, is
this; Paul, says he, had wrote to them before, not to keep company, nor to eat
with such (which strongly implies their non-communion) therefore much more
ought they to cast out from among themselves that incestuous person, which is
the case he argues: Now how many covetous, drunkards, revilers and extortioners
are to be found in most Congregations, open revilers of the Preacher, if godly
and zealous, and of the godly; to which may be added many other sins of as
high a nature: Now suppose the greater party shall be such (as it may easily be
supposed in most Congregations) who shall Excommunicate them? being several
hundreds in some places? 'Twere a vain thing to undertake it; therefore the
lesser party must withdraw, and labor to draw others after them, or else the
Apostles command must utterly be waved.

That of 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. has been opened: As to Romans 16.17. of avoiding such as
make divisions: It Is clear, as most Interpreters, for exercising Discipline on
them; To avoid a man, is to look upon him as cast out.

The same may be said, as Mr Cotton strongly argues from that Scripture, 2 Timothy
3.5. From such turn away, which no question points at non-communion, for Mr
Humfreys himself will sure allow, that the sins enumerated in the former
verses, deserve it.

So of John 2.10, 11. Sure he will not have such as deny the doctrine of Christ
to be continued in the Church, and come to Sacraments, for of such John there
speaks.

As for Prove. 22.24, 25. viz. Make no friendship with an angry man, etc. We
find not usually pressed in this case; and yet a furious man (as the wise man
there calls him) is not fit to be accounted in Christ's family; if it appear
reigningly upon him, and cause him to break out into other sins, as usually it
does.

His last is Titus 3.10. Reject an heretic.

Ans. Is this only of common familiarity too? Then heretics must also it
seems be continued.

Now he concludes, All these Scriptures forbid us wicked familiarity in their
sins, not a bare accompanying in Gods Ordinances.

Ans. We acknowledge it in the converting Ordinances of prayer and preaching,
but not in Sacraments, and in full Church Communion; The truth is, it is a
ridiculous thing to conceive that the Apostle should command not to keep
company with, to avoid, to turn away from, to reject such as are rightfully (as
Mr Humfrays would prove) continued in the fellowship of the Church; for indeed
the Apostle would fully contradict himself in other Scriptures, if he should,
where he bids all the members have the same care one of another, 1. Cor. 12.25.
To love as Brethren, To be as one brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2.17. To exhort; To
comfort one another, which implies all sweet and open familiarity together; Now
how can this be if they must reject, turn from, keep no company one with
another?

Next he anticipates the usual answer to his Argument, viz. If I must decline
a wicked man, so as not to eat with them (which I interpret by our ordinary
conversation) how much more must I decline him at this Sacrament?

He answers, It Is a fallacy, and is sorry to see many gravel'd at it; I must
not be such a man's common companion, therefore I must not go to Church with him.

Ans. This serves but to gratify the ignorance and superstition of too many,
who think it enough if they come to Church; We must all, say they, go to
Church, and have the Communion at Easter, He Is worse then a Jew that will not;
And too many know little further what true Church Communion is.

But says he, Arguments from the less to the greater must be in things of the
same kind and nature; which these are not.

Ans. Sir, Common familiarity is enjoined to Church Members, as has been
showed, and forbidden to others; upon weighty Grounds; for how can there be
mutual edification without familiar coming together, which though the means
may be sometime in eating and drinking together, yet the people of the Lord do,
or should do all to the praise of God and their mutual comfort in him whenever
they meet; and so it is a degree of Church Communion.

Yea (says he) Eating with another is in my own arbitration; I must not choose
evil, but I am bound to go to the service of God.

Ans. True, In Gods way, but not to partake of other men's sins, which I do, if
I do not my duty to prevent them; which as the case stands in the most
Congregations is hard to do, as has been showed.

He says, He understands Mat. 18.17. in the third sense, which is, That there
ought to be no separation from any in any of Gods Ordinances, unless in case
of Excommunication, and so 1 Cor. 5.1.

Ans. 1. Yea Sir, It may reach to persons excommunicable, when the Officers
shall neglect their duty. We require any Scripture to show an obligation upon a
Churchmember to abide in such a Church Communion where no hope of redress of
such abuses, it may be the whole leavened.

2. If Excommunication ought to be, why do not godly men when they have power
from God and man put it in practice? If the Parochial frames as mixed, be too
corrupt to take it up of themselves, by reason of an averseness to any such
Reformation; it will surely justify the godly and willing people in
non-communion in the Sacrament.

3. Though in Mat. 18. and 1 Cor. 5. There be no mention of the Sacrament, yet
that one end of Church Censures is to keep the visibly-unworthy from it, is
confessed by himself in p. 84. as has been observed: He further urges
several Scriptures which prove non-communion with the wicked, which he says
are to be understood only in case of Excommunication, and are many leagues off
from the business of the Sacrament.

Ans. Let it be granted, that these Scriptures are to be understood in case of
Excommunication; But those Scriptures do suppose it to be exercised in all
Churches, as in the Primitive Churches it was; We still say to you and others,
that the case is far different, where people have for the most part owned the
profession of Christianity from the Magistrates Laws, and not from the Gospel
powerfully preached, and do still abide in bitter enmity to the power of
holiness, and too many as great revilers of it, as Papists or flat Atheists;
And had never discipline exercised, nor did ever subject to it, and being now
called upon to do it, do hate and scorn it, and such who are willing to do it;
as Mr Firmin well observes in his serious Question, p. 30.

Now he concludes with 4. wishes.

That we had a Government established in the Church, the nearest in Christian
prudence that may be to the Word of God.

Ans, Yea, let him say, That which the Word of God holds forth; Jesus Christ
did not so little consider of the rule and order of his Churches, as to leave
it wholly to Christian Prudence, which is the very inlet of all tyranny that
has been exercised over the Churches of God: yet we allow Christian prudence,
if clearly according to general rules of the Word of God.

But he would have it established: By whom? We presume he means the Magistrate;
What, cannot the Gospel do it? Sure Jesus Christ would rule by the rod of his
mouth, Isa. 11.4. the rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2, 3. And not by
Magistrates compelling Edicts: Though in bringing all to converting Ordinances,
we humbly conceive their power is to be put forth, and in restraining
blasphemies, but not to the whole order of Church Communion; let the Gospel be
left to its proper work; If men speak of countenancing by their power; what
would we have more then protection in our duties, which blessed be God, we
enjoy; The Lord free the Spirits of godly men who plead for purity and
discipline, from this snare; for we dare aver it to be a great one.

2. He wishes, That the duty of fraternall correption, a watching over, and
admonishing one another in love, were better known and practiced.

Ans. Let him wish and pray for it more; But this may be pressed by a Minister
till his heart ache, considering the customary formality the most are held
under, and stand for nothing, and will not reach any real Reformation, till
they shall be called upon, to come and profess their willingness to submit to
such discipline actively and passively: An then Mr Humphreys and others will
discern the temper of this generation as they yet remain; That they will
neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others to do so:

3. He wishes, That men would look more into their own consciences, and leave
the judging of others spirits, hearts, and reins alone, etc.

Ans. Who he means in this admonition we know not; we know not of any who
undertake this kind of judging, but judge by profession and conversation; We
mean godly Ministers, who call upon their people to submit to discipline, and
joint communion; We wish Mr Humphreys seriously to consider whether he need not
take this back again to his own spirit; For his bringing the practice of
Reformation under the doom of Pride and Pharisaism; as has been observed: And
as he calls for so universal a charity, we wish he extend it not beyond what
his own conscience may one day fly in in his face for; for countenancing
ignorant and profane souls in their ways, as his piece serves for nothing
else: Oh say they, let us go on, for all what our Minister says, Mr Humphreys
in his Book says, they ought to judge charitably of me, though we refuse to
profess Repentance and Faith, and to come under discipline, and checks these
new troublesome Ministers for it; And we all ought to receive the Lords Supper.

Sir, We are bold to mind you again that you have deeply wounded the spirits
of many of your brethren, and the Lords people in the Nation, and made the
wicked bold in their wickedness, and have much hardened them against their
Ministers, See Eze. 13.22, 23.

Lastly, He wishes, That though there may be some judging by the fruits, yet
hat wise religious men would be more cautious of countenancing these
Separations in the visible Church, because upon this score he says there may
be Separation upon Separation in the same Church, etc.

If he mean by Separations and gathering of Churches, the practice which we
have in this Treatise labored to vindicate, viz. That when a faithful
Preacher of the Gospel is sent to an ignorant, superstitious, profane people,
(the most part by far such:) And if it please the Lord to work upon a part of
this people, as to draw them out to own the Gospel from him, and to conform to
it, and so that Preacher draws the willing people upon their profession, into
a more close union and fellowship together, waiting and laboring to bring on
the rest to them; If we say he mean by this, the separation he would caution
against, we hope and pray that wise and religious men will not be deterred from
it by any thing Mr Humphreys has produced against it, but will in the strength
of the Lord set about it against all oppositions, All considerations of ease or
interest being thrown off: By which means, 1. They will be found faithful
Stewards to their Master. 2. They will keep themselves pure, 1 Timothy 5.22. 3.
They will sanctify the Name of Christ aright in this Ordinance of the Supper.
4. They will be free from the sin of flattering souls to hell by it. 5. They
shall discern how the Lord owneth and blesses their Ministry. 6. They shall
have sweet communion with Saints. 7. They will by this provoke and awake all to
examine their condition. 8. They will act sutably to those rich and glorious
promises of the building of the Lords Temple in the latter days of the Gospel,
Zech. 6.12, 13. and many others.

For Separations in the visible Church which he suggests dangerous, We answer,
That if as much and great profaneness and abominations shall be fouled with
the visible Church (as is too apparent) as even among such know not God, Then
Separations as to the holy things of God, where holy men have only right, is
justifiable in the eyes of God, Saints and Angels.

For his suggested danger of separation upon separation; 1. We answer, That how
is there properly a Separation, when there has been no true uniting, nor has
one person considered himself to have any more relation to another, then as one
of their Parish, but hear one another lie, swear, and commit together, and
rather encourage then reprove one another for it; Separation is properly in and
from a true Church Fellowship, and not from ungodliness and profaneness in a
Scripture sense.

Besides, what if there may be unstable souls separate from such a
joynt-communion (as it is like there may in the purest constitutions) shall
there, for that reason, be no Church Communion nor endeavor after it?

What if Excommunication be set up by a Law from men in every Parish, (which we
believe to be impossible to any purpose, as the case stands with most Ministers
and People who are bitterly against it) and there should 50 liars, swearers,
etc. be cast out, would not there lie the same Objection against this practice
also? And yet the Author makes us believe he would have Excommunication set up.

Now when Mr Humfreys has done all, let us see how far we can gather from his
own expressions an implied allowance of our own practice, though his Book in
the main fights against it.

1. He calls for Church establishment, and for Discipline, for watching over one
another, for mutual Reproof and Admonition, and confesses there comes guilt
and defilement upon a soul if it be neglected.

Now we crave of our Brethren of the Ministry, and the people we preach to,
and others, to consider, that these are the duties we call upon for to be
practiced, and that people that fear the Lord might submit conscionably to the
practice of them; We crave of Mr Humfreys his more candid and honest
interpretation of other his Brethren acting conscienciously in the Lords work,
according to the light imparted to him, laboring to extricate the people by
the good hand of God with them, out of ignorance, sin, and dead-hearted
formality, by a real practice and not pretended only of Reformation; And that
the Lord may humble him for his great evil in this little but mischievous
piece, so miserably serving the turns of the enemies of goodness; and that he
will speedily call it in, or we shall pray that the Lord will stir up others to
do it for him.

FINIS.
Postscript.
Reader,
BE pleased to take notice, that this Treatise has been above this half Year
fitted for the Press, but by reason of the death of a friend to whom it was
committed to be printed, it has been retarded.

Be pleased also to take notice that Mr Anthony Palmer has in the Press
several Sermons on Matt. 8.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Entitled, The Tempestuous Soul
Calmed by Jesus Christ.


