APOLLO STATICUS OR, THE ART OF CURING FEVERS BY THE STATICKS Invented by Dr.
PITCAIRN AND Published by him in Latin: NOW Made English by a Well-wisher to
the MATHEMATICS.

Capiat qui capere potest. EDINBURGH, Printed by J. W. and Sold at James
Wardlaw's Shop, opposite to the Locken-buiths. 1695. Price 4 ss.

The PREFACE.
YOU have here a fresh Instance of the Power of the Mathematics, and of the
Usefulness of Geometry in Medicine. It is the Decision of a grand Controversy
about Purging in Fevers, that many have quibbled at in vain. At last Dr.
Pitcairn applied his Mathematics to the Question, and has solved it by a
Method not to be imitate: As he tells us himself in his Learned and Eloquent
Answer to Apol: Mathem: Page 5. It was writ originally in a dead Language, and
is now Translated into a living, for the benefit of all those who understand
not Latin, and have no mind either to be scortched, or reduced to Ashes, by
the fatal Flames of a burning Fever. The Version is almost literal, it being
dangerous in a Thing of this consequence, wherein the Life of Man is so nearly
concerned, to mistake the Sense of the Author, or deviat so much as an
hair-breadth from the Original. Wherefore I hope none will be offended with the
harshness of the Style, which can never be evited in a^ literal Translation.
Besides, it were an Injury done to the learned Author, to put barbarous Latin
into good English. But if any thing be amiss as to the Sense, he is to blame
for it himself: For a Copy was sent to him by the Translator, and was returned
without any Amendments.

I will not Commend this Piece too highly; but this I may say, that any one who
reads it attentively, will find it one continued Mistake from the Beginning to
the End: And that never any one Man bewrayed more Ignorance and Inadvertency in
so few Lines. I confess the Author has done Wonders in his Inaugural Oration,
and far outdone all that ever wrote Nonsense before him: But here he has even
outdone himself. That may be called an Original, but This a Masterpiece, that
can no more be imitate than Homer's Ilia^ds. It would make any Body blush to
see how he stumbles on the very Threshold, and mistakes the Foundation and
Groundwork of the Fabric he is to raise. For instead of giving us out of
Sanctorius the Sensible and Insensible Evacuations, in the same space of time,
he gives us the Sensible Evacuation of a Night's time, and the Insensible of a
natural Day, which is 24 Hours: (as is evident by the Aphorisms cited by
himself) and so ha lost 16 Ounces of his Account: Which is clear from the 6
Aphor. Sect. 1. But allowing him to have stated the Account right, yet he has
cast it up wrong. For he tells us, that Perspiration is the double of the
Sensible Evacuation (which he makes 50) that is to say, twice 20 makes 50. And
so on.

Having now determined, as he fancies, the difference between Sensible and
Insensible Evacuations, he proceeds to open up this Mystery, which lay hid from
the Ages past. And from this, that Perspiration is the double or triple of the
other Evacuations (tho it be neither according to the 6 Aphor. Sect. 1. above
cited) and 10 times as much as Stool, he very Dogmatically, or rather
Mathematically concludes, that the suppression of the 3d. part of the
perspirable Serosity will occasion as great a Fever, as the suppression of all
the other Evacuations together: And that the suppression of the 10 part of
Perspiration will do as much hurt, as the suppression of the whole Excretion by
the Belly. And for the same reason that the promoving the 3 part of
Perspiration suppressed, will be as effectual in Curing a Disease, as the
promoving all the other Evacuations suppressed; and the procuring the 10 part of
the same, as good as the whole Excretion by Stool. Then after all learnedly
concludes, that Fevers and other Diseases will be 10 times more probably Cured
by Sweat than Stool. Which is such an absurd Notion and extravagant Fancy, and
so contrary to the natural Oeconomie, that I wonder it ever entered into any
Man's Head but in a Dream. For besides its native Absurdity, it downright
contradicts the Premises, and concludes the quite contrary of what he
proposes. For he proposes to us the Cure of Fevers by procuring Perspiration,
and then tells us this is to be done by Sweating, which is no Perspiration at
all. Why not good Dr. as well by Urine or Stool, which differ no more from
Perspiration than Sweat does according to Sanct.? But which is more, who tells
us expressly Aph. 3 5. That Sweat alwise hinders Perspiration. Must we then
advance Perspiration by that which hinders it? No doubt, and the Argument runs
thus: The best and readiest way to Cure Fevers is by Perspiration. And the best
way to promove Perspiration is by Sweating, which hinders it and does not
promove it at all. Erg. the best and readiest way to Cure Fevers is by that
which does not Cure them at all: that is, the best way of Curing Fevers is not
to Cure them at all, q.e.d. It follows also from the same Principles, that if
Fevers are to be Cured, the worst way to Cure them is by Sweat. For according
to the Dr. the most probable and ready way to Cure them, is by promoving these
Secretions that are naturally the greatest; and so far as one natural Secretion
exceeds another so much the more probable it is, that the Fever will be Cured
by the one rather than the other; and therefore Perspiration being 10 times
more than Stool a Fever will be 10 times more probably Cured by That than This.
And since Urine is 4 times more than Stool, a Fever will be 4 times more
probably Cured by Urine than Stool. And since Evacuation by Stool is
indefinitly greater than Evacuation by Sweat (for some Men scarce ever sweat in
Health, and others very little) but I shall suppose it only a 1000 times
greater. Then it follows, according to the Professor's Doctrine, that a Fever
will be a 1000 times more probably Cured by Stool than Sweating: And that the
worst way to Cure Fevers is by Sweating. q.e.d. The Professor's Practice
likeways contradicts his Doctrine here. For he tells us Parag. 11. that a
Disease will be sooner carried off by augmenting Insensible Perspiration, than
any other Secretion: And in the mean time he pretends to Cure Scurvies,
Dropsies, Rheumatisms, etc. by augmenting Salivation or Spitting, which is a
sensible Evacuation, and which naturally is very little in sober Men, in
respect of insensible Perspiration, and so flatly contradicts himself. q. e. d.

More might be said to demonstrate the vanity of this Man's Pretensions, and
the absurdity of this following Discourse: But the reading of it will supply
that, and prove the best Refutation of all. But by what is here said, any Body
may see the vast difference that is between one that takes his Observations
from Nature, and one that takes his Marks by the Moon, that is, between a
Rational and Mathematical Physician.

-- Pudet haec opprobria vobis,
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli,
ARCHIBALD PITCAIRN's DISSERTATION Of the CURE of FEVERS BY EVACUATIONS Read
before the College of Physicians of Edinburgh, the First Day of November, 1694.
PHYSICIANS think Continual Fevers arise from the Fault of some Liquor or Body,
stirring up Phenomenon, which all knows are proper to Fevers; to which Body or
Liquor, they attribute the Name of Morbifick Matter. Some will have this Matter
to be an Humor that is usually excern'd by these in Health, but so changed in
sick Persons, that it both begets the Symptoms of Fevers, and of its own
accord, that is, by the natural Force of the Blood cannot be expelled: Others
think it comes from without, calling it, a Miasma; and being joined to the
Liquor that is naturally to be secern'd, that it kindles a Fever. It Is not much
matter which of them be truest, because they come both to one, whether the
Matter morbifick comes from without, or whether the Humor within be changed to
the morbifick Matter.

II. Physicians fell into these Opinions, after they observed Fevers to come
upon the suppressed Transpiration of the Skin, or any other Evacuation, to which
the Animal was used, being stopped or diminished. But the Thing seemed very
manifest to these who observed what way Fevers ended. Some they saw end by
Sweat, Others by copious Urine, Some by Flux of the Belly, and a Crise to come
by a Secretion, provoked throw any Glands, conveighing the Humor out of the
Animal: Wherefore they were persuaded, that it was some morbifick Matter nursed
the Disease, which ought to be expelled out of the Body, after they had brought
it into that fluidity, or so changed it (which they call the procuring of
Concoction and Digesting) that it might be cast out of the Body.

We do not debate of that Concoction so much celebrate; but only enquire, What
Evacuation or Secretion is to be chosen in curing Fevers, if perhaps any be to
be chosen? In this Search we shall be silent of the Cure by Blooding, because
we purpose only to inspect these Evacuations that fall out by ways naturally
open in the healthy Animal, and which Physicians aim at after Blooding, when
they judge it fit to be done.

III. But because there is an Opinion of Writers, now Famous, that Fevers arise
by the Fault of the Ferments proper to every part, or by the Fault of the
fermenting Parts of the Blood: And this Opinion pleases Fopps, because it makes
them Philosophers, and Physicians furnished with a stock of Three Words: I Will
propose this Thing in the Words of the ingenious Nicolas Steno out of the
Prodromus of his Dissertation of a Solid naturally contained within a Solid.
His Words are. Beside the subtle Fluid penetrating all things, at least we
observe three kinds of Fluids in Animals: The First is External, the Second
Internal and Common, the Third Internal and proper to each Part. By the Word
External Fluid, I understand not only that in Animals which incompasseth the
outward, like the Atmosphere, but also that which touches the rest of the
Superfices of the Body, that are continuous by the greater Passages with the
foresaid Superfice, such as the Superfice of the Aspera Arteria, and the
Superfice of the way of the Aliment, etc. Therefore he says, "I call that the
Inward Fluid, which does not communicate with the External Fluids, but by the
intermediat small Holes of the capillary Vessels. The External Common Fluid is
that which is contained in the Veins and Arteries in the lymphatick Vessels,
and it may be in the Nerves. The Internal Proper Fluid is that which
incompasseth the capillary Vessels of the Common Fluid, and is diverse,
according to the Places. Then he adds, that the Reason why in diverse places
from the same Blood, diverse things are excerned, depends upon the Places, whose
consideration, he says, is absolved by these Three.

1st. By the consideration of the capillary Vessels of the internal common
Fluid, in which they are only taken up, who ascribe all to Cribration throw
diverse Pores, of which number I was once one.

2dly, By the consideration of the proper internal Fluid, about which only are
conversant, these who attribute to every Part a particular Ferment; whose
Opinion partly may be true, although the Name of Ferment go upon a Comparison
taken from a thing too peculiar.

3dly, By consideration of the Solid of every particular part, to which they
seem chiefly to adhere; who by attributing to every Part its form, show that
they acknowledge something proper to the Part, but unknown to us, which
according to that knowledge of Matter which we already have, can be nothing
else but the porous Superfice of that Solid, and the subtle Fluid going throw
these Pores. He says, I should go too far beyond the purpose, if I would apply
these foregoing things to explain these things that befall daily our Bodies, and
cannot be explained otherwise. It suffices here to have insinuat, that from the
external Fluid many ways Particles are separate and carried into the internal
common Fluid, by the mediation of Cribration; whence likewise they being
secern'd several ways, and transmitted to the proper internal Fluids, by the
new Cribration, they are applied to the solid Parts, either by the way of the
Fibers or Parenchims, according as they are determined by the unknown property
of every place, that is included in the consideration of these Three preceding
Things.

IV. But we in a Dissertation of the Circuit of the Blood throw the the
smallest Vessels, had and published at Leyden the 1st. January 1693. Although
we showed these Ferments not to be found in the Bodies of Animals; yet that we
might accomodate it to their Capacities that does not take up Demonstrations,
we are pleased to propose the whole Matter, so as it may be understood by new
Beginners. From these Things that are described here in the Words of Steno, it
may be asked, by what way, from the same Blood, so many diverse Liquors are
secern'd, why in the Liver Bile, and the Reins Urine, and other Things in the
rest of the Parts? The Ancients thought this was done by Attraction, whose
Sentence to explain better than they could themselves, it will be easy to him
that understands Newton's Writings. Some Physicians of late having exploded the
word Attraction, have committed this Work to Ferments, which they constitute
different in various Glandules, or in diverse Colatories. But we showed that
there are no Glandules which have different Pores, because the Artery and the
Vein, no Glandule interveening, are stretched out into one and the same Vessel,
which Autopsia or Sight confirms. We showed also, that the Orifices of all the
Vessels are circular, and alike. Whence it follows, that there is no place for
the First and Third of Steno's Considerations. But also it follows hence (that
having laid aside Attraction that those Men reject, and which being admitted
there had been no need of Ferments) by the defect of Glands, instructed with
Pores of different figures, that the Ferments of those proper internal Fluids,
proper to every Part, behoved all to be washed out of the Orifices, by the
Force of the Blood going throw the Arteries. And if they stick any where, they
will stick in every place, making no distinction of the places (for there is
none) and therefore any Secretion will still go out by every place, having no
respect to Ferments. Because if alike Ferments stick to alike Orifices, there
will be no diversity, nor no use of Ferments. But if you affirm, that in alike
places, unlike Ferments are derived from the Blood, and repaired from its Mass,
the Question comes back to the first, viz. How is it, that from the Blood in
the Arteries of the Liver, that are like the Arteries of the Reins, is secern'd
a Ferment, serving for the secerning of Bile? Or why the Particles that repair
this Ferment, go rather into the Liver than to the Reins, especially no
Attraction interveening.

V. Neither is it only for the Reasons here, and in the other Dissertation
manifest, that there is no diverse Ferments peculiar to every Part; but that may
be also known from the known Properties of the Blood. For what way shall any
Part draw from the Blood a Ferment proper to its self, and fit for no other
Part? Or how shall it repair the Ferment diminished or vitiat, or pluck from
the gliding Fluid the Ferment that it has not in its Mass? It Is known to these
learned in Chymy, that no Acid can be drawn from the Blood of Animals that can
excite Fermentation, or Effervescence with the Alcaly in the Blood. And that no
burning Spirit proceeds from Blood or parts of Animals, like that which comes
from these things that ferment: Therefore these Ferments cannot be brought from
the Mass of Blood nor repaired, nor Fermentations be brought into the Blood at
the nod of Sylvies or Willis, to excite Fevers.

VI. I often wondered that so many suffered themselves to be beguiled, while they
glory that the Natures of Things are made known to them. Many of the old
Physicians assigned Qualities, or a Temperament made up of Qualities, to every
Part, by whose help the Actions and Secretions were governed: Our Authors of
Ferments justly esteemed the Qualities and Temperaments for the Refuge of
Ignorance; because without Foundation or any adjuvant Phaenomena's they were
feigned; neither were they known to any but by their Name. They said therefore,
that there was a peculiar Ferment that did preside over every Part and
Secretion. But these Great Improvers of Medicine knew no more the Nature of
these Ferments, than the Ancients knew the Nature of Temperaments; neither is
the Nature of any Ferments proper to any place more known, to any of our Men,
than the Nature of occult Qualities is known to the Peripateticks. Whence it is
too clear from this Opinion, that nothing New is brought into Medicine, but a
Word, or the use of a Word, as I long since admonished in that Dissertation of
the Circulation of the Blood throw the smallest Vessels.

VII. Let us go to other things. We have written it to have been observed, that
Fevers are terminated by the augmented cutanious Secretion, and sometimes by
the augmented Secretion throw the salival Glands, and oft-times also by a
Secretion throw the renal Glands, or by a Flux superveening throw the Glands of
the Liver, Pancreas or Intestines. We need not speak of other kinds of Crisis
here, unless perhaps you would add to the rest the Jaundice superveening upon a
Fever. Then we observe that there are no excretory Vessels, and no Glands
serving for Excretion in our Bodies (that is, Arteries terminating in excretory
Vessels) which cannot be augmented unto such an amplitude, that they may be fit
to receive and secern any Humor, that naturally is fit to be secern'd in other
Glandules. Because we observe in Jaundice, that that thick Liquor, which
naturally is secern'd in the the Glands of the Liver, is secern'd in the
cutaneous Glands, and that too much Secretion of Spittle by the salival Glands
is restrained by provocking of Sweat, and that a Flux of the Belly is stopped
by turning the Humor into the ways of Transpiration opened by Sudorificks, and
that Salivation binds the Belly; but the Flux of the Belly being stirred up
again, that Salivation stops, which, as other Secretions, is staid by a Flux of
Urine.

VIII. In Fevers especially it is to be observed, how often any Liquor is carried
throw any place, enlarged by the help of Art or Nature; and how that there is
no Fever but the like has been terminat by Secretion, throw the sudorifick
Glandules, oftener than by any other Secretion. So that there is no kind of
febrifick Matter that cannot be brought throw the Glands allotted for
Transpiration: And though either by the fault of some restrained Secretion, or
the stopped motion of the Humor, or the fault of the Fluid, introduced by the
chiliferous Vessel, any part of the Blood, or any Humor may be changed into any
Nature; yet this is not the Question, but only, in what and how much condition
of fault, while it excites Fevers, it uses to be driven or perverted. In
solving this Question, Experiments are of use, by which it is shown that this
is the Property of febrifick Matter, that it can and uses to go out by all the
Vessels; but the thing will be more clear by the following, in the which we
will search, what respect the natural Secretions have, and what from that
respect can be drawn, proper for the present Design. viz.

IX. From the Aphorisms 3, 6, 21, 59 and 60. of the First Sect. of Sanct. The
Excretions in the given time keep this proportion for the most part.

By the Belly -- 4 By the Bladder -- 16 By Respiration -- 6 By the Skin -- 60,
59, or 40.
Whence it is manifest, that Perspiration is the double sum of other Secretions
(we take here the middle quantity of Perspiration) and twelve times as much as
the Belly's Excretion. But I admonish here, Excretion stirred up by the Mouth
is accounted for Perspiration: For the little Bladders of the Lungs are no less
exposed to the Air than the superfice of the Skin, neither Perspiration
naturally breaking forth out of the Vesicles of the Lungs can be hindered more
than that which rises from the superfice of the Skin. Because Perspiration
passes throw the Pores of the Vessels exposed to the Air. Therefore there is no
sudorisick Vessels lengthned like Pipes (although we use that Appellation
commonly) in the Skin more than in the Lungs, in which there are no sudorifick
Canals. If then, that I may return, that Excretion made by the Mouth be
reckoned with Perspiration, the cutanious Excretion will be triple the sum of
the rest, and 14 times as much as the Belly's: Wherefore Perspiration will be
with us at least ten times as much as the Secretion of the Belly. For
Perspiration coming out of the Lungs is equal to the excess that any one would
ascribe to the Padua Perspiration beyond the British.

X. Because Fevers and many other Diseases arise both from the cutanious
Secretion suppressed, as well as from any other suppressed, and that the cutanious
is the double of all the rest, or triple: Therefore the suppression of the
half, or third part, of the perspirable Matter, will beget a Fever equal to
that, that the suppression of all the rest begets. And because cutaneous is ten
times as much as the Belly Excretions: Therefore the diminution of the tenth
part of the perspirable Matter will beget a Fever equal to that, that the
suppression of the whole Belly begets. For the same causes the help of the
half, or third part, of Perspiration, will do as much in putting away a Fever,
as the help of all the rest will do: And the help of the tenth part of
Perspiration will be of as much avail, as the Belly Excretion altogether. And
the whole Perspiration will be of as much avail, as ten Belly Excretions.

XI. The Thing it self cries indeed, seeing that the Matter of any Secretion may
be conveyed by any other augmented, and since any may by any way be augmented
by the exhibition of a profitable Medicine: And lastly since Secretions
proportionally augmented, keep that measure they naturally had: Therefore a
greater heap of morbifick Matter, in a certain time, may be brought out by
cutaneous Secretion, than by any other whatsomever, in that proportion that the
quantity of cutaneous, or skin Secretion, naturally bears to any other
Secretion in a natural state. Wherefore a Disease is sooner taken away by
Evacuation by the Pores of the skin, than by any other Secretion whatsomever,
and that on the foresaid Supposition. From these it follows, that a Disease
cannot be so soon put off by making an increase of Stools, as it may be by
increasing the cutaneous Secretion, except the increase of the Belly be to the
increase of the Cutaneous, in the inverse Reason of Secretions, or as the bulk
of the Cutaneous is to the bulk of the Belly in the natural condition.
Wherefore the Secretion by the Belly must be a Hundred times more than the
Natural, that it may evacuate as much in a Day, as in the like time
Perspiration only Ten times more than the Natural evacuats. Or a whole Man must
evacuate by the Belly a Hundred times in that time he uses to stool once, and
Two Hundred times, or Three Hundred times, who Twice or Thrice: But he who in
the space of a Day in Health uses to stool Ten times, he, when he is Sick, if
he would be Cured by Stooling, must stool a Thousand times.

XII. From the Premises it follows, that any supposed Fever (and indeed the
same will hold in any Disease arising within the Animal) it is Ten times more
probable that it will be Cured by Sweating than by Stooling: For since the
tenth part of Perspiration is equal to Belly Secretion and as easily hapens, or
Perspiration made by the 10 part of the Skin; therefore the probability of the
Cure by any Perspiration, is Ten times more than the probability of the Cure by
Stools: For it is clear that Stools are only one way, but there are Ten Cases
in which Stools do not happen, viz. as many as there are Quantities of
Perspiration equal to Stools: And therefore the expectation of Stools is One to
Eleven, and the expectation of the Cutaneous is as Ten to Eleven (see the
Writings of the Geometritians) and the expectation of the Cutaneous is Ten
times as much as that we expect of the Stools, or the value of the hope of the
first, is Ten times the value of the hope of the second. And it becomes the
prudent Physician to endeavor these Things that will not deceive his Hope.

XIII. We have already discoursed of Secretions that are augmented by Medicines
taken within the Animal, and the ways of the Blood's Circuit. Therefore what is
said of Belly Secretions belongs to that, that is done in the Glandules of the
Liver Pancreas and Intestines, the increase of which is occasioned by
Purgatives, properly so called, or breaking into the Animal beyond the first
Ways.

For as to that Belly Excretion that is made by Lenients which frees the first
Ways from Filth sticking there, these no more relate to Purging, or Belly
Secretion augmented, than washing of the outward Skin is referred to the same.
For these Lenients only promove Perspiration of the Intestines like to that of
the Skin: For the Pores of the Intestines being opened, there breaks forth a
greater bulk of Perspiration, than from the like portion of the upper
Superfices of the Body, and these Pores are opened by Medicines cleansing
Filth, chiefly by fit Emeticks.

It Is fit here to admonish the proportion of Secretion given by Sanctorius
obtains in sound Bodies, in which this most deserving Physician has examined
all the Stools (made up of these things which went in to the lacteal Vessels,
and which went not in) But we chiefly discourse of Excrements sent from the
Mass of Blood by the Canals of the Liver and Pancreas and intestinal Glands.
For in sound Bodies, not using Medicines, this Excretion, by ways conveying
liquors from the Mass of Blood, is a very small quantity, and in these that are
costive this is scarce observable. Wherefore the respect that the Cutaneous
Secretion has to the Belly, will be much more than Ten to One, or also more
than a Hundred to One. What may be deduced hence any Body may see.

XIV. Let there be Two Elastick Canals or Conduits, having Orifices alike upon
unequal Diameters, let them receive at every Pulse quantities of alike Liquor,
proportional to the Orifices. From these Things that the Elements teaches it is
manifest.

First if the number of the Pulses in the lesser Pipe* be more than the number
of the Pulses in the greater, in the inverst reason of the Orifices, the
quantities of the Liquors that in the given time flow throw these unequal
Channels, will be equal, but the velocity of the Liquid flowing throw the
lesser, will be more than the swiftness of that flowing by the greater in
proportion to the Pulses.

Secondly, If the number of the Strokes or Pulses in the greater be more (that
is, if the Times or Vices in which the greater Canal receives it is Liquor be
more in number than the Vices that the lesser receives its liquor) the quantity
of the Liquide running throw the greater, in the given time, will be greater
than the other in the compound reason, according to the proportion that the
number of the Pulses of the greater, bears to the number of the Pulses of the
lesser, with the respect that the Orifice of the greater, has to the Orifice of
the lesser. But the swiftness of the Liquor flowing throw the greater, will be
greater in swiftness than that flowing throw the lesser, in the abovementioned
proportion of Pulses.

From which it follows, where the Pulse is more frequent than the Natural, that
is where the number of the strokes is greater, in the reason first exposed (as
it is in Fevers) thesw feness of the Liquor going throw the Arteries is
greater, although the Pulse be also less than the Natural, that is, if the
Canal becomes less, and is less dilated. Moreover if the number of the Pulses
in the greater Canal be greater, that is, if the Pulse be both more frequent
than the Natural, and also greater than the Natural, then the quantity of Blood
carried through the Arteries in the given time will be much more than the
Natural, viz. in the composed Reason declared in the second place. This case
happens often in Fevers, and the Velocity of the Blood must be according to the
proportion of the Pulses or of the frequency. Let them see who are concerned,
what way these Phaenomena's of the Pulses may be explained by the circuit of
the Blood, slower than the Natural, and ascribed to Fevers by more Medicasters
than one.

Now by your leave Gentlemen, having spoken so much of Perspiration, I will
explain and demonstrat Bellinus his Theorem: For none that I know, although it
be a most pretty one have given the Demonstration of it. The Theorem is thus.

The whole quantity of Perspiration coming every Minute from a Shred, whose
weight is a Scruple, is 1200 part of a Scrup. That I will show by the following
Method.

Sanctorius declares, that in the space of 24 Hours the Perspiration is 50
Ounces, which makes 1200 Scrup. that is, 50x24 Scrup. Therefore we perspire in
the space of an Hour 50 Scr. and every Minute of an Hour there is perspir'd in
the whole Body 5 six parts of a Scrup.

Since then the middle quantity of the weight of the Body of Man is 160 lib.
which are equal to 60000 Scr. or 50x1200 there is every Hour expired from the
whole Body a quantity of Perspiration, which is 1200 part of the Body: And
therefore from every part of the same there will expire the 1200 part, or in
the space of an Hour there will go out of every Scrup. the 1/1200 of a Scrup.
Therefore in that Man whose sum of the Shreds by which Perspiration is driven
is 1/60 of his whole Body, that is (of a Man of middle weight) 3 lib. that sum
will be at least 1000 Scrup. Therefore there behooves to sweat out by those 1000
Scrup. every Hour 50 Scrup: or by 1 Scrup. every Hour 50/1000 Scrup. must sweat
out, that is 1/20 Scrup. And therefore in the space of a Minute, or 1/60 part
of an Hour there will sweat out through 1 Scrup: 1/60x20 or 1/1200 Scrup: as
Bellinus finds.

And because the weight of Perspiration, all things being considered, is
according to the weight of the Body perspiring. Therefore in a Body of 120 lib.
or 45000 Scrup. the Perspiration in 24 Hours will be equal to 900 Scrup: and
Perspiration every Hour will be equal to the 37 Scrup. Whence every Hour there
perspires 1200 part of the Body, and so proportionably of every part and
Scruple, because 45000 Scrup: make 1200x37 Scrup. Wherefore in that Body in
whom the outmost Cuticle of the Uterus, Intestins, Lungs, Jaws, etc. made about
2 lib. the sum of the Shreds also by which Perspiration last went throw, was at
the least 750 Scrup: or the 60 part of her Body. For she died of an immoderat
Issue or Emoragy of Blood from the Womb, the third Day after Childbirth, but
her Body was 106 lib. Now throw these 750 Scrup. there behoved every Hour to
come out 37 Sc. that is every Hour out of every Scruple to come out 37/750
Scrup. that equals 1/20 Scru. seeing 20x37 equals 750: Therefore every Minute or
1/60 of an Hour, there will come out throw 1 Scr. 1/60x20 Scr.=1/1200.

Q. E. D. i. e. Quod Erat Delirandum.
FINIS.

