A PLEA FOR SUCCESSION, In Opposition to Popular Exclusion.

Wherein it is Evidenced, That an ASSOCIATION, Or any other such METHOD; Is a
more immediate way to Arbitrary Power; And a more certain Road to POPERY: Than
a standing up to the RIGHT of SUCCESSION, Can in any Reason be supposed to be.

With some Remarques on Coleman, and his Letters.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis, in Amen-Corner. 1682.

A PLEA FOR SUCCESSION, In Opposition to Popular Exclusion, etc.
THESE Papers are part of an Answer to a Pamphlet Entitled, No PROTESTANT
PLOT, part 1. and were designed to have accompanied the rest in their travels
and fortune in the World: But being an entire Discourse of it self, and run to
this length, and being founded on so small a part of the Libel; I resolved for
these, and other Reasons to send it abroad by it self.

That Libel pleads, Page 8. They, viz. the Protestants, know what they are to
hope for from a Popish Successor.

Where we will observe,

1. That the Pamphlet acknowledges his Royal Highness, whom all Men know he
understands by Popish Successor, to be Really Heir, and Lawful Successor to the
Crown: a Truth, that was formerly denied by some, but now stands confirmed by
Three Houses of Commons in their Votes of Exclusion. It being therefore the
sense of the Commons of England, as well as the concession of this Pamphlet, it
is expected we shall hear no more tidings of a Black Box with Fine Novels, and
True Protestant Rarities in it.

He calls him a Popish Successor.

2. We answer, he should first prove before he calls him so. For he never
declared himself such; and those Topics, from whence they would prove this
charge, do admit of very easy, and reasonable answers. We well remember this
was a brand, they set upon His Royal Father, who was the Glory of all
Protestant Princes; and that in order to the dispoyling Him of His Crown, and
Kingdoms. This was set upon all Loyal Subjects, in order to the seizure of
their Estates. This is a brand set again upon His present Majesty, who is
worthily styled Defender of the Faith: and on every honest man, that is ready
to defend his King and Country: in order to the burying them all in a common
ruin. This is just like the Man's giving his Dog an ill name; not because he
deserved it, but that the People might rise and stone him. Therefore (if the
burnt Child may dread the fire) we may suspect that the same charge may be
fastened on His Royal Highness, not so much from merit, as design. But was it
apparently so, I might believe, not because they say, but because I see it.
Their Testimony will induce me, rather to reject, than receive the thing to
which it is given: For even the world does now see, That neither Truth, nor
Justice, is to be found amongst them.

If the Proverb be true, viz. like Master, like Man, we must conclude His Royal
Highness a Protestant, because His Chaplains, and Retinue are such; nor does he
mingle with the Service of the Roman Church.

But because suppositions grant nothing, and that our subject so requires, we
will humbly beg the favor to suppose, That His Royal Highness was once a Roman
Catholic; yet if so, it is very inconsequent to call him a Popish Successor,
because that both speaks Him a Papist now, and also supposes he will be such at
the very instant of Succession; which lies beyond the reach of our knowledge.
For if of a Protestant, he ever became a Roman Catholic, he may return to what
he was; one change speaks the possibility of another: for what has been, may
be again.

But however, having fastened this imputation on him, he would affright us with
what we must expect under Him. They know what they must expect from a Popish
Successor,

Now view Him in His Ancestors, and the World has not been Blessed with milder
Princes, than the STVARTS: and Wolves are never born of Lambs. View Him in His
Royal Person, and you see no ugly Characters of a cruel Prince. View Him in His
Conduct; and He has, like a cheering Sun, thawed the Northern World, and
overcome a Scottish Nation; not with Arms, but with Love, and Wisdom; where He
is now become, next His Majesty, the Pride, and Darling of the Age. He has
there trod the Steps of His Royal Brother, in giving Lives to them, that made
His own the mark, they aimed at. Therefore that thus Wretch should set his ugly
paw on so fair a Character, is a Sin too great for any Goodness, less than
their own, to Pardon.

Then Page 7. says, He has a Memory tenacious of old Injuries, and -- not
inclinable to Forgive.

From both which together it is Evident, that their fears are founded, not so
much on the Princes Nature, as their own Desert. They know they have above all
measures abused, and injured Him; and therefore think He will remember them.
There is no Judge like an Evil Conscience, whose Sentence will not be bob'd off
by an Ignoramus.

The truth then is, some particulars have sinned themselves (as their own Guilt
tells them) beyond a Pardon, and therefore can find no expedient, but an
Exclusion. A fine contrivance! To imbroyl Three Kingdoms in a Bloody War, and
destroy Thousands of Innocent Persons, and hazard the whole at last; for the
carrying off a few particular Offenders; and those such too, whose timely
change may yet atone their former Wickedness. Such Men perplex our Affairs,
and possess the People with an Evil Spirit of Jealousy, and Fear. Such Men
make strange Chimerical Bugbears, and Hobgoblins; and then lay 'em in the Paths
of Obedience, to affright poor silly Mortals out of their Way, their Wits,
their Honesty, and Lives at once.

And certainly did the People know; were they so happy as to see, the Designs
of a few cunning Heads, who would use their Lives, and Fortunes, to the ends of
their own Impunity, Covetousness, and Ambition: they would easily sit Deaf to
all those Charms, whereby they would tempt them to their own ruin. Some Men
have Plotting Heads, but they want your Hands, and Purses, to carry on their
Designs: For the gaining which, they Belly the Government, Perjure Causes, and
Dress up all things in the most Tragical Garbs, that Wit, and Malice can
invent; that as, on the one Hand, they draw People by the Golden Dreams of a
Gospel-Magistracy, and a Gospel Ministry; so on the other, they may fill them
with Horror and Despair, under present Establishments; and by both together run
them into those Calamities which they would persuade will otherwise come upon
them. This is a mere, Kid-napping the People, as the Ignoramus Man did the Boy,
by Lies, and Sugar Plums, into an utter Slavery. A pretty Invention to tempt
Men into Confusions, and a State of War, for their own safety; into Plunders,
and Death, for the preservation of their Persons, and Estates. A Cause, that
some Whigish Council, who quote Laws, as the Devil did Scripture; to the ends
of Sin, and Mischief, may encourage; but no honest Man persuade.

But in case Men will by such Sirens be tempted from the Ships to a foaming
Sea: from Vines, and Fig Trees, to Arms, and Fields of Blood: from the security
of their Estates, to Free Quarter, and Plunders: and from the safety of their
Wives and Daughters, to Rapes and Violence: they are the betrayers of their own
Liberties, and deserve to stand scored for Fools and mad Men to all Posterity.
For why should I hazard my Person, Family, and Estate, to all the Calamities of
War; for the humor, and interest of a few Men, who by my sufferings would save
themselves: and raise their own Honors, and Command on my ruin? Or why should
I from a fond Fear, and foolish Dread of Lawful Governors, only because
Designing Men put frightful Vizors on them; run my self into Arbitrary Power,
Usurpations, and Tyrannies of fellow Subjects, which the Nation has so lately
groaned under. Which yet is the end of all their Intrigues, their Clubs,
Sallaries, culling of Juries, Conventicles, and Libels: they all conspire in
the Design of Spiriting Men from their King, and Country; to become Drudges in
their own Plantations: till the whole Land be made a Carolina, a Pensilvania,
and a Jamaica, where cruel Saints would have the Rule over us.

Now the particulars, the Libel would have us to fear from this Successor, are
two, Arbitrary Power, and Popery: as the next Lines plainly discover.

In answer to which, I will here make it out to the Reasons of Men, that in
case His Royal Highness, were now a Roman Catholic, yet our keeping up to the
Right of Succession, is not by many odds so ready, and certain a Road to
Arbitrary Power, and Popery both, as the Association, or any other such Popular
way is.

1. For Arbitrary Power the case is plain.

For it is the confidence, and ordinary boast of these Men, that they do not
fear this, while the Exchequer is low. This is plain in the Speech of the Noble
Peer, and from numerous instances among that Party. And this very Libel says,
Page 5. That the King has need of the Love of His People: by which it is there
plain, he means their Purses, as well as Hearts. Whence they are so far from
fearing the King should Press them; that even they are bold to Press the King:
and will yield Him no Money, unless He dearly Buy it, with His own Prerogatives.
Men serve themselves on the necessities of the Crown; and are Arbitrary in
making their own Will a Law, while they would have more simple minds believe
the King is doing so.

Now what is thus able to hinder all, that is Arbitrary, in the present King,
is as apt, and powerful in its own Nature, to hinder it in His Successor.
Therefore upon what Grounds, or Reasons, they do not fear this Evil under His
present Majesty; upon the same Grounds, or Reasons, they need not fear it under
a Succeeding Prince. At present then we are free, and even these Men themselves
do boast, we need not fear the Yoke: and consequently where they cry out of any
Arbitrary Power, it must be from Design, and not from any real Fear.

Whereas if we follow the Association, or any Popular way of Exclusion, we do
ipso facto, at the very first motion, step into all, that is Arbitrary. For
hereby we cast our Religion, Lives, and Fortunes, into the Power of a few Men,
whom Faction, Guilt, or Interest, shall persuade to head the Party. Which done,
they must necessarily run us into another Bloody War, to beat down present
Establishments, and to fix their own placits in their room. Which cannot be
done, without great Expenses, and severe Taxations, together with the pretty
Tricks of Public Faith, and the wheedling poor Girls out of all their Plate,
viz. Thimbles, and Bodkins. Which Payments must be raised, not according to
Laws, which are against them, but at their own pleasures: and they, that this
way take a part, may as well take the whole. Then as to Order and Government,
none can say what they will be, because it will ever depend on the Wills of
them, that at any time shall be uppermost. Here then our Persons, and Estates,
lie all at the mercy of every Proud, and Greedy Committee, who will never want,
while the Subject has it. This then is the Height, and Perfection, of what is
Arbitrary, which yet is the inseparable concomitant of Popular Proceedings.

Now in case these Men after a long, and profuse expense of Treasure and Blood,
shall gain their point, in subduing the Powers; they must necessarily keep up a
standing Army to support the Usurpation; and likewise secure all Elections to
themselves, that they may bring in one Member, as another fails; and Purge out
that again, if it does not just jump with the rest. By which means we doubly
enslave both our selves, and Posterity at once; that is, both to the head
Associators, or Covenanteers, call them what you will; and also to the Army
that upholds them. Which two Bodies for Peace, and Mutual Preservation, must
indulge each other, and divide amongst themselves the spoils of the People, and
the Fat of the Land. And I am sure the People will find fellow Subjects, if
once they gain the Government, more Proud, Covetous, and Tyrannical, than any,
upon whom the Government Devolves by Legal, and expected Descents. For it has
ever been observed, that sudden, and great Advances, make Men insufferably
Imperious, Proud, and Covetous. And when Crown, and Church Lands, are devoured
by hungry Armies, and leading Commons; the necessary Charge of many Usurpers,
and of a standing Army, will much exceed the Expenses of a Crown. Besides all
the superfluities, that Men of the Bench, and the Sword will have, when they
are their own Carvers: which must all come out of the Subjects Pockets.
Therefore the Association, or any Popular way of Exclusion, brings Men
immediately under not only Arbitrary Power, but withal, under the most certain,
necessary, and unsupportable Oppressions too.

But some may here Object, that they will avoid all this mischief, for they
will only put His Royal Highness by; and clap another in the Throne. They will
alter a Person, but leave the Government untouched, till Parliamentary ways
shall Purge, and Correct the Laws.

We answer, This is a right Fools Paradise; and as Impracticable a thing, as
the building Castles in the Air. For,

1. A Rebellion, if prosperous, can never set Bounds to it self, that thus far,
and no farther will we go. Which we prove two ways.

1. From matter of Fact; for the Commons that took up Arms against the late
King, pretended they would only remove Evil Counselors, and bring the King to
His Parliament. And truly, I believe the Body of those Men did intend no more,
but to make the King a slave to His Parliament, and themselves. But this Army
soon fell into many wretched Sects, and had as many Interests as Parties: by
which means, while they all Conspired against what was an Obstruction to the
whole; they were yet in contest, who should make his best advantage of it, when
the point should be gained. Which done, the strongest Party carries away the
Ball, and follows not what was intended by others, but what was most
advantageous to themselves. And while these use the Sweat, and Blood of Fools,
that first began the War, to their own ends; up starts a new Player, who
changes the Scene, and befools them all. And upon every change things still run
to a farther excess; till at last those, who began, and set Bounds to this
Monster, viz. Popular Tumult, were inslaved with them, whom they first opposed.
This is just like the Man in the Horn, the farther he creeps, the more he is
straightened, till at last he would fain get out, if he could. When Men in these
ways fight, as some yet speak, pro aris, and focis, they usually fight, till
they have nothing, but smoke and ashes left them. For while Members were
excluded; Generals, and other Commanders changed; and Governors crept up, and
again thrust down one another; we gradually fell under a Monster of Government,
that had so many Heads, we could neither number, nor well understand, which
they were: and things were driven beside, and beyond, the first intention, to
such Tragical events, that will blush in History to all Posterities.

2. From Reason, which gives us to expect the like mischiefs from a like
success of Arms. For here are the same Parties, the same Principles, the same
Interests, the same wicked Policies, cunning Heads, Self ends, and (which is
the complement of all) the same Devil working in the Sons of Disobedience, that
there was before: whence we must expect the same Contests, and Confusions; for
the same Cause will still produce the same Effect.

If there be any alteration among these People, it is for the worse: for they
are much more giddy-headed, rash, and implacable, than they were before the
beginning of the last Rebellion. And the Presbyterians, who are for Government,
though not for such; are generally sunk into Independency which is for such a
Government, that it is indeed for none at all. For all our Conventicles are in
their present state Independent; every such Body, like a flock of wild Geese,
following none, but their own giddy motions. If any thing guides them, it is
mere Opposition, which once ceasing, they fall by the Ears among themselves.
Therefore having lived Libertines so many Years, they will never receive any
Yoke: and consequently confusions must be greater, and things run to farther
excesses, than before. But,

2. In case of success of Arms, these Men would never design, or yield to set
up a King. For,

1. While they are in the way of Conquest, they will, as fast as may be, seize
not only all Church Lands, and honest Men's Estates, but all the Revenues of the
Crown too: which, as they are gained, must go not only to the necessary support
of these kind of Commons, or States, and payment of the Army; but must be given
to some as rewards of their Services, and to others to secure them to the
Party; and when these leading Men have once got them in their Clutches, they
will never resign them; but will be against a King, that they may still enjoy
His Revenues.

2. Soldiers are always for continuing in Arms; and for that Reason alone, will
be against a King, and a settled Government; which rendering them useless, will
soon Disband them.

3. If they yield to any Form of Government, it will be such, that themselves
may partake in; and therefore such, whereby they may farther secure their own
Usurpations, and Arbitrary Proceedings.

Men are quite-mistaken in their measures between Lawful Governors, and
Usurpers: The former have nothing, whether Power, or Revenues, but what is
their own; and from them is to descend to their Heirs: therefore as they fear
none, so they bend their thoughts to the good of the Subject, as well as of
themselves: and many times prefer the Peoples, before their own particular
advantages: as His Majesty has done in many instances, viz. in making the
Thirty Ships of War more large, and fit for Service, than the Tax given by the
Parliament would do: in passing the Irish Bill; and in maintaining about Three
Years War at Tangier, to the expense of near One Hundred Thousand Pound per
annum, and bringing things to an honorable, and advantageous Accommodation;
commodation; and all at the very time: when, beside the keeping a Fleet of
Ships continually in the Streights, for preserving our Trade; the Commons did
successively signify, they would give no Money, how pressing soever the
necessities of State might be. As Kings are Fathers of their Country in the
Language of Nature; and Nursing Fathers in that of Revelation, so they have a
Paternal Care, and Love of their Subjects; Providence has made them a Sun, and
a Shield, whose Influences, and Protection, reach to all Parts of their
Dominions. The Peoples folly, and madness, may look upon their own Interest, as
distinct from that of the Crown; but Kings esteem them so entwisted together,
that they cannot be separate.

But Usurpers have at the most but their own Lives in the case, the Devil knows
who may follow 'em; therefore they care not how Beggarly they leave the Soil to
the next Invader. They have nothing, but what is other Men's; whence they fear
both the Right owner, and what is their only due, viz. Sentence, and Execution
for the Violences, they have done. Therefore all their Designs lie, not for the
Peoples Good, but their own Preservation. And because nothing is so jealous as
Guilt, they never think themselves safe, but when their security, viz. the
Sword, is in their own Hands: whence they will never part with their Power to
any, for fear they should, at least accidentally, betray themselves. The King
before His Restoration, promised Pardon to all, the Regicides only excepted;
the performance of which Promise, they might have been Infallibly certain of,
both from the King's Nature, and the then present circumstances of things: and
yet both the Rump, and the Army, were as irreconcilably set against His Return,
as if the One was to have been Roasted, and the Other Tied up, the first day
the King should set Foot on the Shore: and the Reason was not only that they
might still Domineer, and Eat up the People; but might still stand their own
Defenders. Nothing is so sweet as stolen Honors, and Command: nor so
satisfactory to a Guilty Malefactor, as self-Defence.

But you will say the cases are not alike: for the Army will set up a Person,
from whom they will have no Pardons, but Smiles to receive for their Services.
Those looked upon the King at best, but as a reconciled Enemy; from whom they
could hope for nothing, but to escape Hanging: but these will look upon this
Person as their Friend, who will be ready to advance, and benefit them: and
therefore will be more ready to set up him, than the others were to receive the
King.

We Answer,

1. That this supposed Army will be as unwilling to be put out of a way to
Live, and to give up the Power, and Revenues, they have got into their Hands,
as the other were before; and consequently will be as much against a King, as
they.

2. The Heirs to the Crown must be supposed, at least some of 'em, still in
being; and therefore waiting an opportunity of recovering their own: for which
very cause, as well as others, they will not part from their Power, in giving
the Sword out of their Hands; lest by some slip of Government, or any other
means, the Right owner return; from whom (after a second Rebellion) they must
not expect so large an Indemnity.

When the Roman Armies Ruled the Empire, they were never willing to part from
their Power; though indeed they made Emperors, yet they unmade them again at
their pleasure, and forced the Senate to confirm their next Election, that for
many successive Reigns, they still rode Masters of the Government. In like
manner the Parliament Army would have shook off Oliver Cromwell, though at last
their General, and set up by themselves: neither could he have held it; had he
lived but a little longer. Next they tumble down his Son Richard, and set up
themselves again under their General Lambert. Nor must you ever expect that
another Army of the People, if it once come to tread down all Authority, and
Laws, will act any otherwise; because it is their Interest to do so. They will
not voluntarily give up their Arms, and become your Servants, and be turned a
Begging at your pleasure; when they are once become your Masters.

But to return a little back, whom will you suppose this Army to set up? It
must not be the Lawful Successor, which is His Royal Highness, for whose
Exclusion, they pretend to rise: nor His next Heirs, who will not take it over
a Fathers Head; and in whose Hands Rebels will not put themselves, least
Justice should overtake them. But it must be one, whom we must suppose a very
Usurper; who therefore, like the Protector, must keep up this Army to secure
himself. For if he Disband them, he is exposed to the Lawful Heir; to whom the
Loyal Party will adhere, and great part of these Forces so Disbanded will fly;
some out of revenge, and others, that they may still have something to do.
Therefore in fine it comes to this, viz. that you must Petition, and ask this
Army first, whether you shall have a King or not: and then afterward, how long
you shall keep Him. For if they stand, they are able to put by your King at
pleasure; and if Disbanded, they make way for the owner.

People are thus vilely mistaken, in reckoning what mighty feats, they may do
by Arms; because they do not consider the different Interest of the People, and
of an Army. Take the People peaceably imbodyed together, and they are a Civil
Society, whose Interest is Government, and Trade; without either of which they
perish: but raise an Army from amongst this Body, let them ride over all
Authority, and Power, and their circumstances are quite altered; for they are
now unhous'd, disfurnish'd of Goods, Tools, Implements, and Commodities: and
some never had any: they are now grown Idle, Proud, and Imperious: and can
neither Beg, nor Work. Therefore their Interest is quite altered too: which is
no more to sit under Laws, and follow their Labor, and Trades; but to continue
in Arms, to inslave, and eat up the People. And those very Men of them, that
have other thoughts now, yet will have these, if they ever fall into such
Circumstances: a Man's mind, and sentiments, usually vary with his condition.
For Men are always ready to follow their Interests, to take their advantages,
and make their own markets. Therefore the People in such ways do but conjure up
a Devil, which they will never be able to lay: and which will give them no
King, unless such an one, as Jupiter gave the Petitioning Frogs, which devoured
some, and made all the rest a weary of him.

Nor is there any help in such a case, unless it fall down from Heaven, as it
did before; For the Commons, whom you suppose to have Commissioned these
Forces, and from whom alone you can expect it; neither will, nor can help it.
For,

1. They share with the Army in their stolen Revenues, and Estates, ergo, will
not help it.

2. This Army, if displeased, will exclude some Members, and terrify the rest;
or set up a single Person themselves, who be sure shall be one, that has no
pretenses to the Crown, lest he should keep it longer, than he serves their
Interest; but must be a Person whom themselves may reign under: Ergo, the
Commons cannot help it; but each must comply with the other for Mutual
preservation. The Commons must Vote Money for the Army, and themselves together:
and then the Army must force the People to pay it. Whence the Friends to this
way will be utterly disappointed, and find themselves passed out of God's
Blessing into the warm Sun; and will soon become a Thousand times more weary of
their Arms, than they are of what they please at present to call their
Grievances.

4. Look to the People, and there can be no expectation of a King from them,
who are made up of so many, and so different Parties; of whom some can dispense
with the Name, but not with the Power of Kings; they would possibly give the
Title, so they may keep the Authority themselves: under whom (for he must not
live above 'em) a King should not be half so happy, as a Man, that has but
five honest Tenants, whereof one pays Ten, another Twelve, another Fifteen, and
the other each about Twenty Pound per annum. For this Man knows what he has to
trust to, and may command his own: but the other lives precariously, and can
command nothing. Others are for an Universal equality: who, that themselves
might never want, would have none above 'em. Here are a pure sort of Saints,
that will endure none, but King Jesus. And there a late Sect of Puritans, yet
descended with the rest from the old (...), demure things, a narrow Soul'd
People, whose Consciences cannot stretch so wide, as to call any Man Master, or
own any Guide, but the Light within 'em. A special Medley! A Parcel like to
pull down, and destroy, if they can; but not to Establish, and Build up a
Government. Discord brought a Babel to naught, and shattered the first Monarchy
in pieces, and has ruined all the Empires of the World; Ergo the Poets, to
signify all her Works are Desolation, Paint her in a tattered Garment; and if
(after the Observation, and Experience of all Ages to the contrary) we expect
to see her Erect a Throne, and Build up a Church, and that while she is
threatening the ruin of both; we betray our own weakness, and make our selves
one of the greatest Instances of Vanity, that the wise Man has found under the
Sun. But,

3. They never can set up a King, if they would.

For finding so much fault with the Power of Kings, they will never set up One,
unless upon certain Terms, and Restrictions; making Him to hold His Crown, as
one did of old, by feeding of an Horse; or, it may be, some worse Creatures, as
Mules, and Asses. We may conclude the particulars some such, as these, viz.
Imprimis, That the King shall keep none but True Protestant Misses, such as the
Noble Peer, and other good People, use to do. Item, That He shall keep no more
Guards, than Oats, or Bedloe; upon pain of having them Indicted. Item, That He
shall Borrow no Money, lest He make His loving Subjects Enemies to the State.
Item, That He shall be Ruled by His good Subjects. Item, -- Item, -- Item, --
etc.


In which, the People will agree well enough. But the main difficulty will be
about that, which they have the least of, viz. Religion, and Church Government.
It is this, they pretended to Fight for; therefore as every Party did venture
his Blood, so every Party must be satisfied. This then is a Boat, that every
one must have his Oar in; till, like Noah's Ark, it have in it Forty Beasts for
One Man. And if in this great concern, you put these Questions, viz. Whether
the People shall meet in a Steple-House, a Barn, or Stable; or whether (lest
the Spirit should be confined) they shall Assemble, as the Heathen did, in the
open Air? Whether they shall have set Preachers, or Gifted Men; whether this,
or either Sex; and whether these shall Prophecy by turns, or as the Spirit
moves? When Baptism shall be Administered; and whether the Persons shall be
Baptized by Sprinkling, or Diping; and whether in a Wooden Dish, a Platter, or
a Kookingstool? Whether they shall have Parochial, or Gathered Churches? Or
whether the Preachers maintenance shall be raised by Tyth Pigs, or Women's
Pettitoes? And you have cut them out Work for their whole lives. But take in
all the great matters of Government, Doctrine, and Worship, and no two Parties
can any more agree, than heat, and cold. For their Principles are monstrously
different, and the Parties so intollerably stiff, they will yield in nothing:
in all their Religious controversies every Party are like those, that told
Queen Elizabeth, they would not leave an hoof behind, but are resolved to have
every Beast of Opinion with 'em. And when the Church was fallen under them,
they were set as much Tooth, and Nail, one against another. For the Bishops
were not more severely dealt with, as to verbal Abuses, by all Parties; than
the Presbiterian afterward was by the Independent; and the Quaker by the rest.
Therefore though they now all Herd under the comprehensive shade of True
Protestants, yet if ever they run down present Establishments, they fall into
numerous little Fractions; which can no more accord, than Whig, and Tory: being
as much Dissenters one from another, as they are from the Church.

If therefore any shall draw a Scheme of Ecclesiastical Polity, it must wholly
accord either with no Party; but be in some points suited to more, or to all,
and then it pleases none of 'em; or with only one, and then it displeases all
the rest. It is therefore impossible they should ever agree upon what terms to
set up a King; and consequently impossible they should ever set up any at all.
But they must necessarily live in continual Feuds, and act as strength, and
opportunity shall enable 'em. Whence it must necessarily follow, that, either
they must rend one another in pieces; or fall under some subtle head, that
shall inslave the whole. Therefore after all the tricks of wickedness against
King, and Government; and hope of Chimerical constitutions; which, like your
entia rationis, shall never be found any where else, but in Men's fancies, these
Men will at last (if they had their way) bring their Hogs to a fair Market; as
the Devil before them, who choked 'em in the Lake.

Therefore notwithstanding this Objection of shutting out all these confusions,
by setting up such a Person; himself is like to fall from the greatest Glories
of the Kingdom, matters of the Crown only excepted; which Glories he once did,
and may again, if himself please (and all good Men wish, and pray he would)
enjoy; to be tossed up and down, as the Peoples slights: and the People
themselves to fall under that Arbitrary Power, and Tyranny, which an
Association, a Covenant, or a Popular Exclusion, unavoidably leads to. In
which, if I may not be believed, yet I am sure, that Cassandra like, I speak
the Truth.

The result then is this, that instead of Evils in posse, this is the way to
have them in esse. And thus to inslave our selves at present, lest we should be
inslaved some time hereafter, we know not when; is to Act worse than the Man,
that Killed himself for fear of Death. For his Death was certain; but this
supposed Slavery, Men fear, is not so. A deep piece indeed, whose Policies, we
do not yet discern, to run into present, and intolerable Miseries under
Fellow Subjects; rather than live in a possibility of being miserable under
Lawful Governors.

Then,

2. The Association, or any such Popular way; is a more certain, or ready way
to Popery, than a standing up to the Right of Succession, can in any Reason be
supposed to be.

For the Persons, that must be supposed to Associate, are of many very
different, and irreconcilable Opinions; therefore such Association, or Popular
way of Exclusion, must be carried on, not only by a War, but by an Universal
Tolleration too. For if any Party be debarred its Liberty, it falls off from the
rest; and the Exclusion of one will signify nothing; as reaching no ends at
all, without the Excluding more; and the whole dividing will be soon destroyed.

And if ever they gain the Government, an Universal Liberty must still
continue: for no comprehension, nor any imaginable contrivance, can unite, and
bring more than one Party to the same Rule; nor that one neither, unless that
Rule be of its own making: and consequently Establish any one way, what you
will, and all the rest fly off, and conspire the breaking those Methods. Nor
can any one Party oblige all the rest; because the rest in conjunction will
ever be too strong for one. And yet to Establish a Tolleration by Universal
consent is impossible too; for the Presbyterians, when uppermost, declared
against this, as much as ever they did against Popery it self. Therefore take
which part you will, a Tolleration, or no Tolleration; and all the Fat is in
the fire, either on this hand or that. In fine then this must be such a
Liberty, which the People took, when there was no King in Israel; every one
doing what seemed good in his own eyes.

By which means every Party becomes a Body distinct of it self, and we have as
many Scisms, and Separations, and Interests, as Parties: whence every one is
against every one: and whilst they are all endeavoring to promote every Man
his Way, and Party above the rest; they do hinder, and pull back one another,
till they all fall together by the ears. Therefore such Popular Associations,
have War, Liberty, and Confusion, their inseparable adjuncts. Which things do
give the greatest advantage to Popery.

For which cause Oats tells you the Jesuits were stirring up the Scots against
the Bishops, and in defense of their Covenant: and the spring following they
did rise, and declare accordingly: and Fitz-Harys, who was an Irish Papist,
made a disturbance the very design of that Libel, for which he suffered.

Nor does the same Oats say any less of a Tolleration; but speaks it a great
advance to the Popish Interest. And Coleman in his long Letter, says, that the
next Session of Parliament, They, viz. the Papists designed the procuring a
Liberty of Conscience; which, says he, if we gain, will be half our point. In
which last are many Authorities: for he was a Man, that understood the sense of
that Party, as much as any; and consequently we have herein not his private
Sentiments only, but the Judgment of the Jesuits, who were ever acknowledged
well seen in Politics. And truly they had both Reason, and Observation, to
support this confidence.

1. Reason pleads that an Universal Toleration must be much more advantageous
to the Papists, than to Dissenters; because the Papists are kept clear, and
firm to their Principles, and lie in no danger of receiving any thing contrary
to the Doctrine of their Church: but Dissenters, being kept to no Rule, run
into all extravagancy, and receive any wild conceptions, that are suggested to
them: therefore while Dissenters are multiplying Opinions, changing, and
opposing Parties; the Papists are gathering Proselytes from amongst them all.
Therefore if such Toleration be advantageous to Dissenters, which yet they
presume; and therefore received it so joyfully, that Wild returns a Ballad of
Thanks, and his Wise was so transported, she leaves her Gridiron, and runs with
an Herring tail hanging out at her mouth to hear the news; it must needs be
much more advantageous to the Romanists: and therefore considerably so.

But suppose such Liberty Exclude the Papists, yet it matters not much. For
these creep into every Party, and under disguises of Mechanics, and gifted
Men, will have Liberty of maintaining old, and inventing what new Opinions they
please.

Among which they promote especially.

1. Such as set every Party against every one; and incline them, as much as may
be, to the destroying one another.

2. Such, that dispose Men for the receiving the Romish Faith: in which the
Jesuit has went very far already: as in Doctrines of Resistance,
Infallibility, etc. which former, Dissenters have practiced beyond example: and
the latter they as really attribute to their own Teachers, and Parties; as any
Papists do to the Pope, and the Church. Now keep these Notions abstractedly,
and change but the Persons, to whom they are attributed, that is, your Teachers
for the Pope; your Parties for the Church, etc. and the work is none.

Therefore under such a Liberty, the Jesuit either moves such Parties to
weaken one another, till himself becomes able to deal with them all: or else
carries them on to a conceited Perfection, to sit above Ordinances, to dream of
Visions, and Revelations, and a Light within 'em; which supersede, and exclude
the Scriptures. By which means every Man becomes a Guide, and a Rule to
himself: and being beat off from all Religions, he is ready to receive that,
which alone seems to promise him sure footing, and a quiet repose; and to which
certain Opinions already received do dispose him. Then,

2. Observation, and Experience show, that de facto, it has been so already:
for the last Rebellion, Usurpation, and Liberty, that did accompany each,
brought us so near the Gates of Rome, that we cannot imagine what (in those
Circumstances) could have stoped our course, but the expedient Mercy gave us,
viz. His Majesty's Restoration.

Popery never made such advances from the first of Queen Elizabeth, to the
beginning of that Rebellion, as she did from the Rebellion to the end of the
Usurpation: nor had she been near so considerable as now, was it not for the
strength, she gained then.

Therefore the Association, or any Popular Exclusion, which necessarily
introduces a War, and Toleration both; is the very Bait the Romanists have been
laying for us; the Game, they would fain have us at: and consequently had these
Men designed to turn all to Arbitrary Power, and Popery at once; they could not
possibly have cut out apter Methods that way, than an Association is. Whence
the Nation must justly suspect either the Wisdom; or good intentions of such
Men: however their Friends, who are Factors for another Rebellion, would
persuade us they are True Protestants, and the King's most Loyal Subjects.

Whereas while we keep to the Right of Succession, we enjoy our Peace, our
Liberties, Laws, and Religion; which every Wise, and sober Man, will hold,
while he can: and not throw them away in a pet, because some Politic Pates,
that would fain be making their own Markets, would persuade us to do so. And
for the future there are so many hazards between His Royal Highness, and the
Crown, from infectious Diseases, which seize the strong, and healthful; from
decays of Nature, which the weak as well as age, are under; and from the many
accidents, which the most careful, and reserved, are exposed to; especially
Persons of generous, and braving Souls, as His Royal Highness is. Besides Men's
ignorance of his present sentiments; and the changes, that time, Reasonings,
and Observation, may make upon the best, and most knowing Persons: that it is
very highly uncertain, whether he ever come to the Crown such, as is here
represented.

But suppose he should, yet it is not in any Reason to be imagined, that it
should be possible for him to settle Popery amongst us. Indeed when Men look
upon the thing in the gross, they huddle up a thousand difficulties together,
and make nothing of 'em: but when they come to consider the particular means,
and ways, relation being had to the State, and Circumstances of things, whereby
it must be done, if ever it be done; they will soon find their confidence
broken; and themselves at a loss in showing it fairly probable. For if it be
done at all, it must be either by Law, or Arms; but by neither of these; ergo
not at all.

1. Not by Law; because all our Laws are against Popery. Nor are any new ones
like to be made in our times in favor of it. For in all our last Elections of
Representatives, let but a sly Knave set the Brand of Papist on the most known,
and Loyal Protestant; and the People fly him as a Basilick, that is said to
kill with sight, or breath; notwithstanding we are blessed with a Prince, who
so constantly declares both by His Words, and Conduct, for the preservation of
the Protestant Religion, as it is now Established by Law; whence it is not to
be imagined they will (in our time at least) be any way induced to Elect a
Papist; or one, that shall seem Popishly affected, if ever we fall under a
Prince, that may be suspected to look any whit that way.

For though nothing is more shallow, and unconstant, than the People; first in
determining what is Popery, branding now this, and presently that Catholic
Doctrine, and Practice for such; while Popery in many instances goes
unsuspected, and gives the denomination of a True Protestant: and then in
selecting Methods of Exclusion, which are now one, presently another; and
sometimes the very way to let it in; as throwing open, and pulling down the
Church, which is the best Fence and Bulwark against it. Yet great is their
constancy in opposing what they take to be Popery; and though they mistake in
some particulars, yet they will easily see, when it is coming in the full Body
upon 'em. And especially at such a critical time, they will be incomparably
nice, and curious in their Elections.

Indeed People may, perhaps, run into another extreme in Electing Persons, who
by an overhasty zeal, precipitant Councels, and a fearful flying, as they
think, the farthest from Popery, may give it real advantages: but what it gains
this way is not from design, but by accident: not from direct Laws, but by
Consequence. And indeed this is the Road, in which she has traveled, and
gained ground upon us, even under those Men, who, we doubt not, designed her
utter Extirpation. And how serviceable People may be to the ends of Popery in
this way, we fear; but do not suspect they will Elect such, that shall
introduce it by a Law.

Nor can we in Reason be affrighted at the instance under Queen Mary: because
the condition of things is quite different now from. what it was then. For in
those times the Reformation was weak, and in it is Infancy, these Paths were
uncouth, and strange, and few minds heartily reconciled to 'em; great part of
the Nation lay disaffected, and stood Non-conformists to Protestant
Establishments: and the rest of the People (a few only excepted) having really
no Religion in them, were for this, or the other, and therefore ready upon a
change to return to the old way, in which they were born, and their Fathers
before 'em. Hearty Protestants were very few; Papists still made the multitude.
It was therefore, perhaps, more easy for her to restore the Popish Religion,
than to continue the Reformation; and things seemed rather to return, than to
be brought to their former state. But now the Protestant Religion has
flourished so long amongst us, that it has taken deep Root, and is grown into
a Tree, whose top reaches Heaven, and whose Branches are extended to all the
corners of the Land; in her Boughs the Fowls of the Air do build; and under her
shade the Beasts of the People rest. Men have been so terrified with Popish
Hags, and Furies; and night-mared with Monks, Priests, and Jesuits, that they
think there is no Monster in Africa, nor Evil in the World, like these. Your
Adamites, who are shameless as Naked Truth, and Sweet-Singers, who close their
services with promiscuous mixtures; and the Muggletonian, whose Divine
Discourses are the deepest Blasphemies, will unite against this. This Sect no
sooner hears mention of a Pope, but it falls a quaking for fear it should loose
it is own Infallibility, and be forced to transfer it to another; whilst that,
drunk with Venner's Wine, flies to his Sword, and Musket, lest the Vicar
coming should keep out's master. The Atheist will Swear, not by his God, for he
has none, but by the Heavens; and the Ranter by him, that made him; they will
have no Popery, lest they should be bound to some Religion. The late Divine,
who turns from Coat to Gown, from Gown to Coat again; like amphibious Animal,
or water Rat, that lives in this, or the other Element; and now contrary to the
Antipendium way, stands with Brazen head, and Silver Screw, fast set into all
Sects at once: will for ever turn tail on Rome, lest he should be enjoined too
hard a Penance. Those, whose hungry Titles have eat up all their Grace, and
Honor; with the whole Tribe of True Protestants, who matter no Religion, are
however against this: and he, that would not give a Groat for continuance of
the Gospel, is yet ready to venture his life against Popery. So disparate, and
unlike, are our present things, to what Queen Mary found, that we must not
think what was easy then, to be possible to a Papist Prince now; and
consequently those expedients, that would not have been sufficient in her days,
might yet have been sufficient in ours.

It is not likely then, that Popery should (in our days at least) come in by
Law: Nor yet

2. By Arms; for if so, it must be either by our Arms alone, or in conjunction
with Foreign aids. But,

1. Not by our own Arms alone: For most of the Nobility, and many considerable
Gentry, are Interested in Abby-Lands, or Impropriations: which things alone
will engage them against it. Religion moves but slow against secular Interest,
and present Advantages. And whereas it may be pleaded, that such shall be
recompensed out of the Estates of Protestants; let it be considered;

1. That Men will not easily part from an Estate in certain, for one in hopes
only: with all Men present possession goes far.

2. Many of these will be suspicious that themselves may be the Protestants,
out of the other part of whose Estates, some Sons of Rome must be rewarded.

3. There are so many, that have already, and will yet suffer, for the Popish
Interest, before this day can be supposed to come, who must be first
considered; that they must needs think, there will be but little, if any thing
left for them.

Therefore this Objection can be allowed but little, or no strength to the
ends, for which it is made. Whence consider that the Body of our Nobility, and
Gentry, are Protestants: the Papists being but like a few exceptions from a
general Rule: and some of that Body, that some may think possible to be swayed,
are strengthened, and seeured by Interest. How few then are there, that are like
to appear promoters of this Cause.

2. It does appear upon all public occasions, that the People are so far
prejudiced against this way, that they are truly Impoysoned: and instead of
promoting the Papal, are ready to promote another Interest, to the ruin of all
present Establishments. So far are they transported with a blind, and
precipitant zeal against it; that they are ready to commit those very Treasons,
Rebellions, Murders, etc. for the keeping it out, which themselves say others
would have done, for the bringing of it in.

3. The Loyal Churchman, who never made the Bible speak Treason, nor Religion
the Patroness of Murder: but draws his Principles from precepts, and examples
of Scripture; and from all Primitive Practice, has learned to love his King,
and therefore he will not resist him: and to Love his Religion, and for that
Reason, he will not help to destroy it. He has been taught in the same Acts to
Fear God, and to Honor the King; by yielding Passive, where he cannot yield
Active Obedience. Therefore if he shall ever fall under a King, that shall set
up Popery; he neither helps forward the work, nor resists the Powers; but
commits himself to Him, who governs the Kingdoms upon Earth: which of old was
called, the Faith, and the Patience of the Saints. Now when these stand Neuter,
it is utterly impossible that the Papist Party should ever do any thing by
Arms, upon the numerous Body of Dissenters.

Indeed if Dissenters prepare, or begin a resistance, or if at any time they
take up Arms against the King, the case is quite altered: for then the King,
and all Loyal Subjects, whom these Parties all brand for Papists, are equally
endangered: and then we are bound to defend both our King, and our selves,
against fellow Subjects, who have no Authority to disturb us.

Now suppose we fall under so nice, and trying a case, that we conceive we
cannot defend our King, but we must enable Him to inslave our selves and
Enemies together: yet however, we must do our Duty, and leave the event to God.
For we are not to sin our selves, that thereby we may prevent others from doing
so. You cry Popery is coming, and therefore Rebel: now we do not see the
Popery, but we see the Rebellion: we cannot tell whether that will ever come;
but we see the other is come already. Now we are to take the safest side; but
if we join with you, we may be gulled into a needless War, as many were in the
time of the late King; whereas by a Rebellion, the Powers, the Government, and
every private Interest are endangered. Moreover, if we run on your side; we are
sure to be undone, which way soever the Victory falls: for if you are overcome,
we perish with you, as Malefactors; but if you do overcome, we are ruined by
you: and if we sit still, you destroy us, and our King together. Therefore in
such a case, as duty commands, so safety presses us, to defend our selves, and
King at once; without considering Him as such, but simply as our King, and
therefore whether he be this, or that: which is agreeable to the voice of God,
both in Nature, and Revelation too. And indeed if we allow any Liberty of
resistance, we bring confusion, into the World; set all Government upon Hinges,
and make a gap for all manner of Villainies to creep in at. Whence St. Paul
discoursed like a Politician, as well as a Divine, when he commanded the Romans
to submit, and not to resist the Powers, even when Nero was their Emperor, who
was justly branded for the Monster of Mankind. Therefore unless Dissenters by
their Rebellions give such advantages to Popery; it cannot in our time come in
by our own Arms. Nor,

2. By Foreign Aids. For,

1. If a King shall make use of such, He takes the readiest course imaginable
to disoblige His Protestant Subjects. Especially since these Aids must be
supposed to come from France: against whom the English have the greatest
antipathy of any People in the World.

2. In case the French King come at all, he must come with very numerous
Forces; and consequently leave himself weak at home: and thereby would draw all
Neighbor Princes upon him; not only for the recovery of what he has lately
taken from them; but also to hinder his farther growth; whereby he may set up
himself an Universal Monarch over this part of the World. By which means he
would soon be drawn off to save his own at home.

3. We cannot in Reason think the King of England will ever call in those; who,
if too weak, loose Him His Crown; and, if strong enough, will take it from Him.
For hereby he would bring Himself into a certain ruin, either by His Subjects
at home, or His Aids from abroad.

Look into the World, and tell me where Protestant, or Papist Princes, either
in this or in former Ages, use to sell their Kingdoms into the hands of any,
for the sake of forcing their Subjects to a Religion, they could not otherwise
oblige 'em to. Honor, and secular Interest, cause Princes of the same Religion
to War one upon another. At this very time the Emperor, the King of Spain, the
French King, and Italian Princes, though all Roman Catholics, are either in a
War, or upon their Guards, every one waiting but till another strikes. Queen
Mary while settling Popery at home, lost the last of the English Conquests on
the Continent of France. And can we think that the King of England will tread
counter to all the Kings upon Earth? That he alone had rather have no Subjects,
than not have them in all points such, as himself could wish? Judge by your
selves, and you will believe there is no Man so mad, as rather to have no
Estate, than not have a few encumbrances with it.

Indeed when Subjects are contending for the Government, they usually call in
Foreign assistance: for when once it comes to this point, that they must have
such Aids, or fall, it is easy determining what to do. For by such means they
may reach their end; however they can but fall; and, they think, better fall
under a Foreigner, who by their means may gain the whole; than under the
Powers, they would have dispossessed: for the former may give 'em Life: the
latter the Gallows. Thus our True Protestant Rebels called in the Scots. And a
piece Entitled, The growth of Knavery, tells you by what Lord they desired the
French King to be ready, in case they should Pray his Aids. And this at that
very time too, when they were charging the late King with Foreign
Correspondencies; it being ever their way to charge those Evils on the
Government, which they are Acting their own selves: as again in this case,
because they may not Act: Arbitrarily in choosing Sheriffs, contrary to the Law,
and usage of this City for many Ages before us; and contrary to their own
Order, in the Reign of King Charles the first, they cry out of Arbitrary Power;
as if they could never make Persons, and things appear so odious, as by putting
them in their own Livery. Their Brethren the True Protestants in Hungary,
having Rebelled against their Emperor, call in the Turk, and are shuting out
the Bible by the Alcoran. But as Kings may fall, but cannot rise, so they are
very jealous of their Interest both at home, and abroad, and industriously
careful that they give none an advantage against them.

And certainly none could have thought such a thing of His Royal Highness, was
it not for Coleman's Letter: which, as His Royal Highness did deny to be writ
by His order, or knowledge, so we have all the Reason in the World to believe
Him, not only from the unreasonableness of the Hypothesis, as before; but
farther,

1. From Coleman's Interest, and Temper: who, if things succeeded, was to have
had a great place: and as he was a Man of zeal, and performances, so he had
this vanity, that he loved to Magnify each. Therefore that he might appear
considerable, and drive on things as fast as they could go; it is extremely
probable he might exceed in the accounts, he gave: especially touching His
Royal Highness, because the thoughts of gaining, or honor of using His name in
this matter, would both have Magnified Coleman's fame, and merits, and also
above any thing else, have put life into their affairs. It is usual for
aspiring minds to derive a Reputation to themselves, and their affairs, by
pretending the favor of those great Personages, who have but once Smiled, or
passed a Courtship upon them. And especially Men of designs advance their
matters under the umbrage of those Authorities, that they were never acquainted
with. And in the case before us, the reproach, that might have been feared from
the discovery of his prevarication, he might easily think to keep off, both by
the commendation of his Zeal, and also by the present advantages, he expected
to have made from such an Account.

2. From Oats, and Bedloe, who clear His Royal Highness from the PLOT: Oats in
his Depositions Swears, That the Jesuits durst not trust Him with the knowledge
of it: giving this Reason, viz. for he would never agree to it. And again they
resolved, That if the Duke would not accept the Crown on their terms, they
would send Him after the King. Now do you believe Oats, or no? If you do
believe him, then acquit the Duke from the PLOT; if you do not, then you make
him Perjured, and therefore to be believed in nothing: it comes then to this
point, viz. that you must either believe the Duke was not acquainted with the
PLOT, or else destroy all Oats's Evidence.

Now observe the prodigious impudence of Dangerfield. Oats Swears the Jesuits
dare not trust the Duke with knowledge of the PLOT: and Bedloe, that they
dreaded He would never be reconciled to their Methods: yet this Monster of
Villains Swears, He was acquainted with the Design upon the King's Person. Now
suppose such a Design, and that His Royal Highness, were a Roman Catholic; yet
that the Jesuits should first acquaint the Duke with that Design, and then
suffer Him to Act in it Himself, and that with such a Fellow as this, who has
always lived by wickedness; and whose Story, if true, exceeds that of Guzman,
and the English Rogue, would justly render them as notorious in Folly, as ever
they have been renowned for Politics. Was there nothing in it, but the
Notoriety of the Person in forming, I could no more believe Dangerfield in
this, than I can commend the honesty of Don Tomazo. In the Lord Stafford's
Trial, Mr. Treby, page 40. says, they have proved the PLOT, by Evidence
apparently invincible, -- and by credible Persons: amongst whom was Mr. Smith,
and Mr. Bernard Dennis. And Sir William Jones, another manager for the House of
Commons, proves by Mr. Arnold a Member of that House, and diverse others, that
Mr. Turbervil, was a Man of the fairest Reputation, page 153. But when the same
Men are Evidences for the King at the Old Bailey, they are loaded with numerous
Crimes, and thence made utterly incredible: but among 'em all, show me such a
Fellow as this, and I shall hold him a Person worthy to be gazed at. Indeed the
greater Villain, the more likely to be employed in such a concern; but withal
the more unlikely to be entrusted by such a Personage; where a discovery would
prove incomparably more disadvantagious to his Person, and the whole Cause too,
than if acted by an inferior hand. That the Jesuits should be so shy of the
Duke, as to the PLOT in general, and dread His dislikes; and yet on a sudden
should be so barefaced in this, the top, and perfection of all wickedness,
charged upon them; is the most prodigious madness for any to suppose.

This Wretch was before Angling in another Water, but not catching the Fish, he
comes to this: whence it is probable he was (according to his Methods) seeking
where to make the best advantage; and if once they come to the factious, they
are tied in Golden Chains for ever stiring from 'em. And the rather may we
conclude this, because his charge is so suited to the humor, expectation, and
desire of those Men; who, while they commended the Papist Evidences for so much
as they had said; withal let them know they were yet short in not having
charged the Queen, and the Duke of York. These Discoveries, like paultry
Infects, and some wretched Vermin half formed, and just peeping out of
Corruption, crawling abroad in time; after some warm gleams had a while rested
upon 'em, we may easily guess their Cause, and Origin.

2. For the Jesuits to tell the Duke of the other point, viz. the bringing in a
Foreign Army, had been in effect to let him know, that they were felling those
Kingdoms into Foreign hands, which himself stands Heir to; which is in plain
terms, that they were betraying his Interest, and destroying his Succession: a
thing, that no Man in his private, and narrow capacity, would ever be brought
to; for every one is for securing his own: Therefore whatever some Jesuits
might intend; yet that they should ever impart such a thing to His Royal
Highness, or that His Royal Highness should Design, or Act in such an Affair
Himself, is the most fond, and unreasonable fancy in the World.

Now Coleman in accusing the Duke as to what himself had writ, spoke what in
that Confusion might seem His Interest; regarding not truth, but his own
safety: whereas Oats in his deliberate Depositions, and unconcerned in this
particular, whether so, or not; clears the Duke from having any knowledge of
the PLOT at all, and consequently of these Aids, which was one main part of it.
Therefore if you believe Oats either an honest Man, or well acquainted with the
intrigues of the Papist Party, and the particulars of the PLOT, without which
he was not qualified for a Discovery, you must necessarily receive that part of
his Depositions, which acquits His Royal Highness from any knowledge of these
matters. Therefore the Duke never knowing, nor being ever likely to yield, to
this supposal of Foreign Aids, Popery is not like to come in (at least in our
time) by Arms; and because neither by Arms, nor by Law, therefore not at all.

Unless you plead that if a Papist King (if any such shall be) cannot settle it
by Law, or Arms; yet he may do much by Favor, and Politic advances of it. It
is true, by such means it may make some advances, but cannot come to an
Establishment, or gain the Government: it is but an intruder, and will be soon
thrust out by the next Successors, who after His Royal Highness, are confessed
by all Men to be Protestants.

This Queen Elizabeth found very easy to do; and yet Popery was then of many
Ages growth, and was but checked, or interrupted, rather than removed. For
though Henry VIII. dissolved Abbeys, yet it was Edward VI. that settled the
Reformation, which was not half received, nor well understood by the Body of
the People, before he dies. After whom Queen Mary restores, and continues
Popery near Five Years longer. Whereas now it is a stranger, and generally
disliked; and in the Methods this supposition puts, it can make but very slow
advances; nor can His Royal Highness be supposed (if He outlive the King at
all) to have any considerable time to smile upon it. Therefore being not
Established by Law, nor secured by the Sword, it lives only as a Favorite,
which at the departure of a King, goes off, and makes way, for the Darling of
the next Successor.

If the Church of England though Established by Law, so hardly rubs through the
crowds of Dissenters; who, every step she takes, grin, and show their Teeth,
and stretch out their threatening Paws; and deal by her as the Watchmen by the
Spouse; or the Sober Party by the Lord Mayor, at the late Election of Sh --
justle, and buffer, and pull, or beat off her Veil from her; can we think that
Popery can obtain, merely because supposed to be some little time upon
sufferance amongst us?

The result then is this, viz. an Association, or Popular way of Exclusion,
puts us immediately under Arbitrary Power, and the ready Road to Rome; while
Succession being circumstantiated as it is, may very probably be no way capable
of effecting the Evils, which Men would persuade us to fear. Therefore while
our Libel faith, we know what we must expect from a Popish Successor, we may
more justly say, we know what we must expect from the True Protestant
Association.

In fine, it is certainly a most fond trouble, that we disquiet our selves
withal, about the Succession, and the King of France.

For the Queen may Dye, the King Marry, and leave Heirs of his own body. Or the
Duke may Dye first, and the Succession fall upon a Protestant. Indeed the King
is the elder, but it is so little that it is recompensed in his advantages of
being the first born: for it is held that the Seminal virtue is greater in the
first, than in the second Generation; and in this, than in the third, and so
downwards; whence it is observed that the Eldest Brother generally outlives the
Younger; unless in case of accidents, of contagious Diseases, which seize the
sounder, and stronger Constitutions, rather than the weak, and the more
disposed to Corruption: and of ill Habits, or Diseases, contracted by any kind
of intemperance: accordingly we see His Majesty is the stronger, and more
likely to live; therefore it is not yet come to an even Cast, the odds lie on
the King's side. Therefore for this Reason only, the Evils under a Popish
Successor are improbable, because it is more probable they will not reach us,
than that they will. And certainly it is the greatest folly in the World to
trouble our selves with improbable Evils. Were these Evils certain, but yet at
a distance, solely because they are at a distance, we ought not by the fear of
them to imbitter our lives at present. An anticipation of miseries is a double
misery; and the former, which consists in the fear, is the worst, because
wilful; the latter more supportable, because unavoidable: that is our sin, this
our unhappiness only. The one we bear as Men, the other as Fools. But that men
should make their lives uneasy by a load of Plagues, which are both at a
distance, which we may never live to see come, in case they ever come; and also
unlikely ever to come at all; is the business of men, that want both wit, and
something to do.

And as for the French King, we know not, whether: he may live to see an
alteration here; and if his Son do, it is uncertain what Spirit he may prove
of. That Kingdom is set round with Enemies, and may be disabled to transport
Armies into another Soil. Or, however these things happen, he is a likely
instrument of seting up Popery in these Kingdoms, who is pulling it down in his
own.

Upon the whole matter then, I cannot believe these Men fear what they talk of,
it is not their Passion, but their Policy. Even this Pamphlet in the second
part pretends the same fears under His present Majesty, and yet in this part
page 4. says, he has too much goodness; and page 5. that he has too little
money to do it: themselves Expound their own Riddle, and give us to understand,
that by pretended Fears they would beguile us into real Evils.

Finis hujus Argumenti.

