A PLATFORM OF Church Discipline: Gathered out of the WORD of GOD, and agreed
upon by the ELDERS and Messengers of the CHURCHES assembled in the Synod at
CAMBRIDGE IN NEW ENGLAND: To be presented to the Churches and General Court for
their Consideration and Acceptance in the Lord.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts?

Psalm. 84.1. Lord I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and place where
Thine Honor dwells.

Psalm. 26.8. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after, that
I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple.

Psalm. 27.4. Printed in New England; and Reprinted in London for Peter Cole, at
the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1653.

To all that are Faithful in Christ Jesus, especially to the Godly of the
Commonwealth of England, and the Nations thereunto belonging; Grace, Mercy,
and Peace.
BEloved in our Lord and Savior, being employed as an Agent from New England
these Six years past, to the Right Honorabl the present Parliament of England,
upon some weighty occasions: Amongst other Papers of concernment that came to
my hands from thence, I received sometime since, this ensuing Treatise from
diverse of the Reverend Elders there, with liberty to Re-print it as I saw
occasion; It being entitled, A Platform of Church-Disciplin gathered out of
the Word of God, and agreed upon by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches
Assembled in the Synod at Cambridge in New England, to be presented to the
Churches and general Court for their Consideration and acceptance in the Lord.
It would be too long for me to insert the many Things that have occasioned the
Delay of Reprinting it; But meeting of late with a Copy thereof Reprinted,
not only in a disorderly way, but very Falsely, to the great prejudice of the
Work; the Proofs in the margent (amongst other gross Errors) not rightly
placed, and so not proving the matter against which they are set; I made it
therefore my work to Suppress that Impression, and have gained a Promise, They
shall never come to public sale.

This Impression I have carefully examined (by a Copy I received from that
Known, Reverend, Painful, and Faithful Minister of the Gospel, Mr. John Cotton
of Boston, under his own Hand, directed to my self, for the end before
mentioned) and do find it to Answer the Copy received, some small faults
excepted; the proofs in the margent being duly placed, only sometimes a Figure
is mistaken, but for the most part in Texts so familiarly known to every
studious Reader, as I conceived it would need no Errata; not doubting but the
charitable Reader will bear with it, and Correct it as he reads it, it being
Reprinted at so great a distance from the place where it was first Collected.

It would be but as a drop of water cast into the great Ocean for me to go
about by my Praises to ad to the worth of this Work, and therefore such as the
said Elders and Church-Messengers from their Synod at Cambridge aforesaid
presented to the Churches and general Court for their Consideration and
Acceptance in the Lord: Such, and the same, I Declare this to be; and desire
the Lord to make it useful to his Churches and People for the finding out and
true Discovery of that Order and Government the Lord Jesus has left in his
House till his second Coming; which is the Prayer of

Yours in the Lord Jesus, EDW. WINSLOW.

Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London, And are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the Exchange.
Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, lately published; As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed,
1. What Contentment is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies
of it, 4. The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of
it. 2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of
the Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving
the Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is
showed, 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The
great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5.24.
and on Phil. 3.20. 5 An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and
tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth Chapters of Hosea, being now complete.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's power to Tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of his People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowings of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex.
Five several Books by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly Described the several
parts of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many large Brass Plates. 2 A
Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen 's Method of Physic. 3 A Directory
for Midwives; or, a Guide for Women. 4 Galen's Art of Physic, with a large
Comment. 5 The English Physician; Being an Astrologa-Physical Discourse of the
Vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a man's self of most
Diseases incident to man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for
threepence charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The time of gathering
all Herbs both vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of drying and keeping
them and their Juyces. 3 The way of making and keeping all manner of useful
Compounds, made of those Herbs. 4 The way of mixing the Medicines according to
cause, and mixture of the Disease, and the part of the Body afflicted.
Six Sermons Preached by Dr. Hill, viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Saints and in
the Churches of Christ. 3 The Spring of Strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages
Christ Jesus. 4 The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength.
5 The Best and Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal Preparations for his dying Saints.
The wonders of the Lodestone, by Mr. Samuel Ward of Ipswich. An Exposition on
the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew, by Mr. Ward. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks
of Salvation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin. Great
Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions,
Narative, and Speech. Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr. Prestons
Saints Submission, and Satan's Overthrow. Pious man's Practice in Parliament
Time. The Bishop of Canterburies Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on
the Scaffold. A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children;
wherein is showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Cause, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of
the Disease. Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bate, and Dr. Regemorter,
now translated into English. Mr. Sympsons Sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks
Sermon before the Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ
Geneology. A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel
Stone, in New England. A Treatise of Politic Power, wherein 7. Questions are
Answered, 1 Whereof Power is made, and for what obtained; 2 Whether Kings and
Governors have an absolute Power over the People; 3 Whether Kings and Governors
be subject to the Law of God, or the Laws of their Countries; 4 How far the
People are to obey their Governors; 5 Whether all the People have, be their
Governors; 6 Whether it be lawful to Depose an evil Governor; 7 What Confidence
is to be given to Princes. The compassionate Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on the
Philippians. The Best and Worst Magistrate, by Obadiab Sedgwick. The Craft and
Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries, by Matthew Newcomin. A Sacred Panygrick,
by Stephen Martial. Barriff's Military Discipline. The Immortality of Man's
Soul. The Anatomist Anatomized. King Charles his Case, or an Apeal to all
rational men concerning his Trial. Mr. Owens Stedfastness of the Promises. Mr.
Owen against Mr. Baxter. A Vindication of Free Grace: Endeavoring to prove, 1
That we are not Elected as Holy, but that we should be Holy; and that Election
is not of Kinds, but Persons. 2 That Christ did not by his Death intend to save
All men, and touching those whom he intended to save, that he did not Die for
them only if they would Believe, but that they might Believe. 3 That we are not
justified properly by our Believing in Christ, but by our Christ's believed in.
4 That that which differences one man from another, is not the approvement of a
common ability restored through Christ to all men in general, but a Principle
of Grace wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson.
The Preface.
THE setting forth of the public Confession of the Faith of Churches has a
double end, and both tending to public edification. First the maintenance of
the Faith entire within it self: Secondly, the holding forth of Unity and
Harmony, both amongst our selves, and with other Churches. Our Churches here
(as by the Grace of Christ) we believe and profess the same Doctrine of the
Truth of the Gospel, which generally is received in all the reformed Churches
of Christ in Europe: so especially, we desire not to vary from the Doctrine of
Faith and Truth held forth by the Churches of our Native Country. For though it
be not one Native Country that can breed us all of one mind, nor ought we for
to have the glorious Faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of persons; yet as
Paul, who was himself a Jew, professed to hold forth the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith, and of the resurrection of the dead, according as he
knew his godly Countrymen did, who were Jews by Nature (Galat. 2.15. Acts
26.6, 7.) so we, who are by Nature Englishmen, do desire to hold forth the
same Doctrine of Religion (especially in Fundamentals) which we see and know to
be held by the Churches of England, according to the Truth of the Gospel.

The more we discern (that which we do, and have cause to do with incessant
mourning and trembling) the unkind, and unbrotherly, and unchristian
contentions of our godly Brethren and Countrymen in matters of
Church Government; the more earnestly do we desire to see them joined together
in one common Faith, and our selves with them. For this end, having perused the
public confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, and finding the Sum and Substance thereof (in matters of Doctrine)
to express not their own Judgments only, but ours also: and being likewise
called upon by our Godly Magistrates, to draw up a public confession of that
Faith which is constantly taught, and generally professed amongst us, we
thought good to present unto them, and with them to our Churches, and with them
to all the Churches of Christ abroad, our professed and hearty assent and
attestation to the whole confession of Faith (for substance of Doctrine) which
the Reverend Assembly presented to the Religious and Honorable Parliament of
England: Excepting only some Sections in the 25.30. and 31. Chapters of their
Confession, which concern Points of Controversy in Church Discipline; Touching
which we refer our selves to the draught of Church Discipline in the ensuing
Treatise.

The truth of what we here declare, may appear by the unanimous vote of the
Synod of the Elders and Messengers of our Churches assembled at Cambridg; the
last of the sixth Month, 1648. which jointly passed in these words; This Synod
having perused, and considered (with much gladness of heart, and thankfulness
to God) the confession of Faith published of late by the Reverend Assembly in
England, do judge it to be very holy, orthodox, and judicious in all matters of
Faith; and do therefore freely and fully consent thereunto, for the substance
thereof. Only in those things which have respect to Church Government and
Discipline, we refer our selves to the Platform of Church Discipline agreed
upon by this present Assembly: and do therefore think it meet, that this
confession of faith, should be commended to the Churches of Christ amongst us,
and to the Honored Court, as worthy of their due Consideration and Acceptance.
Howbeit, we may not conceal, that the Doctrine of Vocation expressed in Chap,
10. Sect. 1. and summarily repeated, Chap. 13. and 1. passed not without some
debate. Yet considering, that the term of Vocation, and others by which it is
described, are capable of a large, or more strict sense, and use, and that it
is not intended to bind apprehensions precisely in point of Order or Method,
there has been a general condescendency thereunto.

Now by this our professed consent, and free concurrence with them in all the
Doctrinals of Religion, we hope it may appear to the world, that as we are a
remnant of the People of the same Nation with them; so we are Professors of the
same common Faith, and fellow Heirs of the same common Salvation. Yea moreover,
as this our Profession of the same faith with them, will exempt us (even in
their judgments) from suspicion of Heresy; so (we trust) it may exempt us in
like sort from suspicion of Schism; that though we are forced to dessent from
them in matters of Church Discipline, yet our dissent is not taken up out of
arrogance of spirit in our selves (whom they see willingly condescend to learn
of them:) neither is it carried with uncharitable censoriousness toward them
(both which are the proper, and essential Characters of Schisem) but in
meekness of wisdom, as we walk along with them, and follow them, as they follow
Christ: so where we conceive a different apprehension of the mind of Christ (as
it falls out in some few points touching Church Order) we still reserve due
reverence to them (whom we judge to be, through Christ, the glorious Lights of
both Nations:) and only crave leave (as in spirit we are bound) to follow the
Lamb whither soever be goes, and (after the Apostles example) as we believe,
so we speak.

And if the example of such poor outcasts as our selves, might prevail if not
with all (for that were too great a blessing to hope for) yet with some or
other of our Brethren in England, so far as they are come to mind and speak the
same thing with such as dissent from them, we hope in Christ, it would not only
moderate the harsh judging and condemning of one another in such differences of
judgment as may be found in the choycest Saints 3 but also prevent (by the
mercy of Christ) the peril of the distraction and destruction of all the
Churches in both Kingdoms: Otherwise, if Brethren shall go on to bite and
devour one another, the Apostle fears (as we also with sadness of heart do) it
will tend to the consuming of them, and us all; which the Lord prevent.

We are not ignorant, that (besides these aspersions of Heresy and Schism)
other exceptions also are taken at our way of Church Government: but (as we
conceive) upon as little ground.

As 1. That by admitting none into the fellowship of our Church, but Saints by
calling, we rob many Parish-Churches of their best Members, to make up one of
our Congregations: which is not only, to gather Churches out of Churches (a
thing not heard of in Scripture) but also to weaken the hearts and hands of the
best Ministers in the Parishes, by dispoyling them of their best Hearers.

2. That we provide no course for the gaining, and calling in of ignorant, and
erroneous and scandalous persons, whom we refuse to receive into our Churches,
and so exclude from the wholesome remedy of Church Discipline.

3. That in our way, we sow seeds of division, and hindrance of edification in
every Family: whilst admitting into our Churches only Voluntaries, the Husband
will be of one Church, the Wife of another; the Parents of one Church, the
Children of another; the Master of one Church, the Servants of another: and so
the Parents and Masters being of different Churches from their Children and
Servants, they cannot take a just account of their profiting by what they hear,
yea, by this means the Husbands, Parents, and Masters, shall be chargable to
the maintenance of many other Churches and Church Officers besides their own;
which will prove a charge and burden unsupportable.

But for Answer; as to the first: For gathering Churches out of Churches, we
cannot say, that it is a thing unheard of in Scripture. The first Christian
Church was gathered out of the Jewish Church, and out of many Synagogues in
that Church, and consisted partly of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, partly of
the Galileans; who though they kept some communion in some parts of public
Worship with the Temple: yet neither did they frequent the Sacrifices, nor
repair to the Sanedrim for the determining of their Church-causes; but kept
entire and constant communion with the Apostles Church in all the Ordinances of
the Gospel. And for the first Christian Church of the Gentiles at Antioch, it
appears to have been gathered and constituted, partly of the dispersed
Brethren of the Church at Jerusalem ( whereof some were men of Cyprus and
Cyren) and partly of the believing Gentiles, Acts, 11.20, 21.

If it be said, the first Christian Church at Jerusalem, and that at Antioch,
were gathered not out of any Christian Church, but out of the Jewish Temple,
and Synagogues, which were shortly after to be abolished; and their gathering
to Antioch, was upon occasion of dispersion in time of Persecution.

We desire it may be considered, 1. That the Members of the Jewish Church were
more strongly and straightly tied by express holy Covenant, to keep fellowship
with the Jewish Church till it was abolished, than any Members of Christian
Parish-churches are wont to be tied to keep fellowship with their
Parish-churches. The Episcopal Canons, which bind them to attend on their
Parish Church, it is likely they are now abolished with the Episcopacy. The
common Law of the Land is satisfied (as we conceive) if they attend upon the
Worship of God in any other Church though not within their own Parish. But no
such like Covenant of God, nor any other Religious Tie lies upon them to
attend the Worship of God in their own Parish Church, as did lie upon the Jews
to attend upon the Worship of God in their Temple and Synagogues.

2. Though the Jewish Temple Church at Jerusalem was to be abolished, yet that
does not make the desertion of it by the Members to be Lawful, till it was
abolished. Future abolition is no warrant for present desertion; unless it be
Lawful in some case whilst the Church is yet in present standing to desert it;
to wit, either for avoiding of present polutions, or for hope of greater
edification, and so for better satisfaction to conscience in either future
events (or foresight of them) do not desolve present relation: Else Wives,
Children, Servants, might desert their Husbands, Parents, Masters when they be
mortally sick.

3. What the Members of the Jewish Church did, in joining to the Church at
Antioch, in time of persecution, it may well be conceived, the Members of any
Christian Church may do the like for satisfaction of conscience. Peace of
conscience is more desirable, than the peace of the outward Man: and freedom
from scruples of conscience is more comfortable to a sincere heart, than
freedom from persecution.

If it be said, these Members of the Christian Church at Jerusalem, that joined
to the Church at Antioch, removed their habitations together with their
Relations: which if the Brethren of the Congregational way would do, it would
much abate the grievance of their departure from their Presbyterial Churches.

We verily could wish them so to do, as well approving the like removal of
Habitations, in case of changing Church-Relations (provided, that it may be
done without too much detriment to their outward estate) and we for our parts
have done the same. But to put a necessity of removal of Habitation in such a
case, it is to foment and cherish a corrupt principle of making Civil
Cohabitation, if not a formal cause, yet at least a proper Adjunct of
Church-Relation, which the Truth of the Gospel does not acknowledge. Now to
foment an Error to the prejudice of the Truth of the Gospel, is not to walk
with a right foot according to the Truth of the Gospel, as Paul judges. Galat.
2.14.

4. We do not think it meet, or safe, for a Member of a Presbyterial Church,
forthwith to desert his relation to his Church, betake himself to the
Fellowship of a Congregational Church, though he may discern some defect in the
Estate, or Government of his own.

For first, Faithfulness of Brotherly Love in Church-Relation, requires, that
the Members of the Church should first convince their Brethren of their sinful
defects, and duly wait for their reformation, before they depart from them. For
if we must take such a course for the healing of a private Brother, in a way of
Brotherly Love, with much meekness and patience: how much more ought we so to
walk with like tenderness toward a whole Church.

Again secondly, By the hasty departure of sound Members from a defective
Church, Reformation is not promoted, but many times retarded, and corruption
increased. Whereas on the contrary, while sincere Members breathing after
purity of Reformation abide together, they may (by the blessing of God upon
their faithful endeavors) prevail much with their Elders and Neighbors toward
a Reformation; it may be, so much, as that their Elders in their own Church
shall receive none to the Lords Table, but visible Saints: and in the Classis
shall put forth no Authoritive Act (but Consultative only) touching the Members
of other Churches: nor touching their own, but with the consent (silent consent
at least) of their own Church: which two things, if they can obtain with any
humble, meek, holy, faithful endeavors, we conceive, they might (by the grace
of Christ) find liberty of conscience to continue their Relation with their own
Presbyterial Church without scruple.

5. But to ad a word further, touching the gathering of Churches out of
Churches; What if there were no express example of such a thing extant in the
Scriptures? that which we are wont to answer the Antipaedobaptists, may suffice
here: it is enough, if any evidence thereof may be gathered from just
consequence of Scripture Light. Doctor Ames his Judgment concerning this case,
passes (for ought we know) without exception, which he gave in his fourth Book
of Conscience in Answer to 2. Quest. C. 14. Number. 16. If any (says he) wronged
with unjust vexation, or providing for his own edification, or in testimony
against sin, depart from a Church where some evils are tolerated, and join
himself to another more pure, yet without condemning of the Church he leaves,
he is not therefore to be held as a Schismatic, or as guilty of any other sin.
Where the Tripartite disjunction which the judicious Doctor puts, declares
the Lawfulness of the departure of a Churchmember from his Church, when either
through weariness of unjust vexation, or in way of provision for his own
edification, or in testimony against sin, he joyneth himself to another
Congregation more Reformed. Any one of these he judges a just and lawful cause
of departure, though all of them do not concur together. Neither will such a
practice dispoil the best Ministers of the Parishes of their best Hearers.

For 1. Sometimes the Ministers themselves are willing to join with their
better sort of Hearers, in this way of Reformation: and then they and their
Hearers continue still their Church-Relation together, yea, and confirm it more
straightly and strongly, by an express renewed Covenant; though the Ministers may
still continue their wonted preaching to the whole Parish.

2. If the Ministers do dislike the way of those, whom they otherwise count
their best Members, and so refuse to join with them therein; yet if those
Members can procure some other Minister to join with them in their own way, and
still continue their dwelling together in the same Town, they may easily order
the times of the public Assembly, as to attend constantly upon the Ministry of
their former Church: and either after or before the public Assembly of the
Parish take an opportunity to gather together for the administration of
Sacraments and Censures, and other Church-Ordinances amongst themselves. The
first Apostolic Church assembled to hear the Word with the Jewish Church in
the open Courts of the Temple; but afterward gathered together for breaking of
Bread, and other Acts of Church Order from house to house.

3. Suppose, Presbyterial Churches should communicate some of their best gifted
Members toward the erecting and gathering of another Church: it would not
forthwith be their detriment, but may be their enlargement. It is the most
noble and perfect work of a living Creature (both in Nature and Grace) to
propagate and multiply his Kind: and it is the honor of the faithful Spouse of
Christ, to set forward the Work of Christ as well abroad as at home. The Church
in Cant. 8.8. to help forward her little sister Church, was willing to part
with her choice materials, even beams of Cedar, and such precious living stones
as were fit to build a silver Palace. In the same Book, the Church is compared
sometime to a Garden, sometime to an Orchard, Cant. 4.12, 13. No man Planteth a
Garden, or Orchard, but seeks to get the choysest Herbs and Plants of his
Neighbors, and they freely impart them; nor do they account it a spoil to their
Gardens and Orchards, but rather a glory. Nevertheless we go not so far: we
neither seek, nor ask the choice Members of the Parishes, but accept them being
offered.

If it be said, they are not offered by the Ministers, nor by the Parish
Churches (who have most right in them) but only by themselves.

It may justly be demanded, what Right, or what Power have either the
Ministers, or Parish Church over them? Not by solemn Church Covenant: for that,
though it be the firmest engagement, is not owned, but rejected. If it be by
their joining with the Parish, in the calling and election of a Minister to
such a Congregation at his first coming, there is indeed just weight in such an
Engagement: nor do we judge it safe for such to remove from such a Minister,
unless it be upon such grounds, as may justly give him due satisfaction. But if
the union of such Members to a Parish Church, and to the Ministry thereof, be
only by cohabitation within the Precincts of the Parish, that union, as it was
founded upon humane Law, so by humane Law it may easily be released. Or
otherwise, if a man remove his Habitation, he removes also the bond of his
relation, and the ground of offense.

4. It need not to be feared, that all the best Hearers of the best Ministers,
no nor the most of them, will depart from them upon point of Church Government.
Those who have found the presence and Power of the Spirit of Christ breathing
in their Ministers, either to their conversion, or edification, will be slow to
change such a Ministry of Faith, and Holiness, for the liberty of Church Order.
Upon which ground, and sundry other such like, there be doubtless sundry godly
and judicious Hearers in many Parishes in England that do and will prefer their
Relation to their Ministers (though in a Presbyterial way) above the
Congregational Confoederation.

5. But if all, or the most part of the best Hearers of the best Ministers of
Parishes, should depart from them, as preferring in their judgments, the
Congregational way: yet, in case the Congregational way should prove to be of
Christ, it will never grieve the holy hearts of godly Ministers, that their
Hearers should follow after Christ: yea, many of themselves (upon due
deliberation) will be ready to go along with them. It never grieved nor
troubled John Baptist, that his best Disciples departed from him to follow
after Christ, John 3. But in case the Congregational way should prove to be not
the institution of Christ (as we take it) but the invention of men: then
doubtless, the Presbyterial Form (if it be of God) will swallow up the other,
as Moses rod devoured the rods of the Egyptians. Nor will this put a necessity
upon both the opposite parties to shift for themselves, and to seek to supplant
one another: but only it will call upon them (...) to seek and to follow the
Truth in Love, to attend in faithfulness each unto his own Flock, and to
administer to them all the holy things of God, and their portion of food in due
season: and as for others, quietly to sorbear them, and yet to instruct them
with meekness that are contrary minded: leaving it to Christ (in the use of al
good means) to reveal his own Truth in his own time: and mean while endeavoring
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Philippians, chap. 3.
verse 15, and 16. Ephesians, 4.3.

To the second Exception, That we take no course for the gaining and healing
and calling in of ignorant, and erroneous and scandalous persons, whom we
refuse to receive into our Churches, and so exclude them from the remedy of
Church Discipline.

We conceive the receiving of them into our Churches would rather loose and
corrupt our Churches, than gain and heal them. A little Leaven laid in a lump
of dough, will sooner leaven the whole lump, than the whole lump will sweeten
it. We therefore find it safer, to square rough and unhewen stones, before they
be laid into the building rather than to hammer and hew them, when they lie
unevenly in the building.

And accordingly, two means we use to gain and call in such as are ignorant or
scandalous. 1. The public Ministry of the word, Upon which they are invited by
counsel, and required by wholesome Laws to attend. And the word it is, which is
the power of God to salvation, to the calling and winning of souls. 2. Private
conference, and conviction by the Elders, and other able brethren of the
Church: whom they do the more respectively hearken unto, when they see no hope
of enjoying Church fellowship, or participation in the Sacraments for
themselves, or their Children, till they approve their judgments to be sound
and orthodox, and their lives subdued to some hope of a godly conversation.
What can Classical discipline, or excommunication it self do more in this case.

The 3. Exception wrappeth up in it a threefold domestical inconvenience, and
each of them meet to be eschewed. 1. Disunion in Families between each
relation: 2. Disappointment of edification, for want of opportunity in the
Governors of Families to take account of things heard by their children and
servants.

3. Disbursments of chargable maintenance to the several Churches, whereto the
several Persons of their Families are joined.

All which inconveniences either do not fall out in Congregational Churches; or
are easily redressed. For none are so orderly admitted into Congregational
Churches, but such as are well approved by good testimony; to be duly observant
of Family relations. Or if any otherwise disposed should creep in, they are
either orderly healed, or duly removed in a way of Christ: Nor are they
admitted, unless they can give some good account of their profiting by
Ordinances before the Elders and Brethren of the Church: and much more to their
Parents and Masters. Godly Tutors in the University can take an account of
their Pupils; and Godly Householders in the City, can take account of their
Children and Servants, how they profit by the Word they have heard in several
Churches; and that to the greater edification of the whole Family, by the
variety of such administrations: Bees may bring the more Honey, and Wax into
the Hive, when they are not limited to one Garden of Flowers, but may fly
abroad to many.

Nor is any charge expected from Wives, Children, or Servants to the
maintenance of Congregational Churches, further than they be furnished with
Personal estates, or Earnings, which may enable them to contribute of such
things as they have, and not of such as they have not. God accepts not
Robbery for a Sacrifice. And though a godly Householder may justly take himself
bound in conscience, to contribute to any such Church, whereto his Wife, or
Children, or Servants do stand in relation: yet that will not aggravate the
burden of his charge, no more than if they were received Members of the same
Church whereto himself is related.

But why do we stand thus long to plead exemptions from exceptions? The Lord
help all his faithful Servants (whether Presbyterial, or Congregational) to
judge and shame our selves before the Lord for all our former complyances to
greater enormities in Church Government, than are to be found either in the
Congregational, or Presbyterial Way. And then surely, either the Lord will
clear up his own Will to us, and so frame, and subdue us all to one mind, and
one will (Ezekiel. 43.10.11.) or else we shall learn to bear one another burdens
in a spirit of meekness. It will then doubtless be far from us, so to attest
the Discipline of Christ, as to detest the Disciples of Christ: so to contend
for the seamless coat of Christ, as to crucify the living Members of Christ:
so to divide our selves about Church Communion, as through breaches to open a
wide gap for a deluge of Antichristian and profane malignity to swallow up
both Church and Civil State.

What shall we say more? is difference about Church Order become the inlet of
all the disorders in the Kingdom? has the Lord indeed left us to such hardness
of heart, that Church Government shall become a snare to Zion ( as sometimes
Moses was to Egypt, Exodus 10.7.) that we cannot leave contesting and contending
about it, till the Kindom be destroyed? did not the Lord Jesus, when he
dedicated his sufferings for his Church, and his Church also unto his Father,
make it his earnest and only Prayer for us in this world, that we all might be
one in him? John, 17.20, 21, 22, 23. And is it possible, that He (whom the
Father heard always, John, 11.42.) should not have this last most solemn
Prayer heard, and granted? or, shall it be granted for all the Saints
elsewhere, and not for the Saints in England? so that amongst them disunion
shall grow even about Church-union, and communion? If it be possible for a
little faith (so much as a grain of Mustard Seed) to remove a mountain: is it
not possible, for so much strength of faith, as is to be found in all the the
godly in the Kingdom, to remove those Images of jealousy, and to cast those
stumbling blocks out of the way, which may hinder the free passage of brotherly
love amongst Brethren? It is true indeed, the National Covenant does justly
engage both Parties, faithfully to endeavor the utter extirpation of the
Antichristian Hierarchy, and much more of all Blasphemies, Heresies, and
damnable Errors. Certainly, if Congregational Discipline be Independent from
the inventions of men, is it not much more independent from the delusions of
Satan? what fellowship has Christ with Belial? Light with Darkness? Truth with
Error? The faithful Jews needed not the help of the Samaritans, to Re-edifie
the Temple of God; yea, they rejected their help when it was offered, Ezra 4.1,
2, 3. And if the Congregational way be a way of Truth (as we believe) and if
the Brethren that walk in it be zealous of the Truth, and hate every false way
(as by the Rule of their holy Discipline they are instructed, 2 John, 10.11.)
then verily, there is no branch in the National Covenant, that ingageth the
Covenanters to abhor either Congregational Churches, or their way: which being
duly administered, do no less effectually extirpate the Antichristian Hierarchy,
and all Blasphemies, Heresies, and pernicious Errors, than other way of
Discipline does, which is more generally and publicly received and ratified.

But the Lord Jesus commune with our hearts in secret: and he who is the King
of his Church, let him be pleased to exercise his Kingly Power in our Spirits,
that so his Kingdom may come into our Churches in Purity and Peace. Amen, Amen.

CHAPTER I. Of the Form of Church Government; and that it is one, immutable,
and prescribed in the Word of God.
1

ECclesiastical Polity, or Church Government, or Discipline, is nothing else,
Ezekiel 43.11 Col. 2, 5 1 Timothy, 3, 15
but that Form and Order that is to be observed in the Church of Christ upon
Earth, both for the Constitution of it, and all the Administrations that
therein are to be performed.

2. Church Government is considered in a double respect, either in regard of
the Parts of Government themselves, or necessary circumstances thereof. Heb, 3,
5, 6,
The Parts of Government are prescribed in the Word, because the Lord Jesus
Christ, the King and Lawgiver of his Church, is no less faithful in the House
of God than was Moses, Exodus, 25, 40
who from the Lord delivered a Form and Pattern of Government to the children
of Israel in the old Testament: 2 Timothy, 3, 16,
And the holy Scriptures are now also so perfect, as they are able to make the
man of God perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto every good Work; and therefore
doubtless to the well ordering of the House of God.

3. 1 Timothy 3.15 1 Chronicles, 15 13. Ex. 20, 4 1 Timothy, 6, 13, v 16, Heb, 12, 27, 28 1
Cor 15, 24
The Parts of Church Government are all of them exactly described in the Word
of God, being parts or means of Instituted Worship according to the second
Commandment: and therefore to continue one and the same, unto the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, until he shall
deliver it up unto God, even the Father. So that it is not left in the Power of
Men, Officers, Deuteronomy 12, 32 Ezekiel 43, 8 1 Kings 12 31, 32, 33
Churches, or any State in the World to add, or diminish, or alter any thing in
the least measure therein.

4. The necessary circumstances, as time and place etc. 1 Kings 12 v 28, 29
belonging unto order and decency, are not so left unto men as that under
pretense of them, they may thrust their own inventions upon the Churches. Isay
29, 13 Col: 2, 22, 23. Acts 15 28
Being circumscribed in the Word with many general limitations; where they are
determined in respect of the matter to be neither worship it self, Mat 15, 9 1
Cor 11, 23 c 8, 34
nor circumstances seperable from Worship: in respect of their end, they must
be done unto edification: in respect of the manner, 1 Cor 14, 26 1 Cor 14, 40 1
Cor 11, 14 1 Cor 11, 16 1 Cor 14, 12 19. Acts 15 28
decently, and in order, according to the Nature of the things themselves, and
Civil, and Church Custom, does not even Nature it self teach you? yea, they are
in some sort determined particularly, namely, that they be done in such a
manner, as all circumstances considered, is most expedient for edification: so,
as if there be no error of man concerning their determination, the determining
of them is to be accounted as if it were Divine.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of the Catholic Church in general, and in special, of
a particular visible Church.
THe Catholic Church, Ephesians 1, 22 23, and 5, 25 26, 30. Heb. 22, 23
is the whole Company of those that are Elected, Redeemed, and in time
effectually called from the state of sin and death unto a state of Grace and
Salvation in Jesus Christ.

2. Rom 4, 17 2 Timothy 2, 12 c 4, 8 Ephesians 6 12, 13
This Church is either Triumphant, or Militant: Triumphant, the number of them
who are glorified in Heaven: Militant, the number of them who are conflicting
with their enemies upon Earth.

3. 2 Timothy 2, 19 Rev 2, 17 1 Cor 6, 17 Ephesians 3, 17 Rom 1, 8 1 These 1, 8 Isay 2, 2
1 Timothy 6, 12
This Militant Church is to be considered as Invisible, and Visible: Invisible,
in respect of their relation wherein they stand to Christ, as a Body unto the
Head, being united unto him by the Spirit of God, and Faith in their hearts:
Visible, in respect of the Profession of their Faith, in their Persons, and in
particular Churches: and so there may be acknowledged an universal Visible
Church.

4. The Members of the Militant Visible Church, considered either as not yet in
Church Order, Acts 19, 1 Colos 2, 5 Mat 18, 17 1 Cor 5, 12
or as walking according to the Church Order of the Gospel: In order, and so
besides the Spiritual union and communion, common to all Believers, they enjoy
moreover an union and communion Ecclesiastical-Political: so we deny an
universal Visible Church.

5. The state of the Members of the Militant Visible Church walking in Order,
Gen 18, 19
was either before the Law, Oeconomical, that is, in Families: Exodus 19, 6
or, under the Law, National: or, since the coming of Christ, 1 Cor 14, 23
only Congregational. (The term Independent we approve not,) Therefore neither
national, provincial, nor classical. 1 Cor 14, 36 1 Cor 1, 2 1 Cor 12, 27 Exodus
19, 56 Deuteronomy 29 and 9 to 15 Acts 2, 42 1 Cor 14, 26


6. A Congregational-Church, is by the institution of Christ a part of the
Militant-visible-Church, consisting of a company of Saints by calling, united
into one body, by a holy covenaut, for the public worship of God, and the
mutual edification one of another, in the Fellowship of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. III. Of the matter of the visible Church both in respect of Quality and
Quantity. 1 Cor 1, 2 Ephesians 1, 1

THe matter of a visible Church are Saints by calling.

2. By Saints, we understand. Heb 6, 1 1 Cor 1, 5 Rom 15, 14 Psalm 50, 16, 17.
Act 8, 37 Mat 3, 6 Rom 6, 17 1 Cor 1, 2 Phil 1.1 Col 1, 2


1. Such, as have not only attained the knowledge of the principles of
Religion, and are free from gross and open scandals, but also do together with
the profession of their faith and Repentance, walk in blameless obedience to
the word, so as that in charitable discretion they may be accounted Saints by
calling, (though perhaps some or more of them be unsound, and hypocrites
inwardly:) because the members of such particular Churches are commonly by the
holy Ghost called Saints and faithful brethren in Christ, Ephesians 1.1 1 Cor 5.2.13
Rev 21, 15 and 20. Ezekiel 44, 7 and 9 and chap 23, 36 39 Number 29 and 20 Hagg 2,
13, 14 1 Cor 11.27 29 Psalm 37 21 1 Cor 5 6 1 Cor 7 and 14 Jer 2 21 1 Cor 5, 12
Jer 1.4 Gal 5, 4 2 Cor 12, 21 Rev 2.14, 15 and 21, 21.
and sundry churches have been reproved for receiving, and suffering such
persons to continue in fellowship amongst them, as have been offensive and
scandalous: the name of God also by this means is Blasphemed: and the holy
things of God defiled and Profaned, the hearts of godly grieved: and the
wicked themselves hardened and helped forward to damnation: the example of such
does endanger the sanctity of others. A little Leaven Leaveneth the whole lump.

2. The children of such, who are also holy.

3. The members of Churches though orderly constituted, may in time degenerate,
and grow corrupt and scandalous, which though they ought not to be tolerated in
the Church, yet their continuance therein, through the defect of the execution
of discipline and just censures, does not immediately dissolve the being of the
Church, as appears in the Church of Israel, and the Churches of Galatia, and
Corinth, Pergamus, and Thyatira.

4. 1 Cor 14, 21.
The matter of the Church in respect of it is quantity ought not to be of
greater number then may ordinarily meet together conveniently in one place: Mat
18, 17
nor ordinarily fewer, then may conveniently carry on Church-work. Hence when
the holy Scripture makes mention of the Saints combined into a Church Estate,
Rom 16 1 1 These 1, 1 Rev 2, 8, c 3 7
in a Town or City, where was but one Congregation it usually calls those
Saints [the Church] in the singular number, as the Church of the Thessalonians
the Church of Smyrna, Philadelphia, and the like: But when it speaks of the
Saints in a Nation, or Province, wherein there were sundry Congregations, 1 Cor
16, 1 19, Gal, 1, 2 2 Cor 8, 1 1 These, 2, 14
It frequently and usually calls them by the name of Churches in the plural
number, as the [Churches] of Asia, Galatia, Maccdonia, and the like: which is
further confirmed by what is written of sundry of those Churches in particular,
how they were Assembled and met together the whole Church in one place, Acts 2,
46 c 5, 12, c 6 2, Acts 14 27, s 15, 38 1 Cor 5, 4 c 14, 23 Rom 16, 1
as the Church at Jerusalem, the Church at Antioch, the Church at Corinth, and
Cenchrea, though it were more near to Corinth, it being the port thereof, and
answerable to a Village yet being a distinct Congregation from Corinth, it had
a Church of its own as well as Corinth had.

5. Nor can it with reason be thought but that every Chuch appointed and
ordained by Christ, had a ministry ordained and appointed for the same: and
yet plain it is, that there were no ordinary officers appointed by Christ for
any other, then Congregational Churches: Acts 20, 28
Elders being appointed to feed, not all flocks, but that particular flock of
God over which the holy Ghost had made them overseers, and that flock they must
attend, even the whole flock: and one Congregation, being as much as any
ordinary Elders can attend, therefore there is no greater Church then a
Congregation, which may rodinarily meet in one place.

CHAP. IV. Of the From of A Visible Church, and of Church Covenant.
SAints by Calling, 1 Cor 12, 27, 1 Timothy 3 15
must have a Visible-Political-Union amongst themselves, or else they are not
yet a particular Church: as those similitudes hold forth which the Scripture
makes use of, to show the nature of particular Churches: As a Body, A building,
or House, Hands, Eyes, Feet, and other members must be united, or else,
remaining separate are not a Body. Stones, Timber, though squared, hewn and
pollished, are not an house until they are compacted and united: so Saints or
believers in judgment of charity, are not a Church, unless Orderly knit
together.

2. Particular Churches cannot be distinguished one from another but by their
forms. Ephesus is not Smyrna, Revel. 1
and Pergamus Thyatira, but each one a distinct society of it self, having
officers of their own, which had not the charge of others: Virtues of their
own, for which others are not praised: Corruptions of their own, for which
others are not blamed.

3. This Form is the Visible Covenant, Agreement, Exodus 19, 5 verse 8 Deuteronomy 29,
12 13 Zach. 11 14, c 9, 11
or consent whereby they give up themselves unto the Lord, to the observing of
the ordinances of Christ together in the same society, which is usually called
the Church Covenant; For we see not otherwise how members can have Church Power
one over another mutually.

The comparing of each particular Church unto a City, Ephesians 2, 19 2 Cor 12, 2
and unto a Spouse, seems to conclude not only a Form, but that that Form is
by way of Covenant.

The Covenant, Gen 17, 7 Deuteronomy 29, 12 13, Ephesians 2 12, 19
as it was that which made the Family of Abraham and children of Israel to be a
Church and people unot God, so is it that which now makes the several societyes
of Gentil-believers to be Churches in these days.

4. This Voluntary Agreement, Consent or Covenant (for all these are here taken
for the same): Although the more express and plain it is, the more fully it
puts us in mind of our mutual duty, and stirs us up to it, and leaves
less room for the questioning of the Truth of the Church Estate of a Company
of professors, and the truth of membership of particular persons: yet we
conceive, the substance of it is kept, where there is a real Agreement and
consent, of a company of faithful persons to meet constantly together in one
Congregation, for the public worship of God, and their mutual edification:
which real agreement and consent they do express by their constant practice in
coming together for the public worship of God, Exodus 19, 5 to 8. and 24, 3 17
Josh 24 18 to 24 Psalm 50, 5 Neh 9 38, c 10, 1. Gen 17, Deuteronomy 29
and by their religious subjection unto the ordinances of God there: the
rather, if we do consider how Scripture covenants have been entered into, not
only expressly by word of mouth, but by sacrifice; by hand writing, and seal;
and also sometimes by silent consent, without any writing, or expression of
words at all.

5. This form then being by mutual covenant, it follows, it is not faith in
the heart, nor the profession of that faith, nor cohabitation, nor Baptism; 1.
Not faith in the heart; because that is invisible: 2. Not a bare profession;
because that declares them no more to be members of one Church then of
another: 3. Not Cohabitation; Athiests or Infidels may dwell together with
Believers: 4. Not Baptism, because it presupposes a Church estate, as
circumcision in the old Testament, which gave no being unto the Church, the
Church being before it, and in the Wilderness without it. Seals presuppose a
Covenant already in being: one person is a complete subject of Baptism, but one
person is incapable of being a Church.

6. Act 2, 47 and 9, 26, Mat 3 13, 14, 15 and 28.19, 20 Psalm 133.2 3. and 87.7
Mat. 18.20 1 John 1.3
All Believers ought, as God gives them opportunity thereunto, to endeavor to
join themselves unto a particular Church, and that in respect of the Honor of
Jesus Christ in his example and Institution, by the professed acknowledgment
of, and subjection unto the Order and Ordinances of the Gospel: as also in
respect of their good of communion founded upon their visible union, and
contained in the Promises of Christ's special Presence in the Church: whence
they have fellowship with Him, Ps. 119. last 1 Pet 2, 25 Ephesians. 4.16 John 22.24
25. Mat 18 15, 16, 17
and in Him one with another: also for the keeping of them in the way of Gods
Commandments, and recovering of them in case of wandering (which all Christ's
Sheep are subject to in this life) being unable to return of themselves;
together with the benefit of their mutual edification, and of their posterity,
that they may not be cut off from the Privileges of the Covenant; otherwise,
if a Believer offends, he remains destitute of the remedy provided in that
behalf; and should all Believers neglect this duty of joining to all particular
Congregations, it might follow thereupon, that Christ should have no visible
Political Churches upon Earth.

CHAP. V. Of the first subject of Church Power, or, to whom Church Power does
first belong.
THe first subject of Church Power, Mat 28.18 Rev 3.7 Isai 9.6 John 20.21 23. 1
Cor 14 32. Tit 1, 5 1 Cor 5.12.
is either Supreme or Subordinat, and Ministerial: The Supreme (by way of gift
from the Father) is the Lord Jesus Christ: the Ministerial, is either
extraordinary, as the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists: or Ordinary, as
every particular Congregational Church.

2. Ordinary Church Power, is either the power of Office, that is, such as is
proper to the Eldership: or Power of Privilege, such as belongs unto the
Brotherhood: The latter, is in the Brethren formally, Rom 12, 4 8. Act 1, 23 c
6, 3, 4 c 14, 23 1 Cor 12 29, 30
and immediately from Christ; that is, so as it may according to order be acted
or exercised immediately by themselves: the former, is not in them formally or
immediately, and therefore cannot be acted or exercised immediately by them,
but is said to be in them, in that they design the persons unto Office, who
only are to act, or to exercise this power.

CHAP. VI. Of the Officers of the Church, and especially of Pastors and
Teachers.
A Church being a company of people combined together by Covenant for the
Worship of God, it appears thereby, that there may be the Essence and Being
of a Church without any Officers, seeing there is both the form and matter of a
Church, which is employed, Acts 14, 23
when it is said, the Apostles ordained Elders in every Church.

2. Nevertheless, though Officers be not absolutely necessary, Rom 10, 17 Jer,
3, 15 1 Cor 12, 28 Ephesians. 4, 11 Psalm 68, 18 Ephesians. 4, 8, 11
to the simple being of Churches, when they be called: yet ordinarily to their
calling they are, and to their well-being: and therefore the Lord Jesus out of
his tender compassion, has appointed, and ordained Officers which he would not
have done, Ephesians. 4.12, 13
if they had not been useful and needful for the Church; yea, being ascended
into Heaven, he received gifts for men, and gave gifts to men, 1 Cor 12 28 Ephesians
4 11 Gal 1 Act 8, 6, 26 19 c 11, 25 Rom 11, 7, 8
whereof Officers for the Church are justly accounted no small parts; they being
to continue to the end of the world, and for the perfecting of all the Saints.

3. These Officers were either Extraordinary, or Ordinary: Extraordinary, as
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists: Ordinary, as Elders and Deacons.

The Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, as they were called extraordinarily
by Christ, so their Office ended with themselves, 1 Cor 4, 9.
whence it is, that Paul directing Timothy how to carry along
Church-Administrations, gives no direction about the choice or course of
Apostles, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2 v. 8. to 13. Tit. 1, 5. Act. 20.17.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.
Prophets, or Evangelists, but only of Elders and Deacons. And when Paul was to
take his last leave of the Church of Ephesus, he committed the care of feeding
the Church to no other, but unto the Elders of that Church. The like charge
does Peter commit to the Elders.

4. 1 Timothy 3.2. Phil. 1.1. Acts 20.17.28. 1 Timothy 5 17.
Of Elders (who also are in Scripture called Bishops) Some attend chiefly to
the Ministry of the Word, as the Pastors and Teachers. Others, attend
especially unto Rule, who are therefore called Ruling Elders.

5. Ephesians. 4.11. Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.8.
The Office of Pastor and Teacher, appears to be distinct: The Pastors special
work is, to attend to Exhortation; and therein to administer a word of Wisdom;
The Teacher is to attend to Doctrine, and therein to administer a word of
Knowledge; and either of them to administer the Seals of that Covenant, 2 Timothy
4.1.2 Tit. 1 9
unto the dispensation whereof they are alike called: as also to execute the
Censures, being but a kind of application of the Word, the preaching of which,
together with the application thereof, they are alike charged withal.

6. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. chap. 1.22, 23.
And for as much as both Pastors and Teachers are given by Christ for the
perfecting of the Saints, and edifying of his body, which Saints, and Body of
Christ is his Church; Therefore we account Pastors and Teachers to be both of
them Church Officers; and not the Pastor for the Church, and the Teacher only
for the Schools: Though this we gladly acknowledge, 1 Samuel 10.12. v 19, 20 2
King 23, verse 15
that Schools are both lawful, profitable, and necessary for the training up of
such in good Literature, or Learning, as may afterward be called forth unto
Office of Pastor or Teacher in the Church.

CHAP. VII. Of Ruling Elders, and Deacons.
THe Ruling Elders Office is distinct from the Office of Pastor and Teacher:
Rom 12, 7, 8, 9 1 Timothy 5 17. 1 Cor 12, 28.
The Ruling Elders are not so called to exclude the Pastors and Teachers from
Ruling, because Ruling and Governing is common to these with the other; Heb 13
17 1 Timothy 5 17
whereas attending to teach and preach the Word is peculiar unto the former. 1 Timothy 5 17


2. The Ruling Elders work is to join with the Pastor and Teacher in those acts
of Spiritual Rule, which are distinct from the ministry of the word and
Sacraments committed to them, of which sort, these be, as follows. I. 2 Chronicles. 23 19 Rev 21 12 1 Timothy 4 14 Mat 18 17, 2 Cor: 2 7, 8 Acts 2, 6
To open and shut the doors of Gods house, by the Admission of members approved
by the Church; by Ordination of officers chosen by the Church: and by
excommunication of notorious and obstinate offenders renounced by the Church:
and by restoring of penitents, forgive by the Church II. To call the Church
together when there is occasion, Acts 21.18 22, 23
and seasonably to dismiss them again. III. To prepare matters in private, that
in public they may be carried an end with less trouble, and more speedy
dispatch. IV. Acts 6, 2, 3 c 13, v 15, 2 Cor; 8, 10 Heb 13, 7, 7 2 These 2, 10
11, 12
To moderate the carriage of all matters in the Church assembled; as, to
propound matters to the Church, to Order the season of speech and silence; and
to pronounce sentence according to the mind of Christ, with the consent of the
Church. V. To be Guides and leaders to the Church, in all matters whatsoever,
pertaining to Church administrations and actions. VI. To see that none in the
Church live inordinately out of rank and place; without a calling, Acts 20, 28
verse 32 1 These. 5, 12 Jam 5, 14 Acts 20, 20
or Idly in their calling. VII. To prevent and heal such offenses in life, or
in doctrine; as might corrupt the Church. VIII. To feed the flock of God with a
word of admonition. IX. And as they shall be sent for, to visit, and to pray
over their sick brethren. X. And at other times as opportunity shall serve
thereunto.

3. Act 6, 3, v 6 Phil 1, 1 1 Timothy 3, 8 1 Cor: 12, 28 1 Timothy 3, 8, 9
The office of a Deacon is Instituted in the Church by the Lord Jesus: sometime
they are called Helps.

The Scripture tells us, how they should be qualified: Grave, not double
tongued, not given to much wine, not given to filthy lucre. they must first be
proved and then use the office of a Deacon being found Blameless.

The office and work of the Deacons is to receive the offerings of the Church,
gifts given to the Church, Acts 4, 35 chap. 6, 2, 3 chap 6, 2
and to keep the treasury of the Church: Rom 12, 8
and therewith to serve the Tables which the Church is to provide for: as the
Lords Table, the table of the ministers, and of such as are in necessity, to
whom they are to distribute in simplicity.

4. 1 Cor. 7, 17
The office therefore being limited unto the care of the temporal good things
of the Church, it extends not unto the attendance upon, and administration of
the spiritual things thereof, as the word, and Sacraments, or the like.

5. The ordinance of the Apostle, and practice of the Church, 1 Cor: 16 1, 2, 3
commends the Lords day as a fit time for the contributions of the Saints.

6. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. ^.8 11. Acts 20.28,
The Instituting of all these officers, in the Church, is the work of God
himself; of the Lord Jesus Christ; of the holy Ghost. And therefore such
officers as he has not appointed, are altogether unlawful either to be placed
in the Church, or to be retained therein, and are to be looked at as humane
creatures, mere Inventions and appointments of man, to the great dishonor of
Christ Jesus, the Lord of his house, the King of his Church, whether Popes,
Patriarchs, Cardinals, Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials,
Commissaries, Mat. 15.13.
and the like. These and the rest of that Hierarchy and Retinue, not being
plants of the Lords planting, shall all be certainly rooted out, and cast forth.

7. The Lord has appointed ancient widows, (where they may be had) to
minister in the Church, 2 Timothy 5.9, 10
in giving attendance to the sick, and to give succor unto them, and others,
in the like necessities.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Election of Church Officers.
NO man may take the honor of a Church Officer unto himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that was called of God, as was Aaron.

2. Calling unto Office, is either Immediate, by Christ himself: such was the
call of the Apostles, Galat. 1, 1 Acts 14.23 chap 6, 3
and Prophets; this manner of calling ended with them, as has been said: or
Mediate by the Church.

3. It is meet, that before any be ordained or chosen Officers, they should
first be Tried and proved; 1 Timothy 5.22. chap 7, 10 Acts 16, 2 chap. 6, 3
because hands are not suddenly to be laid upon any, and both Elders and
Deacons must be of honest and good report.

4. The things in respect of which they are to be Tried, are those gifts and
virtues which the Scripture requires in men, that are to be elected into such
places, viz, that Elders must be blameless, sober, apt to teach, and endued
with such other qualifications as are laid down, 1 Timothy 3. and 2. Tit. 1.6. to
9. Deacons to be fitted, as is directed, Asts 6.3. 1 Timothy 3.8. to 11.

5. Act 14, 23 c. 1, 23. c. 6 3, 4, 5.
Officers are to be called by such Churches, whereunto they are to minister. Of
such moment is the preservation of this power, That the Churches excercised it
in the presence of the Apostles.

6. Gal. 5.13
A Church being free cannot become subject to any, but by a free election;

Yet when such a people do choose any to be over them in the Lord, Heb. 13.17
then do they become subject, and most willingly submit to their Ministry in
the Lord, whom they have so chosen.

7. Romans 16, 17
And if the Church have power to choose their Officers and Ministers, then in
case of manifest unworthiness, and delinquency, they have power also to depose
them. For to open, and shut; to choose and refuse; to constitute in Office, and
remove from Office; are acts belonging unto the same Power.

8. Cant. 8.8, 9
We judge it much conducing to the well-being and communion of Churches, that
where it may conveniently be done, Neighbor-Churches be advised withal, and
their help made use of in the trial of Church Officers, in order to their
choice.

9. The choice of such Church Officers belongs not to the civil Magistrates,
as such, or Diocesan-Bishops, or Patrons: for of these or any such like, the
Scripture is wholly silent, as having any power therein.

CHAP. IX. Of Ordination, and Imposition of hands.
Church Officers are not only to be chosen by the Church, Acts. 13, 32. cap.
14.23. 1 Timothy 5.22.
but also to be ordained by Imposition of hands, and prayer; with which at the
ordination of Elders, fasting also is to be joined.

2. Number. 8.10. Acts 6.5, 6 cap. 13.2.3
This Ordination we account nothing else, but the solemn putting of a man into
his place and Office in the Church whereunto he had right before by election,
being like the installing of a Magistrate in the commonwealth.

Ordination therefore is not to go before, but to follow Election. Acts 6.5, 6.
cap. 14.23.
The essence and substance of the outward calling of an ordinary Officer in the
Church does not consist in his Ordination, but in his voluntary and free
Election by the Church, and in his accepting of that Election. Whereupon is
founded the relation between Pastor and Flock, between such a Minister, and
such a People.

Ordination does not constitute an Officer, nor give him the essentials of his
Office. The Apostles were Elders without Imposition of hands by men: Paul and
Barnabas were Officers, before that Imposition of Hands, Acts 13.3. The
Posterity of Levi were Priests, and Levits, before hands were laid on them by
the Children of Israel.

3. 1 Timothy 4, 14 Acts 13, 3 1 Timothy 5, 22.
In such Churches, where there are Elders, Imposition of hands in ordination is
to be performed by those Elders.

4. In such Churches where there are no Elders, Imposition of hands may be
performed by some of the Brethren orderly chosen by the Church thereunto. Numb
8, 10
For if the people may elect officers which is the greater, and wherein the
substance of the Office consists, they may much more (occasion and need so
requiring) impose hands in ordination, which is the less, and but the
accomplishment of the other.

5. Nevertheless in such Churches where there are no Elders, and the Church so
desire, we see not why Imposition of hands may not be performed by the Elders
of other Churches. Ordinary officers laid hands upon the officers of many
Churches: The presbytery at Ephesus laid hands upon Timothy an Evangelist. 1 Timothy 4, 14 Acts 13 3
The presbytery at Antioch laid hands upon Paul and Barnabas.

6. 1 Pet 5, 2 Acts 20, 18
Church Officers, are officers to one Church, even that particular, over which
the Holy Ghost has made them overseers. Insomuch as Elders are commanded to
feed, not all flocks, but that flock which is committed to their faith and
trust, and depends upon them. Nor can constant residence at one congregation,
be necessary for a minister, no nor yet lawful, if he be not a minister to one
congregation only, Acts 20, 28
but to the Church universal: because he may not attend one part only of the
Church, whereto he is a minister, but he is called to attend unto all the flock.

7. He that is clearly loosed from his office-relation unto that Church whereof
he was a minister, cannot be looked at as an officer, nor perform any act of
Office in any other Church unless he be again orderly called unto Office: which
when it shall be, we know nothing to hinder, but Imposition of hands also in
his Ordination ought to be used toward him again. For so Paul the Apostle
received Imposition of hands twice at least, from Ananias. Acts. 9.17. and
Acts. 13.3.

CHAP. X. Of the power of the Church, and its Presbytery.
Supreme and Lordly power over all the Churches upon earth, Psalm 2, 6 Ephesians 1,
21, 22 Isay 9, 6 Mat 28, 18
does only belong unto Jesus Christ, who is King of the Church and the head
thereof. He has the Government upon his shoulders, and has al power given to
him, both in heaven and earth.

2. A Company of professed believers Ecclesiastically Confederat, as they are a
Church before they have officers and without them; Acts 1, 23 c 14, 23 c 6 3, 4
Mat 18, 17 1 Cor 5, 4, 5
so even in that estate, subordinate Church Power under Christ deligated to
them by him, does belong to them in such a manner as is before expressed. C. 5.
S. 2. and as flowing from the very nature and Essence of a Church: It being
natural to al bodies, and so unto a Church body, to be furnished with
sufficient power, for its own preservatio^ and subsistence.

3. This Government of the Church, is a mixed Government (and so has been
acknowledged long before the term of Independency was heard of:) In respect of
Christ, the head and King of the Church, Rev 3, 7 1 Cor 5, 12
and the Sovereign power residing in him, and exercised by him, it is a
Monarchy: In respect of the body, or Brotherhood of the Church, 1 Timothy 5, 17
and power from Christ granted unto them, it resembles a Democracy, In respect
of the Presbytery and power comited to them, it is an Aristocracy.

4. The Sovereign power which is peculiar unto Christ, is exercised. I. Gal 1,
4 Rev 5, 8, 9 Mat 28, 20. Ephesians 4, 8, 11 Jam 4, 12 Isai 33, 22 1 Timothy ^, 15 2 Cor
10, 4 5. Isai 32, 2 Luke 1, 71
In calling the Church out of the world unto holy fellowship with himself. II.
In instituting the ordinances of his worship, and appointing his ministers and
officers for the dispensing of them. III. In giving laws for the ordering of
all our ways, and the ways of his house. IV. In giving power and life to all
his Institutions, and to his people by them. V. In protecting and delivering
his Church against and from all the enemies of their peace.

5. The power granted by Christ unto the body of the Church and Brotherhood,
is a prerogative or privilege which the Church does exercise. I. In Choosing
their own officers, whether Elders, or Deacons. II. In admission of their own
members, Acts 6, 3, 5 c 14, 23 c 9, 26
and therefore there is great reason they should have power to Remove any from
their fellowship again. Hence in case of offense any one brother has power to
convince and admonish an offending brother: Mat 18.15, 16, 17
and in case of not hearing him, to take one or two more to set on the
Admonition, and in case of not hearing them, to proceed to tell the Church: Tit
3, 10 Col 4, 17 Mat 18, 17 2 Cor 2:7, 8
and as his offense may require, the whole Church has power to proceed to the
public Censure of him, whether by Admonition, or Excommunication: and upon his
repentance to restore him again unto his fromer communion.

6. In case an Elder offend incorrigibly the matter so requiring, as the Church
had power to call him to office, Col 4, 17 Rom 16, 17.
so they have power according to order (the counsel of other Churches where it
may be had directing thereto) to remove him from his office: and being now but a
member, in case he add contumacy to his sin, the Church that had power to
receive him into their fellowship, Mat. 18.17
has also the same power to cast him out, that they have concerning any other
member.

7. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 5, 12
Church Government, or Rule, is placed by Christ in the Officers of the Church,
who are therefore called Rulers, while they rule with God: yet in case of
mal-administration, they are subject to the power of the Church, Rom, 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 12, 28, 29. Heb. 13.7, 17
according as has been said before. the Holy Ghost frequently, yea always,
where it mentions Church-Rule, and Curch-government, ascribes it to Elders:
whereas the work and duty of the people is expressed in the phrase of obeying
their Elders; and submitting themselves unto them in the Lord: so as it is
manifest, that an organick or complete Chuch is a body politic, consisting of
some that are Governors, and some that are governed, in the Lord.

8. The power which Christ has committed to the Elders is to feed and rule the
Church of God, Acts 20, 28 chap 6, 2 Number, 16, 12 Ezekiel. 46, 10 Acts 13, 15
and accordingly to call the Church together upon any weighty occasion, when
the members so called, without just cause, may not refuse to come: nor when
they are come, depart before they are dismissed: Hosea, 4, 4
nor speak in the Church, before they have leave from the Elders: nor continue
so doing, when they require silence, nor may they oppose nor contradict the
judgment or sentence of the Elders, without sufficient and weighty cause,
because such practices are manifestly contrary unto order, and government, and
in-lets of disturbance, and tend to confusion.

9. Rev. 2.2 1 Timothy 5, 19 Acts 21, 18 22, 23 1 Cor. 5.4, 5
It belongs also unto the Elders to examine any officers, or members, before
they be received of the Church: to receive the accusations brought to the
Church, and to prepare them for the Churches hearing. In handling of offenses
and other matters before the Church they have power to declare and pubilsh the
Counsel and will of God touching the same, Number. 6.23 to 26
and to pronounce sentence with consent of the Church: Lastly they have power,
when they dismiss the people, to bless them in the name of the Lord.

10 This power of Government in the Elders, does not any wise prejudice the
power of privilege in the brotherhood; as neither the power of privilege in the
brethren, does prejudice the power of government in the Elders; Acts 14.15 v.
23. c 6.2 1 Cor. 5.4 2 Cor. 2.6, 7
but they may sweetly agree together: as we may see in the example of the
Apostles furnished with the greatest Church Power, who took in the concurrence
and consent of the brethren in Church-administrations.

Also that Scripture 2 Cor. 2.9. and chap. 10.6. do declare, that what the
Churches were to act and do in these matters, Heb: 13, 17
they were to do in a way of obedience, and that not only to the direction of
the Apostles, but also of their ordinary Elders.

11. From the Premises, namely, that the ordinary power of Government belonging
only to the Elders, power of privilege remains with the brotherhood, (as
power of judgment in matters of censure, and power of liberty, in matters of
liberty:) It follows, that in an organick Church, and right administration;
all Church acts, proceed after the manner of a mixed administration, so as no
Church act can be consumated, or perfected without the consent of both.

CHAP. XI. Of the Maintenance of Church Officers.
THe Apostle concludes, 1 Cor: 9, 9, v 15, Mat, 9 38, c 10, 1^ 1 Timothy, 5, 18
that necessary and sufficient maintenance is due unto the Ministers of the
Word: from the law of Nature and Nations, from the Law of Moses, the equity
thereof, as also the Rule of common Reason. Moreover, the Scripture does not
only call Elders, Laborers and Workmen, but also speaking of them, does say,
Galat: 6, 6
That the Laborer is worthy of his Hire: 1 Cor, 9, 9, verse 14 1 Timothy: 5, 18
and requires that he which is taught in the Word, should communicate to him in
all good things; and mentions it as an Ordinance of the Lord, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; and forbids the muzling of the
mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn.

2. The Scriptures alleged, requiring this maintenance as a bounden duty, and
due debt, and not as a matter of alms, and free gift; therefore people are not
at liberty to do, or not to do, what and when they please in this matter, no
more than in any other commanded Duty, and Ordinance of the Lord: but ought of
Duty, Rom: 15, 20 1 Cor. 9, 11
to minister of their carnal things to them that labor amongst them in the Word
and Doctrine, as well as they ought to pay any other Workmen their wages, or to
discharge and satisfy their other debts, or to submit themselves to observe
any other Ordinance of the Lord.

3. The Apostle Gal. 6.6. injoyning that he which is taught, Galat: 6, 6
communicate to him that teaches in all good things: does not leave it
arbitrary, what, or how much a man shall give, or in what proportion, but even
the later, 1 Cor. 16.2.
as well as the former, is prescribed and appointed by the Lord.

4. Not only Members of Churches, but all that are taught in the Word, Galat.
6, 6.
are to contribute unto him that teaches, in all good things. In case that
Congregations are defective in their contributions, the Deacons are to call
upon them to do their duty: Acts 6.3, 4.
if their call suffiseth not, the Church by her Power is to require it of their
Members, and where Church Power through the corruption of men, does not, or
cannot attain the end, Neh. 13.11.
the Magistrate is to see the Ministry duly provided for, as appears from the
commended example of Nehemiah. The Magistrates are nursing Fathers, Isay, 49.23
and nursing Mothers, and stand charged with the custody of both Tables;
because it is better to prevent a scandal, that it may not come, and easier
also, than to remove it when it is given. 2 Cor. 8.13, 14.
Its most suitable to Rule, that by the Churches care each man should know his
proportion according to Rule, wha1t he should do, before he do it, that so his
judgment and heart may be satisfied in what he does, and just offense prevented
in what is done.

CHAP. XII. Of Admission of Members into the Church.
THe Doors of the Churches of Christ upon Earth, 2 Chronicles. 23 19. Mat. 13.25.
and 22.12
do not by Gods appointment stand so wide open, that all sorts of people, good
or bad, may freely enter therein at their pleasure; but such as are admitted
thereto as Members, ought to be examined and tried first, whether they be fit
and meet to be received into Church-society, Acts 8.37.
or not. The Eunuch of Aethiopia, before his admission, was examined by Philip,
Rev. 2.2.
whether he did believe on Jesus Christ with all his heart: the Angel of the
Church at Ephesus is commended for trying such as said they were Apostles and
were not: Acts 9.26.
There is like reason for trying of them that profess themselves to be
Believers.

The Officers are charged with the keeping of the doors of the Church, Rev.
21.12. 2 Chronicles. 23 19.
and therefore are in a special manner to make trial of the fitness of such who
enter. Twelve Angels are set at the gates of the Temple, Act. 2.38. to 41. c.
8. 37.
lest such as were ceremonially unclean should enter thereinto.

2. The things which are requisite to be found in all Church Members, are,
Repentance from sin, and Faith in Jesus Christ.

And therefore these are the things whereof men are to be examined, at their
admission into the Church and which then they must profess and hold forthin
such sort, Matthew. 3.6.
as may satisfy rational charity that the things are there indeed. John
Baptist admitted men to Baptism, confessing and bewailing their sins: and of
others it is said, that they came, Acts 19.18.
and confessed, and showed their deeds.

3. The weakest measure of Faith is to be accepted in those that desire to be
admitted into the Church: Romans 14.1.
because weak Christians if sincere have the substance of that faith,
repentance and holiness which is required in Church Members: and such have most
need of the Ordinances for their confirmation and growth in grace. Mat. 12.20.
The Lord Jesus would not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed,
Isay 40.11.
but gather the tender Lambs in his arms, and carry them gently in his bosom.
Such charity and tenderness is to be used, as the weakest Christian, if
sincere, may not be excluded, nor discouraged. Severity of examination is to be
avoided.

4. In case any through excessive fear, or other infirmity, be unable to make
their personal relation of their spiritual estate in public, it is sufficient
that the Elders having received private satisfaction, make relation thereof in
public before the Church, they testifying their assents thereunto; this being
the way that tends most to edification. But whereas persons are of better
abilities, there it is most expedient, that they make their relations and
confessions personally with their own mouth, as David professes of himself.
Psalm 66.16.


5. A personal and public confession, and declaring of Gods manner of working
upon the soul, is both lawful, expedient, and useful, in sundry respects, and
upon sundry grounds. Those three thousand, Acts, 2.37.41. before they were
admitted by the Apostles, did manifest that they were pricked in their hearts
at Peter's Sermon, together with earnest desire to be delivered from their sins,
which now wounded their consciences, and their ready receiving of the Word of
Promise and Exhortation. 1 Pet. 3.15.
We are to be ready to render a reason of the hope that is in us, to every one
that asks us: therefore we must be able and ready upon any occasion to declare
and show our repentance for sin, faith unfeigned, and effectual calling, Heb.
11.1. Ephesians. 1.18.
because these are the reasons of a well grounded Hope. I have not hidden thy
righteousness from the great Congregaaion. Psalm. 40.10.

6. This profession of Faith and Repentance, as it must be made by such at
their admission, that were never in Church-society before: so nothing hinders
but the same may also be performed by such as have formerly been Members of
some other Church, and the Church to which they now join themselves as Members,
may lawfully require the same. Those three thousand, Acts 2. which made their
confession, Mat. 3.5, 6. Galat. 2.4. 1 Timothy 5.24.
were Members of the Church of the Jews before, so were they that were baptized
by John. Churches may err in their admission: and Persons regularly admitted
may fall into offense. Otherwise, if Churches might obtrude their Members, or
if Church Members might obtrude themselves upon other Churches, without due
trial, the matter so requiring, both the liberty of Churches would hereby be
infringed, in that they might not examine those, concerning whose fitness for
Communion, they were unsatisfied: and besides the infringing of their liberty,
Cant. 8.8.
the Churches themselves would unavoidably be corrupted, and the Ordinances
defiled, whilst they might not refuse, but must receive the unworthy, which is
contrary unto the Scripture, teaching that all Churches are Sisters, and
therefore equal.

7. The like trial is to be required from such Members of the Church, as were
born in the same, or received their Membership, and were baptized in their
infancy or minority, by virtue of the Covenant of their Parents, when being
grown up unto years of discretion, they shall desire to be made partakers of
the Lords Supper: unto which, because Holy things must not be given unto the
unworthy, Matthew. 7.6. 1 Cor. 11.27.
therefore it is requisite, that these as well as others, should come to their
trial and examination, and manifest their Faith and Repentance by an open
profession thereof, before they are received to the Lords Supper, and otherwise
not to be admitted thereunto.

Yet these Church Members that were so born, or received in their Childhood,
before they are capable of being made partakers of full communion, have many
privileges which others (not Church Members) have not: they are in Covenant
with God, have the seal thereof upon them, viz. Baptism; and so if not
regenerated, yet are in a more hopeful way of attaining regenerating grace, and
all the spiritual Blessings both of the Covenant and Seal; they are also under
Church-watch, and consequently subject, to the reprehensions, admonitions and
censures thereof, for their healing and amendment, as need shall require.

CHAP. XIII. Of Church Members their removal from one Church to another, and of
Letters of recommendation, and dismission.
Church Members may not remove or depart from the Church, Heb. 10.25
and so one from another as they pleas, nor without just and weighty cause but
ought to live and dwell together: for as much as they are commanded, not to
forsake the assembling of themselves together. Such departure tends to the
dissolution and ruin of the body: as the pulling of stones, and pieces of
timber from the building, and of members from the natural body, tend to the
destruction of the whole.

2. It is therefore the duty of Church Members, in such times and places when
counsel may be had, Prove. 11.14.
to consult with the Church whereof they are members, about their removal, that
accordingly they having their approbation, may be encouraged or otherwise
desist. They who are joined with consent, should not depart without consent,
except forced thereunto.

3. If a members departure be manifestly unsafe, and sinful, Romans 14.23 1 Timothy
5.22. Acts 21.14
the Church may not consent thereunto: for in so doing, they should not act in
faith: and should partake with him in his sin. If the case be doubtful and
the person not to be persuaded, it seems best to leave the matter unto God,
and not forcibly to detayn him.

4. Just reasons for a members removal of himself from the Church are, 1 If a
man cannot continue without partaking in sin: 11. Ephesians. 5.11. Acts 9.25. and
ver. 29, 30. c. 8.1.
In case of personal persecution, so Paul departed from the Desciples at
Damascus. Also, in case of general persecution, when all are scattered. 111. In
case of real, and not only pretended, Neh. 13.10.
want of competent subsistence, a door being opened for better supply in
another place, together with the means of spiritual edification. In these, or
like cases, a member may lawfully remove, and the Church cannot lawfully
detain him.

5. To separate from a Church, 2 Timothy: 4, 10.
either out of contempt of their holy fellowship, or out of covetousness, or
for greater inlargements with just grief to the Church; or out of Schism, or
want of love; Rom: 16, 17. Jude 10
and out of a spirit of contention in respect of some unkindness, or some evil
only conceived; or indeed, Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Col: 3, 13, Galio, 1, 2
in the Church which might and should be tolerated and healed with a spirit of
meekness, and of which evil the Church is not yet co^vinced, (though perhaps
himself be) nor admonished: for these or like reasons to withdraw from
public communion, in word, or seals, or censures, is unlawful and sinful.

6. Isai 56, 8, Acts 9, 26
Such members as have orderly removed their habitation ought to join themselves
unto the Church in order, where they do inhabit if it may be; otherwise, they
can neither perform the duties, nor receive the privileges of members; such an
example tolerated in some, 1 Cor: 14, 33
is apt to corrupt others; which if many should follow, would threaten the
dissolution and confusion of Churches, contrary to the Scripture.

7. Acts 18, 27
Order requires, that a member thus removing, have letters testimonial; and of
dismission from the Church whereof he yet is, unto the Church whereunto he
desires to be joined, lest the Church should be deluded; that the Chuch may
receive him in faith; and not be corrupted by receiving deceivers, and false
brethren. Until the person dismissed be received into another Church, he
cease not by his letters of dismission to be a member of the Church whereof he
was. The Church cannot make a member no member but by excommunication.

8. Rom: 16, 1, 2 2 Cor: 3, 1
If a member be called to remove only for a time, where a Church is, letters of
Recommendation are requisite, and sufficient for communion with that Church, in
the ordinances, and in their watch: as Phoebe, a servant of the Church at
Cenchrea, had letters written for her to the church of Rome, that she might be
received, as becomes saints.

9. Such letters of Recommendation and dismission were written for Apollos:
Acts 18, 27 Col: 4, 10 Rom: 16, 1
For Marcus to the Colosians; for Phoebe to the Romans; for sundry others to
other Churches; and the Apostle tells us, that some persons, not sufficiently
known otherwise, have special need of such letters, 2 Cor: 3, 1
though he for his part had no need thereof. The use of them is to be a benefit,
and help to the party for whom they are written; and for the furthering of his
receiving amongst the Saints in the place whereto he goes; and the due
satisfaction of them in their receiving of him.

CHAP. XIV. Of excommunication and other Censures.
THe Censures of the Church, 1 Timothy: 5, 20 Deuteronomy: 17, 12, 13
are appointed by Christ, for the preventing, removing, and healing of offenses
in the Church: Jude 29, Deuteronomy: 13, 11 1 Cor: 5, 6 Rom: 2, 24
for the reclaiming and gaining of offending brethen: for the deterring of
others from the like offenses: for purging out the leaven which may infect the
whole lump: for vindicating the honor of Christ, and of his Church, Rev: 2, 14
15, 16, and 20
and the holy profession of the Gospel: and for preventing of the wrath of God,
that may justly fall upon the Church, if they should suffer his covenant, and
the seals thereof, to be profaned by notorious and obstinate offenders.

2. Mat: 5, 23, 24 Luk: 17 3, 4
If an offense be private (one brother offending another) the offender is to
go, and acknowledge his repentance for it unto his offended brother, who is
then to forgive him, but if the offender neglect or refuse to do it, the
brother offended is to go, Mat: 18, 15
etconvince and admonish him of it, between themselves privately: if thereupon
the offender be brought to repent of his offense, the admonisher has won his
brother, but if the offender hear not his brother, Verse 16
the brother offended is to take with him one or two more, that in the mouth of
two or three witnesses, every word may be established, (whether the word of
admonition if the offender receive it, or the word of complaint if he refuse
it:) Verse 17.
for if he refuse it, the offended brother is by the mouth of the Elders to tell
the Church; and if he hear the Church, and declare the same by penitent
confession, he is recovered and gained; and if the Church discern him to be
willing to hear, yet not fully convinced of his offense, Tit: 3, 10
as in case of heresy, they are to dispense to him a public admonition; which
declaring the offender to ly under the public offense of the Church, does
thereby withold or suspend him from the holy fellowship of the Lords supper,
till his offense be removed by penitent confession. Mat: 18, 17
If he still continue obstinate they are to cast him out by excommunication.

3. But if the offense be more public at first, 1 Cor: 5, 4, 5 and verse 18.
and of a more heinous and criminal nature, to wit, such as are condened by the
light of nature; then the Church without such graduall proceeding, is to cast
out the offender, from their holy communion, for the further mortifying of his
sin and the healing of his soul, in the day of the Lord Jesus.

4. In dealing with an offender, great care is to be taken, that we be neither
overstrict or rigorous, nor too indulgent or remiss: Galat: 6, 1
our proceeding herein ought to be with a spirit of meekness, considering our
selves lest we also be tempted; Mat: 18, 34 23, c 6, 14.35, Ezekiel: 13, 10: Jer:
6, 14
and that the best of us have need of much forgivnes from the Lord. Yet the
wining and healing of the offe^ders soul, being the end of these endeavors, we
must not daub with untempered mortar, nor heal the wounds of our brethren
slightly. On some have compassion, others save with fear.

5. Mat, 18, 17 1 Cor, 5, 11 2 These, 3, 6 14
While the offender remains excommunicate, the Church is to refrarn from all
member-like communion with him in spiritual things, and also from al familiar
communion with him in civil things, farther then the necessity of natural, or
domestical, or civil relations do require: and are therefore to forbear to eat
and drink with him, that he may be ashamed.

6. Excommunication being a spiritual punishment, it does not prejudice the
excommunicat in, nor deprive him of his civil rights, and therefore touches not
Princes, or other Magistrates, in point of their civil dignity or auothority. 1
Cor, 14, 24, 25
And, the excommunicate being but as a publican and a heathen, heathens being
lawfully permitted to come to hear the word in Church assemblyes; 2 These, 3, 14
we acknowledge therefore the like liberty of hearing the word, may be permitted
to persons excommunicate, that is permitted unto heathen. And because we are
not without hope of his recovery, we are not to account him as an enemy, but
to admonish him as a brother.

7. If the Lord sanctify the censure to the offender, so as by the grace of
Christ, 2 Cor, 2, 7, 8
he does testify his repentance, with humble confession of his sin, and
judging of himself, giving glory unto God; the Church is then to forgive him,
and to comfort him, and to restore him to the wonted brotherly communion, which
formerly he enjoyed with them.

8. The suffering of profane or scandalous Livers to continue in fellowship,
Rev, 2, 14, 15, verse, 20
and partake in the Sacrament, is doubtless a great sin in those that have
power in their hands to redress it, and do it not. Nevertheless, Mat, 23, 3
Acts 3, 1
in as much as Christ and his Apostles in their times, and the Prophets and
other godly in theirs, did lawfully partake of the Lords commanded Ordinances
in the Jewish Church, and neither taught nor practiced separation from the
same, though unworthy ones were permitted therein; and inasmuch as the faithful
in the Church of Corinth, wherein were many unworthy persons, 2 Cor, 6 chap 15,
12
and practices, are never commanded to absent themselves from the Sacraments,
because of the same: therefore the godly in like cases, are not presently to
separate.

9. As separation from such a Church wherein profane and scandalous Livers are
tolerated, is not presently necessary: so for the members thereof, otherwise
worthy, hereupon to abstain from communicating with such a Church, 2 Chronicles, 30
18, Gen, 18, 25
in the participation of the Sacraments, is unlawful. For as it were
unreasonable for an innocent person to be punished, for the faults of others
wherein he has no hand, and whereunto he gave no consent: so is it more
unreasonable, that a godly man should neglect duty, and punish himself in not
coming for his portion, in the blessing of the seals, as he ought, because
others are suffered to come, that ought not, especially considering that
himself does neither consent to their sin, nor to their approaching to the
Ordinance in their sin, Ezekiel. 9.10.
nor to the neglect of others who should put them away, and do not: but on the
contrary does heartily mourn for these things, modestly and seasonably stir up
others to do their duty. If the Church cannot be refermed, they may use their
liberty as is specified, chap. 13. Sect. 4. But this all the Godly are bound
unto, even every one to do his endeavor, according to his power and place, that
the unworthy may be duly proceeded against by the Church, to whom this matter
does appertain.

CHAP. XV. Of the Communion of Churches one with another.
ALthough Churches be distinct, Rev. 1.4. Cant. 8.8. Romans 16.16 1 Cor 16.19
Acts 15.23 Rev. 2.1.
and therefore may not be confounded one with another: and equal, and therefore
have not dominion one over another: yet all the Churches ought to preserve
Church Communion one with another, because they are all united unto Christ, not
only as a Mystical, but as a Political Head; whence is derived a communion
suitable thereunto.

2. The communion of Churches is exercised sundry ways.

1. Cant. 8.8.
By way of mutual care in taking thought for one another welfare.

II. By way of consultation one with another, when we have occasion to require
the judgment and counsel of other Churches, touching any person, or cause
wherewith they may be better acquainted than our selves. As the Church of
Antioch consulted with the Apostles and Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, Acts
15, 2
about the question of circumcision of the Gentiles, and about the false
Teachers that broached that Doctrine. In which case, Acts 15, 6,
when any Church wants light or peace amongst themselves, it is a way of
communion of Churches (according to the Word) to meet together by their Elders
and other Messengers in a Synod, to consider and argue the points in doubt, or
difference, Verse 22, 23
and having found out he way of truth and peace, to commend the same by their
Letters and Messengers to the Churches, whom the same may concern.

But if a church be rent with divisions amongst themselves, or lie under any
open scandal, and yet refuse to consult with other Churches, for healing or
removing of the same; it is a matter of just offense both to the Lord Jesus,
and to other Churches, as bewraying too much want of mercy and faithfulness,
Ezck. 34.4.
not to seek to bind up the breaches and wounds of the Church and Brethren; and
therefore the state of such a Church calls aloud upon other Churches, to
exercise a fuller act of brotherly communion, to wit, by way of Admonition.

III. A third way then of communion of Churches is by way of admonition, to
wit, In case any public offense be found in a Church, which they either
discern not, Gal. 2.11. to 14.
or are slow in proceeding to use the means for the removing and healing of.
Paul had no authority over Peter, yet when he saw Peter not walking with a
right foot, he publicly rebuked him before the Church: though Churches have no
more authority one over another, than one Apostle had over another; yet as one
Apostle might admonish another, so may one Church admonish another, and yet
without usurpation. In which case, if the Church that lies under offense, Mat.
18.15, 16, 17. by proportion.
do not hearken to the Church which does admonish her, the Church is to
acquaint other neighbor-churches with that offense, which the offending Church
still lies under, together with their neglect of the brotherly admonition
given unto them; whereupon those other Churches are to join in seconding the
admonition formerly given: and if still the offending Church continue in
obstinacy and impenitency, they may forbear communion with them; and are to
proceed to make use of the help of a Synod, or counsel of neighbor churches
walking orderly (if a greater cannot conveniently be had) for their conviction.
If they hear not the Synod, the Synod having declared them to be obstinate,
particular Churches approving and accepting of the judgment of the Synod, are
to declare the sentence of non-communion respectively concerning them: and
thereupon out of a religious care to keep their own communion pure, they may
justly withdraw themselves from participation with them at the Lords Table, and
from such other Acts of Holy communion, as the communion of Churches does
otherwise allow and require. Nevertheless, if any Members of such a Church as
lies under public offense, do not consent to the offense of the Church, but
do in due sort bear witnels against it, Genesis 18.25.
they are still to be received to wonted communion: for it is not equal, that
the innocent should suffer with the offensive.

Yea furthermore; if such innocent Members after due waiting in the use of all
good means for the healing of the offense of their own Church, shall at last
(with the allowance of the counsel of neighbor Churches) withdraw from the
fellowship of their own Church, and offer themselves to the fellowship of
another; we judge it lawful for the other Church to receive them (being
otherwise fit) as if they had been orderly dismissed to them from their own
Church.

IV. A fourth way of communion of Churches, is by way of Participation: the
Members of one Church occasionally coming unto another, we willingly admit them
to partake with us at the Lords Table, it being the seal of our communion not
only with Christ, nor only with the Members of our own Church, 1 Cor 12.13
but also with all the Churches of the Saints; in which regard, we refuse not
to baptize their children presented to us, if either their own Minister be
absent, or such a fruit of holy fellowship be desired with us. In like case
such Churches as are furnished with more Ministers than one, do willingly
afford one of their own Ministers to supply the place of an absent or sick
Minister of another Church for a needful season.

V. A fifth way of Church Communion is, Romans 16.3.
by way of Recommendation when a Member of one Church has occasion to reside
in another Church; if but for a season we commend him to their watchful
fellowship by letters of recommendation: but if he be called to settle his
abode there, we commit him according to his desire, Acts 18.27.
to the fellowship of their Covenant, by letters of dismission.

VI. A sixth way of Church Communion, is in case of Need, to Minister relief and
succor one unto another: Acts 11.22.
either of able Members to furnish them with Officers; verse. 29. Romans 13.26 27.
or of outward support to the necessities of poorer Churches; as did the
Churches of the Gentiles contribute liberally to the poor Saints at Jerusalem.

3. When a company of Believers purpose to gather into Churchfellowship, it is
requisite for their safer proceeding, and the maintaining of the communion of
Churches, Gal. 2.1, 2. and 9. by proportion.
that they signify their intent unto the neighbor Churches, walking according
unto the order of the Gospel, and desire their presence, and help, and right
hand of fellowship which they ought readily to give unto them, when there is no
just cause of excepting against their proceedings.

4. Besides these several ways of communion, there is also a way of
propagation of Churches; when a Church shall grow too numerous, it is a way,
Isay 40.20. Cant: 8, 8, 9
and fit season, to propogate one Church out of another, by sending forth such
of their members as are willing to remove, and to procure some Officers to
them, as may enter with them into Church Estate a among themselves: as Bees,
when the hive is too full, issue forth by swarms, and are gathered into other
hives, so the Churches of Christ may do the same upon like necessity; and
therein hold forth to them the right hand of fellowship, both in their gathering
into a Church; and in the ordination of their Officers.

CHAP. XVI. Of Synods.
SYnods orderly assembled, and rightly proceeding according to the pattern,
Acts 15.2. to 15.
Acts 15. we acknowledge as the ordinance of Christ: and though not absolutely
necessary to the being, yet many times, through the iniquity of men, and
perverseness of times necessary to the wel-being of Churches, for the
establishment of truth, and peace therein.

2. Synods being Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Assemblyes, are therefore made up
of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes. The next efficient cause of them under
Christ, is the power of the Churches, sending forth their Elders, Acts 15.2, 3
and other Messengers; who being met together in the Name of Christ, Verse 6.
are the matter of the Synod: and they in arguing, debating, and determining
matters of Religion according to the Word, ver. 7. to 23
and publishing the same to the Churches whom it concerns, do put forth the
proper and formal acts of a Synod; verse 31. Acts 16.4.15.
to the conviction of errors, and heresies, and the establishment of truth and
peace in the Churches, which is the end of a Synod.

3. Magistrates have power to call a Synod, by calling to the Churches to send
forth their Elders and other Messengers, 1 Chronicles. 29 4, 5. to 11.
to counsel and assist them in matters of Religion: but yet the constituting of
a Synod, Acts 15.
is a Church act, and may be transacted by the Churches, even when civil
Magistrates may be enemies to Churches, and to Church-Assemblyes.

4. It belongs unto Synods and Counsels, to debate and determine controversies
of faith, Acts 17.1.2.6.7. 1 Chronicles. 15 23.
and cases of conscience; to clear from the Word holy directions for the holy
Worship of God, and good government of the Church, to bear witness against
mis-administration and Corruption in doctrine or manners in any particular
Church, 2 Chronicles. 29.6, 7 Acts 15, 24. verse 28, 29
and to give directions for the reformation thereof: Not to exercise
Churchcensures in way of discipline, nor any other act of church authority or
jurisdiction: which that presidentiall Synod did forbear.

5. The Synods directions and determinations, so far as consonant to the word
of God, are to be received with reverence and submission; not only for their
agreement therewith (which is the principal ground thereof, and without which
they bind not at all:) but also secondarily, for the power whereby they are
made, Acts 15
as being an ordinance of God appointed thereunto in his word.

6. Because it is difficult, if not impossible, for many churches to com al
together in one place, in all their members universaly: therefore they may
assemble by their delegates or messengers, as the church of Antioch went not
all to Jerusalem, Acts 15, 2
but some select men for that purpose. Because none are or should be more fit
to know the state of the churches, nor to advise of ways for the good thereof
than Elders; therefore it is fit that in the choice of the messengers for such
assemblies, they have special respect unto such. Acts 15, 2. verse, 22, 23;
Yet in as much as not only Paul and Barnabas, but certain others also were
sent to Jerusalem from Antioch. Acts 15. and when they were come to Jerusalem,
not only the Apostles and Elders, but other brethren also do assemble, and
meet about the matter; therefore Synods are to consist both of Elders, and other
church members, endued with gifts, and sent by the churches, not excluding the
presence of any brethren in the churches.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Civil Magistrates power in matters Ecclesiastical.
IT is lawful, profitable, And necessary for Christians to gather themselves
into Church estate, and therein to exercise all the ordinanaces of Christ
accoridng unto the word, Acts 2 41, 47 c 4, 1, 2, 3,
although consent of the Magistrate could not be had thereunto; because the
Apostles and Christians in their time did frequently thus practice, when the
Magistrates being all of them Jewish or pagan, and mostly persecuting enemies,
would give no countenance or consent to such matters.

2. Church Government stands in no opposition to civil government of
commonwealths, John 18, 36
nor any way intrencheth upon the authority of Civil Magistrates in their
jurisdictions; John 18.36 Acts 25.8.
nor any whit weakneth their hands in governing, but rather strengthens them,
and furthereth the people in yielding more hearty and conscionable obedience
unto them, whatsoever some ill affected persons to the ways of Christ have
suggested, to alienate the affections of Kings and Princes form the ordinances
of Christ, as if the Kingdom of Christ in his church could not rise and stand,
without the falling and weakening of their government, which is also of Christ:
Isay. 49.23.
whereas the contrary is most true, that they may both stand together and
flourish the one being helpful unto the other, in their distinct and due
administrations.

3. The power and authority of Magistrates is not for the restraiing of
churches, Romans 13.4. 1 Timothy 2.2.
or any other good works, but for helping in and furthering thereof; and
therefore the consent and countenance of Magistrates when it may be had, is not
to be slighted, or lightly esteemed; but on the contrary; it is part of that
honor due to christian Magistrates to desire and crave their consent and
approbation therein: which being obtained, the churches may then proceed in
their way with much more encouragement, and comfort.

4. It is not in the power of Magistrates to compel their subjects to become
church members, and to partake at the Lords table; for the priests are
reproved, Ezekiel. 44.7.9. 1 Cor. 5.11.
that brought u^worthy ones into the sanctuary: then, as it was unlawful for
the priests, so it is as unlawful to be done by civil Magistrates. Those whom
the church is to cast out if they were in, the Magistrate ought not to thrust
into the church, nor to hold them therein.

5. As it is unlawful for church officers to meddle with the sword of the
Magistrate, Matthew. 20.25.26.
so is it u^lawfull for the Magistrate to meddle with the work proper to church
officers: the Acts of Moses and David, who were not only Princes, 2 Chronicles. 26
16, 17.
but Prophets, were extraordnary; therefore not imitable. Against such
usurpation the Lord witnessed, by smiting Uzziah with leprosy, for presuming
to offer incense.

6. It is the duty of the Magistrate, to take care of matters of religion, and
to improve his civil authority for the observing of the duties commanded in the
first, Psalm. 82.2.
as well as for observing of the duties commanded in the second table. They are
called Gods. The end of the Magistrates office, 1 Timothy 2.1.2.
is not only the quiet and peaceable life of the subject, in matters of
righteousness and honesty, but also in matters of godliness, yea of all
godliness. Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat Hezekiah, Josiah, 1
Kings 15.14. c. 22.43 2 King. 12.3 c. 14.4. c 15 35. 1 Kings 20.42. Job 29.25.
c. 31 26.28. Neh. 14. Jonah 3 7. Ezra 7. Dan. 3.29.
are much commended by the Holy Ghost for the putting forth their authority in
matters of religion: on the contrary, such Kings as have been failing this way,
are frequently taxed and reproved by the Lord. And not only the Kings of judah,
but also Job, Nehemiah, the King of Niniveh, Darius, Artaxerxes, Nebucadnezar,
whom none looked at as types of Christ, (though were it so, there were no place
for any just objection,) are commended in the book of God, for exercising their
authority this way

7 The object of the power of the Magistrate, are not things merely inward, and
so not subject to his cognizance and view, as unbeleif, hardness of heart,
erroneous opinions not vented; but only such things as are acted by the outward
man; neither is their power to be exercised, in commanding such acts of the
outward man, 1 Kings 20.28. verse. 11
and punishing the neglect thereof, as are but mere inventions, and devices of
men; but about such acts, as are commanded and forbidden in the word; yea such
as the word does clearly determine, though not always clearly to the judgment
of the Magistrate or others, yet clearly in it slfe. In these he of right ought
to putt forth his authority, Deuteronomy. 13. 1 Kings 20.28. verse. 42 Dan. 3.29. Zach.
13.3. Neh. 13.21 1 Timothy 2.2. Romans 13.4.
though oft-times actually he does it not.

8 Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, venting corrupt and pernicious opinions, that
destroy the foundation, open contempt of the word preached, profanation of the
Lords day, disturbing the peaceable administration and exercise of the worship
and holy things of God, and the like, are to be restrained, and punished by
civil authority.

9 If any church, one or more shall grow schismatic, rending it self from
the communion of other churches, or shall walk incorrigibly or obstinately in
any corrupt way of their own, contrary to the rule of the word; in such case,
the Magistrate is to put forth his coercive power, as the matter shall require.
Joshua. 22
The tribes on this side jordan intended to make war against the other tribes,
for building the alter of witness, whom they suspected to have turned away
therein from follwing of the Lord.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of the Chapters in this Platform of Church Discipline.
Chap. I. Of the Form of Church Government in general, and that it is one,
immutable, and prescribed in the Word of God. Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Nature of
the Catholic Church in general, and in special of a particular visible Church.
Page 2 Chap. III. Of the matter of the visible Church, both in respect of
quality and quantity. Page 3 Chap. IV. Of the Form of a visible Church, and of
Church Covenant. Page 4 Chap. V. Of the first subject of Church Power, or to
whom Church Power does first belong. Page 7 Chap. VI. Of the Officers of the
Church, and especially of Pastors and Teachers. Page 7 Chap. VII. Of Ruling
Elders, and Deacons. Page 8 Chap. VIII. Of Election of Church Officers. Page 10
Chap. IX. Of Ordination, and Impositionof hands. Page 11 Chap. X. Of the Power
of the Church, and its Presbitery. Page 12 Chap. XI. Of the maintenance of
Church Officers. Page 15 Chap. XII. Of the Admission of Members into the
Church. Page 16 Chap. XIII. Of Church Members, their removal from one Church to
another, and Letters of Recommendation and Dismission. Page 19 Chap. XIV. Of
Excommunication, and other Church Censures. Page 20 Chap. XV. Of the Communion
of Churches one with another. Page 23 Chap. XVI. Of Synods. Page 27 Chap. XVII.
Of the civil Magistrates Power in matters Ecclesiastical. Page 28

