Imprimatur hic Liber, cui titulus, The Natural History of Oxfordshire.

RA: BATHVRST, Vice-Cancellar. OXON.
April. 13. 1676.
THE NATURAL HISTORY OF OXFORDSHIRE, Being an Essay toward the Natural History
OF ENGLAND.

By Robert Plot, Doctor of Laws.

-- (...)
(...)
(...).
Arat. in Phaenom. depiction of Perseus (?) with Medusa shield against backdrop
of Oxford

Printed at the THEATER in OXFORD, and are to be had there* And in London at
Mr. Moses Pits at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at Mr. S. Millers, at
the Star near the West End of St. Paul's Church.

To the most Sacred Majesty of Charles the Second, By the Grace of GOD, King of
Great Britan, France and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
May it please Your Majesty,
IT had certainly been an unpardonable presumtion for so mean a person as the
Author of this Essay, to have presented Your Majesty with a yet meaner
discourse, had not the subject of it always deserved the notice, and the
Enquirers into it, the favor of Princes. Thus had Aristotle in writing his
Treatise of Animals the assistance of Alexander; and Pliny the Patronage of
Titus Vespatian to his Natural History.

Beside, this attemt seems more justly to belong to Your Majesty, than any of
their Histories to their respective Patrons, it being so far from exceeding
Your Majesty's Dominions, that it contains but an Enquiry into one of the
smallest parts of them; viz. Your always Loial County and University of
Oxford, whereas their Volumes are bounded only with the Universe.

Yet what more particularly moved me to present it to Your Majesty, is not only
Your favor to Learning in general, and especially to this place; but much more
Your Majesty's exquisit insight into the matter it self, insomuch that though
the former might have given me some confidence of Your Majesty's acceptance,
yet it seems more my interest to appeal to Your Judgment, and humbly to implore
Your Majesty's decision, Whether if England and Wales were thus surveyed, it
would not be both for the honor, and profit of the Nation?

Which design, if Your Majesty think fit to disapprove, it will yet be some
satisfaction to the Author, that he has showed his ready (though misguided)
zeal to serve his Country: But if Your Majesty shall judge it advantageous to
the Kingdom, or but any way worthy Your Majesty's diversion, there shall none
more industriously and cheerfully proceed in it, than

Your Majesty's most Loial and most obedient Subject, Rob. Plot.

To the Reader.
THough this Essay has swelled to so much greater a Bulk than ever I expected
it could possibly have done, that I might well have superseded any further
address than that of Dedication; yet it being but necessary to acquaint the
Reader with some matters, that are general, and will serve for all other
Counties as well as this, I thought good to put them down briefly as follows.

And first, that though I dare not pretend the Map of Oxfordshire prefixed to
this Essay, is so accurate as any I shall make hereafter, yet I dare promise
the Reader it far exceeds any we had before; for beside that it contains all
the Market Towns, and many Parishes omitted by Saxton, Speed, etc. it shows
also the Villages, distinguished by a different mark and character, and the
Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, and others of any magnitude within the
County; and all these with their bearings to one another, according to the
Compass.

And as for the distances, though I dare not promise them Mathematically exact
(which by reason of the risings and fallings of the ground, interpositions of
Woods, Rivers, etc. I think scarce possible in many places to be given at all)
yet some few of them are as true, as actual dimensuration, and most of them as
the doctrine of Triangles, and the best information, all compared together,
could direct me to put them: So that provided they have not been moved in the
Graving (as I think they have but little) I take them all seated not far from
the truth.

As for the scale of miles, there being three sorts in Oxfordshire, the
greater, lesser, and middle miles, as almost every where else; it is contrived
according to the middle sort of them; for these I conceive may be most properly
called the true Oxfordshire miles, which upon actual dimensuration at several
places, I found to contain for the most part 9 furlongs and a quarter, of which
about 60 answer a Degree: Where by the way its but expedient that the Reader
take notice, that I intend not that there are 60 of these miles in a degree,
according to the common account; for reckoning 5280 feet, (or eight furlongs)
to a mile, as is usual in England, no less than 69 will correspond to a degree;
upon which account it is and no other, that of the middle Oxfordshire miles,
each containing 9 furlongs and a quarter, about 60 will do it.

According to these miles, the degrees of North latitude are divided into
minutes on each side the Map, chiefly made off from the exact Northern latitude
of Oxford, collected from the many years observations of Dr. Banbridg, and at
last concluded to be seated in the 46 minute of the 51 degree, proxime; the
52nd degree beginning at the small line passing through Mixbury, Clifton, north
of Deddington, the two Barfords, South Nuneton, and between Hoke Norton and the
Lodge: By which division it is easy to know to a minute of a degree, nay almost
to a second, in what latitude every Town, Parish, Village, and Gentleman's House
is seated.

Beside, for the Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, this Map is so contrived,
that a Foreigner as well as Englishman, at what distance soever, may with ease
find out who are the Owners of most of them; so as to be able to say that this
is such or such a Gentleman's House: And all this done by Figures put to every
such House, which referring again to Figures of the same value, placed in order
over the Arms in the Limb of the Map, show in the bottom of each Shield the
Nobleman or Gentleman's name, whose house it is; their respective Coats of Arms
being always placed between the Figure and Name: which too (all but some few)
are cut in their metals, furs, or colors, as born by their Owners.

And not only the Shields, but Ordnaries, Charges, Differences, etc. where they
are not too small: if Argent, being left white; if Or, filled with small
points; if Gules, lineated perpendicularly, or in pale; if Azure, horizontally,
or fess-ways; if Vert, obliquely or bend-ways; if Sable, both pale and
fess-ways, as may be seen in the Map, which are all the colors made use of
there. And if ever hereafter I shall meet with any bearing Purpure, Ten, or
Sanguine; the first shall be represented with Lines in bend sinister; Ten, with
lines salter-ways, mixed of Vert and Purpure; and Sanguine, paly bendy, mixed of
Gules and Purpure.

According to this method, not only the Arms of the University, all the
Colleges, and Towns incorporate in the County (which I have placed in the upper
margin of the Map) but on the sides and bottom, those of the Nobility and
Gentry, are industriously ranged in Alphabetical order, to avoid the
difficulties that might otherwise have risen about precedence: which, beside
the use above mentioned of discovering the Owners of the Houses, and that they
are an ornament to the Map, I hope may also have these other good effects. 1.
That the Gentry hereby will be somewhat influenced to keep their Seats, together
with their Arms, least their Posterity hereafter, not without reflections, see
what their Ancestors have parted with. And secondly, Vagabonds deterred from
making counterfeit Passes, by putting false names and Seals to them, both which
may be discovered by such Maps as these.

To these add the ancient houses of Kings, the principal Seats of ancient
Baronies, ancient Ways, Fortifications, and the sites of Religious houses, all
distinguished as described by their respective marks in the Table for that
purpose. All which put together, make the sum of the Map, as I intend they
shall in all others hereafter, so that those Memento's need no more be
repeated, since they are designed to be applied to all following Maps as well
as this.

Yet this Map, though it contains near five times as much as any other of the
County before, partly by reason of its being the first I ever made, and partly
because, either of the pure ignorance or absence of some, and over curious
pievishness that I met with amongst others, is not so perfect, I confess, as I
wish it were; there being upon these accounts, some few Arms omitted, and
others out of place at the foot of the Map, and perhaps here and there a
Village overlooked: wherefore I have entertained some thoughts of cutting it
again, and perhaps somewhat larger, to be hung up in Frames (without alteration
of this for the Book) with all the defects abovementioned supplied; provided
such Gentry as find their Arms omitted, or any Villages near them containing
ten houses (under which number I seldom think them worth notice) please to
bring in their Arms in colors, with the particular bearings and distances of
their Houses and Villages, from the most noted place near them, to the Porter
or one of the Keepers of the Bodleyan Library, who will be ready to receive
them, or any other Curiosity of Art or Nature, in order to the compiling an
Appendix to this Work, to be Printed apart.

Which is all concerning the Map, but that the Reader also note, that the Right
Honorable the Earl of Berkshire, Lord Lovelace, etc. are designedly left out,
in regard that though they have Estates and Seats in this County, yet their
chiefest, and places of most common residence being elsewhere, I have chosen
rather to omit them here, and to place them in those that seem their more
desirable Counties.

Concerning the History it self, I can advise little more, but that I undertook
it at first for my own pleasure, the subject of it being so pleasant, and of so
great variety, that it surprised me to think how many Learned Ages had past
(careful and laborious enough in compiling the Civil and Geographical Histories
of England) without so much as ever attemting that of Nature or Arts: it
seeming to be a design (had the Undertaker been suitable) more highly deserving
of the public too, than either of the former, as tending not only to the
advancement of a sort of Learning so much neglected in England, but of Trade
also, which I hope in some measure is made to appear in the following Treatise.

Which though sufficient to justify my choice of this subject, yet I ventured
not upon it without the joint approbation of the most knowing in these matters,
such as the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire Dr. Willis, Dr. Wallis, Dr. Bathurst,
etc. whose celebrated names serving to remove the groundless suspicions many
had of the attemt, I proceeded to give this Specimen of it: Wherein the Reader
is only desired to take notice, that most of the Curiosities, whether of Art,
Nature, or Antiquities engraven in the Cuts, are so certain truths, that as
many as were portable, or could be procured, are in the hands of the Author.
But for such things as are inseparable from their places, they remain to be
seen as in the History directed, there being nothing here mentioned, but what
either the Author has seen himself, or has received unquestionable testimony
for it, which for the most part, if not always, the Reader will find cited.

In the Philosophical part, I have chiefly embraced the Principles of Dr.
Willis, as the most universally known and received, and therefore most likely
(in this inquisitive Age) to be the truest; which if I have any where
mis-applied (as it is manifold odds some where or other I may) yet I doubt not
but the Learned and sober Reader will heartily accept of the honesty of my
endeavor in excuse of my Error. But as for the hotheaded half-witted Censurer,
who perhaps only looks on the Title of a Chapter, or here and there a Paragraph
that makes for his turn, I must and do expect the lash of his tongue, it being
indeed his business to find out the lapses, and decry all attemts, wherein
(forsooth) he himself has not been consulted: But I would have such to know
(that if I meet with but proportionable encouragement from the former) it is not
all they can say or do, shall discourage me from my purpose; for if I have
erred in any thing, I shall gladly receive the calm reproofs of my Friends, and
still go on till I do understand my business aright, in the mean time
contemning the verdict of the ignorant and fastidious that throw words in have.

map of Oxfordshire To the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN by divine
permission L.d BISHOP of OXON THE MAP OF OXFORDSHIRE being his Lordship's
Diocese, newly delineated, and after a new manner, with all imaginable
Reverence is humbly dedicated by R.P. L.L.D.

Michael Burghers sculp.


THE NATURAL HISTORY OF Oxfordshire.
CHAP. I. Of the Heavens and Air.
OXFORD, being not undeservedly by Mr. Cambden styled, Our most noble Athens,
The Muses seat, and, One of Englands Pillars; nay, The Sun, The Eye, etc. It
would have occasioned as strange a remark, as any to be mentioned in this whole
Essay, had there not some eminent Celestial Observations been made in this
County; especially since that stupendous Mathematical Instrument, now called
the Telescope, seems to have been known here above 300 years ago. But these
being chiefly matters of Art, relating either to the discovery of the
magnitude, figure, or determination of the motions of the Heavenly Bodies, must
be referred (as most proper) to the end of this Work; it being my purpose in
this History of Nature, to observe the most natural method that may be.

2. And therefore I shall consider, first, Natural Things, such as either she
has retained the same from the beginning, or freely produces in her ordinary
course; as Animals, Plants, and the universal furniture of the World. Secondly,
her extravagancies and defects, occasioned either by the exuberancy of matter,
or obstinacy of impediments, as in Monsters. And then lastly, as she is
restrained, forced, fashioned, or determined, by Artificial Operations. All
which, without absurdity, may fall under the general notation of a Natural
History, things of Art (as the Lord Bacon De Augm Scient. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
well observes) not differing from those of Nature in form and essence, but in
the efficient only; Man having no power over Nature, but in her matter and
motion, i. e. to put together, separate, or fashion natural Bodies, and
sometimes to alter their ordinary course.

3. Yet neither shall I so strictly tie my self up to this method, but that I
shall handle the two first, viz. The several Species of natural things, and the
errors of Nature in those respective Species, together; and the things
Artificial in the end apart: Method equally begetting iterations and prolixity,
where it is observed too much, as where not at all. And these I intend to
deliver as succinctly as may be, in a plain, easy, unartificial Style,
studiously avoiding all ornaments of Language, it being my purpose to treat of
Things, and therefore would have the Reader expect nothing less then Words: Yet
neither shall my Discourse be so jejune, as wholly to consist of bare
Narrations, for where the subject has not at all, or but imperfectly been
handled, I shall beg leave either to enlarge, or give my opinion.

4. Since then the Celestial Bodies are so remote, that little can be known of
them without the help of Art, and that all such matters (according to my
proposed method) must be referred to the end of this Book: I have nothing of
that kind to present the Reader with, that is local, and separate from Art, but
the appearance of two Parhelia or mock-Suns, one on each side of the true one,
at Ensham on the 29th of May, early in the morning, in the year 1673. With them
also appeared a great circle of light concentrical to the true Sun, and passing
through the disks of the spurious ones, as in Tab. 1. Fig. 1. which though I
saw not the Phenomenon, is as truly drawn (for so it was confessed by some that
did) as I could possibly have done it if personally present; and yet so
incurious was the amazed multitude, that they could not so much as give me
ground to guess at the diameter of the circle, much less whether it were
interrupted in some of its parts, or intersected (as they usually are) with any
other circles of a fainter color.

5. Whether these appearances are caused by reflection or refraction in the
Clouds, according to the old Philosophy; or by both, in a great annulary cake
of Ice and Snow, as Des Carts; or by semiopaque Cylinders, as M. Hugens de
Zulichem, will be too too tedious hereto dispute. Let it therefore at present
suffice, that this Phenomenon is worthy our notice, in regard, 1. That no
circle passes through the true Suns disk, nor the spurious ones found in the
intersection of two Irides, as in those that appeared at Rome, March 20. 1629.
Des Carts Meteor. cap. 10. and Gassend. in Ep. ad Renerium.
and in France, April 9. Anno 1666. Philos. Trans. number. 13.
2. That whereas generally such mock-Suns appear not so bright, nor are so well
defined as the true one is; these according to the agreement of all, appeared
of so even and strong a light, that 'twas hard to distinguish the true from the
false, and perhaps might not be inferior to the Parhelia mentioned by Cardan De
rerum Varietate lib. 14. c. 70.
, or that lately were seen in Hungary. Philos. Trans. numb. 47.



6. When they appear thus bright and illustrious, Astrologers heretofore always
presaged a Triumvirate: thus the Triumvirate of Antonius, Augustus, and
Lepidus, with all the evils that attended it, was referred to the Parhelia seen
a little before; and herein Cardan is so positive, that he fears not to assert,
That after such an appearance, we seldom (if ever) fail of one, and therefore
refers the Parhelia seen by himself to the Triumvirate of Henry the second King
of France, Charles the fifth, and Solomon the Turkish Emperor. And truly, were
not these to be more than suspected of vanity, it were easy to adapt a
Triumvirate to ours: But my Religion, and that God that has exhorted us, not
to be dismayed at the signs of Heaven, and solemnly professes, that it is even
He that frustrates the tokens of the Liars, and makes the Diviners mad Isa. 44.
v. 24, 25.
, has taught me to forbear. I shall therefore add no more concerning these
things, but that though most commonly the Parhelia with the true Sun, appear
but three in number, yet that sometimes more have been seen; as four Philos.
Trans. numb. 13.
in France, Anno 1666. five Des Carts, Meteor. cap. 10.
at Rome, Anno 1629. five Matthew Paris, 17 Henr. III.
in England, Anno 1233. and six Des Carts Meteor. cap. 10. and Fromond.
Meteor. Lib. 6. Art. 2.
Anno 1525. by Sigismund the first, King of Poland; which are the most that we
read were ever seen at a time, though Des Carts endeavors to show it is
possible there may be seven.

7. And indeed this had been all I thought I should have mentioned concerning
the Heavens, but that even now while I am writing this, at Oxon: on the 23d of
November, Anno 1675. about 7 at night, behold the Moon set her Bow in the
clouds, of a white color, entire and well determined, which continued so for
about half an hour after I first saw it. The reason why such appear not of
diverse colors, as Rain-bows do that are made by the Sun, has been always
ascribed by Philosophers, to the weakness of the Moons rays, not entering so
deeply into the opacity of the clouds. But if we may give credit to Sennertus
in Epitom. Phys.
Dan: Sennertus, it has once to his knowledge happened otherwise, viz. in the
year 1593, when after a great storm of Thunder and Lightning, he beheld an Iris
Lunaris adorned with all the colors of the Rainbow. As for ours, though I
could not perceive in any part of it, that it had the least shade of any color
but white; however, I thought it not unworthy our notice, not only for the
infrequency of the thing (they never happening but at or near the Moons full,
and then but so very seldom too, that (...). Meteor. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Aristotle professes, that he saw but two in above fifty years; and I know
several learned and observing Men, that never saw such an Iris in their lives)
but also because of the great clemency of the weather, that followed upon it at
that time of the year; there falling not one drop of rain, nor any wind
stirring for sixteen days after, but so great a serenity, that the ways were
as clean and passable then, as we could wish or ever enjoyed them at Mid-summer.

8. From the Firmament (waving all considerations of the pure Ether, of which
we know so little, that I shall say nothing) I naturally descend to the lowest
Heaven, I mean that subtle Body that immediately incompasses the Earth, and is
filled with all manner of exhalations, and from thence commonly known by the
name of the Atmosphere. Whether beside these exhalations, there be any peculiar
simple body, called Air, I leave to the more subtle Philosophers, and consider
it here only, as it is the subject of storms, of thunder and wind, of Echo's,
and as it has relation to sickness and health.

9. As to Tempests that have happened in this County, though perhaps there have
been some heretofore attended with as deplorable effects as any where else; yet
because they are no where transmitted to posterity, I shall only mention two
within our memory, viz. The storm of wind that happened one night in February,
Anno 1661/2, which though general (at least all over England) yet was
remarkable at Oxon: in these two respects. 1. That though it forced the stones
inwards into the cavity of All-hollows Spire, yet it over-threw it not. And
2ly, That in the morning, when there was some abatement of its fury, it was yet
so violent, that it laved water out of the River Cherwell, and cast it quite
over the Bridge at Magdalen College, above the surface of the River near 20
foot high; which passage, with advantage of holding by the College walls, I had
then the curiosity to go see my self, which otherwise, perhaps, I should have
as hardly credited as some other persons now may do. But those that have sailed
to the Indies can inform them what force Hurricane's and Turbo's have, with
what violence and impetuosity they take up whole Seas of water, and furiously
mount them into the air. It was observed by an able Seaman of Bristol, that
this wind was the fag-end of a Hurricane, which began in New- England about
three hours before it came hither; the Seamen observed that it went directly
toward England.
Now that such as these may also happen at Land (though perhaps for the most
part of less strength) I think we have little reason to doubt, since our own
Chronicles inform us, that in Q. Mary's time, within a mile of Nottingham, all
the houses of two little Parishes, with their Churches, were wholly born down
by such a Tempest; and the water, with the mud from the bottom of the River
Trent, that ran between them, carried a quarter of a mile and cast against
Trees, with the violence whereof they were torn up by the roots.

10. Of much such another Land Hurricane, Bellarmin gives us a relation so
incredible, that he himself premiseth, Quod nisi vidissem non crederem. Vidi
(says he) a vehementissimo vento effossam ingentem terrae molem, eamque
delatam super pagum quendam, ut fovea altissima conspiceretur unde eruta
fuerat, and pagus totus coopertus and quasi sepultus manserit, ad quem terra
illa divenerat Bellarmin. de ascens. meant. in Deum, Grad. 2. cap. 4.
. Which being sufficient (I suppose) to evince the possibility of my story, I
proceed to

11. The second tempest of Thunder and Lightning, on the 10th of May, 1666.
which though terrible enough to all parts adjacent to Oxford, yet was
mischievous only at Medley, a well known House, about a mile or somewhat more
distant from it; two Scholars of Wadham College, alone in a boat, and new
thrust off shore to come homewards, being struck off the head of the boat into
the water, the one of them stark dead, and the other stuck fast in the mud like
a post, with his feet downward, and for the present so disturbed in his senses,
that he neither knew how he came out of the boat, nor could remember either
Thunder or Lightning that did effect it. Others, in another boat about ten or
twenty yards distance from the former, felt a disturbance and shaking in their
boat, and one of them had his chair struck from under him, without hurt. But of
this no more, a full relation of the accident being already given by the
Reverend and Learned Dr John Wallis Savilian Professor of Geometry in the
University of Oxford, and published in our English Philosophical Transactions
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 13.
.

12. What happened before or after those Tempests, I was not so curious in those
days to observe, but it might indeed be wished, as the learned and observing Dr
Beale advises Philosoph. Transact. Number. 90.
, that some old Almanacks were written instead of new; that instead of the
conjectures of the weather to come, some ingenious and fit Persons would give a
faithful account from diverse parts of the world, not only of the Storms, with
the antecedents and consequents of them, but of the whole weather of the years
past, on every day of the month: as it was industriously begun above 300 years
ago, by William Merle Fellow of Merton College, who observed the weather at
Oxford for every day of the month for 7 years together; viz. from January Anno
Dom. 1337, to January Anno Dom. 1344. the MS copy of which Observations yet
remain in the Bodleyan Library MS. Digby, fol. 176.
: For from hence in time we might examine upon some grounds, as the learned Dr
Beale well remarks, how far the positions of Planets, or other symptoms or
concomitants, are indicative of weathers, and probably be forewarned of
Dearths, Famines, Epidemical Diseases, etc. and by their causes be instructed
for remedies, or prevention. Certainly from such Calendars we might learn more
in few years, then by Observations at random all the days of our lives; and if
they might be had from foreign and remote parts Such observations of the
weather every day of the month through the whole year 1671. were made by
Erasmus Bartholine, and are printed inter Acta Medica Tho. Bartholini Obs. 130.
, we should then be in some hopes of true Investigations of heats and colds,
and of the breadth and bounds of coasting Rains and Winds.

13. Next the Tragedies (it being as agreeable to my Method, as seasonable to
the Discourse) it will not be amiss to present the Reader with some of the
sports of Nature, and entertain him awhile with the Nymph Echo; a Mistress she
is indeed that is easily spoke with, yet known to few: if therefore I take
pains to acquaint him with her, I hope I shall not perform a thankless office.

14. First therefore, that Philechus may not be out in his choice, whenever he
attempts to court her in Oxfordshire, he must know that of these there are
several sorts, and may best, I suppose, be distinguished by their Objects,
which are, either Single, such as return the voice but once; and these again
are either Polysyllabical, such as return many syllables, words, or a whole
sentence. Tonical, such as return the voice but once, nor that neither, except
adorned with some peculiar Musical note.
Manifold, and these return syllables and words, the same oftentimes repeated,
and may therefore be styled Tautological Echo's, which are caused either by
Simple Double
Reflection.


15. As for Polysyllabical articulate Echo's, the strongest and best I have met
with here, is in the Park at Woodstock, which in the day time, little wind
being stirring, returns very distinctly seventeen syllables, and in the night
twenty: I made experiment of it with these words, -- Quae nec reticere loquenti,
Nec prior ipsa loqui didicit resonabilis Echo.
In the day it would return only the last verse, but in the night about twelve
by the clock, I could also hear the last word of the former Hemistick
[loquenti.] The object of which Echo, or the Centrum phonocampticum, I take to
be the hill with the trees on the summit of it, about half a mile distant from
Woodstock town, in the way thence to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Rochester's Lodge: And the true place of the Speaker, or Centrum phonicum, the
opposite Hill just without the gate at the Towns end, about thirty paces
directly below the corner of a wall enclosing some hay-ricks, near Chaucers
house: some advantage I guess it receives from the rivulet that runs as it were
in a direct line between the two centers, and from the pond at the foot of the
object hill; as also from two other hills that run obliquely up to it: Which
may better be apprehended by the prospect of the place, as in Tab. 1. Fig. 2.

16. That this Echo makes return of so many syllables, and of a different
number in the day and night, being indisputable and matter of fact; I proceed
in the next place to the reasons of these certainties, which possibly to every
body may not be so plain. First then, the causes why some Echo's return more,
and some fewer syllables, I take to lie in the different distances of the
objects (returning the voices) from the places of the speakers: for by
experience it is found, that if the speaker be too near the object, the return
is made so quick upon him, that the Echo is as it were drowned in the voice:
but if he remove farther from it, then it begins to be clear and distinct; and
if it be a polysyllabical one, it first repeats one syllable, then two, three,
four, five, or more, according as the speaker removes farther off it, which I
take to be the only true way of measuring the proportions of the spaces of the
ground, requisite for the return of one or more syllables. That this is true, I
shall use no arguments to persuade, because the experiment is subject to every
man's trial; and if so, it must necessarily be admitted, that the reason why
this Echo returns so much, is because of the great distance of the object from
the speaker.

17. What distance is required to the return of each syllable, is best indeed
determined by such a procedure, where the object is fore-known, and the
condition of the place will admit of the experiment: but both these being
wanting here ( Echo's themselves being generally first known, and not the
objects) I was forced to make use of a new analytical method, and find out the
object by the number of syllables already returned, which being seventeen in
the day time, and twenty by night; and having before found by frequent
experience, that according to Blancanus Blancani Echometria Theorem 5.
, no one syllable will be returned clearly, under the distance of 24
Geometrical paces, or 120 feet, I guessed that the object could not be removed
less than 400 of the former, and 2000 of the latter. For the better
understanding of which Analysis, and for the Readers more secure finding of the
true distance of the speaker in any other place, it may be convenient that he
take notice, that all Echo's have some one place whither they are returned
stronger, and more distinct than any other, and is always the place that lies
at right angles with the object, and is not too near, or too far off: for if a
man stand at oblique angles with it, the voice is better returned to some other
person at another place, than to the speaker; and so if he stand too near, or
far off, although he do stand at right angles with it, which is plain by the
diagram, Tab. 1. Fig. 3. where a. is the true place of the speaker. a b. the
vocal line falling at right angles on the object. c d. places on each hand the
true place, and oblique to the object. e f. places above and below the object,
whence also the voice comes obliquely to it. g h. places whence ('it is true) the
voice goes in right angles to the object, but g is too far off, and h too near.
Now the speaker standing in a, and his voice going in the straight line a b,
and striking upon the object so as to make right angles with it, must needs
return to the speaker again in the same line, and no farther, because he is
supposed to stand at the two extremes of the whole mixed line of action: but if
he stand too near at h, then the Echo repeats more syllables, and distincter at
g than either at h or a, because g is now the extreme of the line of action;
for by how much the nearer the speaker is to the object, by so much the more
forcible he strikes it, which causes the rebound to be so much beyond him: and
thus if he stand as much too far off, as at g, then the Echo repeats more
syllables and distincter at h, then either at a or g, because the distance
being too great from g to b, and the reflection weak, the Echo must needs
terminate so much the shorter at h; all these being supposed to take up the
whole line of the voices direct and reflex action. Again, if the speaker stand
in c obliquely to the object, the Echo is better heard at d, than either at a
or c; and so if he stand at d, it is better heard at c then any other place:
thus if he stand at e above the object, the Echo is best heard in the valley f,
and vice versa. All which, may be well enough made out by throwing a ball
against a wall, to which, if it be thrown in an oblique line, it returns not to
the thrower but to another place; and though the projicient do so throw it,
that it strikes at right angles with the wall, yet (like as in the voice) if he
stand too far off, it will fall as much too short in the rebound, as it will
exceed if he stand too near.

18. According to these grounds I carefully examined this Echo, and found, upon
motion backward, forward, and to each hand, the true centrum phonicum, or place
of the speaker, to be upon the hill at Woodstock towns end, about thirty paces
below the corner of the wall aforesaid, directly down toward the Kings
Majesty's Manor: from whence by measure to the brow of the hill, on which my
Lord Rochesters Lodge stands, are 456 Geometrical paces, or 2280 feet; which
upon allowance of 24 Geometrical paces, or 120 feet to each syllable, to my
great satisfaction I found to be agreeable to the return of 19 syllables, viz.
one fewer than it returns in the night, and two more than in the day.

19. The measure I must confess had been much more easy and natural, could I
have began from the object, and so removed backward accordingly as the Echo
gradually increased in the repetition of more syllables; for then I could have
given the due proportion to each, if I had found any inequality upon the
increase, which I guess there may be, because the allowance of an equality
seems to set the object too far off by a syllable or two. But it not being
feasible in this place, I was forced to take the former course; for in the
valley between the two hills, being the whole medium through which the voice
passes, and the Echo returns it, there is scarce any such thing as an Echo to
be found; nay, if you stand at the Manor it self, which is not far from the
true place of the speaker, and situate almost as high, and direct your voice
toward the place of the object, you shall not have the least return; whence
it is most evident that I could not use that procedure here, and therefore must
desire to be held excused from giving the proportions of space, which I
suppose, according to Kircher Magia Phonocamptica, probl. 5.
may decrease, according as the number of syllables increase, till I meet with
an Echo fit for the purpose.

20. The reason of the difference between day and night, why it should return
seventeen syllables in the one, and twenty in the other, may lie, I suppose, in
the various qualities, and constitution of the medium in different seasons; the
Air being much more quiet, and stocked with exhalations in the night than day,
which something retarding the quick motion of the voice to the object, and its
return to the speaker somewhat more, (by reason the voice must needs be weakened
in the reflection) must necessarily give space for the return of more syllables.

21. Amongst other trials of this Echo, I discharged a Pistol, which made a
return much quicker then my voice, and (at which I still wonder) with a much
different sound from that the Pistol made, whence I can only conclude, that the
more forcibly the Air is stricken, (as also in the projection of a ball) the
sooner the response is made, and that possibly there may be some sounds more
agreeable to every Echo, than others. And it being my Lord Bacon's opinion,
That there are some letters that an Echo will hardly express, and particularly
the letter S, which, says he, being of an interior and hissing sound, the Echo
at Pont Charenton would not return Not. Hist. Cent. 3. Numb. 251.
; hereupon I tried, as well as his Lordship, with the word Satan, beside many
others of the same initial, but found the Echo here neither so modest or
frighted, but that, though the Devil has been busy enough hereabout (as shall
further be shown near the end of this History) it would readily enough make use
of his name.

22. Just such another polysyllabical Echo we have at Magdalen College, in the
water-walks, near the Bull-work called Dover Peer; it repeats a whole Hexameter
verse, but not so strongly as Woodstock: Where the true object of this may be,
cannot so well be found by measure, because of the many Buildings interposing;
but I conjecture it may be about the public Schools, or New College Since, New
College has been advanced a Story higher, A. D 1675. this Echo is somewhat
altered.
. I could gladly, I confess, have assigned it something further off, because I
fear that distance falls somewhat short of our former account, but the buildings
beyond lying all lower then those, it must by no means be admitted; which makes
me think, there must be a latitude allowed in these matters, according to the
different circumstances perhaps of time, as well as place; and that possibly
Mersennus might not be so much mistaken, when he assigned to each syllable but
69 feet.

23. Tonical Echo's, such as return but some one particular Musical Note, I
have met with several, and do not doubt but they are to be met with in most
arched Buildings, though scarce observed or noted by any. Such a one is that in
the Gate House at Brasen-nose College, which answers to no Note so clearly, as
to Gamut. The curious and well built Gate of University College, to none so
well as B mi. The like Note I met with again at Merton College, in the Vault
between the old and new Quadrangles, and in the Large arched Vault of Queens
College Gate: Whereas the stately arched Staircase leading into Christ Church
great Hall, will return all the Notes through the Scale of Music. These I must
confess are but Echo's improperly so called, because they will express nothing
that is articulate, and therefore rather fall under the notation of a Bombus;
yet their cause being somewhat nice and subtle, I thought not fit to pass them
by, but to take occasion from hence to advertise the Reader, that there are
some other inanimate Bodies beside the Lodestone, that though they have no
sense, yet have a sort of perception, which I take to be sufficiently proved
from these Vaults, that seem to have a kind of election to embrace what is
agreeable, and exclude all that is ingrate to them: thus are the very seats in
Churches and Chapels affected with some peculiar Notes of the Organ; and I
have a friend (a Violist) whom I dare believe, that says, his Thigh is thus
sensible of a peculiar Note, as often as he lights on it during his playing. Some
have imputed much of this in Buildings, to the figure and accurate structure of
the Arch, and that where they have different shapes and magnitudes, there will
be different tunings also: But I do not find it agreeable to experience, there
being another Vault in the entrance into Merton College Chapel, much less, and
of a far different figure from that other before mentioned in the same College,
which returns very near, if not exactly the same Note: And so do the Gates of
Queens and University Colleges, than which in height, breadth and length, there
are few more different.

24. It must therefore rather be referred to the pores of the stones, which are
fitted to receive some vibrations of the Air, rather than others; just as in
two Viols tuned to a Unison, where the strings being screwed to the same
tension, and their pores put into the same figure, if you strike one, the
corresponding string of the other Viol presently answers it: because the first
string being of such a tension, and having pores of such a form, makes
vibrations in the Air, suitable only to the pores made by the same tension in
the other string.

25. As for Tautological Polyphonous Echo's, such as return a word or more,
often repeated from diverse objects by simple reflection, there are none here
eminent; the best I have met with is at Ewelme, on the side of a bank, in a
Meddow south and by west (about a furlong) from the Church: it returns the same
word three times, from three several objects of diverse distances, which I guess
may be, 1. The Manor, 2. The Church and Hospital, And 3d. Colonel Martins
house. Another there is near Oxford, about the east end of Christ Church new
walk, that repeats three or four syllables twice over; and a treble one at the
most northern point of the Fortifications in New Parks: But there being many
better than these of the kind no doubt in other places, I shall reserve their
consideration at large to a better opportunity, and only take notice here by
the way, that these are never of many syllables; and that always, by how many
more they are of, by so many the fewer times they repeat them, because so great
distance will be required for their objects, that they must quickly be removed
out of the reflex action of the voice: for suppose but a sentence of ten
syllables, viz. Gemitu nemus omne remugit, and allow, as before, for the return
of each syllable 120 feet, the first object must be 1200 feet off; and the
second, with abatement for distance, at least 2000; and the third, certainly
out of the voices reach, beyond all hopes of any response. Indeed, could we
meet with one of Mersennus's Echo's, where sixty nine feet would return us a
syllable, then such an Hemistick might be resounded three times, or perhaps a
whole Hexameter twice; yet however small a space may be found for the clear
repetition of such a Verse, I cannot think it can possibly be, that any Echo
should repeat one eight times over: for suppose a smaller distance would
suffice, then that allowed by Mersennus, as but 350 yards to a Verse of
seventeen syllables, and allowing some decrease for the objects distances; yet
I do not doubt, but two or three of the furthest must needs be out of the
voices action.

26. Much less sure can any single object perform this, and yet Jacobus
Boissardus, in his Topography of Rome, reports this to be true upon his own
knowledge. On the Appian way (says he) amongst many other vast ruins, which
some think to have been the Castle wherein the Praetorian Soldiers lay, there
are many Sepulchers, obtuse and solid Pyramids, etc. But the most eminent is of
a round form, made of squared white Marble, like a Tower, hollow within and
open at the top, erected in memory of Caecilia Metella: it stands in the corner
of another wall, in whose circuit there are carved in Marble, near 200 Bulls
heads, whence it is called, Capo di Boi. At the foot of the hill where this
Tower stands, if any man pronounce an Heroic Verse, a wonderful Echo there is,
that returns it often entirely and articulately: I my self, says he, have heard
it repeat the first Verse of Virgils Aeneids distinctly eight times, and
afterward often broken and confusedly. No place in the World yields the like
Echo Jani Jacob. Boisardi, Topographia Romae, p. 65, 66.
, etc. And what if I add, nor that neither, since beside the natural
impossibility of the thing, the industrious Kircher, after he had used all
imaginable care in the quest of it, came away unsuccessful, and found no such
matter Magiae Phonocampticae, Praelus. 2.
.

27. But though we have no considerable Tautological Echo's, by a simple
reflection, yet we have others of no inferior account made by a double one,
which also arising from diverse objects, though in a different manner, belong to
this place. Of these, though there are scarce any that will return a
Trissyllable, occasioned. I suppose, by the nearness of the secondary objects,
yet a clap with the hands or stamp of the feet, there are some will return
eight, nine, or ten times, the noise dying, as it were, and melting away by
degrees with such a trembling noise, that I sometime thought of the Epithet
[tremulous] to discriminate this sort of Echo from the rest.

28. At Heddington, in the Garden of one Mr Pawling Mercer of Oxon: there is a
wall of about 40 yards long, built for the advantage of the Fruit, with diverse
Niches; to which, if you stand but a little obliquely, so as to see the Peers
standing out between each two of them, you have the several objects of such an
Echo, not above nine or ten foot distant from each other, which return a clap
with the hand, or a monosyllable (the wind being quiet and still) at least
nine, if not ten or eleven times, but so thick and close, that even a
dissyllable breeds a confusion: Where by the way if it be objected, that (the
whole wall being but 40 yards, or 120 foot long) according to the afore-limited
distance for Echo's, a monosyllable should not be returned above once at most:
It is to be noted, that these Echo's made by a double reflection, begin (quite
contrary to all others) at the remotest object from the corpus sonorum, which
in as many as I have yet seen, is a distinct wall, falling on that; on which
the rest of the objects are, in right angles; and this object it is, that first
terminates the voice, clap, or stamp; and from which, by reflection, they next
strike the ultimate secondary object, then the penultimate and antepenultimate;
which, though nearer to the corpus sonorum in respect of the situation of the
objects, yet are still further off in respect of the voice, or other sounds
motion: whence it comes to pass, that the nearest object to the corpus sonorum
is last stricken, and therefore repeats a syllable as well as any of the rest,
because indeed in that respect the furthest from it.

29. After the voice or clap has stricken these secondary objects, by way of
accession as it were to the corpus sonorum, it is carried again by a second
reflection away from it toward the primary object, and sometimes over it, as it
appears to be in this Echo at Heddington, where the sound seems as it were
somewhat refracted, for it is heard quite out of the place, as is evident to any
one that stands in the North-east corner of the Garden and speaks Westwards,
who will hear the Echo rather in the Hortyard on the other side the wall, than
in the Garden, which I take most certainly to be occasioned by this second
reflection; for let any one that suspects the Echo to be really in the
Hortyard, and not in the Garden, go but into it, and he shall there find no
such matter as an Echo. All which, is more sensibly explained in Tab. 1. Fig.
4. where a. is the place of the speaker or maker of any other sound. b. the
primary object first terminating the sound, and reflecting it on the Peers of
the other wall. c c c c c c. the Peers between every two Niches that receive
the sound reflected from the primary object and make the Echo. d d d d d d. the
lines wherein the voice is carried back again over the primary object, whereby
the Echo appears out of its place.
But herein let it be noted, that I am not so sanguine as to exclude all fears
that it may be otherwise, but only suggest what seems most probable at present,
cum animo revocandi, whenever I shall be better informed by another, or my own
future experience.

30. At New College in the Cloisters, there are others of this kind, to be
heard indeed on all sides, but best on the South and West, because on those
there are no doors either to interrupt or wast the sound: These return a stamp
or voice, seven, eight, or nine times, which so plainly is occasioned by the
Peers between the windows, that on the West and shorter side (being but 38
yards long) the returns are more quick and thicker by much than on the South,
where the primary object being above fifty yards removed from the corpus
sonorum, and the secondary ones proportionably further; the returns are much
slower and more distinct, in so much that on that side the Echo will return a
dissyllable, whereas on the West side you can have but a monosyllable only. If
it be objected, that according to the rule, 38 yards are not enough for the
return of a monosyllable; I answer, that though it may be likely enough that
the return of the primary object on that side is not heard, yet that there is
none of the secondary ones, or Peers between the windows, but what are distant
from the speaker above 40 yards, and therefore may well return a monosyllable.
And if again it be objected, that the interval of an Echo must be liberum and
patens Blancani Echometria, Theoremate, 4.
, and it be further demanded how it comes about that we have such Echo's in
Cloisters, when we can have none in wells that are covered with houses, because
the interval is closed at both ends, as this Cloister is: It must be answered,
that that rule holds only in narrow intervals closed up on all sides, and not
in such Cloisters that are open and arched to the top; Which may also be the
reason why at Magdalen College, where the Cloisters are covered with a flat
roof, they have but an inconsiderable Echo, and at Corpus Christi none at all;
notwithstanding they have all other conditions requisite.

31. In the Cloister at All Souls College, in the North and West sides, where
no doors hinder, there is much such another, which to the stamp of ones foot,
or clap with the hands, answers four or five times, with a noise not unlike the
shaking of a door, and in nothing differing from the former, but that to the
voice it TAB. I. ad. page 16

To the right Honble JAMES Lord NORREYS Baron of Ricot His MAIties Ld
Lieutenant of Oxfordsh. This first Table in memory of his Lord ps favors is
gratefully dedicated by R. P. L L. D.

M. Burghers sculp.
makes no response There is much such another as this, in the Ball-Court at
Corpus Christi Coll.
: and indeed, it would be matter of wonder if it should, since no one side of
that Cloister comes near the distance assigned for the return of a syllable,
whereas that at Heddington just equals it, and one side of New College much
exceeds it.

32. Other Echo's there be that belong to this place, as Echo's upon Echo's,
and such as my Lord Verulam Not. Hist. Cent. 3. Number. 249, 250.
styles back-Echo's; of which, because I have met with none considerable, I am
content to pass them by, having sufficiently, as I suppose, by this time tired
the Readers patience with too tedious a consideration of so particular a
subject, and make haste to treat of the Air of Oxfordshire, as it stands in
reference to Sickness or Health. But all Air of it self being equally pure, and
only accidentally good or bad, accordingly as more or less filled with wholesome
or noxious vapors ascending from the Waters, or moist Earths; I refer its
consideration to the next Chapter, to which it seems more intimately and
originally to belong: it being the opinion of Hippocrates, and on all hands
agreed, That Waters are of much more concernment in reference to health than
the Air can be, because they are as it were part of our aliment, and the Air
not so; and may be of themselves fundamentally bad, whereas the Air is only so
by participation.

CHAP. II. Of the Waters.
THAT Oxfordshire is the best watered County in England, though I dare not
with too much confidence assert, yet am induced to believe there are few
better; since beside the five more considerable Rivers of Them, Isis,
Cherwell, Evenlode, and Windrush, there are numbered no less than threescore and
ten at least of an inferior rank, beside smaller Brooks not worthy notice: And
all these of so quick a stream, and free from stagnation, so clear, and yet so
well impregnated with wholesome primogenial Steams of Salts and Sulphurs, that
few (if any) vappid and stinking Exhalations can ascend from them to corrupt
the Air. As for standing Pools, Marish, or Boggy grounds, the parents (at least
occasions) of Agues, Coughs, Catarhs, they are fewest here of any place to be
found: the Soil for the most part lying dry, and watered only with clear and
rapid Fountains. In short, so altogether agreeable is this County to Cardans
Comment. in Hippoc. de Aere, aquis, and locis.
rule, Solum siccum cum aquis currentibus salubritatem Aeris efficient, that
had he wanted an instance for confirmation, he might have found one here most
suitable to his purpose. And if plenty of wholesome Fish, spontaneous productions
of odoriferous Plants, and the scarcity of filthy Reptils, be cogent Arguments
of the goodness of Waters, Soyls, and consequently of Air, as heretofore they
have been accounted, I know not the place can make better pretenses, as shall
be shown more at large in their proper places.

2. Beside its clearness from pestiferous vapors, I take the sharpness we find
this Air to be of, to be no small argument of its health and purity. Aristotle,
it is true, thought Air moderately warm, but its constant return to a brisk
coldness, after it has been heated either by fire, the Sun, or warm
exhalations, gives us strong suspicions that it is naturally cold: All natural
Bodies, after they have suffered violence, returning of themselves to their
innate condition. To which add, that the Air on the tops of high Mountains,
above the reach of the Clouds and other warm Exhalations, as it is found to be
clear, so it is very cold; whence I think it may not be illogically concluded,
That the colder the Air, the nearer to purity, and consequentially more
healthy: Which is also very suitable to the doctrine of Hippocrates, who
speaking concerning the healthy situation of Cities, says, That such which are
placed to cold winds, Hippocr. (...).
(...). i. e. that though their Waters are harsh and cold, yet for the most
part they are sweet, and the Inhabitants healthy and brisk, sound, and free
from defluxions. And so indeed in the main I find them here, of a very cheerful
humor, affable, and courteous in their Deportment; neither sparing, nor profuse
in their Entertainments, but of a generous temper, suitable to the sweet and
healthful Air they live in: Whereas the Inhabitants of fenny and boggy
Countries, whose spirits are clogged with perpetual Exhalations, are generally
of a more stupid, and unpleasant conversation.

3. That the qualities of Waters and Soyls, together with the situations of
places so the respective Quarters of the World, make them more or less healthy,
according to the great Id. ibid.
Hippocrates, there is no doubt. But to these I must beg the favor of adding,
not only more swasive but more irrefragable proof; I mean, the great age and
constant health of persons that have been lately, and are now living here:
Richard Clifford, not long since of Bolscot in this County, died at 114 years
of age: Brian Stephens, born at Cherlbury, but Inhabitant of Woodstock, dyed
last year at 103. Where also there now lives one George Green (but born at
Ensham) in his hundredth year: at Kidlington one Mris Hill was born, and lived
there above an hundred years: and at Oxford there is living, beside several
near it, a Woman (commonly called Mother George) now in her hundredth year
current. The pleasant situation of which City is such, and so answerable to the
great Reputation it ever had in this respect, that it must not by any means be
past by in silence.

4. Seated it is on a rising Ground, in the midst of a pleasant and fruitful
Valley of a large extent, at the confluence, and extended between the two
Rivers of Isis and Cherwell, with which it is encompassed on the East, West,
and South; as also, with a ridge of Hills at a miles (or somewhat more)
distance, in the form of a Bow, touching more then the East and West points
with the ends, so that the whole lies in form of a Theater: In the Area stands
the City mounted on a small hill, adorned with so many Towers, Spires and
Pinnacles, and the sides of the neighboring Hills so sprinkled with Trees and
Villa's, that no place I have yet seen has equaled the Prospect Ab amoenitate
situs Bellositum dictum.
. 'Twas the sweetness and commodiousness of the place, that (no question) first
invited the great and judicious King Alfred, to select it for The Muses Seat;
and the Kings of England ever since (especially when at any time forced from
London by War, Plague, or other inconveniences) so frequently to remove
hither, not only their Royal Courts, but the Houses of Parliament, and Courts
of Judicature: Many Synods and Convocations of the Clergy have been also for
the same reason held here; of which, as they have promiscuously happened in
order of time, take the following Catalogue.

A Catalogue of Parliaments, Councils, and Terms that have been held at Oxford.
A Parliament held at Oxford, in the time of King Ethelred, anno 1002. A
Parliament at Oxford, under King Canutus, an. 1018. A Parliament at Oxford,
under King Harold Harefoot, anno 1036. A Conference at Oxford, under King
William Rufus, an. 1088. A Conference at Oxford, in the time of King Stephen. A
Council at Oxford, held against the Waldenses, temp. Hen. 2. an. 1160. A
Council at Oxford, under King Hen. 2. temp. Tho. Becket Archiep. Cant. an.
1166. A general Council at Oxford, at which King Hen. 2. made his Son John King
of Ireland, an. 1177. A Parliament at Oxford, called Parliamentum magnum, temp.
H. 2. an. 1185. A Council at Oxford, temp. Rich. 1. A Conference at Oxford, in
the time of King John. A Parliament held at Oxford, temp. Hen. 3. an. 1218.
which first gave occasion to the Barons Wars. A Council at Oxford, under Steph.
Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, an. 1222. A Council at Oxford, an. 1227. A
Council at Oxford, under Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Suffragans,
an. 1230. 14. Hen. 3. A Council at Oxford, temp. Hen. 3. an. 1233. A Council at
Oxford, under Edmund Archbishop of Cant. A Council held at Oxford, by the
Bishops, temp. Hen. 3. an. 1241. A Term kept at Oxford, 31 Hen. 3. A Council at
Oxford, temp. Hen. 3. an. 1247. A Council held by the Bishops at Oxford, an.
1250. A Parliament held at Oxford, called Parliamentum insanum, 41 Hen. 3. A
Council at Oxford, an. 1258. A Parliament at Oxford, an. 1261. A Parliament at
Oxford, an. 1264. A Council at Oxford, under John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury, an. 1271. A Council held at Oxford, under Robert Winchilsea
Archbishop of Canterbury, an. 1290. A Parliament summoned at Oxford, 4 Edw. 3.
A Parliament at Oxford, 19 November. an. 1382. A Parliament at Oxford, 6 Rich. 2.
A Term kept at Oxford, 11 Rich. 2. A Term kept at Oxford, 16 Rich. 2. A
Convocation of the Clergy at Oxford, by Tho. Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury,
an. 1395. A Parliament at Oxford, 1 Car. 1. 1625. A Parliament summoned at
Oxford, temp. Car. 1. an. 1644. The Terms kept at Oxford, eodem temp. it being
the Kings Headquarters in the late Civil War. A Parliament at Oxford, 13 Car.
2. an. 1665. The Term kept at Oxford, eodem temp. the Plague being then at
London.
5. Of these there is an imperfect List in a MSS. MSS. fol. C. p. 173.
in Corpus Christi College Library Oxon. in which there are also mentioned
three Synods held in St. Mary's Church: A Provincial Chapter of the Friars
Preachers, and a Council held at Oxon. whose Votes were written by Abraham
Woodhall. There is also a Provincial Council at Oxford, mentioned in the
Catalogue set before the Decrees of Gratian. But these bearing no date, and in
all likelihood the same with some of the aforementioned; I pass on to another
Parliament, which though not at Oxford, yet was held in this County, and
therefore I suppose not improper for this place. However, I shall rather
venture the danger of impropriety and misplacing, then omit the taking notice
of so considerable a Meeting, it being the first Parliament held in the County,
and doubtless in England; called it was at Shifford, now a small Village in the
Parish of Bampton, and showing now nothing adequate to so great an Assembly.

6. There is a MSS. in Sir Robert Cottons Library, that gives an account of
this Parliament, which, it says, consisted of the chief of all Orders of the
Kingdom, and was called at Sifford (now Shifford) in Oxfordshire, by King
Alfred, where the King as Head consulted with the Clergy, Nobles, and others,
about the manners and government of the people, where he delivered some grave
admonitions concerning the same: The words of the MSS. are these, At Sifford
seten Dancr many, feel Biscops, et feel Boclered, Earls prude, et Cnihtes
egloche. there as Earl Elfricof the lage smuth ise, and ec Alfred Englehird,
Engle derling, on England he as Cyng, hem he began leren, so hi heren mihten hu
hi here lif leden scolden. i. e. There sat at Shifford many Thanes, many
Bishops, and many learned Men, wise Earls, and awful Knights: there was Earl
Elfrick very learned in the Law, and Alfred, Englands Herds-man, Englands
Darling; he was King of England, he taught them that could hear him how they
should live.

7. To which perhaps may be added, the great Council of Kyrtlington held there
not long after, in an. 977, at which were present King Edward the Martyr, and
St Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury; and at which died Sidemannus Bishop of
Crediton. This Council by Sir Henry Spelman H. Spelman Council. Tom. 1. An. 977.
p. 493.
is taken to be the same mentioned by Wigorniensis held at Kyrtlinege, which he
guesses to be now Katlage in Cambridge-shire; but I rather believe it was held
here, not only for the sake of the name, which remains the same to this day,
but because of the one and only Constitution made there, viz. That it should be
lawful for the Country People to go in Pilgrimage to St. Mary of Abington; a
thing in all likelihood not so desirable to the People of Cambridge-shire, as
to ours of Oxfordshire so near the place: Beside, the great reputation that
this place was of in ancient times, seems to justify my plea, it enjoying as
great Privileges, and perhaps being a fitter place in those days for the
reception of such an Assembly, then Oxford it self; for I find it part of the
Possessions of the Kings of England, from whom it came to Henry, Son of Edmund
Crouchback Earl of Lancaster, and Father to Henry, the first Duke of Lancaster,
by whose Daughter and sole Heir Blanch, it came to John of Gaunt Duke of
Aquitane and Lancaster, and was free, a Thelonio, passagio, lastagio, pacagio,
stallagio, tallagio, tollagio, cariagio, and terragio, per totum Regnum, as I
find it in an old Charter in the possession of the Right Worshipful Sir Tho:
Chamberleyne, now Lord of the Town, whose singular civilities in imparting
this, and some other matters hereafter to be mentioned, I cannot but in
gratitude ever acknowledge.

8. From whence (after so long, but I hope not unpleasant digression) I return
to the Beautiful Oxford again, a place of so sweet and wholesome an Air, that
though it must not be compared with that of Montpellier, yet upon my own
knowledge it has proved so advantageous to some, that it has prefectly
recovered them of deep Consumptions; and particularly a worthy Friend of mine,
who though he came hither sufficiently spent, yet without the help of any other
Physic, within few Months felt a sensible amendment; and in fewer Years became
of as sanguine a complexion as the rest of his friends, that had almost
despaired of him.

9. Some have thought the Small Pox here more then ordinarily frequent, and it
must indeed be confessed, That we are perhaps as often, though not so severely
infested as some other places; for generally here they are so favorable and
kind, that be the Nurse but tolerably good, the Patient seldom miscarries. But
admit the Objection be truly made, That it is more subject to the Small Pox
than other neighboring Cities about, yet if by so much the less it feel the
rage of the Plague, I think the edge of the charge is sufficiently rebated.
It Is reported amongst the Philosoph. Transact. number. 49.
observations of an ingenious Person that resided long in the Island Japan,
That though the Air be very salubrious there, yet the Small Pox and Fluxes are
very frequent, but the Plague not so much as ever heard of; which has often
made me reflect on the year 1665, when the Pestilence was spread in a manner all
over the Kingdom, that even then, though the Court, both Houses of Parliament,
and the Term were kept at Oxford, the Plague notwithstanding was not there at
all.

10. Others again, tell us of the Black Assise, held in the Castle here, an.
1577. when a poisonous steam broke forth of the Earth, and so mortally seized
the spirits of the Judges, Sheriffs, Justices, Gentry and Juries, beside great
numbers of others that attended the business, that they sickned upon it and
almost all of them dyed: but let it not be ascribed to ill fumes and
exhalations ascending from the Earth and poisoning the Air, for such would have
equally affected the Prisoners as Judges, but we find not that they dyed
otherwise then by the halter, which easily persuades me to be of the mind of my
Not. Hist. Cent. 10. number. 914.
Lord Verulam, who attributes it wholly to the smell of the Goal, where the
Prisoners had been long, close, and nastily kept.

11. It Is true, that Oxford was much more unhealthy heretofore then now it is,
by reason the City was then much less, and the Scholars many more, who when
crowded up in so narrow a space, and the then slovenly Townsmen not keeping
the street clean, but killing all manner of Cattle within the walls, did render
the place much more unhealthy. Hence it is, that we find so many rescripts of
our Kings prohibiting mactationem grossarum bestiarum infra muros, and quod
vici mundentur a fimis and fimariis, bearing date 13 Hen. 3. 29 Edw. 1. 12 Edw.
3. 37 Hen. 6. MSS. in Arch. Bib. Bod. fol. 90, 91.
and all alleging the reason, quia per has mactationes, etc. aer ibidem
inficitur, because by the killing such manner of Cattle, and laying the dung in
the streets, the Air was infected. Moreover, about these times the Isis and
Cherwell, through the carelessness of the Townsmen, being filled with mud, and
the Common-shoars by this means stopped, did cause the ascent of malignant vapors
wherever there happened to be a Flood; for beside its stirring the infectious
mass, great part of the waters could not timely pass away, but stagnating in
the lower Meddows, could not but increase the noxious putrid steams. But the
former being long since remedyed by the care of the University, and the latter
by the piety and charge of Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, and Founder of
C.C.C. Oxon. who in the year 1517. cleansed the Rivers, and cut more Trenches
for the waters free passage Hist. and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. Lib. 1. page 245.
; the Town has ever since continued in a healthful condition: though I cannot
but believe, but were there yet more Trenches cut in some of the Meddows, the
Air might be somewhat bettered still, especially during the Winter season, when
I fear sometimes Floods stay a little too long, and that not only near Oxford,
but in Otmoor; and all along the Isis from Ensham to North-moor, Shifford,
Chimly, and Rotcot, which brings me again to the general consideration of the
Waters as well of the whole County as City.

12. That the healthiness of Waters consists in their due impregnation with
Salts and Sulphurs, and their continuance so, in their continual motion, is
indisputably evinced from the stinking evaporations of them upon any
stagnation. Now that the Rivers here abound with these, will be altogether as
manifest as that they run, if we consider but the Springs they receive and
Earths they wash. The Isis, it is true, till it comes to New-bridge, receives
not (that I find) any eminently salt or sulphurous waters; but there it admits
the nitrous Windrush, so well impregnated with that abstersive salt, that no
place yields Blanketing so notoriously white, as is made at Witney, a Market
Town on that River, and upon this account the most eminent in England for that
kind of Trade; though I am not ignorant, that some add another cause jointly
contributing with the aforementioned, to the excellency of these Blankets; of
which more at large when I come to treat of Arts.

13. Somewhat lower, about Cassington, it receives the Evenlode, a River whose
Banks, especially near the Fountain heads, are very well saturated with both
the Minerals: witness the waters that rise a little above Sir Thomas
Pennyston's, in the Parish of Cornwell, from a sort of Earth that may well pass
for a Marle; and the brinish Bog near Churchill-mill, which though upon the
surface of the ground seems to have no communication with the adjoining
Rivulet, yet being so near, and the Glebe all thereabout being to be presumed
of a like nature, it must needs lick some of the Mineral in its passage. About
Kingham I was told of a sulphurous Earth, and that some of the Waters there
were of such an odor; but whether true or no, I am sure on the other side the
water, at a place called Bold in the Parish of Idbury, it is manifestly so;
which being not far from the River, at least not from the Stream that runs by
Foscot, and so into it, in all likelihood may impart to the waters hereabout no
mean quantity of its more volatile parts. Upon the Cherwell we have a salt
Spring runs immediately into it; and perhaps the sulphurous Glebe of Deddington
may somwhere reach the River. The Banks of the Them are so well sated with
some kind of acid, that no well-water in the whole Town of the name, will
either brew, or lather with soap: But none of these give a tincture so high,
that they can be perceived by the most exquisite palate, but only so far forth
as may conduce to a due fermentation, and to keep them living: And yet without
doubt from hence it is, that the Thames water at Sea, in eight months time,
acquires so spirituous and active a quality, that upon opening some of the
Cask, and holding the candle near the bung-hole, its steams have taken fire
like Spirit of wine, and sometimes endangered firing the Ship Philosoph.
Transact. Number. 27. page 495.
. Hence it is also that its stench is no absolute corruption, and that after a
third or fourth fermentation, it equals the waters of the Well in the Haven of
Brundusium Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 103.
, and stinks no more; and though the Mariners are sometimes forced to drink it
and hold their noses, yet upon that account they do not sicken; whereas all
other waters, as far as has been hitherto observed, become irrecoverable upon
stinking, and dangerous to drink.

14. Cardan in his Comment upon Hippocrates De Aere Aquis and locis super Text.
3.
, takes the plenty and goodness of the Fish, to be a sure indication of the
wholsomness of waters. And our Countryman, the ingenious Dr Brown General
Description of Hungary, page 10.
, speaking of the great fecundity of the River Tibiscus, admits it into
consideration, whether its exceeding fertility may not be ascribed to the
saline Tinctures it receives from the natural salt Mines it licks by the way:
which opinions if approved, as rationally they may be, show the health of our
waters and the reason of it too: for though we must not compare our Isis with
Tibiscus or Brodrack; the one whereof is said to consist of two parts of water,
and one of Fish; and the other so replenished with them, that in Summer when
the River is low, the People say, The water smells of Fish: yet in the year
1674. it gave so ample testimony of its great plenty, that in two days
appointed for the Fishing of Mr Major and the Bailiffs of the City, it afforded
betwixt Swithins-Wear, and Woolvercot-bridge (which I guess may be about three
miles distant) fifteen hundred Jacks, beside other Fish; which great fecundity,
as it argues the goodness of the Element, so it is no whether to be referred, as
to its original cause, but to the various Salts upon which depend the
propagation of all sorts of Species's Willis, de Ferment. cap. 2.
; and as far as concerns this part of the Animal Kingdom, are plentifully to be
found at the bottoms of some Rivers.

15. And I said the rather at the bottoms of Rivers, not only because Bodies
from Salts have their solidity and weight Willis de Ferment. cap. 2.
, and therefore may well be presumed to reside in the lowest places: but
because I find it the joint agreement of all the Watermen hereabout that I
have yet talked with, that the congelation of our Rivers is always begun at the
bottom, which however surprising it may seem to the Reader, is neither
unintelligible nor yet ridiculous: for beside matter of fact wherein they all
consent, viz. that they frequently meet the Ice-meers (for so they call the
cakes of Ice thus coming from the bottom) in their very rise, and sometimes in
the under-side including stones and gravel brought with them ab imo, it seems
upon consideration also consonant to reason: for that congelations come from
the conflux of Salts, before dispersed at large, is as plain as the vulgar
experiment of freezing a pot by the fire; and that induration and weight come
also from thence, sufficiently appears from the great quantities of them that
are always found in stones, bones, testaceous, and all other weighty bodies
Willis de Ferment. cap. 12.
. Now whatever makes things compact and ponderous, must needs be endued with
the same qualities it self, and therefore affect suitable places; so that why
standing Pools should freez at the top, might possibly, have proved the greater
difficulty of the two, had not the Learned Dr Willis already cleared the point,
by showing us, that all standing waters are more or less in a state of
putrefaction Willis de Ferment. cap. 8.
, with their salts and sulphurs ready for flight, and in that posture caught
by the adventitious cold, are probably so congealed at the top of the water.
How consonant to truth this Theory may be, I leave to the Readers judgment and
future experience, and by the way would have him take notice, that as this, so
my other opinions hereafter to be mentioned, are not magisterially laid down,
so as to justle out better whenever they can be brought, but fairly to have
their trial, and so live or dye. But as to the matter of Fact, as I cannot but
think it hard that so many people should agree in a falsity, so methinks it is
as difficult they should mistake in their judgments, since I was told by one of
the soberest of that calling, that he once knew a Hatchet casually fall
overboard into the River near Wallingford, which was afterward brought up,
and found in one of these Icemeers.

16. And so much for the salts that give life to the waters, multiply the Fish,
and are the cause of congelations; for the watery Plants it seems have their
vegetation from none of these, but a higher principle, which some will have to
be a volatile Niter, brought along with the showers in their passage through
the Air. That subaqueous Plants have a proportionable growth to those on the
Land after a shower of rain, is also the general voice of the Barge-men; and
herein I am the rather inclined to believe them, because it is a matter so much
their interest to observe; our watermen here in these shallow Rivers, praying
not so much for rain to fill them when low, as that weeds may also grow to help
keep the waters when they have them, which will otherwise too soon glide away,
to their no small detriment. Some have thought this vigorous shooting of the
aqueous Plants, so presently sensible after plentiful showers, to proceed
rather from the soyls brought with them from the hills, and impregnated with
salts fit to promote vegetation; but the contrary is evident from the former
Paragraphs, for with such as these the Rivers are daily sated, and yet this
brisk vegetation is wanting till it rains: whence I guess that terrestrial and
subaqueous Plants (that I say not such as delight in uliginous places) have
their sprightful shooting from different principles; and if to the former I
should assign a more fixed, and to the latter a volatile salt, perchance I
might not be much out of the way: but it being not so much my business to find
the reasons of phenomenon, as to give the Reader such hints as may lead his
greater sagacity to do it; I forbear saying more, and manum de tabula, only
advertising him, that what has been said of the Isis may be indifferently
applied to the rest of the greater Rivers, of which neither have I any thing
more to add, but an unusual accident that happened to the Cherwell, An. 1662/3,
which without one drop of rain, or any other visible cause here, but from great
and sudden showers that fell in Northamptonshire, swelled to that vast height,
that in two hours time, not only the Medows were o're-flown, Magdalen College
cellar drowned, and their raised Water-walks covered; but the River Isis driven
back as far as Ivy-Hincksey, at least a mile from the confluence of the two
Rivers.

17. But amongst the many smaller Rivulets, perchance it may not be unworthy
notice. (1.) That the two considerable Rivers of Stour and Ouse, though but
small here and running but little way in it, yet rise in this County; the one
at Swalcliff, which goes into the Severn Sea in the west; and the other at
Fritwell, whence it runs into the Sea between Lincolnshire and Norfolk in the
east of England. And (2.) that the Fountain-heads of the River Rea lie for the
most part in a plain Country, having little more to feed them, than just a
declivity to facilitate their passage; which seems to argue, that all running
waters owe not their continuance to rain and dews, collected as they say, on
the spungy tops of hills, and sent forth again somwhere in the declivity. And
so does a a small Spring at Cleydon, that rises in the street on the south side
of the Town, which continues running all the year, but most plentifully like
the Scatebra of Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 103.
, in the dryest weather: to which add a Well at Ewelme, also south of the
Church, whose Springs run lowest in the Winter season, and advance in the
Summer remarkably higher; as I am credibly informed from Lambourn in
Berk-shire, all the Springs in that Town most constantly do. But I decline all
engagement in this great Controversy concerning the origin of Springs, till my
Travels have supplied me with more, and more certain evidences, as well for the
one as other part of the question.

18. That Land-springs, and such as run but once perpahs in many years, have
their rise and continuance from plentiful showers, I think we have little
reason to doubt, since we have them not at all, or but very weak in any Summer,
or the dryer Winters: such are those that foretell (and naturally enough) the
scarcity and dearness of Corn and Victuals; whereof that of Assenton, near
Henly upon Thames, is one of the most eminent that I know of in England; and no
question is the same mentioned by Johannes Eusebius. Nierembergius De Miracul.
Not. lib. 2. c. 26.
, in his Book (as he calls it) of the Miracles of Nature. In Britanniae
territorio Chiltrensi sunt fontes multi, etc. by which, I suppose, he must mean
the Chiltern Country of Oxfordshire, There are, says he, many Springs, which
in fertile years are always dry; but before any defect, as the Harbingers of an
approaching dearth, these waters get loose, and as it were breaking prison,
they quickly unite into a forcible stream. And so they did lately, in An. 1674.
with that violence, that several Mills might have been driven with the Current;
and had not the Town of Henly made some diversion for them, their Fair Mile
must have been drowned for a considerable time. Of these there are many in the
County of Kent, which I know not for what reason they call Nailbourns there,
and prescribe them (some will) a certain time for their running, as once in
seven, ten, or fifteen years. But the certain natural principle of such
Springs, altogether depending upon an uncertain cause, no heed is to be given
to such kind of stories, they being equally as vain as the persons that
broached them.

19. Beside these constant and intermitting Rivulets, that always discharge
themselves into Seas or Lakes, we have others here of a peculiar kind that
empty themselves into neither of them: but as they first rose out of the Earth,
so presently after a short stay on it, ingulf themselves again, and are no more
seen. Two of these there are at Shot-over Forest, both rising as I take it on
the north side of the hill; the one not far from Heddington Quarry-pits, is
constantly fed with a double Spring, yet after it has run about two Bows shoot,
is received by a rocky subterraneous indraught, and appears no more: for though
some have thought it to come forth again at the Pool of a Mill not far from it,
yet after diligent search I could find no such matter. Another there is not far
from Forest-hill, and I think in the Grounds of Sir Timothy Tyrrill, which
sometimes in Winter runs with that violence, and has worn its Inlet to such a
capacity, that it can and has received an Ox.

20. Other waters again are of so slow a pace, that they seem rather to sweat
than run out of the Earth, part whereof being spent in exhalation, and the rest
in sating the dry neighboring Earth, do neither reach the Sea, are received in
Lakes, nor swallowed up like the former, but of themselves are stopped upon the
very surface. And yet I have observed, and believe rightly too, that these are
the most durable Land springs we have, witness that famous one of this kind at
Nettlebed, which I know not from what old Witch heretofore, by way of derision,
they call Mother Hibblemeer; whereas if we consider how serviceable she has
been, being never known to fail them in the dryest Summer, and that in a
Country so incapable of Wells, that there is no such thing to be found in the
Parish, she rather merits the esteem of the Nymph of the place.

21. In Westphalia they have a Spring they call their Bolderborn Varenii Geog.
lib. 1. cap. 17. prop. 15.
, from a noise that it makes at the exit of the water; whether ours may deserve
the name, I know not, but such a one there is in the Parish of Glympton, in a
wood about a mile south-west from the Church, in a place where there are stones
in the form of Cockles; upon which account hereafter I shall mention it again.
The Springs, as I remember, are in number three, and the most southern one of
these it is that has the humming noise, much like that of an empty bottle held
with the mouth against the wind, which perhaps may be a resemblance so
befitting our purpose, that it may help to explain the cause as well as the
sound: for provided the channel be large within, and the passage forth somewhat
narrow like a bottle, the collision of the water against the lips of the
orifice, may well make a noise in a large vault within, especially if the
waters be endued with a spirit, as peradventure anon may be proved like enough.

22. Which is all I have to say concerning the flux of Rivulets, but that one
there is at Sommerton makes a small Cascade, or fall of water about seven foot
high; which were it not in the highway, but in a Gentleman's Garden, some use
might be made on it for diverse good purposes, but as the case stands I think it
can have none, except for experiments of petrifications, for which sure it
cannot but be very excellent, since the living blades of grass of not above
half a years growth, within that small time are all covered with stone, and
hang down the bank like so many Isicles; and the Earth it self over which it
glides, as 'twere foliated over with a crust of stone like the Mosco petroso of
Ferrante Imperato Dell' Hist. Natural. lib. 27. cap. 8.
. Which brings me to a closer consideration of waters, as they are eminently
endued with any peculiar qualities, of Petrification, Saltness, or Medicinal
use; of which in their order as briefly as may be.

23. Of Petrifying waters, though I doubt not but their kinds are as various,
as the effects they produce; and the effects again, as the subjects they work
on; yet I am inclined to believe that they all agree thus far, that they
proceed in the main from the same stock and lineage, and are all more or less of
the kindred of Salts, which sublimed and rarefied in the bowels of the Earth
into an invisible steam, are received by the waters as their most agreeable
vehicle, and brought hither to us at the rising of Springs, as invisibly as the
particles of silver or gold, when each is dissolved in its proper menstruum:
where meeting perchance with an ambient Air, much colder and chilling than any
under ground, in all likelihood are precipitated, and thrown down on such
subjects, as they casually find at the place of their exit, which they
presently cloth with a crust of stone; or else (where precipitation or
cohesion will not suffice) they pass with the waters through the pores of the
subjects, and are left behind in them just as in a filter.

24. The reason of which difference may probably be, tha^ some of these
petrifying steams or atoms, may be gross and more bulky than some others are,
and cannot be held up in the watery vehicle, without such a heat as they have
under ground, but fall, and by reason of their bigness, do not penetrate, but
adhere to their subjects; whereas others that are fine, more minute and
subtle, are easily supported in a volatile condition, and pass with the waters
into the closest textures.

25. If any body doubt whether stones, and so petrifications, arise from Salts,
let him but consult the Chemists, and ask, Whether they find not all indurated
Bodies, such as stones, bones, shells, and the like, most highly sated with the
saline principle? Some mixture of Earth and Sulphur it is true there is in them,
which give the opacity that most stones have; from which, according as they are
more or less free, they have proportionable transparency, and some hardness too;
as the best of gems, the Diamant, evinces. And if he shall ask what Salts are
the aptest to perform this feat of petrification, though the difficulty of the
question might well excuse me, yet I Will venture thus far to give him an answer,
That I have frequently seen at Whitstable in Kent, how their Coperas or Vitriol
is made out of stones that it is more then probable were first made out of that:
to the Spirit of which Vitriol if you add Oil of Tartar, they presently turn
into a fixed and somewhat hard substance, not much inferior or unlike to some
incrustations; which seems to conclude, that from these two, all such like
concretions are probably made; and that could we but admit that Ocean of
Tartar, which Plato Anton. Galataeus de fluminum generibus.
placed in the center of the Earth, and thought the origin of all our Springs,
the business of petrifications were sufficiently clear. To which I also add in
the behalf of Vitriol, what is matter of fact, and prevails with me much, That
wherever I find strong Vitriol waters, the petrifying ones are seldom far
off; which as far as I have observed, I believe may be reduced to these three
kinds that presently follow.

1. Such as purely of themselves are petrifyed, the very body of water being
turned into stone as it drops from the rocks, which we therefore commonly call
Lapides stillatitios, and shall accordingly treat of them in the Chapter of
Stones, these not strictly coming under petrifications, where beside the water
and saxeous odor, there is always required a subject to work on of a distinct
species from either of the two; as in 2. Such as petrifie by incrustation, and
are only superficial, or 3. Such as petrifie per minima, or totum per totum; of
both which I shall instantly treat, but of the last more at large in the
following Chapter.
26. Incrustations, are petrifications made by such waters as let fall their
stony particles, which because either of their own bigness, or closeness of the
pores and texture of the Body on which they fall, are fixed only to the
superficial parts, as it were, by aggregation, and do not enter the solid body;
of which I have met with several in Oxfordshire, and particularly at
Sommerton, as was abovementioned, where the grass, being one of the
fluviatilia, is covered over with a soft stone; and yet so, that broken off,
the grass appeared (for any thing I could see) as fresh and green as any other
not crusted, nothing of the blade being altered or impaired, which is the
nearest incrustation I ever yet saw: for though some of these petrified blades
of grass hung down at least a foot in length, yet slipping them off from about
the root, I could take the grass by the end, and pull it clean out as it were
from a sheath of stone, so little of cohesion had the one to the other: the
reason of which I guess may be, that the pores of the Plant possessed with its
own juice, and already furnished with a congenial salt, might well refuse
adventitious ones.

27. And yet far otherwise is it, but just on the other side the River at
North-Ashton, in a Field north-west of the Church, where either the petrifying
water, or plants, are so different from what before I had found them at
Sommerton, that though there too the work be begun by adhesion, yet the roots
of rushes, grass, moss, etc. are in a while so altogether eaten away, that
nothing remains after the petrification is completed, but the figures of those
Plants with some augmentation.

28. And petrifications of this kind I frequently meet with, that happen on
things of much different substances, as shells, nuts, leaves of trees, and many
times on their most ligneous parts. In the Parish of St Clements in the Suburbs
of Oxford, about a quarter of a mile distant, on the right hand of the first
way that turns eastward out of Marston-lane, there is a ditch, the water
whereof incrustates the sticks that fall out of the hedge, and some other
matters it meets with there: but this is so inconsiderable, that I should not
have mentioned it, but that it has been taken notice of by so many before, that
my silence herein would have looked like a defect. Much better for this purpose
is the water of a Pump at the Cross-Inn near Carfax, in the City it self, which
not only incrustates boards fallen into it, but inserts it self so intimately
into the pores of the wood, that by degrees rotting it away, there is in the
end the succession of a perfect stone; and that not without some course
representation of the very lineaments of the wood it self: Which though I must
confess to be of somewhat a higher kind of petrification than incrustation, yet
it being wholly performed by accession of parts, and continual intrusion into
the open pores of rotten wood, will not amount to the warranty of a different
species.

29. A curious pattern I have of this kind, in a piece of wood given me by Mr
Pomfret Schoolmaster of Woodstock (whose care in my enquiries I must not
forget) wherein nature has been so seasonably taken in her operation, that the
method she uses is easily discovered; for being interrupted in the midst of her
work, one may plainly see how the stony atoms have intruded themselves, as well
at the center as superficies, and so equally too into all parts alike, that
it is hard to discern in any part of it, whether stone or wood obtain the better
share.

30. Petrifications of this kind are always friable, and though sometimes they
faintly show the grain, yet never, that I could see, keep the color of the
wood; in the fire they are as incombustible as any other stone, and lose
nothing of their extension, but their color for the most part seems to alter
toward white: in distilled Vinegar they remain indissoluble, though not without
the motion (as Mr Hook Micograph. Obs. 17.
well observes) that the same spirit has when it corrodes Corals, yielding many
little bubbles, which in all probability (as he says) are nothing else but
small parcels of Air driven out of its substance by that insinuating Menstruum,
it still retaining the same extension: but in aqua fortis, the Sommerton crust
was wholly dissolved into a white substance, not unlike the white wash used by
Plaisterers. All of them increase the bulk of the subject on which they work;
and most of them, as the ingenious Mr Hook also further notes, seem to have
been nothing more but rotten wood, before the petrification began.

31. But some others I have seen of a far nobler kind, that show themselves
likely to be petrifications per minima, and performed with a steam so fine, as
permeates the very schematism and texture of the body, that even to a
Microscope seems most solid, and must in all likelihood be as tenuious as the
subtilest effluviums that come from a Magnet; some whereof are so unlike rotten
wood, that they keep the color and texture of heart of Oak, and are some of
them so hard that they cut Glass: and with one of them, that seems formerly to
have been a piece of Ground-ash, I struck fire to light the candle whereby I
write this. But I have nothing more to say of it here, because I guess the
change not to have been wrought by water; that therefore I offer not violence
to the Chapter of Earths, by which I thank this, and all other of the kind, I
have met with in Oxfordshire have been performed; I forbear, and proceed to
the other salt waters that are more eminently such, and do not petrifie.

32. And amongst them, we must remember to reckon all such as are unfit for
washing, and will not take Soap; for though these to our taste are not sensibly
salt, yet to our touch (as the Learned Willis De Ferment. cap. 9.
notes) they are harsh and unpleasant, which they have from their too great
impregnation with Salts: But what is a much more certain evidence of it, we do
not find any but instantly lathers, except such as hold an acid salt, and
discover themselves such upon evaporation. To which may be added this very
easy Experiment, That if to simple water, and such as before would lather
well, you add some few drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or some such like acid, it
presently refuses to mix with soap: The reason of which seems indeed to be no
other, but the congress of the acid salt of the water, with the fixed and
alcalizate one of the soap, which it so wholly subdues to its own inclinations,
that it will not permit it any longer to hold the oily parts of the soap, or
mix them with the water; but now visibly increased both in quantity and weight,
by the considerable acquest of this new prisoner, it may also perhaps so fill
up the pores and little cells of the water, that the excluded sulphur or oily
parts of the soap (as in their separate nature) are forced to the surface.

33. Many of these waters are every where found, and according to some, all
Pump waters are such; but that they are mistaken, my experience has taught me,
for I have met with some that will lather very well.

34. At Henly they are troubled with many of them but not so much as they are
at Them; for there they have a way to let them stand two days, within which
time (as I was informed by my worthy Friend Mr Monday, Physician there) the
Vitriol, or whatever other acid it be, falls down to the bottom of the Vessels
that hold them, and then they will wash as well as one can desire. But at
Them, where there is never a Well in the whole Town whose water will wash, or
(which is worse) brew: This Experiment, for I caused it to be tried, will by no
means succeed; so that were they not supplied by the adjoining Rivulet, the
place must needs be in a deplorable condition. The reason, I suppose, why the
acid will not fall, as it does at Henly and some other places, is because these
waters, beside their salt, in all probability also hold a crude Sulphur, whose
viscous particles do so tenaciously embrace it, that it will not admit of any
separation; which may also perhaps be a hint to the cause why their Beer will
stink within fourteen days whenever they attempt to brew with this water, for
where a Sulphur is any thing great in quantity, and its body opened and exalted
by the heat in brewing, and the active spirituous particles of Malt, (as I
guess the case may have it self here) the frame of that mixtion may probably be
loosed, wherein the spirits first taking their flight, the Sulphur will next
begin to evaporate, whose steams being smartly aculeated by the salt, that then
bears the chief sway in the subject, cause the stink of the Beer that is brewed
with such water.

35. Other waters there are that are palatably salt, and sufficiently stinking
without being brewed, and such is that beforementioned near Churchill-mill:
but I think within the bounds of the Parish of Kingham; The water as it stands
looks of a greenish color, as most of the palatably salt waters do, and do it
resort all the Pigeons in the Country; which should they not do, I should much
wonder, since besides its saltness it has such a stink, that it equals the salt
stone, and roasted dog too: so that should the Proprietor but build a
Dove-house here, he might honestly rob all his neighbors of their flights; but
that he may not put it to so invidious a use, I shall divert him anon by a more
profitable way.

36. As to the salt that impregnates this water, I do not take it to be a
simple one, but some Mineral concrete both of salt and sulphur; for without
these two be in their exaltation, and become so far fluid as to endeavor a
divorce from each other, it could never acquire so noisome a smell. Which
concrete should I call a salt Marine, peradventure I might not be much
mistaken; for if you take but a small quantity of thrice calcined Bay salt, and
dissolve it in a pint of Well-water, upon dissolution you will have much such
an odor, as has been observed by a late Author in a short account of the
Sulphur Well at Knarsborough Simpsons Hydrolog. Chym part. 2.
.

37. Nor hinders it at all that the Sea is so remote, since whether springs
have any communication with it or no, such marine salts may be had very well;
for if the Sea grow salt by the Earth that it licks, which I take to be as
certain as that it is not so by torrefaction; then if it be possible we may have
such Earths, as give the Sea those salino-sulphureous tinctures, it is
altogether as possible we may have such waters too, without any necessity of
such communication.

38. If it be objected, That the waters of the Sea send forth no such stench as
we find these do, let it be considered that the flux of the one, and stagnation
of the other, may well occasion such a difference; whilst the Sea-waters are
in their motion, it is true their salts and sulphurs so involve one another,
that their mutual embraces hinder all evaporations; but whenever they come to
stand but awhile, as they do most times in the holds of Ships, then their
sulphurs evaporate with as great a stink, as can be supposed ours have here at
Land; and this the Ships pump does frequently witness, to the great content of
all that travel by Sea, it being a sure indication of the Ships health, which
abundantly recompenses the inconvenience of the stench.

39. Such another I have heard of in the Parish of Chadlington, in the grounds
of one Mr Rawlison there, not differing in any thing at all from the former,
but only it is somewhat stronger of the marine salt: this I must confess I saw
not my self, yet having my information from so knowing a Person, and of so
unquestionable fidelity as Sir Thomas Pennyston, I doubt not at all the truth
of the thing.

48. A salt spring there is also at Clifton near Deddington, within a Quoits
cast of the River side: but its saline particles are so subtilized in the
water, that they scarcely can at all be perceived by the palate, and yet it
lays them down plentifully enough on the stones and Earth over which it passes.
What sort of salt this is, I care not to determine, because it will be
difficult not to mistake; for upon evaporation of about a gallon, it yielded a
salt of a urinous taste: which at first I must confess was so surprising to me,
that I could not but think, that during my absence, some waggish fellow had
either put a trick on me, or else that I might have used some unfit vessel;
whereupon I caused a new earthen pot to be bought, well glased, and then
repeated the Experiment very carefully, but found in the end all had been
honest about me, for I had a salt again of the very same taste.

41. How this should come about I cannot divine, unless from the sweat of the
Bodies of Animals, it being much used in cuticular Diseases; but this I think
neither can well be; because it is a constantly running spring, and would sure
carry off what might be left of that nature: I therefore wholly leave it to the
Readers greater perspicacity, and shall content my self with this satisfaction,
that however improbable the thing may seem, that in the mean time it is an
improbable truth.

42. I have often since wished, that I had tried this water with a solution of
Alum, and seen whether it would have given any thing of that milky
precipitation it does with Vrines; which being then quite out of my head, is
left to the trial of some ingenious person that lives thereabout; though
beforehand I must tell him, that I believe it will not succeed because urinous
substance seems not to be copious enough.

43. Diverse might be the uses of these waters, and particularly of the two
first, as good, or perhaps better than that at Clifton, for cuticular Diseases
of Men and Beasts; some whereof I have known carried out of these Inland
Countries to the Sea side; whereas it is likely they might (in all the
Distrempers for which we have recourse thither) with much more ease have had a
remedy at home.

44. But far more profitable must they surely be, if employed to improve poor
and barren Lands, which no question might be done by casting them on it. In
Cheshire Sir Hugh Plat's Jewel-house of Art and Nature, cap. 104.
, near the Salt Pits of Nantwich, it is yearly practiced thus to brine their
Fields; which though never done, but after the fall of great store of
Rain-waters into their pits, which before they can work again must be gotten
out, and with it some quantity of their brine too, yet even with these but
brackish waters do they so season their adjoining Lands, that they receive a
much more profitable return, then they could have done from any soil or dung.

45. In Cornwall and Devonshire, so considerable are their improvements by
sea-sand, that it is carried to all parts as far as they have the advantage of
the water, and afterward 10 or 12 miles up higher into the Country on horses
backs: At which I must confess I marvel not at all, since we are informed by an
intelligent Gentleman of those parts Philosoph. Transact. Number. 113.
, that wherever this sand is used, the seed is much and the straw little, ( I
have seen, says he in such a Place, good Barley, where the ear has been equal
in length with the stalk it grew on) and after the Corn is off, that the grass
in such places turns to Clover. Some of the best of this sand, he says, lies
under Ouse or Mud about a foot deep; and who knows but there may be such a Sand
under the briny Bog near Churchhill-mill, or at Chadlington? I am sure the salt
spring at Clifton comes from a sand; if so, and the Farmers thereabout get such
Corn and Clover-grass, I hope I shall not want the thanks of the Country.

46. However, I do not doubt but the water will serviceable, either to cast on
their Land, as at Nantwich, or to steep their Corn in before they sow it, to
preserve it from all the inconveniences formerly prevented by brining and
liming it, and to strengthen it in its growth.

47. Sir Hugh Plat Id. loco citato.
tells us, of a poor Countryman who passing over an arm of the sea with his
Seed-corn in a sack, by mischance at his landing fell into the water, and so
his Corn being left there till the next Ebb, became somewhat brackish; yet such
was the necessity of the Man, that (notwithstanding he was out of all hope of
any good success, yet not being able to buy any other) he sowed the same upon
his plowed grounds; and in fine, when the Harvest time came about, he reaped a
crop of goodly Wheat, such as in that year not any of his Neighbors had the
like.

48. Now let the Owners or Farmers of these springs fit down and consider of
what has been said, and if they shall think fit, make trial of them, wherein,
if they meet with success, I only beg of them (which I shall gladly accept as
the guerdon of my labors) that they would be as free of it to their poor
Neighbors that have lean grounds and ill penny-worths, as God has been to them
by me his weak instrument in the discovery.

49. Having spoke of such waters as cure faulty grounds, and cuticular
distempers by external application, it follows, that we treat of such as are,
or may be taken inwardly, and deserve the repute of Medicinal waters. The
first, and perchance the best of these, I found at Deddington, a small Market
Town, within the Close of one Mr. Lane, where not long since digging a Well,
and passing through a blew Clay, adorned with some glittering sparks; and
meeting by the way with pyrites argenteus, and a bed of Belemnites, or (as they
call them) Thunderbolts, He came within few yards to this water, of a strong
sulphurous smell, the most like of any thing I can think of, to the water that
has been used in the scouring a foul gun: in weight lighter than pure
Spring Water by an js. in a quart, and yet after several trials, I found it so
highly impregnated with a vitrioline salt as well as sulphur, that two grains
of the powder of galls would turn a gallon of water into a dusky red, inclining
to purple; nor did they only so alter the site and position of the particles,
as to give a different color and consistence, as it happens in waters but
meanly sated; but in a quarter of an hour did so condense and constipate the
pores of the watery vehicle, that the excluded particles of the Minerals
appeared in a separate state, curdled in the Vessel, and of so weighty a
substance, that they subsided to the bottom in a dark blue color.

50. The sediment being great in quantity, I tried upon red hot Irons, and some
other ways, to see whether the salts or sulphur, either by color,
scintillation, or odor, might not by that means betray themselves; but with
small success: whereupon I betook me to distillation, putting about a quart
into a glass body, to which fitting a head and clean receiver, I gave an easy
heat, till there was distilled off about three or four ounces, which when
poured out, I found had neither smell, taste, or any other properties, that
might distinguish it from any other spring water distilled: for with galls it
would make no more alteration than any other simple common water would. Then
ordering the fire to be slackned, to see what precipitate it would let fall;
upon filtration of what remained in the body, I procured only a pale calx of a
gritty substance, showing, as it dried in the Sun, many transparent particles
intermixed: in taste it had a faint pleasant piercing, with a gentle warmth
diffused on the tongue; but pouring on it Spirit of Vitriol, Oil of Tartar,
etc. I could not perceive any manifest ebullition, so as to judge whether the
salt contained in this residence, were either of the acid or lixiviate kind.

51. Wherefore to come closer to the point, and taking directions from that
accurate, severe, and profound Philosopher, the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire the
glory of his Nation, and pride of his Family; and to whose most signal
Encouragement of the Design in hand, these Papers, in great part, owe their
birth: I took good Syrup of Violets, impregnated with the tincture of the
Flowers, and dropped some of it into a glass of this water as it came from the
Well; whereupon, quite contrary to my expectation, not only the Syrup, but the
whole body of the water turned not of a red, but a brisk green color, the
Index of a lixiviate, and not that acid Vitriol, which I before had concluded
on from the infusion of galls. The Phenomenon at first was very surprising,
till I had further weighed the cautious Expressions of that Noble Author Hist.
of Colors, Exper. 20.
, and found, that he restrains the Experiment of the Syrup of Violets, turning
red with acids, with provision always they be distilled Liquors; and what he
seems to hint in a former Experiment Ibid. Exper. 10.
, that sulphurous salts, (such as the Vitriol of this water will anon more
plainly appear to be) being of a quite contrary nature, may have different
effects: which may also be the reason why this sulphurous water,
notwithstanding it most certainly possesses an acid salt, will yet as certainly
lather with soap, and raise a greater sud than other waters commonly do; and if
put into milk, though boiled up to the height, will not separate the more gross
from the serous parts of it: effects so usually following upon such
applications, that perhaps till now they have always been supposed, never as
yet to have happened otherwise.

52. But Experience, that great baffler of speculation, assures us the contrary
to be possible enough, and brings matter of fact to confute our suppositions in
the very trial of this water, wherein the great quantity of Vitriol, is yet so
close locked up by the viscous particles of Sulphur, and thereby rendered so
dull and unactive, that it cannot exert its enmity to (as Dr Mayow De Thermis
Bathoniensibus, sub finem.
) or friendly embraces with (as Dr Willis De Ferment. cap. 11.
) the alcalizate salt it finds in the soap; on so compress the pores of the
milk, as thereby to cause a precipitation: but having as it were thus put on the
nature of a fixed salt, acts not upon its like, nor longer enjoys the
astringent power of an acid.

53. And under this vizor of a fixed Alcali it was, that it acted its part, and
with Syrup of Violets, gave a green tincture; unless we may allow its salt to
be a volatile Alcali, with which also that Syrup turns to the same color: to
admit such a thought it is true is very hard, yet finding but a mile off, at
Clifton as abovementioned, a Spring strangely sated with such a kind of salt;
I adventured to try another Experiment of the aforesaid Honorable Author, and
according as he directs Hist. of Colors. Exper. 40.
, made a solution of sublimate in fair water (the only Criterion I yet know of,
that plainly distinguishes the two Alcali's) to which I added this Well-water,
in great, small, and the intermediate quantities: but it answered not at all
the design of the Experiment, not giving the tawny, much less the white
precipitate: Whence it is easy to conclude, that this also succeeds only in
discriminating Chemical salts, as that great Virtuoso well observes, and not in
the immediate products of Nature.

54. One thing more I could not but observe, that notwithstanding the powers of
the Vitriol are thus restrained in reference to its acting on soap and milk,
that yet it has its usual effect upon Iron: for the corrosion of the Pump-rod I
must believe to proceed from Vitriol, till any one upon better grounds can
convince me, that it is likely it may be from somewhat else; and yet this neither
do I conceive to be done, but by such steams as ascend in the Well, and are
freed from the shackles of Sulphur, much questioning whether the Pump-rod
under, or near the bottom of the water, be eaten so or no.

55. To this add, that although the Sulphur does exercise such dominion over,
and so closely knits up the Vitriol, whilst together in the water, yet it may
and does too, let go its hold; and like, what is reported by Henricus ab Heers
of his Spadacrene, and the Sauvenir by Frambesarius, can hardly be kept within
any bounds, but expires through glasses stopped never so close; it is true, I had
not the convenience there of putting it under the Hermetick seal, but so easy
a passage it made through a good cork covered over with wax, and both bound
down with a double leather, that in six miles riding it lost all its virtues,
not giving then any tincture with galls, and having but a faint putrid smell of
the Sulphur: Whether it lost in weight or bulk, as well as volatile Spirits, I
must acknowledge I was not then enough curious to observe; but imagine it
might, since it is plain from its not tinging with galls, that not only the
Sulphur, but also the Vitrioline particles exhale with it, and corporeally seiz
on the next agreeable subject, which it is manifest they did on the
abovementioned Pump-rod.

56. Beside the more considerable ingredients of Vitriol and Sulphur, it is
evident that this water also holds some small quantity of Naphtha, one of the
liquid Bitumens, which flies not away like the two former, but after separation
of the parts, made either by precipitation with galls, or insensible
evaporation, remains swiming on the top in a thin skin, variegated as it were
with the colors of the Rainbow, much after the same manner as it is frequently
seen upon waters standing in boggy grounds, or such places where we dig the
bituminous Earths called Peats: But whether this will burn at all, or with any
such bright flame exceeding that of sulphur, as Hen. ab Heers Spadacrene, cap.
4.
Hen. ab Heers affirms of such a film that covers the waters of his Spadacrene,
if kept all night, I have left to some ingenious person thereabout, that has
both more skill and leisure to try.

57. At Banbury, another Market Town about four miles hence, at Dr Lanes
Physician there, Brother to the abovenamed Mr Lane of Deddington, and my very
good Friend; there is also another sulphur Well, much like the former in taste,
but not altogether of so strong a smell, holding, I suppose, either much more
salt than that, or a less tenacious sulphur: for here I found not the energy of
the Vitriol so fettered by the vigorous particles of sulphur, but that it had
power to make that hostile or friendly congress with the lixiviat salt of soap,
and send the oily part to float at top, making no lather or mixtion with it;
and also so to constipate the pores of boiled milk, as to separate its parts
into curds and whey. The quantity of salt appeared upon evaporation made by the
said Dr Lane since I was there, but how much to a quart or gallon he sent me no
word. This water has also a volatile part, collected by the said Doctor, which
I did not find that Deddington water had; upon the tongue it seems to have a
little pricking, but nothing that I could perceive of a saltish taste, wherefore
trying further with a convenient Menstruum, it at last confessed it self to be
Flores sulphuris, precipitating with the same ebullition, smell, and color,
that some others did I had from the shops.

58. Another of these of a sulphurous smell that will not take soap, and turns
milk, I found at Bold in the Parish of Idbury, in part of the possessions of
one Mr Loggan, a worthy Gentleman, (whose assistance in the trial of this
water, and furtherance in my other business, I cannot without ingratitude ever
forget:) which differs from the former only in this, that besides its tinging
red with powder of Galls, with spirit of Vrin it turns white, which (as I had
observed before at Banbury) that would not do: whence I have ground to suspect,
that over and beside the ingredients of that, here must in all likelihood be
something of Alum; and in this opinion I am the more confirmed, since I am
informed, by the Controversy between Dr Witty and Mr Sympson, that Vitriol
and Alum are sometimes found together, as in the Cliff near the Scarborow Spaw.
And that in Sweden Philosoph. Transact. Number. 21. Vid. Olai Wormii, Musaeum de
eodem, cap. 9.
there is a single stone of a yellow color, intermixed with streaks of white,
and very weighty, that affords Sulphur, Vitriol, Alum, and Minium; now that
such a stone is here, though I dare not assert, yet questionless there may be
something not so altogether unlike, but whenever there is occasion of digging
there-about again, the stones and earth may deserve examination At
Snowdown-hill, in Carnarvan-shire, there are also such stones. Dr. Merrets
Pinax rerum Not. p. 217.
.

59. I should next have proceeded to the waters impregnated with Vitriol only,
but that I am called back to Deddington again by another water of a fetid
odor, in stench much exceeding all beforementioned. This I met with in a
small Close behind a Barn, within a furlong or less of that at Mr. Lanes,
having the House where the Dutchy-Court is kept to the East, and the Guild
West, and belonging to Chapter Chapter Coll. in Oxon, in smell so perfectly resembling
that of rotten eggs, and accordingly so strongly affecting the sense, that I
could not so much as put it to my mouth without danger at least of straining to
vomit. Such a one as this is mentioned by Georgius Agricola Lib. De Natura
eorum quoe effluunt ex terra.
, at the Castle of Steurewald in the Bishopric of Hildesheim, within a mile of
Hasda; where, says he, there is another Spring that sends forth a stink, qualis
est pulveris bombardae exstincti: a description so agreeable also to our
sulphur well at Deddington, that as I could not at first but wonder, that two
such waters should be found at places so far asunder, so strangly alike; so it
gave me a hint, that these waters in all probability might receive their
tinctures from the same Minerals, and that their difference might only lie in
the distances they have from the Mineral bed, or more Colanders the one may
pass through than the other. Agricola observes, that the water at Steurewald
smelling like ours, much like rotten eggs, not only comes forth of a Marble
Quarry, but that the belchings of such as drink it fasting, give also the odor
of brayed Marble. Whether ours have either such a passage or effect, I must
confess I cannot inform the Reader; my Purse not affording me to try the one,
nor my Stomach the other: However, I could wish it had not been stopped up, as I
hear it is since my being there, not only for the use it might have, but that
Persons better qualified than I, might have made the Experiments.

60. Of Vitriolate and Ferrugineous springs, there are also plenty in this
County, one at Nether-Worton, and another at North-Weston I found another
since, near Whites-Oak in the Parish of North-Leigh.
, within less than a Bolts-shot of each of their Churches; both of these,
beside their tinging with galls, let fall a sediment of a rusty color; only
with this difference, that Nether-Worton spring is much the quicker and
clearer, though I doubt not the other might be very well amended, were but
little charge bestowed on it.

61. At Shipton under Which-wood there is another of these, at an Inn there
whose sign is the Red-horse, but so weakly impregnated with the Mineral, that
it scarce tinges sensibly with the powder of galls, yet lays down the rusty
sediment in as great quantities as any of the rest; and I have met with some at
other places that have plentifully enough yielded this, which by no means could
ever be brought to confess any thing of Vitriol, which has begotten a strong
suspicion in me, that this rusty tincture may probably be the effluvium of some
other Body, different from, and not of the chalybeat kind: for were it so, I
cannot imagine but the salt of Mars must needs be discovered. However, herein I
will not be positive, but propound it only as the subject of a severer research.

62. And of these I was told of a very odd one in the Parish of Heddington,
near a place called the Wyke (I think) now stopped up, that in the winter time
would strike with galls, but not in the summer: whereof may be given this very
easy reason; that during the time of winter, the pores of the Earth being
stopped, and the Mineral thereby not permitted to exhale, the water is then
impregnated with it, and gives the tincture; whereas in the summer season it
expires so much, that the depauperated water can show nothing of it. That
waters do thus alter according to the Seasons of the Year, I found also to be
manifest from the waters of Deddington, which I found sometimes lighter, and at
other times heavyer than common water, and to give much different sediments at
diverse trials with the same materials. And this I thought convenient to note,
not only to excite Men to more critical Observations, but that the curious
Explorator may not be startled, in case he find them at any time not exactly to
answer.

63. In the Park at Cornbury, not far from the Lodge, in a pit newly dug,
there rises a spring also of a Vitriol kind, coloring the mud and earth under
it very black; into this pit, it being designed for a conservatory of Fish,
they put over night some of several sorts, but found them next day in the
morning all dead; which gave me good ground to suspect (having just before met
with a relation of Dr. Witties Answer to Hydrologia Chym. p. 25.
, That Carps put into a Copper Brewing-vessel to be preserved but for one
night, were all found dead in like manner in the morning) that here might be
something of that nature too; and that the Vitriol wherewith this water is
sated, might rather be that of Venus than Mars: And in these thoughts I was the
more confirmed, when I quickly after was informed, of an odd kind of steam that
rose hereabout of a suitable effect. But of this no more, leaving its further
consideration to the Right Honorable and ingenious Proprietor of the place, and
my singular good Lord, Henry Earl of Clarendon, a most effectual encourager of
this design.

64. To these I must add another sort of waters, which though in taste they
resemble milk, must yet I believe be reduced to this Head, for I find,
notwithstanding their eminent sweetness, they all refuse to lather with soap,
and therefore conclude them to hold some Acid: Of these we have several within
the City of Oxford, one at a Pump over against the Cross Inn, another near the
Mount in New College Garden, and a third at the Pump at Buckley Hall, now the
dwelling house of one Mr. Bowman a Bookseller, and several other places I
heard of such another somwhere near Wardington.
: All which, notwithstanding their lacteous taste, I guess may be impregnated
with something of Vitriol, which though of it self it be a smart acid, yet its
edge being rebated with a well concocted sulphur, turns sweet, and becomes of
that more palatable gust. And herein perhaps I have not guessed amiss, since we
are informed by as eminent, as it is a vulgar Experiment, that the austerity
that Vitriol gives in the mouth, is corrected by the fumes of Tobacco taken
quickly after it; whose sulphurous particles, says the Learned Willis De Anima
Brutorum, cap. 12. De Gustatu.
, mixing with the saline pontic ones of the Vitriol, create such a pleasant and
mellifluous taste.

65. There are also two small and very weak springs, of a lacteous color but
no such taste, in the way from South-stoke leading to Goreing, by the River
side; not many years since of great repute in those parts for Medicinal use,
but now quite deserted; whether upon account of the ineffectual use of them, or
because they are but temporary springs, sub Judice lis est: The people will
tell you they were very sovereign, and never ceased running till some advantage
was made of the water, and that Providence till then withheld them not. This
water issues forth from a fat whitish Earth, and has always a kind of unctuous
skin upon it, yet to the taste I thought it seemed dry and stiptical, as if it
proceeded from a kind of Limestone, further within the Earth, and not to be
seen.

66. But however the case may have it self there, it is not so dubious, that at
a Well in Oddington, there is a water of the calcarious kind, and proceeding
sure from some neighboring Limestone, which beside its dry and restrictive
taste, more signally evidences it self, in the providential cure of a local
Disease amongst Cattle, frequently caught by their grasing on Otmoor, and
therefore by the Inhabitants thereabout commonly called by the name of the
Moor-Evil: The Disease is a kind of flux of the belly, and corresponds (in a
Man) to what we call a Dysentery, whereby the Cattle so spend themselves, that
in little time from well and good liking, they fall in a manner to skin and
bone, and so dye away unless prevented; which is certainly done by giving them
dry meat, and suffering them to drink of this water only.

67. Beside these we have many other waters, not apparently (at least to sense)
of any Mineral virtue, yet without doubt have their tincture from some
subterraneous steam, of a much finer than ordinary, and therefore unknown
texture. Such are those in many places accounted so sovereign for the Eyes, and
cure of inveterate Ulcers, after the ineffectual trials of the best
Chirurgions: These for the most part, and perhaps not undeservedly, are
commonly styled Holy-wells, not only for the good they have formerly done, but
for that they seem to be the immediate gift of God, and designed for the poor.

68. A very eminent one of these there is in the Parish of Sandford, not far
from Great Tew, which within the memory of many thereabout, has done great
cures upon putrid and fetid old sores, a long time before given over for
incurable. These waters have with them, according to the observations of the
ingenious Doctor Beal Philos. Transact. Number. 57.
, a kind of active friction, but intermingling with their asperities such a
pleasant titillation, as invites the Patient to rub on the tersive water, and
will all along recompense the pain of searching the wound, with such speedy and
indulgent degrees of sanation, as mitigates the torment with variety of
pleasures.

69. And thus (as I am informed by persons of unquestionable fidelity, that
have often used them for their eyes, and in some other cases) do the waters of
St. Crosses in the Suburbs of Oxford, whose Well was heretofore, and in some
measure yet remains, so considerable for such like purposes, that the great
resort of people to it has given occasion of change to the name of the Parish,
which to this very day we call now nothing but Holy-well.

70. But of much greater Fame was the Well of St. Edward, without St. Clements
at Oxford, now quite stopped up; but as it is remembered by some of the antientest
of the Parish, was in the field above a furlong S. S. West of the Church; this
at least was believed to be so effectual in curing diverse distempers, and
thereupon held to be of so great sanctity, that here they made vows, and
brought their alms and offerings; a custom, though common enough in those days,
yet always forbidden by our Anglican Councils Canonibus sub Edgaro. Can. 60.
, under the name of Wileorthuga [Wilveorthunga] more rightly translated
Well-worship than Will Worship, as is plainly made appear by the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Hammond Annotat. ^n Epist. Coloss. c. 2. v. 23.
, out of an old Saxon Penitential, and a Saxon Homily of Bishop Lupus; where
the word il is rather showed to signify fontem, than voluntatem. Against these
superstitions so ordinary in those days, there are several prohibitions in the
forecited Penitential and Homily. And of which kind are also diverse
Injunctions to be seen in the Office of Lincoln, of Oliver Sutton; and amongst
them, one particularly against the worship of this Well of St. Edward, without
St. Clements in Oxford, and St. Laurence's Well at Peterburgh, etc.

71. And so much for the Waters, with the Minerals they hold; and perhaps too
much too in such like matters, may some Man say, for an unskilful Lawyer:
Howver, since what has been said, has not been magisterially imposed, but
modestly only, and timerously conjectured; and since I have not invaded another
Man's profession, by so much as naming the Dseases they may probably cure,
except where they have a known reputation already, I hope I may evade the
imputations of rashness, or putting my sickle into another Man's Harvest.

CHAP. III. Of the Earths.
OXFORDSHIRE, says Mr. Cambden Britan. in Oxfordshire.
, is a fertile County and plentiful, the Plains garnished with Cornfieldsd and
Meddows, and the Hills beset with Woods; stored in every place not only with
Corn and Fruits, but also with all kind of Game for hound and hawk, and well
watered with Rivers plentiful of Fish. Which general description of the Soil,
though in the main it be true to this day, yet if we come to a more particular
and close consideration of it, we shall find, that though Oxfordshire almost
in every part, where the industry of the Husbandman has any thing showed it
self, does produce Corn of all sorts plentifully enough; yet it has much more
cause to brag of its Meddows, and abundance of Pastures, wherein (as in Rivers)
few Countries may be compared, perhaps none preferred. And as to matter of
Fruits, I think I may better assert of it what Giraldus does of Ireland,
Pascuis tamen quam frugibus, gramine, quam grano, faecundior Comitatus, than
groundlesly to commend it overmuch.

2. The Hills, it is true, before the late unhappy Wars, were well enough (as he
says) beset with Woods, where now it is so scarcy, that it is a common thing to
sell it by weight, and not only at Oxford, but at many other places in the
Northern parts of the shire; where if brought to Market, it is ordinarily sold
for about one shilling the hundred, but if remote from a great Town, it may be
had for seven pence: And thus it is every where but in the Chiltern Country,
which remains to this day a woody Tract, and is (as I have very good ground to
think) some of the western part of the great Forest Andredesald, or
Andredeslege, reaching, says Leland Lelandi Comment. in Cyg. Cant. in verbo
Limenus.
, from beside Portus Limenus in Kent, a 120 miles westward, which happily falls
out to be about this place: To which had Caesar ever arrived, he had never sure
left us such an account, as we find in his Commentaries concerning our Woods:
Materia, says he, cujusque generis, ut in Gallia, praeter Abietem and fagum De
Bello Gallico, lib. 5. sub initium.
, i. e. that there was here all manner of wood, as in France, except the Fir and
Beech: of the last whereof there is such plenty in the Chiltern, that they have
now there-about scarce any thing else; but it lies so far from Oxford, and so
near the River side, which easily conveys it to London Market, that it is scarce
beneficial to the rest of the County.

3. As to the qualifications of the Soil in respect of Corn, I find them in
goodness to differ much, and not only according to their several compositions
(being in some places black, or reddish earth: in others a clay or chalky
ground, some mixed of earth and sand, clay and sand, gravel and clay, etc.) but
chiefly according to the depth of the mould or uppermost coat of the earth, and
the nature of the ground next immediately under it: for let the uppermost mould
be never so rich, if it have not some depth, or such a ground just underneath
it, as will permit all superfluous moisture to descend, and admit also the hot
and comfortable steams to ascend, it will not be so fertile as a much leaner
soil that enjoys these conditions.

4. Thus have I oftentimes seen in this County, in all appearance a very good
soil, and such indeed as would otherwise have been really so, less fertile
because of its shallowness, and a cold stiff clay, or close freestone next
under-neath it, than a much poorer Land of some considerable depth, and lying
over a sand or gravel, through which all superfluous moisture might descend,
and not stand, as upon clay or stone, to chill the roots and make the Corn
languish.

5. Where by the way let it be noted, that I said a cold stiff clay or close
freestone; for if there be under a shallow mould, a clay that is mixed (as it is
common in the blew ones of this County) either with pyrites aureus, or brass
lumps; or the stones be of the warm calcarious kind, it may nevertheless be
fruitful in Corn, because these, I suppose, do warm the ground, and give so
much strength, that they largely recompense what was wanting in depth.

6. More possibly might have been added to this general account of Earths, and
not a little instructive to the Farmers of the Country, but I found most of
them froward and to slight my Quaere's; let them therefore thank themselves if
I am not so obliging: Beside, it seems a business a little beside my design,
therefore in have I proceed to a more particular Consideration of Earths (as
before of Waters) holding some Spirit, Bitumen, or concrete Juice, and as they
are useful in Trades, or are otherwise necessary, convenient, or ornamental.

7. But herein I shall not show my self either so angry or ignorant, or so much
either disrespect my subject, or the civilities of the Gentry for the sake of
the clowns, as not in the next place to treat of such Earths whose most eminent
uses relate to Husbandry, since they also hold some concrete Juices (whereby
they become improvements of such poor barren Lands) and are therefore very
suitable to my present purpose.

8. The best of these we call commonly Marls, whereof, though 'twas believed
there were none in Oxfordshire, yet I met with no less than three several
sorts, and in quantities sufficient enough for use. The British Marls were very
famous of old, whereof Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 17. cap. 6, 7.
numbers several sorts; and of principal note were the Leucargillae, whereby,
he says, Britan was greatly enriched: And of this kind, that I guess may be
one, lately discovered by the much Honored, and my truly noble Friend, Thomas
Stonor Esquire of Watlington-Park, of which he already has had good experience: of
color it is whitish, a little inclining to yellow, not very fat, and of so
easy dissolution, that it may be laid on the ground at any time of the year,
and may be as good, I suppose, for pasture as arable: this he found at a place
near Blunds-Court, but I think within the Parish of Shiplake, where upon
another account sinking a deep pit, amongst other matters he met with this Marl.

9. Since that, there has lately been another discovered by that eminent
Virtuoso Sir Thomas Pennyston, in his own Grounds in the Parish of Cornwell,
about a quarter of a mile north-west of his House, of a blue color, and so
abstersive, that it would readily enough take spots out of clothes, and gave
its owner some ground to hope, that possibly it might be fit for the Fullers
use; but he quickly, upon trial, discovered an incurable fault that the Men of
that Trade will never pardon: however, I take it to be so rich a Marl, that it
may amply recompense the industry of its Master, if laid on its neighboring
barren Hills; which I advise may be done about the beginning of Winter, that
the Frosts and Rain may the better separate its parts, and fit it to
incorporate with that hungry Soil.

10. Which condition I suppose may not at all be required, in the manure of a
light and hollow sort of Marl, lately found by the worshipful and industrious
Improver, George Pudsey Esquire of Elsfield: for in water it dissolves almost as
soon as Fullers earth, and is naturally of it self so hollow and spungy, that
one would think it were always in the very ferment, and may therefore be used
at any fit time of year: of color when dry, it is of a whitish gray,
intermixed with sand, and very friable, and may in all probability be the very
same, with the Marga candida arenosa friabilis, of Hildesheim, mentioned by
Kentmannus Kentman. nomenelat. rer. fos. cap. 3. de Margis.
, and out of him by Lachmund. Of just such another Marl as this, brittle and
dusty when dry, but fat when wet, we are informed there is at Wexford in the
Kingdom of Ireland, by Dr Gerrard Boat Boats Not. Hist. of Ireland, cap. 12.
sometime Physician there; only that that is blue, and this a whitish gray, and
may therefore be fitter for Pasture than Arable. It being observed in the
Counties of Sussex and Kent, where Marls are most plenty of any places of
England, that the gray suit with Pastures, and the blue (such perhaps as Sir
Thomas Pennystons) with Arable best.

11. It may therefore be expedient, that these new found Marls be thus
agreeably tried, and though they answer not expectation the first year, as some
say they will not Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 17. cap. 8.
, let not their Owners be thus discouraged, but still continue to make frequent
trials, of diverse proportions of Earth, at all seasons of the year, with all
kinds of Grain upon all sorts of Soil, till they find out the most suitable and
necessary circumstances, so shall they in time attain to a knowledge beyond the
expectation, and perchance imitation of their Neighbors. But I forbear to
instruct such Ingenious Persons, as the Owners of the abovenamed Marl-pits are:
the Orator being accounted little less than a fool, that went about in his
Speech to teach Hannibal to fight.

12. But beside these, we have another sort of Earth, of a fat close texture,
and greenish color, so well impregnated with some kind of salt, that put in
the fire, it presently decrepitates with no less noise than salt it self; and
in water, after a quick and subtle solution, leaves behind it a kind of
brackish taste, which I thought might proceed from a sort of Vitriol, and
perhaps true enough, though the water would not tinge with powder of galls: it
takes grease out of clothes extremely well, and would it but whiten, as Fullers
earth does, I should not doubt to pronounce it the same with the viridis
Saponaria, found near Beichling in Thuringia, and mentioned by Kentmannus in
his collection of Fossils Cap. 1. De terris.
. This we have in great plenty in Shot-over Forest, where it is always met with
before they come to the Ochre, from which it is separated but by a thin Iron
crust, and may peradventure be as strickt a concomitant of yellow Ochre, as
Chrysocolla (another green Earth) is said to be of Gold. At present it is
accounted of small or no value, but in recompense of the signal favors of its
present Proprietor, the Right Worshipful Sir Timothy Tyrril, who in person was
pleased to show me the pits, I am ready to discover a use it may have, that may
possibly equal that of his Ochre. Which brings me next to treat of such Earths
as are found in Oxfordshire, and are useful in Trades.

13. And amongst these the Ochre of Shotover, no doubt, may challenge a
principal place, it being accounted the best in its kind in the world, of a
yellow color and very weighty, much used by Painters simply of it self, and as
often mixed with the rest of their colors. This by Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. lib.
33. cap. 12.
, and the Latins, was anciently called Sil, which we have now changed for the
modern word Ochra, taken up as some think from the color of the Earth, and the
Greek word (...), Pallidus; or as others, and they perhaps more rightly, from
the River Ochra that runs through Brunswick, whose Banks do yield great
quantities of it Encelius de re Metal. lib. 2. cap. 20.
; and from whence in all likelihood we received the name, upon the arrival of
the Angles and Saxons in Britan.

14. They dig it now at Shotover on the east side of the Hill, on the right
hand of the way leading from Oxford to Whately, though questionless it may be
had in many other parts of it; The vein dips from East to West, and lies from
seven to thirty feet in depth, and between two and seven inches thick;
enwrapped it is within ten folds of Earth, all which must be past through
before they come at it; for the Earth is here, as at most other places, I think
I may say of a bulbous nature, several folds of diverse colors and
consistencies, still including one another, not unlike the several coats of a
Tulip root, or Onyon.

The 1. next the turf, is a reddish earth. 2. a pale blue clay. 3. a yellow
sand. 4. a white clay. 5. an iron stone. 6. a white, and sometimes a reddish
Maum. 7. a green, fat, oily kind of clay. 8. a thin iron-coloured rubble. 9. a
green clay again. 10. another iron rubble, almost like Smiths cinders.


And then the yellow Ochre, which is of two parts.

1. The stone Ochre, which we may also call native, because ready for use as
soon as it is dug: and

2. Clay Ochre, which because of the natural inequality in its goodness, they
wash and steep two or three days in water, and then beat it with clubs on a
plank into thin broad cakes, of an equal mixture both of good and bad; then
they cut it into squares like Tiles, and put it on hurdles laid on trestles to
dry, which when thoroughly done it is fit for the Merchant.

15. Where perhaps by the way it may be worthy our notice, how different either
the Ochres, or opinions of men concerning them, are now, from what they
formerly were: for whereas Dioscorides (as quoted by Wormius Ol: Wormii
Musaeum. cap. 4.
) commends to our choice the lightest earthy Ochre, highly before the other of
stone: We on the contrary, and not without reason, prefer the stone Ochre as
far before the clay.

16. I was told of a yellow Ochre somwhere between Ducklington and Witney, that
serves them thereabout for inferior uses; and met with it beside at some other
places, but none so good as this at Shotover; that at Garsington being full of
blue streaks, and a small parcel (that was shown me) taken up about Pyrton
intermixed a little too much with red, as if it were now in the transmutation
(so much spoke of by Naturalists) by the earth and suns heat; first into
Rubric, or Ruddle, and thence at last into pnigitis, or else black chalk.

Encel. de re Metal. cap. 20.
17. Now that Nature indeed proceeds in this method, I am almost persuaded by
what I have found in Shotover-hill, and elsewhere near it: for within two beds
next under the Ochre (nothing but a white Sand interceding) there lies another
of a much redder hue, which first receiving the steams of the earth, is now in
the way of becoming a ruddle, and in process of time when it grows adust, may
at last make a change into a black chalk; which I should not so easily have
been induced to believe, but that at Whately Towns end, near the foot of the
hill, where lately some attempts were made for Coal, they met with a vein of
such kind of chalk, which perhaps long before might have been nothing but
ruddle, and as long before that, a yellow Ochre. But whether Nature proceed
thus or no; or suppose these are not (as some have thought) the several
gradations of the same individual, yet however, I shall not be guilty of
mis-placing, since all three belong to the Painters Trade.

18. To which may be added a sort of Caeruleum, which in English we may render
native blue, because naturally produced by the steam of some Mineral, latent
under the aforementioned Marl at Blunds-Court, amongst which it is found in
very good plenty; but yet so thinly coating the little cavities of the earth,
and some other bodies (of which hereafter) to which it sticks, that no
quantities can be gotten for the Painters use, for whom it would otherwise be
very fit, as upon trial has been found by the worthy Mr Stonor. Kentmannus
Kentman de terris, cap. 1.
indeed tells us of a cinereous sort of Earth somwhere near Padua, that affords
such a blue; but I guess that ours cannot be (nor perhaps is that) the
immediate production of the ambient Earth, but rather of some mineral or metal
below it; of which more at large in a fitter place.

19. Hither also may be referred a gritty sort of Vmbers, found in all parts of
the County where there are Quarries of Stone: a courser kind of them I met with
near Witney, and a somewhat finer at Bladen Quarry; these sometimes are found in
the seams of the Rocks, and sometimes again in the body of the Stone; and
notwithstanding their gritty texture, yet prove useful enough to dressers of
Leather. But yet a much finer than either of the former, has been lately taken
up at Waterperry, in the ground, and near the House of the Right Worshipful Sir
Thomas Curson, of so rich and beautiful a color, that perhaps it might better
have been placed among the Ochres, but that mixed with Oil, it turned darker
than that they call English, and much more so than the spruce-Ochre of Shotover
Forest.

20. Beside these, we have another fine Earth, of a white color, porous and
friable, insipid and without scent, dissoluble in water; and tinging it, of a
milky color, and sometimes raising a kind of ebullition in it; found frequently
in the lissoms or seams of the Rocks, or sticking to the hollow roofs of them:
in short, so altogether agreeable to what Conradus Gesner De figuris Lapidum,
cap. 6.
(and out of him Boethius de Boot, Calceolarius, Aldrovandus, and Olaus Wormius)
calls Lac Lunae, that I could not but think it the very same. And to put all
out of doubt, I tried the Experiment of Daniel Major (who wrote no less than a
whole Treatise concerning it) and found according to him, that with Lacca,
though I could get none good, it gave the skin so florid a whiteness, that I
dare pronounce it a good Cosmetick, and upon that very score have given it
place here.

21. I observed it first near the Worcester road, about midway between Holton
and Sir Timothy Tyrrils, where the Stones taken up, for I know not what use, as
also at some places in Whately field, were all in a manner covered with it. And
I met with it again near Haseley, in the fields between that and little Milton,
and quickly after at long Hanborough, upon stones provided for walling there: I
enquired of the Quarry-men what it might be, whether they had made any use, or
observations of it, but all I could get would amount to no more, but that it
was a sign of a very good Limestone.

22. Which also it seems is its character amongst our Neighbors in Ireland,
where (we are Boats Not. Hist. of Irel c. 20. sect. 4.
told) the best Limestone is of a gray color, and if broken, has a white dust
that flies away from it. But if we may believe Olaus Wormius, it is a sign also
of something much better than that, who apprehends it to be nothing less than a
certain effect of Metallic vapors: Oritur, (says he, speaking of Lac Lunae) a
vaporibus metallicis, qui indies subtiles vehunt exhalationes, quae ubi per
saxa in cavitates exsudaverint, humido evocato, quod siccum est remanet and in
medullam hanc raram, teneram, and friabilem concrescit. Ol. Wormii Musaeum,
cap. 4.
To which Daniel Major not only agrees, but more particularly adds, that the
matter of this Earth proceeds from the metallic vapors of silver ore, by some
fermentation raised and sublimed, and then condensed on the sides of the Rocks.

23. Of which, says Gesner De figuris Lapidum. cap. 2.
, there are two sorts; the one gross and gritty, because immature and crude;
the other more perfectly concocted, whiter, lighter, and softer: And of both
these we also find here, but whether indicative of silver ore, as in the
mentioned places by Johan: Daniel Major De Lacte Lunae dissertatio Medica.
Edit. Anno 1667.
, is the great question. In answer whereunto I cannot but add, that though I
should be very unwilling, that any Owner, Farmer, or others, should hazard
their Fortune upon my weak judgment, without the advice of ancient and
experienced Bermen; yet that at Shotover, beside Lac Lunae, there are other
Symbols of silver Ore.

24. Whereof, if any heed may be given to Pliny, the Ochre beforementioned may
be accounted one: In argenti and auri metallis nascuntur etiam optima pigmenta
Sil and caeruleum; where by Sil he means such yellow Ochre, than which, there
is no place we know of in the world that has greater plenty, or of equal worth.
To which we may add a sort of Iron-stone, which is not Iron-ore, found
peradventure in as great quantities here, as it is upon the hills near
Schemnitz in Hungary, the greatest Mine-town in that Kingdom: where it seems it
is not only a sign of the Ore, but is also of great use in melting of it;
whereof says Dr. Brown, in his Journey thither, that of a liver-colour is
counted best Account of his Travels. page 92.
. Now that we have such an Ore, though I dare not promise, yet provided we had
in the greatest plenty, the liver-colour'd Iron-stone (I dare say it) would not
fail us.

25. But if Lac Lunae alone may be a sufficient Index, and if we are not
mistaken in the thing it self, as I verily think we cannot be, none of the
places already mentioned can show it in quantity and goodness too, equal to a
Quarry in the Parish of Cornwell, south west and by west about a hundred yards
from the Right worshipful Sir Thomas Pennystons house; where it is found so
well concocted, and of so great purity, that the driven Snow never appeared
whiter; and yet in so great quantity too, that I cannot guess the Mineral, or
whatsoever other metal it be, that gives so great a steam as this, can lie very
deep, or be very poor: Yet I shall not presume to advise its owner, the eminent
Virtuoso Sir Thomas Pennyston, any further to dig in quest of it, than
according as he shall want Stone upon other occasions, to sink his Pit for the
future, perpendicular to the Horizon, whereas now he takes it as it rises in
plano: So that in time, when he is gotten through the Rock, a more certain
judgment may be past on what lies under, with little charge or damage to him:
Where if in time he find a Treasure, I am sure the Discoverer will not want
his reward, from so Ingenious, and every way so accomplished a Person, at least
in such proportion as has always been allowed by the Societies of the Mines
Royal, and Mineral Battery-works.

26. Beside the notice it gives of Mines, and use it has in covering the
blemishes of the Face, like the Earth Quei of China, mentioned by China
illustrata.
Kircher; its Medicinal uses are very great. For by Georgius Agricola, and
Fernante Imperato; the former whereof calls it Stenomarga De Nature. Fossil.
, and the latter Agaricus Mineralis Dell' Hist. Natural. Lib. 5. cap. 4.
: it is thought to have the virtues of the Samian Earth, and to be very
beneficial in stopping of blood, and women's diseases. Boethius De Lapid. and
Gemmis. cap. 229.
holds it to be a good narcotick, and that it safely may be given to procure
sleep. And Gesner De Figuris Lapidum, cap. 2.
affirms it to be commonly sold by the Apothecaries of Lucern, and used by
Chirurgians to dry gleeting sores; and that given to Nurses, it increases their
milk, and quickly makes their Breasts apparently swell. And upon this account it
serves me as a seasonable transition to pass next to the Earths of Medicinal
use.

27. Of which the most likely I have met with yet, is dug amongst the clay they
use for bricks, in the Parish of Nettlebed, not far from the Windmill, of as
red a color as Bolus Armenus, but not like that discoloring the hands;
strongly adhering, if put to the tongue, but whether provocative of sweat or
no, I have not hitherto been able to persuade a trial. However, let it prove
never so good, I Will not promise the owner any great profit, because of the
humor we have of despising our own, and only admiring and esteeming those
things that are far fetched and dearly bought.

28. But quite of another mind was that famous Physician, Mr. Henry Sayer of
Magdalene College Oxon, who commonly made use of a cinereous Earth, somewhat
tending to yellow, and finely chamletted, that he found at the Quarries, in the
gullies of the Rocks in the Parish of Heddington: with which, as I am informed
by my worthy Friend Mr. Cross once his Apothecary, and still living, he did as
frequently, and as well procure Sweats, as with any of the Foreign earths
whatever.

29. To these may be added a whitish fat earth, formerly of some use in
external applications, which they fetched, whilst the waters continued in
request, from the orifice of the aforementioned spring at Goreing, and
phansied it at least, to be a very good remedy for the ach of Corns, and some
other such maladies: but as soon as the waters began to fail, the earth too
(though still there remain enough) began to decline in its reputation, and is
now of very little, if of any esteem.

30. There is another white earth of some use in this Country, which some will
have also, as well as Lac Lunae, to deserve the name of a mineral Agaric: it
grows for the most part within round hollow Flints, to be had almost every
where in the Chiltern Country, and good to stop fluxes boiled in milk; and I
was told by an eminent Physician, has been used in Consumptions with good
success. The stone in which it grows they call here a Chalk Egg, and is the
same with the Geodes of the ancient Naturalists, of which, because further in
the Chapter of stones, I forbear to add more concerning it here.

31. Hither also must be referred not only the earths that are found to be
sovereign for Man's preservation, but according to the Logical rule of
contraries, such as often have been his destruction too: Whereof there are some
in the Parish of North Leigh, that send forth such sudden and deadly steams,
that they kill before the Patient can give the least notice, of which they have
had two very deplorable examples.

32. The first whereof happened in August, about twenty years since, when two
men of the place employed to dig a well, first sickned, and wisely withdrew
from the work: whereupon it was undertaken by two others of Woodstock, men of
greater resolution and less wisdom; who before they could do any thing
considerably in it, sunk down and irrecoverably dyed in the well: which quickly
being perceived by a woman above, a Miller hard by was called to their
assistance, who as unhappily as willingly descending to them, also suddenly
fell down upon them, and dyed: To whom, after some deliberation taken, another
ventures down with a roap about his middle, but he fell from the Ladder in just
the same manner, and though presently drawn up by the people above, yet was
scarcely recovered in an hour or more.

33. And now again but lately, on the 20th of August 1674. upon a buckets
falling casually into a well, on the south side of the Town, about a furlong
from the former, a woman calls her neighbor, a lusty strong man, to go down by
a Ladder to fetch up her bucket, who altogether unmindful of the former
accident, soon granted (as it proved) her unhappy request; for by that time he
came half way down, he fell dead from the Ladder into the water: the woman
amazed, calls another of her Neighbors, a lusty young man of about eight and
twenty, who hastily descending to give his assistance, much about the same
place also fell from the Ladder, and dyed, without giving the least sign of his
change, so suddenly mortal are the damps of this earth.

34. Dr. Boat Cap. 18. sect. 4.
, in his Natural History of Ireland, gives account of an accident that happened
at Dublin, in a well there so very like ours, that they scarcely differ in any
circumstance. And we have a relation in our Philosophical Transactions Philos.
Transact. Number. 3.
, of such kind of damps that happened in Coal-mines belonging to the Lord
Sinclair in Scotland. Now though we must not conclude from hence, that here
must therefore needs be Coal; yet, conjoined with others I know hereabout, I
take it not to be so unlikely a sign, but that of all others I know of in the
County, I guess this may be the most probable place.

35. For though I think those poisonous and killing steams may indeed more
immediately have their rise from a Pyrites, or Coperas stone, found here in
great plenty wherever they dig; a piece whereof brought me by a friend from
thence, upon taste, proved a Vitriol so strong and virulent, that presently from
my mouth it so affected my stomach, that I confess for a while I was fearful of
danger: yet, it being the common consent of Naturalists, that such Pyrites are
nothing but the efflorescence of Minerals, latent underneath them in the bowels
of the earth, my conjecture thereby is not made the less valid.

36. With the Pyrites cinereus, or Coperas stone, not unlikely there may also
be some mixture of Arsenic, which advances its malignity to that deadly
strength, that no man may approach under pain of death: But that for the
future, the insensible invasions of this secret enemy may for ever be avoided;
let all workmen, and such as upon any account whatever have occasion to dig or
go down in these wells, first throw down into them a peck of good Lime, which
slaking in the water, and fuming out at the top, will so effectually dispel all
such poisonous vapors, that they may safely go down, and stay some time unhurt.

37. From these mischievous ones of Vitriol and Arsenic, I proceed to some
other more innocent salts, before promised more fully to be handled here, with
which some earths being peculiarly qualified, are accordingly disposed to
petrifie bodies. How all petrifications are performed by salts, and
petrifications per minima, by their subtilest steams, I suppose has already
sufficiently been shown, as also how waters most probably effect them: It
remains only therefore now to be proved, that earths as well as waters, do
afford such steams as permeate also the most solid texture.

38. To which purpose I met with a curious instance in the Fields between
Clifton and Nuneham-Courtney, of a stone that represents a sound piece of Ash,
cut both parallel and transversly to the pores, and retaining the grain and
color so well and lively, that no body at sight believes it to be other than a
firm and solid piece of wood; and yet this was taken out of grounds thereabout,
as far from water as one need to wish. In short, the version seems so very
perfect, its subject appearing to have been very sound and free from
rottenness, that either we must own such petrifications as this, to be truly
such, and totum per totum, or else allow that stones may grow in grain and
color exactly like wood.

39. But that the latter of these may not so far take place (though the
possibility of the thing must not be denied) as to exclude a possibility of its
being sometimes otherwise; I take leave to instance in another petrification
made also by an earth, and not by water, that seems to carry a necessity with
it, of its subjects once being solid wood: for beside, that it shows the close
grain of Oak, and therefore by Naturalists called Dryites: it was taken up in
great quantities too, and out of some of the pieces, (whereof I have one) it
may be plainly seen where twigs have come forth, the knots still remaining
where they were cut off; so that unless we fly to the sports of Nature, and
allow her to imitate almost all things in stone, we cannot well avoid a
consent, that this was sometime really Wood. It was casually dug up in the
Parish of Wendlebury, in a gravelly ground not far from the Church, and is, I
believe, the same Earth mentioned so good for this purpose in our Philosophical
Transactions Number. 6.
.

40. Thus having considered the principal Earths used in Husbandry, Painting,
Medicine, etc. I proceed in the next place to treat of some others, less in
value, and put to inferior uses: Amongst which we may reckon the very uppermost
Turf; which beside for Bowling-greens, and Grass-walks in Gardens, is here not
unfrequently used by Thatchers, and laid on Mud-walls, and the tops of Houses,
in the place and manner of those we call Ridge-tiles; not that it is so good as
Thatching (though some say it better resists the winds) but because in some
places Wood is so scarce, that they cannot get spraies to fasten on Thatch; or
else the people so poor that they care not to buy them.

41. Also at some other places for want of Wood, they make use of another sort
of Turf for fuel, not the upper Green-sword, but an inferior stringy
bituminous Earth, cut out like Bricks, for the most part from moorish boggy
grounds; in some Countries called Peat-pits, in others Mosses. The best of this
Turf that I have seen in Oxfordshire, I met with at Mr. Warcups in the Parish
of North-Moor, but dug as I was informed in Stanton-Harcourt, about a mile
distance S. West from the Church: it lies but one spits depth within the
ground, and is supposed to be at least four foot thick: They cut it in March,
and lay the pieces called Peats to dry on the grass, sometimes turning them;
which when reasonably well done, they then pile up like Wheelwrights felleys,
leaving every where empty spaces between, that the Air and Wind passing through
them, they at length may become dry enough for the fire. They think that the
stringy roots, that together with the Bitumen, make up the Peats, do never
flourish above the surface: if so, I am something confirmed in an opinion, that
there are many subterraneous Plants not noted, of which I intend a diligent
enquiry Vid. Nich. Stenonis Prodrom.
. After the Peats are taken out, they fill up the ground again with the grassy
earth that was first cut up. And at Cowley, where they also dig them, they
usually leave the depth of one spade-graft at the bottom, as a foundation
whereon they may grow again, which in the space of twenty or thirty years, it is
observed they will do in the North of England They dig pretty good Peats also
near the Wyke at Heddington; and in a boggy ground Eastward of Elsfield Church.
.

42. The scarcity also of fireing has induced some People to burn a sort of
black substance, of a grain somewhat like rotten wood half burnt, but
participating also of a Mineral nature, and therefore by Authors called
Metallophytum, or Lignum fossile Ol. Wormii, Musaeum lib. 2. cap. 6.
: put into water, it will not swim; and into fire, it consumes but slowly, and
sends forth very unpleasant fumes: it is found in a Quarry called
Langford-pits, in the Parish of Kidlington, not far from Thrup, about eighteen
foot deep under the Rock, where there lies a bed about four inches thick. But
at Ducklington I met with a much finer kind, and richer in bitumen; for though
on the out side it looks like wood, yet broken, it shows a smooth and shining
superficies, not unlike to stone-pitch, and put in the fire, has not near so
ill a smell. This was dug, and kindly bestowed upon me by the Worshipful
William Bailey Esquire who told me beside of an Aluminous earth that he somwhere
also f^und in his ground. As for the substance, Lignum fossile it is thought to
be originally a cretaceous earth, turned to what it is by subterraneous heats,
which probably at Kidlington may indeed be great, because reflected by the
Quarry above it, for that it was never formerly wood, notwithstanding its
specious and outward likeness, is plain, from its never being found with roots
or boughs, or any other signs of wood.

43. At Marsh Balden Heath, and Nuneham-Courtney, they have a sort of earth of
ductile parts, which put in the fire scarcely cracks, and has been formerly
used by Potters, but upon what account I know not, now neglected. There is also
a Clay near Little Milton that might very well serve for the Potters use. And
at Shotover-hill there is a white clay, the fourth fold of earth in the way to
the Ochre, which during the late wars, in the siege of Oxford, was wholly used
for making Tobacco-pipes there; and is still in part put to that service, mixed
with another they have from Northamptonshire. It is also of excellent use to
Statuaries, for making Moddels, Gargills, or Anticks; and containing a hard,
but very small grit; in polishing Silver, it comes near to Tripela.

44. And so does an anonymous very white earth, found in the seams of the
Quarries at Teynton, which at first I concluded a crude Alabaster, because I
found near it a piece that was perfect: but reducing it into a very fine
powder, and putting it over a quick fire, it would not boil like Alabaster
dust, nor keep the color, but turned reddish. Many other trials were made with
it, in Plasticks, Polishing, Painting, etc. but my endeavors succeeded in
nothing so well, as in polishing smaller silver Vessels, that could not endure
burnishing well; to which it gave a more glorious brightness than Tripela
would, though perhaps not so lasting; and not far behind that of burnished
Plate.

45. And yet neither this, nor the former will polish brass, nor any thing else
that is not of its color, which has lately engaged my thoughts in a Query,
whether in all other Metals the rule does hold: for I find, that sulphur gives
a luster to Gold; and that nothing does brighten Copper so well, as a sort of
stuff they call rotten stone, also something of its color.

46. At Teynton also, within a spit of the surface, they dig a sort of earth
they there call Lam, of a whitish color inclining to yellow; which mixed with
sand, and some other earth, makes the best earthen floors for ground-rooms and
barns: it dissolves as quick as Fullers-earth, and were it not for a fault
which might possibly be helped, it may serve their turns perhaps as well as any
they use.

47. To these may be added another whitish earth, which corruptly I suppose
from its color is called Which-earth; mixed with straw, they use it for
side-walls and ceilings, and with horse-dung it makes mortar for laying of
stones: it seems to be a natural mixture of lime and sand, found at Them,
Waterperry, and Adwell, and slakes in water (like Gypsum) without any heat.

48. At Milton near Adderbury, Great Tew, and Stunsfield, I met also with
another sort of spungy chalk, which though it will not slake like the former;
yet at Milton and Adderbury used for pointing, seems to bind the stones of
their walls very well: and theirs at Great Tew being somewhat finer, serves as
well to white their rooms within (as I saw at Swerford) as to point walls
without: but at Stunsfield there was no body knew of its use.

49. Other earths there are that I find in this County, for whose names, as
well as natures, I am quite at a loss; whereof there is one in Sir Thomas
Pennystons Park, which for the strangeness of its qualities deserves the first
place. Of color it is extremely white, of little taste, and less smell; lying
in veins in a yellowish clay, like a medulla about the bigness of ones wrist:
taken out with a knife, it falls into a fine powder, somewhat gritty, but of so
very great a weight, that its double at least to any other earth of its bulk;
put in the scale against white Marble dust, it equaled its weight, and
exceeded that of Alabaster by almost a fourth part: set in sand in a glass
retort, and driven with a quick and strong fire, it sublimed to the sides of
the glass a little, but still preserved its color and weight, till put between
two Crucibles, one inverted upon the other; well luted, and strongly forced in
a wind-furnace for about two hours, it lost above the moiety of its weight: for
as I well remember, of three ounces put in, there came not out full one and a
half, and yet nothing sublimed in the top of the Crucible: the color still
remained as white as ever, and the bulk (as near as I could guess) the same,
but now of a strong salt and urinous taste; which after solution, filtration,
and evaporation, came at last, to what people as little understood, as what
became of its ponderous ingredient.

50. We tried it also at Cornwell, in Sir Thomas Pennyston's Laboratory,
because of its weight with diverse fluxing salts, in hopes of some kind of
metalline substance, but all, as before, to little purpose. So that I cannot
tell what to divine it should be, except the Gur of the Adeptists congealed,
which they describe in their Books to be much such a thing, which for want of
more time to spend in its service, I leave to the discovery of future ages.

51. In the Chalk-pits almost every where in the South-east parts of
Oxfordshire, they find a sort of iron-colour'd terra lapidosa, in the very
body of the chalk, which I think they call Iron-moulds, and particularly at a
place between Brightwell and Berrick, of an oval figure: how they came to be of
that shape, or at all grow, in a substance of so different a nature as chalk, I
confess to be a problem beyond my knowledge, as well as the use they may
probably have, which I also remit to posterity to find.

52. They have an earth about Teynton of a yellowish color, adorned all over
with glittering sparks, which unless they are particles of the specular stone,
or English Talc, with the former must be reckoned amongst the unknown earths.

53. To which add another kind of terra lapidosa found about Them, at the
bottom of their Quarries, it is much of the color of the Turkish Rusma, hollow
and spungy, and full of shining grains like a sort of Pyrites, but of what
nature or use I can no where find. Nor of another sort of Clay found at
Hampton-Gay, holding a grit of a golden color, much of the nature of Pyrites
aureus, only it is not found like that in great pieces, which by our modern
Naturalists are called Brass lumps.

54. And thus I had concluded the Chapter of Earths, but that I think it
belongs to this place to mention also such accidents as attend them; and
therefore must not be altogether silent of an eminent Prospect about a mile
from Teynton, where from a Hill North-east from thence, ten Market towns in a
clear day may plainly be seen. Nor of a small Earthquake, that on the
nineteenth of February, 1665. was observed at diverse places near Oxford; as at
Blechington, Stanton St. John's, etc. But it shall suffice just to mention it,
Relations (with the concomitants) of it, being already published: Philos.
Transact. Number. 10, 11.
one by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire and the other by the Learned Dr. John
Wallis.

CHAP. IV. Of Stones.
AS in the Chapters of Waters and Earths, I treated only of such as eminently
held some salt or sulphur, and were some way or other useful to Man: I intend
in like manner in this of Stones strictly to observe the same method, and take
notice only of such as either plainly show those Minerals, and supply the
necessities; or are for the ornament, or delight of Mankind.

2. How all stones are chiefly made out of salts, with a mixture of earth and
sometimes of sulphur, was formerly hinted in another place. It remains only that
I consider them in a more particular manner, and show which they be, and where
they are, that hold any of these principles more signally than other, which I
suppose by their effects may best be discovered.

3. In the Road from Oxford toward London, not far beyond Tetsworth, in a
hollow way on the rising of a hill, I found a soft stone there-about called
Maume, of a whitish color; whose salt is so free from the bonds of sulphur,
that with the frosts and rain it slakes like lime: perhaps half the firing used
to burn away the sulphur in other limestone, might serve the turn here. An
Experiment so very likely to be beneficial to the Country, that I left it with
the Son of the ingenious Improver, Sir Thomas Tipping, as a thing not unworthy
of his Fathers trial; but whether he have at all, or but unsuccessfully made
any, I have not yet had the favor to hear.

4. In the way to Whitfield, as I rod thither from Tetsworth, I found the ways
mended with this kind of stone, I suppose because they could get no other, for
certainly otherwise there were nothing more unfit, than a stone of so loose and
open a salt: much rather with such should they mend their Lands than Highways,
that like lime, marles, and chalk, will slake in the Winter; which I take for
so sure a mark of its improving quality, that I cannot but commend it to the
trial of the Country.

5. And for their encouragement, let me farther tell them, that at a place
called Hornton in the North of this County, they commonly use the chippings of
the stone dug there in the Quarry, for improvement of the Land, and that not
without apparent success: and yet the stone is of a much harder kind, than this
at Tetsworth and in the way to Whitfield.

6. Amongst some MSS. notes of Natural things, I met with one of a stone at
Oriel College, commonly called (says the Author) The sweating stone, at which
the Birds were constantly pecking and licking; as I guess (if ever there were
any such thing) for some kind of saltness they found come from it: I say, if
ever there were any such thing, for I find it not in this new, nor remains
there any tradition of it in the old College. I therefore pass it by without
further notice.

7. However, in short, all stones have so much salt in them, that in some
measure they are an improvement of Land, for though it be so close locked up
with sulphur, that the greatest frosts and rain will not make the stones run,
yet there is still such an emission of saline steams, that some earths have
their whole fertility from them. Thus have I seen Fields covered with Flints
and Pebbles, produce better Corn than where there were none, which perhaps may
be a better reason than what is brought by Pliny Lib 17. cap. 4.
, why the Foreign Coloni that came to Syracuse to inhabit there, and practice
Husbandry; after they had cleared the ground of all the stones, could have no
Corn, till they had laid them again on the very same ground from whence they
had taken them but just before.

8, The like may be observed in walls and buildings, where several sorts of
vegetables, yea trees of great bigness, will thrive and prosper remote from the
earth, without any further nourishment, than that they have from the fertile
stones, and lime they are laid with, also made out of stones.

9. If it be objected that Pebbles and Flints also hold a sulphur, as well as a
salt, and that in all probability Corn and other Vegetables may receive their
flourishing verdure, rather from the warm comfortable steams of that, then the
others of salt, I shall not so much as contend about it, but gladly accept of
the opportunity by this means to pass from stones holding salt only, to such as
have also a mixture of sulphur.

10. And such are all that with steel, or any other fit body, will strike fire,
and therefore by a very fit name called Pyrites, under which genus may be
reckoned not only Pyrites strictly taken, but Flints, Pebbles, Sand, and
whatever else by any quick and sudden attrition may have its parts kindled into
sparks: of which as many as I find eminent in their kind, or are fit for uses,
as briefly as may be.

11. And amongst them (as I think most due) for the prerogative of its color,
I assign the first place to the Pyrites aureus, or golden fire-stone, whereof
they find great plenty in digging of Wells about Banbury and Cleydon, and
somwhere in the River at Clifton near Dorchester: Some of them are taken up in
great lumps (and are therefore also called Brass lumps) of uncertain form,
whereof I had very rich ones out of the Well of one Boreman of Cleydon. But
those from Clifton aforesaid seem to be laminated, and some of them shot into
angles like Bristol Diamants, and are mentioned by Aldrovandus Lib. 4. cap. 3.
, which he calls, Pyrites cum fluoribus adnascentibus, and cujus parts
cohaerent tanquam lapilli angulosi. These strike fire in great plenty, and for
that reason formerly have been much used for Carabines and Pistols, whilst
Wheel-locks were in fashion; and are also very weighty, and perhaps hold metal,
which, were it not for the too great proportion of sulphur (whence such
Minerals, says the Learned Willis De Ferment. cap. 9.
, have chiefly their concretion) that carries it away while it melts in the
Crucible, by over volatilizing it, which the Mine-men therefore term the
Robber, might otherwise be procured with advantage to the owner.

12. At Aston Rowant, Nettlebed, and Henly, and indeed all along the Chiltern
Country, they have another sort of Marchasite, within side of a golden, and
without of a darkish rusty color, and therefore at some of the aforementioned
places called commonly Crow-iron: this sort, if broken and laid in the air, or
any other moist place, dissolves into a salt that tastes like ink, and is no
question the Pyrites of Kentmannus Tit. 2. cap. de Succis efflore scentibus.
, which for that reason he terms atramenti parens. And such a one is the
Pyrites found at North-Leigh, brought me thence by my worthy Friend Dr. Perrot,
which not only like the former gave the taste of ink, but exposed to the air
awhile, became covered with a white downy salt of the very same taste, which I
take to be such a natural atramentum album, as is said by the same Kentmannus,
Efflorescere e pyrite Goslariano, and Radebergensi Tit. 2. cap. Sorry, and de
succis efflorescent.
.

13. Next to these, in order of nature as well as dignity, comes the silver
Marchasite, under consideration of a white glistering color, and to be had in
the bottom of the River between Clifton and Burcot: this strikes fire as well
as the golden Pyrites, but notwithstanding it was exposed in the fittest
places, yet would never, that I could perceive, send forth any efflorescence.
Another sort of them I met with at Deddington, taken out of the aforementioned
sulphur Well there, of as glorious a color as the former; but several times
tried on the best Steel I could get, would never yield the least spark of fire:
whence I rather concluded it to be argentum felium, or Cat-silver, but that it
would not shine in the dark, or consume in the fire: However, it may pass for a
sterile nitidum, so often mentioned by Naturalists, it being a glorious
nothing, of no kind of use.

14. That Flints, Pebbles, and Sands, are also Pyrites, needs no further
evidence than that they strike fire, a thing so obvious to the meanest
Observer, that to spend time to prove it, would be lost time to the Reader; it
shall suffice therefore to enumerate the several kinds of each, and chiefly to
insist upon such as have uses.

15. All along the Chiltern Country of Oxfordshire, Flints are as plentiful as
any where else; amongst them the black one, well polished, will supply the
place of the Lydian stone; and at Henly they use them in making of Glass, of
which more anon in the Chapter of Arts. They are found beside of diverse other
colors, and some of them so transparent, that they seem not only to imitate,
but to be the very same with Achats. I have one, found at Dorchester, about an
inch and half square, of a flesh color, and so transparent, that it may well
enough deserve the name of Sardachates. Such as this were also shown me, by the
truly Ingenious, the Right Honorable James Lord Norreys of Ricot, and found, as
I think his Lordship told me, some where thereabout, and are I do not question
the very same stones, that Kentmannus Kentman. tit. 8.
indeed places in his Title of Flints, yet calls them, Pellucentes Sardae
color.

16. Of Pebbles there are some also transparent, to be had about Finstock and
Nuneham-Courtney; I found them also in the way between New-yate and Ensham, but
none comparable to what was shown me by that great Virtuoso, the Right
Worshipful Sir Anthony Cope of Hanwell, the most eminent Artist and Naturalist
while he lived, if not of England, most certainly of this County, whose House
me thought seemed to be the real New Atlantis, which my Lord Viscount Verulam
had only in fancy. The Pebble I remember was about the breadth of ones hand,
of a flat form, and yet not much less than an inch in thickness, so clear and
pellucid, that no Crystal that ever I saw yet excelled it; so that had not its
Master, the cautious Artist, took care to leave on it part of its outward coat,
few would have believed it had ever been a Pebble.

17. These Pebbles when transparent, make an excellent ingredient for the
Glass-works; and so do those which are white, though not transparent, called by
some Authors by the name of Quocoli, and perhaps not much different in nature
from the Cuogolo of Ferrante Imperato Dell' Hist. Not. lib. 24. cap. 16:
, and such are the Pebbles gathered at Tesino Anton. Neri, lib. 1. cap. 2.
, with which they make the purest Glass at the Moran.

18. There are about Goreing and Nuneham-Courtney, a sort of Pebbles of a
blue-black color, that if polished, might supply the place of Touch. And about
Fawler and Stunsfield are a reddish kind, very hard, and for the most part of
an oval Figure, so excellent for pitching of streets and stables, and for
Painters mullars, that none can be found more fit and durable.

19. After consideration of Flints and Pebbles apart, let us now take a view of
them jointly together, for so I found them at Caversham, and Greenvil, and in
the way from Pushill to Stonor-house, in clusters together of diverse colors,
and united into one body, by a petrified cement as hard as themselves, and most
of them I believe capable of politure There is a Quarry of this South of
Wolvercot Church, but the Cement so soft, that it will not polish.
. But the best of all are in the Close at Stonor, of which there are some so
large and close knit, that could the Ingenious Proprietor, Thomas Stonor Esquire
find a way to slit and polish them without too much charge, he might make him
rich Chimney-pieces and Tables of them, so far excelling Porphyrie and Marble,
that perhaps they might compare with the best Jasper or Achat. For I have seen
such as these found about Hampsted, curiously wrought into handles of knives by
that eminent Artist Sir Anthony Cope; to which few Achats might be compared,
perchance none preferred, either in the polish or variety of colors.

20. The Ingenious Mr. Ray, amongst other Observations made in his Journey
through Italy, etc. tells us, That in the Church of the Benedictines at
Ravenna, the Monks did show him two Marble pillars, for which they said, the
Venetians offered them no less than their utmost weight in Silver. But the like
he says, he had seen elsewhere, at the Library at Zurich, and at Verona in our
Ladies Chapel, in the Garden of Seignior Horatio Guisti: their generation at
first, says he, was out of a mass of small Flints and Pebbles, united by a
cement as hard as themselves, and capable of politure; which cement, he
guesses, was separated by degrees from a fluid wherein the stones formerly lay:
which I take to be a description so agreeable to ours, that nothing more need
be said to promote their trial.

21. Hither also must be reduced a courser sort of Smiris, dug up in the pits
at Whately Towns end, of a cinereous color, hard and rough, and striking fire
as well as a Flint. The best sort of Smiris serves for several uses; but ours
is fit only to cut the harder sort of stones, that the sand commonly used will
not so well do, and perhaps for some other inferior uses.

22. And to these must be added the several sorts of Sands, which upon violent
motions all strike fire, and are commonly, and sometimes promiscuously used, for
Building, Hour-glasses, and cutting of Stone. But some there are of a more
peculiar and considerable use, and such is that dug in the Parish of Kingham,
which after it is washed and duly ordered, so perfectly resembles Calis-sand,
that it serves and is sold for the very same: it is not found in every place,
but they have signs (like Miners) to know where it lies; viz. a sort of stuff
that looks almost like rotten wood, which if they meet with under the Turf,
they seldom fail of the Sand a little deeper; which they first cleanse from
rubbish, and the greater stones, by putting it through a course sieve, then
they wash it in a trough and lay it a drying; which when sufficiently done,
they separate again by a finer sieve, the courser part of it from the finer:
the courser serves for wheting of sithes, but the finer sort for scouring
pewter, for which purpose it seems it is so very excellent, that the Retailers
sell it for a penny a pound, which amounts to above twenty shillings a bushel.

23. Other sands there are also of very good use, to give a consistency and
body to glass; the naturally whitest are at Nettlebed and Shot-over, but the
finest by much at Finstock and Ledwell, which when washed and cleansed, at
least equal the former. The first of these has been tried with success at the
Glass-house at Henly: and any of the rest, perhaps, might prove as good Tarso
as any they have from France, or is used in Italy, were they but in place where
they might be tried.

24. From Sands, I proceed to Lapis arenarius, commonly called Freestone, and
used in Building; of which we have as great plenty and variety in Oxfordshire,
peradventure as in any other part of England. The Quarry at Heddington, scarce
two miles from Oxford, supplies us continually with a good sort of stone, and
fit for all uses but that of fire; in which, that of Teynton and Hornton excel
it. In the Quarry it cuts very soft and easy, and is worked accordingly for
all sorts of Building; very porous, and fit to imbibe lime and sand, but
hardening continually as it lies to the weather.

25. Of it in general, there are two sorts; one that they call Freestone, and
the other Rag-stone: but these again are subdivided into several species,
according as they are cut or put to diverse uses. The Freestone, if cut
cubically into very great blocks, is then by way of eminence called nothing but
Freestone; but if cut into oblong, or other sorts of squares, of a lesser
bulk, they then call it Ashler; and the fragments of these of inequilateral,
multangular Figures, Scabble-burs. The two first are used in principal
Buildings, and the last, if squared, is sometimes mixed with Ashler in
Range-work, or by it self in that they call Planten-work in the meaner
Buildings: but when not squared at all, is commonly thrown in amongst Rag-stone
for walling; for which only, and making lime, that second sort is good, except
it rises flat in the bed, and then it is worth the while to hew it for paving.

26. Of the stone aforementioned consists the gross of our Buildings; but for
Columns, Capitels, Bases, Window-lights, Door-cases, Cornishing, Mouldings,
etc. in the chiefest work they use Burford-stone, which is whiter and harder,
and carries by much a finer Arris, than that at Heddington: but yet is not so
hard as that at Teynton, nor will it like that endure the fire, of which they
make Mault-kills, and hearths for Ovens; but then they take care to surbed the
stone, i. e. set it edg-ways, contrary to the posture it had in the bed, for
otherwise there will be some danger of its flying.

27. Beside the fire, it endures the weather, for of this mixed with another
sort dug near Whately, on the Worcester road side, as it passes betwixt Holton
and Sir Timothy Tyrrills, are all the oldest Colleges in Oxford built; as
Baliol, Merton, Exeter, Queens, Canterbury (now part of Chapter Ch.) College,
Durham (now Trinity) College, New College, Lincoln, All Souls, Magdalen,
Brasen-nose, and the outermost Quadrangle of St. John Bapt. Coll. yet it
endures not the weather so well as Heddington, by reason, I suppose, of a salt
it has in it, which the weather in time plainly dissolves, as may be seen by
the Pinnacles of New College Chapel, made of this stone, and thus melted away.

28. And yet the moisture of water has no such power over it, but that they
make of it Troughs and Cisterns, and now of late Mesh-fats for Brewing; first
hinted, it is true, by Mr. Bailey of Ducklington, but practiced by one Mr. Veysey
of Teynton, who had the first made him by one Strong a Mason, which it seems
did answer expectation so well, that it has since obtained in many other
places. Of these, that generous and courteous Gentleman, Sir Compton Read of
Shipton under Whichwood, has one that holds about sixty five bushels, drawn
home with no less than one and twenty horses; they ordinarily mesh in it three
quarters of Malt, but can, when at any time necessity requires, mesh five at a
time: the dimensions of which Vessel of one single stone, taken within the
hollow and abating its thickness, because of its vast unusual magnitude, I
thought fit to note, and give as follows; long, 2 yards. broad, 1 yard. and
an inch. deep, 1 yard.
yet much larger than this might be had from the Quarry, were there use for
them, or could portage be contrived; for as I was informed by many credible
witnesses, there was one single stone dug in this Quarry, containing no less
than three hundred tuns. And another in the year 1673. measured by Mr. Veysey,
of an hundred and three tuns, accounting sixteen foot cubic to the tun.

29. Other Quarries there are also of considerable use, as Bladen, Little
Milton, Barford, and Hornton, whereof the last has the best Fire-stone of any
in the County; some of it seems to have Iron-colour'd veins, that receive (as I
have seen) a tolerable polish, and is the stone I mentioned before, whose
chippings (laid on it) improve their land, by reason I suppose of the salt
there is in it, which may also be the cause it endures fire so well.

30. At Cornbury Park there was a sort of stone, the Quarry whereof is now
quite exhausted, that never would sweat in the moistest weather, of which the
pavement of the Hall in the house there, still remains as a sufficient
testimony: of this, did it rise in great blocks, might possibly have been made
very good Millstones, the not sweating being a principal qualification in all
stones whatever used for Corn-mills.

31. But before we take leave of materials for Building, we must not forget
that the Houses are covered, for the most part in Oxfordshire (not with tiles)
but slat-stone, whereof the lightest, and that which imbibes the water least,
is accounted the best. And such is that which they have at Stunsfield, where it
is dug first in thick cakes, about Michaelmass time, or before, to lie all the
winter and receive the frosts, which make it cleave in the spring following
into thinner plates, which otherwise it would not do so kindly. But at Bradwell
(near the Grove) they dig a sort of slat-stone, naturally such, without the
help of winter, and so strangely great, that sometimes they have them of seven
foot long, and five foot over: with these they commonly make mounds for their
Closes, and I have seen a small hovel, that for its whole covering has required
no more than one of these stones: and some of them are of so hard and close a
texture, that I have known them by Painters of very good skill, preferred
before Marble for grinding their colors.

32. To stone used in Building they sometimes add Lime, which because for the
most part, is here made of stone, must also be handled in this place; for which
they count the hardest rag-stone best, but any will make it, says the Learned
Willis De Ferment. cap. 10.
, except such as is made up of a reddish kind of gravel: the best sign of it
here, as well as in Ireland, has been sufficiently hinted in the former
Chapter, to be that white and spungy kind of matter, that sticks to the stones
in the caverns of the Rocks, and so plentifully found at Cornwell and Whately;
at Hanborough, Fawler, and in Cornbury Park. Not but that very good Lime may be
had from stone that shows not the least of this sign, as at Bladen Quarry, and
many other places, but that none makes better then the stone that has it;
except hereafter it may be found true here, what Lachmund Lach. (...), Sect. 3.
cap. 1.
asserts of the Bishopric of Hildesheim, where the best (he says) is made of
the hardest stone, quod varia in se Conchylia continet, set full of petrified
shellfish: for if so, our best Limestone must be at Charleton and Langley; at
Little Milton, and Shot-over Forest, in the Quarry there on the north side of
the Hill, not far from the way to Sir Timothy Tyrrills; at all which places,
the stone is stuck full of Cockles, Escallops, and Oysters, of which more anon
in the following Chapter.

33. Beside the stone that is used for the substance, there is other that
serves for the ornament of Building, a sort of gray Marble dug in the Parish of
Blechington, in the Lordship of the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey,
Lord Privy Seal: Of this there are several Chimny-pieces and Pavements, in his
Lordships House there, well worth the notice; as also at the Right Honorable
the Earl of Clarendon's at Cornbury. And of this are the Pillars of the
Portico's at St. John's College in Oxford. They make beside of it Tomb-stones
and Tables, and of late also Millstones, good enough for the Oyl-mills; but
not for the Corn-mills, because of its supposed sweating, to which this is
subject in rainy weather, like all other Marbles.

34. Some other stones there are of inferior use, which yet must by no means be
past by in silence; whereof I know one so like the Tripoli-stone, in color,
consistence, and for all its uses, that I cannot but think it of the very same
kind: to silver it gave that very lasting brightness, that another piece of
Plate that was tried against it, received from the Goldsmiths Tripoli-stone,
and proved it self in all respects so much the very same; that would any thing
please us not far fetched, perhaps there might be no further need of sending
any more to Africa for it.

35. Nor must I forget the Iron-stone at Shot-over, though occasionally
mentioned, and its uses delared, in the immediately preceding Chapter of Earths:
so called, not from any such metal that it holds, but merely I suppose from the
color it is off. This I tried with the Lodestone and Aqua fortis, thinking
thereby, if it held any Iron, it must needs have confessed it to one of those
two. But I since have found the Experiments but ill applied, for neither will
Cavala (which is the best Iron-ore) answer either of them: So that I do not now
condemn it to be no Iron-ore, upon those grounds as at first, but from other
considerable differences it has from the known Iron-ores of Gloucestershire and
Sussex.

36. There is also near Them on Cuttlebrook-side, another Iron-colour'd stone,
but more spungy than the former, and including within it a blackish kind of
Cinder; the most like, of any thing I yet have seen, to Magnesia (in the
Glass-houses, called Manganese) only it wants of its closeness of texture and
weight: what it should be, or for what use likely, to me I confess is wholly
unknown, unless I may call it the Siderites of Pliny Hist. Not. lib. 37. c. 10.
. I therefore desist to say more about it, but commend it to the discovery of
future ages.

37. At Fyfield-merrymouth, in the Field above the Cave lately made by Mr.
Bray, in the bank near the Brook, I found a stone of a light yellow color,
made up of glittering Lamellae, or Plates, which according to the description
of Georgius Agricola Fossilium, lib. 5.
, seems not unlike the Samian-stone, found also about Hasda in the Bishopric
of Hildesheime, and good only for polishing silver and gold. Such laminated
Stones by Nicolas Steno In Prodromo.
are thought to be nothing but incrustations, made in the confines of a fluid
and solid, an opinion that seems to come near to the truth. However it be, it
is something formed, and may well serve to usher in the next Chapter, which I
have wholly reserved for formed stones.

CHAP. V. Of Formed Stones.
AFter Stones made to serve the necessities of Man, and not brought into form
but by the tool of the Artist, come we next to consider those that are
naturally formed, and seem rather to be made for his admiration than use.
Whereof the World is beautified with so great variety, that as on the one hand
I cannot but wonder at the great Providence of God, and his most perfect
Workmanship, that has thus created the Universe for Man's delight as well as
use: so on the other, I cannot but reprehend the petulant despisers of this
innocent sort of Learning, who in derision have called it, picking of stones;
as if what the Omnipotent and most wise God has thought fit to create, were
not worth the consideration of weak Man. But let such malicious Scoffers know,
that it is their pride and ignorance that has engaged them in this Censure: for
as God has created them, so some things must be written off merely for
information, as well as others that tend to our advantage. Beside, who knows
but these things may have a use, that hereafter may be discovered, though not
known at present. Since then their Exceptions are so ill grounded, that they
vanish in a manner as soon as named, it is but just that I pay them in their own
coin, and slight their judgment more than they dare do my subject.

2. In the handling whereof, though in a particular Chapter, I shall observe
the method of the whole Essay: And first treat of such formed stones as either
in name, or thing, or both, relate to the Heavenly Bodies or Air; and next,
such as belong to the Watery Kingdom: After them, such as resemble Plants and
Animals, whether in the whole, or parts. And lastly such stones, wherein
contrary to all rule, Dame Nature seems to imitate Art; for so far from
idleness (says a very good Author Encelius, de re Metallica, cap. 7.
) is Nature in the bowels and dark caverns of the earth, that she continually
plays the Geometrician there, and presents us with Bodies, almost of all kinds,
in stone.

3. Amongst the stones that have relation to the Heavenly Bodies, the first
place I think may be reasonably given to such as respect the greater Lights;
upon which account, since the Heliotrope is not found here, much less the Gemma
Solis, mentioned by Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 37. cap. 10.
: The Selenites or Moon-stone must have the precedence, which we find in great
plenty in a bluish clay that lies above the Rock at Heddington Quarry, and in
digging Wells, etc. at Hampton-Gay and Hanborough.

4. Where by the way let it be noted, that I intend not by the Moon-stone, the
gray Tephrites of Pliny Not. Hist. loco citato.
, that grows like a Crescent, by the Greeks called Menois; nor that other
strange stone mentioned by Pliny and the Poet Marbodeus Musaeum Calceolarium,
sect. 3.
, corporeally containing the Figure of the Moon increasing and decreasing, like
that in the heavens: but a stone so called, not from its figure, but (as it is
honestly confessed by Gesner De figuris lapidum, cap. 2.
and Agricola De Natura Fossilium, lib. 5.
) that only represents the Image of the Moon, in all its phases, but best at
full, just as it were in a glass, and therefore by Authors is sometimes called
also Lapis specularis.

5. And thus much will our Selenites do, if obverted to the rays of the Moon
in right angles; which if all that is really intended by the name, (for the
very same reason) I know not why it may not as well be called the Sun-stone
too, since it equally represents the one as well as the other.

6. But though it has nothing of the Moon in figure, yet it is commonly found
of a certain shape, in circuit hexangular, but with two of the sides broader
and more depressed, in the form of a Rhomboides, as in Tab. 2. Fig. 1. a. and
therefore the learned Steno In Prodromo, page 74.
(which I think its best name) not unfitly styled it Selenites Rhomboides.
Besides the two larger Rhomboideal sides, it has eight others of an oblong
square, in all making up a decahedrum parallelipipedum; whereof the squares of
the two shorter sides of the great Rhomboides, one is sometimes a right angled
inequilateral parallelogram, as in Tab. 2. Fig. 1. and the other a Rhomboid;
and sometimes again they are both Rhomboids, but those on the longest sides of
the great Rhomboids, as far as I have observed, are always Trapeziums.

7. As to its texture, the grain runs several ways, but slits the easiest of
any of them, in a planum to the more depressed Rhomboideal sides; which way it
may be cut into very thin plates by Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallicum, lib. 4.
cap. 33.
, called Scaias, for which reason it is called also Alumen Scaiolae; not that it
has the taste of Alum, or any thing like it. It breaks also another way into
small threads, of which it seems chiefly to be composed, much after the manner
of Amiantus or Talc, but its parts not so pliant as either of them: these
threads lie for the most part, close and parallel to the longer sides of the
great Rhomboids, as they are described in Tab. 2. though I have seen them
sometimes also parallel to the shorter; but they seem not to be continued the
whole breadth of the Rhomboid, but divided by other parallel lines of a greater
distance, that sometimes are subtended to the acute angles of the Rhomboid, but
most commonly run in a more oblique posture, as may likewise be seen in Fig. 1.
a. In these lines its parts are also easily separated, but breaking short off,
and nothing so flexible as they are when broken as the threads run. According to
some peculiar positions of these parts, there are some of them that really
represent the Rainbow, whereof I have some with the colors as vivid, as I
ever saw any in a glass Prism. Of these Aldrovandus had one out of Cyprus, of
which he has given us a Cut in his Musaeum Lib. 4. cap. 33.
; but it being in Man's power to make these Rain-bows as he pleases, I think
even those we find thus, to belong of the two rather to casualty than nature,
and therefore pass them by.

8. There is, it is true, a sort of them of a different figure, not so easily to
be met with, with only two depressed sides, and scarce any angles, but what are
so obtuse that they deserve not the name, in the whole almost of an Oval form,
as represented Tab. 2. Fig. 1. b. This sort of Selenites, besides the shape, is
also so different from the former in texture, that it slits not like that into
plates or scales, parallel to the most depressed sides, but quite contrary
parallel to the thickness only; which I take to be a character abundantly
sufficient, to make it of a different species from the other, though in the
rest of their texture they be much the same.

9. About the origin of this matter, Authors differ much; amongst whom Galen
Lib de Simp. Med. ad Pattern.
makes it the dew of Heaven, congeled, as he says, by the light of the Moon,
and therefore calls it by the name of Aphroselinum, but restrains the
performance of the feat to Egypt. Encelius De Lapidibus and Gemmis, lib. 3.
cap. 56.
thinks it a sort of moisture of the earth, so concreted, that like Crystal it
will not dissolve, but remains as it were an indissoluble Ice, whence the
Germans took occasion to call it Glacies Mariae. But that learned and
industrious investigator of Nature, Georgius Agricola, differs from them all,
and makes it a product of Limestone and water, Gignitur (says he) ex saxo
calcis cum pauca aqua permisto De Natura Fossilium, lib. 5.
; and thus I find it to grow here with us at Heddington, in a blue clay that
lies over the Quarry, whose outermost crust is a hard Limestone.

10. The learned and ingenious Steno Prodromi prop. 1. obser. vat. 1.
in his Prodromus, thinks Chrystalls and Selenites's, and all other Bodies
having a smooth surface to have been already hardened, when the matter of the
Earth, or stones containing them, was yet a fluid; if so, indeed Agricola must
be out in his aim. But I cannot see how our bed of clay at Heddington, above
the Quarry at some places ten foot thick, could have been a fluid within some
ages past; and yet of the Selenites's of the Rhomboideal Figure, I find some as
small as a Barley-corn, some about three inches, and others again at least half
a foot long: so that they seem rather to have some succession of growth, and
now to be in fieri; than to have been all together already hardened, when the
clay that now contains them was but a fluid. Beside, they then would have been
found close together, whereas we here meet them some higher some lower, and
mixed all together little and great; and the very clay it self, as it is broken
to pieces, seeming somewhat inclinable to this sort of form.

11. A third sort we have of them also found here at Heddington, in the very
same clay, as also at Cornwell and Hanwell; with two sides like the former,
more depressed then the other, in compass also hexangular (the thinest sides of
them being divided by a ridge) but in the form, not of a Rhomboid, but an
inequilateral parallelogram, as in Tab. 2. Fig. 1. d There are such as these in
Spain, Thuringia, and Cappadocia. Aldrovand. lib. 4. cap. 33.
. Some of these we find single, lying in any posture, the biggest scarce an
inch broad, or above four inches long; and others joined together in a certain
position, with their flattest sides toward each other, and edges downward, and
their ends constantly meeting in a center. The Ingenious Sir Thomas Pennyston
has observed, that at Cornwell they generally lie in ternaries, but here at
Heddington we find them oftentimes more, and not unfrequently irradiating all
manner of ways into the form of a Globe, the several Selenites, like so many
radii, all pointing to the center, as is plainly represented by one half of
such a globe of them, in Tab. 2. Fig. 1. c.

12. The texture of these is something agreeable, and something different from
the Rhomboideal Selenites, for they all cleave in a planum to the flattest
sides, and seem to consist of small threads like them; but some have the threads
running obliquely to the whole square, as in the lower part of Fig. 1. d.
others have them meeting in the middle of the flat in an obtuse angle, as in
the upper part of the same Figure.

13. The meeting of which threads so in an obtuse angle, I thought at first
might have very well occasioned that representation of the gramen segetum
panicula sparsa, fair panicled corn or bent-grass, to be seen in most, if not
all of this kind (which like a fly or spider in amber) seem to be included at
each end of them, with the panicles turned contrary to each other: But I
quickly found my self mistaken, by slitting of several, whereby I discovered,
that the threads sometimes ran quite contrary to the spreading panicles of the
corn or bent-grass (so very well counterfeited in many of them) and therefore
not likely to give that form: And that the thing it self was nothing but clay,
thus pretily dispersed in the form of a bent; which beside the pleasure of the
surprizal, gave me another argument against Steno's opinion, That Selenites 's
were all hardened, when their beds they now lie in were nothing but fluids: for
it cannot well be conceived how the clay should any way get to be within them,
had it not had a being before the selenites, and thus included at the time of
their formation.

14. Of formed stones, though there are few that have any, yet some there are
of eminent use, and such is our selenites or specular stone; good taken
inwardly for many distempers, numbered up by Cerutus In Musaeo Calceolario,
sect. 3.
, Aldrovandus Lib. 4. cap. 33. Mus. Metal.
and Galen De Simp. Med. facult. lib. 9.
; and externally to take away the blemishes of the face. In ancient times,
before the invention of glass, it was of very great use for Lanterns and
Windows, it being easily slit into very thin plates, yet loosing nothing
thereby of its diaphaneity. Of this says Agricola De Natura Fossilium. lib. 5.
, are the Church-windows made at Caswick in Saxony, and Merseburg in Thuringia,
which certainly must be of a different sort, from what is described by
Aldrovandus Mus. Metal. lib. 4. c. 33.
and Wormius In Musaeo, cap. 7.
: the one whereof says it is imbrium impatiens; and the other, humido
corruptibilis. I exposed this of ours many rainy days, but could not find that
from the weather it received any damage, and therefore guess it to be the same
described by Agricola: I steeped it likewise many days in water, but found not
any sensible alteration of its body, though it gave the water both an odd smell
and taste. As for Lanterns and Windows; so they anciently used it in making of
Bee-hives, that through it they might see the Bees operations, as in glasshives
now: an Invention by some people taken for new, though very well known in the
days of Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 21. cap. 14.
.

15. Out of burnt selenites is made the best gypsum, for Plaistering, Images,
Fret-works, etc. When burned, it turns to a pure white Calx, by the Italians
called Gesso, from the Latin word gypsum: Of this they make those curious
counterfeit Tables, like Marble in-laid with diverse Precious stones, in the
forms of Animals, Plants, etc. The way of making them is taught us by Kircher
Kircheri Mundus sub terr. Lib. 12. sect. 5. part. 3. cap. 3.
; but there is a friend of mine has a better method, who intends very speedily
to make some attempt to make them in England, and of English materials. And so
much for our first formed stone Selenites, on which I had not dwelt so long,
but to supply the defects of other Authors, whose descriptions of it are but
mean and imperfect.

16. After the Moon-stone, the Asteriae, or Star-stones, next offer themselves
to our consideration, which, to avoid the confusion of other Authors, I shall
only call those, whose whole Bodies make the form of a Star, as in Tab. 2. Fig.
2, 3, in opposition to the Astroites, which in the whole are irregular, but
adorned as it were with a Constellation, as in Fig. 4, 5, 6 and 7.

17. The Asteria, or star-stone, otherwise by Gesner De Figuris Lapidum, cap. 2.
called Sphragis Asteros, or sigillum stellae, because of the use it is
sometimes put to, is plentifully found in the Fields at Cleydon, the most
Northern Parish of the whole County, Northward from the Church, and
particularly on the Furlong called Hore-stone Furlong: the texture of as many
as I have yet seen, seems to be of thin lamellae or plates, lying obliquely to
the Horizontal position of the Star, much after the manner of Lapis Judaicus,
and their color various, according to the different Soils they are found in:
whence it is, that in Gloucestershire and Yorkshire, where they are taken out
of a blew clay, they are almost themselves of the same color, breaking, as the
Ingenious Mr. Lister informs us Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 112.
, Flint-like, and of a dark shining politure. In Warwickshire they are
accordingly, and in some places also of Gloucestershire, of a cinereous color.
And here at Cleydon, because taken forth of a yellowish earth, of a yellow
color, herein varying from all I had seen before. They differ much also from
those of other Counties in circumference and softness; for here we have them
ordinarily of above an inch and half, and scarce any so little as an inch in
compass; than which in those Counties there are but few bigger. And whereas in
other Counties they are so hard and so firmly cemented, that it is very
difficult, if at all possible, to separate them from each other, without
spoiling the Intagli or workmanship of the Stars; these if but steeped a night
in vinegar, or other sharp liquor, may be divided the next morning with safety
and ease.

18. And as in color, circumference, and hardness; so these sometimes differ
from those of other places in figure too, as Tab. 2. Fig. 2. where beside the
sculpture that makes up the angles, there is plainly represented a rose, or
other uniform figure, in the middle of it, which I never saw at any other
place, nor indeed are such often to be met with there.

19. In all other matters, I think these Asteriae of Cleydon agree with the
accurate description of them, by the Ingenious Mr. Lister Ibid.
; all seeming to be fragments, and no entire Bodies, and found either in one
single joint, as in Tab. 2. Fig. 2. or in 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 15 heaped
together, as in Fig. 3. making a pentagonous cylindrical column, of which I met
with none that were full an inch long; but however, guess that about 20 joints,
as in other places, may go to an inch: every joint consists of five angles,
which in some are very obtuse, in others more acute; the middle of each angle
is a little hollowed, and the edges more prominent and thick furrowed, by which
the several joints are knit together, their ridges and furrows being
alternately let into one another. In the center of the five angles is a small
hole, conspicuous enough in most of them; but in some I have observed the small
hole on one side, and a little prominency on the other, fit as it were to be
let in to the Central-hole of the next joint, after the manner of the ridges
and furrows of the angles.

20. Many of these longest jointed Asteriae, have certain joints a thought
broader and more prominent than others, dividing the whole body as it were into
certain conjugations, of two, three, or more joints; which conjugations, says
the learned and curious Observer, Mr. Lister Philosoph. Transact. loco citato.
, are marked (as he calls them) with sets of Wyers, which though I could not
perceive in any found at Cleydon, yet when I put a column of them into Vinegar,
at those very places I could perceive bubbles, standing as it were at the
orifices, where formerly these Wyers were in all likelihood inserted, by no
means otherwise visible to the eye. And whereas it is certain that most of these
in other Counties, if of any considerable length, are not straight, but visibly
bent and inclining; these are not now, or scarce appear to have ever been so,
though possibly this may rather be referred to the shortness of those I met
with, or ill luck in finding none of the kind, than to any different operation
in nature here, from her usual performances in other places.

21. They are found also about Swerford of the same color, but nothing so
plentifully, or large as these at Cleydon, for the biggest I found there was
scarce an inch round; in all other respects they correspond with them, only the
conjugations, made by the prominence of some joints beyond the rest, are more
visible in these than in any at Cleydon.

22. Of Astroites or starry-stones, such as in bulk are irregular, but adorned
all over with many stars, there are no less in this County than four several
sorts: Whereof, in two, the stars are in mezzo Rilievo, prominent, and standing
outward, with the striae or streaks descending from the Center at the top, on
all sides to the Rock on which they grow. Some of these are of a larger, as
Tab. 2. Fig. 4. and others of a smaller kind, as Tab. 2. Fig. 5. both found in
the Quarries of rubble-stone, dug only for mending the Highways, not far from
the foot of Shot-over Hill, on the right hand of the road from Oxford to
London, in the Parish of Heddington.

23. A third sort there is, and indeed the most beautiful of any it has been
hitherto my luck to meet with, to be had in the Fields about Steeple-Barton,
first discovered to me by a worthy Gentleman, since deceased, the Worshipful
Edward Sheldon Esquire to whose furtherance of my design I am not a little
indebted. But these, quite contrary to the former, are Intagli, deeply engraven
like a seal, and striated from the prominent edges above (which for the most
part are Hexagons, and sometimes Pentagons) to a center in the bottom, as in
Tab. 2. Fig. 6. yet agree with the former in this, that the Stars of all three
are only superficial, and not to be found in the body of the stone, and have
none of them (that I know of) been any where noted before.

24. To these add a fourth sort, imperfectly described by Gesner, and out of
him by several others; whose striae, like the third sort, descend in a concave,
but from edges most times round, or quinquangular at the top, and tend to a
center not of their own kind, as in Fig. 6. but smooth; and not depressed, but
visibly prominent, as in Fig. 7. These are found in the aforementioned
Quarries of rubble-stone in the Parish of Heddington, and are stellated not
only in the superficies of the stone, but quite through the whole depth of it,
yet not so that one continued star (as some have thought) does reach th^^ugh
it; but many, according to the thickness of the stone, about ten of them lying
in the depth of an inch, much after the manner of the Asteriae or star-stones,
only they are not separate, but joined together, and making as it were so many
ranges in the stone, which are clearly represented by Fig. 8. which shows the
face of such a stone, cut parallel to the descent of the stars in its body,
which lie within one another like so many cones.

25. Of this sort in France there are some so great, as Gesner Ibid.
was informed by Petrus Bellonius, that they used them in building of Walls and
Houses; to which use it is true we do not put ours, but I suppose it is not for
want of bigness, but because we have much better stone for that purpose: for
here we have them likewise so plentifully and great, that we commonly pave our
Causeys with them, as may be seen in the Causey without St. Clements, leading
from Oxford up Heddington hill.

26. Having hitherto considered these stones apart, and seen De Figuris
Lapidum, cap. 2.
how they differ from one another, let us now consider them all together in
that admired quality of their moving in Vinegar, which in some measure is found
in the Astroites, but is much more signal in the Asteriae or star-stones: for
the Astroites must be broken in very small pieces before they will move, though
put in good Vinegar, but the Asteria will move not only in a whole joint, but
two or three of them knit together, which I have often seen done by the yellow
ones of Cleydon, though of greater bulk than those of other places; which
joined, with some other circumstances anon to be mentioned, has given me ground
to suspect, if not conclude, that though it may be true enough what Mr. Lister
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 100.
has asserted, as well of all fossils, as the stones Astroites, that as many of
them as Vinegar will corrode as a Menstruum, do all move in it; yet none of
them reach the effects it has on the Asteria, to which therefore I must crave
leave to allow somewhat more than either to the Astroites or any other fossils.

27. For beside the progressive motion to be seen in those, the Asteria has a
motion of circumgyration, and moves brisker and longer than any of them; for
though it has been steeped in Vinegar three or four days, yet upon infusion of
a fresh acid, it still sends forth many little bubbl^ as at first, from
underneath it, in the instant of its motion: which seems to argue, that it has
it not wholly from the corrosion of the Menstruum, but in part at least from
some other principle, which I take to be a spirituous, yet corporeal effluvium,
continually flowing from it, when provoked by an acid.

28. Whereof there is one, which hereafter shall be public, found out indeed
by chance at the House of Mr. Wildgose, Physician at Denton, and an ingenious
Chemist, whose assistances (in gratitude) I must ever own: where not having
Vinegar so ready at hand, we thought fit to make use of another suitable
liquor, which so effectually excited the effluviums of the stone, that they
ascended in a cloud to the surface of the Menstruum, and there settled exactly
in the form of the stone, and that not only of a single joint, but a whole
column of them together: which persuaded me, that Cardan Subtilit. Lib. 5.
was not so far out of the way, nor deserved so much the reproofs of
Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallic. lib. 4. cap. 65.
and others, for asserting the motion of such stones to arise, from vapors
expelled from them by the power of the Vinegar. Since perhaps his position
(though not so well made out) comes nearer to truth than any his Animadverters
have brought for it since.

29. After the stones some way related to the Celestial Bodies, I descend next
to such as (by the vulgar at least) are thought to be sent us from the inferior
Heaven, to be generated in the clouds, and discharged thence in the times of
thunder and violent showers: for which very reason, and no other that we know
of, the ancient Naturalists coined them suitable names, and called such as they
were pleased to think fell in the Thunder, Brontiae; and those that fell in
showers, by the name of Ombriae: Which though amongst other Authors has been
the only reason why these have had place next the stellated stones, yet
methinks it is due to most of them, by a much better pretense, having something
upon them that rather resembles a star of five points, than any thing coming
from the clouds, or the Fish Echinus; to the shell whereof deprived of its
prickles, Ulysses Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallic. lib. 4. cap. 1.
, and some others, have compared them, and therefore called them Echinites.
However, I think fit rather to retain the old names, though but ill applied to
the nature of the things, than put my self to the trouble of inventing new ones*

30. Of Brontiae therefore, or Ombriae (call them which you will) we have
several sorts in Oxfordshire, which yet all agree in this, that they are a
sort of solid irregular Hemisphears; some of them oblong, and having somewhat of
an oval; others either more elevated, or depressed on their bases. All of them
divided into five parts, most times inequal, rarely equal, by five rays issuant
from an umbilicus or center, descending from it down the sides of the body, and
terminating again somwhere in the base. They are never found in beds together,
like some other formed stones, nor that I have yet heard of (says the Ingenious
Mr. Ray Observations Topograph. etc. p. 116.
) in great numbers in one place: but in the latter I must take leave to inform
him, that though I think it in the main to be true, yet that at Tangley,
Fulbrook, and all about Burford, they are found in such plenty, that I believe
it were easy in a little time, to procure a Cart-load of the first sort of
them, carefully exhibited in Tab. 2. Fig. 9, 10.

31. Whose innermost texture, though it seem to be nothing more than a course
rubble-stone, yet is thinly cased over with a fine laminated substance (the
plates lying obliquely) much like Lapis Judaicus: In form they are flat,
depressed upon the basis; in color generally yellow, their rays made of a
double rank of transverse lines, with void spaces between the ranks, visible
enough on the top of the stone Fig. 9. but not so distinguishable on the bottom
Fig. 10. the whole body of the stone, as well as the spaces included within the
rays, being elsewhere filled with Annulets, much more curiously wrought by
Nature, than by the tool of the Graver.

32. The center of these rays, by Pliny called Modiolus, by Aristotle,
Vmbilicus Lib. de Mundo ad Alexandrum.
, is never placed on the top of the stone, but always inclining to one side, as
that at the bottom does to the other; the Axis lying obliquely to the Horizon
of the stone. Which gave occasion to a Learned Society of Virtuosi, that during
the late Usurpation lived obscurely at Tangley, and had then time to think of
so mean a subject, by consent to term it the Polar-stone, having ingeniously
found out, by clapping two of them together, as suppose the Fig. 9, and 10.
that they made up a Globe, with Meridians descending to the Horizon, and the
Pole elevated, very nearly corresponding to the real elevation of the Pole of
the place where the stones are found.

33. The two next, represented Fig. 11, 12. like the former, being flat and
depressed on their bases, having also some resemblance of a star of 5 points,
were therefore thought fit to be placed next. Whereof the 11 indeed is a
beautiful stone, found somwhere in the Chiltern about Aston Rowant, whose inner
substance, though of black Flint, to outward view is of a cinereous color, and
adorned by Nature with somewhat more than ordinary. For beside the Modiolus, and
the issuing rays made of double ranks of points, with transverse lines
interceding them, it is also set with other points surrounded with double
Annulets; on each side the stone with a single, and from the terminations of
the rays with double ranks. The points thus surrounded, are neither deeply
excavated, nor any thing prominent above the superficies of the stone; but the
rays as they are but short (not extending above half way to the rim of the
stone) so they are deeply hollowed down within it, wherein it differs,

33. From that of Fig. 12. found in the Fields about Ifley, whose rays like
those of the Polar stones, are made of double ranks of transverse lines,
whereof the outermost are much the longer, and extended likewise to the rim of
the stone; its substance also like that seems to be a yellow rubble, but not
cased that I can perceive with any such laminated substance, or adorned with
Annulets, yet the Vmbilicus of some of them, is more beautiful than theirs, it
being sometimes divided and foliated like a Rose. And so much for the Brontiae
depressed on their bases.

35. Let us now proceed to others of a more elevated kind, whereof those
expressed Fig. 13. found somwhere in the Chiltern, by the Country people called
commonly Cap-stones, from their likeness to a Cap laced down the sides, are of
any the most uniform. For the centers of these, both at the top and bottom, are
on all hands equidistant from the rim of the stone, and the rays interceding
the centers being also equidistant, cut it exactly into five equal parts; which
in none of the former, nor those that are to follow, either by reason of their
shape, or excentricity of their Modioli, can possibly be found. The rays of
these are made of two rows of points set pretty deep in the body of the stone,
out of which you are to suppose, according to Aldrovandus (who resembles this
stone to a disarmed Echinus) proceeded the prickles that Animal is fenced with.

36. As also that other somewhat of an oval form, Tab. 2. Fig. 14. whose center
corresponds with the figure of the stone, and is not concluded within the rays,
as in the former, but is extended in a ridge to the rim of it: from which
center there descend as it were double rays, made up of two double sets of
points; which, expanding themselves as they draw toward the rim, at about
midway are surrounded with single Annulets, which each of them including two
points apiece, are therefore all of an oval Figure. Its substance within is a
black Flint, though without it appear of a cinereous color, and was found in
the Fields between Ewelm and Brightwell.

37. At Pyrton I met with another of these, a black Flint within, and cinereous
without, of oval figure and center like the former, but the descending rays
from it of a quite different kind: for whereas they were made of points hollow
and deep, these on the contrary are all prominent; and whereas they descended
table of formed stones TAB II ad page: 92.

To the right Worspll. The learned and curious Artist Sr JOHN COPE Baron. This
second Table of formed STONES whereof ye 9th. and 10th. are found in his own
grounds is humbly dedicated by R. P. L L. D.

M Burgh^^rs. delin. et sculp.
in double branches and points, which near the rim were included in oval
Annulets; the double and protuberant points of these, about midway to the rim
are turned into single, though much larger ones, as in Tab. 3. Fig. 1. which
now descending in single points, and meeting in an Vmbilicus not in the middle
of the basis, but so much to one side, that the branches upon this account
being some longer some shorter, and crossing the basis in a much different
manner, make a figure somewhat resembling a Flower-de-lis, as in Tab. 3. Fig. 2.
which had been all I should have said concerning these Brontiae, but that
perhaps it may not be unworthy our notice.

1. That the protuberancies of this last stone are all hollow, which when
broken, look just like the hollow points of the former; which has given me some
ground to suspect, that the deep points of that may have formerly been
eminencies like the raised points of this, and are only broken down by the
injuries of time. 2. That none of these Brontiae have been described before,
but the 12 and 13 of Tab. 2. which indeed are somewhat like the 8 and 10 of
Aldrovandus Lib. 4. cap. 1. p. 455.
: and 3. That though some Authors have thought them the petrified shells of the
Echinus Spatagus, or Brissus of Aristotle, I have reason to think (as shall
appear in a fitter place) that they will prove nothing less.
38. Beside the Brontiae of the Foreign Naturalists, we have others, which
here in England we call likewise Thunderbolts, in the form of arrows heads,
and thought by the vulgar to be indeed the darts of Heaven: which only in
conformity to my own Country (though for as much reason as the foregoing
Brontiae) I have placed amongst the stones related to the Heavens.

39. From their form, by all Naturalists they are called Belemnites, from the
Greek word (...) telum, which indeed there are some of them represent pretty
well. We have of them in Oxfordshire of diverse sorts, yet all of them I find
agreeing in this, that their texture is of small striae, or threads radiating
from the center, or rather axis of the Stone, to the outermost superficies; and
that burned, or rubbed against one another, or scraped with a knife, they yield
an odor like rasped Horn.

40. In magnitude and color they differ much, the biggest I have met with yet,
being that expressed in Tab. 3. Fig. 3. in length somewhat above four inches, and
in thickness much about an inch and. This was found in the Quarries in the
Parish of Heddington, hollow at the top about an inch deep, and filled with a
kind of gravelly earth; and has the rima or chink, which Aldrovandus and
Boethius say all of them have; but I find it otherwise, as shall be shown anon.
Of color it is cinereous, inclining to yellow, and if vehemently rubbed, is
the only one amongst all that I have, that like Amber takes up straws, and some
other light bodies.

41. There are of them also of a bluish color, found at Great Rolwright in a
bluish clay, of about a fingers length, hollow at the top, and have some of
them, instead of one, three clefts or rimae, but neither so plain or long as
the former, they ascending from the cuspis scarce half up the stone: two
whereof are shown Fig. 4. and the third hidden behind the Sculpture; which may
make some amends for that of Fig. 5. which is of color cinereous and hollow at
the top, but has no chink at all; whereof there was a bed found in digging the
Sulphur Well at Mr. Lanes of Deddington, as was mentioned before in the Chapter
of Waters.

42. To which add a fourth sort, found in great plenty in the Gravel-pits
without St. Clements, in the suburbs of Oxford, very few of them hollow at the
top like the former, but radiated like a star from a closer center, as in Fig.
6 These not being hollow at the top, nor containing any other stone, gravel, or
earth, some call the male Belemnites: the three former being of the female kind.
. which made Gesner De Figuris Lapidum, cap. 5.
think it to be the Astrapias of Pliny, though expressly he says, it is of a
white or azure Not. Hist. lib. 37. cap. 11.
, whereas this is always of an amber color: yet draws not straws, is somewhat
transparent, and may therefore pass for a sort of Lapis Lyncurius; not that it
has original from the urine of that Beast, for we have plenty of the stones
here and none of the animals, but from the unpleasant smell it has when burned
or brayed; like the urine of Cats, or such like ramish creatures, whereof the
Lynx perhaps may be one. These, most of them, are made tapering to a point like
the former; yet sometimes having a blunter ending, and the chink on both sides,
I thought fit rather to show it in that form than the other, as in Fig. 6.
where the cleft runs not only the whole length of the stone, but quite under
the end, and half way up the other side.

43. Many are the Medicinal uses of this stone, mentioned by Boethius,
Aldrovandus, and Gesner: Whereof the chief are, 1. For the stone, for which
(instead of the Eurrhaeus) it is used in Spain and Saxony. 2. For exsiccation of
wounds in Prussia and Pomerania. And 3. for ocular distempers in Horses, in all
parts of England.

44. Thus having run through the supposititious stones from Heaven, I next
descend to the Atmosphere, or inferior Air, immediately encompassing the
terraqueous Globe; which though incapable of it self to be represented in
stone, yet having met with some related to its Inhabitants, I mean the
feathered Kingdom, I thought fit to give them place before those of the Waters.

45. Whereof the first and only one, represented in Sculpture Tab. 3, Fig. 7.
has perfectly the shape of an Owls head, which because not mentioned by any
Author that I know of, I thought good to exhibit, and call Lapis Bubonius; it
is a black flint within, and cinereous without, and was found near to Hardwick
in the Parish of Whitchurch.

46. To which I might have annexed the stone Hieracites, found frequently in
the Quarries in the Parish of Heddington, but is not the Hieracites mentioned
by Pliny Lib. 37. cap. 10.
, which he says alternatly changes its color; but of Gesner De Figuris
Lapidum, cap. 13.
, to whose figure of it, ours is exactly like: but neither his nor ours
resembling any thing of a Hawks, or other Birds feathers, so much as to deserve
a cut, or the Readers view; I have saved my self the expense, and him the
trouble.

47. Next the Air, the stones that concern the Watery Kingdom, fall in order of
Nature under consideration, whereof there are some that seem to be nothing else
but merely concreted drops of water, found plentifully in the Fields about
Kircklington and Northbrook, which I touched on before under petrifications,
and promised to treat of more largely here. By Authors they are called
Stalagmites, and seem either to be generated of pearls of dew, settled on the
stones as they lie in the Fields, which first being coated over with the small
terrene atoms that are flying in the Air, and by that means kept in their own
form for some considerable time, are thus at length fixed into a friable kind
of stone, by the petrifying steam that comes from the earth; or else they are
exsudations out of the stones themselves, whence are formed those excrescencies
like warts in Animals: neither of which seem unagreeable to their description
in Tab. 3. Fig. 8.

48. But beside the Stalagmites, there are other concretions made of much the
same materials, viz. of a cold sort of water, thickened with terrene and
petrifying particles; which yet because of their different mode of generation,
have obtained a different, and more suitable name: And such are the stones made
of nothing but such water, as it drops from the roofs and caverns of the Rocks,
and therefore called Stalactites, or Lapides stillatitii; which, if the drops
descend by the sides of the Rocks, and comply with the usual raggedness of
them, are then indeed of various and the rudest forms, and by the workmen
called Craume Of this there is a Quarry between Heathrop and Enston, called
Broad-stone Quarry, that has great plenty.
. But if the drops descend from the top of a vault, or any more prominent part
of a Rock, in a direct line and free from the sides, they are commonly then of
a pyramidal form, as in Tab. 3. Fig. 9. which is the representation of a stone
of about nine inches long, of a yellowish color, as it hung from the Rock in
Heddington Quarry, where without doubt it was produced much after the same
manner, as Isicles at the ends of spouts in Winter, by a gradual descent and
congelation of the drops.

49. Hither also must be referred all sorts of Spars, by the Miners called
Cawke, and the Latins, Fluores; which (say they) yet retain so much of a fluid,
that with the heat of fire, like Ice in the Sun, they melt and flow: an effect,
which though I could not find it had upon ours without the help of Salts; yet
not doubting at all, but that once they had been fluids, I could not but
accordingly give them place here.

50. Whereof, there is scarce any Rock whatever, whether metalline or vulgar,
which has not some kind or other of them, shot in its seams or other hollows,
which according to their different subjects or matrixes, are sometimes of
different colors, and frequently of diverse figures.

51. As for colors, I have not observed above two sorts in Oxfordshire, a
light yellow, and a Pearl-colour'd white, whereof there are some in the Quarrys
near Shotover, so clear and hard, that they come not much behind the
Bristol-stones, and are in figure (though had from the same Quarry) as various
as Diamants; some of them being comprised in seven, others in nine, others in
eleven, and some in thirteen planes, as may easily be computed from their
trigonal, tetragonal, pentagonal, and hexagonal pyramids, represented in Tab.
3. Fig. 10. to which, adding the planes of their columns, and the planes of
their bases, whereby they are fixed to their subjects, those numbers of Hedrae
must needs be concluded.

52. As to the origin and texture of Spars, I take them to be much of the same
with Chrystals (though we seldom find them of their hexagonal figure, or their
columns ever interceding two pyramids) and that they differ in luster and
hardness according to the more close or loose texture of the stones whereon
they sit, and out of which they have sweat, as through a strainer or colander.
Though it must not be denied, but what is asserted by the ingenious and
observing Steno Prodrom. de Chrystallo. propositionib. 1, 2, 3.
concerning Chrystals, may have place also in the increase and growth of these,
which he says (whatever may be the manner of their first delineation) is by
external apposition of new Chrystalline matter to the external planes of the
already delineated Crystal; which he also observes, not to be joined to all
its planes, but for the most part to the planes of the top only; nor to these
all at a time, nor in the same quantity: Whence it is, that the extreme or top
planes of Spars as well as Chrystals, are seldom or never equal, and not always
triangular, but rising with unequal sides and angles from the planes of their
columns, as in that separate piece of Spar or Crystal near Fig. 10. which I
take to be arguments sufficiently concluding the similitude of their growth and
texture of parts, notwithstanding the planes of the columns of Spars are not
streaked, nor so plainly show the places of apposition, as they do on Crystal;
which streaks, for the Readers more ready apprehension, are therefore cut on
the separate column near Fig. 10. though otherwise indifferently to be
understood either for Spar or Crystal.

53. Some of these Spars fall so little short, either of Chrystals or Bristol
Diamants, either in luster or hardness, that we may very well admit what is
said of them by Aldrovandus Musaeum Metal. lib. 4. cap. 76.
, that they are gemmae inchoatae, and non perfectae. And that Boethius De Lapid.
and Gem. cap. 304.
in all likelihood may have hit the mark, who doubts not but they are made of
the same matter with Gems, and therefore gives them place between Gems and
Stones, Inter Gemmas and lapides medium locum obtinent fluores, says he: to
whom in this matter I readily subscribe, finding many of them to participate
with Gems in luster, but with other Stones in softness and brittleness; whence
it comes to pass, that they will not polish like other stones, and are only fit
to be mixed with other metals, which they render much more quick in fusion,
than otherwise they are inclined to be of themselves.

54. After Stones so purely made out of Waters, that they readily return into
fluids again, or have only such figures, into which that Element seems most
naturally to compose it self, as the Stalagmites and Lapides stillatitii; come
we next to such as represent its Inhabitants, the Fishes of the Sea and fresh
Waters too: of which there are some of so great variety of texture, that in
case they were not heretofore the spoils of real Fishes indeed, and now
petrified, require a much higher principle for their efformation; concerning
which before we attempt any thing, let us first consider some of their
particular shapes, with the places and postures they are now found in.

55. Of such as resemble any of the fresh water kind, I have met with only one
in this County, which did we but know where else to put it, should not be
placed here neither; for it was taken out of a block of coal (whereof there is
none dug in Oxfordshire) by the ingenious and observing Sir Thomas Pennyston,
at his House at Cornwell; and seems to represent a Carp or Barbel, the best of
any Fish I have yet compared it with, and rather indeed the latter of the two,
because of the short and thick scale: It was broken, in taking it out of the
Coal, into several pieces, whereof that is one exactly engraven Tab. 3. Fig.
11. kindly bestowed on me by that worthy Gentleman, and by whom the rest are
carefully preserved; which were it not for want of the variety of colors, I
should take (for the scales sake) to be the Lepidotes of Pliny Not. Hist. lib.
37. c. 10.
.

56. The stones that we find in this Inland Country, having the shapes of Sea
fish, are many, but chiefly of the testaceous kind; whereof there are some that
lie in a mass of stone together, and others found in the Fields or Quarries
apart. Of the first sort of these we have a curious instance in the possessions
of the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Clarendon, at Langley in the confines of
Whichwood-forrest, where there is a Quarry of very hard stone, wholly composed
of a close union of Cockles, scarce any of them exceeding a Pea in bigness, and
streaked circularly to the hinges of the valves, as in Tab. 3. Fig. 12. they
are none of them hollow, but firmer within, than they are to the bed of stone
where they lie; and yet even to that they are so closely knit, that the mass
receives a very good polish, insomuch that his Lordship intends to pave the new
Chapel now building at Cornbury with it.

57. This sort of Marble is mentioned by Steno In Prodromo.
, and called (as he says) by the Italians, Nephiri; whereof there is also a
very good sort at Charleton Towns end, upon the edge of Otmoor It is much
prized by the Painters at London, it having a grit that cuts their colors much
better than other Marble. Mr. Aubrey's notes.
, differing from that of Langley only in this, that the gross of the stone is
somewhat whiter, the Cockles larger, and not so thick set. However, of so firm
and close a texture, that of it they make Tomb-stones, Tables, etc, so
curiously spotted and set with rings, that it very much pleases the eye of the
beholder, and has already gotten (though but lately found) a reputation at
Oxford and the parts adjacent.

58. Of this sort of stone most certainly it was, though somewhat perhaps of a
softer kind, and different color, that Pausanias informs us (as quoted by
Agricola) the Monument of Phroneus, and many other works, were made at Megara.
Megarae in saxo valde albo, and reliquis lapidibus molliore, undique insunt
conchae marinae, ex quo etc. are the words of Agricola De Natura Fossilium.
lib. 7.
; for which very reason this sort of stone is there called Conchites, and since
by Johnston and Fred; Lachmund (...). Hildesheim. sect. 3. cap. 15.
(from the place where found) Lapis Megaricus.

59. There is another sort of it in the Quarries near Adderbury, thick set with
Cockles in their full proportion, as in Tab. 3. Fig. 13. Some of them are
wonderfully Chrystallized, and beautiful to the eye, but not being so finely
cemented together, but that a knock will loosen or make them leap from their
beds; and many of them being hollow, or filled with brittle Spar; the stone by
no means will receive a polish, and upon that account fit for no other work
than to mend the highways, or some other mean uses. Nor can I inform the
owners of these Quarries of any better that it may have, except they shall
think fit to burn it for Lime, for which I dare promise it must needs be
excellent.

60. And so is the stone Ostracomorphos, made of heaps of Oysters cemented
together, and found plentifully enough on Shot-over hill, not far from the way
to Sir Timothy Tyrrils; of which I have forborne to give any draught, it being
easily conceived from the manner of the Cockles thus heaped together in the two
former cuts.

61. To these succeed the stones resembling Seafish of the testaceous kind,
not found in clusters after the manner of the former, but in a separate state:
of these there are some curiously lineated, and others plain, with but few or
no such ornaments, which yet I must treat of promiscuously together, because
there are of both sorts in several species.

62. Of these again some are of a turbinated form, and others bivalvular,
resembling the double shell'd kind, joined together with a hinge, and yet these
sometimes found all with their shells apart, and sometimes again none of them so.

63. Amongst these the turbinated or wreathed kind of stones, by the Greeks
called Strombites, from (...) torqueo, to wreath (which is always helically,
and for the most part from the right hand to the left, and spirally from a
greater to a smaller ending) are but seldom found: However, I have met with
both the sorts of Agricola De Natura Fossilium, lib. 7.
, the greater, which he says is sometimes nine inches long, but ours indeed not
much exceeding five, of a plain superficies, as in Tab. 4. Fig. 1 Vid. Buccinum
lapideum laeve Fabii Columnae, Aquatilium and terrestr. observe. cap. 22.
. and the lesser wanting of half an inch in length, but curiously striated, as
Fig. 2. both found in the Quarries in the Parish of Heddington, of a cinereous
color, somewhat inclining to yellow, and of a harder consistence than the stone
wherein they lie.

64. But as for such as represent the bivalvular Conchae, such as Cockles,
Escallops, Oysters, etc. we have very great plenty, as well of kinds as
individuals. The Conchites or Cockle-stones found in this County, may also be
divided into the greater and lesser; whereof the greater are some of them
striated with large striae, table of formed stones TAB III ad page 100

To the right Honble Henry Earl of Clarendon Viscount CORNBURY and Baron HYDE
of Hindon etc This 3. Table of formed STONES (whereof the 12th fort is dug in
his LORD ps. own Lands) in memory of his LORDps. many and great favors, is
gratefully consecrated by R P. L L. D.

Michael Burghers Delin; et Sculp:
and larger furrows, descending as it were from a center at the top, and
expanding themselves to the rim of the stone; having also six or seven
transverse simple lines, bent circularly to the hinge or commissure of the
valves, as in Tab. 4. Fig. 3. which is a stone without, of a dark cinereous
color, but within, a black flint; found somwhere in the Chiltern about Henly
upon Thames, and kindly bestowed on me by the ingenious Mr. Monday, Physician
there.

65. Some there are again, whose striae also descend from the hinge or
commissure, but not in straight lines, but bent and undulated, and much broader
than the former, as in Tab. 4. Fig. 4. which though in magnitude it fall short
of the Concha Tridacna of Aldrovandus (so called it seems because they made
three mouthfuls apiece) yet in form it shows to be so very like, as may be seen
also in Jonston, Tab. 13. that were it not a stone, I must pronounce it the
same Vid. Concham imbricatam minimam Aldrovandi. de Test. lib. 3. cap. 43.
. This I found at Great Rolwright in a bluish clay, whereof, and of nothing
else, it seems to be concreted; for it does not much exceed it in hardness, and
still participates most of that color, though covered with a bright and
shining substance, by the Naturalists called Hoplites, or Armatura: of which
more anon when I come to Cornu Ammonius, a stone, the most of any adorned with
that substance.

66. Another sort there is found at Heddington Quarries, whose lines or striae
are not drawn like the two former, from the commissure of the valves to the
rim, but transversly and circularly from one side of the stone to the other;
the lesser circles having place next the commissure, and the greater next to
the rim of the stone, as in Tab. 4. Fig. 5. which seems much to resemble the
Concha rugata of Rondoletius Rondoletius de testaceis, lib. 1. cap. 25.
, with valves swelling very high; of color it is cinereous, inclining to
yellow, not hollow within, but a solid stone, and of much the same texture with
the rubble of the Quarry.

67. Of the smaller Conchites there are also several sorts, differing in
color, lineation and valves; for at Teynton and about Burford, where they are
found in the Fields, they are most of them yellow, with their valves rising
high and approaching to a round These made red hot and put into drink, are
accounted in this Country a present remedy for a stitch.
: but at Glympton, where they are only found in a spring that rises in a Wood
about a mile Southward from the Church, they are much more depressed and of a
cinereous color; but both having their lineations from the commissure to the
rim, they are both therefore represented under one draught, Tab. 4. Fig. 6.

68. How it should come about that these Cockle-stones of Glympton should only
be found at the Fountainhead, and no where lower in the stream, nor that I
could hear of, in the Fields about, I must acknowledge to be a knot not easily
loosed. Some have thought them brought out from amongst the Rocks, at the
bottom of the hill where the Spring rises; others that they are formed by a
peculiar virtue of the water, as it runs over the rubble stones that lie near
its exit: for, say they, if you pick them never so clean away, in few months
time you shall have as many more. And indeed it must be confessed, that I met
with several that were only striated on one side, and rubble stone on the
other; and some of them but just begun to be a little lineated: However it be,
I shall determine nothing yet, having employed a careful and ingenious person
to watch the increase and lineations of these stones, which when thoroughly
understood, shall be faithfully communicated.

69. Beside those of Glympton, there are others at Cornwell, in the Park of the
Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Pennyston, found in a bank of yellowish clay, of a
much different form, and transversly striated, as in Tab. 4. Fig. 7. which
though indeed for the most part are hard stones, yet I was showed several by
the Ingenious Owner of the place, that were nothing but clay, not differing at
all from that in the bed wherein they lie, and out of which they seem to be
formed, but in figure only; which is also different from all the bivalvular
Conchae that I find in Books, or have seen in collections of that sort of
Shellfish.

70. And so is the figure of the Conchites found in Hornton Quarry, near
approaching to an oval, and scarce striated at all: which inclines me at least
to doubt, if not certainly to conclude, that these Cockle-like stones were
never heretofore any real Cockle-shells, thus transmuted by the penetrating
force of petrifying juices, but that most of them (as the ingenious Mr. Lister
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 76.
thinks) ever were, as they now are, Lapides sui generis, differing not only
from one another, but many of them from any thing in Nature beside, that the
fresh or salt water can any where afford us. But before I engage in this great
controversy, let us first consider a few more of these stones resembling
shellfish.

71. And first, the abovementioned Conchites found in Hornton quarry, and
represented in Tab. 4. Fig. 8. which is not a solid stone within (as all the
Cockle-stones hitherto described have been) but hollow, and filled with spar;
sometimes shot into irregular figures, but for the most part forked, as in Fig.
9. the basis, or place where the branches of the fork are conjoined, being
rooted (in all that I have yet seen) at the commissure or hinge of the valves,
and the branches extending themselves in the broader parts of the Conchites; of
which operation of Nature I can give no other account, but that it was first
observed, by the Reverend and Ingenious Mr. Clark, Rector of Dreyton near
Banbury, from whom, beside other favors, I received many of them.

72. After the bivalvular Cockles found always with their valves closed
together, come we next to consider the other Bivalves found never so, but their
valves always apart. And such are the stones resembling Escallops, and some
other striated Conchylia: whereof that represented Fig. 10. is the most curious
in its kind I ever yet saw, found in Heddington quarries by Mr. Richard
Stapley, an ingenious young Man, and learned in these matters, to whom I am
beholding not only for this, but for some other choice stones hereafter to be
mentioned. Which amongst all the Pectines or Escallop-shells I could find in
the Icthyographers, best resembles the Pecten asper of Aldrovandus De
Testaceis, lib. 3. cap. 69.
. Of color it is yellowish, eared on both sides, the lineations from the
commissure to the rim of the stone very prominent, and yet having some other
transverse lines (not bending to, but from the commissure) standing upon them,
and not passing through the deep furrows so as to join with each other,

73. As the transverse lines do in the next following Pectinites, Fig. 11.
where they are both of equal depth, and very small, thick and fine; the
transverse lines all of them bent to the commissure, but the other striae not
meeting together in it, as in the former and following Escallops: This stone is
of a light reddish color, eared on both sides, and found in the quarries in
the parish of Heddington.

74. And so was the next stone in form of a Pectunculus, or little Escallop,
Fig. 12. of a whitish yellow color, the striae large and broad, but the
transverse lines small, eared like the former on both sides: Which also argues,
that this stone was never heretofore the shell of a Fish, and thus cast into
stone by an Animal mold. For the Pectunculi, says Rondeletius De Testaceis,
lib. 1. cap. 16.
, are a distinct species from the Pectines or larger Escallops, and never have
ears but on one side, which indifferently are either on the right or left;
except that we shall say that this was once the shell of a young Pecten, not
yet come to its full growth.

75. To this also may be referred another of the same texture, only somewhat
bigger, and wanting the ears of a Pectunculites, or little Escallop-stone, Fig.
13. which because it shows no signs of its ears being broken off, I suppose may
either represent the Chama striata Pectiniformis of Aldrovandus De Testaceis,
lib. 3. cap. 69.
, or else the Pectunculus of Bellonius, which (as quoted by the Zoographer
Gesner De Aquatil. lib. 4. p. 813.
) he not only says has no ears, but has exhibited it in Sculpture.

76. And so perhaps may the next stone, Fig. 14. except we shall rather make it
the first of the Conchites striati, or streaked Cockle stones, which indeed I
cannot choose but assent too, because of its bearing too much on one side, which
I find the Pectinites or Escallop stones do not: and because it cannot be a
Tellinites, which shellfish (if at all) is never streaked that way. Let it
therefore pass only for a streaked Cockle stone, which are plentifully found
not only at Heddington, and about Shot-over, but in the Quarries near
Stunsfield, North Leigh, and Little Milton; and are placed here, because found
like the Escallop stones, always with their shells apart.

77. Whereof there are some larger, and as it were heaped upon one another, as
in Tab. 4. Fig. 15; and others single, as in Fig. 17. The real shellfish of
which kind, called Conchylia striata, though thus lineated without, are always,
says Aldrovandus De Testaceis, lib. 3. cap. 44.
, plain and smooth within, contrary to what we find in these Conchites striati,
as is shown by Fig. 16. which shows the inside of one of those stones, not
only lineated from the commissure to the rim, but adorned also with four or
five transverse fillets, not made of one, but several conjoined lines, which
seems also to conclude table of conchites TAB. IIII ad page: 105

To the right Honble. ARTHUR Earl of ANGLESEY Viscount Valentia Baron of
Newport Pagnel, Mount Norris etc Lord Privy SEAL etc This 4th. Table of formed
STONES representing SHELLFISH of the Testaceous kind is humbly offered by R. P.
LLD.

Michael Burghers delineavit sculpt.
it to be Lapis sui generis, and not to have been molded by a striated
Cockel-shell.

78. Beside Cockle and Escallop-stones, there are others that seem to be of the
Oyster kind, found plentifully in the Gravel-pits without St. Clements, in
Cowley-common, and in a wood near Wood-eaton: amongst them there are some of an
oblong figure, very thick, and of a bluish color, such as that depicted Fig.
18. which I guess may be the same with the petrified Concha oblonga crassa,
mentioned by Dr. Merret Pinax rerum Nature. Brit. p. 216.
, found in Worcestershire, and there called Crow-stones, Crow-cups, or
Egg-stones; or else the more protuberant part of the Mytulus niger of
Aldrovandus De Testaceis, lib. 3. cap. 71.
, or the Mytulus of Rondeletius De Testaceis, lib. 1. cap. 46.
.

79. But others are again of the true Oyster shape, called Ostracites, or
(...), represented Fig. 19. some whereof are blue, and others reddish, of the
color of the Gravel out of which they are taken: These are generally greater,
thicker and weightier, than the true Oyster-shell, yet like them seem to be
resolved, according to the opinion of Steno In Prodromi verse. Angl. p. 75, 76.
, into many little shells, the innermost being always the greatest, and the
outermost the least: Upon which very account I could easily have assented, that
these, and the former, might once indeed have been shell fish; but that we only
find (just as in the Escallops) the protuberant parts of the shells, and never
any of the flat ones; which had they been once fishes, we have little reason to
think, could have been thus absent from them.

80. We find also in Oxfordshire a sort of Mytuloides, or Muscle-stones, of an
odd kind of figure, and not easy perhaps to be paralleled, though the
testaceous Kingdom be of large extent: They are not hollow, but within a terra
lapidosa of a yellowish color, and covered without with a white shining kind
of Armature, with ablong lineations agreeable to the figure of the stone, as in
Tab. 5. Fig. 1. found in digging a Well in the Parish of Cleydon. To which we
may add another sort remarkably small, found in Heddington Quarries, Fig. 2.
which finish my discourse concerning such stones as resemble the (...), or
testaceous shellfish. Whence I proceed

81. To stones representing the (...), or the shellfish of the softer
crustaceous kind, such as that Tab. 5. Fig. 3. in substance and hardness much
like a Pebble, and of color yellowish: divided first by five pretty straight
lines, adorned on each side with double sets of points, ascending from a
protuberant umbilicus in the basis of the stone, to another of like form at the
top, but foliated round in manner of a Rose: And after again subdivided by five
other indented lines, terminated before they reach the umbilici; by which means
the spaces between these lines are all pentagons, like the outer scales of some
sort of Tortoise. Much such another stone as this I find in Aldrovandus, in his
Book De Testaceis De Testaceis lib. 3. cap. 40.
, which because he thought resembled the sea Vrchin deprived of its outward
prickly coat, he calls Echinus lapis spoliatus a suis spinis: But it seeming to
me to be much more like the Estrice marino, si ritrava nelli mari profondi, of
Ferrante Imperato Dell' Hist. Natural, lib. 28. cap. 1.
, I choose rather to call it Histricites, or Porcupine-stone without bristles.
This was found in the Chiltern Country, near Stonor-house, and sent me by the
Worshipful Tho. Stonor Esquire the Proprietor of the place, and one of the Noblest
Encouragers of this Design.

82. And so was the following curiously embroidered stone, Fig. 4. much
resembling the petrified Riccio marino, or sea Vrchin of Imperatus Dell' Hist.
Natural, lib. 24. c. 26.
, found in the same place also without prickles, but much differing from the
former in color and substance, as also from the stone of that Learned Author:
For whereas he confesses that was but of the consistence of the Limestone;
ours, though without of a whitish cinereous color, within is a hard black
flint, covered over with thin glittering plates, set edg-ways to the ball of
the flint, out of which those uniform eminencies and depressures, those waved
and transverse lineations are all framed.

83. These are found in great plenty in the Isle of Malta, and by the Country
men there, says the Ingenious Boccone Recherches and observations Naturelles:
Lettre vingt sixieme.
, called Mamelles de Saint Paul, because of the lenticular eminencies and small
roundures, that fill the whole surface of the stone; or rather because they are
sometimes found coupled two and two, as may be seen in the sculptures of the
same Author. By Boethius and Gesner, and all the old Authors, they are called
Ova anguina, Serpents eggs; perchance because from the basis there issue as it
were five tails of serpents, waved and attenuated toward the upper part of the
stones. They tell us also a story of its being engendered from the salivation
and slime of snakes, and cast into the Air by the force of their sibilations,
where if taken, has effects as wonderful as its generation, and therefore of
great esteem amongst the French Druids. But I care not to spend my time in
Romance, and therefore proceed

84. To another Echinites, resembling the inner shell of the Echinus ovarius or
Esculentus, so called from a sort of quinque-partite or stellated eggs, that
this kind of Echinus has within it good to eat. Their outermost coat is full of
sharp prickles, upon which account they are sometimes called Chastaignes de Mer,
or sea Chestnuts, because of their likeness to rough prickles that encompass
Chestnuts whilst they are on the Tree; for which very reason they are also
called Herissons de Mer, sea Hedg-hogs, and Cardui Marini, sea Thistles: which
rough coat of theirs, when the Fish is dead, coming off from them, they then
discover their inward shell of that curious workmanship, that is lively
represented by our stone, Fig. 5. made up of so many compartements and
eminencies, and so regularly disposed, that, says Monsieur de Rochefort History
of the Isles Antilles, or Caribby Islands, chap. 19. art. 13.
(who calls them also Pommes de Mer, or sea Apples) the most ingenious
Embroiderer would be much troubled to imitate them. This Echinites ovarius was
found in the Parish of Teynton, and sent me by my worthy and ingenious Friend
Mr. Robert Veysey, to whom also I am beholding for many other matters mentioned
in this Essay.

85. From Teynton also was sent me another of this kind, but much smaller, not
exceeding the Rouncival pea, or French Halslet in bigness; and yet with lines
of compartement, and other eminencies as large as the former, but much fewer in
number: to which, whether there be any Animal in Nature whose shell will
exactly, or for the most part correspond, I much question; wherefore that it
may be examined both at home and abroad, I have caused it to be engraven, Fig.
6.

86. To which add a fourth sort with its prickles still on, found plentifully
in the Quarries near Shotover-hill, very like to the fifth sort of Echinus of
Aristotle, as depicted by Rondeletius De Piscibus, lib. 18. cap. 33.
, whose inward shell it seems is very small, but its prickles long and
stubborn, found always in the deepest waters, and sticking to Rocks, much after
the same manner as here represented in stone, Fig. 7. which in conformity to
Aristotle may be called Echinites minutus. And this had ended my Discourse of
Stones resembling Shellfish of the crustaceous kind, but that I am admonished
by the Learned, and deservedly Famous Virtuosi, Mr. Hook Micograph. Observe. 17.
and Mr. Ray Observations Topograph. p. 123.
, and since them by the Ingenious Sicilian Gentleman Monsieur Boccone
Recherches and Observations Naturelles, Lettre 28.
,

87. That the stone commonly styled Cornu Ammonis, also belongs to this place,
as being nothing else but the petrified shell of the Nautilus, or Coquille de
Porcellain; or as Rondeletius De Piscibus, lib. 17. cap. 9.
calls it, the testaceous Polypus. Of these we find plenty in the County of
Oxford, of different colors, figures, cizes, but all so curled up within
themselves, that the place of the head is always in the circumference and the
tail in the center of the stone, and therefore by the Ancients called Cornua
Ammonis, for that they resembled the curled horns of the Ram, worshipped by the
name of Jupiter Ammon in the deserts of Africa Quint. Curtii de reb. Gest.
Alexandri, Histor. lib. 4.
; to whom Alexander the Great having declared himself Son, that he might be the
more like so inhuman a Father, he assumed the horns of the Ram Deity, as may be
seen on the Impresses of some of his Money. And so did Lysimachus that succeeded
him in Thrace See the Cabinet in the Bodleyan Library.
, Attila the Hun, and some other proud Princes.

88. The places in this County most remarkable for this stone, are 1. The City
of Oxford it self, where, in digging cellars, foundations, etc. chiefly in the
eastern parts of it, they are commonly met with; whereof some are small, the
parts protuberant, and swelling to a round, as in Tab. 5. Fig. 8. others
broader and more depressed, as in Fig. 9. but the lineations of both waved, and
extended from toward the center, to a single edged ridge in the back of the
stone: and therein different from a third sort found also at Oxford, whose
lineations are larger, not so thick nor waved, and terminated at great
protuberances on each side of the stone, between which, on the broad back of
it, there intercede other lineations, the whole body of the stone being also
divided by Sutures, in form much resembling the leaves of Oak, as in Fig. 10.
The two latter of these are both perforated at the center, and therefore called
by Bauhinus Joann. Bauhinus de Lapidibus variis in fine Hist. admirabilis
fontis Bollensis.
, Cornua Ammonis pertusa: And all three adorned with a shining brazen Armature,
in luster equalling that metal it self, yet of which in substance it has
nothing less, though Agricola have affirmed it to be naturae rudimentum id
metallum facere discentis.

89. Boethius de Boot, in his Book de Lapidibus and Gemmis Cap. 246.
, thinks the stone it self naturally of a ferrugineous color, which lying in
an Earth sated with an aluminous juice, is changed thereby into this brazen
color. To which de Laet De Lapid. and Gemmis, cap. 22.
in his Supplement, adds, atramentum sutorium; both which, he says, joined,
give that color to Iron. For my part, I rather think it may be performed by
Nature, much after the same manner they guild money at our English Baths; if
so, there will be requisite something urinous, which they always add there to
superinduce such a color, whereof more at large when I come into
Somersetshire.

90. The second place eminent for production of these stones, is the Parish of
Cleydon, where they find them of many more turns than those at Oxford, though
not much bigger; without Armature, of a yellowish color (like the Asteriae
before mentioned found at the same place) and differently striated, as in Fig.
11. in which the striae from the innermost part of the stone are all single,
but many of them divided before they reach the rim of it, where they are
terminated with a back much more protuberant than the rest of the stone, but
alike striated.

91. Near Them, in the Fields Eastward from the Church, they sometimes meet
also with the Cornu Ammonis, striated singly like the former, near the inner
part of the stone, and presently dividing, but without termination either at
any ridge, or other protuberancies in the back; the division being continued to
the other side of the stone, where it is made again into one common lineation,
as in Fig. 12. Of which sort I had some arches or parts sent me also from
Chislehampton, by the Right Worshipful Sir John D'Oyly Baronet, in whom
flourish all the Virtues of that ancient House. But these (not like the former)
a hard stone, but some of them a kind of Terra lapidosa, or hardened yellow
clay, one degree perhaps above that of the bed wherein they lay; which (beside
Sir Thomas Pennystons clay Cockles) seem to overthrow Steno's In t^actatu de
Canis Carchariae dissecto capite, p. 118.
first conjecture concerning these matters: That they are always found in the
same place, of the same consistence; and that there are no signs amongst them
of sooner or later production.

92. And so do the Ophiomorphit's found in a bluish clay in the Parish of Great
Rolwright, Eastward from the Church, whereof some are so soft, that it is easy
to press them asunder with ones fingers; and others a hard bluish stone. But
though they agree with the former in the manner of production, they differ as
much in the manner of their lineations, for whereas their striae were divided
near the rim, some of the lineations of these come together there, and are
united in pretty large protuberant knobs on each side the back of the stone,
which in these being broad and somewhat rising, is crossed by other arched lines
that intercede the eminencies, as in Fig. 13.

93. Other Ophiomorphit's there are, that have only straight single ribs, which
terminate also in straight ridges that run along on each side the back of the
stone; between which two ridges, there rises a third more prominent one, just
in place as it were of the Spina dorsalis, as in Tab. 5. Fig. 14. which though
not wreathed, but plain like the other lower ridges on each hand it, I take to
be the Cornu Ammonis cristatum of Johannes Bauhinus Johannes Bauhinus de
Lapidibus variis in fine Hist. admirabilis fontis, Bollensis p. 20.
. One of these, of about four inches over, and made up of as many turns, was
given me by the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis; and there is another
amongst the (...) of the Medicin School, of above eight inches diameter, taken
up as they say somwhere about Corpus Christi College.

94. There are also Orphiomorphit's found sometimes about Adderbury, about two
miles from Banbury, but so very seldom, that though I were there often, I could
meet with none of them; so that I cannot inform the Reader whether they are of
any peculiar kind, different from what have been already described, or no:
However, that the Town has not its name from these stones (as Mr. Ray thinks) I
dare confidently avouch, Adderbury being only the vulgar name: for in the Court
Rolls of New College, (and oother Instruments) to which the Lordship of the
Town belongs, it is written Eabberbury, perhaps from St. Ebba the tutelar Saint
of the Church.

95. The biggest of the kind that I have yet met with, was at table of
muscle-stones TAB. V ad page 111

To the Worsp.ll THOMAS STONOR of WATLINGTON Park and STONOR Esquire This fifth
Table of FORMED STONES chiefly resembling SHELL FISH of the Crustaceous kind,
whereof the 3d and 4th sort were found in his own grounds, is humbly presented
by R. P. L. L D.

Clifton near Dorchester, but found as I was told at Sandford near Oxford,
about eleven inches over, and seventeen pounds in weight; having single ribs
only, without knobs or ridges at the back, which is plain and even, as in Fig.
15. which though little more than half so big as that mentioned by Dr. Merret
of 21 inches diameter Pinax rerum Naturalium, p. 215. There is another about
that bigness in the Repository of the Royal Society, given by the Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Norwich, Earl Marshal of England.
, that he saw in the Garden of one Mr. Rawdon, yet I guess it must needs so
extravagantly exceed the biggest Nautilus or Porcellane-shell, both in latitude
and number of turns, that we must be forced to seek out another origin for it.

96. Beside, its being in-laid with a small sort of Conchites, so placed in its
sides, that they have segments (if I may so call them) within the very bulk or
body of the Ophiomorphite, seems flatly to deny its original from the Nautilus,
for had this fallen out by compression of their shells together, their uniform
figures must needs have been spoiled, contrary to what appears as well in the
stone as its draught. Which brings me to consider the great Question now so
much controverted in the World.

Whether the stones we find in the forms of Shellfish, be Lapides sui generis,
naturally produced by some extraordinary plastic virtue latent in the Earth or
Quarries where they are found? Or whether they rather owe their form and
figuration to the shells of the Fishes they represent, brought to the places
where they are now found by a Deluge, Earthquake, or some other such means,
and there being filled with mud, clay, and petrifying juices, have in tract of
time been turned into stones, as we now find them, still retaining the same
shape in the whole, with the same lineations, sutures, eminencies, cavities,
orifices, points, that they had whilst they were shells? 97. In the handling
whereof, though I intend not any peremptory decision, but a friendly debate;
yet having according to the wishes and advice of those Eminent Virtuosi, Mr.
Hook and Mr. Ray, made some considerable collections of these kind of things,
and observed many particulars and circumstances concerning them: Upon mature
deliberation, I must confess I am inclined rather to the opinion of Mr. Lister,
that they are Lapides sui generis; than to theirs, That they are thus formed in
an Animal mold. The latter opinion appearing at present to be pressed with far
more, and more insuperable difficulties than the former.

98. For they that hold these stones were thus formed in the shells of fishes,
must suppose either with Steno In Prodromo.
, that they were brought hither by the Deluge in the days of Noah; or by some
other more particular, and perhaps National Flood, such as the Ogygean, or
Deucalionian in Greece, than either of which there is nothing more improbable.

99. First, not by the Flood in the days of Noah, because that (and for very
good reasons too) seems not to have been universal, and at most to have covered
only the continent of Asia Vide Stillingfleti Origines Sacras, lib. 3. cap. 4.
, and not to have extended it self to this then uninhabited Western part of the
World. But suppose it were universal, yet it proceeded from Rain, which (as Mr.
Ray well observes) would more likely have carried shells down into the sea,
than brought any upwards from it. And if it be further urged, That the
fountains of the great deep were broken up Genesis c. 7. ver. 11.
, and that the Deluge proceeded partly from a breaking forth and overflowing
of the sea, which consequently might bring in the shells: It may be answered,
that the overflowing, either gradually increased upon the Earth, or was
violent: if gradually, as it is most likely (for God caused not any wind to
pass over the Earth till the Waters began to assuage Genesis cap. 8. ver. 1.
; and besides, the Waters that descended in Rain, in all probability at first
ran down to the Sea, and gave some check to its floods) why should we think
that any shellfish, especially of the testaceous kind, whereof there are some
that always stick to rocks, and others that have no locomotion, as Oysters,
Muscles, etc. but what is given them by the Waters violence, should leave their
beds in the Sea at all, and be carried aloft to the tops of Mountains. And if
violent, then such a Flood would have indifferently scattered all sorts of
shells over the whole face of the Earth, especially in all valleys; whereas we
find the stones that resemble them many times at the tops of hills, and but in
few valleys; and those not scattered neither indifferently one amongst another,
but for the most part those of a kind together; and of the same kind too, those
of different lineations together. Thus at Cornwell and Hornton we find only
Conchites or Cockle-stones, and those striated (if at all) from side to side
transversly, as in Tab. 4. Fig. 7, 8. And so at Glympton only Cockle-stones,
but lineated the contrary way from the commissure to the rim, as in Fig. 6. of
the same Tab. On Cowley-common we find nothing but Ostracites, such as in Tab.
4. Fig. 19. And in the Gravel-pits of St. Clements a mixture of such
Oyster-stones, and (to which I believe it will be hard to adapt a shellfish)
the stone Belemnites. The Nephiri or Lapis Megaricus at Langley, is a bed of
nothing but Cockles as small as pease; and that at Charlton the same, only the
Cockles are somewhat bigger. So that these beds of Cockle-stones (if they must
needs have been shellfish) seem rather to have been their breeding places,
where they had abode for some considerable time (especially where we find them
of several cizes) than brought hither in the flood in the time of Noah, which
remained on the Earth but forty natural days, too small a time for so many
shellfish, so dispersed, as they must be presumed to be by so violent a
motion, to get together and sequester themselves from all other company, and
set them down, each sort, in a convenient station.

100. And secondly, that they should be brought by any other flood is
altogether as unlikely, since we have no other floods delivered down to us, but
the Ogygian and Deucalionian, which were restrained within Greece. But suppose
all that can be desired by the adverse party, that there was sometime or other a
National flood here in England, that did for some hundreds of years cover the
face of the Land, of which there is no Record delivered to posterity; yet that
it should cover the highest Hills, or if it did, that it should force the
shells to their tops, which are weighty and rather affect the lowest places, is
a concession as hard to be granted, as that the Mountains (where such stones as
resemble them are now found) were heretofore low places and since raised by
Earthquakes: a thing by no means to be believed of our Northern parts, where
the Earthquakes we have at any time are so inconsiderable, that they scarce
sometimes are perceived, much less affrighten us; unless we shall groundlesly
grant, that in the infancy of the World the Earth suffered more concussions,
and consequently more mutations in its superficies, than it has done ever since
the Records of time.

101. Yet granting too that in the Primitive Times there were such strange
Earthquakes, or else that there was some time or other such a Flood, that did
cover our highest hills, and which might be so violent, as to bring shells out
of the great deep, and place them on the tops of Mountains; yet that our formed
stones, at least the most of them, were not fashioned in such molds, but are
Lapides sui generis, may be strongly suspected from the following reasons.

102. First, because I have found some of them that resemble shellfish that
always stick to rocks, and cannot well be presumed to have come away with the
greatest Flood, unless so violent as to have brought the Rocks too: and such is
that engraven Tab. 5. Fig. 7. which whether it best represent the Echinus
quintus of Aristotle, or some sort of Lepas or Patella, equally makes for my
purpose, neither of them leaving the rock they stick too, being Vnivalves, and
having the rock it self instead of the other.

103. Secondly, because there are many shells, and other testaceous and bony
substances belonging to Fish, that must also have been left behind upon the ebb
of such a Flood as well as the rest, of which we have no stones that resemble
them at all. Such are the bones of Whales, Sea-horses, and the bones of all the
squammeous kind; the great shells of the Buccina, Murices, Conchae Veneris, and
Solenes; the sword of the Xiphias or Sword-fish, and almost all the crustaceous
kind, such as Crabs, Congers, Lobsters, etc. which last having locomotion, I
should much rather expected to have found petrified on the tops of Mountains,
than any of the testaceous kind, and yet of these we meet the fewest of any.

104. Thirdly, because there are many Stones formed indeed in the manner of
Bivalves, etc. which yet resemble no species of shellfish now to be found,
whereof several are abovementioned. And this is ingeniously confessed by
Fabius Columna Aquatil. and Terrestr. observat. cap. 21.
, though one of the Adversaries of this my present opinion: Addemus (says he)
Pectunculorum imagines, quarum quasdam non nisi lapideas vidimus, of which that
he calls his Mytulo-pectunculus rarior Berberoides, is one. If it be said, that
possibly these Species may be now lost, I shall leave it to the Reader to
judge, whether it be likely that Providence which took so much care to secure
the works of the Creation in Noah's Flood, should either then, or since, have
been so unmindful of some shellfish (and of no other Animals) as to suffer any
one species to be lost.

105. Fourthly, because there are several formed stones, that no body pretends
to know whether to refer, as representing neither Animals or Plants, either in
the whole or parts; such as the Selenites, Astroites, and Belemnites; which if
thus tacitly confessed to be Lapides sui generis, and formed by some latent
plastic power of the Earth, why might it not as well produce all the rest?
especially since scarce any of them are reduced to Animals or Plants without
great inconvenience. Thus they that think the Asteriae to be nothing but the
Spinae dorsales, or tail-bones of fish petrified (they consisting, it is true,
for the most part of pieces sticking together like Vertebrae) neither can tell
us of what sort of Fish, nor give us any reasonable account why the tail-bones
of such a particular Fish (for the Asteriae of all places are striated alike,
and seem to have had original from the same Species) should be thus petrified,
and not the tail-bones as well of some others?

106. And they that fancy the several Species of Brontiae to be nothing else
but the petrified shells of Echini Spatagi, or Brissi, would be hard put to it
to reconcile the different conditions of that shellfish and these stones: for
first, the Fish it self is but rarely found, (...), says Aristotle Hist.
Animalium, lib. 4. cap. 5.
, which is also confirmed by Rondeletius De Piscibus, lib. 18. cap. 31.
, whereas the Stones are plentiful enough. Again, the Echinus Spatagus has but
few bristles, aculeis parvis and raris septus, says the same Rondeletius Loco
citato.
, and those, if we may believe the Cuts of Authors, but disorderly set; which
how agreeable to our Brontiae, Tab. 2. and 3. let any man judge. The first of
them indeed in the gross Figure, is like the Herissons Spatagi of Boccone
Recherches and observations Naturelles Lettre 26.
which he saw in Holland, flat like a small cake; but he tells us nothing of
such numberless small annulets as there are in our Stones, which if heretofore
the places of so many bristles, but ill agree with the description of
Rondeletius. Beside these of Oxfordshire, there are several other sorts that I
have seen in other Counties (hereafter to be represented, in case this Essay
prove acceptable) which I could heartily wish the Ingenious Steno and Boccone,
or any other Curioso's, for the better clearing of this great Controversy,
would undertake to parallel (and so of other formed stones) with shells in all
parts answerable.

107. They that think the Cornua Ammonis, or Ophiomorphites, to have been
formerly nothing but Porcellane-shells, seem also to be pressed with the like
difficulties: for either there are several sorts of them not known to (I am
sure not described by) Authors, or else our stones must have their formation
from a different mold than their shells. For first, the shells seem to be
extravagantly broad at the mouth, as described by Rondeletius and Jonston, and
not to have more than two other small turns at most; whereas the turns of the
Ophiomorphit's are proportionable to one another, and in number many times four
or five, and sometimes six, if we may believe Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallicum,
lib. 4. cap. 1.
: Of which difference Chioccus Musaeum Calceolarium, sect. 3. p. 416.
seems to have been so well aware in his description of the latter part of the
Musaeum Calceolarium, that he makes the Cornu Ammonis and Nautilus lapideus to
be quite different things, and describes the latter very broad at the greater
end, and with but one turn, somewhat like indeed to the Porcellane-shell.

108. Beside, so far are some of our English Ophiomorphit's from ever having
been formed by the shell of the Nautilus, that at Huntley-Nab in the
North Riding of Yorkshire, they are found always included in other great round
stones, not unlike, says Mr. Cambden Cambden in Yorkshire.
, to Cannon bullets. And at Whitby, says Mr. Ray Topograph. Observat. p. 114.
, in stones of a lenticular figure, which if formerly they had been the shells
of Nautili, how they should become thus included in stones also of a
determinate figure, is a difficulty more insuperable than any of the former.
Add hereunto that Mr. Cambden Cambden in Somersetshire.
, and since him Dr. Childrey Britannia Baconica in Somersetshire.
plainly avouch, that the Ophiomorphit's of Cainsham, have some of them heads,
and that in this they differ from those of Yorkshire: Vidimus enim lapidem
hinc delatum serpentis in spiram revoluti effigy, cujus caput in
circumferentia prominuit, extrema cauda centrum occupante, are the very words
of Mr. Cambden. Which if I find true when I come into Somersetshire, will give
me, and I doubt not, others satisfaction beyond all exception; for that the
shells of the Nautili have any such matter, no body yet has, nor will dare to
pretend.

109. To which also add the greatness of some of these stones, whereof there
are some it seems near two Dr. Merret 's Pinax rerum natural. page 215.*
foot in diameter, far exceeding, says Mr. Ray Topograph. Observations, p. 127.
the bulk of any shellfish now living in our seas. To which if it be said that
most petrifications are made either by aggregation, or by intrusion or
protrusion of parts, which always increase the bulk of the subject: It may be
answered, that though such augmentation must be allowed indeed in many cases,
yet sure it did not so fall out in the petrification of the Nephiri or
Cockle-stone at Langley, where the stones are much less than most Natural
shells.

110. Fifthly, because that even those stones, which so exactly represent some
sort of shellfish, as Oysters, Cockles, etc. that there can be no exception
upon the account of figure, but that they might formerly have been shells
indeed; at some places are found with only one shell, and not the other. Thus
in Cowley-common we meet only with the gibbous, and not the flat shell of the
petrified Oyster, and so of the Escallop-stones in the Quarries near Shot-over;
which had they been once the shells of Oysters and Escallops, in all
probability had scarce been thus parted.

111. Sixthly, because I can by no means satisfy my self, how it should come
to pass, that in case these stones had once been molded in shells, some of the
same kind should be found in beds, as the Conchites at Langley, Charleton,
Adderbury, and others, scattered as at Glympton and Teynton; and so the
Ostracites at Shot-over and Cowley. Nor how it should fall out, that some of
these Bivalvulars should always be found with their shells apart, as the
Ostracites and Pectines: and others always closed together, as the Conchites in
all places I have yet seen.

112. Lastly, because many of these formed stones seem now to be in fieri, as
the Selenites at Shot-over and Hampton-Gay, the Conchites at Glympton and
Cornwell, where within one of the clay Cockles abovementioned, I found a
little one of stone, not exceeding a vetch in bigness; which had they been
formed heretofore by Cockle-shells, in all likelihood would both either have
been Stone or Clay. Nor can it be said they were brought hither by different
Floods, because they were both found in the same bed, one included in the
other. Which is all I have to urge for this part of the Question, but that in
the Bishopric of Hildesheim, between Alfeld and Eimbec, there is a sort of
Ochre that forms it self in this manner into the shape of Oysters Lachmundi
(...). sect. 1. cap. 4.
: And that Mr. Ray was informed by a person of good credit, of a stone of this
nature resembling a Cockle-shell, found in the belly of a Beef, where in all
likelihood it bred, and shot into that figure: Which if true, says he, there
can be no reason to doubt, but that those in the Quarries and other places are
so generated.

113. But against this opinion there are several considerable objections
brought by the ingenious Mr. Hook, Steno and Boccone, which I shall next
faithfully propound to the best advantage, and then see whether they may not
more easily be solved, than the arguments on the other side perhaps are like to
be.

114. First, That amongst those stones, there are some with the perfect shell,
in figure, color and substance, sticking to their surface; especially, says
Mr. Hook Micrograph. Observe. 17.
, (discoursing of these matters) those Serpentine or Helical stones were
covered with, or retained the shining or pearl-colour'd substance of the inside
of a shell, which substance on some parts of them was exceeding thin, and might
be easily rubbed off; on other parts it was pretty thick, and retained a white
coat, or flaky substance on the top, just like the outsides of such shells;
some of them had very large pieces of the shell, very plainly sticking on to
them, which were easily broken or flaked off by degrees. Add hereunto some
particulars mentioned by Steno In Prodromo.
. 1. That there was found a Pearl-bearing shell in Tuscany, a Pearl yet
sticking to the shell. 2. A piece of the great Sea-nacre [pinna marina] in
which the silk-like substance within the shell being consumed, the color of
that substance did remain in the earthy matter which had filled the shell. 3.
That about the City of Volaterra, there are many beds of earth, not stony,
which do abound with true Cockle-shells, that have suffered no change at all,
and yet they must needs have lain there above 3000 years; whence it is evident,
that that part of Tuscany was of old time covered with the Sea: And why then
might not as well all those other places where these petrified shells are
found? 4. To which also let me add, that at some places here in England,
particularly at Cats-grove near Reading, a place sufficiently remote from the
Sea (of which more at large when I come into Berk-shire) they meet with a bed
of Oyster-shells both flat and gibbous, about 12 or 14 foot under ground, not
at all petrified, all of them opened, except some very few, that I suppose have
casually fallen together; which how they should come there without a Deluge,
seems a difficulty to most men not easily avoided.

115. To all which it may be answered, first in general with Mr. Lister
Philosoph. Transact. Number. 76,
, that we will easily believe that along the shoars of most Countries, such as
are particularly the shoars of the British and Mediterranean Seas, there may
all manner of Sea-shells be found promiscuously included in Rocks or Earth, and
at good distances from the Sea, where the grounds are no higher than the
Volaterran hillock, which meeting with suitable petrifying juices, may either
be wholly petrified, or where the juices are not compotent, be only
metamorphos'd in part, some of the shelly substance still remaining; or not
changed at all, as in the instances of Steno, and perhaps of Mr. Hook, for he
tells us not where he found those semipetrified stones.

116. But secondly, Suppose he found them in the highest and most Inland
Counties, since he tells us not that he found them in any great plenty, we can
easily also admit that some small quantities of shells thrown away after the
Inhabitants had eaten the fish, may even there be filled with mud and
petrifying juices, and so turned either in the whole or part into stone.

117. And thirdly, provided it be near a great Town or City, either now
flourishing, or that did so heretofore, and has formerly been the seat of much
action; it may be allowed also that some quantities of shells may be found,
either perfectly or but imperfectly petrified, or that have suffered no change
at all: which helps me to a salvo for my own Objection taken from the bed of
true Oyster-shells found near Reading, it having been a Town of very great
action during the Invasions of the Danes, who cutting a deep trench cross
between the Kennet and Thames, and enclosing themselves as it were in an
Island, held it against King Ethelred, and Alfred his Brother Vid. Hen.
Huntingdon, lib. 5. and Asserium Meneven. de rebus gestis Aelfredi.
a considerable time; from whence, in all probability, the Saxons having
removed their Cattle and other provisions before the Danes arrival, it is likely
that they might be supplied from their Navy with Oysters, which during the time
of the abode of the Army on Land, might be a very suitable employment for it:
Which conjecture, if allowed, there is nothing more required to make out the
possibility of the bed of Oysters coming thither without a Deluge, but that
Cats-grove was the place appointed for the Armies repast.

118. Secondly, That these formed stones are many of them in all respects like
the living shellfish; thus says Boccone, the Herissons Spatagi of stone
Recherches and observat. Naturelles, Lettre 26.
, the Cornua Ammonis or Nautili lapides Libro citato, Lettre 28.
, have the very marks, characters, eminencies, cavities, and all other parts
alike, with the true living Nautili, and Herissons spatagi, and Brissi of
Imperato, and Rondelet, which proves, says he, the body changed to have been
the very same thing, with that which is living. But I must tell him, it does it
but very weakly, all arguments drawn a similitudine being the most
inefficacious of all others, such rather illustrating than proving, rather
persuading than compelling an adversaries assent: For how many hundred things
are there in the World, that have some resemblance of one another, which no
body will offer to think were ever the same, and particularly amongst some
other formed stones hereafter to be mentioned. Such are the stones Otites, or
Auriculares, several sorts of Cardites, Lapides Mammillares, Hysterolithos,
etc. which though they as exactly resemble those parts of Men from whence they
have their names, as any Conchites or Echinites do those shellfish; yet no Man
that I ever heard of, so much as dreamed that these were ever the real parts of
Men, in process of time thus turned into stone. As well might we say, that our
Kettering-stone in Northamptonshire here in England, was once nothing else but
the spawn of Lobsters; than which, that I know of, there is nothing more like.

119. But should it be granted that these stone Herissons spatagi were sometime
real shellfish, as reasonably enough perhaps we may, they being found at
Malta, as you come into the Port over against St. Erme Libro citato, Lettre 26.
, yet this by no means would conclude that all others of the form must needs be
so, that are attended with much different, and indeed (in respect of having
once been shells) inexplicable circumstances.

120. Thirdly and lastly, That it seems quite contrary to the infinite prudence
of Nature, which is observable in all its works and productions, to design
every thing to a determinate end, and for the attaining that end, makes use of
such ways as are (as far as the knowledge of man has yet been able to reach)
altogether consonant and agreeable to man's reason, and of no way or means that
does contradict, or is contrary to human ratiocination: Whence it has been a
general observation and Maxim, that Nature does nothing in vain. It seems I say
contrary to that great wisdom of Nature, that these pretily shaped bodies
should have all those curious figures and contrivances (which many of them are
adorned and contrived with) generated or wrought by a plastic virtue, for no
higher end than only to exhibit a form Mr. Hooks Micrographia, Observe. 17.
.

121. To which I answer, that Nature herein acts neither contrary to her own
prudence, human ratiocination, or in vain, it being the wisdom and goodness of
the Supreme Nature, by the Schoolmen called Naturans, that governs and directs
the Natura naturata here below, to beautify the World with these varieties;
which I take to be the end of such productions as well as of most Flowers, such
as Tulips, Anemones, etc. of which we know as little use as of formed stones.
Nay, perhaps there may proportionably, number for number, be as many of them of
Medicinal or other use, such as Selenites, Belemnites, Conchites, Lapis
Judaicus, etc. as there are of Plants: So that unless we may say also (which I
guess no body will) that these are produced contrary to the great wisdom of
Nature, we must not of stones.

122. And thus I have given the grounds of my present opinion, which has not
been taken up out of humor or contradiction, with intent only to affront other
worthy Authors modest conjectures, but rather friendly to excite them, or any
others, to endeavor collections of shellfish, and parts of other Animals, that
may answer such formed stones as are here already, or may hereafter be
produced: Which when ever I find done, and the reasons alleged solidly
answered, I shall be ready with acknowledgment to retract my opinion, which I
am not so in love with, but for the sake of Truth I can cheerfully cast off
without the least reluctance.

123. However, in the mean time since no doubt it will be expected, upon so
deliberate rejection of Animal molds, that some further and more particular
account should be given of the Plastic virtue, or whatever else it is, that
effects these shapes: I shall briefly set down also my present thoughts
concerning it, which yet I intend not my self (much less desire the Reader) to
embrace, any further then I shall find them agreeable to future experience.

124. That Salts are the principal Ingredients of stones, I think has so
sufficiently been noted already, that to endeavor any further evidence of the
thing, would be actum agere in me, and loss of time to the Reader: And if of
stones in general, much rather sure of formed ones, it being the undoubted
prerogative of the Saline Principle to give Bodies their figure, as well as
solidity and duration: No other principle that we yet know of naturally
shooting into figures, each peculiar to their own kind, but salts; thus Nitre
always shoots into Pyramids, salt Marine into Cubes, Alum into octo, and Sal
Ammoniac into Hexaedrums, and other mixed salts into as mixed figures.

125. Of these spontaneous inclinations of salts, each peculiar to its kind, we
have further evidence in the Chemical Anatomy of Animals, particularly in the
volatile salt of Hartshorn, which in the beginning of its ascent is always
seen branched in the head of the Cucurbit like the natural Horn. And we were
told the last Term by our very Ingenious and Learned Sidleyan Professor Dr.
Tho. Millington Fellow of All Souls Coll.
here in Oxon, That the salt of Vipers ascends in like manner, and shoots into
shapes somewhat like those Animals, placed orderly in the glass. Thus in
congelations which are all wrought by adventitious salts, we frequently find
curious ramifications, as on Glass-windows in winter, and the figured flakes of
snow; of which Mr. Hook Mr. Hooks Micrograph. Observe. 14. Schem. 8.
observed above an hundred several sorts, yet all of them branched as we paint
stars, with six principal Radii of equal length, shape, and make, issuing from
a center where they are all joined in angles of 60 degrees.

126. What salt it should be that gives this figure, though it be hard to
determine, yet certainly it must not be a much different one from that which
gives form to our Astroites and Asteriae, whereof, though the latter have but
five points, and therefore making angles where they are joined at the center of
72 degrees; yet the Astroites both in mezzo Rilievo and Intagli, as in Tab. 2.
have many more. Perhaps there may be something of an Antimonial salt that may
determine Bodies to this starry figure, as no question it does in the Regulus,
and the Caput mortuum of the Cinnabar of Antimony. To such a salt may also be
referred our Brontiae or Ombriae, and all the Echinites, some whereof are
plainly, all in some measure stellated at the top.

127. The Belemnites which are all striated from a center, yet in the whole
affect a pyramidal form; seem to have somewhat also of an Antimonial, but a more
prevalent quantity of a nitrous salt.

128. The Conchites, Pectinites, and Ostracites, whether transversly striated,
or from the commissures to the rim, seem to own their origin to urinous salts,
which shoot likewise from a center (as suppose from the hinges of these stones)
but generally are most extended to one side, as may be seen in the branched
figure formed on the surface of urine by freezing, in Mr. Hooks Micrography
Ibidem.
; whose striae not obtaining much above the quadrant of a circle, whatever
other difference there may be, in this respect at least is agreeable to our
stones.

129. To which add the Ophiomorphit's, or Cornua Ammonis, most probably formed
either by two salts shooting different ways, which by thwarting one another
make a helical figure, just as two opposite winds or waters make a Turbo; or
else by some simple, yet unknown salt, that affects such a figure: perhaps the
stems and branchings bended in a most excellent and regular order, like the
ribs of some of our Ophiomorphit's, observed by Mr. Hook Micrographia observe.
14.
in Regulus Martis stellatus, might not a little conduce to the clearing this
matter.

130. How near I am to the mark in these former Conjectures, I dare not too
temerariously resolve: But as to the formation of the Rhomboideal Selenites,
Tab. 2. Fig. 1. with a little more confidence I shall venture to pronounce it,
to come from a Tartareous salt in the Earth; having observed in the Honorable
Mr. Boyl's way of preparing Tarta^ized Spirit of Wine Essay 1. of the
unsuccessfulness of Experiments.
, that the Calx of Tartar being sated with the phlegmatic part of the Spirit,
and dissolved by the heat; set to cool, sometimes shoots (I dare not say always)
exactly into such Rhomboideal figures made up of plates, and the whole
Rhomboids sometimes issuing out of one another, just as we find the Selenites
often do.

131. More might have been added concerning some other formed stones hereafter
to be mentioned; but I have now only time to hint my Hypothesis, which I
suppose may be sufficiently done in the afore-going instances; not intending to
prosecute it further till I have had more experience, which this my present
attempt serves to show the World is yet but small. And therefore I hasten on to
the residue of the formed stones, which according to my method laid down in the
beginning of this Chapter (having done with all such as relate to the waters)
are those that resemble any terrestrial bodies; and amongst them, first of such
as belong to the vegetable Kingdom.

132. Whereof there are some that represent whole Plants, and such is the
Fungites or Tuberoides, found somwhere in the Chiltern about
Stoken-Church-hill, and engraven Tab. 6. Fig. 1. of a cinereous color without,
but a black Flint within, and lively representing one of the fungi lethales non
esculenti.

133. Others there are that resemble only the parts of Plants, and such is that
depicted Tab. 6. Fig. 2. like a Bryony-root broken off transversly, and showing
the fibrillae from the center to the circumference, with the other striae
descending down the sides, and the annulary divisions; and all these in a stone
so exactly of the color of a Bryony-root, that it would be hard to distinguish
it, were it not for the weight. This was found in the Quarry-pits of rubble
stone near Shot-over hill.

134. And others there are again like the Fruits of Trees, as in Tab. 6. Fig.
3, and 4. which in general may be called Lapides pyriformes, whereof the first
is a black flint found somwhere near Bix brand, above eleven inches round, and
in bigness and form resembling the Bell or King-pear: The other a sort of
Pebble, whitish without, and yellow within (as manifestly appears at the place
of the strig) in the shape of a Warden-pear, found in the Parish of Waterstock,
by the Learned and Ingenious Sir George Croke, somwhere near his house.

135. In the Parish of Whitchurch not far from Hardwick-house, I found a hard
stone in the form of an Apricock, with the Rimula or cleft from the pedicle to
the apex, just as in the true plum, and as depicted Tab. 6. Fig. 5. And in the
Quarries of rubble stone near Shotover-hill, I met with a kind of spar, shot
exactly into protuberances (and in the whole bulk) like a Mulberry, as in Fig.
6.

136. On the Chiltern-hills near to Sherbourn, I found a white Flint, with
another set in it, in the form of a Luca Olive, as in Fig. 7. To which may be
added, the Lapides Judaici of Oxfordshire, which though of a much more slender
and longer figure than any sort of Olive, yet because in other Countries they
are found in that shape, and for that very reason called sometimes Pyrenes, and
treated on by Authors Gesner de Figuris Lapidum, cap. 9.
amongst stones relating to the fruits of Trees, I shall not change their
place. We find them here of different cizes, from about two inches in length
and an inch and half in circuit, downwards to an inch and less in length, and
not much above half an inch round: Most of them have a kind of pedicle, from
which they seem to have had their growth, and are ridged and channelled the
whole length of the stone, the ridges being purled with small knots, set in the
Quincunx order, as in Tab. 6. Fig. 8. As to their texture, I find it to be very
curious, made up of Lamellae or little thin plates, not unlike the stone
Selenites; only these are opaque, and the whole bulk of the stone indeed much
different. The Plates, as in the Selenites, seem to be made up of strings,
which in most of them run three, but in some but two ways; according to the
running of these strings the stones will easily cleave, but generally some one
way rather than any other, which most commonly is agreeable to the helical
running of the ridges of knots or furrows between them, yet all ways obliquely
to the Axis of the stone, as is perfectly shown, Tab. 6. Fig. 9. which
represents the stone broken the three several ways.

137. By Authors they are said to be of different Sexes, the lesser and rounder
of the feminine, and the greater and longer of the masculine gender; whereof
the former is good against the stone in the bladder, and the latter against it
in the kidneys, for which reasons they are sometimes by Authors called Eurrhei,
and Tecolithi. The greater and longer, says Gesner Idem loco citato.
are rarely found, but that must be restrained to his own Country; for here in
Oxfordshire, and particularly in the Quarries of rubble stone near
Shotover-hill, we have plenty of them.

138. There is another sort of them also at the same place, much more slender
than the rest, plain and smooth, without either ridges or channels, mentioned
by Caesalpinus Andreas Caesalpinus de Metallicis, lib. 2 cap. 44.
; which (and not the Lapis Judaicus) by him is said to be the true Tecolithus
of Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 37. cap. 10.
, that breaks and expels the stone, if the Patient do but lick it. Of color
without, it is a whitish yellow, and breaks into shining white plates obliquely
to the axis of the stone, like the former, but whether made up of threads
running differing ways, I could not afford to try, having but one of the kind;
which was found and given me, beside several other matters of the same nature,
by my very good Friend Edward Tyson A. M. an ingenious and industrious searcher
into the works of Nature and Arts.

139. Hither also must be referred the fresh water Adarce made at the Cascade
at Sommerton, which though but a mere incrustation, and formed not of it self,
but ad formam alterius, viz. of the grass about which it gathers, and therefore
none of the Lithophyta; yet it having some form, though but accidental, I have
thought rather fit to misplace it here, than omit to show the Reader how
prettily the grass is sheathed with stone, which is accuratly expressed by Fig.
10.

140. Thus having done with the Lapides (...), I proceed to the stones
resembling Animals, either in the whole or parts; amongst which, some there are
that seem to have been reptils petrified, which possibly enough coming to the
places where they are now found in stone without the difficulties of a flood,
may be true enough too: though I know some places in other Counties, where
there are Cochleomorphit's or snail-stones so thick, that they seem unlikely to
have ever been the spoils of that Animal. In Oxfordshire indeed I have met
with but two, one at Teynton, and another in the rubble Quarries near
Shotover-hill, both which being of the same shape, color and bigness, are
represented together under Fig. 11.

141. At the same rubble Quarries we find also the Lapides vermiculares, or
worm-stones of two sorts, whereof one is of a whitish yellow color, not hollow
within, and as far as I could perceive of the same texture with the rubble
stone it self; some of them are of the bigness of a small quill, and lie in the
rock in mezzo rilievo irregularly contorted, much after the manner of the
Vermicchiara, or Alcyonio Milesio of Ferrante Imperato Dell' Hist. Natural,
lib. 27. cap. 8.
, as in Tab. 6. Fig. 13. whereas the other sort lies in the very body of the
stone, of a white color, and regularly curled up like the table of formed
stones TAB. VI ad page 126.

To the right Worspll. the virtuous and most accomplished Gent. Sr THOMAS
CHAMBERLEYN Baront This sixth Table of FORMED STONES with all imaginable respect
is humbly dedicated by R P L L D

spring of a Watch, as in Fig. 12.

142. After those that concern Reptils, come we next to formed stones that
resemble the parts of four footed beasts, whereof we meet with one sort in the
Quarries at Heddington, set in the body of the stone, the most like to the head
of a Horse of any thing I can think of; having the ears, and crest of the mane
appearing between them, the places of the eyes suitably prominent, and the rest
of the face entire, only the mouth and nostrils are absent in them all, as in
Tab. 7. Fig. 1. These are plentifully enough found, and of diverse cizes, yet
not mentioned that I know of by any Author, wherefore I have taken the boldness
to fit them with a name, and in imitation of other Authors (in the like case)
shall call them Hippocephaloides.

143. At Heddington in the same Quarry there are plenty of Cardites, or stones
in the forms of hearts, but by Authors, because of their bigness, generally
called Bucardites, or stones like Bulls hearts. These at Heddington are all of
them of a whitish yellow color, smooth and plain, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 2. but
there are others found about Brise-Norton and Witney, that seem to be ribbed on
each side, as in Fig. 3. Of these I had one sent me by my worthy Friend Robert
Perrot Esquire from North-Leigh, ten inches round, and near two pounds in weight,
which is the biggest of the kind that I ever yet saw, except one that I found
at Shetford, going up a little hill eastward of the town, about 20 pounds in
weight, though broken half away, curiously reticulated with a
white-spar-colour'd stone, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 4. which being much too heavy for
my Horse-portage, was afterward upon my direction, fetched away by that miracle
of Ingenuity Sir Anthony Cope, since whose decease it is come I suppose into
the hands of his equally ingenious Brother Sir John Cope, the Heir of his
Virtues as well as Estate.

144. To these add the Orchites, or Lapides testiculares, that lie at the foot
of Shotover-hill, which though indeed they extravagantly exceed those parts as
well of beasts as men, yet of the two I rather thought fit to place them here:
Most of them lie in pairs coupled together, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 6. and are
called Diorchites; but sometimes (as it also falls out in monstrous Animal)
there are three of them found together, and then we call them T iorchites,
whereof there are two or three on the foot of the same Hill of so vast a
bigness, that I guess they cannot be less than a tun in weight: I am sure that
which lies highest on the Hill, and is here represented Fig. 5. is so much at
the least. Of these all that Western side of the Hill seems to be composed, if
one may guess by their appearance above the ground on each hand the way; but
how they should come there, or with what Animal-mold formed (if not by some
peculiar plastic power in the earth) I leave to the favorers of that opinion to
find.

145. Hither also I must refer for the very same reason, a sort of stone found
in the Quarries of rubble stone near Shotover, composed as it were of filaments
like hair, which yet must not be the Polythrix of Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 37.
cap. 10.
because not greenish, nor the Bostrychites of Zoroastres, or the Corsoides of
the same Pliny Idem loco ^itato.
, because neither gray nor long. However, let it be a Thrichites (though the
word be differently used by Dioscorides Lib. 5 cap. 114.
) and the rather placed here, because most like the short hair of beasts: Of
color it is yellowish, and each hair (as they appear in the Microscope) seems
to be striated and channelled its whole length; but to the naked eye they show
themselves only in columns, which at certain distances are all jointed, as in
Fig. 7.

146. Beside the stones representing the parts of the Viviparous, I have met
with one that seems to belong to the oviparous Quadrupedes, and that is a
Bufonites or Toad-stone, which perhaps may better deserve its name, than any
yet mentioned by other Authors. For by my Bufonites or Toad-stone, I intend not
that shining polished stone, first demonstrated by the Ingenious and Learned
Dr. Merret, in His Majesty's presence, to be nothing else but the jaw-tooth or
grinder of the Lupus marinus, and so confessed to be by the Goldsmiths that sold
them. But a certain reddish liver-colour'd real stone, indeed of the form of
those of the Shark-fish, i. e. like the segment of a sphere, unequal at the top,
and concave underneath, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 8. but found amongst the Gravel in
Magdalen Coll. Walks: and may be so called (as I presume the others are) from
some resemblance they have to the figure of a Toads skull, not that there comes
any such thing out of a vexed toads head, as is commonly and no less fabulously
reported.

147. The stones that resemble the parts of Men being next to be considered, I
shall begin with those that have relation to the head, and so descend in order
to the lower parts: According to which method, the first that presents it self
is one of the Brontiae, whose upper part was described before, sect. 33. of
this Chapter, where I had also shown its basis, but that it somewhat resembles
part of the (...), or basis of a Man's brain, yet included within its dura
Meninx, with the several pairs of nerves cut asunder as they come through it,
according as the brain is prepared and inverted in Dr. Willis's new way of
dissecting it: Beside the exit of the processus Mammillares, and several pairs
of nerves, it has a fair resemblance of the Cerebellum at a a, and of the
Medulla oblongata at b b, as is plainly represented in Tab. 7. Fig. 9. This was
found, as abovesaid, in the Chiltern Country, and much better deserves the
name of Encephaloides, than any described by Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallicum,
lib. 4. c. 1. page 477.
, or others.

148. Add hereunto another sort of stone, found in the rubble Quarry near
Shotover-hill, lively representing the Olfactory nerves or par primum, entire
and whole, and not cut off. Of these there are many to be found in these pits
of a yellowish color, smooth without, and I think all of them (for I have
broke several) hollow within, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 10.

149. I have also a stone (not unlike a pebble) found somwhere in the gravel
near the City of Oxford, of an oval figure, and for the greatest part of a
reddish color; but at one end distinguished, first with a circle of white,
within which is a Zone of the proper color of the stone, and then a round
pupilla of white, in the whole resembling the figure of an Eye obscured by a
Cataract, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 11. This I should have taken for the stone called
Beli Oculus, but that Boethius Boethius de Boot, de lapid. and gem. lib. 2. c. 99.
expressly makes the body of that to be of a white color: The nearest it comes
to any yet described, is the Leucophthalmus of Pliny, which he plainly says is
of a reddish color, in which yet it carries the form of an Eye both for white
and black Not. Hist. lib. 37. cap. 10.
Vid. Erasmi Colloquium cui Tit. Peregrination Religionis ergo.
: And so does ours, only it wants the black Pupilla, which we must suppose to
be covered by a Cataract. However, it may pass for an Ophthalmites, or some
sort of Eye-stone: whence I proceed to some others, in shape also of another of
our senses Organs.

150. Which by reason they so well resemble the Ears of a Man, though much
less, as in Tab. 7. Fig. 12. I have made bold to call them Otites, or
Auriculares: Of which we have plenty in the rubble Quarries near Shotover, in
the banks of the Highways North of Fulbrook Church; but the most I saw any
where yet, are in a bank near a spring rising at Sommerton Towns end, Eastward
from the Church, in the Lordship of the Worshipful Richard Fermor Esquire whose
many ingenious Contrivances about his House, beside other assistances he
readily afforded me, have eminently contributed to this History, as will more
abundantly appear in the Chapter of Arts.

151. From the Upper, I descend next to such formed stones as resemble any of
the parts of the middle Ventricle, or Thorax: whereof I met with some on
Stoken-Church Hill, of a Flinty substance, strangely like to human Paps, or
Duggs; having not only the Mamma, but Papilla too, surrounded by an Areola, and
studded with small protuberances, as in Tab. 7, Fig. ult. and therefore well
deserving the name of Mammillares: than which yet I had once a much better
pattern, unhappily lost in the portage, betwixt my Chamber and the Gravers.

152. And if we look further into the inner parts, I have a stone that so
exquisitely represents the Heart of a Man, as in Tab. 8. Fig. 1. that at, and
near the basis, there remains the trunck of the descending part of the Vena
Cava at a, the ascending portion of the Vena Cava at b; and from the left
Ventricle the trunck of the Arteria magna, tending upwards at c, and a portion
of the same Artery tending downwards at d. This was also found on the Hills
near Stoken-Church, being a whitish kind of Flint, and perhaps may merit the
name of Anthropocardites. Whereunto add another found in the Gravel near
Oxford, by my ingenious Friend John Banister M. A. of Magdalen College, which
though not so exactly of the shape of a Heart as the former, yet because
stellated all over from the basis to the mucro, as in Fig. 2. I thought its
admittance would not be ungrateful to the Reader.

153. Other stones there are also in likeness of some parts of the Abdomen or
lowest Ventricle; such are the stones, Didymoides, found in the Quarries of
rubble stone near Shotover-hill, having upon it both the rugosity, and suture
of the Scrotum, And Phalloides, which I met with near the Windmill at
Nettlebed, perfectly representing table of formed stones TAB. VII ad page 130

To the right Worspll. Sr. JOHN D'OYLU Baront. in whom lodge all the virtues of
HIS ancient house. This 7th. Table of FORMED STONES with all due respect is
humbly presented by R P. LLD.

presenting the glans and praeputium penis humani; but without any fraenum
fastened to the urethra: Of which out of modesty I have given no sculptures.

154. To these add another stone which we may call Lapis Nephriticus, not from
any likeness either in color or effect to the whitish green stone used in
distempers of the Kidneys (though the signature it carries might persuade a
trial) but from the color and figure it has of the Kidney of an Animal, with a
trunck of one of the Vreters descending from the hollow of it, as in Tab. 8.
Fig. 3. This stone was lent me by the Reverend and universally Learned Dr.
Ralph Bathurst, Vice Chancellor of Oxford, and Dean of Wells, one of the most
cordial Encouragers of this design; who found it hanging to an Oyster by that
part which represents the Vreter, which was then so soft that he easily cut it
away with his knife; but within less than an hour (like the Gorgonia of Pliny
Not. Hist. lib. 37. cap. 10.
) it grew as hard as the rest of the stone, which I guess may be equal to that
of a Pebble: preserving, I suppose, its native softness whilst it enjoyed the
salt steams in the heap of Oysters, and not hardening till exposed to the purer
Air; which evidently shows (though the opinion be exploded of Coral) that there
are indeed some other Sea things, soft under water, or whilst they enjoy the
steams of it, that as soon as exposed to the fresher Air, become presently
stones.

155. Next the stones that relate to either of the three Ventricles, come we
next to such as concern the Artus, or other members of the body: Amongst which,
I have one dug out of a Quarry in the Parish of Cornwell, and given me by the
ingenious Sir Thomas Pennyston, that has exactly the figure of the lowermost
part of the thigh bone of a Man, or at least of some other Animal, with the
capita femoris inferiora, between which are the anterior (hid behind the
sculpture) and the larger posterior sinus, the seat of the strong ligament that
rises out of the thigh, and that gives safe passage to the vessels descending
into the leg: And a little above the sinus, where it seems to have been broken
off, showing the marrow within of a shining spar-like substance, of its true
color and figure, in the hollow of the bone, as in Tab. 8. Fig. 4. In compass
near the capita femoris just two foot, and at the top above the sinus (where
the thigh bone is as small as any where) about 15 inches; in weight, though
representing so short a part of the thigh bone, almost 20 pounds.

156. Which are dimensions, and a weight, so much exceeding the ordinary course
of nature, that by Agricola De Natura Fossilium, lib. 7.
, Caesalpinus De Metallicis, lib. 2. cap. 48.
, and Kircher Kircheri Mundus subterran. lib. 8. sect. 2. cap. 4. disq. 2.
, such stones have been rather thought to be formed either in hollows of Rocks
casually of this figure, and filled with materials fit for petrification; or by
some other sportive plastic power of the Earth, than ever to have been real
bones, now petrified.

157. And that indeed there are stones thus naturally fashioned, must by no
means be doubted, since no question the stony teeth of which there are
Cart-loads to be had in a Cave near Palermo, beside others in the shape of leg
and thigh-bones, and of the Vertebrae of the back, are no others than such Idem
loco citato, disq. 1.
. None of them, as the judicious Charles Marquess of Ventimiglia well observed,
having any signs of hollowness for the place of the marrow, much less of the
marrow it self.

158. Which has fully convinced me that this stone of ours was not so produced,
it having those signs exquisitly expressed; but must have been a real bone, now
petrified, and therefore indeed not properly belonging to this place. However,
it being now a stone, and not coming to my hands whilst I was treating of
petrifications, I have rather thought fit to throw my self upon the Readers
candor, and mis place it here, as I did the Adarce, than altogether to omit so
considerable an instance.

159. But against this opinion of its having been once a real bone, there lies
a considerable objection, viz. that it will be hard to find an Animal
proportionable to it, both Horses and Oxen falling much short of it. To which
if it be answered, that it may be much increased in the petrification; it may
again be replied, that though indeed there be an augment in some
petrifications, yet that it is not so in all: for though in all petrifications
there be an ingress of steams and particles that were not there before, and
therefore either a cession of some other body required, or a necessary
augmentation; yet that those petrifying steams are sometimes so thin and fine,
that they require only the cession of some Airy or Ethereal atoms contained
before in the porous parts of the body to be changed, as indeed it appears to
have been in this instance of our petrified bone: for with it was found a
tooth, depicted Fig. 5. in its exact bigness, weighing two ounces and, not at
all petrified but perfect bone still, rather exceeding than any thing short of
it in proportion; whence it must necessarily be concluded, that there could be
but little if any augmentation at all.

160. And if it be asked how it should come to pass that the thigh bone should
be petrified, and not the tooth, it may be answered, and that experimentally
too, that teeth admit not so easily of any change or petrification, because
they are much more closely compacted substances than any other bones; whence
it is, that we so often find them sound and good, when all other bones are
consumed. Thus at Bathendown, or Bannerdown (the Mons Badonicus of Nennius) not
far from Bath in Somersetshire, there have been Caps full of teeth picked up
by such as followed the Plough Stow's Annals, in the Life of King Arthur.
, but we are told of no other bones found there. And we are informed by
Fazellus, in his History of Sicily, that of two Giants Sceletons, one found by
Johannes a brachiis fortibus, in the Field Gibilo, a mile South of the Town
Mazarenum, now Mazara; and the other by Paulus Leontinus, not far from Palermo,
that when they came to be touched, all fell into dust but the dentes molares,
or the greater teeth called the Grinders Tho. Fazelli de rebus Siculis Decad.
prioris, lib. 1. cap. 6.
, sufficient Arguments (I had almost said) of their unalterable state.

161. Since then it seems to be manifest, that the cize of the bone has been
scarce altered in its petrification: It remains, that it must have belonged to
some greater Animal than either an Ox or Horse; and if so (say almost all other
Authors in the like case) in probability it must have been the bone of some
Elephant brought hither during the Government of the Romans in Britan: But this
opinion too lies under so great difficulties, that it can hardly be admitted;
which are briefly these.

162. First, That we do not find that any of the Roman Authors, who elsewhere
are large enough in describing the Elephants behavior in fight, and how
terrible they were to some of the Trans-Alpine Nations, mention any such matter
in any of their Expeditions into Britan. Dion Dionis Cassii Romans Hist. lib. 60.
, it is true, says, That Claudius Caesar, when he was called to the assistance
of the Praetor Aulus Plautius, sore pressed by the Britans, then revenging the
death of their slain Prince Togodumnus, amongst other preparations, gathered
together his Elephants, (...), are his very words. But Suetonius in his life,
where he is very particular concerning this Expedition into Britan, mentions no
such matter; nor indeed does Dion say, that he brought them hither with him,
only that he gathered them together in order to it. But they both agree in
this, that he met with such storms in his intended passage by Sea thither, that
he was forced to put in at Marseilles, and march by Land quite through France
to Gessoriacum, now supposed to be Boulogne, from whence it is true he passed
over to Britan. But so swift was his motion in this Expedition, that they also
both agree, that he was returned to Rome again within six months, a time scarce
agreeable with the motion of so unwildy Creatures as Elephants; which in all
likelihood were therefore left behind at Marseilles, because hindered by the
weather of their Sea portage, and never transported into Britan at all. Nor
find I in other Authors, that it was ever after attempted. One there was, it is
true, sent hither as a present by St. Lewis the 9th, King of France, to King
Henry the Third, Anno 1255. which, says Matthew Paris Matthew. Paris in Reg. Hen.
3. in Anno Dom. 1255.
, was the first seen on this side the Alps; and perhaps there may have been two
or three brought for show hither since: but whether it be likely any of these
should be buried at Cornwell, let the Reader judge.

163. Beside, had this thigh bone and tooth, and the several others that have
been found in England, such as the two teeth taken up at Edulfsness in the
County of Essex, in the Reign of King Richard the First, that might have been
cut into two hundred of an ordinary cize Cambden in Essex.
; and diverse other bones and teeth found at Chartham near Canterbury Chartham
news, set forth by Mr. Joh. Somner.
, and Farley near Maidstone in Kent, whereof I have one now by me, dug up and
given me, by the truly Noble and Ingenious Jacob Lord Astley, near seven inches
round, and five ounces and in weight, of which more when I come into Kent. Had,
I say, these bones and teeth been ever the spoils of Elephants, we should
certainly at some time or other have met also with those greater Tusks with
which they are armed, of which I have not heard there have been any yet found
in England, nor any thing like them.

164. Add hereunto what prevails with me much, that since the great
conflagration of London, Anno 1666. upon the pulling down of St. Mary
Wool-Church, and making the site of it into a Mercat-place, there was found a
thigh bone (supposed to be of a Woman) now to be seen at the King's Head Tavern
at Greenwich in Kent, much bigger and longer than ours of stone could in
proportion be, had it been entire. We have also here at Oxford In the Medicine
School.
, a thigh bone that came from London, three foot and two inches long, which I
guess may be of an agreeable proportion with ours. And the same day I brought
the tooth from Cornwell, there were two others happily procured for me by my
worthy Friend Samuel Fowler A. M. dug up in the Parish Church of Morton
Valence, about seven miles from Gloucester, in the way thence to Bristol, in all
points so exactly like the other from Cornwell, in ridges, cavities, etc. that
had they not differed somewhat in color, they could scarce have any way been
distinguished. Now how Elephants should come to be buried in Churches, is a
question not easily answered, except we will run to so groundless a shift, as
to say, that possibly the Elephants might be there buried before Christianity
florish'd in Britan, and that these Churches were afterward casually built over
them.

165. If it be urged out of Ponticus Virunnius, and some others, that the
Emperor Claudius was at Gloucester, and that he built that City after his own
name, in memory of the Marriage of his fair Daughter Gennissa, with Arviragus
then King of Britan Pont. Virunnii, Hist. Britan. lib. 4.
, where possibly he might have some of his Elephants with him, which might dye
and be buried thereabout. It must be answered, that notwithstanding the name of
Claudii Castrum, now Gloucester, seems so much to favor the story in hand, that
yet in all likelihood there was never any such matter: For neither Suetonius
Sueton. in vita Claudii.
, who numbers up all the Daughters that he had, and shows how given in
Marriage. Nor Dion Dion. Cass. Romans Hist. lib. 60.
, who does the same (who lived in his time, and had born the Office of Consul)
remember any such Daughter, or so disposed of to Arviragus.

166. Beside, how was it possible that Claudius, who came hither, and was
returned again to Rome within six months, should find so much time, as to come
up so far in the Country as Gloucester, much less to celebrate such a Marriage,
and build that City, since the same Dion expressly says, that of those six
months time, he was here in Britan but sixteen days, (...), are his own words
Idem loco citato.
, and those sixteen days in all probability, were spent in ordering his Army,
and joining them with the Forces of Plautius that lay then at the mouth of
Thames ready to receive him, and in taking of Camulodonum, which the same
Author asserts he did that Expedition, and so immediately returned.

167. But what is instar omnium in this difficult point, there happily came to
Oxford while I was writing of this, a living Elephant to be shown publicly at
the Act, An. 1676. with whose bones and teeth I compared ours; and found those
of the Elephant not only of a different shape, but also incomparably bigger
than ours, though the Beast were very young and not half grown. If then they
are neither the bones of Horses, Oxen, nor Elephants, as I am strongly
persuaded they are not, upon comparison, and from their like found in Churches:
It remains, that (notwithstanding their extravagant magnitude) they must have
been the bones of Men or Women: Nor does any thing hinder but they may have
been so, provided it be clearly made out that there have been Men and Women of
proportionable stature in all ages of the World, down even to our own days.

P68. The Sons of Anak, no question, were very great men, and Goliath for
certain was nine foot nine inches high 1 Samuel c. 17. v. 4.
. We read also of the Sons of the Titans, and of high Giants Judith 16. v. 7.
, and of Giants famous from the beginning, that were of great stature and expert
in War Baruch 3. v. 26.
. And (to omit the Fables of the Giants of Mount Erice near Drepanum in Sicily,
200 cubits high, of Tanger in Mauritania 60 cubits Vid. Athan. Kircheri Mundum
subterr. lib. 8 sect. 2. cap. 4.
, and of the Giant found standing in a Rock, cleft by an Earthquake in the
Isle of Candy, 46 cubits, supposed to be Orion, or Otus Plin. Not. Hist. lib.
7. cap. 16.
, and several others mentioned by Phlegon Phlegon Trallianus de rebus
mirabilibus, cap. 11, 12, 17, 18, 19.
.) Amongst the Romans, Theutobochus King of the Teutones or Germans, vanquished
by Marius, is reported by Florus to be insigne (...) phispectaculum, so very
tall, that he was seen above all the Trophies Fl^ri Hist. Romans lib 3 cap. 3.
, which were the spoils of the Enemies, usually carried aloft upon the tops of
spears. Naevius Pollio, says Pliny Not: Hist. lib. 7. cap. 16.
, was so great a Giant (having no account of his dimensions) that it was taken
for a wonderful strange thing, that when a great press of people came running
upon him, he had like to have been killed.

169. But to come closer to the business, and more determinate statures, the
same Pliny Idem loco citato.
tells of two others living in the time of Augustus, nicknamed Pusio and
Secundilla, whose bodies were preserved for a wonder in the Salustian Gardens,
that were ten foot high: and that in his time there was one Gabbara, brought
out of Arabia, in the days of Prince Claudius the Emperor, exactly of the
height of Goliath, viz. nine foot nine inches high Idem loco citato
; which being a cize very proportionable to our bone found at Cornwell, I am
rather inclined to believe, that Claudius brought this Gabbara into Britan with
him, who possibly might dye and lay his bones here, than that ever they
belonged to any Elephant; except we shall rather say, that here also Corinaeus,
cousin to Brute, might kill one of Gogmagog's race, and that from him the place
does take his name, as well as the County of Cornwall.

170. Moreover, that there were men heretofore of such vast statures, we have
the testimony of Josephus Lib. 18. cap. 6.
, in his Antiquities of the Jews, where he tells us of one Eleazar, a Jew born,
sent amongst the Presents to Tiberius, when Darius the Son of Artabanus King of
Persia, after a Peace made, went as a Hostage to Rome, that was full seven
Cubits in height. And there is a Sceleton Kirch^^ Mund. subterr. lib. 8. sect.
2. cap. 4
now to be seen in the Town Hall at Lucern, found under an old Oak in the
County of Willisau, near a Village called Reyden, within the jurisdiction of
that City, that gives further confirmation, it having all, or most of the bones
wherein a Man differs from other Animals, and being above seventeen foot high.

171. And if we consult the latter ages of the World, we shall still find that
there were always some few persons vastly exceeding the ordinary stature of
Men: Joh. Cassanio Io. Cassanio Monastr. de Gigantibus, cap. 6.
, though no favorer of the stories of Giants, yet tells us of one that lived
about 150 years since at Bordeaux in Aquitan, commonly called the Giant of
Bordeaux, whom Francis the first, King of France, passing that way, beheld with
admiration, and gave especial command that he should be of his Guard: but he
being a Peasant of a narrow soul, and not pleased with a Courtiers life,
quitted his Halbard, and got away by stealth to the place whence he came: Of
whom the said Cassanio was assured by an Honorable Person, who had seen him
Archer of the Guard, that he was of so great a height, that a Man of an
ordinary stature might go upright between his legs when he did stride. And
Thuanus Jac. Aug. Thuani Hist. Tom. 3. lib. 61.
treating of an Invasion made by the Tartars upon the Polanders, in the Year
1575. tells us of a Tartar slain by one Jacobus Niezabilovius a Polander, whose
forehead was 24 inches broad, and his body of so prodigious a bulk, that as he
lay dead on the ground, his carcass reached to the navel of a person standing
by him.

172. Geropius Becanus De Gigantomachia.
, Physician to the Lady Mary, sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, Queen of
Hungary and Regent of the Netherlands, assures us, That there dwelt a person
within five miles of him ten foot high, and that himself saw a Woman of the
same height. The tallest that I have yet seen in our days, was also a Woman of
a Dutch extraction, shown publicly here at Oxford, seven foot and a half high,
with all her Limbs proportionable: when she stretched forth her arm, Men of
ordinary stature might walk under it; and her hand, from the carpus or wrist
where it is joined to the radius of the arm, to the end of the middle finger,
was full ten inches long. A stature, it is true, much short of any of the
aforementioned, and indeed I believe it will be hard to meet with their
fellows in these parts of the World, where Luxury has crept in, together with
Civility: Yet if we look abroad amongst the present barbarous Nations of both
Indies, where they live still according to Nature, and do not debauch her with
the sensual Delights of the more civilized World, we shall find (if the
Relations either of English or Hollanders be of any credit) that there are now
men and women adequate to them in stature; several having been seen, especially
about the Straights of Magellan, of ten: and one near the River of Plate by
Tho. Turner, 12 foot high.

173. Whence it is plain, that whether we respect the more ancient or modern
Times, it is possible enough these bones from Cornwell might be the bones of a
man or woman, there being no decay apparent in the constitutions of Mankind
from the beginning to this day, but what is adventitious and accidental; saving
in the longevity of the antediluvian Patriarchs.

174. Beside this Gigantick thigh bone, there is another stone at the foot of
Shotover-hill, amongst the Orchites beforementioned, Sect. 144. that also
represents one of the Artus; viz. the Leg and Foot of a Man cut off above the
ancle, as in Tab. 8. Fig. 6. which from the toe to the heel is about a yard
long, and perhaps in the whole may weigh 50 or 60 pounds: But I take not this
for a petrification as the former, but a stone formed in this shape purely by
Nature, which may therefore be termed Andrapodites, as might all those of the
kind mentioned by Wormius Musaei Wormian. cap. 1^ Intogrum pedem hominis in
lapidem versum, spectandum habet Musaeum Calceolarium, Ioh. Bapt. Oliv^ (...)
. To which also may be added the Lapis acetabulum referens, whereof there is
plenty on the Chiltern-hills. And a sort of Osteocolla found in Heddington
rubble Quarries, which scraped, has the smell of burnt bone, and may I suppose
be the same mentioned by Gesner Gesner de Fig. Lapid. cap. 12.
, that was sent him by Peter Coldeberg, Apothecary of Antwerp.

175. After the Stones that relate to the parts of Animals, come we lastly to
those that resemble things of Art, such as that in the form of a button-mold,
Fig. 7. whereof there were several found in the very same Quarry with the
thigh bone and tooth, in the Parish of Cornwell, and no doubt did belong to the
owner of those bones: And the other in the shape of the heel of an old shoo,
with the Lifts plainly to be distinguished, as in Fig. 8. which was found
somwhere near Oxford, and given me by the Right Reverend and profoundly
Learned, Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln, one of the first Promoters of this
Design. But both these I take to be but petrifications, and therefore
mis-placed here like the Adarce and thigh bone.

176. But I have another sort of button-stone, sent me from Teynton, which I
take to be a mere production of Nature, finely striated from the top as I have
seen some hair buttons, as in Fig. 9. and may therefore be called Porpites:
Except we should rather take it for a new sort of Echinites, not yet
discovered, which is wholly left to the Readers choice.

177. In the Quarry of rubble stone near Shotover-hill, I met with a Spar-like
stone, made I suppose of the dropings of petrifying water, not unlike to the
bags called Manicae Hippocratis, used in filtrations by the Chemists, three one
above another as they usually place them, as in Fig. 10. And in the very same
Quarry I found a single Trochites of a cinereous color, so called from its
likeness to a wheel, having rays coming forth of its center, like the spoaks of
a Cart-wheel from its stock, hub, or nave: These are said to have affinity with
the Lapis Judaicus in their texture Boet. de Lapid. and Gem. cap. 227.
, and with the Asteriae in the property of moving in Vinegar Geo. Agricola de
Natura Fossilium, cap. 5.
, neither of which I could well try, having but one, and that too set in a
rubble stone of the Quarry. They are found plentifully Northward in
Holy-Island, and in the bottom of the Chanel of the River Tees Mr. Ray's
Topograph. observat. p. 116.
, at Braughton and Stock in Yorkshire, at Beresford in Staffordshire
Philosoph. Transact. Number. 100.
, and are commonly there called St. Cuthbert's Beads, whereof I intend Cuts,
and shall treat more at large when I come to those places.

178. At the Parish of Heath I met with a reddish sort of stone, in the usual
form of a Whet-stone, as in Tab. 8. Fig. 11. about four inches long, very hard,
and for both those reasons not fit for use: it was given me by Mr. Evans,
Rector of the place, and said by him to be taken out of a block of stone dug in
the Quarries thereabout, naturally having grown in that form. And at Stonor
there was given me a crisp'd white stone, taken up not far thence, resembling a
sort of Sweet-meat, not like the Confetti de Tivoli, but rather of Viterbo
mentioned by Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallicum, lib. 4. p. 518,
, or a sort of Sweet-meat we have from Portugal.

179. Amongst the stones, like things of Art, I think I must also number a sort
of globular iron-colour'd balls, taken up about Cornwell; whereof I have two
given me by Sir Thomas Pennyston; the one plain and smooth, the other
granulated on the outside, not unlike to an Orange, very weighty, and made up
within of a golden striated substance from the center to the circumference,
shown in the Hemisphere of one of them, Fig. 12. Of these there are some so
equally round, as if done by Art; and so they are says Cambden at Huntley Nab
Cambd. in the North Riding of Yorkshire.
, where under the craggy Rocks they lie scattered here and there of diverse
bignesses, so artificially by Nature shaped round in manner of a Globe, that
one would take them to be great bullets, cast for shot, to be discharged out of
great Ordnance. Such as these are also mentioned by Joh. Kentmannus, found
inter lapides aerarios, which if broken (says he) are like the silver or
cinereous Marchasite, out of which sometimes brass or silver are smelted
Catalog. Fossilium, Tit. 16. de Lapid. aerariis a natura effigiatis.
, than which ours are somewhat of a better color, but whether possessed with
those or a better metal, I must confess I have not tried, and therefore cannot
inform the Reader.

180. Hither also must be referred a round stone before mentioned, chap. 3
sect. 30. containing within it a white sort of earth, and therefore called
Geodes, or the pregnant stone; differing from the Aetites in this, that whereas
that has within it a movable stone, by the Naturalists called Callimus; this
contains only earth or sand, that moves not at all: The outward crust of these
is sometimes only an indurated chalk, under which are some other folds like the
coats of an Onyon; and when found thus, by the Inhabitants of the Chiltern
(where they are most plentiful) they are called chalk Eggs. Others there are of
them, whose outermost coats are hard black Flints, some very thin, and others
thicker, according I suppose to the seniority of their generation: For I have
some of them by me whose coats are not much thicker than the shell of a
Wall-nut, others stone half way, and others so almost to the very center; and
these Flint coats black without side, and gradually whiter and whiter, as they
approach nearer to the whitish earth contained within: whence I am almost
persuaded; that however it may be in irregular Flints, that in these the chalky
matter does turn into stone, and is the chief principle of their generation.

181. Upon the Chiltern-hills, near to Sherbourn and Lewkner, I found many of
the Flints inclining to a Conical Figure. And in the gravel about Oxford, I
have seen fasciated Pebbles, having as it were Zones or girdles round them, of
different colors from those of the stones. About Fawler and Stunsfield, the
Pebbles before mentioned, cap. 4. sect. 18. are most of them streaked with
iron-colour'd lines, sometimes inclining toward one another like the
ramifications of a Dendrites; which though not so curious as the Pietra di
figure de boschi of Ferrante Imperato Dell' Hist. Natural lib. 24. cap. 24.
, yet fit me well enough with a transition to the Chapter of Vegetables, which
immediately follows.

182. Only I must beg leave first to advertise the Reader, that what I have
ascribed to Dr. Merret concerning the Toad-stone, sect. 146. I have found since
the Printing of that sheet, seemingly also given to the Learned Sir George Ent,
by the no less Learned Sir Thomas Brown, in the last Edition of his Pseudodoxia
Epidemica Pseudodox. Epidem. lib. 3. cap. 13.
, to whether more rightly, let them contend. And that since the Printing the
beginning of this Chapter, I received from the Right worshipful Sir Philip
Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt, two kinds of Selenites, though of the same
texture, yet much differently formed from any there mentioned; both of them
being Dodecaedrums, but the Hedrae too as much different from one another, as
from any of the former: The first sort of them being made up of two Rhomboideal
sides, four oblong, and as many shorter pentagons; and two small Trapeziums,
one half whereof are represented Tab. 8. Fig. 13. And the second, of two oblong
Hexagons, four oblong Trapeziums, four oblong parallelograms, and two large
pentagons, one half whereof are also represented Fig. 14. In both which it is
to be understood, that the Hedrae at the ends of each stone, are opposed by two
others like them, not according to the breadth, but length of the stone. The
two pentagons at the top of the stone, Fig. 13. being opposed by two others
like them, behind the small Trapezium at the bottom of it; and the small
Trapezium at the bottom, by another like it behind the two short pentagons at
the top; and so the oblong parallelograms, and large pentagons at the ends of
the stone, Fig. 14.

table of formed stones TAB. VIII. ad page 142

To the right Worspll. the learned and curious Artist Sr. THOMAS PENYSTON
Baront. This 8th Table of formed STONES whereof the 4th. 5ft and 7th. were
found in his own grounds is humbly presented by RP. LLD.



CHAP. VI. Of Plants.
NEXT Inanimate things, I proceed to such as have Life; amongst which, first of
those that hold the lowest place, that exercise the most universal, and
therefore inferior Faculties, such as Herbs, Shrubs, Trees, all which are
contained under the general name of Plants: But of these I intend not a
complete Catalogue (that being a subject of it self large enough for a Volume)
but only a short account, 1. Of the Indigenous Plants of the County, which yet
either 1. Are not described by any Author that we know of, or 2. Have not been
noted by the ingenious Mr. Ray, in his excellent Catalogue, to be of English
natural growth; or 3. Have indeed been noted, which yet remaining dubious,
either as to the certainty of their description, or specifical difference, are
cleared in this County.
2. Of the extraordinary accidents of well known Plants. 3. Of the unusual
Plants now cultivated in the Fields, under which head somewhat of the Husbandry
of the Country.
according to which method I shall treat of all the three forementioned Species
of Plants; viz. Herbs, Shrubs, Trees, so far forth as each of them will come up
to it. And first, of those styled herbaceous Plants.

2. By which I understand all and only those that are made up of a succulent
and carnous substance, that never in any part will become lignous, (or hardly
any of them retain it all winter) as Shrubs and Trees do: of which those that
are indigenous, and not described by any Author that we know of, are these that
follow.

3. Viola Martia hirsuta major inodora. Which large Violet from a fibrous root
sends forth many leaves, each upon his own foot-stalk, neither creeping as
the common March, nor branched as the common Dog-violet; its leaves and stalks
are all hairy especially on the backside; they are also broader, larger, and
more pointed than the ordinary March Violets, which occasioned (as some think)
the ingenious Dr. Merret to note it by the name of Viola Trachelii folio Pinax
rer. Not. Britan. p. 125.
, but that certainly must be some different kind, the leaves of ours being all
invecked, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 1. whereas the Trachelia are all indented: Amongst
the leaves grow large flowers, upon footstalk (as other Violets) of a pale
blue color, with white lines or rays issuing from the middle of them, but
wholly without scent. They flower in March and April, and are commonly but
abusively sold to the shops amongst other Violets, they not being so good for
any of those uses the Apothecaries put them to, as other Violets are. They grow
plentifully in Magdalen College Cops, on Shotover hill, Stow-wood, and many
other places.

4. Viola polustris rotundifolia. From the root of this Plant, which is white,
and at equal distances knotted (whence only it sends forth its fibers not
downward, but horizontally) arise 3 or 4 (sometimes more) feeble small stalks,
each bearing at its top only a round leaf, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 2. Among which,
about April come up the stalks of the flowers, slender, like those of the
leaves; the whole Plant being weak, and beholding to the neighboring ones for
its support. The flowers are all small and blue, which being past, a long
Prismatical seed-vessel succeeds, opening its self when ripe into three parts,
and showing a rank of brown seeds, appended to each angle by white Nerves: This
is easily distinguished from all other Violets by its native place, wherein it
is supposed they will not grow; and by the smalness of its flowers, which are
considerably less than any of the rest; whereunto add the remarkable roundness
of its leaves, which are so far from drawing to points, that the longest way of
them is from side to side. Clusius indeed seems to describe a Plant like this,
by the name of Viola Alpina altera Car. Clusii Plant. Hist. cap. 13.
, but makes its flower as much greater, as ours is less than the common one;
adding beside, that it flowers about the latter end of June, a month before
which time the Seed of ours is ripe; which are differences so irreconcilable,
that we cannot but pronounce ours as distinct from his, as from any other
Violets before described by Authors, whereof we have consulted most, if not all
the best. It grows sparingly in the Boggs about Stow-wood, and on the Banks of
Cherwell between Oxford and Water-eaton; but most plentifully at Chilswell in
Berkshire, amongst the moistest Boggs.

5. Juncellus omnium minimus capitulis Equiseti. This least club-rush from
small hairy roots, rises no bigger than horse-hair, and not above three inches
high, bearing at the top a little club, as in the other club-rushes, but
proportionably lesser, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 3. where also it may be observed,
that the rush rises singly from the root, and not branched, like the Fluitans
mentioned by Mr. Ray In Catalog. Plantar. Angl.
, who had he seen this, would certainly have owned different species's of
club-rushes, which he seems so much to doubt. It grows in Binsey-Common, in the
moist ditches next the River Isis.

6, Geranium columbinum maximum foliis dissectis. Or the great jagged
Doves-foot Cranes-bill, differs from the jagged ones of other writers, in that
it is jagged at the first coming up, whereas all others are whole then; its
leaves are also standing on long footstalk, and much greater than those of
any other Doves-feet; from the middle of which there rise up great jointed
stalks, near the bigness of a man's finger, branched, and almost standing
upright a yard in height: At the joints, which are largely knotted, are also
large jagged leaves, which at the top grow very thick, amongst which stand the
flowers upon short footstalk, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 4. of a bright and red
color, whereas the others are of a bluish purple; the seeds being like those
of other Doves-feet. This grows in hedges about Marston, and on that part of
Botley-Causey next Oxford, in great plenty.

7. Pentaphyllum reptans alatum foliis profundius serratis. This creeping Plant
in all respects grows like the common Cinque-foil, but that at the bottom some
leaves are found round and undivided like Alchimilla, and others dividing
themselves into five, are jagged but half way: As it increases in growth, the
number of leaves oftentimes decrease, bearing four, three, two, and at the top,
one; all which, have two little leaves or ears at the bottom of the foot-stalk,
like Tormentill: The flowers are of the bigness and color of common
Cinque-foil, but generally made up of four leaves, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 5. and
but very rarely to be found with five. It grows in the edges of the Cornfieldsd
between Hockley and the Woods under Shotover-hill.

8. Orobanche Verbasculi odore. The root of this Plant is skaly and obtuse, to
which are appended a bundle of complicated Fibers, like those of Nidus avis,
whence it rises up with a soft round very brittle stalk, seldom eight inches
high, set with thin, small, short skaly leaves like skins, growing close to it:
At, or very near the top of which stalk, grow sometimes eight or ten small
flowers, altogether different from those of the common Orobanche, each
consisting of four pretty large leaves, within which are contained as many
lesser, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 6. About the seed vessel (which is round at the
bottom, with a narrow neck, and a hole at the top somewhat resembling a child's
sucking-bottle, as in Fig. 6. a) stand small chives with purplish tops, as in
Fig. 6. b. The whole herb, flowers, stalks and leaves, are at the first
flowering, of a whitish yellow, or straw color, and being broken or bruised,
smell like the root of a Primrose. It grows at the bottoms of Trees in the
woods near Stoken-Church, and we find it mentioned in some MS. notes of the
famous Mr. Goodyer.

9. Saxifraga Anglica annua Alsine folio. This small annual Saxifrage from a
small fibrous root, spreads its trailing jointed stalks about an inch or two
from it, at each joint come forth small narrow leaves as in the other
Chickweed-break stone, and from the upper joints toward the end of the stalks,
come small herbaceous flowers made up of four leaves, which prove the case for
the small included seed vessel, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 7. This Plant differs from
the common one, which is of a light fresh green, perennial, and sometimes roots
again at its joints; in that its stalks and leaves are of a brownish green
color, the Plant annual and never reptant: it grows plentifully in the walks
of Baliol College gardens, and on the fallow Fields about Heddington and
Cowley, and many other places.

10. To which perhaps I might add two different Lychnis's from the sylvestris
flore albo Gerardi, observed this Year by Mr. Richard Stapley; one whereof
bears a white flower somewhat less than the common, yet at the center having
another little flowery table of plants TAB. IX. ad page: 146.

To the right Worspll. the learned and curious Botanist Sr. Geo: Croke Knight
This Table of undescribed Plants natives of Oxfordsh: is humbly dedicated by R.
P. L L D

circle, in the middle of which appear several fine stamina, with yellow
longish apices, whereas the reclining stamina of the common Campion have no
apices at all; the other also bears a white flower without that flowery circle,
but has stamina crowned with roundish purple apices, with the dust whereof the
flower it self is commonly soiled. But in the first of these the seed vessel
not appearing at all, and in the second withering away with the flower; We are
not so bold as to make them distinct species's, not knowing as yet whence they
should be propagated. These were found near Holy-Well in the Suburbs of Oxford,
and grow also in the Cornfieldsd about New-parks, and as we suppose in most
parts of England. Sed de hoc quaere.

11. Beside these, there is also another, of which Authors write so obscurely,
that we cannot positively say whether described or no: However, we have
ventured to call it Artiplex vulgaris sinuata spicata, it not being like the
Pes anserinus alter sive ramosior of John Bauhin, mentioned by Mr. Ray In
Catalog. Plant. Angl.
, in that it bears its seeds in buttons close to the stalks, like the
Fragifera. This grows equally common on Dung-hills with the sinuata major,
amongst which we suppose it has hitherto lay hid.

12. As for the Plants described by other Authors, but not noted by Mr. Ray to
be of English growth, we find only these in the County of Oxford. 1. Clematis
Daphnoides sive pervinca major, in the Highways between Woolvercot and
Yarnton, and in several hedges thereabout. 2. Lagopus major vulgaris
Parkinsoni, in Stow-wood plentifully, and several other places. 3. Oenan the
aquatica minor Park. sive juncus odoratus Cordi, in the ditches about Medley
and Binsey-Common, and almost every where about Oxford.

13. Whereunto add some others indeed noted by Mr. Ray, but left in doubt
whether described, or different from one another. Such are the Helleborine
flore albo, mentioned in his Appendix In Appendice p. 339.
to grow in the woods near Stoken-Church, not far from the road leading from
London to Oxford, which because he had not seen either flowering, or green,
modestly refused to determine whether described or no: But we having had time
and curiosity of viewing it often in flower, find it to be the Helleborine
flore albo of Gerard and Tabernaemontanus: Epipactis angustifolia of Besler,
Jac. Theod. Tabernaemont. Part. 2. p. 400.
in his Hortus Eystettensis Horti Eystett. Plant. Vernal. Ord. 9. fol. 5.
: Alisma quorundam Cordi Valor. Cordi Hist. de Plant. lib. 2. cap. 107.
, and Alisma Cymbaleanthemon Thalii Ioh. Thalii, Harcynia Saxono-Thuringica, p.
13.
. Which Authors, and others, we have diligently searched, and by comparing them
together, find the Plant to agree with each Figure, as well as they could do
one with another, had they (as indeed they commonly are) been Printed from one
Plate.

14. The Plants which he doubts whether specifically distinct, yet found so in
Oxfordshire, are also Helleborine's; the one his Helleborine flore
atro-rubente, and the other Helleborine latifolia montana In Catalog-Plant.
Angl.
, both plentifully growing on Stoken-Church hills: Whereof the former has small
narrow leaves, somewhat like the Palustris, and growing thicker on the stalk;
whereas those of the latter are broad and much thinner, the one also flowering
a full month after the other, which we take to be distinguishing Characters
enough, though not so signally differing in the flowers as Mr. Ray owns his to
do; our latifolia montana coming nearer to that of Gerard, then of him or
Dodonaeus, having purple flowers, but as deep or deeper than those of the
Helleborine flore atro rubente.

15. Of Accidents that are incident to herbaceous Plants, beside what I have
seen amongst foreigners in Gardens, I have met also with some amongst the
natives of Oxfordshire; which I guess may happen to them (as likewise to all
others) most times through excess, or defect in their nourishment. Thus have I
seen the stalks of Dyers-weed and Succory, from a round near the root, spread
themselves upward into a broad flat stalk, as if there were several of them
fasciated together, occasioned I suppose by reason of the ascent of to much
nourishment for one stalk, and yet not enough for two. The fasciation (if I may
be allowed to coin such a word) being as it were an attempt for two stalks,
which upon the ascent of sufficient sap, is sometimes accomplished, the flat
stalk then dividing into two, as I observed it this Summer in a Draba lutea
siliquis strictissimis, and several other Plants in the Gardens.

16. Which accident of Plants the German Virtuosi think only to happen after
hard and late Winters Miscellan. curiosa Med. Phys. Acad. Not. Curiosorum, An.
1. observe. 102.
, by reason whereof indeed the sap being restrained somewhat longer than
ordinary, upon sudden thaws, may probably be sent up more forcibly and
together, and so produce these fasciated stalks; whereas the natural and
graduated ascent would have produced them but single. Yet experience has taught
us this present year 1676. that such productions must by no means be thus
restrained; the Winter preceding, in Anno 1675. being one of the mildest ever
known in England, and yet fasciated Plants as frequent as ever.

17. Beside those, we have observed some others here curiously striped; some of
them yellow, as Dens Leonis, Caryophyllata, Vrtica urens, etc. others white, as
Papaver spumeum, Plantago quinque nervia, Cruciata, Calamintha aquatica, etc.
Others again differing from the rest of their kind, not in leaves, but color
of their flowers; such are Lamium rubrum, Lysimachia siliquosa magno store,
Trachelium minus, Gentianella fugax minor, Anagallis terrestris, and aquatica
sive Becabunga, cum multis aliis, all with white flowers; and Hyacinths, we
have sometimes found with red, and white flowers: All which, I guess
accidentally accrue to these Plants (their species's having flowers of
different colors) through defect, or some interception of their nourishment,
which occasion diseases, and such discolorations both in their leaves and
flowers.

18. That this is true of all striped Plants, is manifest, in that such
discolorations may be procured by artificial substraction of the nourishment,
viz. by applying Lime, or other hot dry matter to their roots; which drying up,
or otherwise rendering the nourishment unfit, will thus make the Plants striped;
as our very Learned Botanic Professor, Dr. Morison, informs us he observed it
in Dulcamara creeping through Lime and other rubbish of Buildings, at the Duke
of Orleans his House at Blois, whence not only ours, but most other Gardens of
Europe have since been supplied with the white striped Dulcamara.

19. Moreover, that such stripings are nothing but disease, appears plainly in
that most, if not all striped Plants, are somewhat deformed and imperfect in
their leaves; and though striped very lively in the beginning of the Spring,
will many of them recover in some measure, at least before Autumn, and some of
them have their leaves at length as green, as the rest of the healthy Plants of
their kind: Which I take to be manifest arguments of their sickness, and such
stripings to be only discolorations, and no ornaments of perfection, though
ornaments of our Gardens.

20. To which if it be objected that it is otherwise in the Flowers of all the
Plants abovementioned, which though of different colors from the rest of
their species, continue so still from year to year, not altering in the Autumn
from what they were in the Spring: It must be answered, that notwithstanding what
is urged be true, yet such constancy will not warrant them of a different
species, since no seed they produce will bring more of their kind, but only
such whose flowers will be of the ordinary color; which is so great an
imperfection, that we cannot but suspect these also to be diseased, and to have
their variations only from thence.

21. Though it must be confessed, that it is worthy notice too, that many of these
Plants seem as strong, and flourish as well as any others, and produce perhaps
their Seed as perfect as any: Why then they should be numbered amongst diseased
plants, any more than a red hair'd man should be accounted so in England, or a
black hair'd one in Denmark (where I am informed there are so few, that they
commonly paint Judas with black hair as we do with red) is a difficulty, I
guess, not easily avoided; especially since the difference of colors in
flowers may be occasioned by the different textures of the stalks of some
certain plants, as it is in the hair and feathers of Animals, also of different
colors from the rest of their species, as shall be fully made out in the
following Chapter. It may therefore perhaps be more safely concluded, that the
different colorations at least of some of these flowers, may indeed be
accidents, but no accidents of disease or imperfection.

22. Which is all I have met with concerning wild herbaceous Plants, and the
accidents attending them remarkable in this County, in the relation whereof I
have been all along so careful of not imposing on the World, that I have
mentioned nothing, except in the Philosophical part, wherein I have not
consulted, and had the approbation of some of the most knowing in the Faculty,
such as the Reverend William Brown B. D. and Fellow of Magdalen College Oxon,
Edward Tyson M. A. John Banister M. A. Richard Stapley B. A. and Mr. Jacob
Bobart junior, all eminent Botanists.

23. Of unusual Plants now cultivated in the Fields, to pass by the ordinary
red and white Laminas Wheats, black and white Ryes, the common Barley, Peace,
Beans, and Oats, there are several worthy notice now sown in this Courty, that
have been scarce ever heard of, much less used in some others: Where by the way
let it be noted, that the word [unusual] is not so much to be applied to this,
as other Counties, and that in these matters of Husbandry, I rather write for
the information of strangers, than the inhabitants of Oxfordshire, as I must
hereafter in other Counties for the information of this: There being many
things in each County thought common there and unworthy notice, that perhaps in
some others will appear so strange, that they will scarcely be believed. And
such are

24. Triticum spica mutica rubrum, caul item rubro; red stalkt wheat (mistaken
by many for red Lammas) so commonly called from the redness of its straw,
especially near the joints when the Corn begins to turn; which redness yet will
vanish for the most part away, when it is full ripe. This Corn, as I was
informed, was first propagated from some few ears of it picked out of many
Acres, by one Pepart near Dunstable, about fifty years ago, which sowed by it
self till it amounted to a quantity, and then proving Mercatable, is now become
one of the commonest grains of this County, especially about Oxford; which yet
because not known in many other places, I thought fit at least to mention it,
and the rather because of its seldom or never smutting, a convenience that
pleases the Baker and Husbandman both; and yet it seems it is not now sown about
Them and Watlington so much as formerly, because it brings not so certain, nor
so good a burden as

25. Triticum spica mutica albicante, granis rufescentibus, white eared red
wheat, white Corn, or mixed Lammas, which latter name I take to be as agreeable
as any, because of its participating both of the white and red Lammas, having a
white ear and red grain; whereas the white Lammas has both ears and grain
white, and the red Lammas both red: Nor has this, as I was told, been long in
Oxfordshire, it being first advanced like the former from some few ears, and
at last being found to yield considerably better than most other wheat, viz.
sometimes twenty for one, it is now become the most eligible Corn, all along the
Vale under the Chiltern Hills, and in far better esteem than the red stalked
wheat, or,

26. Triticum spica aristata glumis hirsutis, the long Cone Wheat, which yet is
the best of any, to be sown in rank clay Land, its stalks being reedy and not
subject to lodging; and by hedges sides, because the Birds cannot eat it; for
which reason also it must be good in Enclosures, besides its being the least
subject of any Corn yet known, to the inconveniency of Mildews: This sort also
yields extremely well, but its Flower being course and not pleasing the Bakers,
it is seldom sown but under the mentioned circumstances, except sometimes mixed
amongst the other wheats.

27. Triticum multiplex, sive, spita multiplici, double eared wheat, so named
for that it has diverse small ears issuing out of the sides of the greater, and
is sown about Bissiter and Weston on the Green, but it not proving agreeable to
the soils thereabout, nor advantageous to the Husbandman, it is almost quite
disused, though I hear it succeeds better about Fritwell and Souldern. They sow
also a Wheat about Weston on the Green, which from the hanging of its ear they
call Pendule wheat, but suspecting that it differs in nothing from Cone, it
being aristis munitum, and glumis hirsutis, I forbear as yet to pronounce it
any other, though I am told that the Pendule has a redder and more slender, and
Cone a whiter and fuller ear; and that Cone endures longer, and Pendule but a
very short time here, it yielding for the first year sometimes twenty for one,
and within two years after dwindling away, so as not to be worth sowing; which
time expiring, they supply themselves again out of Berks-shire, at Abington
Market, whereof more (if I find it to be a different kind) when I come into
that County.

28. All which, it is true, in Oxfordshire are so commonly sown, that they
cannot indeed in this respect be styled unusual: but because scarce ever heard
of in the South-east parts of England, I thought it convenient at least to hint
them. And so likewise our

29. Hordeum distichum praecox, or rathe ripe Barley, deservedly so called from
its early ripening, it having been sometimes sown and returned to the Barn again
in two months time, and often in nine or ten weeks. This Barley, it is tree, is
no native of Oxfordshire, only much sown here, it being all had either
immediately or mediatly from Patney in Wiltshire, whence by some it is also
called Patney Barley: Where the soil (as I am told) is of so peculiar a
quality, that whatever other Barley is sown there, it is turned forthwith into
this we call rathe-ripe; a feat, which they say, no other Land will perform.
But we are told by Dr. Childrey Britannia Baconica in Cornwall.
, that in the western parts of Cornwall, they sow a sort of Barley near the
Seaside, which they carry to Mill in eight or nine weeks time after they have
sowed it. However, what we have here comes all from Patney, but is not so
agreeable to our Oxfordshire soil immediately from thence, as when it has been
sown elsewhere twice or thrice; after which, it endures not above three or four
years, but degenerates again into common Barley. Its convenience notwithstanding
is very considerable in wet and backward Springs, and moist Autumns, when many
other Countries lose their seasons, and some of the more Northern ones perhaps
their crop, the common Barley there never coming to be ripe, whereas this may be
sown at the latter end of May, and will come to be ripe in the worst of
Summers. This I heard of first at Gaunt-house, (the Paternal Estate of the
Right Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of Oxon, one of the Noblest
Encouragers of this Design) but met with it after all over the County, it being
generally approved of by all sorts of Husbandmen. And this is the only Barley
sown in this County unknown in some others.

30. But of Peace there are many sorts little thought of Southward, that
possibly were they known, might prove as agreeable to the soils there, as here,
and as advantageous to the Husbandman. Such are the Peace called Henly-gray, and
another sort called Red-shanks, for fresh new broken Land; the Vale-gray for
strong; and Hampshire-Kids for new chalkt Land; the small Rathe-ripes, for poor
and gravelly; and the Cotswold Pea for sour ground. And of Vetches; in deep
clay Lands they sow the Gore and pebble-Vetch; in cold moist grounds the
rathe-ripe Vetch; and Dill or Lentills, in poor stone-brash land, which are a
good podware for cattle, and sown in many parts of the County.

31. As for Beans and Oats, they sow only the common that are every where else;
but for Grasses, the usual name for any Herbage sown for Cattle, especially if
perennial (to pass by the trifolium purpureum majus sive sativum, Clover-gross;
and Onobrychis spicata flore purpureo, semine echinato, commonly called
Sainct-foin, or Everlasting-grass; but according to Dr. Morison, the trite
Lucern, now every where known, and therefore nothing concerning the qualities
and advantages of it.) They have lately sown Ray-grass, or the Gramen
Loliaceum, by which they improve any cold, sour, clay-weeping ground, for which
it is best, but good also for dryer up-land grounds, especially light stony, or
sandy Land, which is unfit for Sainct-foin.

32. It was first sown (as I was told) in the Chiltern parts of Oxfordshire,
and since brought nearer Oxford by one Mr Eustace, an ingenious Husbandman of
Islip, who though at first laughed at, has been since followed even by those
very persons that scorned his Experiment, it having precedence of all other
grasses, in that it takes almost in all sorts of poor Land, endures the drought
of Summer best, and in the Spring is the earlyest grass of any, and cannot at
that time be over-stock'd; its being kept down making it sweeter, and better
beloved by Cattle than any other grass: Nay, sometimes they have been known to
leave Meddow hay to feed on this: but of all other Cattle it is best for
Horses, it being hard Hay; and for Sheep, if unsound, it having been known by
experience to have worked good cures on them, and in other respects the best
Winter grass that grows.

33. As to the manure of it, some sow but two bushels on the Statute Acre, but
it is best to sow three, mixed with the trifolium agrarium Dodonaei, called
Melilot-trefoil, and sometimes Non-such, because of it self it is but a thin
spiry grass, and will not be of any bulk the first year, unless thickened by the
Trefoil, which failing by degrees, the Ray or bennet-grass (so some also call
it) thickens upon it, and lasts for ever. Of Ray-grass and Trefoil thus mixed
together, one at Islip but lately had so advantageous a crop, that from four
Statute Acres, worth not above forty shillings per annum; beside the keeping
six or eight cattle till holy Thursday, and the feeding all the Winter
following, had twenty Quarters of Seed worth twenty pounds, and fourteen loads
of fodder, enough to winter five or six cattle.

34. The faenum Burgundiacum caeruleum L'Obelii, or Medica legitima Clusii and
Dodonaei, commonly called Lucern; but by the Learned Dr. Morison said to be the
true Sainct-foin, is also sown here, and found to agree well enough with a rich
moist ground, but better by much in a warm and dry soil. This stands
recommended for an excellent fodder both by Men and Beasts, especially Horses,
which are purged, and made fat with it in the Spring time in 8 or 10 days. But
no more of this, or any other grasses, they having all (but Ray-grass) been
already described.

35. But beside Grasses, there have some other Plants been cultivated here of
no mean use, such as Cnicus, sive Carthamus sativus, manured bastard Saffron,
sometimes called Safflore, for dying of scarlets; and therefore by some called
also the scarlet Flower, whereof there was once a considerable quantity sown at
North-Aston by Colonel Vernon, the Seeds being planted in rows about a foot
distant, for the more convenient howing and keeping it clean from weeds: In
these rows it rises with a strong round stalk three or four foot high,
branching it self to the top, where it bears a great open skaly head, out of
which it thrusts forth many gold yellow threads of a most orient and shining
color, which they gather every day as fast as they ripen, and dry them well;
which done, it is fit for sale, and dying of scarlet.

36. And about Hampton and Clanfield, they make some profit of sowing Carum
sive Careum, or the Carui of the shops, commonly called Caruwaies, which they
sow in March or April, as they do Parsley; the first year (it seems) it bears no
Seed, but the next it seeds and shatters, and so will hold six or seven years
without new sowing, or any other care or trouble, beside keeping it from weeds:
the encouragement they have to sow it, is the value put on it; one pound of
this being esteemed by the Grocers, worth almost two of that which they have
from London.

37. And this is all I have met with concerning cultivated plants worthy taking
notice of in this County, but that like the wild Indigenous ones, these have
sometimes accidents that attend them too: for such, and no other, were the two
ears of Wheat branched from one stalk, and six ears of barley from another,
found at Fulbrook near Burford, and given me by Mr. Jourden, since deceased.
Nor have I more to add concerning them, but that I find few that I have
mentioned to be noted by Mr. Ray.

38. Next Herbaceous plants, I proceed to the Shrubs, amongst which I met with
but little extraordinary, only the Haw-thorn at Bampton, in the bowling-green
hedge, bearing white berries or haws, which indeed I take to be a great
curiosity: for though in Flowers and Animals, white be esteemed by some a
penurious color, and a certain indication of a scarcity of nourishment: Whence
it is, says my Lord Verulam Not. Hist. Cent. 1. Number. 93.
, that blue Violets and other Flowers, if they be starved, turn pale and white;
Birds and Horses by age turn white; and the hoary hairs of men come by the same
reason. And though among Fruits the white for the most part argues but a mean
concoction, they being generally of a flashy over-watery taste, as Pear-plums,
the white-harvest plum, white Bulleis, etc Here except the Pardegwin and white
Damasin.
. and diver sorts of pears and apples of that color. Yet in Berries the case
seems to be quite different, as we see in Goosberries, Grapes, Straw-berries,
Rasps, whereof the white are by much the more delicate, and have the better
flavor; which if true, in the whole species of berry-bearing Plants (as in
probability it may) we have reason to conclude that the berries of this Thorn
are not accidentally white, through defect or disease as in some other Plants,
but that they are an argument of its perfection, and that the Thorn it self is
of a quite different species from all known before, and may justly challenge
the name of Oxyacanthus baccis albis. These Burries it is true, I saw not my
self, not being there in time of year for them, but being certified of the
truth of it by the common voice of the Parish, and particularly by the
Worshipful Tomas Hoard Esquire who first told me of it, and the Reverend Mr.
Philips Archdeacon of Salop, and one of the three Vicars there; (men of great
ingenuity and undoubted veracity) I had no reason to question the certainty of
the thing.

39. And hither I think may be referred the Glastenbury Thorn, in the Park and
Gardens of the Right Honorable the Lord Norreys, that constantly buds, and
sometimes blossoms at or near Christmas: Whether this be a Plant originally of
Oxfordshire, or brought hither from beyond Seas, or a graft of the old stock
of Glastonbury, is not easy to determine. But thus much may be said in behalf
of Oxfordshire, that there is one of them here so old, that it is now dying,
and that if ever it were transplanted hither, it is far beyond the memory of
men.

40. As far the excellent and peculiar quality that it has, some take it as a
miraculous remembrance of the Birth of CHRIST, first planted by Joseph of
Arimathea; Others only esteem it as an earlier sort of Thorn peculiar to
England: And others again are of opinion, that it is originally a foreigner of
some of the southern Countries, and so hardy a Plant, that it still keeps its
time of blossoming (which in its own Country might be about the end of
December) though removed hither into a much colder Climat. Whether of these is
most probable, I shall not determine, but leave every Reader best to please
himself; and whatever more can be said of it, I shall reserve till I come into
Somersetshire, where it is in greatest reputation, and has been most observed.

41. Whereunto perhaps may be added a kind of Rosa Canina, which we have
ventured to style, humilior fructu rotundiori, for that it wants much of the
height and strength of the common one, and has round leaves, and the hips
compressed at the top, and branches thick set with small prickles between the
great ones; whereas the common one has both leaves and hips long and pointed,
and only a larger sort of prickles set at some distance: But whether this be
not the rosa sylvestris folio glabro, flore plane albo, of John Bauhin, to which
we find it most agreeable of any described Hist. Plant. lib. 14. cap. 1.
, we dare not pronounce; and therefore have not ventured to give it any
draught, but have left it to further enquiry, which that all men may readily,
make, they may find it growing plentifully in Magdalene College water-walks; in
the way up Heddington-hill; and in many other places near about Oxford. And if
judged at length to be that of John Bauhin: however, we find it not noted by
Mr. Ray, and therefore cannot be guilty of misplacing it here.

42. Beside this, I met with no others either dubious or omitted, but several
of them diseased, discolored or striped; such as Periclymenum sylvestre (with
the more accurate Botanists, rather a subfrutex than a shrub) found at
Shotover-hill; Cornus faemina at Waterstock; Rubus major vulgaris, in the Lane
between Finstock and Fawler; and Sambucus vulgaris, in the hedges at Cowley,
and near to Oxford; all which are striped yellow, but the last somewhat more
remarkably than any of the former, the veins only being yellow, and all the
parenchymous part of the leaf remaining green, so that the striping represents
as it were a Network: but this also growing out after some time like the rest,
must be reputed of the same kind, and to proceed from the same cause. Which is
all I have found observable under the species of shrubs, except it be worthy
notice, that in the Chiltern part of Oxfordshire the Rubus Idaeus, Framboise,
or Rasp-berry bush, grows plentifully enough among the woods and hills: and the
Oxyacantha, or Barberry-bush, between Upper and Nether Kiddington.

43. Thus having dispatched both Herbs and Shrubs, I come at length to the
Trees, whereof I have met with but one undescribed, and that a narrow leaved
Elm, which also being smooth, justly deserves the name of Vlmus folio angusto
glabro, wherein it differs not only from the Vlmus minor of Parkinson and
Gerard, but also from their Vlmus folio glabro, whose Leaves they say are
nothing so large as the Wych Hasel, but nearest in bigness, and exactly in the
figure of the common Elm; whereas ours are much less, and of a quite different
figure; being narrow, and having a peculiar kind of pointed ending, as exactly
expressed in Tab. 10. Fig. 1. Of those there are plenty in the Avenues to the
House of the Honorable the Lady Cope, the Relict of the most Ingenious Sir
Anthony Cope of Hanwell, where there is a whole Walk of them planted in order,
beside other that grow wild in the Coppices of the Park.

44. As for Trees either not noted, or any way doubted, I have met with none
here: but of Trees remarkable for some unusual accident attending them, there
are several worthy notice. For of Oaks, though I found none so prodigious as
some mentioned by the Learned and Ingenious John Evelyn Esquire in his discourse of
Forest Trees Discourse of Forest Trees, cap. 30.
yet there is one between Nuneham-Courtney and Clifton, that spreads from
boughs end to boughs end, 81 foot, in circumference supposing the boughs to
spread uniformly 243, shading 560 square yards of ground; under which allowing
three square yards for a horse or other beast, and two square feet for a man;
186 of the former, and 2420 of the latter, may be sheltered from the injuries
either of sun or rain.

45. Yet there is a somewhat bigger Oak than that, at Magdalen College, near the
Gate of the Water-walks, whose boughs shoot from the boal fifteen or sixteen
yards, which supposing they did spread of equal length from the trunk, like the
rays of a circle; the content of ground on which it would drop, would be no
less than 768 square yards, whereof allowing as before, three square yards of
ground for a horse to stand on (three yards long, and one yard broad, seeming a
competent proportion) there might 256 horses stand under that Tree; or allowing
as before 2 square feet for a man, 3456 men.

46. Yet at Ricot, in the Park of the Right Honorable the Lord Norreys, there
is an Oak yet somewhat bigger then eiher of the former, by the Author of
Dodona's Grove, called his Robur Britanicum, which extends its branches from
the trunk of the Tree about 18 yards, so that the diameter of its circumference
being 36 yards, it takes within its Area 972 square yards; under the umbrage of
which Tree, upon the aforementioned proportions, no less than 324 horses, or
4374 men, may sufficiently be sheltered.

47. And these are the Trees most capacious without; some others there are that
have given shelter within the hollow of their trunks: Mr. Evelyn tells us of
one, somwhere in Gloucestershire, that contains within its bowels a pretty
wainscoted Room, enlightened with windows, and furnished with seats, etc. which
I suppose may have given reception to many an honest Gentleman. Now though it is
true we have none put to so Honorable a use, yet the hollow Oak on
Kidlington-green, for the necessary and public service it has done, ought
perhaps to have preference, though neither so great nor gaudy; it being
frequently used before the death of Judge Morton (before whose House it stood)
for the Imprisoning Vagabonds and other inferior Malefactors, for the space of
a night or so, till they conveniently might be had to the Goal at Oxford: Of
whom, the hollow is so large within, that it would receive eight or ten
commodiously enough, the Tree without being 25 foot round above the spurs.

48. Just such another Prison as this, as we are informed by Johan. Ferdinand
Hertoda Tartaro-mastigis Moraviae, part. 1. cap. 17.
, was made in Moravia, in the trunk of a Willow 27 foot round, in the Village
of Moravan, by a certain Judge of that Country: The extravagant growth of which
Tree, he attributes to the fertility of the whole Marquisate; whereas I rather
think (not but that the Country may be fertile enough) the extreem rank growth
of that, and of all other Plants so exceeding the ordinary course of Nature,
ought rather to be imputed to some more peculiar agreeableness ot the
respective soils and Plants, than is ordinarily met with in any other places of
the same Country wherever it be.

49. On Blechington-green, near the Angel and Crown Inn, there is also an Elm
of so capacious a hollow trunk, that it once gave reception to a poor great
bellyed woman (excluded all the houses in the Parish, to prevent her bringing a
charge on it) who was brought to bed in it of a Son, now a lusty young man, and
living, as they told me, at or near Harwich. And yet neither this Elm, nor the
aforementioned Oak, are either of them so big, but that they may be matched in
many other places, in so much that I should scarce have thought them worthy my
notice, had it not been for the strange uses they were heretofore put to.

50. And thus I had immediately passed on to Elms, but that I am detained by a
parcel of subterraneous Oaks, found some years since at the bottom of a Pond on
Binfield-heath in the Parish of Shiplake, very firm and sound, but quite
through to the heart as black as Ebony; caused I suppose by a Vitriolic humor
in the Earth, which joining with Oak the parent of a sort of Galls, might
reasonably enough produce such an effect, as we see they do always in the
making of Ink: And that I am not mistaken in this conjecture, the Ditches by
the Woods side between this and Caversham will bear me witness, the Waters
whereof, where they stand under Oaks and receive their dropings and fall of
their leaves, being turned blacker than any Vitriolic ones I have any where
seen, except those of Mr. Tyrrill of Oakley in Buckingham-shire.

51. And these also no question performed the same feat to some Tuns of Oak
found also under a Pond, belonging to the Worshipful Thomas Stonor Esquire of
Watlington-Park, near Blunds Court, in the Parish of Rotherfield Pypard, which
for the benefit of the soil, and other conveniences, being cleansed in July,
Anno 1675. the Workmen sinking it a convenient depth, came at last, as it
proved, to the top Branches of an Oak: relation whereof being made to the owner
the worthy Mr. Stoner, a person not only curious, but equally generous; he
presently gave order for a further inquisition, and accordingly employed an
equal number of men to the greatness of the work, who sinking a pit about
twenty yards over, and about fifty or sixty foot deep, found many whole Oaks;
whereof one stood upright perpendicular to the Horizon, the others lay
obliquely, only one was inverted, the forked end downward: All of them dyed
through of a black hiew like Ebony, yet much of the Timber sound enough, and
fit for many uses, several of the Trees being a foot or fourteen inches, and
particularly one above three foot diameter, and all receiving a very good
polish; and therefore fitter for Joyners in-laid works, than pales to set about
closes, to which use that was put, which was found at Binfield.

52. Beside the Trees, all along as they dug, they met with plenty of
Hasel-nuts from within a yard of the surface to the bottom of the pit, which
Times iron teeth had not yet cracked; and that which amazed me most of all, I
think they lay thicker than ever they grew: Some of which, as well as the Oaks
were at some places covered with a bluish substance, much of the consistence of
the flower of Sulphur, and not much unlike to the finest blue starch; which is
the Caeruleum nativum before mentioned in this History, Cap. 3. Sect. 18. The
Oaks had none of them any roots, but plainly cut off at the kerf, as is used in
felling Timber; The shells of the Nuts very firm without, but nothing remained
within of the Kernel, but a show of the dry outer rind. And the blue substance
not found only upon the Nuts and Oaks, but in any other small cavities of the
Earth, dispersedly here and there all over the pit.

53. Moreover, there was found a sort of white stone dispersed in like manner,
in pieces sometimes as big as ones fist, in color somewhat like to white Marble
or Alabaster, but of a much different texture. And near the bottom of the pit a
large Stags head, with the Brow-antliers, as sound as the Beam it self, with
two Roman Vrns, both which were broken by the incurious Workmen.

54. How the Timber should be thus dyed as black as Ebony, I hope I have made
no improbable conjecture, nor is it liable that I know of to any exception,
unless to a Quaere: Why the Nuts and Stags head were not dyed so too? To which
it may be answered, That the pores of the shells being closer than the wood,
and neither the nuts nor the born having any thing gallish, the Vitriol of the
Earth could have no power on them, whether it be wrought by repugnancy or
combination, to work that effect.

55. But how the Timber should become thus buried both at Binfield and Blunds
Court? and at the latter how joined in so strange a mixture, as Hasel-nuts, a
Stags head, and Vrns; and at some places only, with an Alabastrine kind of
substance? remains yet a knot not so easily loosed. However, since attemts have
sometimes pleased, and it has always been acceptable in magnis voluisse, I shall
adventure to propound my present thoughts; still reserving the liberty to my
self, as well as Reader, of thinking otherwise when sufficient grounds of
change shall offer themselves at any time hereafter.

56. First then, as for the timber dug at Binfield-heath, it is likely that
might be felled and buried there when Societies of men (which I guess was not
common till the days of King Alfred) under some Mean, or Lord Paramount, first
chose to themselves certain places of abode, and promoted Agriculture: which
that they might the better do they felled and buried the timber which they
could not well burn with the under-wood. Thus, as I have been informed by a
very worthy Person, who had it from his aged Father, did our Grandfathers
serve their timber in the inland parts of Kent to make room for tillage,
digging a trench by each tree after it was felled, and so tumbling it in, its
sale not being worth the portage, even there, so few years ago. Much rather
therefore might the first Planters of Binfield-heath throw it into Ponds, or
other hollow places ready at hand, to make room as well for habitation as
tillage, in ancienter times: which I guess might be done in the Reign of King
Alfred, 1. because he divided the Kingdom into Shires and Hundreds; and 2.
because Binfield gives name to the Hundred (however inconsiderable it be now)
in this woody part of the County.

57. Moreover, that this Timber must be buried by design, and not casually
over-thrown, either by their roots being loosened by to much wet, occasioned by
the obstruction of Rivers, as Camden Camden in Lancashire.
apprehends those Trees were, found in Chatmoss in Lancashire: Nor by the
overflowing of any Rivers, nor fall of any Torrent, as Steno would have it
Steno in Prodrom. concerning the matter of beds.
: Nor undermined by subterraneous streams, or dissolution of matter underneath
them, as Dr. Jackson Philosoph. Transact. Number. 53.
thinks it happened about 18 years since at Bilkely in Hereford-shire, is plain
and evident; for that all the Country hereabout lies very high, and is as stony
a fast ground, as almost any where to be found.

58. It remains therefore, that it must needs be designedly buried, and if in
any other places of the heath, as well as in the pond, may possibly be
discovered either by the herbage over them, which will wither much sooner than
any of the rest; as near Yeovil in Somersetshire, where, as we are informed by
the Reverend and Learned Dr. Beal Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 18.
, the parched part just over them, will bear the very length and shape in gross
of the trees, whence they have been instructed to find and take up hundreds of
Oaks: Or by the direction of the dew in Summer; it being observed in Cumberland
Britannia Baconica in Cumberland.
, that the dew never stands on any of the ground under which such trees lie;
though possibly too, on the other side we may have no such indications here in
firm grounds, they being hitherto observed only in moors and mosses.

59. But as for the timber at Blunds Court, as it was found, so it requires a
deeper research, it being very unlikely they should dig so low, upon the same
score as at Binfield, since timber might have been buried on far easier terms,
as formerly in Kent. Much less can it be admitted it should be swallowed by an
Earthquake, or as the vulgar will needs have it, thus covered with Earth by
the violence of a Flood, and particularly by that in the days of Noah. For in
either of those cases, we should have found each tree with roots as well as
branches, whereas these were plainly hewn off at the Kerf, as is used in
felling Timber, the marks of the Ax still remaining upon them.

60. Beside, the several other things found in company of these trees, seem to
give testimony of some other matters. The first and chiefest whereof, is that
bluish kind of substance, which I am strongly persuaded is Caeruleum nativum,
and the rather, because found in an Ash-colored Earth. The true Cyprian
Caeruleum, or Vltramarine, as is testified by Rulandus, being found in terra
cinerea; and the Caeruleum Patavinum, in glebis subcinereis Mart. Ruland.
Lexic. Alchemiae.
; with whom agrees Kentmannus, as cited above, Chap. 3.. 18. And if true
Caeruleum, we have reason to suspect a Mine underneath; for then, says
Aldrovandus, is Caeruleum produced, when some saline acid humor (such as the
Vitriol that dies the Trees black) corrodes some metallic matter or other
Musaeum Metallicum, lib. 3. cap. 8.
; which sometimes is Copper, and sometimes Gold, as Encelius witnesses it is at
Lauterberg and Goldeberg in Silesia, in his Book De re Metallica Encel. de re
Metallica. cap. 22.
; where he also further adds, that Gold is smelted out of Caeruleum it self.

61. Dr. Brown also tells us, in the account of his Journey from Comara to the
Mine-Towns in Hungary Account of his Travels, p. 93, 94.
, that at Schemnitz, where the silver Ore holds some gold, and at the silver
Mines in Peru, there are Rocks covered over with a fair shining blue. Rulandus
Mart: Rulandi Lexicon Alchemiae
also joins it with a silver Ore at Gieshubelia, and so does Pliny Not. Hist.
lib. 33. cap. 12.
: What then should hinder but it may be so here? since I do not doubt it to be
the steam of a mineral; for when I was at the bottom of the pit (above 50 foot
deep) notwithstanding the openness of the pit, and coolness of the day, no Sun
appearing, I found it so hot, that the drops followed one another on my face,
whence I judged the Mine-chamber not to be far off.

62. Which I rather guess to be of silver than of any other metal, because of
the Alabastrine or spar-like substance found mixed with it; which, says Mr.
Webster, was in some places intermixed also in the best Silver-mine ever yet
found in England, the Ore whereof held about sixty six pounds per Tun History
of Metals, cap. 13.
. From all which it may be concluded, that it is probable at least that here may
have been formerly such a mine, stopped up as I first thought by the Aboriginal
Britans, upon the arrival and conquests of the Romans or Saxons, who not being
able to recover their Country within the memory of man, it might be lost like
the Gold-mine of Glass-Hitten in Hungary, when Bethlem Gabor overran that
Country Dr. Brown's Travels into Hungary.
; or the Gold-mine of Cunobeline in Essex, discovered again temp. Hen. 4. as
appears by the Kings Letters of Mandamus, bearing date 11 May, An. 2. Rot. 34.
directed to Walter Fitz-Walter concerning it Sir John Pettus his Fodinae Regal.
cap. 9. and 13.
; and since that lost again.

63. Till at length they found the Vrns, and then 'twas plain and evident that
it must have been formerly some Roman Work, and probably still remains some old
Roman Mine, in all likelihood stopped up, when Gallio of Ravenna sent hither with
a Legion (the last that ever was in Britan) to repel the Picts and Scots, was
finally recalled by Valentinian the third, to assist Aetius in Gallia against
the In-roads of the Francks under Clodion, and to support his then tottering,
and quickly after ruined Western Empire: At what time, says Mr. Speed History
of Britan. lib. 6. cap. 54.
(but he quotes not his Author) they buried also their Treasures, whereof we
have found parcels in all Ages ever since.

64. And this it is likely they might do, first by throwing in Trees, which not
lying close enough immediately to support the Earth, were after covered with
Hasels (when the Nuts were fully ripe, which has occasioned their endurance to
this very day) on which they heaped Earth; which after some time sinking below
the surface of the other ground might occasion this Pond, never thought to have
been any other till the time abovementioned.

65. After the accidents of Oaks, come we next to those of Elms, whereof there
stands one on Binsey-Common, at the spurs next the ground at least 6 yards
diameter, occasioned here, as (I suppose) at many other places, by erecting a
Turf seat round the bottom of the Tree, it being elsewhere but of ordinary
dimensions. But this is not so extravagant in the excess of the growth of its
trunk near the ground, but there is another more strange for a defect in that
place, viz. a great old Elm growing near the North-east corner of the
Bowling-green in Magdalene College Grove, disbarked quite round, at most places
two foot, at some at least a yard, or four foot from the ground; which yet for
these many years past has flourished as well as any Tree in the Grove.

66. Now how this should come to pass (all Trees being believed to receive
their nourishment between the wood and bark, and presently to die upon their
separation) many have admired, but few attempted to explain, being further
discouraged by the absence of the pith, the Tree being within as hollow as a
Drum, and its outmost surface, where unbark'd, dead and dry beside. All which I
think had not startled me much, but that I found it in our Transactions
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 43.
positively asserted, that if any circle be drawn round any common English tree
(only Ash excepted) as Oak, Elm, Poplar, etc. by incision to the timber (how
thin soever the knife be) so that no part of the rind or bark to the very solid
timber be uncut, the Tree will die from that part upwards.

67. For the better clearing of which point, and avoidance of the attending
difficulties, it will be but requisite, though two principal parts of our tree
be wanting, to represent in Sculpture, at least a sextant of the body of an Elm
cut transversly, together with the bark and pith, as well as the wood, as they
all appear in a Microscope: Which without further trouble, or suspicion of
falsehood, I have carefully taken out of the Anatomy of Trunks lately published
by the accurate and ingenious Dr. Grew, as in Tab. 10. Fig. 2. only with some
alteration of the Letters of direction. Wherein AB, CD. represent the whole
bark of the tree. AB. the skin of the bark. CD one kind of sap vessels. OF.
another kind of sap vessels. GH. the parenchyma of the bark wherein the
Vesiculae are so exceeding small, as difficultly to be perceived by the
Microscope. IK, LM, NO, PQ. the great air vessels postured chiefly in rings on
the inner verge of every annual growth of wood. rs, rs, rs. the small air
vessels postured in cross bars. TVW the pith. XY. the diametral portions, or
insertions running through the several annual rings from the pith to the bark.
zzzz. the true wood, having been originally the sap vessels of the bark.
now the sap vessels in this diagram being only to be found in the Bark, and
those passages intercepted at so great distances, as abovementioned in our
Elm, the great question still returns as difficult as before, and as far from
solution.

68. In the clearing whereof, it must first for certain be answered, that its a
great mistake (though it have obtained so long) that a tree only lives by the
ascent of its nourishment in or between the Bark and the Wood, and that trees
must needs die when once they are barked round, here being matter of fact to
confute those opinions. And secondly, That it is as certain a truth as the
other is a mistake, that an Elm as well as an Ash, or any other tree, whatever
Experiments may have been made, may and does sometimes live after it is
disbarked, and that therefore there must be other vessels, beside the sap
vessels of the Bark, capable of the office of conveying sap, sufficient not
only for the life, but flourishing condition of a tree.

69. And such perhaps are a sort of small vessels in the very schematism of the
wood at zzzz, not perceptible by a Microscope, it being on all hands agreed on,
that the whole wood of trees, was all heretofore the sap vessels of the Bark:
The Bark every year, as Dr. Grew Compar. Anatom. of Trunks, c. 3.
well observes, dividing into two parts, and distributing it self two contrary
ways; the outer part falling off toward the skin at A B, and becoming at length
the skin it self; and the inner part adding it self to the wood, the
parenchymous part thereof making a new addition to the Insertions at X Y, and
the sap vessels a new addition to the lignous parts at zzzz standing between
the Insertions: So that a Ring of sap vessels in the Bark this year, becomes a
Ring of wood in the tree the next; all which may be perfectly seen in the great
Oak aforementioned, (. 45. of this Chapter, and belonging to the same College)
at several places where the rind is bruised off.

70. And if so, not unlikely they may so far retain their ancient office of
conveying sap, as to keep a tree alive, though not augment it, which perhaps
may be one different use of these sap vessels in the wood from those in the
bark, these being sufficient for the continuation of a tree, and the others
serving only for its augmentation: Which if true, and our tree past its
increase, as no doubt it has been many years since; what need has there been of
any such thing as the sap vessels of the bark? or indeed of the bark it self?

71. Now that this indeed is certainly so, seems agreed on and confirmed by the
learned and ingenious Mr. Willughby and Mr. Ray Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 43.
; who have made it appear by irresistible experience, that the sap not only
ascends between the bark and the tree, but also through the very substance of
the wood: And by the accurate Dr. Grew Comparat. Anatom. of Trunks, cap. 8.
, who allows to the wood, as well sap vessels as air vessels, it being proper
to the bark to have sap vessels only. All which put together, seem abundantly
to dispel all appearing difficulties, and no question will satisfy all
unprejudiced Readers how our tree comes to flourish, though disbark'd all round.

72. But if there shall be any found so froward, as not to allow (against all
experience) those minute sap vessels in the substance of the wood, yet the
visible pricked circles between the annual coats of the wood, observed also by
Mr. Willughby, Mr. Ray, and Dr. Tongue Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 43. etc 48.
, which I suppose may be the large air vessels of Dr. Grew, may be sufficient
for this purpose; especially in Elm, where they are numerous and of two sorts,
as in Tab. 10. Fig. 2. I K, etc. r s, etc. It being the office of air vessels,
for about a month in March and April Dr. Grew of the vegetation of Plants, cap.
1.
, before the new sap vessels of the back are fit for use, to convey the sap
necessary for the vegetation of all Plants. And if so, in old trees that have
done growing, and have no need of the annual new production of a bark, why may
it not continually ascend by them still?

73. To which if it be objected, that a tree lives as well by vegetable air as
sap, and that if the air vessels be continually filled with sap, the tree must
dye on the other side for want of air: It may easily be replied, that the use
of the Insertions or Diametral portions, Fig. 2. X Y, interceding the pith at T
V W, and the parenchyma of the bark at G H, all made of small kind of bladders
clustered together, is for conveyance of air, as well as the air vessels
themselves. But if it be further urged, that the Diametral portions only serve
to convey it by the breadth, and not the length of the tree, which makes them
insufficient for this purpose; we have latitude enough, and can allow the
lesser sap vessels that lie in cross bars at r s to supply that defect, and
still retain all the ranges of the great air vessels at IK, LM, NO, PQ, for
conveyance of the sap, in such like Trees as our old Elm.

74. And if it be further enquired, how it comes to pass that some trees do dye
upon the loss of their bark, and all are not preserved by the help of the sap,
or air vessels of the wood: It may be answered, and probably rightly enough,
that such trees as are young, a growing, have a plentiful issue of thin sap
between the bark and the wood, and that readily bleed when they are wounded or
bored, do most commonly (if not always) certainly dye: whereas some of the same
trees when older, past growing, especially if they have a more gummy juice,
such as Ash, Elm, Lime-tree, etc. may live and flourish many years after their
disbarking, by the saps ascent through the sap or air vessels of the wood.

75. Moreover, amongst the accidents that have happened to Elms, I must not
forget a very pleasant one that fell out at Middle-Aston, where cleaving of Elm
blocks at one Mr. Langston's, there came out a piece so exactly representing a
shoulder of Veal, that it was thought worth while to preserve it from the fire
by the owner of it, by whom it was kindly bestowed on me, as an addition to the
rest of my Curiosities of Nature.

76. But the most remarkable accidents that ever befell trees, perhaps here, or
in any other County, were the foundations of two eminent Religious houses both
occasioned by trees. The first, Oseney Abbey founded in that place by Robert
D'Oyly the second, by reason of a certain tree that stood in the meddows where
after he built the Abbey, to which it seems repaired a company of Pyes, as
often as Editha the wife of Robert came to walk that way, which in company with
her maid she often used to do (as Leland expresses it) to solace her self
Lelandi Itinerarium, Vol. 2. page 18, 19.
: at whose arrival the Pyes were always so clamorous, that she took notice of
it, and consults with one Radulphus Canon of St. Frideswid's, what this might
signify: who cuningly advises, that she must build some Church or Monastery
where the tree stood, which she instantly procures her Husband to do, and this
Radulphus (her Confessor) to be made the first Prior.

77. What tree this was, Leland acquaints us not; but that which occasioned the
second Foundation in the place where it is, was a triple Elm, having three
trunks issuing from one root. Near such a Tree as this Sir Thomas White, Lord
Major of London (as we have it by Tradition) was warned in a Dream he should
build a College, for the education of Youth in Religion and Learning: whereupon
he repairs to Oxford, and first met with something near Glocester-Hall that
seemed to answer his Dream, where accordingly he erected a great deal of
Building. But afterward, finding another Elm near St. Bernards College,
suppressed not long before by King Hen. 8. more exactly to answer all the
circumstances of his Dream, he left off at Glocester-Hall, and built St. John
Bapt. College, which, with the very Tree beside it, that occasioned its
Foundation, flourishes to this day, under the Presidence of the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Levinz, a cordial promoter of this Design.

78. Beside the Elms at St. John's knit together at the root, there are two
Beeches in the way from Oxford to Reading, near a place called Cain-end, more
strangely joined together a great height from the ground: for the bodies of
these Trees come from different roots, and ascend parallel to the top, but are
joined together a little before they come to bough, by a transverse piece of
timber entering at each end into the bodies of the Trees, and growing jointly
with them, for which reason it is commonly called the Gallow-tree, though the
piece that intercedes them lies somewhat obliquely: How this should come to pass
many have wondered, but the problem I guess may be easily solved, only by
allowing the transverse piece of Timber to be one of the boughs of the Tree to
which its lowermost end still joins, which whilst young and tender, might bear
so hard against the body of the neighboring Tree, that with the continual
motion of the wind, it might not only fret it self asunder, but gall off the
bark too of the other Tree; which closing up again in calm weather at the
rising of the sap, might well include so near a neighbor, first within its
bark, and after some time within the wood it self: which I have observed to
have been done but very lately in New College Gardens, where the boughs of two
different Sycomores are thus grown together, only by bearing hard on one
another, and interchangably fretting away each others bark, and then closing up
again at the rising of the sap.

79. There have also some accidents befallen the Ash and Willow, not commonly
met with; the former whereof in a Close of one Mr. Coker, of the Town of
Bisseter, grows frequently out of the boal of the other, yet not as it is usual
amongst other Trees, but so that the roots of the Ashes have some of them grown
down through the whole length of the trunks of the Willows, and at last
fastening into the earth it self, have so extended themselves that they have
burst the Willows in sunder, whose sides falling away from them and perishing
by degrees, what before were but the roots, are now become the bodies of the
Ashes themselves. But this happens only to Willows that have been lopt at six
or seven foot high; the Willows at Enston, in the walks near the Rock, whereof
there are several about 50 foot high, being incapable I suppose of any such
accident.

80. Beside this unusual growth of the Ash, I have met with other accidents
that frequently attend it, which because so much commended by Pliny Not. Hist.
lib. 16. cap. 16.
in Maple, in which they are common, I think ought much more to be noted in
this: And such are the Nodosities called Bruscum and Molluscum, to be found in
Ash as well as Maple, which when cut, show a curled and twining grain; the
Bruscum thick and intricate, the Molluscum being streaked in a more direct
course. With the Molluscum of Ash there is a whole Closet wainscoted, at the
much Honored Mr. Stonor's of Watlington Park, the grain of the panes being
curiously waved like the Gamahe's of Achats. And at the Worshipful Mr. Reads,
of the Parish of Ipsden, the Bruscum of an old Ash is so wonderfully figured,
that in a Dining-table made of it (without the help of fancy) you have exactly
represented the figure of the Fish, we commonly call a Jack, though endeavoring
to mend, they have somewhat marred it by Art: and in some other Tablets the
figures of a Unicorn, and an old Man from the navel upwards, but neither of
these so plain as the former.

81. Jacobus Gaffarellus, amongst his unheard of Curiosities Unheard of
Curiosities, chap. 5.
, tells us of a Tree found in Holland, which being cut to pieces by a
wond-cleaver, had in one part of it the figure of a Chalice, in another that of
a Priests Albe, in another that of a Stole; and in a word, there were
represented very near all the ornaments belonging to a Priest: which relation
if true, says he, it must needs be confessed, that these figures could not be
there casually or by chance; and indeed it is very hard to think, how so many
things pertinent to the same office, should thus meet together without some
design of Nature. However, till I am better satisfied of the truth of the
thing, or convinced by the sight of some other such Curiosity, I cannot afford
to think ours (being altogether independent) more than mere accidents.

82. Beside these unusual accidents of whole Trees, or their Trunks, there are
some also that have happened to their upper branches and leaves, whereof the
former are sometimes fasciated, and the latter striped. In willows, and some
other of the softer woods, the uppermost boughs are commonly fasciated, but the
best of the kind I ever yet saw, was the top-branch of an Ash, which I met with
at Bisseter, not only fasciated, but most uniformly wreathed two or three times
round. And there is a good example of this nature, in a top branch of Holly
hanging up in the Gate House of the Physick-garden, whence it is plain, that
this happens also to the hardest woods; and in both, by the ascent of too much
nourishment, though in branches of Trees, especially such as are not only flat
but helically curled, I guess there concurs some blast, or some such like
matter, that contracts the fibers and so turns them round, beside the excess in
the ascent of their nourishment.

83. As for the striped leaves of Trees, as well as those of Shrubs, and
herbaceous Plants, I suppose they may be met with almost in every kind. The
greater Maple, miscalled the Sycomore, was found striped white not many years
since in Magdalen College Grove, and translated thence into the Physick-garden,
where it flourishes still and retains its stripings; and I hear of a striped
Elm somwhere in Dorset-shire. Dr. Childrey Britannia Baconica in Cornwall.
, and out of him the ingenious Mr. Evelyn Discourse of Forest Trees. cap. 3.
, inform us of an Oak in Lanhadron Park in the County of Cornwall (to omit the
painted Oak in the Hundred of East) which constantly bears leaves speckled with
white. And there was another of these found this instant year, 1676. by my
worthy Friend Dr. Thomas Tailor, in a place called Frid-wood, in the Parish of
Borden near Sittingbourn in Kent. But of these more hereafter, when I come into
those Counties.

84. Of Unusual trees now cultivated in Oxfordshire, there are some
remarkable; such is the Abele-tree, advantagiously propagated by Sir George
Croke of Waterstock, which he does, by cutting stakes out of the more
substantial part of the wood, which put into moist ground grow more freely than
willows, coming in three or four years time to an incredible height. And such
are the Fir Tree, and the lesser mountain Pine, whereof there are several
Nurseries planted in the Quincunx order, at Cornbury, in the Park of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, which they propagate by slips twisted, as well
as by Kernels, to that advantage that there is great hopes of beautiful and
stately Groves of them; such as I met with at the Right Worshipful Sir Peter
Wentworths at Lillingston Lovel, where there are three Walks of Firs, most of
them 20 yards high.

85. Which Parish, if the Reader look for in the Map of Oxfordshire he must not
expect to find, though it belong to the County, it lying five miles within
Buckingham-shire: as on the other side several Parishes of Berkshire,
Buckingham-shire, and Worcestershire, are placed within Oxfordshire. How
these things come to pass we have little of certainty, but in all probability
this Lillingston was accounted in Oxfordshire for the sake of the Lords Lovels,
whose Inheritance, from the addition, we may conclude it once was; who being
powerful men in these parts, and not unlikely most times the Kings Lieutenants,
might have permission to reckon this their own Estate, within their own
Jurisdiction as part of Oxfordshire; as I suppose all other Parishes thus
placed out of the body of their Counties, may also have been.

86. From this necessary, and therefore I hope pardonable digression, I proceed
to some Fruit Trees not ordinary elsewhere, such as the double-bearing
Pear Trees: whereof I met with one in the Parish of Haseley, at a place called
Latchford, in the Hortyard of Mr. Gooding, called the Pear of Paradise, whose
first Crop is ripe about Midsummer, and the second at Michaelmass. There is
also another of these, but of a different kind, in the Parish of Stanlake at
the Chequer-Inn, called the Hundred-pound Pear, which Blossoms at two distinct
times, and bears two Crops, whereof it has both sorts (much like the Fig) upon
the Tree at a time, some ripe, and others green. But in both these trees, the
Pears in the second Crops are somewhat less than of the first, and grow both
after a peculiar manner, most of them, if not all, coming forth at the ends of
the twigs, which are all the pedicles they seem to have; and therefore on the
tree they do not hang downwards, like those of the first Crop, but point up in
the air, or any other way the shoots direct them.

87. At Corpus Christi College they have a sort of Pear Tree, that bears Fruit
in hardness little inferior to the younger shoots of the very tree that bears
them; and therefore not undeservedly by some called the Wooden-pear, though in
wet years I have known them pretty soft: but generally they are so sound, and
of so unalterable a constitution, that I have now some by me that were
seasonably gathered, above ten years old, as hard and firm as ever they were at
first, only somewhat less than when first gathered; for which very reason, in
some parts of Worcestershire where they have plenty of them, they are called
Long-lasters, being not subject to rot like other Pears.

88. And thus I had finished the Chapter of Plants, but that I think fit to
acquaint the Reader of a further design I have concerning them, viz. Of
enquiring hereafter into some other accidents of Plants of an inferior quality
to any before mentioned; which yet perhaps are more abstruse in their
consideration than the more noted ones are. And such are the blebs or blisters
we find on the leaves of many Trees and Shrubs, which sometimes happen to them
after heat and droughts, and sometimes too upon cold nipping weather: but
whether thus infected from the air from without, or by juices within, or by
both; and when by one, or the other, or both together? is a Question requires a
great deal of time, and more sedulity than has yet been afforded, to be but
probably solved.

89. And this I the rather design, because all that I find certain concerning
them yet, is only that the weak, and free growing sappy Trees are most subject
to them, and the stout Ever-greens but little, if at all: that the infection
for the most part is under, and the blister above the leaf, but sometimes
otherwise: that the blisters sometimes have Insects in them, sometimes bear
fungus's on their tops See Mr. Hooks Micrograph. Observat. 19.
, and sometimes have neither: But what kind of Insects or fungus's they are,
that belong to each Plant that have them? or whether the same Plants have not
sometimes different Insects and fungus's, especially in dry, and wet years? are
also Questions that require indefatigable industry, to be in any measure
satisfied.

90. And yet even in these, if God give me life, and I find encouragement to
proceed in my undertaking, I intend to attempt something. As also to find out
how it comes to pass, that of the seeds of many Plants, such as Oak, Ash, Elm,
Beech, Yew, Juniper, Hemp, etc. there come some Plants again that will never
bear seeds, if not timely prevented by our Learned Professor of Natural
Philosophy, the Ingenious Dr. Millington; the Learned Dr. Morison our Botanic
Professor; or the Learned and accurate Dr. Grew, now reading, writing, and
practicing the Anatomy, of Vegetables.

CHAP. VII. Of Brutes.
HAVING done with the Vegetative, I proceed to the Animal Kingdom, wherein I
shall consider first, that part of it that indeed has apprehension of external
Objects, of Pleasures and Pains, and Locomotion to make address to the one, and
fly the other, but is void of reason; within which may be comprehended all
manner of Brutes, such as Birds, Insects, Fishes, Reptils, and four-footed
Beasts, which I presume may be a subject sufficient for this Chapter, though as
in the former of Plants, I intend only to mention such, as either have not been
noted before, are very unusual, or have something extraordinary attending them;
Leaving what concerns Men for a Chapter by it self.

2. And herein, as before in the Chapter of Formed stones (and as I intend for
the future in all other Chapters so far forth as they will bear it) I shall
observe the method of the whole Essay, and first treat of such Animals as are
Inhabitants of the Heavens, then of those that belong to the Waters, and lastly
of such as inhabit the dry Land; of which in their order.

3. But amongst the inhabitants of the Air or lowermost Heaven, it cannot be
expected in so small a County, I should produce many not already noted, since
the feathered Kingdom has been so lately and so carefully surveyed, by the
Learned and Industrious Francis Willughby Esquire Nor indeed could I meet with any
omitted by him, except perchance a little Bird, sometimes seen, but oftener heard
in the Park at Woodstock, from the noise that it makes, commonly called the
Wood-cracker: Described to me (for I had not the happiness to see it) to be
about the bigness of a Sparrow, with a blue back, and a reddish breast, a wide
mouth and a long bill, which it puts into a crack or splinter of a rotten bough
of a Tree, and makes a noise as if it were rending asunder, with that violence,
that the noise may be heard at least twelve score yards, some have ventured to
say a mile from the place.

4. Which is all I could find in the County of Oxford omitted by that careful
and ingenious Author, except I may have leave to number the Diabolus marinus,
or Sea Devils-bird mentioned by Johnston De Avibus, lib. 4. tit. 2. cap. 4.
, and others, and to be seen in the Repository of the Bodleyan Library: Which
though it has so ill a name, contracted I suppose from its exquisite blackness,
and the ill it bodes to Seamen whenever they see it; yet is a very beautiful
Bird, and has therefore by some been numbered amongst the Manucodiata's, and
called the black Bird of Paradise. But of this no more, because no inhabitant
of the Land, much less of this County.

5. Which yet I think I had not forborne to describe, had our Bird been perfect,
it not being to be found in Sculpture in any Author that I know of: For though
I did it not in Foreign undescribed Plants growing in our Gardens, well knowing
the much abler Dr. Morison to be about it: Yet I think I may take the liberty
to do it in Animals, not hearing of any body else now designing such a work.

6. And therefore shall not omit the Hen from the Isle of St. Helen, now
living, and in the possession of the Right Honorable the Lord Norreys, a great
lover of Curiosities in all sorts of Animals: which for her kind I think may be
accounted one of the (...), and amongst them of the rapacious, carnivorous
sort, having her beak near its end, crook'd after the manner of a Vultur, and
striking with her pounces like a Hawk, though her talons indeed are not much
more turned than those of a common house Hen.

7. In her head it is true she is somewhat like the second sort of Gypaetos of
Aldrovandus Ornitholog. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 10.
, or the Percnopteros of Johnston Hist. Not. de Avibus, lib. 1. Tit. 1. cap. 2.
Art. 4.
, being bald and wrinkled, but not quite to the hinder part of the head, as
they are said to be; having from the crown of her head down to the beginning of
her neck, and so behind her ears to her throat, a sort of slender plume, like
bristles, which she erects or lets fall at pleasure: in her gorge also and
pounces she is very unlike them, for though she be carnivorous, yet her gorge
is slender, and though she strike with her pounces, they scarce exceed in
bigness those of a common house Hen, whereas the gorge and pounces of the
Gypaetos, and Percnopteros, are protuberant and very long; nor has she like
them any part of her plume so disposed at the top of her back, as to represent
a Monks hood, thrown backward from his head Vid. Willughbeii Ornitholog. lib. 2
cap. 3 Artic. 8. and Tab. 4.
.

8. However, for her near resemblance of them in her head, and some other
parts, we cannot but allow her to be a Bird of that genus, though undescribed;
and accordingly advise, she may be placed amongst them by future
Ornithologists, to which purpose let them take the following description.

9. Her beak is straight, only at its extremity, where it is turned like the
Vulturs, in length 2 inches, and her Nares long and narrow, as in Tab. 10. Fig.
3. The pupillae of her eyes are full and black, encompassed with Irides of a
dark brown color, bald and wrinkled to the top of the head, and so round by
the ears (which are of an irregular oval form) next which stand the pennae
setiformes as aforesaid; her gorge not at all protuberant, but slender; her
wings complicated or folded to her body, reach almost to the end of her train,
and extended at full stretch, have their extremities distant about five foot,
being somewhat larger than those of a Lanar, and containing in each of them 34
Remiges, i. e. beside the five feathers, 29 at least or 30 flags: her thighs
and pounces are much like those of a common house Hen, having the outermost
talon knit to the rest by a membran. In the whole, she is bigger than a Moscovy
Goshawk, from the point of her beak to the extremity of her train, above two
foot long, her plume for the most part being of an Ash Color, mixed with some
white feathers, and growing whiter upon mewing, as those of Hawks do.

10. Other Birds there are here that are but rarely seen, yet breed in this
Country, and are continually with us, and therefore to be numbered amongst those
we call perennial. Such are the Vpupa the Hoopoe, or Hooping-bird; whereof I
saw one alive on Otmoor, and another was given me for the Repository of the
Bodleyan Library (killed somwhere about Cassenton) by one Mr. Painter Alderman
of Woodstock. A Bird it is to admiration beautiful, being curiously decked with
feathers of diverse colors, and with a large crest on its head, as it is
exquisitely engraven both by Dr. Charleton Onomast. Zoicon. Titul. Aves, Class
Conorarum.
and Mr. Willughby; but like the Diabolus marinus, never appearing or being
heard (as the vulgar will have it) till immediately before some approaching
calamity.

11. As for Birds that have casually flown hither, or come but at some certain
seasons of the year, by Naturalists styled Aves migratoriae, beside Swallows,
and some well known winter Fowl: The Cormorant has been observed to come hither
about Harvest time, whereof there was one killed from St. Mary's steeple (tired
with along flight) An. 1675. and another young one taken up in Arncot-field
fallen down in the Corn, and brought me to Oxford.

12. But what is somewhat stranger, in the year 1644. the Pica Brasiliensis, or
Toucan, whose beak is near as big as its whole body, was found within two miles
of Oxford, and given to the Repository in the Medecine-School, where it is
still to be seen; which argues it a Bird of a very rank wing, there being a
necessity of its flying from America hither, except we shall rather say it
might be brought into England by Ship, and afterward getting away might fly
hither.

13. Of Birds well known of unusual colors, I have met with two remarkable
examples: the one a white Linnet, given me by Mr. Lane of Deddington; and the
other a sort of white, and pyed Phesants, kept by the Right Honorable James
Lord Norreys of Ricot: Whereof how some happen to be of different colors from
the rest of their species, especially when they have deviated from their kind
by whiteness, has been a question thought worthy of severe examination. In the
prosecution whereof, it has been observed (as before in the Chapter of
Plants,. 38.) that whiteness often proceeds from a defect of moisture or
nourishment; and it has been a received opinion concerning Birds, that they
may become white by plucking off their first feathers, which will cause their
new ones to come forth of that color. But beside these ways of art and
privation, it is manifest that Nature her self sometimes positively designs such
a color, even in species too that seldom are of it, many other Animals as well
as Birds, having been produced of that color unusual to the species, as brisk
and well liking as any others whatever, such as white Moles, Rats, Mice, and
sometimes white Fawns, where there has been neither Buck nor Do of that color
in the Park.

14. And this I guess she does by giving some certain Individuals of each
species a skin of finer and more contracted pores than others, which will cause
whiteness in feathers, hair, etc. by not permitting of the sulphurous
particles to expire, which give variety of colors Vid. Willisium de Ferment.
cap. 2.
; thus we see in the cicatrization of wounds where the skin is drawn together
like a purse, and the pores closed up, the hair comes constantly white: thus
the subtle Veterinarians procure white stars, or other desired marks in the
foreheads of their horses; and I have seen the skins of black Greyhounds
powdered with white, or made Ermyness, by applying wood-ticks to their skins
when young, both which are performed also by cicatrization, and closing the
pores of the skin, thereby hindering the exhalation of the Sulphur in those
parts.

15. Which will further appear from an observation of my Lord Verulam's
concerning Flowers, whereof the whites for the most part are more inodorate
than other colors: And this he makes out in many Flowers, as single white
Violets, the white Rose, white July-flowers, etc. We find also, says he, that
blossoms of Trees that are white are commonly inodorate; as of Cherry, Pear,
and Plum-trees: whereas those of Apple, Crab, Almond, and Peach-trees, are
blushy, and smell sweet. The cause whereof is, that the texture of these Plants
producing white Flowers (excepting such as produce white Flowers only, as
Lillies; or are extravagantly succulent, as the white Satyrion) is so very
close and fine, that it will not permit any sulphurous particles, which are
also the cause of smells Idem in loco citato.
as well as colors, in any measure to exhale. Which possibly may be found
true, if duly examined, in all sorts of Animals; and if so, we hereby may be
profitably instructed what Beasts of each kind are least offensive, and fittest
for the conversation of men or women, especially Ladies, who commonly have
great sagacity in smelling, may hereby be directed in the choice of their
Melitaei or Lap-dogs.

16. As for pyed Birds that are generally of another color, such as pyed
Phesants, etc. the case is easier, for such are produced either by common
colored Hens trodden by a white Cock-phesant, or vice versa; which possibly may
have happened also by our white Linnet whether male or female, or in any other
Birds of any other species, as we see it falls out in Dogs and Horses, and most
other Animals.

17. And this had been all concerning Birds, but that at Witney, Anno 1674. I
met with an Egg about the bigness of a Pigeons, containing another imperfect
one in it, given me by Mr. Hinton the then Minister there, which seems to have
been in the way toward such an Ovum in Ovo as is mentioned by the Learned Dr.
Harvey, and shown by him to that incomparable Prince, Charles the Martyr, and
many others; Vidi inquit Ovum perexiguum (Fabricius Centeninum vocat, and
Nostrates mulieres Gallo ascribunt) crusta tectum, intra aliud Gallinae ovum
majus, perfectum and cortice circumcirca obtectum, contineri De Generat.
Animalium, Exercit. 10. de Ovi cortice.
. Just such an Egg as this, pregnant with another, is preserved in the
Repository of the King of Denmark, which was shown by his Majesty to Tho.
Bartholine, as he testifies in his Epistles Epist. Cent. 3. Ep, 42. and Epist.
Cent. 4. Ep. 63.
; who also saw another in the year 1669 Miscellanea Cur. Med. Phys. Acad. Not.
Curiosorum. An. 1. observe. 36.
. And Geo. Sebastian Jungius met with another of these the nineteenth of June,
1671 Ibid. An. 2. observe. 250.
. which are Authorities enough (though more might be brought) to justify my
mentioning the thing, though by some thought inconsiderable.

18. Yet before we take leave of the inhabitants of the Air, we have something
worth notice concerning winged Insects, and particularly of the feminine
monarchy of Bees, not only the Prognosticators, but Concomitants of Eloquence:
of their Prophetical presages of future Eloquence, we have instances in Plato,
Pindar, Lucan, and that eloquent Father of the Church St. Chrysostom, about
whose mouths, whilst Infants, the Bees gathered, and dropped their honey, thereby
foretelling those Rhetorical Endowments they should hereafter be possessed of,
which accordingly came to pass.

19. But none of those, says the industrious Butler History of Bees, Numb. 59.
, are more memorable than the Bees of Ludovicus Vives, who being sent in the
year 1520. by Cardinal Wolsey to Oxford, to be public Professor of Rhetoric
there, and placed in the College of Bees (Corpus Christi being so called by the
Founder in his Statutes) was welcomed thither by a swarm of Bees, which to
signify the incomparable sweetness of his Eloquence, settled themselves over
his head under the leads of his Study (at the west end of the Cloister) where
they continued about 130 years.

20. The truth of this story appears as well by the general voice of the House,
who have received it by tradition, as by the special testimony of a worthy
Antiquary [Mr. Brian Twine] who affirmed [to Mr. Butler] that he had often
heard his master, Dr. Benefield ( one of the public Professors of Divinity)
who then had L. Vives 's chamber and study; and Dr. Cole ( then President, and
in Q. Mary's days Scholar of this House) to say as much, calling these Bees,
Vives his Bees.

21. In the year 1630. the leads over Vives his study being plucked up, [it then
being the study of Mr. Gabriel Bridges] their Stall was taken, and with it an
incredible mass of honey: but the Bees, as presaging their intended and imminent
destruction (whereas they were never known to have swarmed before) did that
Spring (to preserve their famous kind) send down a fair swarm into the
Presidents garden, which in the year 1633. yielded two swarms; one whereof
pitched in the garden for the President; the other they sent up as a new Colony
to preserve the memory of this mellifluous Doctor, as the University styled him
in a Letter to the Cardinal. Thus far Mr. Butler.

22, And there they continued, as I am informed by several ancient Members of
that Society that knew them, till by the Parliament Visitation, in Anno 1648.
for their Loyalty to the King, they were all, but two, turned out of their
places, at what time with the rest of the inhabitants of the College, they
removed themselves, but no further than the East end of the same Cloister,
where as if the feminine sympathized with the masculine Monarchy, they
instantly declined, and came shortly to nothing. After the expiration of which
ancient Race, there came, it is true, another Colony to the East corner of the
Cloister, where they continued till after the return of his most Sacred Majesty
that now is: but it not being certain that they were any of the remains of the
ancient Stock (though it is said they removed thence to the first place) nor any
of them continuing long there, I have chose rather to fix their period in the
year 1648. than to give too much credit to uncertainties.

23. And thus unhappily, after above six score years continuance, ended the
famous stock of Vives his Bees, where it is pity they had not remained, as
Virgil calls them, an Immortale Genus Georgie. Lib. 4.
. However, since they are now irrecoverably lost, it would not I think be
amiss, if the College provided them another Colony; not that I think that
Learned Society wants any such monitor of Industry, but that it seems but
congruous, they should always have by them the Thing, whereof their whole House
is but the metaphor, the Founder calling it Alvearium, and the Students,
Ingeniosas apes, dies noctesque Ceram ad Dei honorem, and dulciflua mella
conficientes, ad suam and universorum Christianorum commoditatem. And this I
the rather persuade, because by the new discovery of that excellent method of
Bee-houses and Colonies, they are freed from most, if not all the hazards,
charge, and trouble that heretofore attended them: Not to mention the advantage
and profit accrewing by them, which has always been judged so considerable,
that there have been several Tracts written and published full of experiments,
directions, and methods to be used in the menage of these Insects.

24. But none yet extant that I know of comparable to what are practiced by
John Lad of Over-Worton, and William Tailor of Warkworth, who though a
Nortbampton-shire Man, has Apifactories in this County, who profess (as I am
informed by the Reverend Mr. Clark Rector of Dreyton near Banbury) 1. That they
can take swarms out of any stock that is able, and neglects to swarm, without
any prejudice to the stock. 2. That they can take honey out of a stock without
that hazard to the Bees, which (they say) the way proposed by the Author of the
Colonies is subject too. 3. That they can secure any stock from the invasion of
Robbers. 4. That they can so order an old stock, that the Bees shall gather
pure Virgin honey. 5. If a stock be in low condition, they can preserve and
recruit it, so as it shall do well. 6. They can take away a Queen where there
is more than one in a hive, and place her in a stock where the Queen is dead,
or otherwise wanting, and by that means keep the subjects together, which would
else disperse. 7. If a Queen wants subjects, they can draw out of several
stocks supplies in what number they please, that shall settle under her
government. And these operations they commonly practice, which because
profitable to them, they are unwilling should be made too common, which yet
they are so ingenious as not to deny to communicate to fit persons upon
reasonable terms.

25. Of other flying Insects, I have minded only the Muscae aquaticae, such as
are generated in the waters, and come of Cadworms, and therefore called by
Johnston, Phryganides Hist. Not. de Insectis, lib. 1. tit. 2. cap. 2. art. 2.
punct. 4.
, quod e Phryganio Monfeti Insect. sive Min. An. Theat. cap. 12. de Muscarum
usu.
(the Caddis of the English) ortum habeant: Nor shall I venture to describe
above one of these neither (and that only as a specimen of what I intend of the
rest, as fast as I can compass the method of their productions) which I think I
may call Musca e Phryganio saxatili, there being a stone, as well as a stick
Caddis, or Cad-worm; in the generation of which, Nature seems to observe the
following method. First, there appears on the stone to which many of them
stick, as in Tab. 10. Fig. 4. only little bubbles of a glutinous nature, like
the spawn of frogs, which by the descent of gravel and sand that stick to them,
are formed into stone Caddis houses, including the Animal therefore called the
stone Caddis; which after it has continued in its rough-cast stone house its
due time, gets off the stone either to the bank of the River, or climes up some
reed, where also leaving its house, it becomes a fly, somewhat like in shape to
the Muscae (...), or bipiles Moufeti Idem. cap. 11.
, that come of the stick Caddis, only it is shorter, and wants both the
Antennae and forked bristly tail; but most of all like the Breise, only the
Briese is all gray, and this has a black head and dark brown wings. See its
form, Tab. 10. Fig. 5.

26. Other water Flys there are that come of such worms, called Cock-spurs,
Rough-coats, Pipers, etc. of which no more at present till further observation;
but that though at last they come to be flying Insects, yet at first they are
all of them water Animals, which puts me in mind of proceeding next,

27. To the Fishes, whereof we have a sort in the River Isis, that we call here
a Pride, of the long cartilagineous smooth kind, concerning which Authors seem
so obscure, that I know not whether it be described at all; or if it be, it is
done so imperfectly, that perhaps it may be acceptable if I contrive another.
The Fish the most like it of any I can find, is the Lampetra parva fluviatilis
of Rondeletius De Piscibus fluviatil. cap. 24.
, rendered by Dr. Charlton Onomast. Zoicon. tit. Pisces, cap. Laevium.
and Dr. Merret Pinax rer. Not. Britan. p. 188.
, the Stone-grig: it having a mouth cut neither perpendicularly downward, nor
transversly, but hollowed as it were between two cheeks, without an under jaw,
after the manner of Leeches; on the top of its head it has one, and on each
side seven holes that supply the place of gills; and under the belly a small
line, reaching from the mouth to the exit of its excrement; it moves by a
winding impulse of its body, without the help of any other fins but the
pinnulae at the tail, by which it steers its course; and thus far it agrees
with the Lampetra fluviatilis.

28, But though they agree in some particulars, they differ in as many, our
Pride being streaked from the top of its back down to the aforementioned line
at the bottom of its belly, with lines of a distinct color from the rest of
its body, like the Pricka marina of Aldrovandus Aldrovand. de Piscibus, lib. 4.
cap. 13.
, whereof the Lampetra is not said to have any: Beside the two pinnulae of the
Lampetra, whereof one stands on the top of its tail, and the other a little
higher on the back, some space interceding; the Pride has another underneath
its tail, joining with the other from above at the tip, making the whole tail
to end like the head of a spear. Moreover, the eyes of the Pride are very
obscure, and not such plain round ones as are given the Lampetra, not only in
the description but Cut of Rondeletius; And though it have a hole in its head,
yet it stands not as Rondeletius describes it in the Lampetra, just in the
middle between the eyes, but more forward in the extremity of the head, near
the upper lip; all which may plainly be seen Tab. 10. Fig. 6, and 7. Whence
it is easy to conclude, that either this Fish has not been described at all, or
so very meanly, that there was almost a necessity of giving another, either of
which I suppose will excuse this attempt.

29. Beside the Pride which we think undescribed, we have another sort of Fish
plentiful in the Cherwell (scarce ever found in Isis but below the place where
the Rivers join) that is more certainly so; and that a Fish of the squammous
kind, which they call a Finscale, somewhat like a Roach, only the belly fins,
and the single one at the exit of the excrement, and those at the tail are much
redder then those of a Roach; it has also a full black eye, encompassed with a
yellow iris, whereas that of a Roch is red; it is also a much deeper and
thinner Fish, but yet neither so deep or thin as a Bream; from which also it
differs not only in the redness of its fins, but in that the single fin placed
next the exit of its excrement, is not continued to the tail as it is in the
Bream: Its fins at the gills are much whiter than the rest, and that upon the
back of a dirty bluish color: its scales, especially near the back, are of a
greenish yellow color, on which from the gills to the tail there runs a
crooked line of points, one on each scale, as in Tab. 10. Fig. 8. The Fishes
most like it of any described, are the Bollerus or Bordeliere, and the Phoxini,
Rose or Rosiere of Rondeletius Rond. de Piscibus lacustribus, cap. 8. and de
fluviatilibus, cap. 28.
; but that they cannot be the same is plain from hence, in that the Bordeliere
is confessed to have no teeth, whereas the Finscale has teeth as large as a
Roach; and the Phoxini never to be found without spawn, or to exceed half a
foot in length, whereas I have seen Finscales, even in time of year when one
might well have expected it, without any spawn; and some of them (particularly
the described one, Fig. 8.) from the mouth to the fork of the tail a foot long,
and four inches and a half in depth, beside many other differences that might
also be brought.

30. Which is all I have met with extraordinary amongst the squamous kind of
Fish, but that there is a sort of Chub peculiar to the Evenlode, some say
exceeding, all equalling the Perch or Tench in goodness. And that at
Lillingston-Lovell, about six years since were taken two Salmons, one somewhat
above, the other somewhat under a yard in length, in a small brook (a branch of
the Ouse) that a man may step over, little less (as the river runs) than two
hundred miles from the Sea. How these Salmons should come up so high, has been
much wondered at by some, since so many Mills and Locks stand in the way on
this Rivulet to hinder them: but to such as have either seen, or but read of
the Salmon-leap at Kilgarran in Pembroke-shire Camden in Pembr. and Cardigan.
, or at Wasserfal in the Rhine, which I suppose is much greater, and that they
run up that river above five hundred miles to the Lake of Zugh in Switzerland
Mr. Rays Observat. Topograph. etc. p. 430.
, perhaps it may not appear so strange; especially if it be also considered,
that our Mills and Locks have most of them back streams and lashers to carry
off the water when it is too plentiful, over which the leap is but very
inconsiderable.

31. I have met with also somewhat remarkable of our fresh water shellfish, and
particularly of a sort of Gammarus, or Crey-fish, found in Salford stream, that
does not boil to a brisk red color, but at best of a dirty yellowish red,
which I suppose must be attributed to the badness of the water, infected with
ill qualities perhaps by the Moor through which it passes, which is very
agreeable to one of Cardans signs of good water: Vbi aqua bona (says he) astaci
debent esse valde rubri, cum coquantur In Hippoc. de A^re Aquis and Locis, lib.
2. Lect. 14. in text. 2. 3.
: whence it is easy to conclude (if the Symbol be truly put) that where they
boil of a different color, the water must needs be naught.

32. I found also in Ponds at Bradwell, Hanwell, and Shot-over Forest, as well
as in Rivers, the Mytilus fluminum maximus subviridis, whereof I examined
several in hopes of the Pearls to be found in them, mentioned by Sir Hugh Plat
in the Appendix to his Jewel-house of Art and Nature Sir Hugh Plats App. p. 221.
; but I could not meet with any with craggy rough out sides, in which it seems
they are only found ( ours being all of them smooth) and so lost my labor; but
I hear they are to be met with in Buckingham-shire, Montgomery-shire, and
Shrop-shire, as Sir Hugh also informs us, where more fully concerning them, if
this design be encouraged, and I live to travel and examine the productions of
these Counties.

33. We have also in great plenty all the Cochleae fluviatiles, or fresh water
Snails mentioned by Mr. Lister Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 105.
, concerning which I can add nothing, but that his Cochleae fasciatae ore ad
amussim rotundo (which is somewhat strange) seem to be all viviparous,
containing their young within their bodies, covered over with shell before
their exclusion, as I found it upon examination in great numbers of them; and
that I found most of them this Summer swiming above water, dead and stinking,
which whether to be ascribed to the drought, or any other cause, I am yet
uncertain.

34. Amongst the Cochleae marinae, and fluviatiles, I find all the Naturalists
to treat of the Cochleae terrestres Vid. Gesnerum de Cochlearum terrest.
diverse. specieb. lib. 4. de Aquatil. and Aldrovandum, lib. 3. de Testaceis,
cap. 30.
, though I think they should rather be put under the title of Reptils; whereof
we have one sort met with in Cornbury Park by Mr. Jacob Bobart junior, that I
find not described in any of our Zoographers: in shape (though not so big) like
the Turben magnus of Rondelet Rond. de Testaceis, cap. 16.
, or the twelfth Turbo of Aldrovandus Lib. 3. de Testaceis, cap. 30.
, having a long Turbinated shell rough and unequal, by reason of many
protuberant ribs thwarting the helical turns of the shell, as in Tab. 10. Fig.
9. which was found alive and creeping on the grass, but what it should be I
cannot divine, unless the same with the Cagaroles of Spain and Montpellier,
mentioned by Aldrovandus Idem de Testaceis, cap. 31
, which he seems to describe to be a Cochlea terrestris of this figure, but
gives no cut of it.

35. Of other Reptils we have little to say, but that in the Lordship of
Blechington, and all the more Northern parts of Oxfordshire, no Snakes have
been ever or very rarely seen, in so much that I met with several ancient
people about Deddington and Banbury that scarce ever saw a Snake in their
lives, at least not in that Country. And at Blechington 'twas confidently
believed, that a Snake brought from any other place, and put down there, would
instantly die, till I made the experiment and found no such matter: Whereupon I
got leave (in the absence of the Family) to enclose my Snake in the Court,
before the Right Honorable the Lord Anglesey's house, to see what time would
produce, leaving the Gardener in trust to observe it strictly, who found it
indeed, after three weeks time dead, without any sensible external hurt.

36. How this should come to pass, is a question indeed not easy to determine,
but certainly it must not be ascribed to the Talismanical figure of the stone
Ophiomorphites to be found about Adderbury, and in most blue clays, whereof
there are plenty in this Country. Since these are to be met with about Oxford
too, and many other places, where there are Snakes enough. Beside, we are
informed by Cardan De Subtilitate, lib. 7.
, that Albertus Magnus had a stone, that being naturally marked with the figure
of a Serpent, had this no less admirable than contrary virtue, that if it were
put into a place that was haunted with Serpents, it would draw them all to it.
Much rather may we subscribe to the cause assigned by Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 17.
cap. 4.
, who seems confidently to assert, that the earth that is brackish, and
stands much upon Saltpeter, is freer from vermin than any other. To which we
may add (if need be) Sulphur and Vitriol, whereof there is plenty in these
parts of the County; but whether by one, two, or all these, though we dare not
pronounce, yet that it is caused by some such mineral steam disagreeable to the
Animal, I think we may be confident.

37. Amongst the inhabitants of the Earth, come we next to the Quadrupeda,
whereof some are (...), whole-hooft, such as Asses, Mules, Horses, of which
last kind I met with three remarkable for their age; one at Souldern, another
at Sherbourn, and a third at Aston Rowant, each reported to be about forty
years old apiece. And amongst the Quadrupeda (...), or cloven-hooft Beasts,
there was a Hog at Vpper-Tadmerton, of as strange a stature as they were of
age; being fed by one Pargiter to so extravagant a greatness, that he came at
last to be near 13 hands high, as it was testified to me by the Reverend Mr.
Whateley, Rector of the place, and several others who had carefully measured
him.

38. Of four-footed Beasts that chew the cud, they have a sort of sheep
esteemed in this Country for their constantly bearing two lambs at a time,
whence they have justly obtained the name, though somewhat an improper one, of
double Ews. They are said to have been first brought into this Country by the
Worshipful James Vxley of Darnford Esquire where I hear they are still preserved by
the Right Worshipful Sir Nicholas Pelham Knight, who with one of his daughters
(a coheiress) enjoys that Estate. I heard of them also about Newington and
Dorchester, and some other places here and there in the County.

39. But there are much stranger sheep, though perhaps not so profitable, at
Ricot in the Park of the Right Honorable the Lord Norreys, brought hither from
some other parts of England or Wales, but now breeding here: Of which, some of
them at first had six or eight horns apiece, but the number upon mixture of
their generation with other sheep is since diminished. However, there remain
still two of them with very strange heads, having each four horns; one of them
with two larger ones issuing from the top of its head, bending forward, and two
side ones coming out from under its ears, and bending round toward its mouth,
as in Tab. 10. Fig. 10. And the other having two large horns standing pretty
upright on its head, and two side ones proceeding from under the ears like the
former, and bending round to the cheeks, into which they would grow (and so in
the whole kind) were they not prevented by being timely cut off, as in Tab. 10.
Fig. 11.

40. And as these are remarkable for their many horns, there was another sheep
once there, that excelled all the rest, in its being a Unicorn, having a single
horn growing almost in the middle of its forehead, 21 inches long, with
annulary protuberances round it, and a little twisted about the middle, as in
Tab. 10. Fig. 12. There was, it is true, another little horn grew on the same
head, but so inconsiderable, that it was hid under the wool. This head is still
preserved by the Honorable the Lord Norreys, and is now to be seen nailed up at
Ricot on the North side of the Hall.

41. To which may be added a Cow of Mris. Dunches, of Newington near
Dorchester, more strangely prolific, than the Sheep are strange in form, that
whilst a Calf, before she was eleven months old produced another: which
Animals carrying their burden no less than nine months, we must either admit
that she took Bull at about ten or eleven weeks old, or that the Cow her self
was at first brought forth pregnant of another, as Aristotle reports a sort of
Mice commonly are in a certain place in Persia, (...), i. e. that in female
Mice dissected, the female offspring was found pregnant with others Hist.
Animal. lib. 6. cap. ult.
. The same again is reported by Claudius Aelian of the very same Animals, near
the Caspian Sea (...), lib. 17. cap. 17.
. And Aristotle further acquaints us, that the Fish Phoxini have spawn when
they are very little, (...) are his very words Hist. Anim. lib. 6. cap 13.
, in so much that Rondelet adds, ut periti Piscatores cum ovis nasci affirment
Rond. de Piscib. fluviatil. cap. 28.
.

42. We are informed also, that the same sometimes happens in more perfect
Animals, by Joan. Baptista Nierembergius, who tells us of a certain mare in
Spain that brought forth a mule, great of another In Hist. Not. lib. 6. cap. 2.
. And the learned and observing Bartholin Hist. Anatom. and Med. rar. Cent. 6.
Hist. ult. and Epist. Med. Cent. 3. Ep. 28.
, yet further acquaints us, that in the Parish of Vleslovia near Neoburg in
Fionia, Joan the wife of Nocholas Peter, a Husbandman of that Country, was
delivered of a female still-born child, pregnant with another female, duly
placed in the womb about a span in length, with all its parts so perfect, that
the Grandmother (who dissected the pregnant infant) believed it had been
living.

43. But what yet comes nearer to the business, we are informed by David
Spilinbergerus, Physician of Leutschovia, that in the year 1663. there was a
Cow in Hungary that brought forth a Calf with a great belly, wherein there was
found another Calf with all its limbs perfect Miscellan. Curiosa Med. Phys.
Germaniae, An. 1. observe. 36.
. How these things should come to pass, the learned Bartholin gives us his
conjecture, viz. that in such productions as these three last, Nature at first
intended only twins, and that by some error in her procedure, one, of each of
these, might be thrust into the belly of the other (as I suppose it happened in
some measure in the case of Lazarus Colloredo and his Brother Baptist Tho.
Barthol. Anatom. Med. rar. Hist. 66.
) over which we may easily allow a skin to be superinduced. But that ever any
such second faetus was brought into the world, living after the first, we have
no instance, except this calf of Newington may pass for one, which is wholly
left to the readers judgment. For my part, I am rather inclined to believe that
the Cow might take Bull at ten or eleven weeks old, that being the lesser
wonder of the two, especially having lately received news out of the Country
from an intelligent Lady, that the thing is not so strange, but possible enough.

44. Hither also must be referred the three calves brought forth by a cow at
one time, that I met with at Hardwick not far from Bisseter, which though a
production not frequent, yet is as much remarkable in that they became all
grown cattle, and so strangely alike, that their very owner himself scarce knew
them asunder, much less could I, though I observed them strictly: whence I was
firmly convinced, that similitude was a concomitant as well of Tergemini as
Twins, and held as well in Brutes as rational Animals.

45. Nor can I pass by without admiration, the Deer of Cornbury Park, which
before His Majesty's wonderful restoration, being (in part at least) turned
into a Cony-warren, the Deer upon it had all dwarf heads, the most of them
irregular, as in Tab. 10. Fig. 13. but if any of them were uniform, as in Tab.
10. Fig. 14. yet they were still far short of growth, seldom exceeding 8 or 10
inches long, though the Deer themselves were well enough grown, and
warrantable; the two that bore those engraven heads, being both of them two
years a Buck at least, and in all other respects well enough liking: which yet
as soon as the Warren was destroyed by the present Proprietor, the Right
Honorable the Earl of Clarendon came again, to have as fair branched-heads as
any Deer whatever in the adjoining Forest: Which strange alterations I cannot
guess to proceed from any other cause than the infection of the grass by the
urin and crotizing of the Conies, which being hot and dry must needs abate the
moisture of the Deer, which supplied matter for the fair heads wherewith before
and since they have been as well adorned, as any of their kind.

46. Amongst the Quadrupeda (...), or claw-footed Animals, I met with nothing
so strange as the rib of a Dog, or some such like Beast, set in a bone
interceding two other ribs, that the intercostal parts were filled with it, as
in Tab. 10. Fig. 15. in so much that if all the ribs were thus qualified, the
whole chest of that Animal must needs be one bone. This was found about Oxford,
and given me by the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas Lord Bishop of
Lincoln. And there are two other ribs joined in like manner, to be seen in the
Repository in the Medicin School. But I find this has happened not only to
Beasts, but sometimes to Men, who have been always remarkable for their
prodigious strength; whereof in their respective places as I meet them
hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Men and Women.
THE subject matter of this Chapter being very narrow, extending it self only
to Man, whom God created Male and Female, and them only in his own Image,
little lower than the Angels: It cannot be expected, that the methods of the
other Chapters can be observed here, there being no new species of Men to be
produced, or not sufficiently noted already. All therefore that remains
concerning them to be handled here, will be only the unusual Accidents that
have attended them, whereof, though I have not met with over many in this
County, yet they are enough to be distributed into such as have attended them,
either at or before their birth. in their course of life. in their death or
grave.


2. Before the birth of Man, the Vagitus uterinus, or crying of the child in
the mothers womb, is not ordinarily to be met with, though we find many
examples of the thing in Authors Tho. Bartholin. Hist. Anatom. rar. Cent. 1.
Hist. 1.
, to which may be added one more that lately happened at Heyford Purcel, where
there was a child cried very audibly in its mothers womb sometime before the
birth. For the performance of which action, whether there be a necessity of the
Infants having respiration whilst included in the Amnion; or whether it may
not be done without it? let the Physicians dispute: The matter of fact
suffices me at present that there was such a thing, the people being frighted
with it, and expecting some calamity should soon attend such a Prodigy,
pernicious (forsooth) not only to the place where heard, but to the State it
self. Whereas the learned Bartholin more rightly notes, that the ruin of
Kingdoms depends rather on the wickedness of the people, living in contempt of
God and his Laws, than any such vagitus; which portends nothing but happiness
to the Infant, the Mother, and State it self: To the Infant, in that it is an
Index of its strength, and perfection of Organs; To the Mother, in the
certainty that her child is living, and likely to promote its own exit; To the
State, which is likely to be blessed with an able subject: the Vagitus being
nothing but such an Jo Triumph, as Livy T. Livii Hist. ab Urbe Cond. lib. 24.
reports was made by the infant in the mothers womb in Marrucinis, Q. Fabius
Maximus being the fourth time, and M. Marcellus the third time COSS. So that if
any thing amiss fall out after such Vagitus, it must be imputed rather to
chance than design of nature: Let us but mend our lives, and no such matters
can hurt us.

3. In the birth of man it is equally strange, that the pangs of the woman in
the exclusion of the child have sometimes affected the Abdomen of the husband,
which yet to such as have experimented the secrecy of sympathies, and
understand the subtilty and power of effluviums, perhaps may not seem
difficult: But that the man should sometimes suffer such pains, whilst the
woman is well, and before she is in labor, is a problem I fear beyond all hopes
of solution. And yet that this has happened to some persons in Oxford is very
certain, and that to knowing ones too, very unlikely to be deceived, and of
unquestionable veracity: whereof one of them told me ( whom I enquired of more
particularly concerning them) that they came upon him when he little thought of
his wife, and that the pangs were very odd ones, such as he never felt in his
life; not like any griping in the guts, but lying in the muscles of the
Abdomen, which yet he should never have thought to have had relation to his
wife, had they not suddenly, and beyond expectation ceased, as soon as his wife
began to be in labor. Which makes much for the credit of a relation of the
German Virtuosi Miscellania Curiosa Med. Phys. German. An. 2. observe. 215.
, concerning one Faber of Buxovil in Alsatia, who constantly acted the part of
his pregnant wife, being taken with vomitings, and suffering those inordinate
longings that usually attend women in that condition, his wife all the while
suffering no such inconveniences.

4. That such symptoms should be thus translated from the woman to the man, the
woman remaining well and undisturbed, Dr. Primirose Jac. Primirosii M. D. de
vulgi erroribus, in Med. lib. 2. cap. 13.
thought so irrational (upon account that natural Agents first work on the
nearest objects, and then on the remotest, and that therefore a woman must
needs be first affected with her own noxious humors) that he looked upon it as
no better than a ridiculous error, as indeed I think I should have done my
self, but that I am otherwise persuaded by sober men, who well know how to
distinguish the manner of the pangs, and the circumstances of them: Nor should
I have ventured to have made this relation, but that the persons are living,
and ready to justify what I have written to any person fit to be discoursed
with about such matters: but how they should come to pass, is so hard to
determine, that I dare not yet attempt it, it being difficult not to err
concerning such mysteries of Nature.

5. That women may bring forth three at a birth appears evidently by the
example of the Horatii, and Curiatii; to whom may be added, though of unequal
rank, the three children of a Tailor here in Oxford, which he had all at a
birth. But to go above that number says Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 3.
, is reputed and commonly spoken off as monstrous, and to portend some mis-hap:
for confirmation whereof, he instances in a Commoners wife of Ostia, who was
delivered at one birth of two boys and two girls; but this, says he, was a most
prodigious token, and portended no doubt the famine that ensued soon after: i.
e. It pleased God to visit those parts with famine about that time, there being
no more dependence between the famine and the preceding birth, than there is
between the Wars, Plagues, and Famins, that sometimes follow Comets; there
having been (no question) as many of them, to which nothing extraordinary has
been subsequent, as to which there has; and so of Births.

6. Witness the four children brought all at a time by Elenor the wife of Henry
Deven of Watlington, An. 1675. since which time we have yet lived (thanks be to
God) in as great health, peace and plenty, under our good and gracious King, as
ever People did, which God of his mercy continue to us; whom if we serve in
sincerity, performing unto Him an honest, faithful, and uniform obedience
(though it is true our best performances will be mixed with much of weakness,
ignorance, frailties, and recidivations) we need never to fear the influence of
any such accidents, though they much exceed the ordinary course of nature.

7. The same Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 14.
informs us, that many men indeed have begotten children at sixty or eighty
years old: for which he instances in Volusius Saturninus, who on Dame Cornelia,
of the lineage of the Scipio's, begat Volusius Saturninus (who afterward was
Consul) at sixty two years old and upwards. Cato Censorius, says the same Pliny
(ancestor to Cato who slew himself at Vtica) begat a son on the daughter of
Salonius his Vassal, after he was past 80 years of age; and King Massinissa,
another, whom he called Methymathnus, when he was eighty six. But as to women,
he is positive that they are past childbearing at fifty, and that for the most
part their customary purgations stop at forty.

8. But I met with an instance at Shetford near Banbury, that proves him
plainly mistaken, where I saw and spoke with one Catharine Tailor, that had a
son then living and lusty, in the sixtieth year of her age, which was testified
also to me by many there about. And I have since heard of one Good wife Harvey
of Smithen-green, in the Parish of Leigh, within three miles of Worcester, that
is now with child in her sixty third year, which are instances wonderful rare,
and scarce heard of in other Countries; though we are informed indeed by Dr.
Boat Natural History of Ireland, chap. 23. sect. 1.
, that amongst the women in Ireland, there are several found who do not only
retain their Catamenia, but even their fruitfulness, above the age of fifty,
and some till that of sixty years; whereof he tells us, his brother knew some,
who being above threescore years old, did not only conceive and bring forth
children, but nursed them, and brought them up with their own milk: which also
as we are acquainted by Gul. Piso Gul. Piso, de Indiae utriusque re Not. and
Med. lib. 1 cap. 1 p. 13
, is very common in Brasil.

9. As in the childbearing of women, and the accidents attending it, I have
met with also somewhat extraordinary in their growth, which must be ranked among
the accidents that have befallen the sex during their course of life; and such
is the growth of one Philippa French, born at Milcomb in this County, now six
or seven and thirty years of age, and a married woman, having all her parts
proportionable, and of good symmetry, yet wanting half an inch of a yard in
height: which is somewhat lower than Manius Maximus, or M. Tullius, who as Varro
reports, were each but two cubits high, and yet they were Gentlemen and Knights
of Rome: but higher then Conopas the Dwarf of Julia, Niece to Augustus, who as
Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 16.
tells us, was but two foot high and a hand breadth; but he tells us not whether
Conopas were at his full growth, or had good symmetry of parts like our
Philippa, it being common enough for persons to be very low of stature, when
either their Bodies are awry, or some of their parts disproportionable to the
rest.

10. And amongst such accidents as these, we may reckon a strange disease that
befell Mary the daughter of John Collier of Burford* who out of the corners of
her eyes excluded a sort of congealed matter, which after some time turned into
a stony kind of substance, not unlike the stones, as they were described to me,
that sometimes come forth of the tumor called Atheroma: which I therefore guess
to have been only a more exalted kind of Aegilops, or fistula lachrymalis, and
not to have been caused by fascination, as Lachmund Fred. Lachmundi, (...).
sect. 3. cap. 22.
thinks the stones were that came forth of the left eye of Margaret the
daughter of Conrad Brandis of Banteln, she being cured of the disease by that
eminent Oculist Dr. Turbervil of Sarum.

11. Yet a much stranger accident than that befell one Rebeckah Smith, the
Servant-maid of one Thomas White of Minster Lovel, who being of a robust
constitution, though she seldom eat flesh (it scarce agreeing with her) and
above 50 years of age; after she came from the Communion on Palm Sunday, April
16. Anno 1671. was taken with such a dryness in her throat, that she could not
swallow her spittle, nor any thing else to supply the decays of nature: and in
this case she continued without eating or drinking, to the amazement of all,
for about ten weeks, viz. to the 29 of June, being both St. Peter's, and
Witney-fair day: by which time being brought very low, her master enquired and
found out a person who gave him an Amulet (for it was supposed she was
bewitched) against this evil; after the application whereof, within two or
three days time (though I dare not suppose there was any dependence between the
medicin and disease) she first drank a little water, then warm broaths in small
quantities at a time, and nothing else till Palm Sunday again twelve months
after, when she began to eat bread and other food again as formerly she had
done, and is now about the age of sixty, and still living at the same place
ready to testify the truth of the thing, as well as Tho. White and his wife,
who were all that lived in the house with her, and will confidently assert (for
they carefully observed) that they do not believe she ever took any thing in
those ten weeks time, nor any thing more all the year following but what was
abovementioned: wherein I think they may the rather be credited, because there
was never any advantage made of this wonder, which argues it clear of all
juggle or design.

12. Concerning the death of women, we have two as remarkable examples, as any
perhaps to be met with in History, both of them being confirmations of what
Pliny says of them, that they much more frequently revive after they have been
reputed dead, than males do Hist. Not lib. 7. cap. 52.
, whence doubtless also the Proverb, mulieri ne credas, ne mortuae quidem. Of
which recoveries of the female Sex rather than the male, the same Pliny offers
us a natural reason, but I think fit to wave it, especially since the
reviviscence of Anne Green, innocently condemned to dye, and executed at Oxford
for the murder of an abortive Infant, is rather ascribed to the Justice of
Heaven, than to the strength or other conveniences of nature for such purpose
in women rather than men, though it must also be allowed, that God Himself
makes use many times of natural means in production of the most wonderful, most
amazing effects. The History whereof, as it is taken out of a Chronicle of the
late Civil Wars, by James Heath Gentleman History of the Civil Wars of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, in Anno 1650.
, and the continuation of the History of the World, by Dionysius Petavius
Append. ad Hist. D. Petavii, in Anno 1650.
, with some few additions and alterations, take as follows.

13. In the year 1650. this Anne Green, being a Servant-maid of the Right
Worshipful Sir Thomas Read of Duns Tew in Oxfordshire, was gotten with child
by some servant, or other of the family (as she constantly affirmed when she
had little reason to lie) and through over-working her self in turning of
malt, fell in travel about the fourth month of her time: But being but a young
wench, and not knowing what the matter might be, repairs to the house of
easment, where after some straining, the child (scarce above a span long, of
what sex not to be distinguished) fell from her unawares. Now presently after,
there appearing signs of some such matter in the linen where she lay, and she
before having confessed, that she had been guilty of what might occasion her
being with child, a search instantly was made, and the Infant found on the top
of the ordure.

14. Whereupon, within three days after her delivery, she was conveyed to the
Castle at Oxford, where forthwith (an Assise being purchased on purpose) she
was arraigned before Sergeant Vmpton Croke, then living but at Marston, who sat
as Judge by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and by him sentenced to be
hanged; which was accordingly executed on the fourteenth of December in the
said Castle-yard, where she hung about half an hour, being pulled by the legs,
and struck on the breast (as she her self desired) by diverse of her friends; and
after all, had several strokes given her on the stomach with the but-end of a
Soldiers Musket. Being cut down, she was put into a coffin, and brought away to
a house to be dissected, where when they opened it, notwithstanding the rope
still remained unlosed, and straight about her neck, they perceived her breast
to rise; whereupon one Mason a Tailor, intending only an act of charity, set
his foot upon her breast and belly; and as some say, one Orum a Soldier struck
her again with the but-end of his musket.

15. Notwithstanding all which, when the learned and ingenious, Sir William
Petty, then Anatomy Professor of the University, Dr. Willis, and Dr. Clark now
President of Magdalen College, and Vice Chancellor of the University, came to
prepare the body for dissection, they perceived some small rattling in her
throat; hereupon desisting from their former purpose, they presently used means
for her recovery, by opening a vein, laying her in a warm bed, and causing
another to go into bed to her; also using diverse remedies respecting her
senselessness, Head, Throat, and Breast, in so much that within 14 hours, she
began to speak, and the next day talked and prayed very heartily.

16. During the time of this her recovering, the officers concerned in her
execution, would needs have had her away again to have completed it on her:
but by the mediation of the worthy Doctors, and some other Friends, with the
then Governor of the City, Colonel Kelsey, there was a guard set upon her to
hinder all further disturbance, till he had sued out her pardon from the Powers
then in being; thousands of people in the mean time coming to see her, and
magnifying the just Providence of God in thus asserting her innocence of
murder.

17. After some time Dr. Petty hearing she had discoursed with those about her,
and suspecting that the women might suggest unto her to relate something of
strange visions and apparitions she had seen, during the time she seemed to be
dead (which they already had begun to do, telling about that she said, she had
been in a fine green meddow, having a River running round it, and that all
things there glittered like silver and gold) he caused all to depart the room
but the Gentlemen of the Faculty, who were to have been at the dissection, and
asked her concerning her sense and apprehensions during the time she was hanged.

18. To which she answered at first somewhat impertinently, talking as if she
had been then to suffer. And when they spoke unto her concerning her miraculous
deliverance, she answered, that she hoped God would give her patience, and the
like: Afterward, when she was better recovered, she affirmed, that she neither
remembered how the fetters were knocked off, how she went out of the Prison;
when she was turned off the ladder, whether any Psalm was sung or not, nor was
she sensible of any pains that she could remember: what is most observable is,
that she came to her self as if she had awakened out of a sleep, not recovering
the use of her speech by slow degrees, but in a manner all together, beginning
to speak just where she left off on the gallows.

19. Being thus at length perfectly recovered, after thanks given to God, and
the persons instrumental in it, she retired into the Country to her friends at
Steeple-Barton, where she was afterward married, and lived in good repute
amongst her Neighbors, having three Children afterward, and not dying as I am
informed till the year 1659. Which occurrence being thought worthy of
remembrance by the Author of the continuation of the History of the World, by
Dionysius Petavius, who esteemed it no less than the finger of God pointing out
the Maids innocence; and by Mr. Heath, who thought fit to transmit it to
posterity for Gods glory, and man's caution in judging and punishing. It would
have been a great omission in me to have passed it by untouched.

20. Not long after, viz. in the year 1658. Elizabeth the servant of one Mrs.
Cope of Magdalen Parish Oxon, was indicted at the City Sessions for killing her
bastard child, and putting it in the house of office; of which being convicted,
she was condemned to dye, and accordingly was hanged at green-ditch, the place
appointed for the execution of the City malefactors, where she hung so long,
that one of the bystanders scrupled not to say, that if she were not dead, he
would be hanged for her: hereupon being cut down (the gallows being very high)
she fell with such violence on the ground, that it would have been enough to
have been the death of many another person, only to have had such a fall. Being
thus cut down, she was put into a coffin and brought to the George Inn in
Magdalen Parish aforesaid, which when opened, they found perfect life in her,
as in the former: whereupon breathing a vein, and putting her to bed with
another young wench by her, she came quickly to her self, and might no question
have lived also many years after; but having no friends to appear for her, she
was barbarously dragged the night following by the order of one Mallory then
one of the Bailiffs of the City, to Glocester-green, and there drawn up over
one of the arms of the Trees, and hanged a second time till she was dead.

21. After what concerns women solitarily considered, who according to the
courtesy of England, have always the first place, come we next to treat of
things unusual that concern women and men jointly together; amongst which I
think we may reckon many ancient Customs still retained here, abolished and
quite lost in most other Counties: such as that of Running at the Quinten,
Quintain, or Quintel, so called from the Latin [Quintus] because says Minsheu
Minsh. (...), in verbo.
, it was one of the Ancient Sports used every fifth year amongst the Olympian
games, rather perhaps because it was the last of the (...), or the quinque
certamina gymnastica, used on the fifth or last day of the Olympicks. How the
manner of it was then I do not find, but now it is thus.

22. They first set a Post perpendicularly into the ground, and then place a
slender piece of Timber on the top of it on a spindle, with a board nailed to
it on one end, and a bag of sand hanging at the other; against this board they
anciently rod with spears; now as I saw it at Deddington in this County, only
with strong staves, which violently bringing about the bag of sand, if they
make not good speed away it strikes them in the neck or shoulders, and sometimes
perhaps knocks them from their horses; the great design of the sport being to
try the agility both of horse and man, and to break the board, which whoever
does, is for that time accounted Princeps Juventutis.

23. For whom heretofore there was some reward always appointed, Eo tempore
(says Matthew Paris) Juvenes Londinenses, statuto Pavone pro bravio, ad stadium
quod Quintena vulgariter dicitur, vires proprias, and Equorum cursus, sunt
experti: Wherein it seems the Kings servants opposing them were sorely beaten;
for which, upon complaint, the King fined the City Matthew. Paris sub initium An.
1253. edit. Watsiana, p. 863.
. Whence one may gather that it was once a trial of Manhood between two
parties; since that, a contest amongst friends who should wear the gay garland,
but now only in request at Marriages, and set up in the way for young men to
ride at as they carry home the Bride, he that breaks the board being counted
the best man.

24. To which may be added the observation of Hoc-day, Hock-day, Hoke-day,
Hoke-tide, Hoke-Monday and Hoke-Tuesday: by all agreed to be a Festival
celebrated in memory of the great slaughter of the Danes in the time of King
Ethelred, they being all slain throughout England in one day, and in great part
by women Vid. Watsii Glossarium in Mat. Paris.
; whence it came to pass, that the women to this day bear the chief rule in
this Feast, stopping all passages with ropes and chains, and laying hold on
passengers, and exacting some small ma^ter of them, with part whereof they make
merry, and part they dispose of to pious uses, such as reparation of their
Church, etc.

25. For which very reason some have thought it to be called Hoke-Tide, from
the German or High Dutch, Hoge zeit, i. e. Tempus Convivii, a time of Feasting;
or the Saxon Hoegen, which signifies a Solemn Feast; or perhaps rather from the
Anglo-Saxon, Heage, sid i. e. a high Time, or high Day: Others that thought the
name respected the contempt that the Danes now lay under, amongst whom is Mr.
Lambard, thought it so called, quasi Hucxsuerdaeg, i. e. Dies Martis irrisorius
Perambulation of Kent, in Sandwich.
, perhaps rather from Hogian temnere: And others, that respected the manner of
the celebration of the Feast, chose rather to derive it from the German Hocken,
which signifies obsidere, cingere, incubare Vid. Spelman. Glossarium in verbo.
, to compass about, lay hold off, etc. as the women do on the men upon this day.

26. And as about the name, so about the time Authors differ much, some making
Hoke-day to be the Tuesday, and others the Monday fourteenth night after
Easter, and none of them on the Danes massacre, which Henry Archdeacon of
Huntingdon Historiarum Libro 6. sub initium.
expressly says was on the Feast of St. Brice, i. e. the 13 of November. That it
was formerly observed on Tuesday, not only Mr. Lambard, ut supra, but Matthew
Paris also gives us testimony, Et post Diem Martis quae vulgariter Hoke-day
appellatur, factum est Parliamentum Londini, etc Matthew. Paris in An. 1258.
edit. Wats. p 963.
. And yet the same Matthew Paris in another place makes it to fall on the
Quinsieme of Easter, in Quindena Paschae quae vulgariter Hoke-day appellatur
convenerunt Londini, etc Idem in An. 1255. edit. Wats. p. 904.
. which must needs be Monday; and the very same day it is observed here at
Oxford in our times.

27. In so much that I once thought they might anciently, as well as now,
observe two Hock-days, one for the women, and another for the men, but that I
find the same Matthew Paris to mention the Monday before Hoke-Tuesday, and not
calling it a Hock-day at all; viz. Anno 1252. where mentioning King Henry the
thirds taking on him the Crusado, he says, he did it die Lunae, quae ipsum diem
proxime praecedit quem Hoke-day appellamus Matthew. Paris edit. Wats. p. 834.
. However it were then, it is most certain that now we observe two of them
here, on Monday for the women, which is much the more solemn, and Tuesday for
the men which is very inconsiderable; and yet neither of these perhaps was the
dies Martis ligatoria, whatever Sir Henry Spelman may think Vid. Spelman
Glossarium in verbo.
, whereon men and women use to bind one another, that being now celebrated in
some parts of England on Shrove Tuesday: Much less the same with the Feast of
St. Blase, as Minsheu Minsh. (...), in verbo.
thinks, when Country women went about and made good cheer, and if they found
any of their Neighbor-women a Spinning, set their distaff on fire; that Feast
being celebrated on the third of February, and in all probability upon some
other grounds.

28. Amongst things of this nature, I think we may also reckon an ancient
Custom of the Royalty of Ensham, where it was formerly allowed to the
Towns-people on Whit-monday, to cut down and bring away, wherever the
Churchwardens pleased to mark it out, by giving the first chop, as much Timber
as could be drawn by men's hands into the Abbey-yard, whence if they could draw
it out again, notwithstanding all the impediments could be given the Cart by
the servants of the Abbey (and since that by the family of the Lord, it was
then their own, and went in part at least to the reparation of their Church;
and by this, as some will have it, they hold both their Lammas and Michaelmas
Common. But this Custom, now the Timber is almost destroyed thereabout, begins
to be so inconvenient, that if it be not seasonably laid aside, it will
discourage all people from planting it again, even about their very houses: for
to what purpose should they do it, when it would still be in the power of a
malicious Churchwarden to give it a chop, and destroy it when he pleases. To
prevent which great evil, I hear the chiefest of the Parish have lately
combined, wherein I think they have done well enough, provided always that the
Rights of the Church (whatever they be) be fully compensated some other way.

29. In the Northern part of Oxfordshire, about Banbury and Bloxham, it has
always been the custom at set times of year, for young people to meet to be
hired as servants; which meeting, at Banbury they call the Mop; at Bloxham the
Statute, where they all sort themselves, and carry their badges according as
they are qualified; the Carters standing in one place with their whips, and the
Shepherds in another with their crooks; but the maids, as far as I could
observe, stood promiscuously: which custom I had scarce I think noted, but that
it seems to be as old as our Savior, and to illustrate his Parable in St.
Matthews Gospel Matthew. 20. v. 3.
, where the laborers are said to stand in the market to be hired.

30. And now I have run my self into Divinity, I cannot but note an odd custom
at Stanlake, where the Parson in the Procession about holy Thursday, reads a
Gospel at a Barrels head in the Cellar of the Chequer Inn, where some say there
was formerly a Hermitage; others, that there was anciently a Cross, at which
they read a Gospel in former times, over which now the house, and particularly
the cellar being built, they are forced to perform it in manner as above.

31. But in matters of Religion there is nothing so worthy memory as the
Christian unanimity of the Parish of Brightwell, where, through the exemplary
Piety, and prudent conduct of that worthy Gentleman, the Worshipful John Stone
Esquire Lord of the Town, and the Reverend Mr. Fiddes, Rector of the place, and
their Predecessors, and the good disposition of the people themselves, all
matters both of Spiritual and Temporal concern, have been so effectually
pressed, and prudently menaged, that there has not been known any such thing as
an Alehouse, a Sectary, or Suit of Law commenced within the whole parish
(which is of a large extent) in the memory of man: which being more for ought I
know than any Parish in England can say beside, and so well worthy the
imitation of all other places, I thought fit (for the eternal honor of its
Inhabitants) to recommend it accordingly.

32. Yet but few miles off, at the Town of Watlington, I was told of a sort of
Sectaries, perhaps never heard of in the world before; which if so, is as
strange as the thing it self, for one would have thought there could have
nothing been so absurd in Religion, but what must have needs been embraced
already. These by the rest of the people are called Anointers, from the
ceremony they use of anointing all persons before they admit them into their
Church, for which they allege the fifth of St. James, v. the 14 and 15. Is
there any sick among you (which it seems they account all people to be but
themselves) let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed
sins they shall be forgiven him: which Elders amongst them are some poor
Tradesmen of the Town, and the oil they use, that commonly sold in the shops,
with which the Proselyte being smeared over, and fired with zeal, he presently
becomes a new Light of this Church; which I could not but note, these people
being as remarkably mad, as those of Brightwell are good. Though perhaps some
may think one Richard Hastings, then of Broughton, and yet living near Banbury,
more religiously mad than any of those; who with Origin understanding the
twelfth verse of the nineteenth Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel literally, has
castrated, and so made himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heavens sake.

33. And thus much of men and women jointly together in their lives; as to what
concerns their deaths, I must add also a Relation, as strange as it is true, of
the Family of one Captain Wood late of Bampton, now Brise-Norton, Captain in
the late Wars for the King; Some whereof before their deaths have had signal
warning given them by a certain knocking, either at the door without, or on the
table or shelves within; the number of strokes, and distance between them, and
the place where, for the most part respecting the circumstances of the persons
to dye, or their deaths themselves, as will easily be collected from the
following relation.

34. The first knocking that was heard, or at least observed, was about a year
after the restoration of the King, in the afternoon a little before night, at
or upon the door it being then open, as it was apprehended by Mrs. Elenor Wood,
mother to Captain Basil Wood, who only heard it, none being then by or about
the house but her self; at which she was very much disturbed, thinking it boded
some ill to her or hers, and within fourteen nights after, she had news of the
death of her Son in law Mr. George Smith, who dyed in London.

35. About three years after that, there were three great knocks given very
audibly to all that were then in the house, viz. to the aforesaid Mrs. Elenor
Wood, Mr. Basil Wood, and his wife Mrs. Hester, and some servants: which knocks
were so remarkable, that one of the maids came from the well which was about
twenty yards from the place, to see what was the matter; and Mrs. Elenor Wood,
and another maid that was within the house, saw three great pans of Lard shake
and totter so upon a shelf in the Milk-house, that they were like to fall down.
Upon this violent knocking, Mr. Basil Wood and his wife being then in the hall,
came presently into the milk-house to their mother, where finding her somewhat
disturbed, and enquiring the reason, she replied, God Almighty only knew the
matter, she could tell nothing but she heard the knocking; which being within
doors, Mr. Basil Wood concluded must be for some of the Family at home, that
upon the door being for a friend abroad: which accordingly fell out, three of
the family, according to the number of the knocks, dying within little more
than half a year after; viz. Mrs. Hester Wood wife to Mr. Basil Wood, a child
of Mr. Woods sister, and Mrs. Elenor Wood his mother.

36. About August, 1674. Mr. Basil Wood junior, son of Basil aforesaid, living
at Exeter in Devon-shire, heard the same kind of knocking, at which being
disturbed, he wrote word of it to his Father here at Bampton in Oxfordshire;
viz. That one Sunday, he and his wife, and her sister, and his brother, did
distinctly hear upon a Table in their Chamber as they stood by it, two several
knocks struck as it were with a cudgel, one of them before, and the other after
Morning-prayer, a little before dinner: which Letter was shown by Mr. Wood
senior (as the other knockings before the deaths of any that dyed, were
beforehand told) to several neighboring Gentlemen. After which, within about
fourteen days, Mrs. Hester Wood a second wife of Mr. Basil Wood senior, and
about a quarter of a year after, her Father Mr. Richard Lisset, dyed both at
Bampton; since which time they have heard nothing more as yet.

37. Amongst such unaccountable things as these, we may reckon the strange
passages that happened at Woodstock in Anno 1649. in the Manor-house there,
when the Commissioners for surveying the Manor-house, Park, Deer, Woods, and
other the Demeasnes belonging to that Manor, sat and lodged there: whereof
having several relations put into my hands, and one of them written by a
learned and faithful person then living upon the place, which being confirmed
to me by several eyewitnesses of many of the particulars, and all of them by
one of the Commissioners themselves, who ingeniously confessed to me, that he
could not deny but what was written by that person abovementioned was all
true; I was prevailed on at last to make the relation public (though I must
confess I have no esteem for such kind of stories, many of them no question
being performed by combination) which I have taken care to do as fully, yet as
briefly as may be.

38. October the 13. 1649. the Commissioners with their servants being come to
the Manor-house, they took up their Lodging in the Kings own rooms, the
Bedchamber and withdrawing Room; the former whereof they also made their
Kitchen; the Council-hall, their brew house; the Chamber of Presence, their
place of sitting to dispatch business; and a wood-house of the Dining Room,
where they laid the wood of that ancient Standard in the high-Park, known of
all by the name of the Kings Oak, which (that nothing might remain that had the
name of King affixed to it) they dug up by the roots. October the 14 and 15
they had little disturbance, but on the 16 there came as they thought, somewhat
into the Bedchamber where two of the Commissioners and their servants lay, in
the shape of a dog, which going under their beds, did as it were gnaw the
bed-cords; but on the morrow finding them whole, and a quarter of Beef which
lay on the ground untouched, they began to entertain other thoughts.

39. October. 17. Something to their thinking removed all the wood of the Kings
Oak out of the dining room into the Presence Chamber, and hurled the chairs and
stools up and down that room: From whence it came into the two Chambers where
the Commissioners and their servants lay, and hoisted up their beds feet so
much higher than the heads, that they thought they should have been turned over
and over, and then let them fall down with such a force, that their bodies
rebounded from the bed a good distance, and then shook the bed-steds so
violently, that themselves confessed their bodies were sore with it. October 18.
Something came into the Bedchamber and walked up and down, and fetching the
warming-pan out of the withdrawing room, made so much noise that they thought
five bells could not have made more. And October 19. Trenchers were thrown up
and down the dining room and at them that lodged there, whereof one of them
being shaken by the shoulder and awakened, put forth his head to see what was
the matter, but had trenchers thrown at it. October 20. the curtains of the bed
in the withdrawing room were drawn to and fro, and the bedsted much shaken,
and eight great pewter dishes, and three dozen of trenchers, thrown about the
bedchamber again, whereof some fell upon the beds: this night they also
thought whole arm-fulls of the wood of the Kings Oak had been thrown down in
their chambers; but of that, in the morning they found nothing had been moved.

40. October 21. The keeper of their Ordnary and his bitch, lay in one of the
rooms with them, which night they were not disturbed at all. But October 22.
though the bitch kennel'd there again (to whom they ascribed their former
nights rest) both they and the bitch were in a pitiful taking; the bitch
opening but once, and that with a whining, fearful yelp. October 23. they had
all their clothes plucked off them in the withdrawing room, and the bricks fell
out of the chimney into the room; and the 24th they thought in the dining room
that all the wood of the Kings Oak had been brought thither, and thrown down
close by their bedside, which noise being heard by those of the withdrawing
room, one of them rose to see what was done, fearing indeed that his fellow
Commissioners had been killed, but found no such matter; whereupon returning to
his bed again, he found two dozen of trenchers thrown into it, and handsomely
covered with the bed-cloaths.

41. October 25. The curtains of the bed in the withdrawing room were drawn to
and fro, and the bedsted shaken as before: and in the bedchamber glass flew
about so thick (and yet not a pane of the chamber windows broken) that they
thought it had rained money; whereupon they lighted candles, but to their grief
they found nothing but glass, which they took up in the morning and laid
together. October 29. Something walked in the withdrawing room about an hour,
and going to the window opened and shut it; then going into the bedchamber, it
threw great stones for about half an hours time, some whereof lighted on the
high-bed, and others on the truckle-bed, to the number in all of about
fourscore. This night there was also a very great noise, as though forty pieces
of Ordnance had been shot off together; at two several knocks it astonished all
the neighboring dwellers, which it is thought might have been heard a great way
off. During these noises which were heard in both rooms together, both
Commissioners and servants were struck with so great horror, that they cried
out to one another for help, whereof one of them recovering himself out of a
strange agony he had been in, snatched up a sword, and had like to have killed
one of his Brethren coming out of his bed in his shirt, whom he took for the
Spirit that did the mischief: However, at length they got all together, yet the
noise continued so great and terrible, and shook the walls so much, that they
thought the whole Manor would have fell on their heads. At its departure it
took all the glass away with it.

42. November 1. Something as they thought walked up and down the withdrawing
room, and then made a noise in the dining room: The stones that were left
before and laid up in the with-drawing-room, were all fetched away this night,
and a great deal of glass (not like the former) thrown about again. November 2.
came something into the withdrawing room treading (as they conceived) much like
a Bear, which first only walking about a quarter of an hour, at length it made
a noise about the Table, and threw the warming-pan so violently, that it quite
spoiled it: It threw also glass and great stones at them again, and the bones
of horses, and all so violently, that the bedsted and walls were bruised by
them. This night they set candles all about the rooms, and made fires up to the
mantle-trees of the chimneys; but all were put out no body knew how, the fire,
and billets that made it, being thrown up and down the rooms; the curtains torn
with the rods from their beds, and the bed-posts pulled away, that the tester
fell down upon them, and the feet of the bedsted cloven in two: And upon the
servants in the truckle-bed, who lay all this time sweating for fear, there was
first a little, which made them begin to stir; but before they could get out,
there came a whole coule, as it were, of stinking ditch-water down upon them,
so green, that it made their shirts and sheets of that color too.

43. The same night the windows were all broke by throwing of stones, and there
was most terrible noises in three several places together, to the extraordinary
wonder of all that lodged near them; nay, the very Cony-stealers that were
abroad that night, were so affrighted with the dismal thundering, that for have
they left their Ferret in the Cony-boroughs behind them, beyond Rosamonds well.
Notwithstanding all this, one of them had the boldness to ask in the Name of
God, what it was? what it would have? and what they had done, that they should
be disturbed in this manner? to which no answer was given, but the noise ceased
for awhile. At length it came again, and (as all of them said) brought seven
Devils worse than it self. Whereupon one of them lighted a candle again, and
set it between the two chambers in the door-way, on which another of them
fixing his eyes, saw the similitude of a hoof striking the candle and
candle-stick into the middle of the bedchamber, and afterward making three
scrapes on the snuff to put it out. Upon this the same person was so bold as to
draw his sword, but he had scarce got it out, but there was another invisible
hand had hold of it too, and tug'd with him for it, and prevailing, struck him
so violently with the pummel, that he was stunned with the blow.

44. Then began grievous noises again, in so much that they called to one
another, got together and went into the Presence Chamber, where they said
Prayers and sang Psalms; notwithstanding all which, the thundering noise still
continued in other rooms. After this, November 3. they removed their Lodgings
over the gate; and next day being Sunday, went to Ewelm, where how they
escaped, the Authors of the Relations knew not; but returning on Monday, the
Devil (for that was the name they gave their nightly guest) left them not
unvisited; nor on the Tuesday following, which was the last day they staid.
Where ends the History (for so he was styled by the people) of the just devil
of Woodstock; the Commissioners and all their dependants going quite away on
Wednesday; since which time, says the Author that lived on the place, there
have honest persons of good Quality lodged in the Bedchamber and withdrawing
room, that never were disturbed in the least like the Commissioners.

45. Most part of these Transactions, during the stay of these Commissioners,
it is true, might be easily performed by combination, but some there are of them
scarce reconcilable to Juggling: Such as 1. The extraordinary noises, beyond the
power of man to make, without such instruments as were not there. 2. The taring
down and spliting the bed-posts, and putting out so many candles and so great
fires no body knew how. 3. A visible shape seen of a horses hoof treading out
the candle. And 4. a tugging with one of them for his sword by an invisible
hand. All which being put together, perhaps may easily persuade some man
otherwise inclined, to believe, that immaterial beings might be concerned in
this business; which if it do, it abundantly will satisfy for the trouble of
the Relation, still provided the speculative Theist, be not after all, a
practical Atheist.

46. And thus, before I am aware, being fallen amongst the unusual accidents
that have happened to men only, the next unaccountable thing that presents it
self, is a remarkable Dream of Thomas Wotton Esquire of Bocton Malherb in the
County of Kent, Father to the famous Sir Henry Wotton Provost of Eaton, whose
dreams did usually prove true, both in foretelling things to come, and
discovering things past. The dream, it is true, of which I am now writing, was
had at Bocton in Kent, but the most important concern of it relating to Oxford,
I thought fit rather of the two to place it here; the particulars whereof, as
taken verbatim out of Sir Henry Wottons life Inter Reliquias Wottonianas.
, are briefly these.

47, This Thomas Wotton, a little before his death dreamed, that the University
Treasury was robbed by Townsmen and poor Scholars, and that the number was
five. And being that day to write to his Son Henry ( then a Scholar of Queens
College) at Oxford, he thought it worth so much pains, as by a Postscript in
his Letter, to make a slight enquiry of it. The Letter (which was writ out of
Kent, and dated three days before) came to his Sons hands the very morning
after the night in which the robbery was committed; and when the University and
City were both in a perplexed inquest of the Thieves, then did Mr. Wotton show
his Fathers Letter, by which such light was given of this work of darkness,
that the five guilty persons were presently discovered, and apprehended.

48. Amongst the unusual accidents attending men in their Lives, we must also
reckon all unusual diseases, such as that of Mr. Evans Rector of Heath, who had
a Ranula under his tongue, wherein there bred a stone, I suppose e sanguine
crasso and terrestri; or as they call it, a Tartareous humor got together in
the veins under the tongue, so hard and great that it almost quite deprived him
of his speech; which he drew away with his own hand, and as he told me sent it
to the Medicin School at Oxford; but upon search I could not find it, nor had
the School-keeper ever heard of any such matter: So that whoever he were that
he sent it by, proved false both to him and the University; which I the rather
note, that people hereafter may take more care by whom they send such matters.
Of just such another stone as this Mr. Lister gives us an account in a Letter
to his Grace the Archbishop of York Phiiosoph. Transact. Numb. 83.
, cut from under the tongue of a man, and now preserved in the Repository of
the Royal Society, which he chooses to call Lapis Atheromatis, though the place
of its birth made him allow the distemper to be a Ranula: but for my part,
though the Ranula be always a tumor, and sometimes perhaps of that sort they
call Atheromata; yet the place giving the disease a peculiar name, I think I
ought rather to call it Lapis Ranulae, from the place of its birth, and those
only Lapides Atheromatis found in that tumor in other places of the body.

49. To this may be added a large stone taken out of the bladder of one
Skingley of Oxford, weighing above a pound, and being ten inches round one way
fere, and full eleven the other; preserved, and now to be seen in the Medicin
School. As also a Corn that grew on the Toe of one Sarney a Wheel-wright, of
St. Aldates Parish in the City of Oxford, Anno 1655. two inches long, which for
the unusual figure and bigness of it, I have caused to be engraven of its just
magnitude, Tab. 10. Fig. 16. which is also to be seen in the Medicin School.

50. Amongst which also I think we may number the descending trunck of the
Arteria magna, taken out of the body of an ancient person, by the skilful Mr.
Pointer Surgeon of Oxford, in the presence of Dr. Millington our Sidleyan
Professor of Natural Philosophy, whose innermost coat from above the Emulgents
down to the Iliac branches, is by parcels only (and not continued throughout)
turned into bone, the outer coat remaining soft and tender in its ordinary
state; which Artery remains to be seen in the custody of Mr. Pointer. Just such
another Artery as this, I find observed by Fallopius Gabr. Fallop. Tom. 2.
Tract. 9. cap. 14.
: and Dr. Willis took another of them out of a man much used to wine and stale
drinks Pharmaceut. rationalis, sect. 6. cap. 3.
; who also informs us, that in the dissection of one that dyed of an ulcerated
Schirrus in the Mesentery, he found one of the Carotides turned into bone in
the same manner Cerebr. Anatom. cap. 7.
: Beside, above the Emulgents nearer the heart, there was a portion of this
Artery turned into an annulary bone, perhaps such another as was observed by
Dr. Harvey, and Veslingius Syntag. Anatom. cap. 10.
, in the great Artery of an old man; but this I have not seen, it being in the
possession of our afore-mentioned Professor residing in London.

54. Amongst other the forerunners of death and the grave, we must not forget
extreme old age, such as those abovementioned,. 3. of the second Chapter; and
of one Josias Pierce late of Witney, better known by much by the name of George
Jus, who lived to the age of an hundred and twelve. Where also in the Tithing
of Curbridg there is one William Carter now living, at least a hundred years
old, who yet it seems has not lived more abstemiously than others of his rank,
nor does he now at this age take so much care, as other people of his health:
he commonly lying naked amongst the blankets of the Mill where he lives, which
many times are not over dry; out of which he will go naked in the midst of
winter, and drink cold water at the Rivers side.

52. Of accidents in the very point of death, I have met with none observable
amongst the Men of this County, nor of any attending them in the Grave, except
we may reckon that one, of preservation from corruption many years after death;
such as that table of animals TAB. X ad page: 212.

To the Hon.ble JAMES HERBERT of Tythrop Esquire This 10th Table Consisting chiefly
of undescribed Animals. where-of some are near neighbors to HJM in memory of
his many and signal favors is gratefully dedicated by R.P. L L. D.

Michaell Burghers sculpsit.
of the body of one that had been Rector of Wendlebury, taken up in the Church
there near forty years after he had been buried, whose flesh yet looked as red
(as I was informed by the Incumbent, since also dead) as raw beef: which
whether it might not be caused by the petrifying qualities of the earths and
waters about that Town, would be an experiment worthy the trial of the
Ingenious thereabout; or about Sommerton or North Aston, where it would be
easy to try whether flesh were so inclinable to corrupt in petrifying waters
as others. But if this prove the cause, all bodies must equally be preserved
there, as well as that. De quibus quaere.

53. And thus I had finished this eighth Chapter, but that I must beg leave to
acquaint the Reader, that since the Printing the 21. of it, I have found the
Quintan amongst the Roman exercises (which yet perhaps they might borrow from
the Greeks) by the name of Quintana; so called, by reason the Romans in their
Tents made first four ways in manner of a Cross, to which adding a fifth on one
side, it was called Quintana Vid. Guide. Pancirollum, Rer. memorabilium, lib. 2.
tit. 21:
. In this way they set up a great Post about six foot high, suitable to the
stature of a man, and this the Roman Soldiers were wont to assail, with all
Instruments of war, as if it were indeed a real enemy; learning upon this, by
the assistance of the Campidoctores, how to place their blows aright. And this
they otherwise called exercitium ad Palum; and sometimes Palaria, the form
whereof may be seen in Vulturius In Augustanis Monumentis, p. 237.
: which practice being in use during their Government here, in all likelihood
has been retained among us ever since, being only translated in times of Peace,
from a military, to a sportive marriage exercise.

CHAP. IX. Of Arts.
THUS having run through all the Natural Bodies I have met with in
Oxfordshire, such as either Dame Nature has always retained the same from the
beginning, as Waters, Earths, Stones, etc. or freely produces in her ordinary
course, as Plants, Animals, with all her extravagancies and defects, or other
accidents attending: I am come at length, according to my proposed method, to
treat of Arts, and things artificial, that have either been invented or
improved in this County; whereof first, of such as have tended to the discovery
of the magnitudes, or determination of the motions of the Heavenly Bodies,
whither also must be referred the contrivance of new Periods, of new Hypotheses
and their demonstrations. Secondly, I shall consider Air, Fire, and
Waterworks, and thence go on to such Arts as have any relation to Earths,
Stones, or Plants. In short, I shall here also follow the method of the whole
Essay as in some other Chapters, by the way taking in all Inventions, and
improvements that I have met with in this County, whether in the Mechanic or
Liberal Arts; which I intend the whole scope of the following Chapter.

2. The first Celestial Observations in order of time, made here, that were any
thing artificial, I presume might be done by Robert Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln, crassi quidem capitis, sed subtilis ingenii, says Pitseus of him In
Anno 1253.
; who amongst other his Learned works, left us Treatises of the Sphere and the
Astrolabe, with which no question he found out many things that were new to
that age: But because we can instance in no particulars, let it suffice as an
evidence of the great probability, that he is highly commended for his
knowledge in Astronomy and Perspective by Roger Bacon a Friar minor of Oxon:
and sometime Fellow of Merton College, a Man of such affrighting skill in
Mathematics, especially Perspective, that he justly deserved the title of Dr.
Mirabilis. Nor indeed was he out of the way who gave him so much, since had he
lived in our days we could have given no less, to one who in all probability
was a great Improver at least, if not the Inventor of that useful Mathematical
Instrument, since by Galilaeus and others called the Telescope; of which
admirable Invention perhaps Oxford may justly boast, and for it expect to be
celebrated to all posterity. Which assertion if made good with all perspicuity
and clearness, without wresting any words or begging favorable construction, I
think I need not to doubt but on all hands 'twill be granted, that the
observations here made as they were new and frequent, so to the vulgar and
ignorant, they must needs be terrible and amazing.

3. That this Learned Friar understood all sorts of glasses, and to order and
adapt them to such like purposes (not to cite other places that might easily be
brought) I think I may with truth as well as confidence affirm from the
unconstrained sense of his own words, in his Book of Perspective. Si vero
corpora non sunt plana per quae visus videt, sed sphaerica; tunc est magna
diversitas, nam vel concavitas corporis est versus oculum, vel convexitas
Perspectiv. part. 3. did. 2. cap. 3.
. But, says he, if the glasses be not plain (having treated of them before) but
spherical; the case is much otherwise, for either the concavity of the glass is
next the eye, or the convexity, etc. Now that he used these glasses in
Celestial Observations, is altogether as evident from the same Book, where he
proceeds in these words. De visione fracta, majora sunt, nam de facili patet,
maxima posse apparere minima, and e contra; and long distantia videbuntur
propinquissime, and e converso: sic etiam faceremus Solemn, and Lunam, and
Stellas descendere secundum apparentiam hic inferius, etc Ibid. did. ultima.
. Greater things are performed if the vision be refracted, for [by refraction]
it is easily made appear that the greatest things may be represented less, and
little things as the greatest; and that things a far off may be represented
near: Thus we can make the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, to all appearance, to come
down to us here below, etc.

4. Again in his Epistle ad Parisiensem, concerning the secret works of Art and
Nature. Possunt enim sic figurari perspicua, ut longissime posita, appareant
propinquissima, and e contrario; ita quod ex incredibili distantia legeremus
literas minutissimas, and numeraremus res quantumcunque parvas, and stellas
faceremus apparere quo vellemus In Epist. ad Parisiens. cap. 5.
. Glasses may be so figured, that things the most remote may appear near; so
that at an incredible distance we may read the smallest Character, and number
things though never so small; and lastly, make Stars appear as near as we
please. And these things, he says at another place, were to the illiterate so
formidable and amazing, ut animus mortalis ignorans veritatem non possit
aliqualiter sustinere Perspectiv. part. 3. did. 3.
: that no mortal, ignorant of the means, could possibly bear it.

5. Wherein this Learned Franciscan did so far excel the ancient Magicians,
that whereas they represented the Moons approach by their magical charms, he
brought her lower with a greater innocence, and with his glasses did that in
truth, which the ancient Poets always put in a Fable: thus Petronius brings in
his Witch, boasting the power of her charms.

-- Lunae descendit imago
Carminibus deducta meis.
And Martial Martial. Epigram. lib. 9. Epig. 22. sive 30.
in the Epitaph of Philaenis enquires,
Quae nunc Thessalico Lunam deducere Rhombo
Quae sciet?
All which put together, it must necessarily be confessed, that he had some such
Instrument, though not so trimly made, it is like, as our Telescopes are now. In
favor of which truth, much more might be alleged, did I not think this
sufficient to evince it with unprejudiced Readers, for whose benefit I have
laid down his words thus at large, and translated them (as I also intend in
some other matters) that such as have not the opportunity of seeing his Books,
or understand not his Language, might give their verdict, as well as those that
have, or do.

6. Upon the account of these, and many other excellent Experiments, exceeding
('it is true) the capacity, but not the malice of those times, he was accused of
Magic in its worst sense, to have performed them by the concurrent help of the
Devil Vid. Histor. and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. Lib. 1. p. 138.
, persecuted as such by those of his own Fraternity, and thrown into Prison by
Hieronymus de Esculo Balaei Cent. 4 Numb. 55.
, General of his Order, afterward Pope by the name of Nicholas the Fourth,
where they so barbarously treated him, that he was forced to seek redress of
Clement the Fourth, to whom he made complaint not only of his hard usage, and
sequestration of his Books, but charge of his Experiments, some whereof he
tells him, especially concerning burning things at any distance, would amount
at least to a thousand marks, Et certe combustio in omni distantia constaret
plusquam mill marcas, antequam specula sufficientia fierent ad hoc In Operis
Min. part. 3. cap. 13. MS. in Bib. Bod.
, are his very words. And at another place speaking of Mathematical
Instruments, Instrumenta haec non sunt facta apud Latinos, nec fierent pro
ducentis nec trecentis libris In eadem Op. Min. part. 3. cap 11.
, that they would not be made for two or three hundred pounds: great sums
indeed in Bacons time, yet scarce bearing proportion with his greater attempts.

7. Which made them at last so jealous of him, that notwithstanding he wrote a
whole Treatise against the use of Magic Contra Necromanticos sive de nullitate
Magiae.
, they would suffer none to come near him, nor his Books to have place in their
Libraries, insomuch that it almost repented him of his Inventions Vid. Hist.
and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. Lib. 1. p. 138.
, which in all probability (not to mention the humor of the Age, very careful
of breaking the Heavenly Seal (as they called it) which obscured their
mysteries from the unworthy multitude) was the cause why he left us no
particular Phenomenon of the motions of the Planets, nor any thing of new
stars; the disclosing such secrets producing many inconveniences. Which also
was the reason (as guessed by Dr. Dee Dr. Dee's Annot. in Epist. ad Parisiensem.
) why he never revealed his secret of Gunpowder; not but he esteemed it a
considerable Invention, but because he foresaw the many evils attending it,
which these latter ages have severely felt; since brought into practice by
Bertholdus Swartz, of which more fully in its proper place.

8. So far then was John Lippersein of Zeland, Metius of Alckmar, or Galilaeus
himself from being the Inventor of the Telescope, or first applyer of it to the
Heavens; that perhaps had not Bacon left his Books to posterity, with such
pregnant Indications how much might be done that way; he had been as little
able to make those advancements he did, as Paulus Middleburgensis, or
Copernicus had been, to give occasion for the correction of the Julian
Calendar, or Tropical Year, consisting of 365 days and 6 hours (first
contrived, as Bacon informs us, by one Faelix In Libro Fratris Rog. Bacon.
Computus Naturalium, dicto, cap. 2 MS. in Bibl. Coll. Vniversitatis Oxon.
, and only perfected by Caesar) which though not performed till the time of
Gregory the 13th, Anno 1582. yet the first motion of its being done, was
certainly made by this Learned Friar to Pope Clement the 4th, as appears from a
fair MS Copy of the fourth part of his Opus minus in the Bodleyan Library:
Where after he has passionatly lamented its errors awhile, he gives this
succinct account of it, viz. that its being greater than the true Solar year,
was the cause of the going back of the Aequinoxes and Solstices, and then how
all was to be amended.

9. Quod autem hic intendo (says he 4o MS. in Bib Bod. in Musaeo
Protobibliothecarii p. 327.
) est de correctione Calendarii quo utitur Ecclesia. Julius quidem Caesar in
Astronomia edoctus complevit ordinem Calendarii secundum quod potuit in tempore
suo; and sicut Historiae narrant contra Achorium Astronomum, and Eudoxum ejus
Doctorem disputavit in Egypto de quantitate Anni Solaris, super quam fundatum
est Calendarium nostrum, unde sicut Lucanus refert, ipse dixit Non meus Eudoxi
vincetur fastibus Annus. Sed non pervenit Julius ad veram anni quantitatem quam
posuit esse in Calendario nostro 365 dies, and quartam diei integram, quae
quarta colligitur per quatuor annos, ut in anno Bissextili computetur unus dies
plus quam in aliis annis communibus: Manifestum autem est per omnes
computistas, antiquos and novos, sed and certificatum est per vias Astronomiae,
quod quantitas anni Solaris non est tanta, imo minor; and istud minus
aestimatur a sapientibus esse quasi 130 pars unius diei, unde tanquam in 130
annis superflue computatur unius dies, qui si auferretur, esset Calendarium
correctum quoad hoc peccatum, i. e.

10. That which I intend here (says he) is the correction of the Calendar now
in use in the Church. Julius Caesar indeed being learned in Astronomy,
completed the Calendar very well for his time, and as Histories tell us,
disputed in Egypt against Achorius, and his Master Eudoxus, concerning the
quantity of the Solar year, on which our Calendar is founded, which made Lucan
bring him in speaking to this effect, The Julian, shall never be proved amiss,
By the Eudoxian Ephemeris.
But Julius never came to the knowledge of the true quantity of the year, which
he made to consist of 365 days, and a whole fourth part of a day, which fourth
part collected at four years end, made, that in the Bissextil there was one day
more than in any other year: But it is manifest (says he) to all Astronomers
both old and new, and it is plain from the rules of Astronomy, that the quantity
of the Solar year is not so much, but less, and that as it is judged by wise
men, by the 130th part of a day; whence it comes to pass, that in 130 years we
have one superfluous day, which were it but taken away, the Calendar would be
corrected as to this error.

11. And then he proceeds to show, that upon this account it is that the
Aequinoxes and Solstices are not fixed, but continually ascend in the Calendar,
that in the beginning of the Church they were not, where they are now in his
time; and in the conclusion of the Discourse, Debet autem nunc temporis
remedium apponi propter istos errores manifestos, etc Loco citato sub finem
Paragraphi.
. But that now some remedy must be found for those palpable errors, and that to
take off scandal from the Church; for (says he) all the learned in Astronomy
know this, and laugh at the ignorance of the Prelates that suffer it. Nay, the
Infidel Arabians, Hebrews, and Greeks, abhor the folly they see in the
Christians in ordering the time they set aside for their greater Solemnities:
But now Christians have so much skill in Astronomy, that they can amend all
these things. Therefore your Holiness (meaning Pope Clement) may command, and
invenietis homines qui praeclara remedia apponent in hac part.

12. Thus earnestly wrote he for the reformation of the Calendar, not only in
this but in several other Books; in one whereof he makes also this complaint,
Non tamen aliquis praesumit tradere Calendarium correctum, propter hoc quod
Concilium generale prohibet ne quis mutet Calendarium, sine licentia sedis
Apostolicae generali In Operis Minor. part. 3. 4o. MS. in Bibliotheca
Bodleiana. cap. 67.
, i. e. Yet no body presumes to correct this Calendar, because it is forbid by
a General Council that no man should offer to alter it, without special license
first obtained of the Apostolic Sea. Which license I gather at length was
given him, for I find him in the end of the aforesaid Chapter, mentioning a
more correct Copy of a Calendar sent to the aforesaid Pope by his Boy John,
than any he had sent him before. Cum propter festinantiam, and propter
occupationes in aliis magnas and varias, vestrum Exemplar non fuit usquequaque
correctum, hic iterum feci transcribi, and correxi; and haec ideo facio, ut
certitudinaliter considerare and confer possitis de hac materia cum quocunque
velitis, i. e. because upon the account of have and various other businesses
intervening, your Copy was not sufficiently correct, I have corrected and
transcribed it again, that you might consider and confer about it more
certainly with whom you please. A perfect and fair MS. Copy of which Calendar,
I hear yet remains in the hands of one Mr. Theyer, a Gentleman of
Gloucestershire.

13. From which, or some other Calendar of his, Paulus Middleburgensis Bishop
of Fossombrone, in the Dukedom of Vrbin, stole half of his great Volum, which
he calls his Paulina, concerning the true time of keeping Easter, and day of
the Passion of our Lord JESUS; directed to Pope Leo the Tenth, in order to the
reformation of the Roman Calendar and Ecclesiastical Cycles, written just in
the same order and method generally and particularly as Roger Bacon long before
had done to Clement the Fourth; and yet full slender mention (says Dr. Dee Dr.
Dees proposal to Queen Elizab. and her Council concerning the reformation of
the vulgar Calendar. MS. in Biblioth. C.C.C. Oxon. lit. Z. fol.
) does this Bishop make of him, though his chief Instructor in the best part of
the matter contained in his Book: In which design, though the Plagiary were
unsuccessful, his endeavors being frustrated for a time, yet 'twas he that
stirred up Nicholas Copernicus (as the same Nicholas honestly confesses in an
Epistle of his to Paul the Third In Praefat. in libros revolutionum.
) more accuratly to observe the motions of the Sun and Moon, and thence to
define the quantities of years and months more truly than they were before in
the Julian Calendar; upon whose foundations Aloysius, and the rest of the
sumptuous College of Mathematicians at Rome having built their Reformation, it
is easily deducible that whatever has been done in this matter from the time of
Friar Bacon, to that of Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, must in great measure be
ascribed to him, their whole Reformation scarce differing from his.

14. Only in this (which is well worth the observation) that whereas the
Gregorian Reformers reduced the Equinoxes and Solstices to the places they
supposed they held in the time of the Nicene Council, Bacon seems inclinable to
have brought them (and that most rationally) to their places, in a much more
eminent Epoche, viz. the Winter Solstice to the tenth of the Calends of
January, and the Vernal Aequinox to the tenth of the Calends of April, their
true places at the time of Christ's birth: which he proves by a very cogent
Argument drawn from the observations of Ptolomy, who lived but 140 years after
Christ; in whose time the Vernal Aequinox was found to be on the eleventh of
the Calends of April: now allowing, as before, that it ascends in the Calendar
a whole natural day in 130 years; if in Ptolomies time it fell on the eleventh
of the Calends of April, it must needs at Christ's birth have been at least on
the tenth; and so of the Solstice In Operis Min. part. 3. cap. 69. MS. in
Bibliotheca Coll. Universe.
. According to which computation they have now gone back in our Calendar since
Christ's time almost 13 days, the number 130 days being so often to be found in
1676. wanting but 14. Now the Era of Christ's birth being a time of much higher
value, and more to be respected by Christians than the Nicene Council, in what
ever else they have exceeded him, I am sure in this they have fallen short of
his reformation.

15. And so much for the invention of the Telescope, and other Instruments, by
the assistance whereof he so nearly defined the true quantities of the Solar
and Lunar years, that he first gave occasion to the reformation of the Julian
Calendar: wherein if the Reader (with me) be convinced, let him hither refer
those inordinate Encomiums by Kepler, Fabricius, and Caesar la Galla, heaped on
Galilaeus for the one; and whatever else of that nature he shall meet with,
given to Paulus Middleburgensis, Copernicus, or Aloysius for the other.

16. Thus was the Christian World first informed in matters of Astronomy by
Roger Bacon, and with so much success here in England, that in the next Century
we meet with Richard Wallingford Abbot of St. Albans, and Simon Bredon, both
Oxford men, the most eminent for their time in the whole World: who for their
subtilty, and yet clearness of demonstration, we find yoaked with no less than
the great Albategnius, by Lewis Caerlyon also an Oxford man, in his
observations of the Eclypses, An. Dom. 1482 4o MS 79. inter Codices MS. Seldeni.
. where also he treats of the oblique ascensions of the Signs calculated to the
Meridian of Oxford. And quickly after we meet with William Read (after Bishop
of Chichester) and John Eschenden jointly to carry on this study, as appears
from their Treatises of the central Eclyps of the Moon, and conjunction of the
three superior Planets that happened An. 1345. and the great conjunction of
Jupiter and Saturn, An. 1365. both which were calculated by William Read, and
the Prognostications added by John Eschenden Fol. MS. 176. inter Codices Digby.
: From which Eclyps, and the first conjunction, he foretold the Epidemical
Pestilence that followed in the year 1349. which beginning in Turkey, spread all
over Syria and Greece; whence it came into Italy, Spain and France, and at
length into England. To these add John Somer and William Wyrcester, also most
eminent Astronomers; the former whereof corrected the Calendar perhaps yet more
accuratly than Bacon Quod. vid. inter Codices Digby, 12o MS. 5.
; and the latter wrote a verification of all the fixed stars, as to their
longitude and latitude, for the year 1440 MS. inter Codices Laud, 12o. B. 23.
. with some other Astronomical matters, at the instance of his Patron Sir John
Falstoff.

17. Great we see was the increase of this sort of Learning, even in those
days, yet that former Ages may not carry away the whole honor, let us also make
an estimate of its modern advancements; such as it received from Thomas Lydiat,
formerly Fellow of New College, and Rector of Alkerton in this County, who
defining a yet truer period than any of the former, of the Sun and Moons motion
(without which, there could be no accurat System or Calendar of years, months
and days) most happily first contrived the Octodesexcentenary Period: ipse
primus, absit dicto invidia, nostro seculo observavi, are his own words Lydiati
Ep. Astronom. de Anni Solaris mensura.
: Which Period, though till now not so certainly known, by Learned Antiquity
was called the great year, as is manifest from Josephus his History of the Jews
Lib. 1. cap. 4. sub. finem.
, where speaking of the great advantages our Forefathers had in Astronomy, he
says, (...). i. e. that it is probable God gave them a longer life, that they
might fully understand the Theorems of Astronomy, which they could not well do,
unless they lived six hundred years; for the great year, says he, is
accomplished in that number of years.

18. Which Lydiat found to come so near the truth, that there needed but the
abatement of eight in six hundred, his true period consisting of 592 years, and
that (according to Geminus) of whole years, whole months, and whole days, as a
period ought to do Periodus debet comprehendere, (...). Geminus in libro (...).
, viz. of 592 entire solar years, 7322 entire months (whereof 218 are
intercalary) 216223 entire days, and 30889 entire weeks; defining every Lunar
month to consist of 29 days, 12h, 44, 3, 12, 44'''', 3V, 12VI. And the solar
year of 365 days, 5h, 47, 50, 16, and 8/37; or 5h and 59/74; or 365 days and
1/128 part of a day: So that the whole period, or 592 Lydiatean years, do
anticipate so many Julian ones by five days.

19. According to this period found out in An. 1605. exceeding the Dionysian
but 60 years, he calculated the middle motions of the seven Planets for the
nine first periods entirely, and the tenth so far forth as it had gone in his
time; (some MS. fragments of which calculations I had lately in my possession,
but now disposed of to the Worshipful Dr. Lanphire, Principal of Hart-hall,
carefully to be preserved amongst the rest of his writings.) And in An. 1620.
viz. in the last year of the first half of his tenth period, he put it forth,
with his Menologium, or reformation of the Calendar, which he opposed to the
new, but confused, absurd, and false Pontifical Gregorian year, contrived by
the sumptuous College of Mathematicians at Rome; and defended it against the
obtractations of Joseph Scaliger Vid. Lydiati Solis and Lunae periodum, in
Titulo.
, a man, it is true, of great Learning, but withal so confident and imperious,
so abusive and assuming, that whenever he wanted Arguments for the support of
his cause, he always sought revenge upon the person of his Adversary.

20. Which was manifestly the case of modest Lydiat, whom in an Epistle to
Richard Thomson (his correspondent in England) he calls, the greatest monster
that ever England produced Jos. Scaligeri Epistolar. lib. 3. Epist. 240.
; and in another to the same Thomson, the veryest fool in the whole world, and
that 'twas below his dignity, nor had he leisure to write against such a Beetle
Jos. Scaliger. Epistol. lib. 3. Epist. 241.
. But herein (as the Reverend Dr. Heylin very well notes in another case) we
must pardon Joseph; for had not scorn and contempt been part of his Essence, he
had neither been a Scaliger, nor the son of Julius Cosmograph. in Called. Assyr.
and Mesopot. sub finem.
, who scrupled not to pass this rash censure on the whole English Nation; that
we are, Perfidi, inflati, feri, contemptores, stolidi, amentes, inertes,
inhospitales, immanes Jul. Caesar Scal. Poetices, lib. 3. cap. 16.
. In which very act yet I think he proves nothing, but that most of those
Epithets rather belong to himself.

21. If it be objected that Joseph did not so far patrizare, but that he spoke
Honorably of some of the English, such as Wotton, Savil, Camden Jos. Scalig.
Epistol. lib. 3. Epist. 232.
, Reynolds Ibid. lib. 4. Epist. 446.
: it must be answered, That these touched not the apple of his eye, nor
endeavored the ruin of his great Diana, the Julian Period, of which he
conceited himself the Inventor: which yet since by an indifferent, and that a
competent judge, is given to Robert Lorringe an English Bishop of Hereford, who
lived 500 years before Scaligers invention In Praefat. in Annals Jac. Vsserii,
Archiep. Armachan.
. It Is true, he fitted it to Chronological uses; but whilst in the midst of
his glorious attempts, behold him shaken by meek, and modest Lydiat, the happy
Inventor of a more accurat period, whereby he so disturbed and confounded all
his supputations, that (if we may believe the most Learned of the Age) he laid
his angry Rival flat upon his back.

22. And so much concerning the Lydiatean Period, of which, because so much
already in Print, I shall not add more, only in what years of as many of them,
as have already been (which possibly may not be unacceptable to the Reader) the
most considerable Aera's of the world have happened.

Years of the World. Years of the Lydiatean Periods. The Flood. 1657. 473. (3)
Birth of Isaac. 2109. 333. (4) Exodus. 2509. 141. (5) The Temple. 2988. 28. (6)
Empire of Nebuchadn. 3401. 441. (6) Empire of Cyrus. 3471. 511. (6) Empire of
Alexander the Great. 3675. 123. (7) Empire of Jul. Caesar. 3956. 404. (7)
Baptism of Christ. 4033. 481. (7) The Dionysian year of our Lord, 1620. 5624.
296. (10) The year of our Lord, 1676. 5680. 352. (10)

23. If I descend yet lower to persons now living, we shall daily find
Astronomy receiving new advancements, particularly from the Right Reverend
Father in God, Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum, one of the most cordial Promoters of
this undertaking: who rather embracing the opinions of Diogenes, Apollonius
Myndius, of the Chaldees, and at length of Seneca; That Comets are perpetual
stars, and carried about in a continued motion; than of Kepler, who thought
them still produced de Novo, quickly perishing again; or of Gassendus, who held
indeed they might be corpora aeterna, but yet that they always moved in
straight lines; he first proposed this new Theory of them, viz. that it was
much more probable they might rather be carried round in Circles or Ellipses
(either including or excluding the Globe of the earth) so great, that the
Comets are never visible to us, but when they come to the Perige's of those
Circles or Ellipses, and ever after invisible till they have absolved their
periods in those vast Orbs, which by reason of their standing in an oblique, or
perpendicular posture to the eye, he demonstrated might well seem to carry them
in straight lines; all circles or ellipses so posited, projecting themselves
naturally into such lines: which Theory was first proposed in a Lecture here at
Oxford, and afterward set forth in the year 1653. The Right Reverend Father in
God, Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum, and my very good Lord, being then Professor of
Astronomy in this University.

24. In the same year, the same Right Reverend, and most accomplished Bishop
first Geometrically demonstrated, the Copernico-Elliptical Hypothesis to be the
most genuine, simple and uniform, the most easy and intelligible, answering
all Phenomenon without complication of motions, by Excentrics, Epicycles, or
Epicyc-Epicycles. That the Excentricities of the Planets and their Apoge's
according to the Ptolomaic hypothesis, and the Aphelions according to the
Copernican, might all be solved by a simple Elliptical line, was first indeed
noted by Kepler, but how their proper and primary Inequalities, or Anomaliae
Coaequatae, should thence be demonstrated geometrically, he professed he knew
not, and utterly despaired it would ever be done: which stirred up the Learned
Ismael Bullialdus to attempt the removal of this disgrace to Astronomy, which
accordingly he thought he had done, finding the method of the Aphelions, and
demonstrating (at least as he thought) the first Inequalities geometrically,
and making Tables; calling his work Astronomiam Philolaicam.

25. But how far he came short of what he pretended, was so plainly and
modestly made appear by the Reverend Bishop, in a Book which he entitled,
Inquisitio in Ismaelis Bullialdi Astronomiae Philolaicae fundamenta. Edit.
Oxonii, 1653. that the ingenious Bullialdus himself, sent him a Letter of
thanks, and recognition of his errors. Where also he further shows, that
although Bullialdus had not, and Kepler thought no man could, rightly calculate
the first inequalities according to the rules of Geometry, i. e. out of the
known middle motions of the Planets (or true places of the Aphelions) accuratly
find a priori, their true or appearing motions: That yet there were methods by
which it might be done, whereof he propounded two in the same Book, and
demonstrated them, which afterward applying to all the primary Planets, he set
forth both Elliptical and Circular Astronomy, showing how the Phenomenon,
according to both Hypotheses, might be geometrically made out, which he called
his Astronomia Geometrica. Edit. Londini, An. 1656.

26. The Elliptical Hypothesis has received yet further advancement from Mr.
Edmund Hally of Queens College Oxon. a young man, for his years of prodigious
skill in Astronomical matters, who, amongst many other excellent performances
in that Science to be met with in our English Philosophical Transactions
Philosoph. Transactions, Numb. 116, 127, 128.
, has showed us a direct and geometrical method for finding the Aphelions,
Excentricities, and proportions of the Orbs of the primary Planets, without
supposing the equality of the angle of motion at the other Focus of the Planets
Ellipsis, which has been hitherto always done amongst Astronomers Ibidem. Numb.
128.
: From whom I dare promise yet further improvements, he being lately gone to the
Isle of St. Helen, for the more advantageous prosecution of his Astronomical
studies; from whose solitary observations there, and comparative ones with Mr.
Flamsted's here, Astronomy no question will receive considerable advancements.

27. To which may be added several other improvements this Science has received
from that incomparable person Sir Christopher Wren, late Professor here: who
before any thing of Hugenius appeared on that subject, from his constant
observations of Saturn, stated a Theory of that Planet; and of the Moons
Libration. He has attempted also (and perhaps by this time performed) a
Selenography by measure, what we have yet of that kind being rather pictures,
than accurate surveys or maps of the Moon: To this purpose he contrived a Lunar
globe, representing not only the Mountains and Valleys in solid work, but the
several degrees of whiteness and blackness on the surface, which if turned to
the light, shows all the menstrual phases of the Moon, with the several
appearances that arise from the shadows of the Hills and Vales.

28. He has made Maps of the Pleiades, and other Telescopial stars, and
proposed ways to solve the great Question concerning the earths rest or motion
by some small stars about the North pole, to be seen only in large and well
made Telescopes: To which Instrument he has added many sorts of Rete's, screws,
and Apertures, to take in more or less light, by opening and shutting like the
pupil of the eye, according as the Observer thinks fit; and has improved the
manufacture of grinding good glasses. He has also made two Telescopes to open
with a joint after the manner of a sector, whereby distances may be taken to
half minutes, and no differences found in the same observation often repeated,
the Instrument not being liable to any prejudice by warping or luxation. He has
contrived and hung Quadrants, Sextants, and Radii, much better than heretofore,
by which Astronomical Observations may be made more accurate and easy. Of all
which ingenious and useful Inventions, there are much more full and elegant
relations, in the most accurate History of the Royal Society History of the
Royal Society, Part. 2. sub finem.
: However, they being most, if not all of them found out here, or at least
whilst their Author was Astronomy Professor in this University, I could not
but mention them with relation to this place, as I shall some other matters
which ow their invention to the same worthy person.

29. And these are all the modern advancements in Astronomical matters I can at
present think of, only a late invention of one R. Holland, a teacher of
Mathematics in this City for many years, who has showed us a way to get the
Angle of Parallax of a Comet or other Phenomenon at two observatious to be
taken in any one station or place of the earth, and thereby the distance from
the earth: whereof no more, there being a short account of the whole
contrivance set forth by himself, and printed at Oxford.

30. Having done with the Inventions and Improvements that concern the Heavens,
come we next to those belonging to the sublunary World, whereof the same
Ingenious Sir Christopher Wren has furnished us with several; as of exquisite
subtilty, so of excellent use: Such as his contrivance to make Diaries of wind
and weather, and of the various qualifications of the air, as to heats, colds,
drought, moisture, and weight, through the whole year; and this in order to the
History of Seasons: with observation, which are the most healthful or
contagious to men or beasts; which, the Harbingers of blights, meldews, smut,
or any other accidents attending men, cattle, or grain; so that at length being
instructed in the causes of these evils, we may the easier prevent, or find
remedies for them.

31. Now that a constant observation of these qualities of the air, both by
night and day might not be insuperable; he contrived a Thermometer to be its
own Register, and a Clock to be annexed to a weathercock, which moves a Rundle
covered with white Paper; upon which the Clock moving a black-lead pensil, the
observer, by the traces of the pensil on the paper, may certainly know what
winds have blown, during his sleep or absence, for 12 hours together. He has
also discovered many subtle ways for easier finding the degrees of drought,
and moisture, and the gravity of the Atmosphere; and amongst other Instruments,
has Balances (also useful for other purposes) that show the pressure of the
air, by their easy (I had almost said spontaneous) inclinations Ibidem.
.

32. He has made Instruments whereby he has shown the Mechanical reason of
sailing to all winds; and others of Respiration, for straining the breath from
thick vapors, in order to trial whether the same breath thus purified will
serve turn again. Which Experiments, however nice they may seem, yet being
concerned about a subject so nearly related to man, that he always lives in it,
and cannot long without it, and is well or ill according to its alterations,
the minutest discoveries of its nature or qualifications ought to be valuable
to us.

33. Wherein yet we have been assisted by nothing more, than the Pneumatick
Engine, invented here at Oxon: by that miracle of Ingenuity, the Honorable
Robert Boil Esquire with the concurrent help of that exquisite contriver, Mr.
Robert Hook, commonly called the Air Pump; so different a thing from the
Instrumentum Magdeburgicum, devised by Otto Gericke Gasp. Schotti Magiae
Univer. part. 3. lib. 7. cap. 6.
, an ingenious Consul of that Republic, that it can scarce be reckoned an
improvement of that, but a new Engine; although it must not be denied but the
Magdeburg Experiment gave occasion to its Invention. By the assistance whereof,
that Noble Philosopher has accuratly examined the Elastical power, pressure,
and weight; expansion and weakness thereupon, of this element; and thereby
found out so many things new, relating to the height and gravity of the
Atmosphere, nature of a Vacuum; Flame, and Excandescence of coals, match,
firing of gunpowder; propagation of sounds, fluidity, light, freezing,
respiration, etc. that to give an account of them all according to the merits
of the Experiments, would be to transcribe the whole Treatise of that Honorable
Author set forth on this subject; whither I refer the Reader for further
satisfaction, and so to the rest of his Works upon several other subjects; many
of his numerous inventions and improvements, wherewith he has so highly obliged
the World, having been made in this place.

34. Whereof I shall mention no more (it being indeed uncertain as to most of
them, which were made here, which at London, and which at other places) only
the Barometer, a well known Instrument, also invented here by the same Noble
Person, whereby, the gravity of the Atmosphere has been daily observed by the
Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis, for about six years together: in all
which time he found the Quicksilver in the Tube, never to ascend much above 30
inches, and never to descend much below 28, which he takes to be the whole
latitude of its variation. He also observed, for most of that time, the temper
of the air by a Thermometer, whereof he has still the Notes by him, which are
very particular for every day.

35. Which latter instrument, though of very ancient invention, there having
been one of them found by Robert de Fluctibus graphically delineated, in a MS.
of 500 years antiquity at least Mosaical Philosophy; lib. 1. cap. 2.
: yet it has still received other useful advancements (beside that above
mentioned) from that curious Artist Sir Christopher Wren, who finding the usual
Thermometers not to give so exact a measure of the airs extension, by reason
the gravity of the liquor as it stands higher or lower in the Glass, weighs
unequally on the air, and gives it a contraction and extension, beside what is
produced by heat and cold; he therefore invented a Circular Thermometer, in
which the liquor can occasion no such fallacy, it remaining continually of one
height, and moving the whole instrument like a wheel on its axel History of the
Royal Society, part. 2. sub finem.
.

36. Amongst other Aerotechnicks, here is a Clock lately contrived by the
ingenious John Jones LL. B. and Fellow of Jesus College Oxon: which moves by
the air, equally expressed out of bellows of a cylindrical form, falling into
folds in its descent, much after the manner of Paper Lanterns: These, in place
of drawing up the weights of other Clocks, are only filled with air, admitted
into them at a large orifice at the top, which is stopped up again as soon as
they are full with a hollow screw, in the head whereof there is set a small
brass plate, about the bigness of a silver half penny, with a hole perforated
scarce so big as the smallest pins head: through this little hole the air is
equally expressed by weights laid on the top of the bellows, which descending
very slowly, draw a Clock-line, having a counterpoise at the other end, that
turns a pully-wheel, fastened to the arbor or axis of the hand that points to
the hour: which device, though not brought to the intended perfection of the
Inventor, that perhaps it may be by the help of a tumbrel or fusie, yet highly
deserves mentioning, there being nothing of this nature that I can find amongst
the writers of Mechanics.

37. To which may be added, a hopeful improvement of that uncommon Hygroscope,
made of two Deal, or rather Poplar boards, mentioned in our English
Philosophical Transactions Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 127.
, contrived by my ingenious Friend John Young M. A. of Magdalen Hall, who
rationally concluding, that the teeth of the thin piece of brass placed across
the juncture of the two boards, must needs in its passage from bearing on one
side of the teeth of the pinion, to the other, upon change of weather, make a
stand as it were in respect of the motion of the axel of the hand; thinks a
pretty stiff spring cut on the under side, after the manner of a fine file,
placed flat and not edge-ways, and bearing pretty hard upon an axel of Copper,
may turn the hand upon change of weather in the punctum of reversion, without
any more than a negative rest: which being an opinion so very rational and
unlikely to fail, when brought to the test, I thought fit to propound it to the
Ingenious, though the Press would not give us leave first to experiment it our
selves. Whence I proceed,

38. To such Arts as relate to the Fire, which I have placed next, in regard we
have knowledge of no other but what is Culinary, that in the concave of the
Moon being only a dream of the Ancients. Amongst which, we must not forget the
perpetual, at least long-lived Lamps, invented by the Right Worshipful Sir
Christopher Wren; nor his Registers of Chemical Furnaces for keeping a constant
heat in order to diverse uses; such as imitation of Nature in the production of
Fossiles, Plants, Insects; hatching of Eggs, keeping the motions of Watches
equal, in reference to Longitudes and Astronomical uses, and several other
advantages History of the Royal Society, Part. 2. sub finem.
.

39. But amongst all the Fireworks ever yet produced by the Art of Man, there
is none so wonderful as that of Friar Bacon, mentioned in his Epistle ad
Parisiensem, where speaking of the secret works of Nature and Arts, he has
these words, In omnem distantiam quam volumus possumus artificialiter,
componere ignem, comburentem ex sale Petrae, and aliis In Epist. ad
Parisiensem. cap. 6.
; which alia, as the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis saw it in a MS. Copy
of the same Roger Bacon, in the hands of the Learned Dr. Ger. Langbain, late
Provost of Queens College, were Sulphur, and Carbonum pulvis: concerning which,
after a while he further adds: Praeter haec (i. e. combustionem) sunt alia
stupenda naturae, nam soni velut Tonitrus, and coruscationes possunt fieri in
aere, imo majore horrore, quam illa quae fiunt per naturam: Nam modica materia
adapta, sc. ad quantitatem unius pollicis, sonum facit horribilem and
coruscationem ostendit violentem, and hoc fit multis modis quibus Civitas aut
Exercitus destruatur. -- Igne exsiliente cum fragore inaestimabili -- Mira haec
sunt si quis sciret uti ad plenum in debita quantitate and materia.

40. That is, that of Saltpeter, and other matters, viz. Sulphur, and the dust
of coal, he could make fire that should burn at what distance he pleased; and
further, that with the same matter he could make sounds like Thunder, and
coruscations in the air more dreadful than those made by Nature: For, says he,
a little of this matter rightly fitted, though not bigger than ones Thumb,
makes a horrible noise, and shows a violent coruscation, which may be ordered
many ways; whereby a City or Army may be destroyed -- the Fire breaking forth
with an unspeakable noise -- which are wonderful things, if a man knew exactly
how to use them in due quantity and matter.

41. Whence it is plain, he either invented or knew Gunpowder, though I think
we cannot allow him less than the first, till we find out an ancienter Author
for it Baconus fatis concessit, Anno 1292 near 100 years before any of the
other pretended Inventions.
, which if no body ever does (as it is manifold odds they never will) in all
probability it was invented here at Oxford, where he made the rest of his
affrightening Experiments. And that out of his works, Constantinus Ancklitzen
of Friburg Vid. Guide. Pancirolli rer. memora^. recens Invent. part. 2. tit. 18.
, or Bertholdus Swartz Vid Steph. Forcatulum I. C. de Gallorum Imperio and
Philosoph. lib 4. sub finem.
, and the rest of the Improvers, in all likelihood might have their pretended
Inventions, though we allow him not quite so explicit as in the Copy of the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Langbain, but that as it is conjectured by Dr. Dee Dr.
Dees Annotations in Epist. ad Parisiensem.
, he somewhat concealed his Invention in the word [aliis] well knowing it might
be dangerously destructive to mankind.

42. As for Waterworks invented or improved in this County, some concern
profit, and others only pleasure. Of the first sort, is an Instrument of Sir
Christopher Wrens, that measures the quantity of Rain that falls, which as soon
as it is full, empties it self, so that at the years end it is easy to compute
how much has fallen on such a quantity of ground for all that time; and this he
contrived in order to the discovery of the Theory of Springs, exhalations, etc.
And secondly, other Instruments whereby he has shown the Geometrical Mechanie
of Rowing, viz. that the Oar moves upon its Thowle, as a vectis on a yielding
fulcrum, and found out what degree of impediment the expansion of a body to be
moved in a liquid medium ordinarily produces in all proportions, with several
other matters in order for laying down the Geometry of sailing, swiming,
rowing, and the fabric of Ships History of the Royal Society, Part. 2. sub
finem.
.

43. Hither also belong the Locks and Turn-pikes made upon the River Isis, the
21 of King James, when it was made navigable from Oxford to Bercot, which are
absolutely necessary for that purpose, on shallow rivers that have also great
falls, to keep up the water, and give the vessels an easy descent. For the
first whereof, provided the fall of water be not great, a Lock will suffice,
which is made up only of bars of wood called Rimers, set perpendicularly to the
bottom of the passage (which are more or less according to its breadth) and
Lock-gates put down between every two of them, or boards put athwart them,
which will keep a head of water as well as the Turn-pike for the passage of a
Barge, but must be all pulled up at its arrival, and the water let go till
there is an abatement of the fall, before the boat may pass either down or
upwards; which, with the stream, is not without violent precipitation; and
against it, at many places, not without the help of a Capstain at Land; and
sometimes neither of them without imminent danger.

44. But where the declivity of the Channel, and fall of water is so great,
that few barges could live in the passage of them, there we have Turn-pikes,
whereof there are three between Oxford and Bercot; one at Ifley, another at
Sanford, and a third at Culham in the Swift-ditch, which was cut at that time
when the River was made navigable; and are all thus contrived. First, there are
placed a great pair of Folding doors, or Floodgates of Timber cross the river,
that open against the stream and shut with it, not so as to come even in a
straight line, but in an obtuse angle, the better to resist and bear the weight
of the water, which by how much the greater it is, by so much the closer are
the gates pressed; in each of which Floodgates there is a sluice to let the
water through at pleasure, without opening the gates themselves. Within these,
there is a large square taken out of the river, built up at each side with
Freestone, big enough to receive the largest barge afloat; and at the other
end another pair of Floodgates, opening, and shutting, and having sluices like
the former. Which is the whole Fabric of a Turn-pike.

45. At the uppermost pair of these gates the water is stopped, which raises it
in the river above, and gives the Vessels passage over the shallows, which when
come to the Turn-pikes, the Sluices are first opened, and the water let in to
the square or enclosed space between the two pair of gates, where it must
necessarily rise (the lower gates being shut) till at length it comes to be
level with the surface of the river above: when this is done, the upper stream
then making no such pressure on the gates as before, they are easily opened by
two or three men, and the Vessels let in one at a time; which done, they shut
those upper gates and sluices as before: Then they open the sluices of the gates
at the other end of the Turn-pike, and let the water by degrees out of the
enclosed square till it is sunk down, and the Vessel with it, level with the
river below, and then open the gates themselves, and let the Vessel out; the
upper gates all the while being drove too, and kept so fast by the water above,
that little of it can follow. And thus the boats go down stream.

46. But when they return, they are first let into the enclosed space (where
the water stands constantly level with that of the lower channel) at the lower
gates, which as soon as shut again, the sluices are opened at the uppermost
gates, and the water let in, till it rises with the boat upon it, to be equal
with that of the river above: this done, the upper gates are easily opened as
before, there being no pressure upon them, and the boat let out. So that
notwithstanding the Channel has much steeper descents where these Turn-pikes
are set, than at any of the Locks, yet the boats pass at these with much more
ease and safety. Notwithstanding these provisions, the River Thames is not made
so perfectly Navigable to Oxford, but that in dry times, barges do sometimes lie
aground three weeks, or a month, or more, as we have had sad experience this
last Summer; which in great measure no doubt might be prevented, were there a
convenient number of Locks, or Holds for water, made in the River Cherwel above
Oxford, to let down flashes as occasion should serve; and so again out of the
River Kennet near Reading, the Lodden, etc.

47. Not impertinent hereunto is a contrivance for Fish Ponds, that I met with
at the Right Worshipful Sir Philip Harcourt's at Stanton Harcourt, where the
stews not only feed one another, as the Ponds of the Right Honorable the Earl
of Clarendon at Cornbury, Sir Timothy Tyrrils at Shot-over-Forrest, and the
worshipful Brom Whorwoods at Holton, etc. and may be sewed by letting the
water of the upper Ponds out into the lower; but by a side Ditch cut along by
them, and Sluices out of each, may be any of them emptyed, without letting the
water into, or giving the least disturbance to any of the rest: which being a
convenience that I never met with before, and perhaps unknown to many, I
thought good to mention.

48. Amongst the Waterworks of Pleasure, we must not forget an Engine
contrived by the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord Bishop
of Chester, when he was Warden of Wadham College, though long since taken
thence; whereby, of but few gallons of water forced through a narrow Fissure,
he could raise a mist in his Garden, wherein a person placed at a due distance
between the Sun and the mist, might see an exquisite Rainbow in all its proper
colors: which distance I conceive was the same with that assigned by Des
Carts, viz. where the Eye of the Beholder is placed in an angle of 42 degrees,
made by the decussation of the line of Vision, and the rays of the Sun; and the
Fissure such another as in his Diagram Des Carts Meteoror. cap. 8.
. But what kind of Instrument it was that forced the water, I dare not venture
to relate, the description given me of it being but lame and imperfect.

49. Nor can I pass by unmentioned, a Clock that I met with at Hanwell, at the
House of the Right worshipful Sir Anthony Cope, that moves by water, and shows
the hours, by the rise of a new gilded Sun for every hour, moving in a small
Hemisphere of wood, each carrying in their Centers the number of some hour
depicted black; as suppose of one a clock, which ascending half way to the
Zenith of the arch, shows it a quarter past one, at the Zenith half hour;
whence descending again half way toward the Horizon, three quarters past one;
and at last absconding under i^, there presently arises another gilded Sun
above the Horizon at the other side of the arch, carrying in its center the
figure two: and so of the rest. Which ingenious device, though taken out of
Bettinus Marii Bettini Aerarii Philosoph. Mathemat. Tom. 2. Exodio 5. and ult.
, who calls it, aquarii Automatis ingeniosissimi horariam operationem: yet
being since improved by that ingenious Person, and applied to other uses,
particularly of a Pseudo-perpetual motion made by the descent of several guilt
bullets upon an indented declivity, successively delivered by a wheel much of
the same fabric with the Tympanum of the Water-clock, so that they seem still
the same: I could not but in justice take notice of it.

50. There are some other Waterworks at the same Sir Anthony Copes, in a House
of diversion built in a small Island in one of the Fish Ponds, Eastward of his
house, where a ball is tossed by a column of water, and artificial showers
descend at pleasure; within which they can yet so place a candle, that though
one would think it must needs be overwhelmed with water, it shall not be
extinguished, etc. But the Waterworks that surpass all others of the County,
are those of Enston, at the Rock first discovered by Tho. Bushel Esquire about 4
or 5 and forty years since, who cleansing the Spring then called Goldwell,
though quite overgrown with briars and bushes, to place a Cistern for his own
drinking, met with a Rock so wonderfully contrived by Nature her self, that he
thought it worthy of all imaginable advancement by Art.

51. Whereupon he made Cisterns, and laid diverse Pipes between the Rocks, and
built a house over them, containing one fair room for banqueting, and several
other small Closets for diverse uses, beside the rooms above; which when finished
in the year 1636. together with the Rock, Grove, Walks, and all other the
appurtenances, were all on the 23d of August, by the said Tho. Bushel Esquire
presented to the then Queens most excellent Majesty, who in company with the
King himself, was graciously pleased to honor the Rock not only with her Royal
Presence, but commanded the same to be called after her own Princely Name,
HENRIETTA: At which time as they were entering it, there arose a Hermit out of
the ground, and entertained them with a Speech; returning again in the close
down to his peaceful Vrn. Then was the Rock presented in a Song answered by an
Echo, and after that a banquet presented also in a Sonnet, within the Pillar of
the Table; with some other Songs, all set by Simon Ive.

52. Which structure, with all the Ingenious Contrivances about it, continued
in a flourishing condition for some few years, till the late unhappy Wars
coming on, it became wholly neglected, and so sensibly decayed, till at last it
lapsed (being next door to ruin) into the Hands of the Right Honorable and
truly Noble Lord, Edward Henry Earl of Lichfield, Lord of the soil; who in the
year 1674. not only repaired the broken Cisterns and Pipes, but made a fair
addition to it, in a small Island situate in the passage of a Rivulet, just
before the building set over the Rock; which though the last in erection, is
yet the first thing that presents it self in the exterior Prospect of the whole
work, Tab. 11. wherein the Figures, 1. 1. Show the water of the Rivulet. 2. 2.
The Island in the middle of it, exterior of Waterworks TAB. XI. ad page 237

To the right Honorable Edward Henry Earl of Lichfield Viscount QUARRENDON and
Baron of Spelsbury, etc This Elevent Table Showing the exterior Propspect of
ENSTON Waterworks, in part erected, all restored by his LORD.p with all
imaginable respect is justly dedicated. by R.P. LL D.

M. Bur. sculp.
3. 3. the Pales round it standing on a stone wall. 4. An artificial Rock
erected in the middle of the Island, covered with living aqueous Plants. 5. The
Keeper of the Waterworks that turns the Cocks. 6. A Canopy of water cast over
the Rock, by 7. an Instrument of Brass for that purpose. 8. A Column of water
rising about 14 foot, designed to toss a Ball. 999999. The streams of water
from about 30 Pipes set round the Rock, that water the whole Island, and
sportively wet any persons within it; which most people striving to avoid, get
behind the Man that turns the Cocks, whom he wets with 10. a spout of water
that he lets fly over his head; or else if they endeavor to run out of the
Island over the bridge, with 11. 12. which are two other Spouts, whereof that
represented at a 11, strikes the legs, and that at 12 the reins of the back.
13. The Bridge over the water lying on two trestles. 14. The steps leading into
the Grove, and toward the House, where you pass by 15. a Table of black Marble.
16. A Cistern of stone, with five spouts of water issuing out of a ball of
brass, in which a small Spaniel hunts a Duck, both diving after one another,
and having their motion from the water. 17. The way up into the
banquetting-room over the Rock, and other Closets, etc. 18. The passage between
the Cistern and Building. 19. The iron grate that gives light to the Grot
within. 20. The passage down to the Grot. 21. The windows of the
Banqueting-room. 22. The Grove and Walks behind and on each end of the Building.


53. Being now come down into the Grot by the passage 18, Tab, 11. and landing
at the bottom of the stairs, Tab. 12. a. on a large half pace before it bb. The
Rock presents it self made up of large craggy stones with great cavities
between them, ccc etc. out of which flows water perpetually night and day,
dashing against the Rocks below, and that in great plenty in the dryest
Seasons, though fed only with a single spring rising in a piece of ground
called Ramsall, between Enston and Ludston. The natural Rock is about 10 foot
high, and so many in breadth; some few shelves of lead d d, and the top stones
only having been added (easily to be distinguished by their dryness) which have
advanced it in all about 14 foot high.

54. In the half pace just before the Compartment e e e, upon turning one of
the cocks at f rises a chequer hedge of water, as they call it, g g g g; and
upon turning another, the two side columns of water h h, which rise not above
the height of the natural rock; and of a third, the middle column i, which
ascending into the turn of the Arch, and returning not again, is received into
hidden pipes provided for that purpose: Into one whereof, terminated in a very
small Cistern of water behind a stone of the rock, and having a mouth and
Languet just above its surface, the air being forced into it by the approaches
of the water, a noise is made near resembling the notes of a Nightingale: But
when that pipe is filled there is then no more singing, till the water has past
away by another pipe in the lower part of the rock, which when almost done,
there is heard a noise somewhat like the sound of a drum, performed by the
rushing in of air into the hollow of the pipe, which is large, and of copper,
to supply the place of the water now almost gone out; which don, the Nightingale
may be made to sing again.

55. From the turned roof of the rock, by help of the brass instrument k, and
turn of a cock in one of the closets above, they can let down a canopy of water
l l; from the top also they can throw arched spouts of water crossing one
another, and dashing against the walls, opposite to those of their rise, as at
m n and o p; and others that rise out, and enter in again to the roof at some
distance, never falling down at all at q r and s t. Which falls of water may be
also delicatly seen, turning the back upon them as well as looking forward, by
help of a Looking-glass placed in the wall opposite to them, which could not be
possibly represented in the Cut. And some of these waters (I must not say
which) being often used by way of sport to wet the Visitants of the Grot, that
they might not avoid it by running up the stairs, and so out into the Grove, by
turning a cock in another of the Closets, they can let fall water so
plentifully in the door u u, that most people rather interior of Waterworks
grotto TAB. 12. ad page 238.

To the most Illustrious Lady. the Lady CHARLOTTE Countess of Lichfield
Viscountess Quarrendon and Baroness of Spelsbury etc. This 12. Table. Showing
the interior Prospect of E^STON Waterworks. with the greatest devotion is
humbly Consecrated by R.P. L L.D.

Burghers sculpsit
choose to stay where they are, than pass through it: which is all concerning
the inner Prospect of the Rock; what remains being only a representation of the
Arch of stone w w built over it, with two Niches x y one of each side, and the
grate z at the top, through which they look down out of the Banqueting-room
into the Grot. Of which no more, but that behind the Rock there is a Cellar for
keeping Liquors cool, or placing Music, to surprise the Auditors; and behind
that the Receivers of water to supply the Pipes, etc.

56. To these succeed the Arts relating to Earths, which either respect the
Tillage, or Formation of them. How many sorts of Soils I met with in
Oxfordshire, viz. Clay, Chalk, and others from their different mixtures called
Maum, Red-land, Sour-ground, Stone-brass, Stony, Sandy, and Gravelly, were
enumerated amongst Earths, Chap. 3. It remains that we here give a particular
account, by what Arts they are tilled to the best advantage. And first of Clay,

57, Which if kind for Wheat, as most of it is, has its first tillage about
the beginning of May; or as soon as Barley Season is over, and is called the
Fallow, which they sometimes make by a casting tilth, i. e. beginning at the out
sides of the Lands, and laying the Earths from the ridge at the top. After
this, some short time before the second tilth, which they call stirring, which
is usually performed about the latter end of June, or beginning of July, they
give this Land its manure; which if Horse-dung or Sheeps-dung, or any other
from the Home-stall, or from the Mixen in the Field, is brought and spread on
the Land just before this second ploughing: But if it be folded (which is an
excellent manure for this Land, and seldom fails sending a Crop accordingly if
the Land be in tillage) they do it either in Winter before the fallow, or in
Summer after it is fallowed. And these are the manures of Clay Land in the
greatest part of Oxfordshire, only in and near the Chiltern; where beside
these, it is much enriched by a soft mellow Chalk that they dig from underneath
it: when it is stirred it lies again till the time of sowing Wheat, except in a
moist dripping year, when running to thistles and other weeds, they sometimes
give it a second stirring, before the last for sowing.

58. All which tillages they are very careful to give it as dry as may be,
ridging it up twice or thrice for every casting tilth (i. e. in their stirring,
and for sowing, beginning at the top of the Land and laying the Earth still
upwards to the ridge) by which means both Land and Corn lie dryer, warmer, and
healthier, and the succeeding Crop becomes more free from weeds. After it is
thus prepared, they sow it with Wheat, which is its proper grain; and if it be
a strong stiff Clay, with that they call Cone-wheat: and the next year after
(it being accounted advantageous in all tillage to change the grain) with
Beans; and then ploughing in the bean-brush at All Saints, the next year with
Barley; and amongst the several sorts of that grain, if the Land be rank, with
that they call sprat-Barly; and then the fourth year it lies fallow, when they
give it Summer tilth again, and sow it with Winter Corn as before. But at most
places where their Land is cast into three Fields, it lies fallow in course
every third year, and is sown but two: the first with Wheat, if the Land be
good, but if mean with Miscellan, and the other with Barley and Pulse
promiscuously. And at some places where it lies out of their hitching, i. e.
their Land for Pulse, they sow it but every second year, and there usually two
Crops Wheat, and the third Barley, always being careful to lay it up by ridging
against winter; Clay Lands requiring to be kept high, and to lie warm and dry,
still allowing for Wheat and Barley three plowings, and sometimes four, but for
other grains seldom more than one. When at any time they sow Peace on this Land,
the best Husbandmen will choose the Vale-gray as most proper for it; and if
Vetches, the Gore or Pebble-vetch: But if so cold a weeping Clay that unfit for
these, then they improve it with Ray-grass.

59. As for the Chalk-lands of the Chiltern-hills, though it requires not to be
laid in ridges in respect of dryness, yet of warmth it does: when designed for
Wheat, which is but seldom, they give it the same tillage with Clay, only
laying it in four or six furrowed Lands, and soiling it with the best mould, or
dung but half rotten, to keep it from binding, which are its most proper
manures; and so for common Barley and winter Vetches, with which it is much more
frequently sown, these being found the more suitable grains. But if it be of
that poorest sort they call white-land, nothing is so proper as ray-grass mixed
with Non-such, or Melilot Trefoil, according as prescribed in Chap. 6.. 33.

60. If the Land be of that sort they call Maumy, consisting of a mixture of
White-clay and Chalk, and somewhat of Sand, which causes it to work so short if
any thing dry, it is commonly sown with all sorts of Wheat, Miscellan, Barley,
etc. having the same tillage, and requiring to be kept high, and to lie dry and
warm as the Clay does, only its most proper manure is the rottenest dung; and
as they sow Beans next after Wheat in clay grounds, in this they judge Peace a
more agreeable grain, and take care in their seed-time that the weather be
fair, and settled; for if there happen but a smart shower presently after they
have sown, it will bind so fast, that the seed in great part will be utterly
lost; whereas if they have but one or two dry nights, all succeeds well enough.

61. If Red-land, whereof there are some quantities in the North and West of
Oxfordshire, it must have its tillage as soon in the year as possibly may be,
before the clay, where they are in competition, because it will not endure the
scorching tillage that clay will do, and therefore must have it before the Sun
get to near the Crab: if it be moist when fallowed, so it be not too wet, it is
the better. This never requires a double stirring, nor must be made too fine
and light, for then it runs to May-weed, or Mathern, as they call it; yet the
manure for clay does very well with it, but the mixed manure of Horse-dung and
Cow Dung together, they say does best of any: Nor is the Sheepfold amiss
either Winter or Summer, which must all be applied before stirring, and
ploughed in; if for wheat, about the latter end of July, or beginning of
August; if for barley, later in the year, as the time and season gives leave.
This Land, like clay, bears wheat, miscellan, barley, and peace, in their order
very well, and lies fallow every other year, where it falls out of their
hitching.

62. There is another sort of ground in this County which they call Sour-land,
which must have its tilth according to its state and condition when they set
about it; if it have a strong swarth on it, then they cast to give it a fallow,
when the Sun is pretty well entered Cancer; and this they call a
scalding-fallow, which kills the grass roots, and makes the Land fine: But if
it be light, and as they term it, has little skin on the back, they either
leave it for cooler tillage, or plough it early in the year as soon as their
clay is fallowed, and then there will spring some spiring-grass that will keep
it from scorching in the Summer; for if they suffer it to be scorched when it
is light before, all their Art and Manure will never procure a good Crop of it.

^^ The Sheepfold is good for this Land winter and summer, (...) manure it
also with the Dung-cart, if near home, before the ^^^ing; but Pigeons dung is
the most proper for this sort of soil, because it is for the most part very
cold Land, and so is Mault-dust in a larger quantity, both sown with the
winter-corn and ploughed in with it, for then it lies warm at the roots of the
Corn all winter, and corrects the crudities of the rains and frosts, makes the
Corn cover the ground sooner than ordinary, and holds the moisture of the
Spring longer with it; and in short (if thus ordered) brings a certain Crop. It
must not be stirred or sown very wet, for then it proves uneasy both for Man
and Beast, nor will it be kind for Corn, it being then very hard to cover it
with the harrows. It is a good Land for wheat or miscellan, when it is fine,
especially if in condition for a scalding fallow, and accordingly is sown with
that and barley by turns to change the grain; and when it falls in a Peace
quarter, seldom fails of a good burden, though sometimes it does not kid very
well, which yet possibly may be prevented by sowing the Cotswold Pea, which I
guess the most agreeable to this sort of ground: But if too wet for these, the
rath-ripe Vetch is fittest for it.

64. In some parts of the County they have another sort of Land they call
Stone-brash, consisting of a light lean Earth and a small Rubble-stone, or else
of that and sour ground mixed together, which are also tilled according to their
present condition; for if they be grasie, which they otherwise call swardy,
they fallow them pretty late, but not so hot and scorching as sour ground,
because they will not bear such tillage: But if they be scary, as they word it,
i. e. have no skin or sward upon them, they either fold them in winter, and the
sheeps dung with addition of some hay seeds, will help them to get grasie; or
else they lay upon them in the beginning of the spring, old thatch or straw, or
the most strawy part of the dunghill, earth out of ditches, the shovelings of a
dirty Court, or the like, which spread thin will assist the grass in its
growth; which must necessarily be had, for they hold it (in some parts of the
County at least) for a general Rule, that if these sorts of Land have not sward
on them before they are fallowed, they will by no means bring a kind Crop, but
great store of Mony-wort, May-weed, etc.

65. This done in September, October, November, and sometimes in December, they
fallow them as their swards direct, and if in either of the two last months,
are called Winter-fallows, and are never stirred at all, but sowed with Barley
upon the second earth in the beginning of sowing, because then they work most
kindly, and will bear cold weather better than when more finely tilled. These
Lands will also bear Wheat and Miscellan indifferently well in a kind year, but
not so well as clay, sour-ground, or red-land; but they bear a fine round barley
and thin skinned, especially if they be kept in heart: They lie every other year
fallow (as other Lands) except where they fall among the Peace quarter, and
there after Peace they are sown with Barley, and lie but once in four years.
These are sown also many times with Dills or Lentils, and when quite worn out,
or so poor that they will bear nothing else to advantage, they are yet fit for
Ray-grass mixed with Trefoil, as prescribed above in the Chapter of Plants.

66. There is a sort of tillage they sometimes use on these Lands in the spring
time, which they call streak-fallowing; the manner is, to plough one furrow and
leave one, so that the Land is but half of it ploughed, each ploughed furrow
lying on that which is not so: when it is stirred it is then clean ploughed,
and laid so smooth, that it will come at sowing time to be as plain as before.
This is done when these Lands are not swardy enough to bear clean tillage, nor
callow or light enough to lie to get sward, the intent is to keep the Sun from
scorching them too much: But in most places they think this way of tillage
wears their Land too fast, and therefore seldom use it.

67. As for stony Land, whereof there is but little can be properly so called
but in the Chiltern Country, they give it for Wheat, Peace, and Barley, much the
same tillage and manure, they do Clay in other places, adding the advantage of
chalking it, which they have not elsewhere for their clay grounds, by which
they much enrich it for some years, so that it bears excellent wheat, barley,
peace; of which last those they call Hampshire-kids, if the Land be new chalkt,
are counted most agreeable; where by the way let it be noted, that I said but
for some years, for when once the manure by chalk is worn out, the Land is
scarce recoverable by any other, whence it is Proverbial here, as well as some
other parts of England, That chalkt Land makes a rich Father but a poor Son,
thereby intimating the ruin of the Land in the end, it becoming at last only
fit for Ray-grass, mixed with Trefoil as above.

68. Lastly, their sandy and gravelly light ground, has also much the same
tillage for wheat and barley, as clay, etc. only they require many times but two
ploughings, especially if for wheat, except the fallow be run much to weeds,
and then indeed they sometimes afford it a stirring, else none at all. Its most
agreeable grains are, white, red, and mixed Lammas wheats, and miscellan, i. e.
wheat and rye together, and then after a years fallow, common or rathe-ripe
barley: so that it generally lies still every other year, it being unfit for
hitching, i. e. Beans and Peace, though they sometimes sow it with winter
Vetches; and if ever with Peace, the small rathe-ripes are accounted the best:
Its most agreeable manure is of straw, from the Close or Mixen half rotten,
which keeps it open, and suffers it not to bind too much, where subject to it;
but if otherwise, the rottenest dung is the best.

69. Whereof, as upon all other Lands before mentioned, they lay about 12 loads
upon a common Field acre, i. e. about 20 upon a Statute acre; but I find the
business of manuring Land to have a great latitude, Men doing it here many
times not according to their judgment, but according to the quantities they
have, so that where the quantities of manure are but small and the tillage is
great, the case is much otherwise, than where both tillage and manure are in a
contrary condition. But however the case stand, I find this a general Rule
amongst them, that they always soil that Land first and best, which is to bear
three Crops; one on the tillage, another of beans and peace, and a third of
barley, on the beans or peace brush; all which depend upon the single manure
given it when it lay fallow for wheat: though I have known this order
frequently inverted by the best Husbandmen on their richest Lands, sowing barley
first, then peace or beans, and their wheat last, for which they allege this
very good reason, That wheat following the dung Cart on their best Land, is the
more liable to smut.

70. And so much for the ordinary Manures of this County, there being two
others yet behind, viz. Chippings of stone, and woolen rags, not altogether so
common, which I have therefore thought fit to consider apart; the first whereof
I met with at Hornton near Banbury, where the chippings of the stone they hew
at their Quarry, proves a very good manure for their Ground thereabout, and is
accordingly made use of, by reason no doubt of a salt that stone holds, which
being dissolved by the weather, is imbibed by the Earth, as hinted before in
Chap. 4. of this Essay.

71. The 2d sort I first observed about Watlington, and the two Britwels, where
they strew them on their Land with good success; and I have heard since of
several other places where they do the same. To this purpose they purchase
Taylers shreds, which yet retaining somewhat of the salt of the Fulling-earth
with which they were dressed, do well enough; but I judge them not so good as
other old rags first worn by men and women, which must needs beside be very
well sated with urinous salts, contracted from the sweat and continual
perspiration attending their Bodies. And in this Opinion I am confirmed by
Sanct. Sanctorius, who is positive, that our insensible evacuations, transcend
all our sensible ones put together S. Sanctorii Medicinae Staticae, Lib. 1.
sect. 1. Aphorism. 4.
, to that excess, that of eight pounds weight of meat and drink be taken by a
man in one day, his insensible transpirations use to amount to five Ibid
Aphorism 6.
. Now if so, our clothes must needs be so filled with a well rectified salt,
left behind in the percolation of the steams of our bodies, that there can be
nothing more rational, if well considered, then that they should be a very fit
manure for Land, when unfit for other uses.

72. As to the quantities of Corn sown on the statute Acre, they differ much in
proportion to the richness or meanness of the land; about two bushels of wheat
and vetches, two bushels and of barley, oats, and peace, and a quarter of beans
sufficing the poorer; whereas the richer Land will take up three bushels or
more of wheat or vetches, three bushels and or upwards of barley, oats, peace,
and sometimes six bushels of beans: Yet I have known some able Husbandmen afford
more Seed to their poor than rich Land, giving this reason, That the Seed in
the rich does tillar, i. e. sprout into several blades and spread on the
ground, whereas on the poor Land its sprouts come all single, which therefore,
say they, requires the more seed.

73. In the choice of their seed they have a double respect, first to the grain
it self, and secondly to the land it grew on. As to the first, they take care
that it be clear of all manner of seeds; that it be handsome round Corn, of an
equal cize, which some of them call Even shooting Corn, or well brested; such
Corn being for the most part full of kernel, and the likeliest to give strong
roots. And in respect of the soil, they constantly choose Corn that grew on
land of a quite different nature from that it is to be sown on; but in general,
they desire it from land that is well in heart, and rich in its kind. If they
are to sow wheat upon tillage, they choose wheat sown before upon bean stubs,
and when they sow upon peace or bean stubs, wheat sown before on tillage; for
Clay ground they have their seed from Red-land or Chalk, and vice versa; for
the other soils, that from Clay is esteemed the best, though that from Red-land
is little inferior; for barley they count that best which comes of new broken
laud; and for the rest, none so good as those that come from the richest soils.

74. Before they sow, if the place be subject to the annoyances of Smutting,
Meldews, Birds, etc. they take care to prevent them either in the preparing or
choice of their grain. Against smutting they both brine and lime their Corn,
some making their brine of urin and salt; or else sow red-straw'd wheat, which
is the least subject to it of any. To prevent meldews, some sow pretty early,
judging Corn most subject to that annoyance when sown late; or else make choice
of the long bearded Cone, that being the least subject of any wheat yet known
to the inconveniences of meldews, and of being eaten by Birds, and therefore
also fittest to be sown in small Enclosures, as noted before in the sixth
Chapter.

75. In Sowing they have their several methods, viz, the single Cast, the
double Cast; and as they call it about Burford, the Hackney bridle, or riding
Cast. The single Cast sows a Land at one bout; the double Cast is twice in a
place, at two different bouts, viz. once from furrow to ridge, and afterward
from ridge to furrow. The Hackney bridle is two casts on a Land at one time,
and but once about, though I find these two latter sometimes confounded, their
names being interchangably applied in different parts of the County. The first
way is seldom used amongst them, only by the ancientest Seeds-men; the second
is their usual and most certain way; the last, though the newest fashion, is
but seldom used yet, though some have tried it with good success, and perhaps
may hereafter bring it more in practice, it having more speed than the double
Cast to recommend it to use. They have also a way of sowing in the Chiltern
Country, which is called sowing Hentings, which is done before the Plough, the
Corn being cast in a straight line just where the plough must come, and is
presently plougbed in. By this way of sowing they think they save much seed and
other charge, a dexterous Boy being as capable of sowing this way out of his
hat, as the most judicious Seeds-man. But of this way more hereafter, when I
come into Buckingham-shire.

76. Thus having run through, the Tillage, Manures, Quantities and choice of
Seed, and the several ways of sowing the Soils of this County, I proceed to the
Instruments used in their tillage: Amongst which, the Plough being the best,
because the most useful Engine in the World, deserves the first place; of which
there are two sorts used in Oxfordshire, the Foot, and Wheel-plough; whereof
the first is used in deep and Clay Lands, being accordingly fitted with a broad
fin share, and the Horses going always in a string and keeping the furrow, to
avoid poching the Land; and the second in the lighter and stony Land, the
Horses either going in a string, or two a breast, according as thought most
suitable to the tillage in hand On light Land some count the treading of double
Cattle advantageous to it.
: This Plough when used in stony Land, is armed with a round pointed share,
having also near the chep of the Plough a small fin to cut the roots of the
grass, for in this Land the broad fin jumps out of the ground. The foot plough
does best at the henting, i.e. ending of a Land, it going close up to a hedge,
and not being subject to overthrow; whereas the wheel plough, if care and
discretion do not meet in the holder, is apt to overthrow there, the Land being
ridged; but goes much more lightsom and easy for the Horses than the foot
plough does, which is the sum of the Conveniences and Inconveniences of both.

77. After Ploughing and Sowing, they cover their Corn with Harrows, whereof
some have 4, 5, or 6 bulls, or spars apiece, each of them armed with five
tines, and of a square form as at most other places. But at Whitfield, near Sir
Thomas Tippings, I saw a great weighty triangular Harrow, whose tines stood not
in rows after the manner of others, its use being in ground much subject to
Quitch-grass, whose roots it seems continually passing between the tines of
other Harrows, are not so easily dragged forth by them, as this, whose tines
stand not in rows, and is drawn with one of the Angles fore-most, after the
manner of a Wedge: Yet I could not find it answered expectation so well as to
obtain in other places, most thinking the great square Bull harrow, drawn by
the second bull on the near side of the harrow, to take the Grass much better
than that.

78. But the worst ground to harrow of all others is new broken Land, the parts
of its furrows being commonly so fast knit together by the roots of the grass,
that though great charge and trouble be afforded in the harrowing, yet after
all it will not so disperse the Corn, but that it will come up as it fell,
thick and in ranks between the furrows, and scarce any where else. To prevent
these inconveniences, the Ingenious Mr. Sacheverel, late of Bolscot, deceased,
contrived a way of howing the earth from the turf as soon as a little dried,
thereby first laying his ground even and then sowing it; by which means his
seed not only fell and came up equally dispersed in all parts alike, but he
found that a quantity considerably less, did this way serve the turn. Which
Experiment he often made with good approbation, the charge of howing not
exceeding that of harrowing, which without it must be great, whereas after it,
one cross tine covers the Corn well enough.

79. After harrowing, if it has been so dry a time, that the ground has risen
in clods that cannot be broken with harrows, they commonly do it with a beetle,
or big stick: But a much quicker way is that I met with about Bisseter by a
weighty Roll, not cut round, but octangular, the edges whereof meeting with the
clods, would break them effectually, and with great expedition. I was showed
also at Bolscot another uncommon Roll, invented by the same Mr. Sacheverel
abovementioned, cut neither smooth nor to angles, but notched deep and pretty
broad, after the manner of a Tessella or Lattice, so that the protuberant parts
remained almost as big as the foot of a Horse, by which being large and
weighty, he could so firmly press his light Land subject to Quich-grass and
other weeds, and so settle the roots of the Corn, that it would come up even
and well; whereas if it had been left hollow it would certainly have been
choked, and came to little; He asserted, that it also excelled a smooth Roll,
especially if the Season proved dry and windy, in that, when a Field is rolled
smooth, the wind is apt to blow the Earth from the Corn, whereas by this the
ground is laid so uneven and full of holes, like Chequer-work, that what the
wind blows from the ridges, still falls into the hollows between them, and on
the contrary gives the Corn the better root.

80. I have heard of another sort of Roll, of a large diameter, and weighty,
set the whole length with edged plates of steel, prominent from the body of the
Roll about an inch and half; thus contrived for the quicker cutting of turf,
which drawn first one way, and cross again at right angles, cuts the turf into
squares, in bigness proportionable to the distance of the edged plates on the
Roll, requiring no farther trouble afterward, then to be pared off the ground
with a turfing Spade, which seems to promise well for the cutting out of
Trenches, Drains. etc. But this I have not seen, nor has it that I know of,
been yet experimented by the ingenious Inventor: However, I thought fit to
offer it to the consideration of Improvers, and the rather because it affords
me a smooth transition from the consideration of the Arable, to the Meddow and
Pasture Lands.

81. For the Meddow grounds of this County, as they are numerous, so they are
fertile beyond all preference, for they need no other compost to be laid on
them, than what the Floods spontaneously give them, and therefore the Reader
must not expect any methods or rules concerning that affair here: Nor
concerning the remedies of annoyances, such as Sour-grass, Mosses, Rushes,
Sedges, etc. for I find none of our meddows much troubled with them. As for
their Vp-lands, when they prepare them for grass, they make them as rich as
they can with their most suitable soils, and lay them also dry to keep them
from Rushes and Sedges; if any thing boggy, they usually trench them; but that
proves not sufficient, for the trenches of boggy grounds will swell, and fill
up of themselves.

82. To prevent which inconveniency, I know an ingenious Husbandman, that
having dug his trenches about a yard deep and two foot over, first laid at the
bottom green Black-thorn bushes, and on them a stratum of large round stones,
or at least such as would not lie close; and over them again, another stratum
of Black-thorn, and upon them straw, to keep the dirt from falling in between,
and filling them up: by which means he kept his trench open, and procured so
constant and durable a drain, that the land is since sunk a foot or 18 inches,
and become firm enough to support carriages.

83. As for the Grasses sown in this County, I have little more to add
concerning them, but what was said before in the Chapter of Plants, only that
it has been found most agreeable that Sanctfoin, Ray-grass, etc. be not sown
presently after the Barley, Oats, or whatever other Grain it be sowed with, but
rather after the Corn is come pretty high, so that it may shelter the seed from
the heat of the Sun, which, as is apprehended at least, is sometimes
prejudicial. And that in the Chiltern Country, after they have eaten off their
Ray-grass or Sanct-foin, they find it advantageous to fold it with Sheep, as
other Corn-lands: which I thought good to note, it being, as I am informed, but
lately practiced.

84. Amongst Arts that concern formation of Earths, I shall not mention the
making of Pots at Marsh-Balden, and Nuneham-Courtney; nor of Tobacco-pipes of
the White-earth of Shot-over, since those places are now deserted. Nor indeed
was there, that I ever heard of, any thing extraordinary performed during the
working those Earths, nor is there now of a very good Tobacco-pipe Clay found
in the Parish of Horspath, since the Printing of the third Chapter of this
History. Let it suffice for things of this nature, that the ingenious John
Dwight, M. A. of Christ Church College Oxon. has discovered the mystery of the
stone or Cologne Wares (such as D' Alva Bottles, Jugs, Noggins) heretofore made
only in Germany, and by the Dutch brought over into England in great
quantities, and has set up a manufacture of the same, which (by methods and
contrivances of his own, altogether unlike those used by the Germans) in three
or four years time he has brought it to a greater perfection than it has
attained where it has been used for many Ages, insomuch that the Company of
Glass-sellers, London, who are the dealers for that commodity, have contracted
with the Inventor to buy only of his English manufacture, and refuse the
foreign.

85. He has discovered also the mystery of the Hessian wares, and makes
Vessels for reteining the penetrating Salts and Spirits of the Chemists, more
serviceable than were ever made in England, or imported from Germany it self.

86. And has found out ways to make an Earth white and transparent as
Porcellane, and not distinguishable from it by the Eye, or by Experiments that
have been purposely made to try wherein they disagree. To this Earth he has
added the colors that are usual in the colored China-ware, and diverse others
not seen before. The skill that has been wanting to set up a manufacture of
this transparent Earthen-ware in England, like that of China, is the glazing of
the white Earth, which has much puzzel'd the Projector, but now that
difficulty also is in great measure overcome.

87. He has also caused to be modelled Statues or Figures of the said
transparent Earth (a thing not done elsewhere, for China affords us only
imperfect mouldings) which he has diversified with great variety of colors,
making them of the colors of Iron, Copper, Brass, and party-colored, as some
Achat-stones. The considerations that induced him to this attempt, were the
Duration of this hard burnt Earth much above brass, or marble, against all Air
and Weather; and the softness of the matter to be modelled, which makes it
capable of more curious work, than stones that are wrought with chisels, or
metals that are cast. In short, he has so far advanced the Art Plastic, that
it is dubious whether any man since Prometheus have excelled him, not excepting
the famous Damophilus, and Gorgasus of Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 12.
.

88. And these Arts he employs about materials of English growth, and not much
applied to other uses; for instance, He makes the stone Bottles of a Clay in
appearance like to Tobacco-pipe clay, which will not make Tobacco-pipes, though
the Tobacco-pipe clay will make Bottles; so that, that which has lain buried
and useless to the Owners, may become beneficial to them by reason of this
manufacture, and many working hands get good livelyhoods; not to speak of the
very considerable sums of English Coin annually kept at home by it.

89. About Nettle-bed they make a sort of brick so very strong, that whereas at
most other places they are unloaded by hand, I have seen these shot out of the
Cart after the manner of stones to mend the Highways, and yet none of them
broken; but this I suppose must be rather ascribed to the nature of the Clay,
than to the skill of the Artificer in making or burning them, and should
therefore have been mentioned in the Chapter of Earths.

90. At Caversham, near the Right Worshipful Sir Anthony Cravens (and at some
other places) they make a sort of brick 22 inches long, and above six inches
broad, which some call Lath-bricks, by reason they are put in the place of the
Laths or Spars (supported by Pillars) in Oasts for drying malt, which is the
only use of them, and in truth I think a very good one too; for beside that
they are no way liable to fire, as the wooden Laths are, they hold the heat so
much better, that being once heated, a small matter of fire will keep them so,
which are valuable advantages in the Profession of Maulting.

91. And which brings me to the Arts relating to Stone, they have lately also
about Burford, made their Malt kills of stone; the first of them being
contrived after an accident by fire, by Valentine Strong, an ingenious Mason of
Teynton, much after the manner of those of brick, which for the benefit of
other Counties where they are not known, I have caused to be delineated so far
forth at least, as may be direction enough to an ingenious Workman, in Tab.
13. Fig. 1, 2. whereof the first Figure shows the front of such a Kill, and the
Letters a. The Kill hole. b. The Pillars that support the principal Joists. c.
The sloping away of the inside of the Oast. d. The ends of the Joists. e. The
spaces between the Joists for the Laths.


And the second Figure, the square above, immediately supporting the Oast-hair
and the Malt, wherein the Letters f f. show the Flame-stone. g g. The Pillars
on which the principal Joists lie. h h. The principal Joists. i i. The shorter
Joists. k k. The Laths between the Joists. l l. The spaces between the Laths.
Which first Kill of Valentine Strong, built after this manner in stone,
succeeded so well, that it has since obtained in many other places; nor do I
wonder at it, for beside the great security from fire, to which the old Kills
were very subject, these also dry the malt with much less fuel, and in a
shorter time, than the old ones would do; insomuch that I was told by one Mr.
Trindar, an ingenious Gentleman of West-well, who showed me a fine one of his
own at Holwell, that whereas he could formerly dry with the ordinary Kill but
two Quarters in a day, he can now dry six, and with as little fuel. Now if
Mault-kills or Oasts made with ordinary stone prove so advantageous, what would
one of them do, if the Joists and Laths at least were made of the Cornish
warming-stone, that will hold heat well eight or ten hours? or of Spanish
Ruggiola's, which are broad plates like tiles, cut out of a Mountain of red
salt near Cardona, which being well heated on both sides, will keep warm 24
hours See Mr. Willughby's Voyage through Spain. p. 471.
?

92. To which may be added the Invention of making Glasses of stones, and some
other materials, at Henly upon Thames, lately brought into England by Seignior
de Costa a Montferratees, and carried on by one Mr. Ravenscroft, who has a
Patent for the sole making them; and lately by one Mr. Bishop. The materials
they used formerly were the blackest Flints calcined, and a white Christalline
sand, adding to each pound of these, as it was found by solution of their whole
mixture, by the ingenious Dr. Ludwell Fellow of Wadham College, about two
ounces of Niter, Tartar, and Borax.

93. But the Glasses made of these being subject to that unpardonable fault
called Crizelling, caused by the two great quantities of the Salts in the
mixture, which either by the adventitious Niter of the Air from without, or
warm liquors put in them, would be either increased or dissolved; and thereby
endure a Scabrities or dull roughness, irrecoverably clouding the transparency
of the glass; they have chosen rather since to make their glasses of a great
sort of white Pebbles, which as I am informed they have from the River Po in
Italy; to which adding the aforementioned salts, but abating in the
proportions, they now make a sort of Pebble glass, which are hard, durable, and
whiter than any from Venice, and will not Crizel, but endure the severest
trials whatever, to be known from the former by a Seal set purposely on them.

94. And yet I guess that the difference, in respect of Crizeling, between the
present Glass and the former, lies not so much in the Calx, the Pebbles being
Pyrites (none but such I presume being fit for vitrification) as well as the
Flints; but rather wholly in the abatement of the salts, for there are some of
the Flint glasses strictly so called (whereof I have one by me) that has
endured all trials as well as these last. But if it be found otherwise, that
white Pebbles are really fitter for their turns than black Flints, I think they
have little need to fetch them from Italy, there being enough in England of the
same kind, not only to supply this, but perhaps Foreign Nations. Which is all
concerning Arts relating to stone and glass; except it be also worth notice,
that Venerable Bede of this University, first brought Building with stone, and
Glass windows into England Vid. Comment. in Carmen Phaleucium Johan. Seldeni,
before Hoptons Concordance of years.
.

95. Whence according to my proposed method, I proceed to the Arts relating to
Plants; amongst which, the first that present themselves, are those that
concern the Herbaceous kind. Of this sort we may reckon that ingenious
Experiment made in June, 1669. by my worthy Friend John Wills M. A. and Fellow
of Trin. Coll. Oxon. in order to find in what measure Herbs might perspire,
wherein he made use of the following method. He took two glass Vials with
narrow necks, each holding one pound 8 ounces, and 2 drachms of water, Avoir de
pois weight: into one of these glasses filled with water, he put a sprig of
flourishing Mint (which before had grown in the water) weighing one ounce; the
other glass he also filled with water, and exposed them both in a window to the
Sun. After ten days time, he found in the bottle where the mint was, only five
ounces and four drachms of water remaining, and no more, so that there was one
pound two ounces and six drachms spent, the mint weighing scarce two drachms
more than at first.

96. From the other Glass, where water was put of the same weight, and no mint,
he found the Sun had exhaled near one ounce of water, and therefore concluded
it drew but so much out of the first glass, at least not more: So that allowing
one ounce for what the Sun had exhaled, there was in those ten days spent by
the mint, one pound one ounce six drachms of water; and the mint being
increased in weight only two drachms, 'twas plain the mint had purely expired
in those ten days, one pound one ounce and four drachms, that is, each day
above an ounce and half, which is more than the weight of the whole mint.
Whence he concluded, that what Malpighius so wonders at in his Book De Bombyce,
viz. that those Animals will sometimes eat in one day, more than the weight of
their bodies, is outdone by every sprig of mint, and most other Herbs in the
Field, which every summers day attract more nourishment than their own weight
amounts too.

97. Which the same ingenious person at least questions not (and therefore
wishes trials may be made) of the Tithymali, Esulae, and especially of
Pinguicula and Ros Solis, which last sucks up moisture faster than the Sun can
exhale it, and is bedewed all over at Noonday, notwithstanding its power: Nor
doubts he but that Wormwood, and all other Plants that are very hot, and of
strong smells, expire as much, if not more than Mint.

98, There are also several Arts, used about the Corn in this County, whilst
in the blade, and straw, that belong to this place, such as eating it off with
Sheep, if too rank, to make it grow strong and prevent lodging: whilst the
Corn is young they also weed it, cutting the thistles with a hook; but rattles
they handweed as soon as in flower, and so they do cockles when they intend the
Corn for seed. If the Crows toward Harvest are any thing mischievous, as they
many times are, destroying the Corn in the outer limits of the Fields, they dig
a hole narrow at the bottom, and broad at the top, in the green swarth near the
Corn, wherein they put dust, and cinders from the Smiths forge, mixed with a
little Gunpowder, and in and about the holes stick feathers (Crow-feathers if
they can get them) which they find about Burford to have good success.

99. They cut their Wheat here rather a little before, than let it stand till
it be over-ripe; for if it be cut but a little too soon, the shock will ripen
it, and the Corn will be beautiful, whereas if it stand too long, much will
shatter out of the head in reaping, especially if the wind blow hard, and that
the best Corn too; the worst only remaining, which will be pale in the hand, an
unpardonable fault where the Baker is the Chapman. In reaping Wheat and Rye
they use not the sicle, but a smooth edged hook, laying their Corn in small
hand-fulls all over the Field; I suppose that it may the sooner dry, in case
wet come before they bind it, which they do in very small sheaves, and very
loose in comparison of some other Counties: They shock it rafter-wise, ten
sheaves in a shock, which if set wide in the but-end, will be very copped and
sharp at the top, and will bear out rain beyond hope, or almost credit.

100. They count their Barley ripe (as they do their Wheat) when it hangs the
head and the straw has lost its verdure, which they mow with a sith without a
cradle, never binding but raking it together, and cocking it with a fork, which
is usually a trident, whose teeth stand not in a row, but meet pyramidally in a
center at the staff: They let it lie in the swathe a day or two, which both
ripens the Corn and withers the weeds. Oats, and all mixed Corns called
Horse-meat, are Harvested sometimes with two reaping hooks, whereof the manner
is thus: The Workman taking a hook in each hand, cuts them with that in his
right hand, and rolls them up the while with that in his left, which they call
bagging of Peace; Others they cut with a reaping hook set in a staff about a
yard long, and then they cut and turn the Peace before them with both hands till
they have a wad, which they lay by, and begin again; and this they call cutting
with the staff-hook: But the sith they say is much the speediest way, which if
used with care, cuts them as well and clean, as either of the other.

101. After the sith they wad both Beans and Peace, and so turn them till they
are thoroughly withered and dry, and then cock and fit them for carriage, only
with this difference, that Beans while they are cocked and carried, have the
loose stalks picked up by hand, the rake being apt to beat the Beans out of the
pods, as they are drawn up against the leg. All sorts of Cocks are best made of
a middleing cize, and well top'd; the advantages are, that these are
apprehended at least to take less wet with the same rain than greater, and will
dry again without breaking; whereas the great cocks, after rain, must be pulled
to pieces, which cannot be done without great loss, for in the opening and
turning much Corn will be beaten out, and that certainly the best too.

102. If their Corn be brought home a little moister, or greener than ordinary,
or the weeds be not let lie to be thoroughly shrunk or withered, that they
suspect it may heat in the Barn more than ordinary (for it is kind for Corn and
fodder to heat a little) then they draw a Cubb or Beer-lip (which others call
the Seed-cord) up the middle of the mow or stack, and through the hole that
this leaves, the heat will ascend and so prevent mow-burning; Or if it heat in
the Barn beyond expectation, and be like to do amiss, they then pull a hole in
the middle from the top to the bottom, which will also help it much. They draw
an old Axel-tree of a Cart up a Hay-rick to the same purpose, if they think
their Hay of the greenest, or over moist when stacked.

103. But the best contrivance I ever yet saw to prevent the fireing of Ricks
of Hay, or Sainct-foin, I met with at Tusmore, at the Worshipful Richard
Fermors Esquire where they let in square pipes made of boards of a foot diagonal,
to the middle of their stacks, to give them Air perpetually; the number of
pipes bearing proportion to the bigness of the Ricks, which no question may
also be as rationally applied to stacks of Corn, whenever thought subject to
the same danger.

104. To preserve their Ricks of Corn liable to rats and mice, they commonly
place them in this Country, on standers and caps of stone; the standers being
four Obeliscs about two foot high, and the caps as many Hemispherical stones
placed upon them, with the flat sides downwards, on which having laid four
strong pieces of Timber, and other Joists to bear up the Corn, they place their
Ricks, which then are not annoyed by mice or rats (at least not so much) as
stacks on the ground, by reason the Hemispherical stones being planums at the
bottom, though they may possibly ascend the standers well enough, yet can
scarce get up the caps, whose broad bottoms hang so over them in plano
Horizontis, that they must needs fall in the attempt.

105. The Cart they most use to bring home their Corn, is the two-wheeled long
Cart, having shambles over the shafts or thills, a Cart Ladder at the breech,
and hoops over the wheels, on which they will lay great and very broad loads,
though it go not so secure and steady as a Wagon, which notwithstanding that
advantage is of but little use here, only amongst Carriers, etc. They use also
a sort of Cart they call a Whip-lade, or Whip-cart, whose hinder part is made
up with boards after the manner of a Dungcart, having also a head of boards,
and shambles over the thills; which head being made so as to be taken out or
left in, the Cart may be indifferently used to carry dung or other matters;
dung, when the head is in, and Corn, etc. when taken out.

106. About Banbury most of their Carts have Axel-trees of Iron, made square at
one end and round at the other; at the square end they are made fast into one
of the wheels, and move round together with it; and at the other end they move
within the box of the wheel, and the wheel round them too: With this sort of
Axel some are of opinion that the Cart moves much lighter for the Cattle, than
with a wooden one, to whom I should much rather assent, did the round end of
the Axel move in a box of brass, and were the places where the Cart rests on
it, lined with brass plates, for then a small matter of oil (as it is in the
oiling of bells) would cause the heaviest weight to be moved with great ease:
however as they are, much less grease serves the turn; and one of them made of
good tough iron, will last a man's age, and sometimes two, whereas the wooden
ones are frequently at reparations: nor does there any inconveniency attend
them that I could hear of, but that the wheels have not so much room to play to
and fro on these, as on the others of wood, and therefore not so good where
either the ways or Cart-routs are deep.

107. Their way in this Country to bring the corn from the straw, is for the
most part by the flail, only in some places when their wheat is very smutty,
they have a way of whipping it first, and then threshing it afterward: their
manner of whipping is striking the corn by a handful at a time, against a door
set on its edge; and when a sheaf is thus whipped, they bind it up again for the
flail: which way indeed is troublesome and tedious, but by this means the smut
bags or balls are preserved unbroken, and by the strength of a good wind, and
care in the raying, most part of them may be gotten forth, and the wheat left
clear.

108. But before they thresh Rye, they sometimes take care to preserve some of
the straw whole or unbroken, to serve for straw-works: which I should not have
thought worth mentioning, but that we have an Artist here in Oxford, the
ingenious Robert Wiseman, excellent for such matters, beyond all comparison;
and yet he modestly owns, that he saw work in Italy that gave him a hint for
his Invention, but knows not whether that Artist (but believes rather the
contrary) uses the same procedure that he does or no: However, if it must not
be allowed his Invention, yet because he has improved it to so great an
excellency, I cannot but let the World know, that though he professes nothing
extraordinary in the dying of his colors, yet by certain method, of first
scraping the straw, and cutting it into small square pieces, none longer than
the 20th or 30th part of an inch, he can lay them on wood, copper or silver
(first prepared for the purpose) in such order and manner, and that with great
expedition, that thereby he represents the ruins of Buildings, Prospects of
Cities, Churches, etc. upon dressing or writing Boxes, or Boxes for any other
use.

109. He also represents in a most exquisite manner, both the Irish and Breadth
stitch in Carpets and Screens, which he makes of this straw work for the more
curious Ladies; and with these he covers Tobacco boxes, or of any other kind,
whether of wood or metal, putting the Arms of the Nobility and Gentry, if
desired, upon the tops or elsewhere: And all these with the colors so neatly
shaded off, from one another, that at due distance they show nothing inferior
to colors laid with a Pensil. When these Prospects, etc. are made, he can and
does frequently wash his work with common water, leting it continue at least an
hour underneath it; then drys it with a sponge, and beats it with a wooden
mallet as thin as may be, and then lays it on his boxes, giving it lastly so
curious a polish, that no varnishing excels it: which work, though made of such
minute squares of straw, will endure portage, and any other as severe usage, as
most other materials; none of them being to be gotten off by easy means, but
will admit of washing and polishing again, when at any time foul, as well as at
the first.

110. Which is all concerning Corn, whilst in the blade or straw, what remains
relates to the separating the seed from the chaff, and preserving it in the
stores. As to the first, they either do it in a good wind abroad, or with the
fan at home, I mean the leaved fan; for the knee fan, and casting the corn the
length of the Barn, are not in use amongst them. They that have but small
quantities, when no wind is stirring, will do it with a sheet; the manner thus:
Two persons take a sheet, and double it at the seam, then rolling in each end a
little, and holding one hand at the top, and the other a foot or 18 inches
lower, they strike together and make a good wind, and some speed. But the wheel
fan saves a man's labor, makes a better wind, and does it with much more
expedition.

111. They preserve it in their stores, as well as ricks, from mice and rats by
many ordinary means used in other places: but I met with one way somewhat
extraordinary, performed by a peculiar sort of Rats-bane, that kills no
creatures but those for which it is designed, except poultry; so that it is an
excellent remedy, especially within doors, where Fowls seldom come, or any
other place where they may be kept from it; all Cats, Dogs, etc. tasting it
without hurt. To secure their Corn from musting, I have heard of some that have
laid it in Chambers mixed with Pebble-stones of the larger cize stratum super
stratum, viz. after every six inches thickness of Corn, a stratum of Pebbles,
placed about a yard distance from each other, then Corn again to the same
thickness, and so S S S to ten lains apiece: by which method, as I was told,
Corn had been preserved sweet and free from must, ten years together, only
removing it once a year, and laying it again as before; and in the Summer time
when the weather was dry, setting open the windows in the day time and shutting
them at night.

112. To recover it from mustiness, to its pristin sweetness, some have laid it
out all night, thin spread on clothes, to receive the Evening and Morning dews,
with so good success, that being dried again next day in the Sun, the ill smell
has been quite removed. And thus I have done with the most uncommon Arts I have
met with concerning Plants related to Husbandry, and the whole Herbaceous kind:
where by the way let it be noted, as in Chap. 6.. 23. that these Arts are
called uncommon, not so much in respect of this, as of other Counties, where
indeed they will seem so: and that I have written of them rather for the
information of strangers, than the Inhabitants of Oxfordshire, as I must
hereafter in other Counties, for information of this. Wherein if through my own
ignorance, or frowardness of some Husbandmen (I dare not say all) I have failed
of that accuracy, that might otherwise have been expected, I beg the Readers
pardon, and promise amendment in the following Counties, provided I have
encouragement to go on in my design.

113. After the Herbaceous Plants, come we next to consider the Shrubs and
Subfrutices, amongst which I met with one, perhaps I may say scarce heard of
curiosity, though it have been an Experiment frequently performed many years
since, not only by those excellent Gardeners and Botanists, the two Bobarts,
Father and Son; but as I have heard also by the Reverend and Ingenious Robert
Sharrock L L D, and Fellow of New College, who after many unsuccessful trials
of grafting one Fruit upon another, made at last a very pleasant one, and to
good advantage too, upon different Vines, which in so great measure answered
their hopes, that they have now signal proof in the Physic Garden of the white
Frontiniac grafted upon the Parsley Vine, growing and bearing very well; and to
this advantage, that they think the early ripening stock of the Parsley Vine, to
conduce somewhat to the earlyer ripening of the white Frontiniac, naturally late.

114. They have also grafted the early red-cluster or Currant-grape, upon that
large, luxuriantly growing Vine, called the Fox-grape, which seems to produce
much fairer and stronger Fruit, than that grape is usually upon its own stock.
And diverse other Experiments of this nature they say may easily be made, as
well to have white and black, or other varieties, as they have already broad
leaved and narrow leaved, early grapes and late ones, on the same stock: But
this is not to be done by present amputation, as in other Fruits, the wood
being not sufficiently solid to bear it.

115. As to the Arts relating to Trees, the chiefest are those of the Planter
and Gardener making curious Walks, and Topiary works of them; such is the Dial
cut in Box in New College Garden, the Kings arms, and the College coat of arms
there, and at Exeter College; beside the other Garden knots of Box in both
those Colleges, and in Brasen-nose College Quadrangle; to which add the Guards
at the Physic garden gate of Gigantick stature, and several other Topia in the
same Garden, all formed of the Yew tree. Of Walks, the most curious I have met
with in this County, are those elegant ones of Trees of various kinds in
Cornbury Park; and (to omit the numerous Walks in and about the University)
those of Firs at Sir Peter Wentworths at Lillingston Lovel, and the pleasant
Vista at Sir Timothy Tyrrils, from a short walk of Trees toward the Chiltern
hills; and for a close Walk there is a fine one lately designed in
Grimes-ditch, near Ditchley, a seat of the Right Honorable Edward Henry Earl of
Lichfield's, about half a mile in length.

116. For Garden walks, I think one of the longest I met with, was at the
Worshipful Mr. Clerks at Aston Rowant. And for a descent, there are none like
the Walks at Rousham, in the Garden of the Worshipful Robert Dormer Esquire where
there are no less than five one under another, leading from the garden above,
down to the river side, having steps at each end, and parted with hedges of
Codlings, etc. But of all that I ever met with, there is a Walk at the
Worshipful Mr. Fermors of Tusmore, the most wonderfully pleasant, not only in
that it is placed in the middle of a Fish Pond, but so contrived, that standing
in the middle no Eye can perceive but it is perfectly straight, whereas when
removed to either end, it appears on the contrary so strangely crooked, that
the Eye does not reach much above half the way,

117. Which deception of sight most certainly arises from a bow in the middle,
which seems only an ornament, and the incapacity of the Beholder of seeing both
parts of the Walk at one time; which that it may be the better apprehended, see
the manner of it, Tab. 13. Fig. 3. where the letter a shows the walk from the
garden tending toward that in the Fish Pond, b the place of the beholder, c the
semicircle or bow opposite to him, d e the two ends of the walk: Now the
beholder being placed in b, and having the bow before him, is not commonly so
wary as to find, that if the lines f g h i were continued, they would decussate
and not fall into straight lines, nor that the walks themselves would do the
same, because he sees but one straight part of the walk b d at one time, and
the other b e at another time, which when seen together at either end, plainly
meet in an angle, and by reason of the side hedges terminate the sight at
little more than half way, at k l.

118. Hither also belong the methods whereby they order their Woods in this
County, which if Underwoods in or near the Forest of Whichwood, they commonly
fell not till twenty years growth; but in the Chase near by it, sometimes at
seven or eight: dividing them into Acres and Braids (or bredths) every Acre
containing forty braids, a braid being one pole long and four broad; into which
they thus divide their Woods for the better sale of them to the meaner sort of
people, some buying ten, others twenty, and some thirty braids or more.

119. In the Chiltern Country they fell their Under-wood Copices commonly at
eight or nine years growth, but their tall wood, or Copices of which they make
tall shids, billet, etc. at no certain time; nor fell they these Woods all
together, but draw them as they call it, almost every year some, according as
their wood comes to be of a fit scantling for tall shid or billet, cutting
every shid of tall wood four foot long beside the kerf, and the billet three
foot four inches, according to the Statutes of the 7 of Edw. 6. 7. and the 43
of Q. Eliz. 14. which ought also according to the same Statutes, whether round
bodyed, half round, or quarter cleft, to be of a certain number of inches
about, according as named or marked of so many Cast, as may be seen
particularly in the Statutes at large. Which is all concerning Arts relating to
Plants, except it shall be thought worthy notice, that they use ropes in this
Country, made of the bark of the Tilia faemina folio minore, small leaved Lime
or Linden tree, in some Countries called Bast; whence the ropes are also called
Basten ropes; but of these no more, the Tree neither growing, nor the ropes
being made in this County, but only used here.

120. Of Arts relating to Brutes, I have met with none extraordinary concerning
the winged Kingdom, but the new sort of boxes, or Colony hives for Bees, first
invented, I suppose, by the Right Reverend Father in God John Wilkins, late
Lord Bishop of Chester; notwithstanding the pretensions of John Gedde Gent. and
his seven years experience: for I find one of them set up in Wadham College
Garden (where it still remains) when the said accomplished Bishop was Warden
there above twenty years since. For Fish, I was showed the model of a Net
contrived by the ingenious Sir Anthony Cope, that seemed likely to catch all
found within such a compass.

121. Relating to four footed Beasts, the ingenious Richard Fermor of Tusmore
Esquire showed me a pretty contrivance to avoid the encumbrance of Oat tubs in
Stables, especially where they are any thing straightened in their room, by
letting the Oats down from a loft above, out of a vessel like the Hopper of a
Mill, whence they fall into a square pipe let into the wall, of about four
inches diagonal, which comes down into a Cup-board also set into the wall, but
with its end so near the bottom, that there shall never be above a gallon, or
other desirable quantity in the cup-board at a time, which being taken away and
given to the Horses, another gallon presently succeeds; so that in the lower
part of the Stable where the Horses stand, there is not one inch of room taken
up for the whole provision of Oats; which contrivance has also this further
convenience, that by this motion the Oats are kept constantly sweet (the taking
away one gallon moving the whole mass above) which laid up any otherwise in
great quantities grow frequently musty.

122. The same ingenious Gentleman has also applied the same contrivance, with
some little alteration, to the feeding of his Swine, which have constantly
their meat from such a vessel like the hopper of a Mill placed over the sty,
into which having put a certain quantity of beans, enough to fat so many Hogs,
they continually descend to about half way down the sty in a large square pipe,
which then divides it self into six smaller ones, which terminate each of them
in a small trough, no bigger than just to admit the nose of a Hog, and come all
of them with their ends so near the bottom, that there is never above a handful
of beans or so, in each trough at a time, which taken away by the Hogs, there
follow so many handfulls again, but never more: so that having also drawn a
small Rivulet of water through the sty, the daily trouble of servants waiting
on them is not only saved (for they need never come near them till they know
they are fat) but the Hogs themselves are also made hereby incapable of
spoiling a bean, by trampling or pissing amongst them as in most other sties,
they never having above a handful at a time, and those in a trough too small to
admit any such means of wast.

123. He has thoughts also of applying the same contrivance to the feeding of
his Hounds; and has made stalls for Oxen, by spars of wood descending
perpendicularly from the utmost rim of the rack, and nailing boards on them
half way up before the Oxen, that they cannot spoil by trampling, or any other
means, the least straw or grass, all that go beside their mouths falling still
within the boards nailed upon the spars, which when come to any quantity, is
returned into the rack as sweet and good, as when put there at first. Which
being matters of Architecture relating to Beasts, bring me next to treat,

124. Of Arts that respect Mankind, and first of Architecture, wherein we have
many remarkable Curiosities, as well in the Country as University; some whereof
are of an inferior, others of a more Honorable rank and quality. Of the first
sort are several Mills that I have met with in this County, scarce perhaps to
be found elsewhere in England; such is that at the same ingenious Mr. Fermors at
Tusmore, which with one horse and man (who is carried round as it were, in a
Coach-box behind the horse) performs at pleasure these very many offices.
First, it grinds Apples the common way for Cider. And secondly Wheat, which it
sifts at the same time into four different finenesses. Thirdly Oats, which it
cuts from the husk, and winnows from the chaff, making very good Oat-meal. And
lastly makes Mustard, which indeed is a mere curiosity. And all these it
performs severally, or together, according as desired.

125. At Hanwell, in the Park, there is also a Mill erected by the ingenious
Sir Anthony Cope, of wonderful contrivance, wherewith that great Virtuoso did
not only grind the Corn for his House, but with the same motion turned a very
large Engine for cutting the hardest stone, after the manner of Lapidaries; and
another for boaring of Guns: and these, as in the Mill at Tusmore, either
severally or all together, at pleasure.

126. To these add the Mills for making French Barley, erected some years since
upon the river near Caversham, by one Mr. Burnaby, but are now carried on by
one Mr. Nelthrop of London, Merchant: They are four in number, and differ from
other Corn mills chiefly in the following particulars. 1. In that they have
always double tackling. 2. The stones not being the Cologne, but ordinary white
stones; which thirdly, are both of them cut the sending way: and fourthly, the
upper stone or runner, hung about a hands breadth distant from the lower or bed
stone, also called the Legier. They put in the Corn, about half a bushel at a
time, not at the eye, but round the hoops at the sides of the stones; they stop
the spout or tunnel, and let the Mill run just an hour, for if the Corn stay
longer the heat will turn it yellow: then they let it out, and sever the bran
and flower from the Corn, and put it up again into another mill of the same
kind, and let it run in the same manner another hour, and the work is finished.

127. Hither also must be referred the Malt Kills of Henly, so thriftily
contrived, that the Kill holes are placed in the backs of their Kitchen
Chimneys, so that drying their malt with wood, the same fire serves for that,
and all the other uses of their Kitchins beside. To this place also belongs a
sort of Oast made about thirty years since by one Philips a Baker of Magdalen
Parish Oxon, who having a very great Oven, made it plain at the top and
plastered it over, whereon laying malt, he dried it with the same fire that
heated his Oven for the bread, and thus made the best malt that Oxford
afforded, and of necessity the cheapest, for the fire cost him nothing. I have
heard also of the same method used at Henly on the Thames; and these, as some
have ventured to assert, gave the first hints to the Invention of that sort of
Kills whereby they dry malt with coal; but herein I dare not be too confident,
not knowing of what standing those Kills are, otherwise the thing seems to be
likely enough.

128. Thus having run through those of inferior rank, I come next to the
remarkable curiosities of Architecture in our most stately buildings, and that
have a more immediate relation to mankind than any before mentioned, whereof
some are private, others public; and may both be considered either in the
whole or parts. Of private buildings, the most eminent in this County, are the
Seats of the Right Honorable the Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal, at
Blechington, the Earl of Clarendon at Cornbury, the Earl of Lichfield at
Ditchley, the Earl of Rochester at Adderbury, the Countess of Down at Wroxton,
the Lord Viscount Say and Seal at Broughton, the Lord Viscount Falkland at
Great Tew, the Lady Abergavenny at Sherbourn, the Lord Norreys (His Majesty's
Lord Lieutenant of Oxfordshire) at Ricot, the Lord Carrington at Ledwel, and
of the Honorable James Herbert Esquire at Tythrop in Oxfordshire, though of
Kingsey Parish in the County of Buckingham.

129. Whereunto might be added several structures of the minor Nobility, that
show a great deal either of past or present Magnificence, such as that of the
Right Worshipful Sir Anthony Cope late of Hanwell, of Sir John Cope at Bruern
Abbey, Sir Tho. Spencer at Tarnton, Sir Tho. Chamberleyn at Northbrook, Sir
Francis Wenman at Thame-Park and Caswel, Sir Tho. Cobb at Adderbury, Sir
Anthony Craven at Caversham, Sir William Glyn at Amersden, Sir Robert Jenkinson
at Walcot, Sir William Walter at Saresden, Sir Thomas Penyston at Cornwel, Sir
Compton Read at Shipton under Whichwood, Sir John D'Oyly at Chislehampton, Sir
Edward Norreys at Weston on the green, Sir George Croke at Waterstoke, Sir
Philip Harcourt at Stanton Harcourt. And of the worshipful Tho. Stonor at
Watlington Park and Stonor, Esquire Robert Dormer at Rousham, Esquire Richard Fermor at
Tusmore and Sommerton, Esquire John Stone at Brightwel, Esquire John Clerk at Aston
Rowant, Esquire Tho. Hoard at Coat, Esquire Arthur Jones at Chasleton, Esquire Basil Brook
at North-Aston, Esquire and the seats of the Families of Knolles at Rotherfield
Grays, and Blount at Maple-Durham, Esqs; To which add the Parsonage House of
the Rectory of Chinner, little inferior to some of the aforementioned, either
in greatness, commodiousness, or elegancy of Building.

130. And yet amongst all these eminent private Structures, could I find
nothing extraordinary in the whole: But in the parts, the Kitchen of the Right
Worshipful Sir Philip Harcourt Knight, of Stanton Harcourt, is so strangely
unusual, that by way of Riddle one may truly call it, either a Kitchen within a
Chimney, or a Kitchen without one; for below it is nothing but a large square,
and octangular above ascending like a Tower, the fires being made against the
walls, and the smoke climbing up them, without any tunnels or disturbance to
the Cooks; which being stopped by a large conical roof at the top, goes out at
loop-holes on every side according as the wind sits; the loop-holes at the side
next the wind being shut with falling doors, and the adverse side opened.

131. The spacious Staircase at Blechington-house is also remarkable, not only
for that it stands on an Area of 30 foot square, but for its rarity too, it
being not perhaps at all, at least not easy to be met with amongst the writers
of Architecture: wherefore, though I cannot approve of its contrivance in all
particulars, yet for the sake of its magnificence, and variety from most, if
not all others, I cannot in justice but afford it a short description.

132. It being placed therefore backward, opposite to the most honorable
entrance of the House, between two wings that extend themselves beyond it, and
the gross of the Pile, you enter upon it having past by the hall, and other
offices usually placed by it, at the door-way A, Tab. 13. Fig. 4. and land upon
the half pace 1, which together with the rest marked 234, etc. are 6 foot
square: The figures in their natural order show how you ascend from one half
pace to another, by ascents of 7 steps, each about 5 inches deep, and near 10
inches broad: The half paces marked with the same figure lie on the same level,
and therefore as 4 is the highest half pace in this first Scheme of it, so it
is the lowest in the second, Tab. 13. Fig. 5.

133. In which also the order of the figures shows the manner of ascent just as
in the former, only it must be observed, that as the ascent to the half pace 4
in the first Scheme, was suppose from East and West, so the ascent higher from
it in the second, is to North and South: Of which two Schemes placed alternatly
over one another, the whole staircase is framed from bottom to top, which is
easily apprehended, if you but imagine the half pace 4 in the second Scheme, to
be placed over 4 in the first, and such another frame as is delineated in the
first Scheme to be placed on the second: The Letters V V show the vacancies
that open a Prospect from the top to the bottom of the whole staircase, and a
b c d show the places of the doors into the rooms at each corner of it.

134. In short, this staircase seems to be a composition of 4
half-pace-open-newel'd stair-cases, as may easily be perceived by the figures,
123, 123, 123, 123, and 567, 567, 567, 567, only communicating in the middle;
which indeed shows very magnificently, but has this inconvenience, that there
is no passage from one room into another though on the same floor, without
going up and down many steps; as in Scheme the second, if from a to b, and so
of the rooms of any of the other sides, you have no passage but from 6 to 7,
and so down again to 6, i. e. 14 steps. But if you are to go from corner to
corner, as suppose from a to c, or b to d, and vice versa, whether you pass
round the sides, or over the middle half pace, you cannot do it, without
ascending and descending in all twenty eight steps.

135. Of public Buildings, the most eminent in the County are certainly those
of the Colleges and Halls, the Public Schools, Library and Theater in the
University of Oxford; of which yet in the whole I shall give no account, their
magnificence and outward Architecture being already sufficiently shown, by the
exquisite hand of Mr. David Loggan, Chalcographer to the University, in his
Cuts of them all lately set forth. It shall suffice me therefore to give a
succinct account of some particular parts of them, whether in the stone or
Timber-work, scarce to be met with elsewhere, or known to few.

136. Of the first sort is the flat floor of stone over the passage between the
Right Reverend the Provosts Lodgings, and the Chapel at Queens College, born
up only by the side walls without any pillar, though consisting of diverse
stones not reaching the walls, which yet indeed may very well be, since as I am
informed by the same Right Reverend Provost, and Bishop of Lincoln, who pulled
up the boards of the room above to view the curiosity; the stones are all
cuneoform, and laid like that they call straight Arch-work.

137. The Roof of Merton College Treasury is also an odd piece of stone-work,
being all made of Ashler, yet slooping to an angle (only more acute than usual)
like roofs made of Timber: It has, it is true within, three inequidistant arched
ribs of stone that seem to support the Fabric, which is about 20 foot long,
but the stones not reaching from rib to rib, and seeming to be laid like common
pavement both within and without, make many to wonder that it does not fall in:
but the stones being pretty thick, and cut as they call it, with an arching
joint, must necessarily lie as firm (and for the very same reason) as those at
Queens College do, and so most certainly they would, were the arches quite
removed. There is also much such another roof over a little Oratory or Chapel
in the Church of North Leigh in this County.

138. As for arched roofs of stone, that of the Divinity School is a fine piece
of Architecture; and so is that of the stately staircase leading into
Christ-Church great hall. The Physic garden gate is a curious piece of rustic
rock-work; and the Portch at St. Mary's, the University Church, is a well
contrived thing. And were it not improper amongst these to mention a structure
of so inferior a quality, as New College house of Easement, commonly called the
long-house, I could not but note it as a stupendous piece of building, it
being so large and deep, that it has never been emptyed since the foundation of
the College, which was above 300 years since, nor is it ever like to want it.

139. The Portico's on the East and West sides of the New Quadrangle at St.
John's College, built by the most Reverend Father in God, William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury, supported with pillars of Blechington Marble, are
well worthy notice; and so is the Cloister at Magdalen College, the Butteresses
without being curiously adorned with Hieroglyphical Imagery.

140. The erect Southern declining Dial over All Souls College Chapel, is a
neat piece of work, so curiously contrived by Sir Christopher Wren, that though
it stand high, yet by the help of two half rays, and one whole one for every
hour, one may see to a minute what it is a clock, the minutes being depicted on
the sides of the rays, viz. 15 on each side, and divided into fives by a
different character from the rest.

141. The Cylindrical Dyal in Corpus Christi College Quadrangle, set at right
angles with the Horizon (the common sections whereof, with the hour circles
(except the Meridian circle which divides it by the axis) as also the
Aequinoctial, are all Ellipses) is a fine old piece of Gnomonicks; of which no
more, because its Contriver Mr. Robert Heggs, Fellow of the College, has
already written of it Tract. de Horologiis, Lib 4. cap. 4. MS. in Biblioth.
C.C.C.
. And the Dials made upon a pile of Books on New College Mount, with Time on
the top, exactly pointing out from what Quarter the wind blows, upon the 32
Points of the Compass, depicted on a Cylinder of stone, is an ingenious
contrivance.

142. There are many lofty spires about the Country as well as City, built all
of Freestone, and of exquisite workmanship, such as those of Bampton, Witney,
Burford, Bloxham, Spelsbury, Kidlington, etc. but that which excels all the
rest is the spire of St. Mary's in Oxford, the University Church, the
Battlements whereof were repaired, and thus thick set with Pinnacles as it now
stands, by Dr. King Dean of Christ Church, then Vice Chancellor of the
University, afterward Bishop of London.

143. For Towers, that of Merton College is a large well built thing; and so is
that of the Schools, but more remarkable, for that it is adorned on the inner
side next the Quadrangle, with all the orders of Pillars. But for a neat plain
piece of work, that of Magdalen College excells all I have yet seen, adorned on
the top with well proportioned Pinnacles, and within with a most tunable sweet
ring of bells.

Miraris Turrim egregiam sacro Aere sonantem. 144. Amongst curiosities in
Timber-work, we may reckon several screens in College Chapels; such as that of
Magdalen College, that of Cedar at Lincoln College, and another at Corpus
Christi now erecting. There is an Altar rail at All Souls College of curious
workmanship, and to this place belongs the Tomb of St. Frideswide, still
remaining at Christ Church, the top whereof is wood, and a fine old piece of
work: But not comparable to the Tomb of fair Rosamund at Godstow, in the
Chapter House of the Nuns there, which according to the description of Ranulph
Higden seems to have been also of wood, and of wonderful contrivance, cista
ejusdem puellae (says he, having spoken before of her death and Epitaph, and of
the Amour's between her and K. Henry the second) vix bipedalis mensurae, sed
mirabilis architecturae ibidem cernitur, etc Ranulphi Higden Polyckron. Lib. 7.
in Hen. 2. MS. fol. in Bib. Bod.
. i. e. That her chest coffin or tomb was there to be seen, not above two foot
long, or perhaps rather square, but a stupendous piece of workmanship, in qua
(says the same Author at the same place) conflictus Pugilum, gestus animalium,
volatus avium, saltus piscium absque hominis impulsu conspiciuntur, i. e. where
in might be seen the conflicts of champions, the gestures of animals, the
flights of birds, with fishes leaping, and all done without the assistance of
man.

145. By what means this was effected, we are not informed by the afore-cited
Author, but the Learned Thomas Allen M. A. of Glocester-hall, thought it might
be done by a sort of Looking-glass, whose structure he found mentioned in an
ancient MS, De Arcanis and Secretis, with this Title, Speculum in quo uno visu
apparebunt multae imagines moventes se. To be made thus, accipe pixidem been
profundam, and pone in fundo ejus speculum commune, sc. convexum, postea, etc.
Take, says the Author, a deep box, and place in the bottom of it a common
unequal glass, then take 6 or 7 other unequal glasses of the same bigness, and
scrape off the lead [plumbum is the word] in the concave part with a knife;
where by the way the Author advises, that since it is very hard to get the lead
clean off without breaking the glass, that Quicksilver be made use of, to
anoint the lead to get it off.

146. These glasses when made clean, he orders to be put into the box, so as
they may stand obliquely in diverse positions, in this manner: When the first
glass is put in the bottom, the second must be so put, that one side of it must
touch the first glass, and the opposite side be distant from it an inch, and
sic (says he) oblique pones in pixide. In the top there must be put one
cleansed glass as the first, plain and not obliquely, so that nothing must be
seen but the uppermost glass, into which if you look, you shall see as many
Images as glasses; and if turned round, how one Image always stands still in
the middle, and the rest run round it, as if they went about to dance. Of which
contrivance, though I understand not some particulars, yet I thought fit to
mention them, because they may possibly meet with a Reader that may, and
translate them too as well as I could, for the benefit of them all. As for
those that have opportunity, and are desirous of seeing the Latin Copy, they
may find it in a Miscellaneous MS. in Mr. Seldens Library 4o MS. 79. in
Biblioth. Seldom.
. For my part, all that I can add concerning it, is, that I have seen a sort of
Cabinets of this nature, that by the help of glasses placed obliquely have
shown such pretty prospects.

147. The great bivalve wooden windows in the upper Gallery of the Theater, are
so ingeniously contrived, that notwithstanding their great weight, yet can
never sink so as to be brought out of square, as it is usual in such windows,
for the Iron bars crossing them from side to side, not being set at right
angles, but diagonally like struts or braces, as in Tab. 13. Fig. 6. must
necessarily bend or break before the window can sink. Nor are the round windows
below unworthy consideration, being contrived to admit air in foul weather, yet
not one drop of rain; for being opened and set obliquely, as in Tab. 18. Fig.
7. it receives the rain within at a, and casts it out again at b; much less
will it admit rain any ways when shut, it closing within its frame at the top,
and without it at the bottom.

148. It was an excellent device, who ever first contrived it, of making flat
floors or roofs of short pieces of Timber, continued to a great breadth without
either Arch-work or Pillar to support them, being sustained only by the side
walls and their own texture; for by this means many times the defect of long
timber, or mistakes of Workmen, are supplied and rectified without any
prejudice to the Building. Of this sort of work we have an example in the
Schools, in the floor of the uppermost room of the Tower, but to be seen only
in the room underneath where the Records of the University lie. There is also a
diagram of such work in the Architecture set forth by Sebastian Serly Seb.
Serlii Architect Lib. 1. de Geom. cap. 1.
, for which reason I think I should scarce have mentioned it, but that the
Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis, Savilian Professor of Geometry here, was
the first that demonstrated the reason of this work, and has given diverse forms
of it beside the forementioned, in his Book De Motu, whence I have taken the
diagrams, Tab. 13. Fig. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 Wallisii Mechanica sive de Motu, Part
3. de vecte cap. 6. prop. 10.
. to make them more public; upon the two first whereof depend the three last,
and all others of the kind what ever, whether made up of quadrats or oblong
parallelograms, of which there are some other forms in the forecited Book De
Motu, beside that engraven Fig. 10. consisting of great and small Quadrats; or
Triangles alone, as Fig. 11. or mixed with Hexagons, as Fig. 12. to which Book I
recommend the Reader for further satisfaction concerning them.

149. But of all the flat floors having no Pillars to support it, and whose
main beams are made of diverse pieces of Timber, the most admirable is that of
the Theater in Oxford, from side wall to side wall 80 foot over one way, and 70
the other, whose Lockages being so quite different from any before mentioned,
and in many other particulars perhaps not to be paralleled in the World, I have
taken care to represent an exact draught of it, Tab. 14. Fig. 1.

architectural elements TAB. 13. ad page: 272.

To the Worsp.ll RJCHARD FERACOR of Tusmore Esquire This 13.th Table wherein the
third Diagramm has relation to H^ACSEL^ in memory of his Favors is gratefully
offered by R.P.L L.D.

Burghers sculpsit


150. Wherein a a a and b b b show the walls of the Theater that support this
frame of timber, and the places of the pilasters of the rail and ballister
round it; c c c and d d d the leads and pipes let down into the wall for
conveyance of water; e e e and f f f the wall plate or lintel, and places of
its joints; g g g the girders of the semi circle, each supported by a King
piece or Crown post cut off at h h h, and screwed into the binding beam i i i;
which is somewhat different from the rest of the binding beams k k k, l l l, m m
m, n n n, having several prick-posts let into it at o o o o, beside the
King-posts that support this and the rest at p p p p p, etc. The Letters q q q
show the purlines between the binding beams, not set right against one another
because of room to turn the screws whereby they are fastened, and r r r r two
dragon (perhaps rather Trigon) beams or braces lying under the joists ss ss ss,
etc. the true lengths and distances whereof, and of all other pieces of timber
and places whatever, are all shown by the scale Fig. 2.

151. And so are the lengths and distances of the several pieces of timber set
over this flat floor, such as the principal rafters t t t t, the Crown posts or
King pieces u u u u, the prick posts w w w, braces or punchons x x x, by all
which together the binding beams, girders, joists, etc. are all held up as it
were by an Arch above, as in Tab. 14. Fig. 3. which is the whole band of Timber
that stands next the semi circle, having prick posts and different lockages
from the rest of the four bands, as is sufficiently represented by one half of
one of them, Tab. 14. Fig. 4.

152. Which is all I think need be said concerning this fine piece of
Timber-work, only that there are cross braces between the middle Crown posts as
they stand in a line from the front to the semicircle, as is represented Tab.
14. Fig. 5. marked with the letters y y y y y y both here, and as they stand
Fig. 1. And that it was contrived by our English Vitruvius, the Right
Worshipful and Learned Sir Christopher Wren, and worked by Richard Frogley an
able Carpenter; and both this, and the stone-work too, at the sole charge of
the most Reverend Father in God Gilbert, by Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primat of all England, and Metropolitan, who finishing, and
having endowed it with a competent Estate for its reparations for ever, It is
like to stand a most magnificent and lasting monument of his Graces
Munificence, and favor of good Learning to all posterity.

153. There are several other roofs in this University also well worth the
noting, whereof some are flat or under-pitched, as the roof of the great Hall
at Christ Church College, and the roofs of the Chapels and Halls at Magdalen
College and New College; others due proportioned, or over-pitched, such as at
Jesus, Wadham, Corpus Christi, Exeter, and Oriel Colleges; which yet having
nothing extraordinary either in their contrivance or workmanship, I pass them
by, and proceed next,

154. To some remarkable pieces of Painting that we have here at Oxon; amongst
which (to omit the deformation of a Caesar's head to be seen in the Schools,
brought into shape by a metalline Cylinder, and several others of the kind at
Sir Anthony Copes; and that Painting it self was first brought into England by
Venerable Bede of this University Vid. Comment. in Carmen. phaleucium, Joh.
Seldeni, before Hoptons Concordance of Year^
) I take the Painting of the Theater to be well worth examination: for in
imitation of the Theaters of the ancient Greeks and Romans, which were too
large to be covered with lead or tile, so this by the Painting of the flat roof
within, is represented open: and as they stretched a cordage from Pilaster to
Pilaster, upon which they strained a covering of cloth, to protect the people
from the injuries of the weather, so here is a cord-molding gilded, that
reaches cross and cross the house both in length and breadth, which supporteth a
great reddish Drapery, supposed to have covered the roof, but now furled up by
the Genii round about the House toward the walls, which discovers the open
Air, and makes way for the descent of the Arts and Sciences, that are
congregated in a circle of clouds, to whose assembly Truth descends, as being
solicited, and implored by them all.

155. For joy of this Festival some other Genii sport about the Clouds, with
their Festoons of Flowers and Laurels, and prepare their garlands of Laurels
and Roses, viz. Honor and Pleasure for the great lovers and students of those
Arts: and that this assembly might be perfectly happy, their great enemies and
disturbers, Envy, Rapin, and Brutality, are by the Genii of their opposite
Virtues, viz. Prudence, Fortitude, and Eloquence, driven from the society, and
thrown down headlong from the Clouds: The report of the assembly of the one,
and the expulsion of the other, being proclaimed through the open and serene
Air, by some other of the Genii, who blowing their antic Trumpets, divide
themselves into the several Quarters of the World. Hitherto in gross.

architectural elements TAB XIIII. ad page 274.

To the right Worsp.ll S.r FRANCJS WENACAN K.t and Bar.t K.t of the SHIRE in
the p.sent Parliam.t This 14 Table Showing the Timberwork of the THEATER will
all due respect is humbly dedicated by R.P. L.L.D.

Burghers sculp.


156. More particularly the circle of Figures consists first of Theology, with
her Book with seven seals, imploring the assistance of Truth for the unfolding
of it. On her left hand is the Mosaical Law veiled, with the Tables of stone,
to which she points with her Iron rod. On her right hand is the Gospel, with
the Cross in one hand, and a Chalice in the other, In the same division over
the Mosaical Law is History, holding up her Pen as dedicating it to Truth, and
an attending Genius with several fragments of old Writing, from which she
collects her History into her Book: On the other side, near the Gospel, is
Divine Poesy with her Harp of David's fashion.

157. In the triangle on the right hand of the Gospel, is also Logic in a
posture of arguing; and in another on the left hand of the Mosaical Law, is
Music with her antic Lyre, having a Pen in her hand, and paper of music
notes on her knee, with a Genius on her right hand (a little within the
partition of Theology) playing on a flute, being the emblem of the most ancient
music; and on the left (but within the partition for Physic) Dramatick Poesy,
with a vizor representing Comedy, a bloody dagger for Tragedy, and the reed
pipe for Pastoral.

158. In the square on the right side of the Circle, is Law, with her ruling
scepter, accompanied with Records, Patents, and Evidences on the one side; and
on the other with Rhetoric: by these is an attending Genius with the scales of
Justice; and a figure with a Palm branch, the emblem of reward for virtuous
actions; and the Roman Fasces, the marks of Power and Punishment. Printing,
with a Case of Letters in one hand, and a Form ready set in the other, and by
her several sheets hanging as a drying.

159. On the left side the Circle opposite to Law is Physic, holding the
knotty staff of Esculapius, with a serpent winding about it: The Botanist
imploring the assistance of Truth in the right understanding of the nature of
her Plants: Chemistry with a Retort in her hands: and Chyrurgery preparing her
self to finish the dissecting of a head, which has the brain already opened,
and held before her by one of the Genii.

160. On the other side of the circle opposite to Theology, in three squares
are the Mathematical sciences (depending on demonstration, as the other on
Faith) in the first of which is Astronomy with the Celestial globe, Geography
with the terrestrial, together with three attending Genii; having Arithmetic
in the square on one hand, with a paper of figures; Optic with the
Perspective-glass; Geometry with a pair of compasses in her left, and a Table
with Geometrical figures in it, in her right hand: And in the square on the
other hand, Architecture embracing the capitel of a column, with compasses, and
the norma or square lying by her; and a workman holding another square in one
hand and a plumb-line in the other.

161. In the midst of these squares and triangles (as descending from above) is
the figure of Truth siting on a cloud, in one hand holding a Palm-branch (the
emblem of Victory) in the other the Sun, whose brightness enlightens the whole
circle of figures, and is so bright, that it seems to hide the face of her self
to the spectators below.

162. Over the entrance of the front of the Theater are three figures tumbling
down; first Envy with her snaky hairs, squint eyes, hags breasts, pale venomous
complexion, strong but ugly limbs, and rivel'd skin, frighted from above by the
sight of the shield of Pallas, with the Gorgons head in it, against which she
opposes her snaky tresses, but her fall is so precipitous, that she has no
command of her arms.

163. Then Rapine with her fiery eyes, grinning teeth, sharp twangs, her hands
imbrewed in blood, holding a bloody dagger in one hand, in the other a burning
Flambeau, with these Instruments threatening the destruction of Learning, and
all its habitations, but is overcome and so prevented by a Herculean Genius, or
Power. Next that is represented brutish scoffing Ignorance, endeavoring to
vilify and contemn what she understands not, which is charmed by a Mercurial
Genius with his Caduceus. Which is the sum of what is designed by the painting
of the Theater, for the most part thus described by William Soper M. A. of
Wadham College, after of Heart Hall, only with some few additions and necessary
alterations.

164. Beside the painting of the Theater, there are other fine pieces perhaps
as well worthy notice, such are the Resurrections at Magdalen and All Souls
Colleges, both of Fullers work; though the latter indeed be somewhat defaced.
The written Picture of his Majesty King Charles the first, in St. John's College
Library, taking up the whole Book of Psalms in the English tongue; and the
written Picture of King James, and the Arms of England (as now born) taking up
the whole Book of Psalms in the Latin, in the hands of Mr. Moorhead Rector of
Bucknel, are pretty curiosities, and much admired.

165. And so is the Cat painted over one of the compartments including the Arms
of the University, in the South side of the gallery at the Schools, for her
looking directly upon all her Beholders, on what side soever they place
themselves; which common, yet surprising effect of the Painters Art, is caused,
says the ingenious Honoratus Faber Honorati Fabri Tract. de Homine, Lib. 2.
prop. 93. sub finem.
, in all Pictures whatever of this nature, by their turning the nose to one
side and the eyes to the other; whence it comes to pass that such Pictures seem
to look to the right side, because indeed the eyes are turned that way; and to
the left in like manner, because the point of the nose is turned to the left:
where by the way he also notes, that it is necessary that all such pictures be
drawn on flat tables, so that the Beholder perceive not that the eyes of the
picture are turned contrary to the nose; which he must needs do if the eyes of
the portraict were unequal, concluding, that no figure can be made in Rilievo
thus to look every way.

166. To this place also belongs the Invention of drawing pictures by
Microscopical glasses by Sir Christopher Wren History of the Royal Society,
Part. 2. sub finem.
, and the Invention of Mr. Bird Stone-Cutter or Carver of Oxford, of sinking a
color a considerable depth into the body of polished white marble, by
application of it to the outside only, so that the same Figures delineated
without, shall be as perfectly represented within, deeper or shallower,
according as he continues his application to the surface a longer or shorter
while Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 7.
. And if we may take in Etching, which is painting in Copper, there is a very
curious and speedy way also invented, by the so often mentioned Sir Christopher
Wren Hist. of the Royal Society, Part. 2. sub finem.
. And which borders still on these, in the Statuaries Trade, we can show two
excellent pieces of Art, in the Statues of Brass of King Charles the first, and
his Queen Henrietta, placed in the Niches over the gates of the new Quadrangle
in Saint John Baptist College Oxon.

167. In some other Trades yet inferior to these, there have been made also
considerable Inventions and Improvements, such as that of weaving silk
stockings, first invented by one Mr. William Lee M. A. of this University, who
being married and poor, and observing how much pains his Wife took in knitting
a pair of stockings, put himself on thinking of a nearer way: whereupon having
observed the contrivance of the stitches by unravelling a stocking, he designed
a Loom accordingly, which succeeded so well, that (with but small alteration)
it remains the same to this very day.

168. And it is confidently vouched, that the Engine for cutting of handles of
Knives, we commonly buy cut into those various figures, was first invented and
practiced here in Oxford by Thomas Pierce a Cutler, whose Apprentice now
practices the same Art in London: But not with so much accuracy as Robert Alder
another Cutler of Oxford, who only by observance of the others work, and long
study, at last found it out also, and has improved it much: which two last, as
I am informed, are the only two persons that can do this in England, perhaps I
may say in the World. Nor can I pass by the Invention in the Coopers Trade, of
making barrels without hoops, whereof I found a specimen in St. Ebbs Parish
Oxon. though I know the Invention belongs to another place, of which more when
I come thither.

169. For Improvements, it is certain that the Blanketing trade of Witney is
advanced to that height that no place comes near it; some I know attribute a
great part of the excellency of these Blankets to the abstersive nitrous water
of the River Windrush wherewith they are scoured, as was mentioned before, cap.
2,. 12. but others there are again that rather think they owe it to a peculiar
way of loose spinning the people have hereabout, perhaps they may both concur
to it: However it be, it is plain they are esteemed so far beyond all others,
that this place has engrossed the whole trade of the Nation for this Commodity;
in so much that the wool fit for their use, which is chiefly fell wool (off
from Sheepskins) centers here from some of the furthermost parts of the
Kingdom, viz. from Rumney-marsh, Canterbury, Colchester, Norwich, Exeter,
Leicester, Northampton, Coventry, Huntington, etc. of which the Blanketers,
whereof there are at least threescore in this Town, that amongst them have at
least 150 Looms, employing near 3000 poor people, from children of eight years
old, to decrepit old age, do work out above a hundred packs of wool per week.

170. This Fell wool they separate into five or six sorts, viz. long fell
wool, head wool, bay wool, ordinary, middle, and tail wool: Long fell wool
they send to Wells, Taunton, Tiverton, etc. for making worsted stockings; of
head wool and bay wool, they make the blankets of 12, 11, and 10 quarters
broad, and sometimes send it, if it bear a good price, to Kederminster for
making their Stuffs, and to Evesham, Parshore, etc. for making yarn stockings;
or into Essex for making Bays, whence one sort of them I suppose is called bay
wool: of the ordinary and middle they make blankets of 8 and 7 quarters broad;
and of these mixed with the courser locks of fleece wool, a sort of stuff they
call Duffields (which if finer than ordinary, they make too of fleece wool) of
which Duffields and blankets consists the chief Trade of Witney.

171. These Duffields, so called from a Town in Brabant, where the trade of
them first began (whence it came to Colchester, Braintry, etc. and so to
Witney) otherwise called shags, and by the Merchants, trucking cloth; they make
in pieces of about 30 yards long, and one yard broad, and dye them red or blue,
which are the colors best please the Indians of Virginia and New England, with
whom the Merchants truck them for Bever, and other Furs of several Beasts, etc.
the use they have for them is to apparel themselves with them, their manner
being to tear them into gowns of about two yards long, thrusting their arms
through two holes made for that purpose, and so wrapping the rest about them as
we our loose Coats. Our Merchants have abused them for many years with so false
colors, that they will not hold their gloss above a months wear; but there is
an ingenious person of Witney that has improved them much of late, by fixing
upon them a true blue dye, having an eye of red, whereof as soon as the Indians
shall be made sensible, and the disturbances now amongst them over, no doubt
the trade in those will be much advanced again.

172. Of their best tail wool they make the blankets of 6 quarters broad,
commonly called cuts, which serve Seamen for their Hammocs, and of their worst
they make Wednel for Collar-makers, wrappers to pack their blanckets in, and
tilt-cloths for Barge-men. They send all the sorts of Duffields and Blankets
weekly in wagons up to London, which return laden with fell wool from
Leaden Hall, and Barnaby-street in Southwark, whether it is brought for this
purpose from most places abovementioned; Oxfordshire and the adjacent
Counties being not able to supply them.

173. There are also in this Town a great many Fell-mongers, out of whom at the
neighboring Town of Bampton, there arises another considerable trade, the
Fell-mongers sheepskins, after dressed and strained, being here made into
wares, viz. Jackets, Breeches, Leather linings, etc. which they chiefly vent
into Berk-shire, VVilt-shire, and Dorset-shire, no Town in England having a
trade like it in that sort of ware.

174. Which two trades of the Towns of VVitney and Bampton, are the most
eminent, that are too, the most peculiar of this County. The Maulting trade of
Oxford and Henly on Thames, it is true are considerable, and Burford has been
famous time out of mind for the making of Saddles; and so has Oxford had the
reputation of the best Gloves and Knives, of any place in England; but these
trades being not peculiar to the places where they are practiced, I therefore
pass them by without further notice.

175. But the Starch trade of Oxford, though indeed it be not great, yet being
practiced in few places, and the method known to fewer how it is made, its
discovery perhaps may be acceptable to some, I shall not therefore stick to
give a short account of it. Let them know therefore, that the substance we
commonly call Starch, notwithstanding its pure whiteness, is made of the
shortest and worst bran that they make in the Meal shops, worse than that they
sell to Carriers to feed their Horses; This they steep in a water prepared for
that purpose (by a solution at first of Roch-Alum, about a pound to a Hogshead,
which will last for ever after) for ten or fourteen days in great tubs; then
it is taken and washed through a large Osier basket over three other tubs, the
sower water of the second tub washing it into the first; and the sower water of
the third, into the second; and clear water from the Pump washing it into the
third.

176. Whereby the way it must be noted, that only Pump water will serve the
turn to give it this last washing, and continue the waters sowerness for ever
after, by reason I suppose of the incisive particles of salt to be found in
most Pump waters (which are plain from their not taking soap) that are apt to
work upon and separate the finest flower yet sticking to the bran
(notwithstanding the mill and sieve) which at last becomes starch.

177. What remains in the basket at last after the three washings, is thrown
upon the dunghill, which, as they have found of late, becomes a very good
manure for meddow land, and should therefore have been mentioned in the 70. of
this Chapter, amongst the uncommon manures. And the fine flower thus washed
from the bran, is let stand again in its own water for about a week, then being
all settled at the bottom, it is stirred up again and fresh Pump water added,
and strained from its smalle'^^ bran through a Lawn sieve; which done, they
permit it to settle again, which it does in one day, and then they draw off the
water from it all to a small matter: then standing two days more, it at last
becomes so fixed, that with a burchen broom they sweep the water left at the
top, (which is a slimy kind of matter) up and down upon it to cleanse it from
filth, and then pouring it off, they wash its surface yet cleaner, by dashing
upon it a bucket of fair Pump water.

178. Which done, they then cut it out of the tubs in great pieces with sharp
trowels, and box it up in troughs, having holes in the bottom to drain the
water from it, always putting wet cloths between the wood and it, for the more
commodious taking it out of the troughs again to dry, which they do within a
day; laying it first on cold bricks for about two days, which suck away a great
deal of moisture from it, and after over a Bakers oven four or five days
together, which will dry it sufficiently, if intended only to be ground to
powder for hair, as it is chiefly here; but if intended to be sold as starch,
they then use a stove to give it the starch-grain, which the oven will not do.

179. From the inferior, I proceed to the superior Arts and Sciences, and
others instrumental to them, for in these too, there have been many Inventions
and Improvements made in this University. In enumeration whereof, if we begin
so low as the very Elements of Speech, we shall find that the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Wallis, Savilian Professor of Geometry here, first observed and
discovered the Physical or Mechanical formation of all sounds in Speech, as
plainly appears from his Treatise de Loquela, prefixed to his Grammar for the
English Tongue, first published in the Year 1653.

180. In pursuance whereof, he also found out a way whereby he has taught dumb
persons (who were therefore dumb because deaf) not only to understand what they
read, and by writing to express their minds, but also to speak and read
intelligibly, according to directions for the artificial position and motion of
the Organs of Speech, and thereby also assisted others who have spoken very
imperfectly. Of which no more, there being a particular account given by
himself in our English Philosophical Transactions, of July 18. 1670 Philosoph.
Transact. Numb. 61.
.

181. I know that the Right Reverend Father in God John Wilkins, late Lord
Bishop of Chester, has also laid down the distinct manner of forming all
sounds in Speech, and showed in Sculpture which letters are Labial, Lingual,
Nasal, etc. and how the Epiglottis, Larynx, Aspera Arteria, and Oesophagus,
conduce to them. Since him, in the Year 1669. the Reverend and Ingenious
William Holder D.D. published an Essay of Inquiry into the Natural Production
of Letters, together with an Appendix to instruct persons deaf and dumb
Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 47.
. Yet whether either of these, with advantage of what Dr. Wallis did before,
have with more accuracy of judgment performed the same, I dare not by any means
take upon me to determine.

182. The same Dr. Wallis has also, with great sagacity, deciphered many
things written in Ciphers, of very intricate and perplexed contrivance, beyond
what has been known to have been done by any other, whereof there be Examples
of many in a MS. Book of his, reserved in the Archives of the Bodleyan Library.

183. Add hereunto the ingenious Invention of a Universal Character, or
Philosophical Language, first contrived here at Oxford by Mr. George Dalgarno
M. A, who in the Year 1656. endeavoring to improve the Art of Shorthand beyond
what others had done, by expressing the auxiliary Particles of the English
Language, by distinct points and places about the radical or integral words,
after the manner that it is done by prefixes and suffixes in the Hebrew; found
at last that there was no way to distinguish the affixed points which he
intended to be used really, from those used before in the common way of
Shorthand (where not only the Capital Character, but points about it were
Alphabetical) but by making the principal Character it self, to which they were
to be accessory, not Alphabetical but real.

184. Thus having formed Tables both of Integrals and Particles, to be
expressed by single Characters, he perceived at length, that he was gone
unawares further than ever he intended, having not only improved the Art of
Shorthand, but also discovered a real Character equally applicable to all
Languages: And after he had pursued the design of a dumb Character a
considerable time, at last he perceived that it would naturally resolve it self
into a Language, having this advantage over any Character, that we may use our
known Alphabet to express it, whereas in a Character the figures must be new.
At length having digested his whole contrivance into a Synopsis, he
communicated it to several Learned Men, whose approbation and certificates
procured him good encouragement; but he met with no Man that took so much pains
to understand the Novelty, or so zealous to have it finished and come abroad,
as the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wilkins late Lord Bishop of Chester, then
the worthy Warden of Wadham College.

185. The last thing he attempted in his Tables, was the reducing the species
of Natural Bodies to the rules of Art, the reason of which delay, was because
he perceived that they occurred but seldom in common discourse, and that there
was but little Grammatical difficulty about them, though in number they much
excelled all the other simple notions, which make the body of a Language: His
judgment then being, and as far as I can perceive, still remaining unshaken,
notwithstanding what has been done since, that from a few general words allowed
to be radical, the names of the inferior species should be made off by
composition, adding to the general and radical word, one, or sometimes more such
words taken from the Table of Accidents as might describe the intended species,
and difference it from all others, and sometimes also to allow Periphrases.

186. And this Institution, as he takes it to be grounded upon nature and
necessity, as appears more or less in all Languages, so he thinks it approved
by the highest Examples that ever Art was: For God Himself named the first Man,
though a single Individual, not by a word of a first, but second institution;
and Adam as a perfect Philosopher imitating his Maker, named all living
Creatures not by words of a first institution, antecedently insignificative,
but by such as by an antecedent institution, might be apt to express something
of their nature, for otherwise the common opinion of Divines that Adam gave
names to the Creatures according to their natures, would be absurd.

187. Which Institution he takes also to have this further advantage, that the
name of any single species may be known without obliging the Learner to carry
in his memory all the Predicamental Series of its fellow Species; so that names
of common use may be known, passing by others that are not so, which to
Learners is as great an encouragement, as the obtruding things not necessary is
a discouragement to them. According to this Institution, he published a
Specimen called Ars Signorum, in the Year 1660. containing but 500 Radicals,
all the Particles being brought from the Radicals by which they are resolved;
every Radical, except the genera intermedia being Monosyllables, and all things
else being made off from these by composition, which is allowed here in its
fullest latitude, Quidlibet cum quolibet pro re nata, provided the simple terms
loose nor change nothing of signification, by composition.

188. But the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wilkins, who thoroughly understood
and commended his labors in the former part of the work, thinking perhaps that
this way of composition would produce too long words, or that the various
conceptions of Men, must needs cause different compositions and descriptions of
the same things, and thence unavoidably bring misunderstandings (which yet Mr.
Dalgarno thought might be avoided by stating of notions and a collection of
Formula's) did not approve of this Institution; declaring his judgment to be,
that all the species of Natural Bodies (according as he owns, was suggested to
him by that most learned and excellent person Dr. Seth Ward, the present Bishop
of Salisbury Essay toward a Real Character, in the Epistle to the Reader.
) ought to be provided for as Radicals, by a regular enumeration of them
according to the Theories of the Schools.

189. Nor did he approve of his rejection of a Character, since a graceful one
might be contrived more proper for Brachygraphy, and equally convenient for
many Nations, with the common Alphabet: Nor of his bringing the Particles from
the Radicals by which they are resolved; judging perhaps their composition,
beside the reducing some of them handsomely, more troublesome than that, of
learning a small, yet sufficient number of them disposed regularly in schemes,
and noted with smaller Characters than those of Integrals. All which may be
collected from the learned Essay toward a real Character, or Philosophical
Language, put forth by that highly ingenious person then Dean of Rippon, An.
1668.

190. In which, though it is true the number of Radicals are near 3000, yet are
they so ordered by the help of a natural method, that they may be more easily
learned and remembered than 1000 words otherwise disposed of, upon which account
they may be reckoned but as 1000. For the Signa (they are so methodically
contrived) they may be all learned in less than an hour, were they twice as
many; the difficulty therefore must be in the signata, but these being drawn up
in schemes, so that one notion will clearly depend upon another, they seem to
be a perfect artificial memory, rather than require any help to be remembered.
Notwithstanding it leaves a large scope, enough for derivation and composition,
as may be seen by the Tables, where several words, though no Synonoma's to it,
may be made off from a Primitive, as Queen, Crown, Scepter, Throne, from the
Radical [King]; and so from the Primitive, [sheep] are made off, ram, ewe,
lamb, weather, mutton, bleat, fold, flock, shepherd, etc. which compositions
are clear, though the greatest difficulty of the Language consists in these.

191. Yet I shall not offer to determine which of these is to be preferred,
leaving that wholly to the Readers judgment, who may consult both Treatises: It
being sufficient for me, that a Universal Character and Philosophical Language
can be no more reckoned amongst the Desiderata of Learning, and that the defect
was first supplied here at Oxford; the Contrivances of both being first founded
here, and both grounded upon rational and solid principles, with greater
advantages of facility, than can be believed possible to any that have not made
trial. And this is all concerning Letters and Language, but that John
Basinstoke also an Oxford man, Figuras Graecorum numerales in Angliam portavit,
and earum notitiam suis familiaribus significavit, de quibus figuris hoc maxim
admirandum, quod unica figura quilibet numerus significatur, quod non est in
Latino vel in Algorismo Matthew. Paris, Hist. Angl. in Anno 1252. page 835. Edit.
Watsiana.
.

192. In Logic the subtle Johannes Duns Scotus, Fellow of Merton College, was
the Father of the Sect of the Reals; and his Scholar Vid. Johannis Lelandi
Collectanea de Viris Illustribus.
Gulielmus Occham, sometimes falsely printed Holran, of the same House, Father of
the Sect of the Nominals, betwixt whom as the story goes, there falling out a
hot Dispute (Scotus being then Dean of the College, and Occham a Bachelor
Fellow) wherein though the latter is said to have obtained the better, yet
being but an inferior, at parting submitted himself with the rest of the
Bachelors to the Dean in this form, Domine quid faciemus, as it were begging
punishment for their boldness in arguing; to whom Scotus returning this answer,
Ite, and facite quid vultis. They forthwith brake open the Buttery and Kitchen
doors, taking all they could meet with, making merry with it all night: Which,
it is said, gave occasion to their observing the same diversion to this very
day, whenever the Dean keeps the Bachelors at Disputations till twelve at
night, which they now commonly call a Black night.

193. Rogerus Swisset, alias Swinshead, of the same College, was the first
Contriver of the Art Calculatory in disputation, wherein says the Learned
Seldom, Multiplicatis particulis negativis and trajectis per esse, and non
esse, Calculo (which was Beans and Peace) opus erat, quoties erat disputandum
Vid. Comment. in Carmen Phaleucium, Joh. Seldeni, before Hoptons Concordance of
Years.
. But others who have consulted more of his Works than I suppose Mr. Seldom
ever did, rather think this Art Calculatory, to be some way he had to determine
the proportions of matters capable of proportion or degrees, such as action,
motion, reaction, intension, remission, etc. whereof the Reader, if he think it
worth while, may further satisfy himself from his Printed Works; such as his
Introductorium in Calculationem, his Calculationes cum Quaest. de Reactione,
his Treatises de intensione and remissione, maximo and minimo; to which add, M.
Bassani Politi, Introductorium in Calculationes Swisset, most of which, if not
all, are in Merton College Library.

194. The same Roger Swisset found out many things in Mathematics, which no
body found before him, and perpauci post eum jam Inventa comprehendere
valuerunt, says Pitseus of him Vid. Pitsci Relationes Hist. de rebus Angl.
praesertim de Scriptoribus in An. 1350.
. And the Honorable Robert Dudley of Christ Church College Oxon (made Duke by
the Emperor Hist. and Antiquitates Vniversitatis Oxon. per Anthonium a Wood,
lib. 2. page 275.
, with the Title of Northumberland here in England, whereof he fansied himself
wrongfully deprived) contrived many Engines and Mathematical Instruments not
known before, now in the possession of the Great Duke of Tuscany, to whose
Ancestors he applied himself in his discontent, by whom he was succor'd and
highly valued for his great Learning, and with whom his Children now remain to
this day in Wealth and Honor, retaining the Titles of Dukes of Northumberland
and Earls of Warwick and Leicester; which Titles others say, and perhaps more
rightly too, were conferred on them by the Pope, in whose Quarrel they were
pretended at least to have been lost Ex Itinerario Joh. Bargrave S. T. P. and
Praebend. Ecclesiae Christi Cant. MS penes seipsum.
.

195. Of later years the highly ingenious Sir Christopher Wren, in the year
1668. first found out a straight line equal to a Cycloid and the parts thereof,
as is clearly made appear in his behalf by the Right Honorable and Learned, the
Lord Viscount Brouncker, Chancellor to Her Majesty, and President of the Royal
Society; and the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis Philosoph. Transact.
Numb. 98.
. The same Right Worshipful and very learned Person Sir Christopher Wren, found
out also several new Geometrical Bodies, that arise by the application of two
Cylinders and one Lenticular Body, fit for grinding one another; by whose
mutual attrition will necessarily be produced a Conoides Hyperbolicum, and two
Cylindroidea Hyperbolica: The Engine whereby this may be done being represented
in Sculpture in our Philosophical Transactions, and designed for grinding
Hyperbolical glasses Ibid. Numb. 53.
. He also first observed that a plain straight edged Chisel, set any way
obliquely to a Cylinder of wood, did necessarily torn it into a Cylindroides
Hyperbolicum Convexo-concavum, the several sections whereof are accuratly
demonstrated by the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis our English Archimedes
Wallisii Mechanica, sive de Motu, part. 2 de Calculo Centri gravitatis, cap. 5.
Prop. 32.
.

196. The same Dr. John Wallis, Savilian Professor of Geometry in this
University, in the year 1656. published his new method called his Arithmetic
of Infinites, for the more expedite and effectual enquiry into the Quadrature
of Curvilinear figures, or other difficult Problems in Geometry; and therein,
amongst other things (at the Scholium of his 38 Proposition) showed the way of
comparing straight and crooked lines, which gave occasion to Mr. William Neil
(in pursuance thereof) in the year 1657. to find out (the first of any Man) a
straight line equal to a Curve, of which we have an account in the
Philosophical Transactions of November. 17. 1673 Philosoph. Transact. Number. 98.
.

197. The same Reverend and Learned Dr. John Wallis, amongst his other numerous
and new Performances in Arithmetic and Geometry, first demonstrated the
impossibility of squaring the Circle, Arithmetically, according to any way of
notation yet generally received Vid. Arithmeticam Infinitorum, Prop. 190. cum
Scholio sequ.
, and what kind of new notation must be introduced to express it, with diverse
methods of squaring the Circle, Ellipsis, and Hyperbole, so far as the nature
of Numbers will bear, having applied his method of Infinites in order
thereunto; as also for rectifying of Curve-lines, plaining of Curve-surfaces,
squaring of innumerable sorts of Curve-lined figures, plain and solid (amongst
which are a multitude of figures of infinite length, and finite content)
determining their Centers of Gravity, and other accidents.

198. He has also adjusted the strength of percussions and reflections (or
repercussions) and other motions to Geometrical measures, deduced from
principles of Elasticity; and has estimated the artificial force acquired in
all sorts of Mechanic Engines, deduced from our common principle of the
Reciprocation of strength and time; with many other improvements of
Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, Mechanics, and other parts of Mathematics, in
his Arithmetic of Infinites, his Treatise of the Cycloid, with that adjoined
of the rectification of Curves; his Treatise of Motion, and other his Printed
Works.

199. In Music (which is Arithmetic adorned with sounds) to pass by a
Harpsechord that I met with at Sir Tho. Penystons with Cats-gut strings. It
has been lately observed here at Oxford, that though Viol or Lute strings
rightly tuned do affect one another, yet most of them do it not in all places
alike, as has till now been supposed: for if the lesser of two Octaves be
touched with the hand or bow, each half of the greater will answer it, but will
stand still in the middle; and if the greater of the two Octaves be touched on
either of its halves, all the lesser will answer it, but if touched on the
middle, the lesser will not stir any where at all. So if the lesser string of
two fifths be touched on either of its halves, each third part of the greater
will answer it, but if on the middle they will not stir; and if the greater of
two fifths be touched on either of its thirds, each half of the lesser will
answer it, but if in the divisions they will not stir: and so of twelfths,
fifteenths, etc.

200. Which Phenomenon I shall always gratefully acknowledge were first
discovered to me by the ingenious Thomas Pigot B. A. and Fellow of Wadham
College, which have also been observed for about these two years, by the no
less ingenious William Noble M. A. of Merton College: The solution whereof in
all their Cases, as received from the learned and accurate hand of the Reverend
Narcissus Marsh D. D. and Principal of St. Alban Hall, one of the most cordial
Encouragers of this Design, take as follows: which though so exquisitely
done, that it seems not capable of much addition or amendment, yet he modestly
will have called but a short Essay touching the (esteemed) Sympathy between
Lute or Viol strings.

201. Wherein he first lays it down as a Postulatum, that if two Lute or Viol
strings be rightly tuned, the one being touched with the hand or bow, the other
will answer, or tremble at its motion, which holds also in some measure in Wire
strings; and between Organ pipes and Viol strings, but not between Wire and
Viol strings. For the clearer solution of which Phenomenon in all its cases,
he has laid down these two following Principles.

Princip. 1. That strings which are Unisons are of the same, or a
proportionable length, bigness, and tension; so that by how much any string is
longer than other, caeteris paribus, by so much smaller, or more tended; and by
how much bigger, by so much shorter or more tended must it be, to render them
Unisons, which will appear in the following Cases. Whereunto he premiseth,

That in strings moved by an equal force, through a like medium, the difference
of motion does arise from the difference of magnitude and tension, wherefore
(the force and medium being alike) he Premiseth 1. That strings of the same
cize move equally fast, because they cut the Air with the same facility. Hence
2. That the greater any string is in diameter (or circumference) the slower it
moves (and on the contrary) because it finds the greater resistance in the Air.
3. That strings of the same length and tension move to the same distance,
because they have the same compass to play. Hence 4. That the longer, or less
tended, any string is, the farther it moves (and on the contrary) because of
the greater compass it can fetch.


Whence he infers this Conclusion,

That (in strings moved through the same medium) the swiftness of motion does
arise from the greater force, and less cize or bigness; the compass of
vibration, from the greater length (or force) and less tension; and the
quickness or frequency of vibration, from the greater or swifter motion, and
less compass.

202. This premised, he proceeds to his first Hypothesis, and shows, that if A
B and C D, Tab. 15. Fig. 1. be equal in length, as in Viol strings, what sounds
and vibrations they will produce according to their different bigness and
tension in the following Cases.

Cas. 1. Let A B = ( i. e. be equal to) C D, Tab. 15. Fig. 1. have the same
cize and tension, and be touched with an equal force, they will vibrate to
equal distances EG=IK (per praemissam 3) in the same time ( per praem. 1.)
whereby striking the Air into alike arches, or arches of equal circles, with
the same briskness, and alike quick or frequent returns of their vibrations,
they will produce the same sound, and so be unisons, 1 to 1 vibration.

Cas. 2. Let A B= C D, Fig. 1. have the same cize and a greater tension, 'twill
with the same force, vibrate proportionably to a less distance ( per praemis.
4.) in a shorter time ( per praem. 1.) as, if double the tension, to half the
distance OF=1/2 EG or IK, in half the time; striking the air into an arch of a
greater circle (and that so much the greater, as A B is a chord of fewer
degrees to A G B, the less) which doing brisk and smartly with a quick return,
because of the little compass it fetches, 'twill beget a sound so much the more
acute, as its vibrations (are shorter, and thereby) come thicker and oftener; i.
e. of double the acuteness, or an upper octave to C D 2 to 1 vibration.

Cas. 3. Let A B= C D, Tab. 15. Fig. 2. have a greater cize and the same
tension, it will with the same force, vibrate to the same distance E G= I K
(per praem. 3.) but in a longer time proportionably ( per praem. 2.) as, if it
be double in diameter (and so in circumference, i. e. quadruple in bulk) in
twice the time; striking a Note so much the more grave, as its vibrations
return slower and seldomer, and are thereby fewer, i. e. twice as grave, or an
under octave to C D, 1 to 2 vibrations.

Cas. 4. Let A B= C D Fig. 2. have as much greater a cize as tension, it will,
with an equal force, vibrate to a less distance proportionably; as if double
the cize and tension, to half the distance E F=1/2 E G or I K in the same time
(per Cas. 2. and 3.) and so keeping touch in their vibrations, they will strike
unisons 1 to 1 vibration.

Cas. 5. Let A B= C D Fig. 2. have as much greater cize as less tension, 'twill
with the same force vibrate to a greater distance proportionably, in a time
greater in a duplicat proportion; as if double the cize, and but half the
tension, to double the distance E H=2 E G or I K, in quadruple the time (per
Cas. 2. and 3.) and so will strike an under disdiapason or 15th to C D, 1 to 4
vibrations; as on the contrary C D to A B an upper, 4 to 1 vibr.

Where by the way he gives notice, that when he speaks of strings (of a
different cize) being moved by the same or an equal force (which is also to be
understood in all the following cases where not expressed) that he means it that
way their gravity does propend, viz. downward in those that are Horizontally
streined, lest their proper gravity might be thought to cause a difference.

203. Thus having absolved his first Hypothesis concerning strings of equal
length, he proceeds to his second, and shows that if A B and C D, Fig. 3. be
unequal in length, as in most Lute-strings, what vibrations and sounds they
will produce, according to their different cizes and tension also in the
following Cases.

Cas. 1. Let A B ( i. e. be longer than) C D, Tab. 15. Fig. 3. have the same
cize and tension, it will with an equal force, vibrate proportionably to a
greater distance (per praem. 4.) in a greater time ( per praem. 1.) as if twice
as long to double the distance, LN=2 LM: For ALL. LN::CL. LM. (and AN. CM::NL.
ML. [per 4. 6. Euc.] ergo Arch. AN= Arc. CMD) and that in twice the time;
striking the air into an arch of a circle of double the Radius; by which double
slower return of its vibrations, 'twill produce a sound twice as grave, or an
under octave to C D. 1 to 2 vibrations.

Cas. 2. Let AB CD Fig. 3. have the same cize, and a tension as much greater as
it is longer, 'twill with an equal force, vibrate to the same distance LM (per
praem. 4. vel per Cas. 1. Hyp. 2. and Cas. 2. Hyp. 1.) in the same time ( per
praem. 1.) striking the air (with alike briskness) into an arch of a circle, so
much greater proportionably, as CD is the chord of fewer degrees, and so will
produce alike sounds or unisons. 1 to 1 vibration.

Cas. 3. Let AB CD, Fig. 3. have the same cize and a tension as much less, as
it is longer; 'twill vibrate to a distance, and in a time greater in a duplicate
proportion (per praem. 4. and 1. vel per Cas. 1. Hyp. 2. and Cas. 2. Hyp. 1.)
as, if being double, it has but half the tension to quadruple the distance LO=4
LM in quadruple the time, and so will produce a sound 4 times as grave, or an
under disdiapason to CD 1 to 4 vibr.

Cas. 4. Let AB CD, Tab. 15. Fig. 4. have a cize as much greater as it is
longer, and the same tension. 'twill vibrate to a greater distance
proportionably ( per praem. 4. vel per Cas. 1. Hyp. 2.) in a time greater in a
duplicate proportion (per praem. 2. vel per Cas. 3. Hyp. 1.) as if double in
length and cize, to double the distance PR=2 PQ in quadruple the time; and so
will strike an under disdiapason or 15th to CD. 1 to 4 vibr.

Cas. 5. Let AB CD, Tab. 15. Fig. 5. have a cize as much less as it is longer,
and the same tension; 'twill with the same force, vibrate to a greater distance
proportionably ( per praem. 4. vel Cas. 1. Hyp. 2.) as if twice as long to
double the distance TX=2 TV, in the same time (per praem. 2.) and so keeping
pace in their vibrations will strike unisons, 1 to 1. vibr.

Cas. 6. Let AB CD, Fig. 4. have both cize and tension as much greater as it is
longer, 'twill vibrate to the same distance PQ (per praem. 4. vel Cas. 2. Hyp.
2.) in a longer time proportionably ( per praem. 2.) as if double the cize, in
twice the time, and so will strike an under octave, 1 to 2 vibrations.

Cas. 7. Let AB CD, Fig. 5. have both cize and tension as much less, as it is
longer; 'twill vibrate to a distance greater in a duplicate proportion (per.
Cas. 3. Hyp. 2.) in a time proportionably greater ( per praem. 2.) as if double
the length, it has but half the cize and tension, to quadruple the distance
TY=4 TV in twice the time, and so will strike an under octave 1 to 2 vibr.

Cas. 8. Let AB CD, Fig. 4. have a cize as much greater, and a tension as much
less as it is longer; 'twill vibrate to a distance greater in a duplicate
proportion (per Cas. 3. Hyp. 2.) in a time greater in a triplicate proportion
(per praem. 2.) as if double in length and cize, and but half so much tended,
to quadruple the distance PS=4 PQ in octuple the time; and so will strike an
under trisdiapason, or a 22d, 1 to 8. vibr.

Cas. 9 Let AB CD, Fig. 5. have a cize as much less, and a tension as much
greater as it is longer; 'twill vibrate to the same distance TV (per Cas. 2.
Hyp. 2.) in a time proportionably less (per praem. 2. vel Cas. 3. Hyp. 1.) as
if half the cize in half the time; and thereby will strike an upper octave, 2
to 1 vibr.

All which Cases, may be thus briefly expressed (putting T for Tension, D for
the Cize or Diameter, and L for the length of the string:) supposing T / LXD =
1 to be the acuteness of the sound proposed (to which you compare the rest) the
acuteness in the other cases compared to it, will be in the proportions
following respectively.

Hypoth. 1. Case 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Hypoth. 2. Case 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. ^ ^ ^
^ ^ 6. 7. 8. 9. ^ ^ ^ ^

The reason of which manner of expression, depends on this; that (in
Proportions expressed after the manner of Fractions) increasing that above the
line, does increase the value (and so does the increase of Tension, increase
the acuteness:) But increasing that under the line, does diminish the value
(and so does the increase of the length, and the increase of the cize, diminish
the acuteness) in the same proportion. Which may serve for a brief
demonstration of the whole.

By which may be judged of, all other more mixed or compound Cases, which are
infinite, according to the diverse unequal proportions, of length, bigness, and
tension; but being all made out of, or founded on these, they will all hold
true in Analogy to them.

204. From many of which Cases it is plain and easy, that the sympathy and
consent of strings lies not wholly in their like tension and formation of
pores, as was supposed. 24. of the first Chapter of this Book. Whence also it is
equally easy to make these three following Illations.

1. That strings agreeing in either length, bigness, or tension, can be made
unisons but four ways. 1. If they be of the same length, bigness, and tension
(per Cas. 1. Hyp. 1.) 2. Of the same length, and one a cize and tension equally
greater than the other ( per Cas. 4. Hyp. 1.) 3. Of the same cize, and one a
length and tension equally greater (per Cas. 2. Hyp. 2.) 4. Of the same
tension, and one as much longer as it is less (per Cas. 5. Hyp. 2.) and after
the same manner when they disagree in all three, as will be obvious to the
considering: Wherefore unisons are always strings of the same, or a
proportionable length, bigness, and tension.

2. That unisons may be moved by the same force, in the same time; or being
moved by the same or an equal force, will vibrate in the same time; as is
manifest in the forementioned Cases, to which all others bear Analogy.

3. That octaves being moved by the same or an equal force, the upper will
vibrate in half the time, that the under does, or twice to its once ( per Cas.
2 and 3. Hyp. 1. and Cas. 1, 6, 7, and 9. Hyp. 2.) wherefore they can by no
force be made to vibrate together; for as much as the same string (being of the
same length and tension) always vibrates in the same time; a greater force only
making it fly out to a greater distance, or fetch a greater compass in its
vibrations, and thereby move (but not vibrate) faster, per Conclus. post
Praemissas. And the same is verified concerning all other Notes.

205. Having done with his first Principle, with the Hypotheses, and several
Cases attending it, the same Reverend and Learned Dr. N. M. proceeds to his
second Principle, viz. That all tuned strings either are or consist of unisons,
which will plainly appear from the division of the Monochord; where,

1. Unisons are as AB to BC, Fig. 6. 1 to 1 part, or vibration, per Illationem
1. and 2.

2. A Diapason or Octaves, as BC to CD, Fig. 7. 1 to 2 Unisons, or 2 to 1
Vibrat. per Illat. 3.

3. A Diapente, or perfect fifths, as CD to DE, Fig. 8. 2 to 3 Unisons, or 3 to
2 vibrat.

4. A Dia^^sseron, or fourths, as DE to OF, Fig. 9. 3 to 4 Vnis^^^, or 4 to 3
vibrat.

5. A Ditone, or greater thirds, as OF to FG, Fig. 10. 4 to 5 Unisons, or 5 to
4 vibrat.

6. A Semiditone, or lesser thirds, as FG to GH, Fig. 11. 5 to 6 Unisons, or 6
to 5 vibrat.

7. A Diapason with a Diapente, or twelfths, as IK to KL, Fig. 12. 1 to 3
Unisons, or 3 to 1 vibrat.

8. A Disdiapason or fifteenths, as MN to NO, Fig. 13. 1 to 4 Unisons; or 4 to
1 vibrat.

And so for the rest, whereof the chief may be expressed on one line, Fig. 14.

Where AB. AC. or AC. CG or AD. AG. are 8. AC. AD. or AE. AG. 5. AD. AE. 4 AE.
AF 3 ma. AF. AG. 3 mi. AD. AF. 6. AC. AF. 10. AB. AD. or AB. BE. or AC. AG. 12.
AB. AE. or AB. BF. or AB. CG. 15. AB. AF. or AB. BG. 17. AB. AG. 19.

206. And thus much for his Principles, whence he goes on to some special or
particular Propositions, in order to demonstrate the late observed Phenomenon,
which immediately follow.

Prop. 1. If two strings be tuned Unisons AB. BC. Fig. 6. and either be touched
with the hand or bow, the other will answer it, by trembling at its motion.

For the Air being put into an arched figure and motion by the string that is
touched, rolls away to the other, which finding of a length, bigness, and
tension, that are the same, or proportionable ( per Illat. 1.) it easily (by
the force it received from the touched string) imprints both figure and motion
into it, in the first Case (per Cas. 1. Hyp. 1. Princ. 1.) or else communicates
its motion only, in the second, (per Illat. 2.) whereby the next undulation of
Air, from the touched string, taking it just at its return, and in like manner
the consequent ones, and moving it as before, they continue their vibrations
together, passibus aequis, Q. E. D.

Prop. 2. If the lesser of two Octaves BC, be touched Fig. 7. each half of the
greater C2, 2D will answer it, the middle 2 standing still; which he thus
demonstrates.

About CD wrap loosly 3 narrow strips of paper, one in the middle 2, the other
betwixt C2 and 2 D (exemp. gr. in p and q) then with the finger or bow strike
BC, or any part of it, and you will see the papers in p q, dance and play up
and down and about the string, 'twixt C2 and 2 D, but that in 2 stand still.
Whence it is evident, that CD moves in its two halves, by two distinct motions.
Which he thinks occasioned by the arched Airs, rushing with the force of BC
against all CD, and moveing it somewhat forward out of its place; but finding it
of a disproportionate length, bigness, and tension, to be excited by so quick
vibrations, as may correspond with those of BC, and the undulations whereinto
they strike the Air (by which alone it causes any string to vibrate) per Illat.
3. the second undulation of the Air from BC meets CD just at its return ( CD's
vibrations to BC's, and the Airs undulations caused thereby, being as 1 to 2)
whereby it is beat back, and rebounds from 2 toward BC, when the third
undulation from BC occurring, forces it forward again; whereupon (not being
able to move backward nor forward) the undulations break and roll away to each
side, toward C and D. Which parts C2. 2 D being Unisons to BC, per Princip. 2.
it easily moves them per Prop. 1. and so, (though Des Carts denis it Des
Carts Mus. Comp. p. 5.
) they apparently vibrate in p q (vid. Fig. 15.) by two distinct motions, Q. E.
D.

Prop. 3. If the greater of two Octaves CD be touched on either of its halves
C2. 2D. all the lesser will answer it, but if on the middle 2 it will stir no
where. Which is thus demonstrated.

About BC, Fig. 7. wrap loosly one strip of paper, then with the finger or bow,
strike CD on either half, C2 or 2 D, and you will see the paper dance and play
as before, and that in all parts of BC alike; but if you strike it on the
middle 2, the paper will not stir: The reason whereof seems to be, that C2. 2D
being Unisons to BC, per Princip. 2. if either be touched, BC will answer it,
per Prop. 1. But CD having a disproportionate length, bigness and tension to
BC: if touched in 2 (whereby the whole string is equally moved) it cannot
affect it, by reason of their different vibrations; as in the former
Proposition, Q. E. D.

Note that this, and (especially) the following Experiments, must be tried
curiously by a gentle touch of the string (only so hard as to make the papers
move) and that with a bow rather than the finger: For if CD be touched boldly
in 2 (with the finger he means, not the bow) by reason of the strong motion
communicated to its parts (and happily divided there, which perhaps may be the
cause too, why, if you strike it with the bow in 2, it sends forth forth a
screaking broken sound) BC will tremble, but with a motion nothing so brisk, as
when touched with but half the force any where else.

Prop. 4. If the lesser of two Fifths, CD Fig. 8. be touched on either of its
halves C2. 2D, each third part of the greater D X, XZ, ZE, will answer it, but
if in the middle 2 they will not stir. Which will plainly appear,

By laying papers as before, on t, x, 3, z, v, if then you strike CD on C2 or 2
D, you will see the papers on t, 3, v, frisk and dance, while those on x and z
stand still, but if you strike it on 2 none will move. Demonstratio eadem est
cum superioribus, for C2. 2 D are Unisons, and CD an Octave, to DX, XZ, ZE, per
Princ. 2.

If it be demanded, wherefore DZ or XE (which are Unisons to CD per Princip.
2.) do not vibrate when it is touched in 2. He answers, if DZ, then by the same
reason XE also, and so XZ would at the same time be moved by contrary motions,
as in Fig. 16. Q. E. A.

Prop. 5. If the greater of two fifths DE be touched, Fig. 8. on either of its
thirds DX, XZ, ZE, each half of the lesser C 2. 2D, will answer it: but if in
the divisions XZ, they will not stir.

Experimentum and demonstratio instituuntur ut supra, DX, XZ, ZE, being Unisons
to C2. 2 D, and octaves to CD, per Princip. 2.

If it be asked, why, when DE is touched on X or Z, whereby the conterminous
parts seem principally to be moved, CD does not vibrate, which is Unison to it.
He answers, that if all CD could tremble, then beating the Air back again on
DE, it would at once shake DZ and XE (Unisons to CD) as in the former Propos.
Q.E.A.

Prop. 6. If the lesser of two twelfths IK, Fig. 12. be touched, each third
part of the greater, K a, a b, b L, will move; but in the divisions, a b stand
still. On the contrary, if the greater be touched on its parts, K a, a b, b L,
all the less will tremble; but if on the divisions a b, it will not stir.

Experimentum and Demonstratio ut ante, IK being a Unison to K a, a b, b L, per
Princip. 2.

Prop. 7. If the lesser of two fifteenths, MN Fig. 13. be touched, the greater
will move in all its quarters N c, c 4, 4 d, d O, but not in their divisions, c
4 d. On the contrary, if the greater be touched on either of its quarters N c,
c 4, 4 d, d O, all the less will move; but if on the divisions c 4 d, it will
stand still.

Experimentum and demonstratio instituuntur ut supra. MN being Unison to N c,
c4, 4 d, d O, per Princip. 2.

207. Thus having cleared the late observed Phenomenon mentioned above in. 199.
he infers the following Corollaries.

1. That all Consonancy (or Sympathetick motion of strings) is made by Unisons,
that is, 1 moves 1, and not 1.2, or 2.3, etc. as appears from the foregoing
Propositions. Hence 2. That each string at the due touch of another, will
tremble in as many places as it contains Unisons thereunto, whether to the
whole or its parts. So a lower octave in 2, each half being Unison to the
higher; a lower fifth in three, and the higher in two, they being as 3 Unisons
to 2, etc. Hence 3. That all tuned strings whatever (whether thirds, fourths,
fifths, sixths, etc.) will answer each other more or less, at the due touch of
their Correspondents: But the tremor or vibration in some of them being made in
many places at the same time (according to the number of the Unisons, per
Corol. 2.) and therefore not great, where the part moved is but short ( per
Cas. 1. Hyp. 2. Princ. 1.) it cannot always be discerned by by the sense, but
follows by a parity of reason; contrary to what Des Caries Musicae Compend. p.
9.
asserts, that such vibrations are found only in upper thirds and fifths.
208. From the same Principles may be shown how a Man may strike any two Notes
with his mouth at the same time. For if a Man open his mouth in two places at
once, as AB to BC, Fig. 17. or as 1 to 2 both in length and breadth, and then
force out the breath strongly against them (thus opened) so that the sound be
all begotten there (as in whistling) you will hear distinct and perfect
octaves, per Princ. 2. And so secondly, if a Man can open his lips as BC to CD,
Fig. 18. or as 2 to 3 in length and breadth, and do as before, he will strike
fifths, per Princip. 2. And after the same manner for the rest of the Notes,
according to the division of the Monochord.

209. According to which Hypothesis one Hooper here of Oxford could so close
his lips, as to sing an octave at the same time. And I know two other persons
now living here, that can do it though their lips seem not to be set in that
posture, yet they shut them so close that they can by no means pronounce any
thing articulate. But he that excels them all, and indeed to a miracle, is one
Mr. Joshuah Dring, a young Gentleman of Hart-hall, who sings a Song
articulatly, ore patulo, and all in octaves so very strongly, and yet without
much straining, that he equals if not excels the loudest Organ.

210. By what means he performs this, is hard to guess, unless the Epiglottis
and Uvula be both concerned in it, one sounding the upper, and the other the
lower octave; or either of them apart, opening unequally as 1 to 2 in Fig. 17.
or which is most likely of the three, by an unequal application of the Uvula to
the Epiglottis. For his own part he can give but little account of it himself,
only that he performs it in the lower part of his throat, and that it came
casually on him at first, upon straining his voice; yet must it not be reckoned
a mere casualty neither, for he sings these octaves, or otherwise (and both
very strongly) according to pleasure. And this is all I know of new, concerning
the Mathematics, except there be any thing of Chorography in the Map of
Oxfordshire prefixed to this Essay, that may be thought worthy the name of a
new Contrivance.

211, In Natural Philosophy, Medicine and Anatomy, there have also been many
new Inventions and Improvements, made of later years in this University, which
as they promiscuously fell out in order of time, immediately follow. The
Honorable and Ingenious Robert Dudley Esquire formerly of Christ Church
aforementioned, titular Duke of Northumberland, was the first Inventor of the
Pulvis Cornachinus, being a mixture of Diagridium, Tartar, and Diaphoretic
Antimony, with cream of Tartar, the proportions varying pro re nata Vid. Jo
Schroderi Pharmacop. Medico-Chym. lib. 2. cap. 77.
; a Medicine of such general and excellent use, that Marcus Cornachinus (from
whom it has its name) wrote a whole Treatise concerning it, commending it to the
World as highly useful in all Diseases whatever, requiring Purgation.

212. Nor doubt I in the least, notwithstanding the pretensions of the famous
Thomas Bartholin, and Olaus Rudbeck, but that the ingenious Mr. Jolliff of this
University, first of Wadham, and after of Pembroke College, was the first
Inventor of that fourth sort of Vessels, plainly differing from the Veins,
Arteries, and Nerves, now commonly called the Lympheducts: That he knew them
about the beginning of June, An. 1652. we have the testimony of the learned and
famous Dr. Glisson, to whom he discovered them, coming to Cambridge to take his
Doctors degree Fran. Glissonii Anatom. Hepatis, cap. 31.
; at what time, says the Learned Dr. Walter Charleton, it is plain from
Bartholins own Book set forth in May, 1653. that he scarce ever dreamt of them
Gualt. Charletoni OEconom. Animal. Exercit. 9.
.

213. Yet I know the Learned Bartholin, amongst his Anatomical Histories, tells
us he first found them the 15th of December. 1651. and again, the 9th of January,
and 28 of Febr. 1652 Tho. Bartholini Historiar. Anatom. Rar. Cent. 2. Hist. 48.
. and that the Learned Olaus Rudbeck says, He first discovered them in October
and November, 1650 Rudbeckii Epist. ad Bartholin. de Vasis Serosis, p. 11.
. both anticipating the date of Dr. Glisson. But I have been frequently told by
my worthy and learned Friend, Dr. Robert Stapley, an eminent Physician, and one
of unquestionable fidelity, Contemporary with Mr. Jolliff at Pembroke College
till Oxford was made a Garrison for the King, about the Year 1642. that they
were often shown to him by the same Mr. Jolliff while they were Students there.
To which add the Testimony of the forecited Dr. Charleton, that these Vessels
were known and commonly talked of amongst the Fellows and Candidats of the
Famous College of Physicians in London, many years before they heard any news
of them from beyond Sea Idem loco citato. Vid. etiam Epist. Timoth. Clark, M.
D. Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 35.
. Not to mention that Dr. Highmore seems to have noted something of them, though
veiled under a different name and description.

214. The same Learned Dr. Highmore, formerly of Trinity College Oxon. was the
first that we know of that treated of the structure of Man's body, adapting it
to the then new received Doctrine of the circulation of the Blood; for the
proof whereof he seems chiefly to have intended his piece of Anatomy,
dedicating it to the Author of the Invention, the famous Dr. Harvey: Wherein he
has several new Cuts of the Spleen, Pancreas, Testes, etc. of which, though
most have since received considerable Improvements from others, yet it must be
acknowledged that he deserved very well for his diligent and laborious search
into them all, but more particularly for his first discovery of the new ductus
for the carriage of the seed from the Testes to the Parastatae Corp. Human.
disquisit. Anatom. Lib. 1. part. 4. cap. 2.
, and for his new descriptions of the Vessels and Fibers of the Spleen, by the
ancient Anatomists held to be Veins Ibid. part. 3. cap. 3.
, and of the intricate plexus of the Parastatae, etc Ibid. part. 4. cap. 2.
.

215. In Natural Philosophy, the famous Dr. Willis of Christ Church College
Oxon. and Sidleyan Professor of Natural Philosophy in this University, first
taught us, that the Generations, Perfections, and Corruptions of Natural
Bodies, whether Mineral, Vegetable, or Animal; and so likewise of Bodies
Artificial, do depend upon fermentations, raised from the different proportions
and motions of Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth, which he has
constituted the ultimate sensible principles of mixed bodies In Libro de
Ferment.
. According to which, in his Book de Febribus, he has given us the Anatomy of
Blood, and declared the true causes and nature of fermentations in the Juices,
and upon them built his most rational Doctrine of Fevers, intermittent, putrid
and malignant, with particular instances and observations concerning them, much
different from the ways of the Ancients: to which he has superadded the
Spagyrical Anatomy of Vrin.

216. In Anatomy (wherein he had the assistance of the deservedly famous, Sir
Christopher Wren, Dr. Millington, Dr. Edmund King, Dr. Masters, but chiefly of
Dr. Lower) his method of dissecting the Brain is new, and most natural; and so
exact, that there is scarce any one part in it, but what has received
considerable advancements from him. To mention all would be endless, let it
therefore suffice, that after his description of the Palace in general, he has
allotted the several appartments to the faculties of the sensitive Soul: His
placing the Spirits to serve to voluntary actions in the Cerebrum, and those
that serve Involuntary in the Cerebellum, is a noble and useful discovery.

217. His assigning the cortical part for generating Spirits, and the seat of
Memory; the Medullary, or Corpus callosum, for the operations of the Fantasy;
the Corpus striatum for the common sense; the Medulla oblongata, a promptuary
for the Spirits, for performing the office of Sensation, and spontaneous
motion; and the Prominentiae orbiculares, and their Epiphyses, for conveying
the impresses of the passions, and natural instinct, between the Cerebrum and
the Cerebellum, are highly ingenious and his own; and so is his, and Dr. Lowers
joint discovery of the curious plexus, of the Vertebral and spinal Veins and
Arteries; their Neurologia is also most elaborate and no less admirable,
tracing the Nerves from their very source, and following them through all the
Meanders of the Body, and thence showing us the reason of the secret sympathies
of the parts.

218. And although Dr. Willis was not the first that mentioned two Souls in a
Man, viz. the Sensitive and Rational; yet there is no body has proved it so
well as himself; as likewise that the sensitive is igneous; and that there are
two parts of it, the flammea and lucida: Where he discourses of the manner how
the Soul performs its operations in us; he does it, as indeed he has done all,
with the greatest Improvements within the compass of Wit and Reason: And having
fully discovered the Hypostasis of the sensitive Soul, its affections and
senses; he further obliges Mankind with a most rational account of the diseases
seated in it, and the Nervous Juice, according to the different parts of the
Brain, and the Systema nervosum; placing Cephalalgies in the Meninges;
Lethargies, somnolentia continua, Coma, Carus, Pervigilium, and Coma vigil, in
the Anfractus and Cortical part of the Brain; the Incubus in the Cerebellum:
Then descending to the Corpus callosum, he finds the Spirits there sometimes
hurled round into Vertigo's, sometimes exploded in Spasms, Convulsions,
Epilepsies, sometimes eclypsed in Apoplexies.

219. In the Corpora striata, and Medulla oblongata, if the spirits that serve
to motion be disturbed, thence he shows come likewise Spasins and Convulsions;
if those that serve to sensation, dolor; if either, or both, are impeded or
destroyed, the Palsy: And as the sensitive Soul is the seat and organ of the
Rational, so the ill constitution of that (he observes) proves oftentimes the
disorder of the other: For the Animal spirits being spirituo-saline, if they
are inflamed, they produce a Frenzy; if acid, Melancholy; if acrous, like
Aqua stygia, Madness; if vapid, Stupidity. In discoursing of which distempers,
his Aetiologies of the various symptoms, his methods of cure, and forms of
prescriptions, are founded upon far more rational principles, than ever Greece
taught us. And how far Antiquity, and later Ages too, were mistaken in their
notions of diverse other diseases; his evincing Hysterical and Hypochondriacal
affections, the Colic, Gout, Scurvy, some sort of Asthma's, the Tympanitis,
with others; either wholly, or in part to be Nervous, does plainly demonstrate.

220, Nor has the Pathological part of Physic been only happy in his labors;
but the Pharmaceutical part likewise highly improved in the Inventions of his
Spiritus Salis Armoniaci succinatus, Syrup of Sulphur, preparation of Steel
without Acids, and from thence of his artificial Acidulae: In general, this
part of Physic has been so far advanced by him, that what was formerly
Empirical, and but lucky hits, is now become most rational, by his making the
operations of Chathartic, Emetic, Diaphoretic, Cardiac, and Opiat Medicines,
intelligible by Mechanical Explications; having subjoined to each most neat and
artificial Formula's, as well Chemical as others; a Province but meanly adorned
by the Ancients, though of infinite use. And where Nature is exorbitant in any
of these Evacuations, he has likewise taught us how to check and reduce her;
adding for the better illustration of the whole, a new Anatomy of the Stomach,
Intestines, Gula, Veins, and Arteries.

221. Which he has seconded with a further discovery and rational account of
Thoracic and Epatic Medicines, and of the Diseases belonging to those parts;
discoursing also of Venesection, stopping of Hemorraghies, of Issues and
cutaneous Distempers: In all which it may be observed, what is almost peculiar
to him; that there is nothing trivial, most new, and all most ingenious. To
which add, that the organs of Respiration, which have been the subject of so
many Learned Pens of late, are best understood, from his most elegant
descriptions, and beautiful Cuts. But it is too difficult a task to give a just
account how far Physic, Anatomy, Chemistry, and Philosophy, stand indebted to
him for their Improvements. Let it suffice to say, that he has introduced a new
Body of Physic, almost universally embraced before all others, and a new Sect
of Philosophers at home and abroad called Willisians; so that England (for
ought I know) may have as much reason to boast of her Learned Willis, as Coos,
and Pergamus of old, of their great Masters in Physic.

222. The Learned and Ingenious Sir Christopher Wren, Savilian Professor of
Astronomy in this University, was the first Author of that noble Experiment of
injecting Liquors into the Veins of Animals, first exhibited to the meetings at
Oxford, about the Year 1656 Vid. Epistol. Timoth. Clarck, M. D. Philosoph.
Transact. Numb. 35.
. and thence carried by some Germans and published abroad; by which operation
diverse Animals were immediately purged, vomited, intoxicated, killed or revived,
according to the quality of the Liquor injected History of the Royal Society,
Part. 2. sub finem.
, whereof we have several Instances in our Philosophical Transactions of
December. 4. 1665 Philosoph. Transact. Numb 7.
. From whence arose many other new Experiments.

223. Particularly that of transfusing of Blood out of one Animal into another,
first performed here at Oxford about the latter end of February, in the Year
1665 Vid. Tractat. de Cord, etc. cap. 4. de transfusione Sanguinis.
. by that most exquisite Anatomist, and eminent Physician, Dr. Richard Lower
Student of Christ Church; the method whereof I shall not here mention, nor the
considerations upon it, because there is a particular account of both already
given by the Learned Inventor, in his forecited Book de Cord, etc. and in our
Philosophical Transactions Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 20.
. Nor how much the famous Willis was beholding to him for most of his
Anatomical Discoveries, because already freely acknowledged by the Doctor
himself, in the Preface to his Book de Cerebro.

224. Wherefore passing by those, I shall only hint in short what I meet with
new in Dr. Lowers Book de Cord, a subject though handled by many Learned Men,
yet not so far exhausted, but it afforded new discoveries, when it came to be
examined by this most curious, most judicious Author. For though the Heart by
Hippocrates was called (...), yet Dr. Lower was the first that published the
true method of dividing it into its several Muscles, illustrating the same with
most elegant Cuts; and by attributing to it a muscular motion, and showing
several ways how it may be impeded or disturbed, has done a good piece of
service toward the advancement of the Pathological part of Physic.

225. His computation of the frequency of the Bloods circulation through the
heart, is very ingenious, and the cause he assigns of the florid color of it
when emitted, I think is new, and believe generally received: And having
discovered the Channels that carry away the Serum that is separated by the
Glandules of the Brain, to be those two foramina in the Os Cuneiforme, which
empty it into the Jugular Veins, he has sufficiently detected how far the
Ancients were mistaken, in making the causes of several distempers to be
defluxions or humors falling from the Brain; which passage of the secreted
humors into the Jugular Veins, is indeed mentioned also by Dr. Willis, but
supposed by most to be Dr. Lowers Invention.

226. The Ingenious John Mayow L. L. D. and Fellow of All Souls College, but
Student in Physic, has lately also taught us that the Air is impregnated with
a Nitro-aerial Spirit, and that it is diffused almost through the whole System
of Nature; that Fire it self, as to its form and essence, is nothing else but
this Nitro-aerial Spirit put into motion, and that all Fermentations, whether
tending to generation, perfection, or corruption, also depend on this Spirit,
with many other Phenomenon of Nature; all which he has ingeniously deduced from
his Nitro-aerial principles, and confirmed them by Experiments.

227. He has taught us also in his Treatise de Motu musculari, that whereas
Anatomists have hitherto persuaded us, that the carneous Fibers chiefly make
the contraction in Muscles, that it is much more probable that the Fibrillae,
transversly set into the greater Fibers, are the immediate instruments of that
motion, by reason as well of their position as cize and number. And he has
given the best account that I have any where met with, of the reason of the
Incurvation of the Leg-bones and Spina dorsi, in the disease called the Rickets.

228. Lastly, the ingenious Edward Tyson M. A. of Magdalen Hall, and Student in
Physic, has lately observed, that many other strong scented Animals, beside
the Hyaena odorifera, Catus Zibethicus, or Civet-cat; the Fiber [Castor] or
Bever, from whom we have our Castoreum; the Gazella Indica or Capra Moschi,
from whom our Musk; and the Fishes, Sepia, Loligo, Purpura, have follicular
Repositories or Bags, near the exit of the Intestinum rectum, wherein they keep
those humors or liquors, that are the Vehicles of their respective scents.

229. This he first observed in a male Pol-cat he dissected here at Oxford,
Febr. 4. 1674. and was further confirmed therein the second of March in the
year following, 1675. in a female Pol-cat, at the opening whereof I was present
my self; since which times, he has found the same in a Fox dissected in the
presence of Dr. Grew; and since again in Weasels, Cats, etc. the vesicles or
little bags being found by pairs, one on each side the gut; and according to
the bigness of the Animals, largest in the Fox, and least in the Weasel.

230. Those of the Pol-cat were about the bigness of Peace, of a somewhat oblong
figure, and a yellowish color, and seemed to consist of a double substance,
glandulous and membranous; the membranous toward the necks of the bags being
covered with glandules, but toward the fundus wholly membranous, representing
upon being emptied, orbicular muscular Fibers, which he supposes by contraction
force the contained humor out into the gut.

231. The use of the Glandules he doubts not to be, to separate the humor from
the mass of blood (all secretions in the Body being performed by the help of
Glandules) and the necks of the bags immediately emptying themselves into the
gut, without any continued ductus; and being placed near the Sphincter Any,
made him think the contained humor in respect of the Animal, to be
excrementitious. In this Pol-cat it was of somewhat a thick consistence, for the
most part white, but in some places of a greenish yellow color, and upon
pressing out, of so strong a scent, that I could scarce (I well remember)
endure the room; which once removed from the body, we could not perceive any
considerable ill smell in any of the other parts.

232. In a Cat that he dissected (which was but a young one, and a female) the
bags when blown up were not above the cize of ordinary Peace, seated like the
former on both sides the intestinum rectum, just under the Sphincter Any, which
covering them, he supposes might both occasion their not being noted before,
and help in the expression of the humor out, which (he observed in the Cat) was
not into the gut, but in the limb or margo Any, the orifices of the bags
terminating there, so that he plainly perceived them before he began to dissect
her: The Glandules that separate the humor from the mass of Blood, and
transmitted it into the bags, afforded a pleasant sight, there being seven
small round ones placed in a circle about the vesicles, the humor within not
being considerable but for the faetor.

233. Such Glandules (which he thinks hold the nature of Emunctories) he has
likewise observed in Rabbits, but with no considerable cavity, the liquor
whereof he rationally guesses may give the rank taste we find about those parts
after they are roasted: He thinks also such like Glandules are found in Mice
and Rats, and observes that in some Animals they are found more glandulous, in
others with a more signal bag or cavity. And analogous to these scent-bags in
Quadrupeds, he believes those Glandules seated on the rumps of Fowls, whose
excretory vessels may be those little protuberances or pipes we observe on
them; whence it is also (as in Rabbits) that we find the rumps of Fowls
strongest tasted, and to partake most of the natural scent of the Fowl.

234. That all Animals conserve their peculiar scents in such like parts,
though he dares not assert; yet if the analogy that Nature observes in forming
most of the parts, of most Animals alike, be sufficient Logic to warrant an
inference, he thinks it highly probable that it is so in most; and that should
they be found in Man (which he has not yet had opportunity to Experiment) it
might be worthy enquiry how far Fistula's, Tenesme's, etc. might be concerned
in them. Which is all I have met with new relating to this County, in Medicine,
Anatomy, or Natural Philosophy. For to mention the many and new Experiments of
the Famous Mr. Boil (did we distinctly know which were made here) would be
endless, and to recapitulate the New Discoveries (if there be any in this
Essay) but a vain repetition.

CHAP. X. Of Antiquities.
AND thus having finished the Natural History of Oxfordshire, I had
accordingly here put a period to my Essay, but meeting in my Travels with many
considerable Antiquities, also relating to Arts, either wholly past by both by
Leland and Camden, or but imperfectly mentioned; and finding that I may as well
also note them in other Counties hereafter, as let them alone: I have been
persuaded to add (because perhaps a digression that may be acceptable to some)
what I have met with in this kind, whether found under ground, or whereof there
yet remain any footsteps above it; such as ancient Money, Ways, Barrows,
Pavements, Vrns, ancient Monuments of stone, Fortifications, etc. whether of
the ancient Britans, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans. Of which in their order,

2. Leaving the Antiquities and Foundations of Churches and Religious Houses,
their Dedications, Patronages, and foundation Charters; with the pedigrees and
descents of Families and Lands, etc. as sufficient matter for another
Historian, and as too great a task, and too much beside my design, for me to
attempt. However, I have taken care in the Map prefixed to this Essay, to put a
mark for the site of all Religious houses, as well as ancient ways and
Fortifications, except Brockeley and Saucomb, both mentioned in the Catalogues
of Harpsfield Catalogus Aedium Religiosar. in fine Hist. Angl. Ecclesiast.
and Speed History of Great Britan. lib. 9. cap. 21. sub finem.
, which I could not find out, though I sought them diligently.

3. Of British Antiquities that are certainly such, I have met with none here
but some pieces of their Money; whereof, as much as I find not described before,
I have caused to be delineated, Tab. 15. Fig. 19, 20, 21. Of which the first no
doubt is a Coin of King Cunobelin, a King here in Britan at the time of the
birth of our Savior CHRIST; it showing a Horse, and his Inscription on one
side, and an Ear of Corn and CAMV on the reverse; intimating the place of its
coinage to be Camulodunum, the Royal City and seat of Cunobelin.

4. Camden, it is true, has described a Coin of the same King, not differing in
the reverse at all from this; but the Inscription of ours varies from his, in
that the final Letter O, is not placed in a line with the rest of the preceding
Letters under the Horses feet, but just before his breast; the Horse having
also a spica or ear of Corn (or some such like thing) placed over his back,
Fig. 19. which is not to be found in any of his. This was dug up at Wood-Eaton
this present Year 1676. near the House of the Worshipful John Nourse Esquire
amongst old Foundations, and kindly bestowed on me by the same worthy Person.

5. At the same time and place, the small one next engraven; Fig. 20. was also
dug up, but whether of the same King or no, does no where appear, it having
nothing upon it but somewhat like a Chalice, and a crooked lineation, under
which there is also a forked kind of Figure, and a small Crescent; unless the
affirmative may be collected from the last of these, the Crescent being to be
met with on Cunobelins money, as is plain from Mr. Camden, and so on the money
which he thinks carries the name of the City Callena, alias Gallena, now
Wallingford See Camdens general History of Britan.
: Whereof though I can give no better account, I however thought fit to give a
draught of it, because possibly it may meet with a Reader that can.

6. But for the third, that seems adorned with two faces on the obverse, and an
ill shapen Horse and a wheel underneath him on the reverse, Fig. 21. dug up at
Little Milton, now in the possession of my Reverend and Learned Friend, Mr.
Obadiah Walker the worthy Master of University College; I take, notwithstanding
the want of an Inscription, to be a coin of Prasutagus, King of the Iceni,
mentioned by Tacitus, who out of hopes of preserving his Kingdom and House
quiet after his death, made the Emperor Nero, and his two daughters, Coheirs
of his Fortunes. And that the two faces are of him and his valiant Queen
Boodicia Taciti Annalium, lib. 14. cap. 31.
, otherwise called by the same Tacitus, Boudicea Ibidem cap. 35.
, and Voadica In Libr. Tacit. de Julii Agricolae vita, cap. 16.
, who in revenge of her own daughters ill usage by the Romans, after the
decease of her husband, raised an Army against them, utterly vanquished the
ninth Legion, sacked Camulodunum and Verulam, and slew no less then seventy
thousand of them Taciti Annalium, lib. 14. cap. 33.
.

7. And the ground of this conjecture, I take from the reverse with the Horse
and wheel under him, most times found on the Coins of the same Boodicia, where
her name is stamped on them, as may be seen both in Mr. Camden and Mr. Speed's
Histories: by the horse and wheel intimating perhaps their great strength to
lie in their Esseda, a sort of Chariot much used by the Britans in War, as is
testified by Caesar Jul Caesaris Comment. de Bello Gallico, lib. 4.
, and particularly by Tacitus of this very Boudicea, viz. that she was drawn in
a Chariot, with her daughters placed before her Tacit. Annal. lib. 14. c. 35.
, when she came to fight Suetonius then Propraetor of Britan. Or else perhaps
by this time having learned of the Romans the necessity and convenience of
making military ways, and other passages for Carriages through the Woods and
marish grounds; in memory of the fact, after the manner of the Romans, as may
be seen on the money of Trajan, Hadrian Vid. Ducis Croyiaci and Arschotani
Numismata, Tab. 36. and Levini Hulsii Imp. Romans Numismatum seriem. in Hadriano.
, etc. they might put these horses and wheels on their Coin.

8. Which is all I know remarkable in these British pieces, but that they are
all hollowed to a concave on one side, and unequal on the other (a concomitant
of most, if not all British coin) and that they are all gold, or at least
Electrum, as most of the British money we now find is, which is a sort of metal
compounded of gold and silver, and this done either by nature, or proportioned
by the Artist. That there is such a metal as natural Electrum, we have not only
the testimony of Pliny Not. Hist. Lib. 33. c. 4.
, who says, it is found commonly in trenches and pits. But of Servius Maur.
Servii Honorat. Comment. in Pub. Virgilii, Aeneid. lib. 8. ad v. 204.
, and St. Isidore Bishop of Sevil, the latter whereof asserts, that the natural
Electrum is of great value, Quod naturaliter invenitur in pretio habetur, are
his very words, for that it is more pure then any other metal, and that if
poison be put into a vessel made of it, it makes a hissing sparkling noise (as
Pliny also witnesses) and casts it self into semicircles, resembling Rain-bows,
as well in colors as figure Isidori Epi. Hispalensis, Originum lib. 16. cap.
23.
.

9. To which add the testimony of Peter Martyr, a person of unquestionable
credit and veracity, who himself saw a great piece of pure natural Electrum, so
heavy, that he was unable to move it one way or other, much less to lift it
with both hands from the ground: they affirmed (says he) that it weighed above
300 pounds, at eight ounces to the pound, and that it was found in the House of
a certain Prince, and left him by his Ancestors. And albeit, that in the days
of the Inhabitants then living, it was no where dug, yet knew they where the
Mine of it was, but were very unwilling to discover the place; yet at length
they did, it being ruinated and stopped with stones and rubbish; being much
easier to dig then Iron mine, and might be restored again, if Miners, and
others skilful therein, were appointed to work it Petri Martyris Anglerii de
Orb Novo, Decad. r. cap. 4.
.

10. Some such natural Electrum seems also to be hinted in the Civil Law, and
to have been mixed with Silver. Neratius reporting that Proculus gave sentence,
that it was no matter in a Legacy of Electrine vessels, how much Silver or
Electrum was in them, but whether the Silver or Electrum exceeded? which might
easily be perceived by ocular inspection; or if so equally mixed that it could
not be done, that then recourse was to be had to the Estimat of the Testator,
amongst which sort of vessels he usually accounted them ff. De Auro Argento,
etc. Leg. Pediculis,. Neratius.
. Whence it is easy to collect, that the Electrum here spoke of, can be no
artificial mixture of silver and gold, again mixed with silver; but a natural
metal before it mixtion with silver.

11. Moreover, that there is also an artificial Electrum, is as evident from
the Institutes of the Emperor Justinian Institut. de Rerum divisione,. Si
duorum.
, and Q. Flor. Tertullian Q. Septimii Florent. Tertulliani Lib. advers. Hermog.
cap. 25. and adversus Praxean. cap. 27.
: made by intermingling gold and silver, according to the natural mixture;
which according to Servius and St. Isidore Locis supra citatis.
, was of gold in a triple, but according to Pliny Loco citato.
and Monsieur Savot Lovis Savot de la Matiere des Medalles antiques, 2 part.
chapitre 9.
, in a quadruple proportion, to one of silver; viz. 19 Carats 1/5 of gold, and
4 Carats and 4/5 of silver; which as the same Savot testifies, were the
proportions observed by the Emperor Severus Alexander, and Lewis the Twelfth of
France, by an Ordinance made at Blois, of Nov. 19. 1506. for the French gold.

12. Which very proportions I should be willing to think our British coins to
have; only I guess the Britans had, and made use of, as little Art as might be:
Wherefore I am inclined to believe them rather native Electrum, dug and coined
thus according as they found it, either richer or poorer; for I have seen some
pieces of this sort of money, much richer in gold then some others are. That
gold and silver Mines were worked here in Britan in those ancienter days, is
plain out of Tacitus: Fert Britannia (says he) Aurum and Argentum, and alia
metalla, pretium victoriae Tacitus in vita Julii Agricolae, cap. 12.
. And Prince Galgacus chief Captain of the Britans, now beat Back as far as
Mount Grampius in Scotland, in his speech (before the fight with the Propraetor
Agricola) exciting them to indignation against the Romans; amongst other things
tells them, that these were the men that had taken from them their fertile
Soil, their Mines, and trading Towns: Neque enim Arva nobis, aut metalla, aut
Portus sunt, quibus exercendis reservemur Ibidem cap. 31.
. Now all gold whatever containing some silver more or less, and the Britans
not being able to refine it then, as in after Ages, were necessitated to coin
Electrum after this manner.

13. That they had and coined silver in these early times, is also plain from
Mr. Camden, Mr. Speed, etc. who have given us draughts of silver Coins of
Cunobelin, Venutius King of the Brigantes, and Caractacus King of the Silures,
both which make not a little for the reputation of my conjecture 62 and 63 of
the sixth Chapter of this Essay, the Mines there mentioned, in all probability,
being some of those spoken of by Tacitus, and perhaps first belonging to the
aboriginal Britans, and after to the Romans.

14. To this if it be objected out of Caesar's Commentaries, that the Britans
then used only Copper (and that imported) and Iron rings instead of money Julii
Caesar. Comment. de Bello Gallico, lib. 5.
; and that this gold might either be also imported, or the Mines discovered
after the conquests of the Romans. It may rationally be answered, that Caesar's
account of the State of Britan (as has been shown also before in another case,
Chap. 3.. 2. of this Essay) is as imperfect as his Victories or Travels in it
were. For we find in Mr. Speed a gold coin of King Cassivellaun, who was King
here in Britan at Caesar's arrival; beside the Romans came then not to enrich,
but to spoil Britan, how unlikely it is therefore they should supply them with
gold, or find them Mines so early, let the Reader judge.

15. Whereunto it may be added (as Tacitus informs us) that Caesar rather
discovered then conquered Britan; that he rather frightened the Inhabitants on
the shoars, than got footing there: Quanquam prospera pugna terruerit Incolas,
ac littore potitus sit, potest (...) videri ostendisse posteris, non tradidisse
Tacitus in vita Julii Agricolae, cap. 13.
, are his very words of him: And that whatever he pretended at Rome, he got
little here but dry blows, and the honor of having led an Army hither, (...),
says Dion Cassius of his first Expedition Dionis Cassii, Romans Hist. lib. 39.
. And Tacitus rather more than less of his second, who brings in Caractacus
encouraging his British Army to recover their Liberty; and in order thereunto,
calling upon the names of their Ancestors, Qui Dictatorem Caesarem pepulissent,
that had driven the Dictator Caesar out of the Land Taciti Annalium, lib. 12.
cap. 34.
.

16. Add further hereunto what Strabo delivers concerning his Expeditions into
Britan, (...), that he did nothing great, nor went far up into the Island
Strabon. Geograph. lib. 4.
. And that Tacitus further confesses him beaten hence: for speaking concerning
the arguments the Britans used amongst themselves to persuade the Revolt under
Voadica, he says they brought this as a main one, that could they show but the
courage of their Ancestors, Recessuros (i. e. Romanos) ut Divus Julius
recessisset Tacitus in vita Agricolae, cap. 15.
: intimating, that his sudden departure hence was little better than a flight.
Not to mention what Quintilian says of one M. Aper, that he met with an ancient
Britan, that avowed to him, that he was in the British Camp when they beat
Caesar from the shore Fab. Quinctiliani de Oratoribus Dialog. cap. 17.
; and that Lucan says of him expressly, Territa quaesitis ostendit terga
Britannis An. Lucani de Bello Civili, lib. 2. v. 572.
.

17. After whose departure, the Britans, says Tacitus, enjoyed a long Peace,
lying forgotten by the Romans all the days of Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula
Tacitus in vita Agricolae, cap. 13.
; so unlikely were the Romans to help Cassivellaun or Cunobelin to this Gold or
Electrum: Nor indeed is it probable they would do it after, in the time of
Claudius, when they had footing here; not only for that money and riches are the
incentives to rebellion, and the very sinews of war, but because had they
thought it fit either then or before, we should certainly have heard on it in
some of their writings.

18. Of Roman Antiquities yet remaining in this County, (to wave the stories of
Molmutius and Beline) the most considerable of any, are their public ways,
whereof though there are several, and of different forms and materials, and
those too broken down, and discontinued by ploughing and other accidents; yet
by their pointing, and after a diligent scrutiny, I hope I shall render at
least a probable account of them.

19. But before I descend to particulars, it will be necessary I think to
acquaint the Reader, that of these amongst the Romans some were called public,
(...), and others Vicinal ff. Ne quid in loco publ. vel Itinere fiat. L.
Praetor ait,. viarum.
. And that the first sort of these were otherwise called (as reckoned up by
Taboetius Julius Taboet. in Ephemerid. Histor.
) by these other different names, Regiae (by the Greeks (...)) Praetoriae,
Consulares, Militares, Privilegiatae, Illustres, frequentatae, Celebres,
Eximiae, etc. and after by the Conqueror William, in the Laws he confirmed of
St. Edwards, Chemini majores, from the French Chemin, as may be seen by the
Laws of the same King Edward (...) Gul. Lambard. inter L.L. boni Regis Edoard.
LL. 12, 13.
: of which sort we had in all but four in England; Watling-street, the Fosse,
Ikenild-street, and Erming-street; whereof two stretched themselves from Sea to
Sea the length of the Land, and the two other the breadth; all misdemeanors
committed in these, falling under the cognizance of the King himself. Pax autem
quatuor Cheminorum (intellige majorum) sub majori judicio continetur Ibidem.
?

20. Beside these, there were many others of like erection, though of less
extent, by the ancient Romans called Vicinales, quod in vicos ducebant, i. e.
from Colony to Colony, from station to station; which were also public, if
compared with the more private Agrarian ways ff. Ne quid in loco, etc. L. and.
quibus supra.
. And these were after by King William called Chemini minores, and were the
ways (as expressly described in the Laws of St. Edward the Confessor) de
Civitate ad Civitatem, de Burgis ad Burgos, ducentes, per quos Mercata
vebuntur, and cetera negotia fiunt, etc. all misdemeanors committed in these,
falling under the cognizance of the Earl, or chief military Governor of the
County, or of his Vice-Comes or Sheriff.

21. It will also be expedient to inform the Reader, that both the Majores and
Minores were sometimes raised, and sometimes level with the ground Nich. Bergier
Histoire des grands Chemins de L'Empire, Live. 2. chapitre 17.
, and sometimes trenched; and the raised ones sometimes only of earth, and
sometimes paved Ibid. Chapitre 7.
, especially in moist and boggy grounds; though it must also be acknowledged
that we sometimes find them paved, where there was little need: which I guess
might be done to exercise the Soldiers and common people of the Country, least
by lying idle they should have grown mutinous, and affected alterations in the
State. But where they were indeed laid through meers and low places, and
necessity compelled them to raise and pave them, we have the exact method of
making them, laid us down by Statius Papin. Surc. Statii Silvar. Lib. 4. in via
Domitian.
.

Hic primus labor inchoare Sulcos,
Et rescindere limits, and alto
Egestu penitus cavare terras:
Mox haustas aliter replere fossas
Et summo gremium parare dorso,
Ne nutent Sola, ne maligna seeds
Et pressis dubium Cubile saxis.
i. e. that they first laid out the bounds, then dug trenches, removing the
false earth: then filled them with sound earth, and paved them with stone, that
they might not sink or otherwise fail.

22. Of the four Basilical, Consular, or Praetorian ways, or Chemini majores, I
have met with but one that passes through this County, the discovery whereof
yet I hope may prove acceptable, because not described before, or its footsteps
any where noted by Sir H. Spelman, Mr. Camden, or any other Author that I have
read or could hear of: whereat indeed I cannot but very much wonder, since it
is called by its old name at very many places [Ikenild way] to this very day.
Some indeed call it Icknil, some Acknil, others Hackney, and some again
Hackington, but all intend the very same way, that stretches it self in this
County from North-east to South-west; coming into it (out of Bucks) at the
Parish of Chinner, and going out again over the Thames (into Berks) at the
Parish of Goreing, lying within the County in manner and form, and bearing to
the Parishes and Villages placed on each hand, as described in the Map prefixed
to this Essay, by two shaded parallel lines made up of points, which I have
chose, to show that this way is not cast up in a ridged bank, or laid out by a
deep trench, as some others are; described also in the Map by two continued
parallel lines, that the Reader, or such as please to view them hereafter, may
know where to expect a bank or trench, and where no such matter.

23. The reason, I suppose, why this way was not raised, is, because it lies
along under the Chiltern hills on a firm fast ground, having the Hills
themselves as a sufficient direction: Which is all worth notice of it, but that
it passes through no Town or Village in the County, but only Goreing; nor does
it (as I hear) scarce any where else, for which reason it is much used by
stealers of Cattle: and secondly, that it seems by its pointing to come from
Norfolk and Suffolk, formerly the Kingdom of the Iceni, from whom most agree
(and perhaps rightly enough) it received its name Icenild, or Ikenild; and to
tend the other way Westward, perhaps into Devon-shire and Cornwall, to the
Lands end. So much mistaken is Mr. Holinshed in his description of this way
Raph. Holinshed 's description of Britan, lib. 1 cap 19.
, who fansied it began somwhere in the South, and so held on toward
Cirnecester, and thence to Worcester, Wicomb, Brimicham, Lichfleld, Darby,
Chesterfield, and crossing Watling-street somwhere in Yorkshire, stretched
forth in the end to the mouth of the Tine at the main Sea. Yet the Learned Mr.
Dugdale Antiquities of Warwickshire in Barlickway Hundred, page 568.
seeming to favor this opinion in his description of Ickle-street that passes
through Warwickshire, I suspend my judgment till I have seen more of both.

24. Amongst the many Vicinal ways, or Chemini minores, we have but one neither
here, of all those mentioned by Antoninus in his Itinerary, and that is part of
the Gual-Hen, which signifies in British antiquum Vallum, that went between
Pontes, now Colebrook, and the old City Caleva, or rather as it was written in
the ancientest Books, Gallena See Burton 's Commentary on Antoninus his
Itinerary. Itinere 7. a Regno Londinium.
; to which our Forefathers adding the word, Ford, by reason of the shallowness
of the River there, and changing the letter G into W (a thing frequently done
by the Saxons See Rich. Verstegan's Antiquities of the English Nation, cap. 5.
sub finem.
) it was at length called allengaford, now more contractedly Wallengford.

25. Which it is plain stood not formerly where it now does, this old Vallum, or
high ridged way, pointing down from between Mungewell and Nuneham-Warren on
Oxfordshire side the River, as described in the Map, near a mile below the
Town as it is now seated; whereabout, in all likelihood, on the other side the
River stood that part of the City containing the 12 Parishes, laid desolate by
a great Plague that reigned there, temp. Edw. 3. Which great blow it could
never recover (though much endeavored by Rich. 2.) the Bridges of Abington and
Dorchester being also about that time built, which diverted the Trade another
way, whereas before there was no passage over the Thames but here at
Wallengford Vid. Lelandi Comment. in Cygneam Cantionem in verbo Caleva.
.

26. This Vallum or ridged Bank, now called Grimes-dike, as it runs toward
Pontes, yet remains very high, but is but single till it comes to the Woods
near Tuffield, alias Nuffield, where it appears double with a deep trench
between, like the ways near Piperno and at Porto in Italy Vid. Leon. Bapt.
Alberti de re Aedific. lib. 4. cap. 5.
; which induces me to believe, that that part next Wallengford was once so too,
and therefore still called Grimes-ditch, the trench in all likelihood being
filled up with one of the banks thrown into it upon the increase of
Agriculture, perhaps at first designed only to carry off the water, and the two
banks on each side for the carriages 'twixt the stations Ibidem.
; those from Wallengford to Pontes going upon one Bank, and those from Pontes
to Wallengford upon the other, so that there could be no disturbance by meeting
on the way. From Tuffield, I was told, it held on its course through the thick
Woods, and passed the River below Henly into Berk-shire again, but the Woods
scarce admitting a foot passage, much less for a Horse, I could not
conveniently trace it any further.

27. There seems also to have been cast up another Roman way, between the old
City of Alcester in the Parish of Wendlebury (of which more anon in its proper
place) and the City of Calleva, whereof there is part to be seen to this day
running quite cross Otmoor, as described in the Map, and coming out of the Moor
under Beckley Park-wall; which it is plain, has been paved (as indeed it had
need) by the stones yet found upon, and about the ridge, and no where else on
the Moor. From Beckly it passes on to, and may plainly be seen in the Wood near
Stockers, where cutting the London road to Worcester, it goes plainly through
the fields to Stafford-Grove, and thence over Bayards watering-place, toward
Heddington Quarry pits, leaving Shotover-hill on the left, and the Pits on the
right hand.

28. At the foot of Shotover-hill it enters Magdalen College Coppices, and
thence through Brasen-nose College Coppices, over the Eastern part of
Bullington-green, as I gather by its pointing, for it is not to be seen there,
it having been ploughed down as well in the green, as fields thereabout, as may
be seen by the marks of the ridge and furrow yet remaining upon it; whence I
guess it passes on toward the two Baldens, and so for Wallingford; going over
the River at Benson, alias Bensington, where it may be seen again running West
of the Church, and is there called by the name of Medlers-bank.

29. If it be asked why this way 'twixt Wallengford and Alcester was laid so
crooked? it is plain, 'twas for the convenience of taking Oxford in the way as
occasion should serve. For though I could not discover the diverticulum tending
toward Oxford in the way from Wallengford, yet in the way from Alcester it
remains at some places yet plain and evident, coming out of the main road about
the Parish of Beckley, and passing more Westward through Stow-wood, and more
particularly through the grounds still called Principal (for that they were
formerly the Principal Coppices before the dis-forresting that Wood) where the
way is to be seen entire and perfect, having formerly been paved, as appears by
a ditch cut through the bank in a division of these grounds, where the stones
lie arch-wise in form of the bank, there being none neither like them in the
fields thereabouts.

30. Coming almost as far as Elsfield, where it is now deeply trenched between
two banks, like some part of Grimes-dike mentioned above, it is broken down and
discontinued, I suppose by ploughing, but points just upon Heddington, whereof
the hollow lane ascending into the Town, near Mr. Pawlings new Buildings,
perhaps may be a part; and the deep way between two green banks a little on
this side Heddington, another; and the hollow way on the brow of
Heddington-hill, another piece of it. Out of which there seems also another way
to have branched about the top of the hill, which passing through the grounds
'twixt that and Marston-lane, where it is plain to be seen, by its pointing
shows as if it once passed the River above Holy-well Church, straight upon St.
Giles's, or the old Bellositum, now Beaumont; where about Thomas Rudburn in his
Chronicon Hydense, says, anciently before its restoration by Aelfred, the
University was seated: Quae Vniversitas Oxoniae quondam (says he, having before
discoursed of its restoration by Aelfred) erat extra Portam Borealem ejusdem
Vrbis, and erat principalis Ecclesia totius Cleri, Ecclesia Sancti Aegidii
extra eandem portam Chronicon Hydense MS. inter (...) Oxoniens.
. Which two put together, perhaps may make as much for the Antiquity of this
place, as need be brought for it.

31. Beside, this branch out of the way 'twixt Alcester and Wallengford
pointing toward Oxford, I must not forget there is another that seems
designedly made for a passage hither immediately from Alcester, whereof there is
a part still remaining about Noke, whence it passes through the fields to the
purlue grounds, where it cuts the Worcester road, and so into Drunshil,
formerly a part of the Forest of Stow-wood, where about fourteen years since
there were several Roman Vrns and Coins dug up; beyond which place I could not
trace it, it being ploughed down in the following grounds, which yet is the
best conjecture I can make of it, unless we shall rather say it was only laid
this way to avoid Otmoor in the winter season, when it is usually under water;
and that it turned about again (as indeed it seems to point) and joined with
the forementioned to Wallengford and Oxford.

32. Nor must it be omitted, that the people hereabout call that part of this
way that lies through Otmoor, by the name of Akeman-street, supposing it to
have come from Wallengford, and to have passed on by Alcester to Banbury; to
which name of theirs, and course of the way, Mr. Camden seems to afford his
tacit consent Vid. Camd. Britan. in Commit. Oxon.
: wherein I wonder they, but more that he, should be so much or'e-seen, since
he could not but know, that neither end of such a way could tend toward Bathe,
the old (...), or Vrbs Aegrotorum hominum; nor they, that the true (...), comes
near indeed to Alcester, but passing through the County quite another way, both
the City and way leading to it, having their names from the sick persons, or
men with aches, traveling on it thither.

33. The true Akemanstreet then, or as some call it Akehamstreet, and others
Akermanstreet, coming out of Buckingham-shire, enters this County at a Village
called Black-thorn, whence it passes on without any raised bank, close by
Alcester as far as Chesterton, as described by the shaded or pointed lines in
the Map: whence it goes to Kirklington Towns end, and so over the River
Cherwell near Tackley, and thence in a straight line to Woodstock-Park, which
it enters near Wooton-gate, and passes out again at Mapleton-well near
Stunsfield style, whence it holds on again as far as Stunsfield; and all this
way on a raised bank, as described in the Map by two parallel lines; where
breaking off (but still keeping its name) it goes on over the Evenlode to
Wilcot, and so to Ramsden; a little beyond which Village, at a place called
Witty-green, it may be seen again for a little way; but from thence to Astally,
over Astall-bridge, and so through the fields till it comes to Brodwel-grove,
it is scarce visible, but there it is as plain again as any where else, holding
a straight course into Gloucestershire, and so toward Bath the old
Akemancester.

34. And out of this Akemanstreet, as most other such ways, there are several
branches; viz. two near Kirklington; one at the Towns end, which though
presently discontinued, yet points just upon the Port way running East of
Northbrook, the two Heyfords, Sommerton, and Souldern, for six miles together;
and another, that by its pointing seems to have come out of Akemanstreet,
nearer the place where it passes the River Cherwel, crossing the Port way, and
running at the broadest place, scarce a mile distant from it, as far as
Fritwell, where on the North side of the Town it inclines toward the Port way,
as if it joined with it again somwhere about Souldern, both of them pointing
upon the Fortifications called Rainsborough (perhaps a corruption of
Romansborough) near Charleton in Northamptonshire: whence in all probability
it went to Vennonis, alias Bennonis, an old Roman station, by the Saxons after
called Claycester, in the confines of Warwick and Leicester-shires; and so on
to the Ratae of Antoninus, or Ragae of Ptolomy, now Leicester Vid. Ptolomaei
Geograph. Edit. per Pet. Bertium.
.

35. This second branch of Akemanstreet, about Fritwell they call Wattle-bank;
but in an old Terrier of Sir Thomas Chamberleyns, it is called Avesdich,
perhaps a corruption of Offa's- ditch, the great King of the Mercians, whose
Kingdom might at first be terminated here, though I find he extended it at
length as far as Benson, as thinking it for his honor and profit both, that the
West Saxons should have nothing North or West of the Thames Vid. Camd. Britan.
in Com. Oxon.
. Or if ancienter than Offa, it might perhaps be a praetentura, or forefence of
the Romans, raised against the Britans (or vice versa) who might possibly be
possessed of the Port way before.

36. Yet I rather believe they might be both of them ancient ways, though so
near together, for we read that the Romans, where the way was not well laid
out, or was longer than needed, did commonly (to keep the people from idleness,
and the Soldiers from mutinies) lay them straiter and better; as Galen
witnesses that Trajan did in Italy: (...) (...).
, i. e. that where the way was longer than needed, he cut out another shorter,
which possibly might also be done here, the Port way being much shorter and
more direct then Avesdich, to the place whither they both seem to hold on their
course: which may also be the reason of the two Ikenild ways under Stoken
Church hills, there being about Lewkner and Aston Rowant, an upper and lower
Ikenild way.

37. Beside these, there are yet two other branches coming out of Akemanstreet;
one in Woodstock Park near Col: Cooks Lodge, whence it runs toward the trees
called Oak and Ash, not far from Glympton, where it is discontinued; and where
to be met with again I could no where find; so that all I can say of it is,
that toward the end it points North-west toward Enston and Chippingnorton,
and seems to have cut another such like way near Upper Kiddington, which has
its period there, as far as I could learn, but runs as far as Ditchley the
other way, where the ridge turns to a ditch by the name of Grimes-dike (as that
near Wallengford) and gives name I suppose to Ditchley that stands upon it, a
Seat of the Right Honorable Edward Henry Earl of Lichfield's, whence it runs in
that manner fair and visible for about half a mile: but before it comes to
Charlbury, turns again to a ridge, very high and lofty at a place called
Baywell, where it enters into Cornbury Park but scarce visible there; yet as I
was told, to be found again in the woods beyond it, and that it pointed toward
Ramsden, where at first (as I guess) it branched out of Akemanstreet.

38. But whether this, and the other beforementioned tended, is hard to guess,
no Roman station lying near this place, unless I may be allowed to conjecture
by their pointing, at a great distance, which must needs be very uncertain.
However, because a guess perhaps may better please than to say nothing, I
conjecture the way by Ditchley may tend either toward Vennonis, and Ratae, as
the Port way and Avesdich afore-mentioned were thought to do, or else toward
Tripontium, now Toucester in Northamptonshire; and that from Woodstock toward
Manduessedum, now Manchester in Warwickshire, or rather the old Etocetum, now
the Wall in Staffordshire.

39. Which are all the raised banks or deep trenches that I met with in
Oxfordshire, except the two banks with a trench between them (therefore called
dike-hills) South and by West of Dorchester, which I cannot imagine part of any
Roman way, because extended only as a string to a great bow of the River Isis,
as described in the Map; but rather a Fortification, such as P. Ostorius
Propraetor here in Britan under Claudius, is said by Tacitus to have made on
the Rivers Antona and Sabrina Taciti Annal. lib. 12. cap. 31.
; or else some of the Outworks of the Fortifications on Long-Witenham hill on
the other side the water, which perhaps was the Sinnodunum Vid. Leland.
Comment. in Cygneam Cant. in verbo Sinnodunum.
of the ancient Britans.

40. Nigh to the raised ways thus cast up by the Romans, they placed the
Tumuli, or Sepulchers of their Generals, or such other valiant persons as dyed
in the wars; it being forbid by the Law of the 12 Tables to bury within their
Cities or Stations. Hominem mortuum in Vrbe ne sepelito neve urito Ex Legibus
12. Tab. de Jure Sacrorum. Vid. etiam Cicer. de L. L. lib. 2.
: And by a penal Rescript of the Emperor Hadrian ff. De Sepulchro violato. L.
Praetor ait,. Divus Hadrianus.
. Now the reason why they placed them on the military ways, rather then
elsewhere, is given us by Camden, viz. that Passengers might be put in mind,
that as these here buried were sometimes mortal men, that they themselves are no
better now Vid. Camdeni Britan. in Com. Wilts.
: whence perhaps the formula still used on Tombs, Siste Viator, and monumentum
a monendo.

41. But I guess that there could not but be somewhat more in it, for as it was
accounted the greatest dishonor imaginable to lie unburyed, so it was a great
reputation to the person deceased to be covered with a large Tumulus, which
it is like might in part at least be the reason of their placing them so near
the public ways, that Passengers might continually add to the heap, it being
looked upon as piety in them so to do; nor sufficed it to throw on a single
handful of earth, but (as may be collected from Horace) usually three. For in
Archytas's request to the Mariner, that he would not suffer his Body any longer
to lie on the shore unburyed, he makes it part of his plea, that
notwithstanding the swift motion of Seamen, yet he might find time enough to
throw 3 handfuls of dust.

Quanquam festinas, non est mora longa, licebit
Injecto ter pulvere curras Q. Horatii Flac. Carminum, lib. 1. Ode 28.
.
42. Which way of burial under Conical hillocks, whether naturally composing
themselves into that Figure by the fall of the Earth, or designedly so made by
the Soldiers, was sure very ancient; for from their being placed without
Cities, I find them called by the Greeks, (...), and upon Highways, (...), for
that the God Mercury had the charge of ways; as his other name (...) likewise
imports.

(...) Hom. Odyss. (...). v. 471.
. We find also Achilles in Homer, complaining how small a Tumulus he had made
for his beloved Patroclus, (...)
(...), Hom. Iliad. (...). v. 245.
etc.
and entreating those should come after to raise it higher, which desire of his
was piously performed by the succeeding Greeks, who raised it to so great a
height, that they designed it for a Seamark to those that should sail the
Hellespont. (...)
(...). etc Hom. Odyss. (...). v. 80.
.
and this I find here, and at all other places, they always performed (...)
Hom. Iliad. (...). v. 257.
; and so again in the erection of the Tumulus over Hector Ibid. (...). v. 801.
, by pouring on earth or stones; the word (...) as Eustathius informs us, being
sometimes used absolutely, pro (...) Vid. Eustathii Schol. in Hom.
. i. e. (in the most critical sense) for humare.

43. It was also very ancient amongst the Romans, not only for Princes, as
Virgil witnesses, fuit ingens monte sub alto
Regis Dercenni terreno ex aggere bustum.
Antiqui Laurentis, opacaque Ilice tectum Aeneid. lib. 11. v. 850.
.
with whom agrees Lucan, Et regnum cineres exstructo monte quiescunt An. Lucani
Pharsalia sive de bello Civili, lib. 8. sub finem.
. but also for meaner persons; for thus we find Aeneas burying his Nurse
Cajeta, At pius exequiis Aeneas rite solutis.
Aggere composito tumuli, etc Aeneid. lib. 7. v. 5.
.
Nay so very ancient was it, that Pliny says expressly, it was long in use
amongst them before Burning, Ipsum cremare apud Romanos non fuit veteris
instituti; terra condebantur, i. e. that they always interred them, till they
began to understand that the bodies of their men slain in the wars afar off,
were sometimes taken forth from under their Tumuli, and barbarosly abused Plin.
Secund. Not. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 54.
, as Florus acquaints us the Germans served the body of the Consul Varus,
amongst other indignities offered the Romans: Ipsius quoque Consulis Corpus,
quod militum pietas abdiderat, effossum L. An. Flori Rerum Romans lib. 4. c. 12.
.

44. To prevent which barbarity for the future, they ordained burning before
tumulation, as was used always amongst the Greeks; for we find in Homer, that
the body of Hector (as well as Patroclus) was first burned, and his calcined
white bones then gathered by his Friends and put in an Vrn. (...) Hom. Iliad.
(...). v. 793.
etc. and then follows their raising a tumulus over him, which it seems was of
stones, (...)
(...) Ibidem v. 797, 798.
.
and yet expressed as where made of Earth, by pouring them on, (...) Ibidem, v.
801.
.

45. It was a usual custom also amongst the Northern Nations, in their second
Age, which they called Hoigold, or Hoelst tijd, Tumulorum Aetas; thus to bury
their dead under earthen hillocks, Arenam and terram exaggerando usque dum in
justam monticuli exsurgerent altitudinem, says Wormius of the Danes Olai
Wormii, Monument. Danic. lib. 1. cap. 7.
; and of these he says they had two sorts, the Rudiores, which, ex sola terra
in rotunditatem and Conum congesta constabant, i. e. that were made only of
Earth, cast up in a round conical figure, which were set up in memory of any
stout Champions that had deserved well of their Country. And the Ornati, which
were encompassed with a circle of stones, set up only for their Generals, or
some other great Persons Ibidem lib. 1. cap. 6.
.

46. And these they set over the Bodies without burning them (as they had
formerly done in their first age, which they called Roisold, or Brende tijd,
Aetas ignea Ibidem cap. 7.
) the manner being as Mr. Camden informs us, for every Soldier remaining alive
after a field fought, to carry his headpiece full of earth, toward making the
tombs of their fellows that were slain Vid. Camd. Britan. in Com. Wilt.
, (...), fundentes tumulum, after the manner of the Greeks.

47. But the Romans here in Britan, having little reason to expect more favor
then they found in Germany; whenever any Consul, or eminent Warrior dyed in
such an Expedition, first burned them on the level near the via strata, or
militaris; by which means having deprived their exasperated Enemies of all hope
of being able to abuse the dead bodies; they more-over endeavored to prevent
the very scattering their ashes in have, the whole Army casting on them pure
grassy turfs, cut from the surface of the ground, which probably indeed may be
the very reason (as the learned and ingenious Mr. Dugdale Mr. Dugdale's
Antiquities of Warwickshire, in Knightlow Hundred.
guesses) why there appears not any hollowness whence the earth was taken that
raised these Tumuli.

48. Whereof here in Oxfordshire I have met with two kinds; one placed, as
above, on the Praetorian ways; and the other sort not so, yet both commonly
called Burrows, alias Barrows, from the Saxon Beorg, collis, acervus, whence
our word to bury Vid. Guliel. Somneri, Dictionar. Saxonico Latino Angl. in
verbo.
. Hence also the raised banks, made for Conies to hide themselves, says Sir
Henry Spelman, were also called Berries Vid. Spelmanni Glossarium in verbo
Bergium.
. Of the first sort is the hillock in the Parish of Fritwell, called
Ploughly-bill, standing just within Oxfordshire on the Port way, and (which is
somewhat more then ordinary) giving name to the Hundred wherein it stands.

49. And there is another on the West side of that branch of Akemanstreet that
comes out of Woodstock Park, close by the Rivulet over which that way passes;
but the most eminent on Akemanstreet, is that they call Astall Barrow, standing
high and lofty, which I conceive might be the Sepulcher of some considerable
person, at least of great repute amongst the common people that past that way;
there being another, not far off upon the same way, on the edge of
Oxfordshire, incomparably less.

50. Upon these their Highways it was also usual amongst them to place pillars
of stone, whereon they inscribed the distances from the regal Cities, Stations,
and Mutations, whence the phrase, ad tertium, quartum, vel quintum, ab Vrbe
lapidem, i. e. so many miles from the City. And of these I think the stone,
that yet lies on a bank close by Akemanstreet way, not far from Astall Barrow,
to have been a remnant, and most likely of any the pedestal of such a Pillar:
unless we shall rather think it to have been a pedestal to a statue of Mercury,
made with four sides and without arms, from thence called (...), or Cyllenius
Laevini Torrentii Comment. in Horat. Flac. lib. 1. Ode 10.
, and in old time Hermae, which were also used every where to be set up near
highways; and if in cross roads, with as many heads as there were ways, ut
interdum etiam quatriceps conspiceretur Ibidem.
.

51. Whatever it were, no doubt this, and the forementioned Barrows, were of
Roman erection; but as for Kenners Barrow near Shipton under Which-wood, the
large Barrow at Stanton-Harcourt, and that other (if it be one) called Adwel
Cop; I think rather erected by the Britans or Danes, for that near no
highways, but in the open fields, as Saxo-Grammaticus Saxonis Grammatici Hist.
Danica, lib. 8.
, and Wormius say they made them: Non solum in campis and pratis occurrunt
Tumuli, sed and in Silvis and Lucis, etc. Olai Wormii Monument. Danic. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
i. e. that they have them not only in the fields and meddows, but in the woods
and groves too.

52. More particularly, as for Kenners barrow and Adwel cop, I think them
erected but for inferior Captains, though perhaps eminent Soldiers, because
they are of the rudiores, ex sola terra: But for that at Stanton Harcourt, if a
Danish Monument, it was certainly a memorial of some greater Person, because of
the stones set near it, of which more anon in another place: though it be
possible too that these may be Roman, it being customary for them to set up
such Trophies, at the utmost bounds of their Victories, or where they could not
conveniently advance them further, as Dion testifies, the Roman General Drusus
did at the River Albis, (...) Dionis Cassii Romans Hist. lib. 55. sub initium.
, i. e. that he set Trophies and returned: which Trophies of his, Florus says
expressly, were only a Tumulus: Nam Marcomannorum spoliis insignibus quendam
editum tumulum in Trophaei modum excoluit, are his very words L. An. Flori Rer.
Roman. lib. 4. cap. 12.
concerning the same Expedition of Drusus.

53. However it were, it is certain the two former of these, are much different
from those erected on the viae militares, for I found them trenched round, and
particularly that of Adwel cop, with two or three circumvallations, part
whereof are still visible on the South-east side of it, insomuch that I
question whether there were not some Camp, with this Trophie perhaps of Victory
erected within it, of which more anon when I come to speak professedly, of the
ancient Fortifications yet remaining in this County.

54. Of other Roman Antiquities that I can certainly call such, the most
eminent I met with is a part of their pavement made of small bricks or tiles,
not much bigger than dice; whereof the Roman Generals, amongst their other
baggage, were used to carry a quantity sufficient to pave the place, where they
set the Praetorium or Generals Tent, or at least some part of it, which is
particularly witnessed of Julius Caesar, In expeditionibus tessella, and
sectilia pavimenta, circumtulisse Suetonius in vita Julii Caesaris.
.

55. These if made of small square Marbles, of diverse natural colors, were
called Lithostrota; but if of small bricks or tiles, artificially tinged with
colors, annealed and polished, Pavimenta tessellata, or opus Musivum Salmasii
Annot. in Sueton. in vita Julii Caesaris.
; and both Asarota Plin. Sec. Hist. Not. lib. 36. c. 25.
, for their not being to be swept, but wiped with a sponge. As for ours
ploughed up somwhere about great Tew, and engraven Tab. 15. Fig. 22. I take it
for certain to be of the second sort, it consisting of a matter much softer
than Marble, cut into squares somewhat bigger then dice, of four different
colors, viz. blue, white, yellow, and red, all polished, and orderly disposed
into works; the colors of the squares being represented in the Cut, as those
of the Arms in the Map.

56. There was much such another Pavement ploughed up at Steeple-Aston,
consisting likewise of squares of diverse colors, and set in curious figures,
but as described to me by the Reverend Mr. Greenwood, Rector of the place, not
cubick like the former, but oblong squares set perpendicular to the Horizon.
That these Pavements were Roman, I think there is no doubt, notwithstanding
found near no Roman station, and far enough removed from any Roman highway;
(except the branches of Akemanstreet from from Ramsden and Woodstock, might
happily pass these places:) but I guess not set here till they wholly possessed
themselves of this Southern part of Britan, and might securely enough pass
their Armies any where; and therefore cannot afford them any higher antiquity
than the time of Agricola the Lieutenant of Vespasian, who completed the Roman
Conquests; or at most of Paulinus, that defeated Boadicea.

57. Under the Sepulchral monuments, or tumuli aforementioned, raised by the
Romans over their dead in memory of them, they placed the more immediate
receptacles of their ashes, or at least some part of them, as much as could be
saved in the Vas ustrinum; for they were not so curious as some have imagined,
to scrape together all the bones and ashes of the Corpse, as may be easily
collected from the smalness of all Vrns, but Family ones. Yet over all their
Vrns they raised not such a tumulus; for we find them many times in level
ground, though containing the remains of noble Persons, as may be guessed by
the Lamps, Lachrymatories, and Vessels of Oils, or Aromatical Liquors sometimes
found with them.

58. Of which sort of Vessels, I presume that odd fashioned glass, depicted
Tab. 15. Fig. 23. must needs be one, found in a place called bushy Leas,
betwixt Brightwel and Chalgrave, being part of the possessions of that right
worthy Gentleman, John Stone of Brightwel Esquire surrounded with no less than
twelve of those Vrns, Tab. 15. Fig. 24. both which, amongst many other signal
favors, were kindly bestowed on me by the same worthy person. That the Earthen
pot, Fig. 24. is a Roman Urn, I take to be so plain, that it would not need
proof, though one of the four Regal highways were much farther removed than
Ikenild way is, which comes up almost to Ewelm, not far from this place: But
whether this glass contained a lamp, were a Lachrymatorie, or a vessel
containing water, or some Aromatical liquor, is the great question next to be
determined.

59. That the Bodies of great Persons were usually accompanied with Lamps after
death, is plain from the Civil Law ff De Manumissis Testamento, L. Maevia.
and to interr Lamps with them, was heretofore so frequent, that Fortunius
Licetus has written a whole Book, De reconditis Antiquorum table of antiquities
TAB XV. ad page 328.

To the Worsp.ll The worthy and much Honored Gentlemen JOHN and CARLETON STOEVE
Esqrs. This 15th Table Consisting partly of Antiquities whereof the 23d. and
24th were found in the grounds near their Seat at Brightwel; in memory of their
favors is gratefully dedicated by R.P.L.L.D.

Burghers sculpsit.
Lucernis, amongst which he mentions one out of Baptista Porta, called Lucerna
Nesidea (from the Island where found in Cratere Neopolitano sita) which was
included within a glass, and placed in a Marble Tomb Bapt. Portae Magiae Not.
Lib. 12. cap. ult.
, upon the same account (I suppose) that indeed all others were; both as a
Symbol of the quality of the person there interred, and for the sake of the
soul, which they thought did not so quite desert the body, but that it rested
with it in the grave Fortunii Liceti de reconditis Antiquorum Lucernis, Lib. 3.
cap. 6, and 7.
.

60. But that ours was such a glass including a lamp, I dare not conclude, more
than that it is barely possible it might be so, it seeming much rather likely
to have been a phiala Lachrymatoria, or tear-bottle, wherein the surviving
Friends of the deceased, collected those passionate expressions of their grief,
and usually buried with them, as is sometimes signified in old Inscriptions, by
some such expression as, Cum lachrymis posuere Vid. Johan. Bapt. Cassalium de
Vrbe, and Ritibus Romanorum, cap. 21.
; only it is of a much different figure from any of those described in Joh.
Bapt. Casalius Ibidem.
and Paulus Aringhus Pauli Aringhi Roma subterranea, lib. 3. cap. 22.
.

61. And therefore I rather believe it to have been one of those vessels
containing some Aromatical liquor, such as they usually interred with the Vrns
of Noble Families Sir Thomas Brown's Hydriotaphia, cap. 3.
, and perhaps a glass of the same kind with those three found in a Roman Vrn,
preserved by Cardinal Farnese, and mentioned by Vigeneri Ibidem cap. 2.
: Except we shall rather think it the vessel for the Aqua lustralis sprinkled
by the Priest on the Vrns, to expiate for the smaller faults of the deceased
Joh. Bapt. Casalius de Urbe and ritibus Romanorum, cap. 22.
, which possibly they might after bury with them, which waters were otherwise
called arferiae aquae, and by the Greeks, (...), or (...) Vid. Joh. Meursium de
funere, cap. 14.
: But I rather incline to the former of the two, because there seems a kind of
white substancc yet remaining between the two coats of the glass (it being a
vessel of a peculiar make, one glass as it were including another) which
possibly might be the sediment of some such Aromatical liquor when dried away.

62. Also in the Parish of Wendlebury I saw a great square stone, hollowed
round in the middle, dug up in or near the old City of Aldcester, in which
there was set a glass bottle fitted to it, containing nothing but somewhat like
ashes, and covered over above with another broad flat stone: This Vrn I saw at
a house in the Town, where it is used for a Hog-trough, but the glass had been
broken long before, nor could I get any certain description of it; however, I
guess it some such like vessel with that described above, and placed there upon
the same or like accounts. There have been several other Vrns also taken up at
diverse other places, particularly in the old Mine at Blunds Court
abovementioned, Chap. 6.. 63. at a place called Drunshil not far from
Wood-Eaton, but belonging, as I was told, to the Parish of Marston, near the
ridged way that comes from Noke; and three in one Mr. Finches house at the
Mercat-place in Henly, and one in the highway that leads toward the North at
the Towns end, not far from Ancastle, which argues those places some of the
first Roman habitations, though no recorded garrisons.

63. Nor indeed is there any such to be found in this County, though it cannot
but be acknowledged that Oxford it self must be a noted place, before the
departure of the Romans at least, if the Roman way thither described in the
Map, prove so good an argument to the Reader as my self. Where by the way
perhaps it may not be unworthy notice, that Oxford is mentioned by the Arabian
Geographer, Sharif ol' Edrisi, or Adrisi (of whose works the Geographia
Nubiensis translated by Gab. Sionita, and Joh. Hezronita, is too short an
Epitome) by the name of (...) Ozcfort Perhaps written (...) Ozcfort, (by a
transposition of the Letters which many times occurs in words of difficult
sound) instead of (...) Oczfort.
, withal adding, that it stands on the same river with London (which river he
calls (...) Retandah (...) Retande seems to be a fault of the Scribe: whereas
the Author probably intended to have it read (...) Tamize, or Tamise.
) 40 miles above it Sharif Ol' Edrisi Geograph. MS. Arab. penes Reverend. Edw.
Pocock. S. T. P. and Eccles. Cath. Christ. Oxon. Canonicum.
, which shows that Oxford was always a Town of good repute, in the remotest
places, as well as times.

64. As for the antiquity of the University, beside what was alleged. 30. of
this Chapter, I think it very considerable what remains upon record in Magdalen
College Library, in an ancient MS of Walter Burley's Fellow of Merton College,
(Tutor to the Famous King Edw. 3. and deservedly styled Dr. Profundus) upon the
Problem [Complexio rara quare sanior] he has these words (which should indeed
have been mentioned before, Chap. 2.. 3. of this Essay) concerning the healthy
situation of Oxford, and its selection by Students, for the seat of the Muses:
Notanda, inquit, sunt tria, quod Civitas sana est in Borea and in Orient si
plantata est aperta, and in Austro and Occidente si montosa; propter puritatem
Boreae, and Orientis, and putrefactionem Austri and Occidentis: sicut Oxonia,
quae per industriam Philosophorum de Graecia fuerat ordinata In problematibus
Aristot secundum laborem Magistri Walter Burley, ad ordinem Alphabeti. MS. 65.
in Bib. Coll. B. M. Magdal. Oxon fol. 12 b.
, i. e. that a healthy City must be open to the North and East, and mountanous
to the South and West; by reason of the purity of the two former quarters, in
respect of the latter: just as Oxford is seated, which was selected by the
Philosophers that came from Greece.

65. And that according to the rules of their great Master Hippocrates, who
requires no other, but the very same situation for a healthy City (...).
Hippocrat. Oper. sect. 3. cap. (...).
. But about what time it was these Philosophers arrived, though I dare not be
too confident, yet in all probability they might be some of those Graecians
brought over by Theodorus the Greek Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year
668 Godwinus de Praesulib. Ang. in vita Theodori.
, whom it is like he placed here to instruct the Saxon youth; for we find
Venerable Bede and St. John de Beverlaco (always reputed of this University)
to have been his Scholars; and so Tobias Bishop of Rochester, and Albinus Abbot
of St. Augustins Cant. who are said to have understood the Greek Tongue as well
as their native one Matthew. Parker de Antiquitate Eccles. Britan. in vita Theod.
.

66. Not to mention that Britan was known to the Greeks before the arrival of
the Romans; for otherwise Polybius could never have hoped to have described
Britan, or the method there used in ordering Tin, as we find he designed,
having promised to write, (...) Polybii Megal. Historiar. lib. 3. p. 209 Edit.
Is. Casaub. An. 1619.
. Which Book though lost, yet Strabo Strabon. Geograph. lib. 2. page 104. Edit.
Casaub. Paris, An. 1620.
bears us witness, that therein he refuted the Errors of Dicaearchus, Pythias
and Eratosthenes, concerning the magnitude of Britan, who were also Greek
Authors (that it seems had written something concerning this Island) and much
ancienter than himself. Nor to note secondly, that the French Druids (who had
their Learning out of Britan) in things of common concern, used the Greek
Character Jul. Caesaris Comment. de bello Gallic. lib. 6.
; which how they should come by without the learning of the Greeks (which
possibly might be brought over by some of their Philosophers who accompanied
the Merchants trading for Tin, and seated themselves here) let the Reader judge.

67. But for the Bishopric of Oxon, it is but of late erection, taken out of
that of Lincoln by King Hen. 8. and of no longer standing than his days,
notwithstanding what we meet with in the Decretals of Pope Gregory; where we
find two Rescripts of Pope Alexander the Third, about the year 1158. directed
to the Bishop of Oxon. and others Decret. de filiis Presbyteror. ordin. and
non. c. Proposuit. and de officio, and potest. just. deleg. c. Causam.
, it being but a mistake (though to be found in all the Copies, I could meet
with) of Oxoniensi, for Exoniensi, as plainly appears in the fourth Book of the
same Decretals Decret. qui filii sint legitimi, c. Causam.
, compared with the places afore-cited.

68. Yet the ancientest Town of the whole County I take to be Henley, so called
from the British Hen, which signifies old, and Lley a place, and perhaps might
be the head Town of the people called Ancalites, that revolted to Caesar Julii
Caesaris Commentar. de bello Gallico, lib. 5.
: it was also called Hanleganz and Hanneburg, as appears by an Inspeximus of Q.
Elizabeth, granted this Corporation. And there is a place near it, still called
Ancastle (west of the Town where the Windmill now stands) which is but the
Norman name, importing the same with the Saxon Hanneburg. If it be objected,
that Aldbury near Ricot in this County (according to vulgar tradition) is the
mother of Henly, and consequentially older; it may be answered, that its
probable indeed that Christian Henley may be younger than Aldbury, in respect
of a Church first built there, but upon no other account.

69. And the Town of Watlington seems of no small antiquity, provided its age
do but answer its Etymology; for by its name it seems also to have been an old
British City, which according to Strabo, were nothing else but groves fenced
about with trees cut down, and laid cross one another, within which they built
them sheds both for themselves and Cattle. (...) Strabonis Geographiae, lib. 4.
, are his very words: which manner of fence the Saxons after called patelas
Crates, hurdles or wattles, within which mound building them tents or
coverings, by the Saxons also called patel Gul. Somneri Dictionarium
Saxonico-Lat-Angl. in verbis.
; from one of these, or both, I guess this Town took its name.

70. As also the Praetorian or Consular way, called Watlingstreet, and
Wattle-bank here in Oxfordshire, these in all probability being made the same
way, that Hadrian is said to have made boundadaries (where Rivers were wanting)
between barbarous people, Stipitibus magnis in modum muralis sepis funditus
jactis atque connexis Aelius Spartianus in Hadriano.
, i. e. with great stakes set fast in the ground, and knit together it is like
with smaller wood woven between; which if happily made use of in these ways to
keep up the earth at first, might well invite the Saxons to name them
Wattleing-street, Wattle-bank, etc.

71. Just upon the meeting of Akemanstreet way, and the Port way from
Wallengford, there are also some footsteps of that decayed ancient station, by
Camden called Alchester, still remaining, which he guesses so called, as one
would say an old Town Camd. Britan. in Oxon.
. But I have met with some notes in a MS. now by me, that says it was the Seat
of Alectus the Emperor, who having trecherously slain his Friend and Master,
the Emperor Carausius, basely usurped Britan for himself, calling this his new
Seat after his own name, Alecti Castrum, since Alchester or Aldcester: but it
seems by the story that it florish'd not long, for Constantius Chlorus being
sent against him by the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian, and by the benefit of
a mist, landing privately somwhere on the South shore, near the Isle of Wight
(whether Alectus came to prevent it) gave him battle, defeated, and put him to
flight toward this his chief Fortress, but was over-taken and slain by
Asclepiodotus, one of Constantius's Captains (as this Author will have it) here
at Elsfield MS. penes Authorem.
near Oxon, (which he also would have a corruption of Alectus-field) before he
could reach it.

72. For the credit of this relation, it having no foundation in the Roman
story, I shall wholly leave it to the Readers judgment; yet shall add thus much
for its reputation, that the Roman military ways lie very agreeable to it; for
on supposition, this conflict happened about Regnum, now Ring-wood; or
Clausentum, now Southampton, the Roman ways lie directly thence to Venta
Belgarum, now Winchester; and so to Callena, now Wallengford, according to the
Itinerary of Antoninus See Burton's Map of Antoninus his Itinerary.
; and thence close by Elsfield to Alchester, as described in the Map, and in.
27. and 28. of this Chapter.

73. Which is all I find remaining of the Romans here, but some parcels of
their Money found at many other places, particularly near Dorchester not far
from Dike-hills, near the Fortification at Idbury, and Madmarston-hill in the
Parish of Swalcliff, enclosed with a double vallum; which I therefore judge to
have been Roman works. There is also a small circumvallation in a Wood South
and by West of Harpsden Church, near which place there has also been Roman money
dug up (whereof there is some in the possession of the Worshipful..... Hall
Esquire) and so likewise about Horley, Swerford, Chippingnorton, Teynton, and a
Village called Sinet near Burford, Stratton-Audley, Fringford and Tusmore, and
most of them, of the Emperors between Cocceius Nerva, and Theodosius the
second, exclusively.

74. After the departure of the Romans came the Saxons into Britan, and after
them the Danes, who also made them Works so indistinguishable from the Romans
(otherwise than by the Roman money found near them, as in the former Paragraph)
that they can scarce be known asunder: So that whatever of these Fortifications
(at most places in this County abusively called Barrows) have no Roman money
found at or near them, I think we must conclude either Saxon or Danish; Saxon
if square, and if round Danish; for so I find them distinguished in a MS,
History of Ireland by E. S. whereof the first sort he calls Falkmotes, i. e.
places for the meeting of the folk or people, upon the approach of the enemy;
and the latter Danerathes, i. e. hills of the Danes made for the same purpose
History of Ireland, MS. panes Authorem.
, though I very much question whether I shall find these forms strictly
observed in all places hereafter.

75. Yet I find Tadmerton-Castle, and Hooknorton Barrow not far from it,
agreeable to this rule; the former being large and round, and the other smaller
and rather a quinquangle than a square; both of them cast up (the great round
one by the Danes, and the less square one by the Saxons) about the year 914,
when the Danes in the time of Edward Senior being grown strong and numerous,
came forth of Northampton and Leicester, and made great slaughter of the
English-Saxons at Hochmeretune, says Joh. Bromton, An. 10. of Edw. Sen In
Chronico Johan. Bromton. Abbot. Jornalens, in An. 10. Ed. Sen.
. at Hokenertune, says Florentius Wigorniensis, which he calls Villam Regiam
Florentius Wigorniensis in Anne 914.
, now Hoke-norton.

76. As for Chastleton barrow, by the abovementioned rule, it should be a
Fortification of the Danes, perhaps cast up about the year 1016. at what time
Edmund Ironside met Canutus the Danish King hereabout, and defeated him after a
long and bloody Battle, fought at a place called Seorstan by Job. Bromton
Chronicon Jo. Bromton Abb. Jorn. in vita Edmundi Fer. lat.
, Sterneston and Scerusdan by Matthew. Westminster Matthew. Westmon. Flores Histor.
in An. 1016.
, Scearstan by Florentius Wigorniensis Flor. Wigor. in An. citato.
and Simon of Durham Simeon Dunelmensis Hist. de gestis Reg. Ang. in eodem.
, and Sejerstan by Wormius, from sejer victoria, and stan lapis; whereof all
the rest seem but corruptions, there being several such in Denmark and Norway
called by that name to this day Ol. Worm. Mon. Dan. lib. 5. Monumentorum inter
Ripensia 5. p. 343.
: which though they all say expressly was in Hwinctia or Huiccia, i. e.
Worcestershire, yet I verily believe it with Camden, to be that stone not far
off, called Four shire stone (or else that other near it) parting four
Counties, whereof Worcestershire is one.

77. And as for the Entrenchments in Merton Woods, I guess them cast up by King
Aethelred, or the Danes in the year 871. at what time says Floren.
Wigorniensis, King Aethelred and his Brother Aelfred, cum paganis pugnantes
apud Meretune Floren. Wigornensis in An. citato.
, fighting with the Danes at Mereton (as I find this town was anciently written
in the Leigier Book of Ensham E. Registro de Ensham, MS. penes Reverendissimum
Decanum and Capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedral. Christ. Oxoniae.
) overcame them, and put their whole Army to flight. That the Danes had somewhat
to do hereabout, is further evinced, from one of their spurs in the hands (if I
misremember not) of George Sherman, of the Town of Bisseter not far from this
place, which I took no care to get engraven, because already done by Olaus
Wormius Olai Wormii Monument. Danicor. lib. 1. cap. 7. p. 50. Fig. E.
, where the Reader may see the exact figure of it: All which put together, and
that this place is near the meeting of two military ways, I am pretty well
satisfied that this Battle between Aethelred, his Brother Aelfred, and the
Danes, was much rather here, than at Merdon in Wilt-shire, as some have thought
it.

78. And if Adwell Cop may pass for a Fortification, as the Entrenchments about
it on the South-east-side seem to promise, I guess it made about the year 1010.
when the Danes, as Simeon of Durham testifies, came forth of their Ships in the
month of January, and passing through the Chiltern Woods, came to Oxford and
burnt it Simeon Dunelmensis, de gestis Reg. Ang. in Anno 1010.
, erecting perhaps this fortified Barrow in the way, where it is like they might
meet with some opposition, and loose some principal Captain. As also upon
Shotover-hill, where there seems to have been two other little Barrows, on the
left hand of the road from Oxford to London, that should I confess have been
mentioned before in. 51. of this Chapter.

79. But as for the large square Entrenchments on Callow-hills in the Parish of
Stunsfield (which yet it is possible too may have been an old British town, such
as described by Caesar, Oppidum vocant cum sylvas impeditas vallo atque fossa
munierunt Julii Caesaris Commentarior. de bello Gallieo, lib. 5.
, it being much larger than any of the rest, and having deep holes within, I
suppose, to preserve water) the small Fortification under Cornbury Park-wall,
and the large one called Beaumont, near Mixbury-Church, encompassed with a
ditch 170 paces one way, and 128 the other; I can give no account of them, but
that in general it is like they were works of the Saxons, these being all
square, though the last by its name should indeed be Norman.

80. And so again for the Fortification commonly called Roundcastle, west of
Begbrook Church, but in the Parish of Bladen, and Lineham Barrow (between which
and Pudlycot, a Seat of the ancient Family of the Lacy's, there is a passage
under ground down to the river) I can say little of them, but that in general
it is most probable they were made by the Danes (they being both round) but upon
what particular occasion, I could no where find.

81. Beside the circles of Earth cast up by the Danes, there are others of
stone in many places of this Nation, and particularly one here in the very
bounds of Oxfordshire, near Chipping-norton, in the Parish of Little
Rollwright, the stones being placed in manner and form, and now remain as
exactly engraven Tab. 16. Fig. 2222, in a round of 'twixt 30 and 40 paces over;
the tallest of them all (which may be a scale for the rest) being about seven
foot high. North of these, about a Bolts-shoot off, on the other side the
hedge, in the County of Warwick, stands one singly alone, upwards of nine foot
high, in form as described Fig. 1. and Eastward five others, as in Fig. 3.
about two furlongs off, the highest of them all about nine foot also; meeting
formerly at the top (as drawn by Mr. Camden) with their tapering ends, almost
in shape of a wedge, since whose time there are two of them fallen down from
the rest. Of which ancient Monument (or what ever else it be) he gives us in
brief this following account Britannia in Oxfordsh.
.

82. Not far from Burford (he should have said Chipping-norton, for Burford
cannot be less then 7 or 8 miles from it) upon the very border of Oxfordshire,
is an ancient Monument, to wit, certain huge stones placed in a circle: the
common people call them Rollrich-stones, and dream they were sometimes men, by a
miraculous Metamorphosis turned into hard stones. The highest of them all,
which without the circle looks into the Earth, they call the King, because he
should have been King of England (forsooth) if he had once seen Long-Compton, a
little Town lying beneath, and which one may see if he go some few paces
forward.

83. Other five standing on the other side, touching as it were one another,
they imagine to have been Knights mounted on horseback, and the rest the Army.
These would I verily think, says he, to have been the Monument of some Victory,
and happily erected by Rollo the Dane, who afterward conquered Normandy; for
what time he with his Danes troubled England with depredations, we read that
the Danes joined Battle with the English at Hochnorton, a place for no one
thing more famous in old time, than for the woeful slaughter of the English in
that foughten Field under the Reign of King Edward the elder.

84. That this Monument might be erected by Rollo the Dane, or rather
Norwegian, perhaps may be true, but by no means about the time of Edward the
elder; for though it be true enough that he troubled England with depredations,
yet that he made them in the days of King Alfred, I think all the ancient
Historians agree, An. 897. according to Florilegus Matthew. Westmonast. in An.
citato.
, but according to Abbot Bromton Johan. Bromton Abb. Jorn. in vita Aluredi.
a much better Author, in the year 875, near 40 years before that slaughter of
the English in King Edwards days, as will plainly appear, upon comparison of
this with the 75.. of the same Chapter.

85. Therefore much rather than so, should I think he erected them, upon a
second Expedition he made into England, when he was called in by King
Aethelstan to assist him (as Thomas of Walsingham witnesses) against some
potent rebels that had taken arms against him Tho. de Walsingham Ypodigma
Neustriae, sub initium.
; whom having vanquished, and reduced into obedience to their Prince, and
perhaps too slain the designed King of them (who possibly might be persuaded to
this rebellion, upon a conditional Prophecy of coming to that honor when he
should see Long-Compton) might erect this Monument in memory of the Fact; the
great single stone for the intended King, the five stones by themselves for his
principal Captains, and the round for the mixed multitude slain in the Battle,
which is somewhat agreeable to the tradition concerning them.

86. But if I may give my opinion what I really think of them, (though I do not
doubt much but they must be a Danish or Norwegian monument) I can by no means
allow the round or other stones to be Sepulchral monuments: For had the Cirque
of stones been any such memorial, it would certainly have had either a tumulus
in the middle, like the monument near the way to Birck in Seland, and of
Langbeen Kiser not far from it Olai Wormii Mon. Danic. lib. 1. cap. 3.
, and another near Roeschild Idem lib. 1. cap. 6.
; or a stone Altar, as in the notable monument of Harald Hyldetand near Leire
in Seland Idem lib. 1. cap. 5.
, placed there, says Wormius (in another part of his Book) eo fine ut ibidem in
memoriam defuncti quotannis sacra paragantur, that they might yearly offer
Sacrifices in memory of the defunct, at the place of his inhumation. But
neither of these are within Rollright Cirque, nor could that curious and
learned Antiquary the Worshipful Ralph Sheldon of Beoly Esquire (one of the noblest
Promoters of this design) who industriously dug in the middle of it (to see
whether he could meet any symbols or marks, either who might erect it, or for
what end or purpose) find any such matter.

87. For the very same reason, it is also as certain that it cannot have been
any place of Judicature, such as was used in old time in the Northern Nations,
whereof there is one so great in Seland, as described by Wormius, that it takes
up no less than six and forty great stones of stupendous magnitude within its
circumference Olai Wormii Mon. Danic. lib. 1. cap. 10.
, and so does Rollright and more too; but then it has no stone (nor I suppose
ever had) erected in the middle for the Judge to sit on, as those always had.
Beside these Fora, or places of Judicature, (by the Danes called Tings) seem
always to have had their muniments of stone, either of a Quadrangular or Oval
Figure, and not to be entered but at two sides, as that at Orething mentioned
by Wormius Ibidem.
, whereas ours is circular, and shows no signs of such gates.

88. Which perhaps might occasion the Learned Dr. Charleton, to judge it rather
a Trophie, or Triumphal pile, set up as a Monument of some great Victory
Doctor Charleton's Stone Heng restored to the Danes, page 46.
, to whom though I cannot but somewhat incline, yet am verily persuaded, that at
the same time it might serve also for the Election and Inauguration of a King;
and much rather than the great and famous monument of Stone-Heng on Salesbury
Plain; the very disparities betwixt it and those in Denmark, brought by himself
Idem page 54.
, being not to be found here.

89. For beside that it is placed (as all such Courts of the Danes were) 1.
Upon a rising ground, for the advantage of prospect (that the common people
assembled to confirm the suffrages or votes of the Electors by their universal
applause, and congratulatory acclamations, might see and witness the solemn
manner of Election:) 2. Made of huge stones of no regular Figure. And thirdly,
Having no Epigraph or Inscription cut or trenched in the stones, as carrying a
sufficient evidence of its designment and use, in the figure of its platform.
It is but a single Cirque of stones without Epistyles or Architraves, few of
them very high on which the Electors might easily get up to give their
suffrages, as was usually done in the Northern Nations; whereas Stone-Heng is
made up of three circles at least (some say four) and the stones of each circle
joined with Architraves, whereof there is no example to be found in those
Countries.

90. Now that the Northern Nations usually erected such Cirques of rude stones
for the election of their Kings, is fully testified by Olaus Wormius,
Reperiuntur inquit in his oris loca quaedam in quibus Reges olim solenni
creabantur pompa, quae cincta adhuc grandibus saxis, ut plurimum duodecim,
conspiciuntur, in medio grandiore quodam prominente, cui omnium suffragiis
Electum Regem imponebant, magnoque applausu excipiebant. Hic and Comitia
celebrabant, and de Regni negotiis consultabant. Regem vero designaturi
Electores Saxis insistebant forum cingentibus, decreti firmitudinem
pronunciantes Ol. Wormii Monument. Danic. lib. 1. cap. 12.
, i. e. as Englished by Dr. Charleton Stone-Heng restored to the Danes, page 48.
.

91. In this County are beheld certain Courts of Parliament, in which Kings
heretofore were solemnly elected, which are surrounded with great stones, for
the most part twelve in number, and one other stone exceeding the rest in
eminency, set in the middle; upon which (as upon a Regal Throne) they seated
the new elected King, by the general suffrage of the Assembly, and inaugurated
him with great applause and loud acclamations. Here they held their great
Councils, and consulted about affairs of the Kingdom: But when they met
together to nominate their Kings, the Electors stood upright on the stones
environing the Court, and giving their voices, thereby confirmed their choice.

92. The very same practice of the Northern Nations, with the Ceremonies of it,
are also briefly set down by Saxo Grammaticus, Lecturi Regem veteres affixis
humo Saxis insistere suffragiaque promere consueverunt, subjectorum lapidum
firmitate, facti constantiam ominaturi Saxon. Grammatici Hist. Danorum, lib. 1.
sub initium.
, i. e. that the Ancients being about to choose their King, used to stand upon
stones fixed in the ground, and thence give their votes, by the firmness of the
stones on which they stood, tacitly declaring the firmness of their Act. Which
manner of election is also proved of them, by Crantzius, Meursius, and
Bernhardus Malincort de Archicancellariis De quibus vide Olaum Wormium, Mon.
Dan. lib. 1. cap. 12.
.

93. Which places of election it seems were held so sacred, as further
testified by Wormius Ibidem sub finem.
, and out of him by Dr. Charleton Stone-Heng restored to the Danes, p. 48.
, that in times of peace the Candidate King, was obliged de Jure there to
receive his Inauguration, the place and ceremonies being accounted essential
parts of his right to Sovereignty, and the votes of his Electors much more
valid and authentic for being pronounced in the usual Forum.

94. But if it happened the King fell in a Foreign expedition by the hand of
the enemy, the Army presently got together a parcel of great stones, and set
them in such a round, as well sometimes perhaps for the interment of the corpse
of the deceased King, as election of his successor. And this, it is like, they
did, 1. Because they esteemed an election in such a Forum, a good addition of
Title. And second, with all expedition, because by the delay of such election
too long, irreparable damages many times accrewed to the Republic thereupon
Ol. Wormii Mon. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 12. sub finem.
; which practice of the Danes they both confirm, by the authorities of
Stephanus Stephanius, in his Commentaries on the first Book of Saxo
Grammaticus's History of Denmark, and Svaningius a grave and faithful Writer of
that Nation, though what they cite of the latter (if that be all he says)
scarce proves quite so much.

95. Beside the erection of Stones in Foreign Nations upon the loss of one
King, and election of another, what if I should add that its also very likely
that the same might be done at the Investiture of a Conqueror into a new
acquired Principality: Thus why might not Rollo, either being compelled as a
younger brother, to leave Denmark or Norway, as was appointed by the Law of the
former Kingdom, and to seek him a new seat Tho Walsingham's Ypodigma Neustriae
in principio.
; or forced from the latter for Piracy by King Harold Harfager, as in the
Chronicle of Norway Vid. Chronicon. Norwegicum.
; I say, why might not Rollo after good success against those he invaded (as
Walsingham says expressly he was Tho Walsingham's Ypodigma Neustriae in princip.
, though in another place) be elected King by his followers, and be inaugurated
here, as well as there, within such a circle of stones, which bearing his name
to this very day, and he being acknowledged both by Bromton Joh. Bromton Abbat.
Jornal. in An. 875.
and Florilegus Matthew. Westmon. in An. 897.
to have beaten the Saxons, and to have tarryed in this Nation a whole Winter,
it is highly probable he might be.

96. For if we enquire into the origin of the name of this Cirque of stones, we
shall find that Reich or Riic signifies a Kingdom, and sometimes a King, as Eyn
reich fraw, the Queen, or Kings woman Vid. Petri Dasypodii Dictionar. Lat.
German. in verb. Regno.
: Whence it is plain, that these stones seem still to be called the stones of
King Rollo, or perhaps rather of Rollo's Kingdom, for it was customary for them
to have so many Cirques of stones as Kingdoms, though in the same Country.
Thus, as Wormius testifies, there are three at this day in the Kingdom of
Denmark; one in Seland, another in Schoneland, and a third in the Cimbrick
Territory, because these were anciently three distinct Principalities, and
under the dominion of as many Kings Ol. Wormii Mon. Dan. lib. 1. cap. 12.
, as it is certain England was also about this time.

97. And if this conjecture may be allowed to take place, we are supplied also
with a reason why we have no tumulus in or near this monument, there being no
King or eminent Commander slain, but only a conquest of the enemy in or near
this place, intimated by the five stones meeting in a point at the top; which
perhaps may be the disposition intended by Saxo Grammaticus, and out of him by
Wormius, Cuneato ordine, which he says expressly signified, Equestrium acies
ibidem, vel prope, fortunatius triumphasse Idem lib. 1. cap. 9.
i. e. that Knights or Horsemen there, or near the place, obtained a glorious
Victory.

98. Yet against this conjecture I foresee there lie two objections worth
removal. 1. That in these Cirques of stones designed for the election of Kings,
there was always a Kongstolen most times bigger than the rest placed in the
middle of it, as intimated above,. 90. And secondly, that had this place been
at first designed for the Inauguration of a Danish or Norwegian King, and such
places been so essential to a good title, as pretended above,. 93. certainly
all the Kings of the Danish race that reigned after here in England, would have
been either crowned here, or at some other such Forum; whereas we have no such
Kongstolen in the middle of the Cirque; and beside, find Canutus with great
solemnity Crowned at London, Harold Harefoot here at Oxford (not far from this
Cirque) and Hardi-Canute likewise at London.

99. To which it may be replied, that though not placed in the Cirque, yet here
is a Kongstolen not far off, which it is like was not necessary should be set
within it; for I find the place where the new elected King stood and showed
himself to the people, at the Forum for this purpose at Leire in Seland, to
have been without the Area, as our Kongstolen is. Area saxis undique cincta
Coronationi Regum deputata vicinum habet Collem, cui Coronatus jam insistebat
jura populo daturus, and omnibus conspiciendum se praebiturus Idem lib. 1. cap.
5.
, i. e. that the Area encompassed with stones designed for the Coronation of
their Kings, had a Hill near it, whence the new Crowned King gave Laws, and
showed himself to the people; it seeming indifferent from hence, and another
such like hillock called Trollebarolhoy, whereon the King also stood, at the
place of such election near Lundie in Scania Idem lib. 1. cap. 12.
, whether he ascended a stone or mount of earth; within, or without the Area,
so he thence might be seen and heard by the people.

100. And to the second Objection it may be reasonably answered, that the Danes
by this time having gotten the whole Kingdom, and such capital Cities as London
and Oxford were, might well change the places of their Coronations: Beside,
Canutus and the rest were much greater persons, and more civilized than Rollo
and his crew, can be presumed to have been; for beside that he lived above a
hundred years before them, we find him (though the son of a Norwegian Iorli, or
Earl) a great Pyrate at Sea Vid. Chronicon. Norwegicum.
, and little better then a Robber by Land; well might he therefore be contented
with this Inauguration, after the old barbarous fashion, having gained no City
wherein it might be done with greater solemnity.

101. But as for the stones near the Barrow at Stanton-Harcourt, called the
Devils Coits, I should take them to be appendices to that Sepulchral Monument,
but that they seem a little too far removed from it; perhaps therefore the
Barrow might be cast up for some Saxon, and the stones for some Britans slain
hereabout (aut vice versa) at what time the Town of Eignetham, about a mile
off, as Camden informs us, was taken from the Britans by Cuthwolf the Saxon
Vid. Camd. Britan. in Oxfordsh.
. Which is all I can find worthy notice concerning them, but that they are
about eight foot high, and near the base seven broad; and that they seem not
natural, but made by art, of a small kind of stones cemented together, whereof
there are great numbers in the Fields hereabout; which makes thus much for the
conjecture concerning those at Stone-Heng, that they may be artificial, it
being plain from these, that they could, and did do such things in the
ancienter times.

102. There stands also a stone about half a mile South-west of Enston Church,
on a Bank by the way-side between Neat-Enston and Fulwell, somewhat flat, and
tapering upward from a broad bottom, with other small ones lying by it; and
another near the road betwixt Burford and Chipping-norton, which I guess might
be erected for the same purpose with the two former, as abovementioned: Unless
we shall rather think, both these and them to have been some of the Gods of the
ancient Britans, as the Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet thinks it not
improbable those Pyramidal stones, mentioned by Camden in Yorkshire, called
the Devils bolts Idem in Com. Ebor.
, sometimes were. And so likewise Stone-Heng in Wiltshire, which he judges
neither to be a Roman Temple, nor Danish Monument, but rather somewhat belonging
to the Idol Markolis, which Buxtorf says the Rabbis called (...) domum Kolis
Joh. Buxtorfii Lex. Talmud. in v. Markolis.
; of which more hereafter when I come into that County; and into Kent, where of
Kits-coty-house, which I take to be an Antiquity of the same kind.

103. That the Britans long before the arrival of the Romans, were acquainted
with the Greeks, has sufficiently I guess been made appear already,. 66. of
this Chapter; and that long before that they were known to the Phaenicians, and
all the Eastern Countries, is plain out of Strabo Strabonis Geographiae, lib.
3. page 175. Edit. Is. Casaub. Paris, An. 1620.
, and Bochartus Sam. Bocharti Geog. Sacr. part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 39.
, and by comparison of the Learning and Religion of the Druids, with those of
the Indian Brachmans. Now that it was the ancient custom of all the Greeks to
set up unpolished stones instead of Images, to the honor of their Gods, we have
the testimony of Pausanias in these words, (...) (...). page 228. Edit. Sylburg.
. i. e. that unhewn stones amongst all the Graecians, had the honor of Gods
instead of Images; more particularly the same Author asserts, that near the
Statue of Mercury there were 30 square stones, (...), which the Pharii
worshipped, and gave to every one of them the name of a God Ibidem.
.

104. That the Arabians and Paphians also worshipped such like Gods, is likewise
witnessed by Maximus Tyrius. (...) Max. Tyrii Dissert. Philosoph. 38. p. 384.
Edit. Dan. Heinsii.
. i. e. that the Arabians worshipped he scarce knew what God, but that he saw
amongst them was only a square stone; and that the Paphians worshipped Venus
under the representation of a white Pyramid.

105. And Herodian describing the Worship of Helaegabalus at Emesa in
Phaenicia, says, that he had no kind of Image after the modern Greek or Roman
fashion made by men's hands, (...) Herodiani Historiar. lib. 5. page 114. Edit.
Hen. Stephani.
, i. e. but a great stone round at the bottom, and lessening by degrees toward
the top, after the manner of a Cone. To which add, that Peter della Valle, in
his late Travels into the Indies, says, that at Ahmedabad there was a famous
Temple of Mahadeu, wherein there was no other Image but a little column of
stone after a Pyramidal form; which Mahadeu, he says, in their Language
signifies the great God Pet. della Valle Viaggi, p. 3 Let. 1.. 15. p. 107.
. And after this fashion, he says, it is the custom of the Brachmans to
represent Mahadeu Ibidem.
.

106. All which being put together, especially as recommended by so Learned a
Person as the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, have prevailed with me much: However,
the Reader is free to use his judgment, whether they are memorials of the dead,
as commonly thought, or representations of the Deities of the ancient Britans,
given them by some Companions of the Eastern Merchants, trading hither for Tin,
to the Cassiterides.

107. Other Antiquities contemporary with the stones abovementioned, I met
with none here in Oxfordshire, but those three Rings lincked one within
another, and engraven by mistake a little out of their place, Tab. 16. Fig. 4.
for that they are not like to be British or Roman, I think is pretty certain.
The Britans, it is true, used Rings instead of Money, yet as Caesar testifies,
they were only of Iron Jul. Caesaris Comment. de bello Gallico, lib. 5.
. And though the Romans, amongst their other dona militaria, did usually give
Calbeos Vid. Sexti Pomp. Festi, Fragment. libro 3.
, sive armillas, bracelets, yet they were constantly I find, either of gold or
silver; whereas ours, as in number, are of three different materials; the
largest copper, the second iron, and the least green glass, or some stone of
that color.

108. It remains they must therefore be either Saxon or Danish, but whether of
the two, we must not hope to determine, since we find such rings used by both
Nations. That the Saxons had such bracelets, is plain from King Aelfred, who
notwithstanding he came to the Kingdom, long habituated as it were to rapines
and murders, yet brought it before his death into so good a posture, (as is
learnedly made out, and by what degrees he did it, in that excellent History of
his Life, now in the Press) that he could, and did hang up such bracelets of
gold in the highways, which no Traveller dared touch. Aelfredus per publicos
aggeres, ubi semitae finduntur in quadrum, Armillas jubebat aureas appendi, ut
Viantium aviditatem irritaret, cur non esset qui eas acciperet, says Florilegus
of him Matthew. Westmon. Flores Hist. in An. 892.
. Where, by the way, perhaps it may not be amiss to note, that these Rings were
drawn out of the River Cherwel with a Fishing-net, near Hampton Gay, not far
from the meeting of such ways at Kirklington, and kindly bestowed on me by my
worthy Friend Mr. Barry, amongst some other matters of like nature, though not
so fit to be mentioned here.

109. And that the Danes also made the same Experiment of the innocence of
their people, and of universal peace and freedom from rapine, is as manifest
out of Saxo Grammaticus, who says expressly of Frotho the Great, Vt
uniuscujusque rem familiarem a furum incursu tutam praestaret, Armillam unam in
Rupe, etc Saxon. Gram. Hist. Dan. lib. 5. p. 46. Edit. Operin.
. i. e. that he might preserve every man's Goods from the spoils of thieves and
robbers, hung up a bracelet of gold on the rock called after his own name,
Frothonis petram; and another in the Province of Wig, threatening great severity
to the Presidents of those Countries, if they should be taken away. They used
them also (like the Romans) as rewards of valor, as appears from the proffer
of King Roricus, of his six bracelets to any man that would undertake the
Champion of the Sclavi (his Enemies) challenging any man in his Army Idem lib.
3. page 24. D.
; and sometimes too as rewards of Wit, as the same Author informs us, Wiggo
being honored with a great Armilla by Rolvo Krage, for a Jest Idem lib. 2. page
16 C.
; and Refo, by Goto King of Norway, ideo tantum quod eum cultius and
familiarius habuisset Idem lib. 8. page 83. C.
.

110. These Armillae, the Danes and other Northern Nations accounted so sacred,
that as Bartholin informs us out of Arngrimus, the Islanders usually swore upon
them, Cujus religionis fuit ritus, ut juramentum praestituri, adhibitis
testibus Annulum in Ara Deorum asservari solitum, and in foro Judiciali a
Judice supremo in brachio gestatum, hostiarumque sanguine illinitum,
attrectarent Tho. Bartholini Schedion de Armillis veterum,. 7. p. 98.
, i. e. that the manner of people to be sworn was, that before witness they
should lay their hands on a certain Ring, usually kept upon the altar of their
gods, worn upon the arm of the Chief Justice (whence it is plain it was an
Armilla) and smeared over with the blood of their Sacrifices. And Ethelwerdus
and Asserius both acquaint us, that King Aelfred having gotten considerable
advantage over the Danes, made them swear (beside on his own Relics) in eorum
Armilla sacra, quod caeterarum Regionum Regibus fecere nunquam Chronicorum
Ethelwerdi, lib. 4. in An. 876. vid. etiam Asserium Menevens. in eodem An.
, i. e. upon their holy bracelet, which they had never done before to the Kings
of any other Nation.

111. Which Armillae it seems were sometimes single, and sometimes curiously
linked together. Thus the six bracelets of King Roricus abovementioned, are
said to have been, ita mutuis nexibus involutas ut ab invicem sequestrari
nequirent, nodorum inextricabiliter serie cohaerente Sax Gram. Hist. Dan. lib.
3. p. 24. D. Edit. Operini.
, i. e. so inextricably involved one within another, that there was no parting
them. The Learned Bartholin also informs us, that sometimes the Armilla had a
Ring hung to it. Est tamen Armillae suus quandoque circulus Tho. Bartholin.
Schedion de Arm. Vet.. 4. p. 41.
: And that when rings are thus hung to bracelets, there is always some mystery
in it, quod annuli Armillis fere jungantur non caret mysterio Idem. 4. in
princip.
. Where by Armillae he means (...), or (...), ornaments for the wrists, and by
annuli and circuli, ornaments for the fingers: Armillae id brachio praestant,
quod digitis annuli Ibidem.
, i. e. that bracelets have the same use on the wrist, that rings have on the
finger.

112. Now that ours was an Armilla, is plain enough, for that the great Copper
ring is of somewhat above three inches diameter, and big enough to encompass any
ordinary man's wrist; the lesser iron one, and green ring of glass, being
additional ornaments, especially the latter, which questionless was put on to
represent an Emrauld; that sort of stone, as Pignorius and Bartholin both
testify, being much used in bracelets Vid. Laurentium Pignorium de Servis. Et
Bartholin. Schedion de Armill.. 3. p. 37.
: which makes me think it the bracelet but of some ordinary person, the Armilla
it self being copper, with which, says Bartholin, only the vulgar adorned
themselves, Armillae aereae, plebeae censendae sunt Idem. 3. de Armillarum
materia, p. 32.
, and the appendent glass but a counterfeit Jewel.

113. For eminent places in this County, during the Government of the Saxons
and Danes in Britan, we may reckon first Banbury, then called Banesbyrig, where
Kenric, the second West Saxon King, about the year 540, put to flight the
Britans, fighting for their lives, estates, and all they had Camd. Britan. in
Oxf.
. After the Conquest, about the year 1125. it was strengthened with a Castle by
Alexander the then great Bishop of Lincoln; and since that, Jan. 26. 1o Mariae,
made a Burg or Borough consisting of a Bailiff, 12 Aldermen, and 12 Burgesses,
in recompense of their faithful service done to the said Queen Mary (as it is
expressed in their Charter) in manfully resisting John Duke of Northumberland
that rebelled against her; whence it is plain this Town was ever zealous in
matters of Religion, of what persuasion soever they were, heretofore as well as
now. Since again on the 8 of June, Jac. 6, it was made a Major Town, consisting
of a Major, 12 Aldermen, and 6 Capital Burgesses.

114. And secondly, Benson, alias Benesingtune Will. Malmesburiens. de gestis
Reg. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 2.
, which Marian (says Camden) calls villam Regiam, the Kings Town, and reports
that Ceaulin, the third King of the West Saxons, about the year 572, took it
from the Britans, which his successors kept 200 years after, till they were
dispossessed again by Offa the great King of the Mercians Camdeni Britan. in Com.
Oxon.
. And thirdly, though Dorchester has its name from the British Dour, which
signifies water, and therefore called by Leland, Hydropolis; and seems to have
been known to the Romans by the money found thereabout, and the Latin
termination Cester, which, says Leland, the Saxons applied to Cities as well as
Fortifications Lelandi Comment. in Cygneam Cant. in v. Hydropolis.
; yet it never came to its height till Birinus, an. 614. was seated there as
Bishop of the West Saxons, by Cynigelse their King, whom he had newly Baptized,
and Oswald King of Northumberland, Godfather to Cynigelse Ven. Bedae Hist.
Ecclesiae Gent. Ang. lib. 3. cap. 7.
.

115. About this time the Town of Berencester, alias Berncester, in Saxon
Burenceaster, and Bernacester, which I take to have been its primitive names,
seems also to have been raised, and to have taken its name, as some have
thought, from the same Bishop Birinus, quasi Birini castrum: But I much rather
believe it so called from Bern-wood, or Forest, mentioned by Bid Chronologia
Saxonica, in An. 921.
, Florilegus, and Wigorniensis Mat. Westmon. and Florent. Wigorn. in An. 918.
, upon the edge whereof it was then seated, nor is now far off it; after which
perhaps from St. Eadburg, to whom the Priory there was, and Parish Church is
now dedicated, it changed its name to Burgcester, and since that to Burcester,
now Bisseter.

116. The Town of Burford, in Saxon Beorford, seems also to have been a place
of good Antiquity, but most remarkable for a battle fought near it, about the
year 750 Rog. Hoveden Annal. Part. priori in An. citat.
, perhaps on the place still called Battle-edge, West of the Town betwixt it
and Vpton; between Cuthred or Cuthbert, a tributary King of the West Saxons,
and Ethelbald the Mercian, whose insupportable exactions the former King not
being able to endure, he came into the Field against him, met, and overthrew
him here about Burford, winning his Banner wherein there was depicted a golden
Dragon Camd Britan in Com. Oxon.
; in memory of which Victory, perhaps the custom (yet within memory) of making
a Dragon yearly, and carrying it up and down the Town in great jollity on
Midsummer Eve, to which (I know not for what reason) they added a Giant, might
likely enough be first instituted.

117. After the Conquest, I find it the Town of Robert Earl of Gloucester, base
Son to King Henry the First, to whose Son William I have seen an Original
Charter granted him by King Henr. 2. giving to this his Town of Bureford,
Gildam and omnes consuetudines quas habent liberi Burgenses de Oxeneford; most
of which it has since lost, and chiefly by the overruling power of Sir
Lawrence Tanfield, Lord chief Baron in Queen Elizabeth's time: Yet it still
retains the face of a Corporation, having a common Seal, etc. the very same
with Henley, as described in the Map, if they differ not in colors, which I
could not learn.

118. As for Wudustoke, or Wudestoc, Sax. udestoc (i. e. locus sylvestris) now
Woodstock, it seems to have been a seat Royal ever since the days of King
Aelfred, it appearing by a MS. in Sir John Cotton's Library, that he translated
Boethius de Consolatione Philosophiae, there MS. in Biblioth. Cottoniana, sub
Othone A.
. Nay, so considerable was it in the time of King Aetheldred, that he called a
Parliament there, and Enacted Laws, to be seen amongst that collection of
ancient Laws set forth by Mr. Lambard (...) Gul. Lambard, fol. 82.
. Whence it may almost be certainly concluded, that here must have been a house
of the Kings of England, long before the days of King Henry the First; who yet
it is like indeed was the first that enclosed the Park with a wall, though not
for Deer, but all foreign wild Beasts, such as Lions, Leopards, Camels, Linx's,
which he procured abroad of other Princes; amongst which more particularly,
says William of Malmesbury, he kept a Porcupine, hispidis setis coopertam, quas
in Canes insectantes naturaliter emittunt Will. Malmesburiens. de Henr. 1. lib.
5.
, i. e. covered over with sharp pointed Quills, which they naturally shoot at
the dogs that hunt them.

119. Of the Town of Them, anciently Tamesforda, I could find little, till
about the time of Edward Senior, An. 921, when the Danish Army out of
Huntingdon came hither and erected some kind of Fortification; but at this time
it seems it was so considerable, that it had the reputation of a Burg; for King
Edward coming against it the same year, his Army is said to have besieged the
Burg and taken it, and to have slain the Danish King, Earl Toglos, and Earl
Mannan his son, his brother, and all others whatever within the Town
Chronologia Saxonica, in An. 921.
. And again, An. 1010. when the Danes overran most of this part of England, we
find this Town amongst others to have suffered much by them Joh. Bromton Abb.
Jornal. in An. citat.
.

120. Chippingnorton, anciently Ceapan-nertune, was also most certainly a Town
of note in the Saxons days, as one may gather from its name, it being so called
from Ceapan Emere, to buy or cheapen, so that it implies as much as Market
Norton, or Norton where the people usually cheapened Wares. And Whitney, now
Witney, seems to have been a Town of good repute before the Conquest, it being
given about the year 1040. to the Church of St. Swithins Winton: with eight
other Manors, by Alwinus then Bishop of that See, who for his over-familiarity
with Emma Mother to K. Edward the Confessor, was causelessly suspected of
Adultery with her: Of which suspicion Queen Emma purging herself and him by the
Fire Ordeal, of walking barefoot over nine red-hot plough-shares without hurt;
in thankfulness ('it is said) they each gave nine Manors to the Church of
Winchester, which are all named by Mr. Dugdale, Witney being one of those given
by Alwinus Monastici Anglicani, vol. 1. inter Addenda, page 980.
.

121. And the neighboring Town of Bampton, anciently Bemtune, seems to be of
much about the same antiquity, yet neither can I find any higher Record of it,
than of Leofric Chaplain to King Edward the Confessor, who An. 1046. upon the
union of the Bishoprics of Criditon and Cornwall, and both of them translated
to Exeter, whereof he was made the first Bishop, quickly after gave to this his
new Church his aet Bemtune E Cod. vet. MS. in Bib. Bod. fol. Med. 120. in
princip.
, to which it belongs to this very day.

122. Which is all I could meet with of the Towns of Oxfordshire before the
Conquest (for after long search I could find nothing of Deddington, till about
the Reign of King Edw. 2. whereof when I come to speak of the Castle there)
concerning which I could have added much more, and brought their History down
to these times, as above in Banbury; only that, and whatever else is worthy
notice of them, may be found in some other modern Histories.

123. Yet before we come to the times since the Conquest, let us first remember
that the Town of Islip, Sax. Gightslepe; or Gibetslepe, must needs be of good
repute in those days; for Camden says expressly, and so do several other
Authors, that King Edward the Confessor was born there, which they prove from
his original Charter of Restoration of the Abbey of Westminster, wherein he
gives to this his new Church the Town of Islip, with the additional Clause of [
the place where he was born Camd. Britan. in Com. Oxon.
] which though, it is true, I could not find in Mr. Dugdale Vid. Monasticon
Angl. vol. 1. p. 59.
, yet here remaining some footsteps of the ancient Palace, and a Chapel now
put to profane use, called the Kings Chapel, and the Town still belonging to
the Church of Westminster, there is no great doubt to be made of the thing,
tradition it self being not like to be erroneous in a matter of this nature,
though there were no such Charter to prove the thing alleged, which yet we have
reason to believe there is, or was, though not produced by Mr. Dugdale.

124. In the Chapel abovementioned, not many years since, there stood (as was
constantly delivered down to posterity) the very Font, wherein that Religious
Prince, St. Edward the Confessor, received the Sacrament of Baptism: which,
together with the Chapel; in these latter days being put to some indecent at
least, if not profane use, was carefully and plously rescued from it, by some
of the Right Worshipful Family of the Browns of Nether Kiddington, where it now
remains in the garden of that worthy Gentleman Sir Henry Brown Baronet, set
handsomely on a pedestal as exactly represented Tab. 16. Fig. 6. and adorned
with a Poem rather pious than learned, which yet I think I had put down, but
that it is imperfect.

125. Which holy King Edward was the first to whom was granted the gift of
Sanation, only with the touch of his hand, of the Disease called the Struma; or
Scrofula, and in English upon this account, the Kings Evil; which as a mark of
Gods most especial favor to this Kingdom, has been transmitted with it, as an
hereditary gift to all his Successors: Every sacred hand in all Ages ever
since, that has held the Scepter of this most happy and now flourishing Kingdom,
having been signally blessed by diverse and undoubted Experiments of healing that
Disease.

126. Before they touch for this distemper, they have always Prayers read
suitable to the occasion, both which when performed, the King forthwith bestows
on every Patient, a piece of Angel-gold purposely coined, and put upon a white
ribbon to be hung about the neck; which as long as worn preserves the virtue of
the touch, though Dr. Tooker will have it only, Sanitatis symbolum inchoatae,
and Eleemosynae sacrae monumentum Gul. Tookeri Charisma sive donum Sanationis,
Reg. Ang. coelitus concessum.
, i. e. a mark that the Cure is already begun, and a lasting memorial of the
Kings charity and piety to the poor patients.

127. However it be, that this was the custom ab initio, I take to be plain
from that piece of Gold of King Edward the Confessor, Tab. 16. Fig. 5. found in
St. Giles's field in the Suburbs of Oxon. having the initial letters of his
name over the hinder part of the head, and two small holes through it, as if
designed to be being on a ribbon for the purpose abovementioned, the holes
being strengthened with Gold Wire fastened round them, and to the piece it
self, much after the fashion of the eye of a man's doublet, as exactly described
in the Figure, ut supra; which piece was lent me by that courteous Gentleman
Sir John Holeman Baronet, in whose possession it now remains at his House near
Northampton.

128. From King Edward the Confessors being born at Islip, it is easy to
collect, that his Father King Aethelred must necessarily have had a Royal Seat
there, as in all probability likewise at Heddington near Oxford; for though
Tradition now goes, that it was but the Nursery of the Kings Children, whereof
there remains yet upon the place some signs of foundations in a Field near the
Town, called Court-close; yet it is plain, that King Aethelred did sometimes at
least reside there himself, for he concludes a Charter, or some such like
Instrument, wherein he grants Privileges to the Monastery of St. Frideswide
here in Oxon. of his own Restoration, in English thus, This privilege was idith
at Hedinton, and after in Latin, Scripta fuit haec Cedula jussu praefati Regis
in villa Regia quae...... appellatur, die octavarum beati Andreae Apostoli, his
consencientibus p...... qui subtus notati videntur. Ego Aethelredus Rex hoc
privilegium, etc Monasticon Anglican. Vol. 1. inter add (...)
.

129. Beside these, the Kings of England had several other seats within this
County (not to mention again that Woodstock was one, or that old Alcester was
the seat of Alectus) such as Beaumont, just without the suburbs of Oxford, the
Birthplace of the valiant King Richard the First. Langley, upon the edge of
the Forest of Whichwood, a seat, as Tradition has delivered it down to us, of
the unhappy King John, who perhaps during the time of his Residence here, might
indeed build the Castle of Bampton, which also Tradition informs us was of his
foundation. And Ewelm, built indeed by William De la Pool Duke of Suffolk, who
marrying Alice the daughter and heir of Thomas Chaucer, had a fair Estate
hereabout; but after, upon the attaindure of John Earl of Lincoln, and Edmund
his brother, Grandchildren to the Duke, it came to the Crown in the days of
King Henr. 7. and was afterward made an Honor, by laying unto it the Manor of
Wallengford, and several others, by King Hen. 8. All which houses are marked
out in the Map, by the addition of a small Imperial Crown placed somwhere near
them.

130. As all places that gave title to ancient Barons, most of whose Families
long since have been extinguished, are marked with a Coronet; such are, 1. The
Baronies by ancient Tenure, which were certain Territories held of the King,
who still reserved the Tenure in chief to himself: whereof the ancientest in
this County were those of Oxford and St. Valeric, the head of the latter being
the Town of Hoke-Norton Camd. Britan. in Com. Oxon.
, both given by the Conqueror to Robert D'Oyly who accompanied him out of
Normandy Monasticon. Angl. vol. 2. p.
. 2. The Barony of Arsic, belonging to Manasser Arsic, who florish'd An. 1103.
3 Hen. 1. the head of which Barony was Coggs near Witney, Summerton and
Hardwick in this County, being other members of it. 3. The Barony of Hedindon,
now Heddington, given the 25 of Henr. 2. to Thomas Basset in Fee-farm, whose
Son Gilbert the Founder of Bisseter Priory, in the first year of Richard the
First, was one of the Barons that attended at the Coronation. And these are all
the Baronies of ancient Tenure that were heretofore in Oxfordshire.

131. In the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the First, there were
several other able men summoned as Barons to Parliament, that had not such
Lands of ancient Tenure, as those above had, which were therefore styled Barons
by Writs of Summons to Parliament. The first of these in Oxfordshire was
William de Huntercomb (whose seat still remains by the same name in the Parish
of Tuffield) who was summoned to Parliament by the Kings Writ, bearing date the
23 of Edw. 1. The second, I find, was Joh. Gray of Rotherfield, whose Ancestors
being of a younger House of Walter Gray Archbishop of York, had Rotherfield
given them, beside many other possessions by the said Archbishop: He was
summoned first to Parliament the 25 of Edw. 1.

132. And so was thirdly, his next Neighbor Ralph Pipard of the other
Rotherfield, in the same year of the same King, their seats having now almost
quite changed their names, for those of their owners; one of them seldom being
called otherwise than Pipard or Pepper, and the other Grays. Also fourthly,
John Baron Lovel, of Minster-Lovel, whose ancestors though Barons by tenure
many years before, as seized of the Barony of Castle-Cary in Somersetshire,
yet dis-possest of that I know not by what means, received summons to
Parliament whilst seated here at Minster, 25 of Edw. 1.

133. The fifth of these Barons was Hen. le Ties, who having a grant of
Sherbourn here in Oxfordshire from Richard Earl of Cornwall, temp. Henr. 3.
which Sherbourn had formerly been a part of the Barony of Robert de Druis, was
summoned to Parliament the 28 of Edw. 1. And so was sixthly, John de la Mare of
Garsington, the very same year. To which should be added, the Barons by Letters
Patents of Creation, so first made about the 11 of Rich. 2. But of these, whose
Barony is now vacant, there is only, seventhly, the Lord Williams, solemnly
created Lord Williams of Them the first of April, 1 Mariae, who had also
summons the same time to the Parliament then sitting, but his Patent it seems
was never enrolled.

134. For this account of these Baronies, I acknowledge my self beholding to
that Learned Antiquary, William Dugdale Esquire Norroy King at Arms, in whose
elaborate Volumes of the Baronage of England, the Reader may receive more
satisfaction concerning them. Yet beside these, as the people will have it, the
Manor of Wilcot was the head of a Barony, one of the Barons whereof, as
tradition tells them, lies buried under a fair Monument in North-Leigh Church:
But the Writings of the present Proprietor, my worthy Friend Mr. Carry of
Woodstock (whom yet I found inclined to believe some such thing) being at
London, whereby otherwise it possibly might have been proved, and the testimony
of the people being too weak an evidence to build upon; I have rather chosen to
forbear, then add a Coronet to the place.

135. Beside the Saxon and Danish Fortifications abovementioned, there are
others here in Oxfordshire of a later date, either quite rased, or in a manner
useless, and some of them too, known but to few; wherefore I have thought fit
to give this short account of them. To pass by therefore the Castle of Oxford,
so well known to be built by Robert d'Oyly who came in with the Conqueror, and
the Castles of Bampton and Banbury spoken of before: the first that presents it
self to my consideration, is the old Castle of Deddington, formerly Dathington
Thomas de la Moor in Hist. vitae and mortis Edv. 2. in principio.
, which I take to be ancient, and the very place no question to which Aymer de
Valence, Earl of Pembroke, brought Piers de Gaveston the great Favorite of King
Edward the Second, and there left him to the fury of the Earls of Lancaster,
Warwick, and Hereford, who carrying him to Warwick, after some time, caused him
to be beheaded in a place called Blaklaw, in their own presence Ibidem.
.

136. Secondly, the Castle of Ardley, the Foundations whereof are yet to be
seen in a little Wood west of the Town, which if any heed may be given to the
tradition of the place, florish'd about the time of King Stephen: and so
perhaps thirdly, might Chipping-norton Castle; free leave being given at the
beginning of his Reign, to all his Subjects to build them Castles, to defend
him and them against Maud the Empress, which at last, finding used sometimes
against himself, he caused no less than eleven hundred of these new built
Castles to be rased again, which no doubt is the cause we find no more of them,
but their bare Foundations and Trenches.

137. But fourthly, the Castle of Middleton, now Middleton-stony, was none of
these, for I find Richard de Camvil had Livery given him of Middleton Castle in
Oxfordshire (which must needs be this) the tenth of King John, as part of his
own Inheritance by descent from his Father See Mr. Dugdale's Baronage of
England. vol. 1. Bar. Camvil.
. And fifthly, as for the ruins of old Fortifications at Craumersh, or Croamish
Giffard near Wallengford, I take them either for the foundations of that wooden
Tower erected by King Stephen, in the year 1139. when he besieged Maud the
Empress, and her Brother Robert Earl of Gloucester in Wallengford Castle
Chronica Gervasii Dorobornensis, and Floren. Wigorn. in An. citato.
, or else of the Castle of Craumerse, or Croamish it self, built by the same
King Stephen at another siege of Wallengford, An. 1153. which Henry
Fitz-Empress endeavoring to raise, and bringing King Stephen to great straits,
they came at last to an accord concerning the Kingdom of England Chron. Gerv.
Doroborn. in An. citat.
.

138. There are some other Antiquities of yet later date, that I have met with
in Oxfordshire also perhaps worthy notice, such as that odd bearded Dart, Tab.
16. Fig. 7. having the beards issuing from it, not as usually one against
another, but one lower and the other higher, perhaps thus contrived for its
easier passage in, and as great or greater difficulty to get it out of a body;
which were it not for the too long distance of time, I should be willing to
take for the Materis, Mataris, or Matara, the British long Dart, which were
usually thrown by those that fought in Essedis Jul. Caesar. Comment. de bello
Gallico, lib. 4.
: But the stem of it being wood, and not very hard neither, I cannot afford it
to be above 200 years standing, or thereabout: Nor can I add more concerning
it, but that it was found somwhere about Steeple Barton, and given me by the
Worshipful Edward Sheldon Esquire

139. Yet the stone engraven Tab. 16. Fig. 8. dug up in the garden, and now in
the possession of the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Spencer Baronet, a most
cordial Encourager of this undertaking, can scarce be allowed so ancient as
that, the Character upon it in Rilieve work being certainly China: For unless
we may imagine it brought thence in the days of King Aelfred, by Swithelin
Bishop of Sherbourn, Qui detulit ad Sanctum Thomam in India Eleemosynas Regis
Aluredi, and incolumis rediit Joh. Bromton Ab. Jorn. in An. 15. Regis Aluredi.
, i. e. who carried the offerings of King Alfred to the Church of St. Thomas in
India, and returned safe, we can by no means allow it to have been here, 180
years; that Country having been quite lost again to this Western part of the
world, till Vasquez Gama was sent by Emanuel King of Portugal to make new
discoveries, in the year 1497. In which year, though he recovered the way again
to the East Indies, yet Fernandus Andradius discovered not China till 1517
Hieronymi Osorii Hist. Lusitan. lib. 11.
. So that table of antiquities TAB. XVI. ad page 356

To the right Worsp.ll Sr. THOMAS SPENCER Baron! one of the Noblest Encouragers
of this Essay This 16.th Table of some of the ANTJQUJTJES of OXFORDSHJRE cohere
of the last was Aug out of HJS (...) grounds, in memory of his kindness is
thankfully dedicated by R.P.L.L.D

M Bur^hers Sclupsit

provided this stone (which is very unlikely) were brought thence by some of
Andradius his company the very first voyage, yet it can be (with us) but 160
years standing.

140. As for the Stone it self it is of an odd kind of texture, and color too,
not unlike (to sight) to some sort of cheese, exactly of the figure and bigness
as engraven in the Table; and most likely of any thing to have been one of
their Togra's, or Stamps, wherein the chief persons of the Eastern Countries
usually had their names cut in a larger sort of Character, to put them to any
Instruments at once, without further trouble. That they have such kind of
stamps, is clearly testified by Alvares Semedo, in his History of China: They
Print, says he, likewise with Tables of stone, but this manner of Printing
serves only for Epitaphs, Trees, Mountains, etc. of which kind they have very
many Prints; the stones which serve for this use being also of a proper and
peculiar sort F. Alvares Semedo, Hist. Chin. part. 1. cap. 6. sub finem.
, as ours seems to be: So that in all probability the letters on this stone
contain only the name, and perhaps the office, or other title of some person of
Quality, and therefore hard to be found out; and that it was brought hither by
some Traveller of the Honorable Family of the Spencers, and either casually
lost, or carelessly thrown out as a thing of no value.

141. And thus with no small toil and charge, yet not without the assistance of
many Honorable Persons, whose names in due time shall be all gratefully
mentioned, I have made shift to finish this specimen of Oxfordshire; which I
am so far from taking for a perfect History, that I doubt not but time and
severe observation (to which I hope this Essay will both encourage and direct)
may produce an Appendix as large as this Book: For that new matter will daily
present it self, to be added to some one or other of these Chapters, I am so
sensibly convinced. that even since the Printing the first Chapter of this
Treatise, I have found here at home just such another Echo, as at Mr. Pawlings
at Heddington, in the Portico's of the new Quadrangle at St. John Baptist's
College. And since my writing the second, my worthy Friend Dr. Tho. Tailor has
found so strong a Chalybeat Spring in Fulling-mill-ham-stream near Oseney
Bridge, that notwithstanding last hard Winter (when the greatest Rivers were
frozen) this continued open and smoking all the time, tinging all the stones
by reason of its not running, nor mixing with other water, with a deep rusty
color. And thirdly, since the Printing the 48. of Chap. 8. I have seen a Lapis
Ranulae taken out from under the Tongue of one Johnson a Shoo-maker (by the
skilful Mr. Pointer Surgeon) here in Oxford.

142. Which is all I have at present to offer the Reader, but that he would
take notice, 1. That in Chap. 2.. 69. where I mention a Well so eminent
heretofore for curing distempers, in the Parish of St. Crosses, that it has
given it the more lasting name of Holy-well; that I intend not that Well of
late erection (though perhaps the water of that is as good) and now most used,
but an other ancienter Holy-well behind the Church, in Mr. Nevil's Court before
his house. And that secondly, notwithstanding the authority of the Learned Dr.
Hammond (with whom a man need not much be ashamed to err) some will have, that
he calls the Well of St. Edward in the Parish of St. Clements, rather the Well
of St. Edmund, for which I find the very same authority alleged, that Dr.
Hammond brings Vid. Hist. and Antiq. Univers. Oxon. lib. 2. page 10. col. 1.
. And lastly to beg of him, that though in general he find me unequal to my
design, and many particulars of this Essay perhaps ill placed, and worse
expressed, that yet in consideration that this is my first attempt (wherein
many Inconveniences could not be foreseen, which may hereafter be avoided) he
would heartily accept of the sincerity of my intention, with all imaginable
endeavor of amendment for the future, in lieu and excuse of my present
Inabilities.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Map, the Crown belonging to Ewelm, is mis-placed at Benson; and the
mark for Banbury Castle wanting. In Tab. 7. Fig. 9. for b b read a a; and for c
c read b b. In the Book, p. 34. line 4. for nearest, r. meerest. p. 56. l. 14.
for parts, r. sorts. p. 98. l. 8. r. with metals. p. 151. l. 29. r. white Cone.
p. 155. l. 18. for Hampton, r. Bampton. p. 231. l. 27. r. adaptata. p. 253. l.
21. r. induce. p. 280. l. 2. r. stained. p. 323. l. 32. r. regum. p. 344. l.
31. r. (...).

THE INDEX.
Wherein the first Figure signifies the Chapter, the rest that follow, the
Paragraph.
A.
ABele Tree in Oxfordshire. cap. 6. Paragraph. 84. Adwell Cop, an ancient
Fortification. c. 10. par. 51, 52, 53, 78. Air-pump, invented at Oxford. c. 9.
par. 33. Air of Oxfordshire healthy, proved from the nature of the soil,
waters, manners, and long life of its Inhabitants. c. 2. par. 1, 2, 3. Air of
Oxford (see Oxford) healthy, proved from its curing Consumtions. c. 2. par. 8.
Frequency of the Smallpox, no argument to the contrary. par. 9. Nor the Black
Assize. par. 10. Not so healthy formerly. par. 11.
Akemanstreet-way. c. 10. par. 27, etc. Aldcester, the seat of the Emperor
Alectus. par. 71. Anatomy improved at Oxford. c. 9. par. 214, etc. Antiquities,
British. c. 10. par. 2, etc. see Coins. Roman, par. 18, etc. see Barrows,
Buryals, Coins, Pavements, Ways. Saxon and Danish. par. 74, etc.
Architecture, see Buildings. Ardly Castle, when built, c. 10. par. 136.
Armillae, Rings or Bracelets, the ancient use of them, par. 107, etc. Arsic, an
ancient Barony, par. 130. Arteria magna descendens, turned partly into bone, c.
8. par. 50. Ashes growing in Willows, c. 6. par. 79. Black Assize at Oxon, c.
2. par. 10. Astall-barrow, a Funeral Monument, c. 10. par. 49. Asteriae,
Star-stones, c. 5. par. 16, etc. Move in Vinegar, and why, par. 26, etc.
Astroites lapis, Starry-stones, par. 22. Astronomy advanced at Oxford, by Lord
Bishop of Sarum, c. 9. par. 23. By Sir Christopher Wren, par. 27. Mr. Hally of
Queens Coll. par. 26. Mr. Holland, par. 29.
Atri lex vulgaris, etc. not yet described, c. 6. par. 11. Avesditch, an
ancient Highway, c. 10. par. 35, 36. Axel-trees for Carts made of Iron, c. 9.
par. 106.
B.
Roger (Friar) Bacon his excellent Discoveries, c. 9. par. 2, etc. Why accused
of Magic, par. 6.
Bampton given to the Sea of Exeter before the Conquest, c. 10. par. 121. The
Castle there, built by King John, par. 125.
Banbury, a short History of it, c. 10. par. 113. Barley with six ears on one
stalk, c. 6. par. 37. Rathe-ripe Barley, par. 29. Barometer, invented at
Oxford, c. 9. par. 34. Barons, by Writs of Summons to Parliament, c. 10. par.
131, etc. Ancient Baronies in Oxfordsh. par. 130. Barrels without hoops, c. 9.
par. 168. Barrows, or Barrow-hills, c. 10. par. 48, etc. item par. 78, etc.
Beaumon, the Birthplace of King Richard the First, c. 10. par. 129. Bees, an
emblem of Eloquence, c. 7. par. 18. The History of those over Lud. Vives his
Study in Corpus Christi Coll. par. 19, etc. The improvement and management of
them in Oxfordshire, par. 24. A new sort of Hives for them, c. 9. par. 120.
Belemnites lapis, Thunderbolts, cap. 5. Paragraph 38, etc. Their use in
Medicine, par. 43.
Benson, an account of it before the Conquest, c. 10. par. 114. Birds, see
Diabolus marinus, Hoopingbird, Toucan, Wood-cracker. Bisseter, an account of it
before the Conquest, c. 10. par. 115. Blanketing-trade at Witney, c. 9. par.
169, etc. Native Blue in Oxfordshire, c. 3. par. 18. see Caeruleum not. Boggy
grounds, how drained, c. 9. par. 81, 82. Thigh Bone of a prodigious bigness
petrified c. 5. par. 158. Bracelets, the ancient use of them, c. 10. par. 107,
etc. Brass lumps, cap. 3. par. 53. item. c. 4. par. 11. Bricks made to supply
Laths in Maltkills, c. 9. par. 90. Strong Bricks made at Nettlebed, par. 89.
The Parish of Brightwell has had no Alehouse, Sectary, or suit at Law, within
memory of man, c. 8. par. 95. Britain known to the Greeks, long before the
Romans came, cap. 10. par. 66. Brontiae, Thunder-stones, c. 5. par. 29, etc.
Called also Polar-stones, par. 32:
Bubonius lapis, c. 5. par. 45. Bufonites lapis, par. 146. Buildings eminent in
Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 128, etc. Burford, the reason why they carry a Dragon
about the Town on Mid-summer-eve, c. 10. par. 116. Privileges granted them,
par. 117.
The ancient and Roman way of Burial, c. 10. par. 40, etc. Button-molds
petrified, c. 5. par. 175.
C.
Stone Cadworms (see Musca e Phryganio saxatili) c. 7. par. 25. Caeruleum
nativum, c. 3. par. 18. item c. 6. par. 52. A sign of Silver Ore, par. 60, etc.
Caesar never entered Britan so far as Oxfordshire, cap. 3. paragraph 2. Beaten
out by the Britans, c. 10. par. 14, etc.
Ars Calculatoria Rogeri Swisset, c. 9. par. 193. Calendar reformed by Tho.
Lydiat, c. 9. par. 19. Gregorian reformation of the Calendar, taken from Roger
Bacon, c. 9. par. 8, etc. A Calendar or register of weather, its use, c. 1.
par. 12. Caleva, now Wallengford, c. 10. par. 24, 25. A Calf of 11 months old
that brought forth another, c. 7. par. 41. How it is possible to be so, par.
42, 43.
Three Calves cast at once, all three living to be of full growth, par. 44.
Caraways, an improvement of Land, c. 6. par. 36. Cardites lapis, c. 5. par.
143, 151. Carts, of what fashion used in Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 105. With
Iron Axel-trees, par. 106.
Castles, when and by whom built in Oxfordshire, c. 10. par. 135, etc. Chaff,
how separated from the Corn in Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 110. Chalk eggs, c. 5.
par. 180. Black Chalk, c. 3. par. 16, 17. Chastleton Barrow, a Danish
Fortification, c. 10. par. 76. A Child born with another in its womb, c. 7.
par. 42. Heard to cry in the Mothers womb, c. 8. par. 2. Portends no
misfortune, ibid.
Four Children at a birth, c. 8. par. 5, 6. Childbirth, the pangs affecting
the Husband, par. 3, 4. China ware, the way to make it found out at Oxford, c.
9. par. 86. Chipping-norton, its antiquity, c. 10. par. 120. The Castle when
built, par. 136.
Chubs in the River Evenlode equalling Perch in goodness, c. 7. par. 30.
Clematis daphnoides, etc. of English growth, c. 9. par. 10. A Clock that moves
by the Air, c. 9. par. 19. By water, par. 49.
Coals, where likely to be found in Oxfordshire, c. 3. par. 34. Cochleae
fluviatiles, viviparous, cap. 7. Paragraph 33. Cochleomorphites lapis, c. 5.
par. 140. Conchites lapis, c. 5. par. 56, etc. Good for Tables, etc. ibid.
A Cormorant killed at Oxford, c. 9. par. 11. Pulvis Cornachinus invented by R.
Dudley titular Duke of Northumberland, c. 9. par. 211. A Corn two inches long,
c. 8. par. 49. Corn, how managed in Oxfordshire when green, c. 9. par. 98. How
in Harvest, par. 99, etc. How preserved in the Barn from heating, par. 102. How
from Mice in the Rick, par. 104. How preserved when smutty, par. 107. How
preserved from Mice and mustiness after threshing, par. 111.
Cornbury Park, see Deer. Cornu Ammonis, c. 5. par. 87, etc. Bodies why not
Corrupted when buried, c. 8. par. 52. Cosmeticks, or Medicines beautifying the
skin, c. 3. par. 20. Councils held at Oxford, c. 2. par. 4. At Kirtlington,
par. 7.
British Coyns, c. 10. par. 3, 4, etc. Roman Coyns, par. 73. A Coin of King
Edward the Confessor, such as he gave when he touched for the King's Evil, c.
10. par. 127. Craume, c. 5. par. 48. Crey-fish at Salford, c. 7. par. 31. Their
different colors, when boiled, show the different goodness of waters, ibid.
Crows how frighted from mischiefing Corn, c. 9. par. 98. Crow-iron, c. 4. par.
12. Customs used in Oxfordshire. See Burford, Ensham, Hoke-tide, Quinten,
Stanlake.
D.
A bearded Dart found at Steeple-Barton, c. 10. par. 138. Damps at North Leigh,
with an account of several men killed by them, cap. 3. Paragraph 31, etc. Are a
sign of Coals thereabouts, par. 34. Are remedyed by casting in Quicklime, par.
36.
Death, some odd presignifications of it, c. 8. par. 33, etc. Deddington
Castle, c. 13. par. 135. Deer of Cornbury Park defective in their horns, when
made a Warren, c. 7. p^r. 45. Devils Coits, a Funeral Monument, c. 10. par.
101. Made of artificial stone, ibid.
The just Devil of Woodstock, c. 8. par. 37, etc. Diabolus marinus, Sea
Devils-bird, c. 7. par. 4. Dial at All Souls College, c. 9. par. 140. Corpus
Christi Coll. par. 141.
Dorchester, an account of it before the Conquest, c. 10. par. 114. Robbery
Discovered by a Dream: c. 8. par. 46. Dudleys Dukes of Northumberland, Earls of
Warwick and Leicester, in Italy, c. 9. par. 149. Dump and deaf persons taught
to speak, c. 9. par. 180. Dyke hills, a Roman Fortification, c. 10. par. 39.
E.
Earths (see Soils) fit for Husbandry, c. 3. par. 8, etc. see Marles.
Medicinal, c. 3. par. 27, etc. Serving for Statuaries, Tobacco pipes, Potters,
polishing silver, etc. par. 43, 44.
Earths serving for Earthen floors, Ceilings, side-walls, whiting and pointing
walls, par. 46, etc. Earths fit for painting. See native Blue, Lac Lunae,
Ochre, Pnigitis, Ruddle, Umber. Sending forth poisonous steams. See Damps. Yet
undescribed, c 3. par. 49, etc.
A green sort of Earth at Shotover-hill, par. 12. Earthen-wares, as Juggs,
Bottles, Porcellane, the way how to make them discovered at Oxford, c. 9. par.
84. etc. An Earthquake at Stanton St. John's, c. 3. par. 54. Echimites lapis,
c. 5. par. 82, etc. Echo's, their several sorts, c. 1. par. 14. Returning
twenty Syllables at Woodstock, par. 15. at Magd. Coll. par. 22. How to find the
place of the speaker, and the place returning the voice, par. 16, etc. Tonical,
or returning a certain Musical Note, c. 1. par. 23. Tautological, or returning
the same word several times, par. 25. Returning often the same inarticulate
sound, at Heddington, par. 25. at New Coll. par. 30. at All Souls Coll. par.
31. at S. Joh. Bapt. Coll. c. 1. par. 141.
An Egg with another within it, c. 7. par. 17. King Edw. the Conf. born at
Islip, c. 10. par. 123. His Font still remains at Sir H. Browns Bar. par. 124.
First cured the Kings Evil, par. 125.
Electrum, a mixed metal of Gold and Silver found in England, cap. 10. par. 8,
etc. Elliptical hypothesis of the Planets motions, first demonstrated at
Oxford, c. 9. par. 84, etc. An Elm whose trunck is six yards diameter, c. 6.
par. 65. An Elm flourishing without Bark or pith, ibid. How it is possible to
live so, par. 66, etc.
An Elm having three trunks out of one root, c. 6. par. 77. A narrow leaved Elm
not yet described, par. 43. Encephaloides lapis, c. 5. par. 147. Enquiries to
be made by the Author about Plants, c. 6. par. 88, etc. Ensham, the custom of
that Roialty, c. 8. par. 28. Ewelm a Roial Seat, c. 10. par. 129. The Echo
there, c. 1. par. 25.
Double Ewes, or Ews that always yean two Lambs at once, c. 7 par. 38.
F.
Fasting, Rebecca Smith fasted ten weeks, c. 8. par. 11. Began to eat after the
application of an Amulet, ibid.
Fellmongers, a pretty considerable Trade at Witney, c. 9. par. 173. Fuel,
some unusual sorts of it in Oxfordshire, c. 3. par. 41, 42. Finscale, a Fish
not yet described, c. 7. par. 29. Fir Tree, planted in Oxfordshire, c. 6. par.
84. Fishes, See Finscale, Mytilus, Pride. Fish Ponds, a new contrivance to few
them, c. 9. par. 47. Flints, transparent like Agats, c. 4. par. 15. Black,
their use, ibid.
A great Flood in the River Cherwell, c. 2. par. 17. Fortifications in
Oxfordshire, c. 10. par. 73, etc. At Croamish, Giffard, par. 137. In Merton
Woods, where King Aethelred beat the Danes, par. 77.
Free stone, the several sorts, c. 4. par. 24, 25. Rivers Freeze first at the
bottom, c. 2. par. 15. Fungites lapis, c. 5. par. 132.
G.
Garsington, an ancient Barony, c. 10. par. 133. Geodes lapis, c. 5. par. 180.
New Geometrical Bodies invented by Sir Christopher Wren, c. 9. par. 195.
Geranium columbinum, etc. not yet described, c. 6. par. 6. Giants, a Discourse
of them, c. 5. par. 168, etc. Glasses made of Flints, c. 9. par. 92, etc. Found
together with Urns, their use, c. 10. par. 57, etc.
Glassenbury thorn, c. 6. par. 39, 40. Grapes, meliorated by grafting, c. 9.
par. 113, 114. Grimes-ditch, a Roman way, c. 10. par. 26. Robert Grosted Bishop
of Lincoln, a great Astronomer, c. 9. par. 2. Gual Hen, a Roman way, c. 10.
par. 24. Gunpowder, an Invention of Friar Bacon, cap. 9. Paragraph 7, 39, 40.
Gur, c. 3. par. 50.
H.
Harrows, a new sort of them, c. 9. par. 77. Harvesting, the manner of it in
Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 99, etc. A Hawthorn with white berries, c. 6. par. 38.
Hay, how preserved from heating, c. 9. par. 103. Heddington, a Seat of King
Edw. the Conf. c. 10. par. 128. An ancient Barony, par. 130. The Echo there, c.
6. par. 25.
Helleborine store albo, c. 6. par. 13. Atro rubente, par. 14. Latifolia
montana, ibid.
A Hen of the Island of St. Helen described, c. 7. par. 67, etc. Henly, the
ancientest Town in Oxfordshire, c. 10. par. 68. Hippocephaloides lapis, c. 5.
par. 142. Histricites lapis, par. 81. A new sort of Hives for Bees, c. 9. par.
120. Hoggs, an ingenious way of giving them meat, c. 9. par. 122. A Hog near 13
hands high, c. 7. par. 73. Hoke-norton barrow, an ancient Fortification, c. 10.
par. 75. Hoke-norton an ancient Barony, par. 131. Hoke-tide, or Hoke-Munday, c.
8. par. 24, etc. Hooping-bird, c. 7. par. 10. Hordeum disticum praecox, c. 6.
par. 9. Horses forty years old, c. 7. par. 37. Ancient Houses of the Kings, in
Oxfordshire, c. 10. par. 128. Husbandry of Arable Land in Oxfordshire, c. 9.
par. 56, etc. Of Pasture Land, par. 81, etc. Of Corn when green, par. 98. when
ripe, par. 99.
Huntercomb, an ancient Barony, c. 10. par. 131. The Hygroscope improved, c. 9.
par. 37.
I.
Ice-meers, cap. 2. Paragraph 15. Ikenildstreet-way, c. 10 par. 22, 23. Several
Improvements by Sir Christopher Wren, c. 9. par. 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 38, 42,
166, 195. By Dr. Wallis, c. 9. par. 196, etc. By Mr. Dwight in Earthen wares,
par. 84, etc.
Injection of Liquors into the veins of Animals, c. 9. par. 222. St. John Bapt.
Coll. how it came to be built, c. 6. par. 77. Iris Lunaris seen at Oxford, c.
1. par. 7. Iron moulds, c. 3. par. 51. Iron-stone, c. 4. par. 35, 36. Islip the
Birthplace of King Edward the Confessor, c. 10. par. 123. A Roial Seat, par.
128.
Lapis Judaicus, c. 5. par. 136, etc. Juncellus omnium, etc. not yet described,
c. 6. par. 5.
K.
Kenners barrow, a Funeral Monument, c. 10. par. 51, 52. Northern Kings how
anciently elected and inaugurated, c. 10. par. 88, 90, etc. Kirtlington,
anciently part of the possessions of the Kings of England, c. 2. par. 7. Its
ancient Privileges, ibid.
A Kitchen without a Chimney, c. 9. par. 130. Knives, their carved hafts first
made at Oxon. c. 9. par. 168.
L.
Lac Lunae found in Oxfordsh. c. 3. par. 20, etc. A sign of Silver Ore, par.
22, 23. Its use in Medicine, par. 26.
Lagopus major vulgaris Parkinsoni, c. 6. par. 12. Langley, anciently a Roial
seat, c. 10. par. 129. Philosophical Language. See Universal Character.
Lightning, strange effects of it, c. 1. par. 11. Lignum fossile, c. 3. par. 42.
Lillingstone Lovel, why in Oxfordshire, c. 6. par. 85. Lime, the fittest
stones to make it, c. 4. par. 32. Quicklime, rectifies the malignancy of
Damps, c. 3. par. 36. A white Linnet, c. 7. par. 13. The reason of its
whiteness, par. 14, 15.
Locks to keep up waters. See Turn-pikes. Lucern. See Sainctfoin. Lychnis, a
sort of them not yet described, c. 6. par. 10. Lymphaeducts, first discovered
at Oxon. c. 9. par. 212.
M.
Malt-kills of stone very advantageous, c. 9. par. 92. New contrivances of
them. par. 127.
Mamillaris lapis, c. 5. par. 151. Marble at Blechington, c. 4. par. 33. A new
way of painting it, c. 9. par. 166.
Marchasite. (See Pyrites) c. 4. par. 12. Marl, the several sorts of it, c. 3.
par. 8, etc. Mathematics improved at Oxon, c. 9. par. 194, etc. Maum, a good
soil, c. 4. par. 3, 4, 5. Men apt for generation till eighty, c. 8. par. 7. Of
a great Age, par. 54.
Merton Coll. the reason of black night there, c. 9. par. 192. Mesh-fats, very
good ones made of Burford stone, c. 4. par. 27. Middleton-stony, the Castle
there, c. 10. par. 1^7. Mills of a rare contrivance, c. 9. par. 124, etc.
Minster Lovel, an ancient Barony, c. 10. par. 132. Artificial Mists, c. 9. par.
24. Money. See Coyns. Moon-stoon. See Selenites. Moor-Evil, how cured, c. 2.
par. 66. Musca e Phryganio saxatili, c. 7. par. 25. Music, new discoveries in
it, with their demonstrations, cap. 9. par. 199. Mytilus fluminum maximus
subviridis, not found to have Pearl in them, c. 7. par. 32.
N.
Nephriticus lapis, cap. 5. Paragraph 154. Hasel-Nuts found fifty foot under
ground, c. 2. par. 52.
O.
Oasts. See Malt-kills. Oats, a way to dispose them conveniently in stables, c.
9. par. 121. Yellow Ochre at Shotover-hill, c. 3. par. 13, etc. A sign of
Silver Ore, par. 24.
Oenanthe minor aquatica, Park. c. 6. par. 12. Ophiomorphites lapis, c. 5. par.
92, etc. Ophthalmites lapis, par. 149. Orchites lapis, c. 5. par. 144.
Orobanche verbasculi odore, not yet described, c. 6. par. 8. Oseney Abbey how it
came to be built, c. 6. par. 76. Osteocolla, c. 5. par. 174. Ostracites lapis,
par. 79. Ostracomorphos Lapis, par. 60. Otites lapis, c. 5. par. 150. Ova
anguina, c. 5. par. 83. Oxen, a pretty contrivance to feed them, c. 9. par.
123. Oxford, how situated at present, c. 2. par. 4. How anciently, c. 10. par.
30. Its present situation healthy, c. 10. par. 64. Parliaments and Councils
held there, c. 2. par. 4. When made a University, c. 10. par. 65. When the
Bishopric was founded, par. 67.
Oxfordshire has more Pasture than arable Land, c. 3. par. 1.
P.
Painting, an account of that at the Theater at Oxon. c. 9. par. 154, etc. Some
that is remarkable elsewhere, par. 164. 165.
Parhelia, or Mock-suns, seen at Ensham, cap. 1. Paragraph 4. Their
signification, par. 6.
Parliaments held at Oxford, c. 2. par. 4. The first in England held at
Shifford, par. 5, 6.
Pasture-land, how manured in Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 81, etc. Roman Pavements
in Oxfordshire, c. 10. par. 54, etc. Pear Trees, an unusual sort of them
bearing twice a year, c. 6. par. 86. Bearing a Pear hard and durable like wood,
par. 87.
Pease, the sorts of them in Oxfordshire, c. 6. par. 30. Peat found in
Oxfordshire, c. 3. par. 41. their way of menaging it, ibid. Pebbles
transparent, c. 4. par. 16. their use, par. 17, 18. Cemented with Flints make
excellent Chimney pieces, Tables, etc. par. 19, 20.
Pectinites lapis, c. 5. par. 72, etc. Pentaphyllum reptans alatum foliis
profundius serratis, c. 6. par. 7. Period of years, a more acurate one found
out by Tho. Lydiat, c. 9. par. 17, etc. Perspiration of Plants discovered at
Oxford, c. 9. par. 95. Petrifications, whence they proceed, c. 2. par. 23, etc.
Their several sorts, par. 25, etc. item, c. 5. par. 47, etc.
Petrified bone, c. 5. par. 158. Petrified wood, cap. 3. par. 38, 39. item c.
5. par. 175. Phalloides lapis, c. 5. par. 153. Phesants, with white and pyed
feathers, c. 7. par. 13. Pictures, drawn by Microscopical glasses, c. 9. par.
166. Remarkable ones of K. James and K. Charles, par. 164. Another of a Cat
looking several ways, par. 165.
Plants, not yet described, c. 6. par. 3. etc. Not yet noted whether of English
growth, par. 12. Doubted whether yet described, par. 13, 14.
Plants fasciated, c. 6. par. 15. Not only after hard Winters, par. 16.
Plants striped, c. 6. par. 17, 42. How procured, Paragraph 18. Is their
disease rather then perfection, par. 19, etc.
River Plants grow sensibly after rain, and why, c. 2. par. 16. Plants
cultivated in Oxfordshire, that are not in some other Counties. See Barley,
Caraways, Lucern, Pear Trees, Peace, Ray-grass, Rosa canina, etc. bastard
Saffron, Sanctfoin, Wheat. Plants, enquiries to be made by the Author about
them, c. 6. par. 88, etc. Ploughly-hill, a Funeral Monument, c. 10. par. 48.
Ploughs, the several sorts of them used in Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 76.
Pnigitis, or black chalk, c. 3. par. 16, 17. Porcellane ware, the way to make
it invented at Oxford, c. 9. par. 86. Port way, c. 10. par. 35, 36. Pride, a
Fish doubted whether yet described, c. 7. par. 27, 28. Prospect at Teynton, c.
3. par. 54. Pyrites aureus, c. 4. par. 11, 12. Argenteus, par. 13.
Poisonous exhalations how remedyed, c. 3. par. 36.
Q.
Quarries at Burford, c. 4. par. 26. At Heddington, par. 24. Elsewhere, par.
29, 30.
Quinten, a Sport used in Oxfordshire at Weddings, as they carry home the
Bride, c. 8. par. 21, etc. 53.
R.
Rainsborough, an ancient Fortification, c. 10. par. 34. Lapis Ranulae, c. 10.
par. 141. Raspberry bush grows commonly in the Chiltern part of Oxfordshire,
c. 6. par. 42. Ray-grass, an improvement of Land, c. 6. par. 31, etc. When the
best time to sow it, c. 9. par. 83.
Rib of a Dog of an unusual make, c. 7. par. 46. Rings, the ancient use of them
in these Northern Countries, c. 10. par. 107, etc. Rivers running into the
ground, c. 2. par. 19. Robber, c. 4. par. 11. Robbery discovered by a Dream, c.
8. par. 46. Rolls, of an unusual make for tilling Land, c. 9. par. 79, 80.
Roll-rich stones, c. 10. par. 81. Not a Funeral Monument, par. 86. Nor a Court
of Judicature, par. 87. Built by Rollo the Norman, par. 83. at his
inauguration, par. 95, etc.
Roofs of Stone of rare contrivance, c. 9. par. 136, etc. Ropes made of the
barks of Trees, c. 9. par. 119. Rosa canina, etc. c. 6. par. 40. Rosamond's
Tomb, c. 9. par. 144, etc. Rotherfield Grays, an ancient Barony, c. 10. par.
131. Rotherfield Pipard an ancient Barony, par. 132. Rubric, or ruddle, c. 3.
par. 16.
S.
Bastard Saffron, c. 6. par. 35. Sainctfoin, par. 31, 34. How managed, c. 9.
par. 83.
Salmons at Lillingstone Lovel, how they come thither, c. 7. par. 30. Sand, its
use. c. 4. par. 22, 23. Saxifraga Anglica, etc. not yet described, c. 6. par.
9. Sent-bags, discovered in most strong sented Animals, at Oxon, c. 9. par.
228, etc. Sectaries, a new sort of them at Watlington, c. 8. par. 32. Selenites
lapis, the several sorts, c. 5. par. 3, 8, 11, 182. Its use, par. 14, 15.
Servants, how hired, c. 8. par. 29. A Sheep with only one horn, c. 7. par. 40.
Sheep with 8 or 10 horns apiece, par. 39. Sherbourn an ancient Barony, c. 10.
par. 133. Silk stockings, the way of weaving them discovered at Oxford, c. 9.
par. 167. Silver Ore, where likely to be found See Caeruleum nativum. Singing,
two octaves, or fifths, sung by the same person at the same time, c. 9. par.
208, etc. Slat-stones serving for covering houses, c. 4. par. 31. Good for
grinding colors, ib.
Smiris its use, c. 4. par. 21. Snails, a sort of them not yet described, c. 7.
par. 34. Snakes, none to be found in the Northern parts of Oxfordshire, c. 7.
par. 35, 36. Soils (See Earths) of a small depth, why some fertile, others not,
c. 3. par. 3, etc. Spars, c. 5. par. 49, 50, 51. Their original, par. 52. Their
use, par. 53.
Speech, improved by Dr. Wallis, c. 9. par. 179. By Dr. Wilkins, par. 181.
Spire steeples, c. 9. par. 142. Springs, their original, c. 2. par. 17. A
Chalybeat Spring beside Oxford, c. 10. par. 141. Land Springs, c. 2. par. 18.
Sweating out of the Earth, and for the most part imbibed again, par. 20.
A Stags head found 50 foot under ground, c. 6. par. 53. Staircase at
Blechington described, c. 9. par. 131, etc. Stalactites lapis, c. 5. par. 48.
Stalagmites lapis, par. 47. Stanlake, the Parson reads a Gospel every Holy
Thursday, on a Barrels head in the Cellar of the Chequer Inn, c. 8. par. 30.
Starch-trade at Oxford, an account of it, c. 9. par. 172, etc. Star stone. See
Asteria. Excellent Statues in Brass of King Charles I. and his Queen, c. 9.
par. 166. Stones an improvement of Land, c. 4. par. 7, 8. item c. 9. par. 70.
Stones resembling Fishes, as a Barbel, c. 5. par. 55. Cockles singly, par. 64,
etc. 76. Cockles in clusters, par. 56, etc. Their use, ibidem.
Escallops, c. 5. par. 72. Muscles, par. 80. Oisters, par. 60, 78, 79. A
Porcupine, par. 81. A Rams horn, par. 87. etc. Snakes, par. 92. A Sea Urchin,
par. 82, etc.
How Stones resembling Shell-fishes acquire that form, c. 5. par. 96, etc.
Stones resembling Plants, as, an Apricock, c. 5. par. 135. A Briony root, par.
133. A Mulberry, par. 135. Luca-Olives, par. 136. Pears, par. 134. Toad-stools,
par. 132.
Stones resembling living Creatures, or some parts of them, as a Bullocks
heart, c. 5. par. 143. A Horse head, par. 142. An Owls head, par. 45. Snails,
par. 140. The Testicles, par. 144. A Toads head, par. 146. Worms, par. 141.
Stones resembling some part of man, as his Brain, c. 5. par. 147. Breast, par.
151. Ear, par. 150. Eye, par. 149. Foot, par. 174. Glans penis humani, par.
153. Heart, par. 152. Kidneys, par. 154. Olfactory nerves, par. 148. Scrotum,
par. 153.
Stones representing Buttons, c. 5. par. 175. The heel of a shoo, par. 176. A
wheel, par. 177.
Stones naturally globular; some smooth, some granulated, c. 5. par. 179.
Stones voided out of the Eyes, c. 8. par. 10. Bred under the Tongue, par. 48.
item c. 10, par. 141. Taken out of a man's bladder that weighed above a pound,
c. 8. par. 49. Made by art, c. 10. par. 101. Worshipped by the ancient Britans,
par. 102, etc. Set up in the highway, to show the number of miles, par. 50.
A Stone with Chinese Characters found at Yarnton, c. 10. Paragraph 139.
Straw-work, of a new contrivance, c. 9. par. 108. Strombites, or wreathed
stones, c. 5. par. 63.
T.
Tadmerton Castle a Danish Fortification, c. 10. par. 75. Teeth of a prodigious
bigness, c. 5. par. 159, 163, 164. Telescope, known to Friar Bacon, c. 9. par.
2, etc. Them an ancient Barony, c. 10. par. 133. Its antiquity, par. 119. The
Well-waters, when brewed, stink, c. 2. par. 34.
Theater at Oxford, its contrivance, c. 9. par. 147, etc. An account of the
Painting, par. 154, etc.
Thermometer invented 500 years ago, c. 9. par. 35. Thigh-bones of a prodigious
bigness, c. 5. par. 155, 164. Whether really the bones of a man, par. 157.
Thunder. See Lightning. Thunderbolts. See Belemnites. Thunder-stones. See
Brontias. Tillage. See Husbandry. Tobaccopipe-clay at Shotover-hill, c. 3. par.
43. Toucan, an American Bird found beside Oxford, c. 7. par. 12. Towers at
Oxon, c. 9. par. 143. British Towns how built, c. 10. par. 75. Transfusion of
Blood invented at Oxford, c. 9. par. 223. Trees of a vast bigness. c. 6. par.
44, etc. That have been put to odd uses, par. 47, etc. Buried under the ground
at Binfield-heath, par. 50. Where dyed black, and why, ibid. Found fifty foot
under ground at Rotherfield-Pipard, par. 51. How, and on what account buried
under ground, par. 55, etc.
Two Trees joined together after an odd way. c. 6. par. 78. Trichites lapis, c.
5. Paragraph 145. Tripoli-stone, c. 4. par. 34. Trochites lapis, c. 5. par.
177. Turf laid on houses instead of ridge-tiles, c. 3. par. 40. Serving for
fuel, par. 41.
Turn-pikes to keep water up, c. 9. par. 43, etc.
V.
Vagitus Vterinus, c. 8. par. 2. No ill omen, ibid.
Vermicularis lapis, c. 5. par. 141. Vines meliorated by grafting, c. 9. par.
113, 114. Viola Martia, etc. not yet described, c. 6. par. 3, 4. Ludovicus
Vives his Bees, c. 7. par. 19. Vmber, c. 3. par. 19. Universal Character
invented at Oxford, c. 9. par. 183, etc. Improved there, par. 188, etc.
Urns, c. 10. par. 57, 62. Found at Rotherfield-Pipard fifty foot under ground,
c. 6. par. 53.

W.
Walks, and other curiosities in Trees, c. 9. par. 115, etc. Waters in Oxford
shire healthy, proved from the abundance of Fish, c. 2. par. 14. From their
impregnations with Salts and Sulphurs, par. 12, 13, 15.
Waters petrefying. See Petrifications. Why some will not bear Soap, c. 2. par.
32. How remedied at Henly, par. 34. Strongly impregnated with Salts at
Church-hill Mill, par. 35. At Chadlington, par. 39. At Clifton, par. 40.
What use they may be put to, par. 43, etc.
Waters Medicinal at Deddington, c. 2. par. 49. At Banbury, par. 57. At Idbury,
par. 58. Curing Eyes and Ulcers, par. 67, etc. item c. 10. par. 142. Chalybeat,
c. 10. par. 141. Vitriolate, c. 2. par. 60, etc. Tasting like Milk, par. 64.
White like Milk, par. 65.
Waters, a note of their goodness, c. 7. par. 31. Waterworks, c. 9. par. 42,
etc. At Enston described, par. 50, etc.
Watling-street, why so called, c. 10. par. 70. Wattle-bank, why so called, c.
10. par. 70. Watlington an ancient Town, with the reason of its name, par. 69.
Roman ways, their several sorts, c. 10. par. 18, etc. See Akeman-street,
Avesditch, Grimes-ditch, Ikenild-street, Port-way. Wheat with two ears on one
stalk, c. 6. par. 37. The several sorts of it cultivated in Oxfordshire, not
so in some other Counties, par. 23, etc.
Dr. Willis, an account of his discoveries in Anatomy and Physic, c. 9. par.
215, etc. A great Wind at Oxford, c. 1. par. 9. Witney given to St. Swithins
Winton before the Conquest, c. 10. par. 120. Woollen rags an improvement of
Land, c. 9. par. 70, 71. Women bearing Children till 63. c. 8. par. 8. Revive
oftener then men, two examples in Oxfordshire, par. 12, etc.
A Woman of extreme little growth, not a yard high, yet all parts
proportionable, c. 8. par. 9. Wood petrified, c. 3. par. 38, 39. Sold by
weight, par. 2. How ordered in Oxfordshire, c. 9. par. 118, 119.
Woodcracker, a Bird not yet described, c. 7. par. 3. Woodstock, the Echo
there, c. 1. par. 15. When made a Seat Royal, c. 10. par. 118.

FINIS.

