A LOVING INVITATION (To Repentance, and Amendment of life) Unto all the
INHABITANTS OF THE Island Barbados. BEFORE THE Lords sore Judgments come upon
them, which is seen to be Nigh, and which they cannot escape, except Fruits
meet for Repentance, and Amendment of Life be brought forth. WITH Something more
particularly to the Heads, and Owners, of the several PLANTATIONS.

By a Friend to the whole Creation, called Richard Pinder.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand, near Aldersgate, 1660.

A loving Invitation (to Repentance, and Amendment of life) unto all the
Inhabitants of the Island Barbados.
OH Barbados! Listen oh Island! for the Lord has a sore and great Controversy
with thee, because of the Lewdness, and Abominations that are found in thee,
which the Righteous soul hates, and which the Lord is burdened with; that
though he be merciful, and full of pity, and bear long; yet nevertheless, the
wicked cannot go unpunished, nor escape his sore and great Judgment: For so he
has determined, that the wicked shall bear the weight of their own wickedness.
And oh Island, consider the wickedness that is committed in thee is great; that
it is become even as a Mountain before the Lord of Hosts; that Vile, and
Contemptible, thou art in his sight, because he has replenished thee, and
filled thee with earthly Fruit, and Substance; and yet thou rebellest against
him, as though thou could bring forth Fruit of thy self. O consider, and
call to mind thy former days, wherein thou wast little in thine own eyes, and
in the eyes of all that knew thee. (Mark) O all ye Inhabitants of this Island!
many of you are Full, and Rich, and the sins of Sodom are found among you;
fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness. Oh how is the Creatures of God
abused, and destroyed among you, in satisfying your ungodly lusts? Do you think
the Lord takes no notice of all your wickedness, and unchristian-like
Practices? Are you not bad Examples unto all about you; both to the Heathen,
and them that have the Name of Christians? Do your think you can escape the
Lords Hand? Will all your Riches, and Greatness in the Earth, defend you from
it? Oh no: his hand is Mighty, and his stroke will be Grievous; and assuredly
it will fall heavy upon the Heads of the Wicked; and especially upon them whom
he has suffered long, as he has done thee, oh Island: yet provokes him to
displeasure, thou daily does, by the Sins which daily abound in thee, and are
brought forth by the Tillers, and Manurers of thee: That though, oh Istand,
thou yeildst unto them Fruit, and Substance in abundance, yet against him (who
causes the pleasant showers to come upon thee) they rebel. Oh bring thou
forth Thorns and Thistles for their sake, that they may read their Figure, and
see how unfruitful they are unto him, who replenisheth thee, who is the God of
the whole Earth, whom all ought to serve, and obey, and not their ungodly
lusts, which oh Island, destroys thy increase; that I say bring thou forth,
and be thou overspread with unfruitful Weeds, that thy Inhabiters may read
their Figure, and see how they cumber the ground, and how they are become as an
unfruitful Wilderness unto him, who has been gracious unto them, in causing
thee to yield increase in abundance; but with it their hearts are made fat, and
corrupted before the Lord, whom they ought to serve, and obey, with their whole
heart, who is displeased with their ungodly lusts; and is coming forth of his
Holy Habitation, to punish, and reprove, because of them; that they oh Island,
may know that they have rebelled against him, and displeased him, in letting
their hearts be carried away, and exalted with the Riches which thou brings
forth, and yields unto them. For why, oh Island, should thy Inhabiters
dishonor the God of the whole Earth, through being puffed up, and exalted by
the abundance of Fruit which thou brings forth? For does not he, who is the God
of the whole Earth, who causes the former, and the latter Rain to come upon
thee, (that thou may bring forth fruit) create all things for his own glory
and honor, to be used in his fear, and wisdom, and not to spend in satisfying
the lust? that why, oh Island, should not thy Inhabiters know, that he, who
causes Rain to come on thee, will above all be Honored, in blessing them with
an everlasting blessing, that walks humbly before him; and in pouring forth his
judgments, in the fierceness of his wrath, upon those which obey him not, but
obey unrighteousness, which oh Island thy Inhabiters do: For which cause the
wrath of God is near to be revealed from Heaven in flames of fire, that
vengeance may be taken upon all ungodly men; and indeed, to deal plainly with
thee oh Island, thou art filled with them, as I may take the witness of God in
every Man's Conscience, (who knows thee in the State thou now art in) to bear
record, that plainly thy State and Condition is seen to be miserable; for the
wickedness that abounds in thee is great, and the weight of it has lain for
sometime upon my Spirit: which thing I am now moved to publish unto thee; and I
dare not but do it. For verily the Lord has let me see that his wrath is waxed
hot, and nigh to break forth in thee, if repentance be not speedily sought, by
turning from the evil, and choosing that which is good. And I clearly seeing,
oh ye the Inhabitants of this Island, that there is no other way, whereby you
can escape the heavy hand of God, but by turning away from the evil of your
ways, and coming into amendment of life. Therefore I am constrained, by the
compassion of the Almighty, which is to all your Souls, to lay some things
before you, as an Information unto you. But this first I would have you to
understand, that while you are in that State (the greatest part of you are now
in) I cannot speak peace unto you. For if I should, then I should be like
those abominable Deceivers, which are among you, who prophecy smooth things
unto you for their own ends; that they may live in the same excess of rioting
with you; but little of them (the covetous hireling Priests I mean) I need say
unto you: For you know that they are a company of men, not at all like any,
whom God ever sent into his work, to convert Souls unto himself; but more like
a company of men that never heard of Christ, nor has any regard unto peoples
Souls, as their fruits makes manifest, and by the fruit every Tree is know. As
Christ said, by their fruits the false Prophets should be known. And this oh
Barbados may be a sufficient proof, that thy Teachers are not according to the
mind of God, their disorderly walking; but believe them not, though they cry
peace, peace unto thee; while the evil abounds in thee, as it does at this day.

Unto all you, who are the Masters, and Owners of the several Plantations, am
I moved to write, and to lay some things before you to be considered of in the
fear of the Lord. You, many of you, has many under you as Slaves, and
Bondmen: Therefore consider your Places, and be not high minded, but fear;
provoke not your Servants through cruel usage, for that the Lord hates; they
are of the same Blood, and Mould, you are of; and you must give an account of
your actions unto the Lord, as well as they, and with him there is no respect
of persons; for his Judgment is True, and Just; and the Sentence which
proceeds out of his Mouth is right, according to that of God in all
Consciences; so listen, and take a word of advice, now while the Day and Time
is, that you may learn Wisdom, and make your Peace with God. But know first,
that before you can come into peace, with God, you must let his witness search
your hearts; and truly it will find much in the hearts of many of you, which is
to be condemned and denied, before you can come into peace with God; for he is
pure, and hates the Garment spotted with the flesh; and he turns his mighty
hand against all Iniquity, where his pure witness finds it. And oh ye Heads of
the several Plantations of this Island, You are generally a lofty, and high
Minded People, given to the Lusts and Pleasures of this present Evil World;
that many of you are become without sense or feeling of any thing of God; that
the God of this world has so far prevailed, that your eyes are become eves
wholly blind; that truly the darkness, even the thick darkness, which lies over
you, may easily be felt by any whose hearts God has opened unto himself; and
into this great, and thick darkness, and benumbed State you have run your
selves, by giving way, and following your ungodly lusts, which is conceived in
your Earthly Minds, which run forth in Covetousness, after the earth; which
many of you have chosen to be your God, and so have denied the living God, who
gives you life, and being; and all creatures, that consider; you whose hearts
are thus bowed down to the Earth, and Earthly things, your State and Condition
is miserable; for the God of Heaven and Earth, will require an account of you,
for all his Creatures (which he has given you) which you spend in satisfying
your Lusts, and able to stand before him you will not be; and your mouths will
be stopped by his Witness, in your Consciences, which now in this the Day
wherein the long suffering of God is upon you, you reject, and do despite unto.
And thus you reject the day of your Visitation: And verily it is nigh at an end
with many of you, that the day of destruction hastens greatly, and it shall
overtake every one that is proud, and lifted up: Therefore consider, while time
is, for it is precious. And truly it will be your burden one day, that you have
spent so much precious time, in rioting, feasting, and drunkenness; through
which you destroy Gods Creatures; when, as alas, many of your Servants, both
white People, and Negroes, are like to perish, and be destroyed for want of the
Creatures: and thus you burden the Creation, by being Subject unto your own
Lusts: For consider, if the Wisdom of God did lead you, it would bring you to
use his Creatures to his Glory; and then it would be your care, Oh ye Heads,
and Owners of the several Plantations, that none of your Servants, or Slaves
did perish, or suffer, for want of the Creatures; and also it would be your
care, if the Wisdom of God you lived in, which is the Wisdom of the Creation,
that none of your Servants, nor any under you should abuse themselves, and the
Creatures of God through drunkenness. And then if these things be your care,
God would bless you; but so long as you are bad examples your selves unto your
Servants, you strengthen them in their wicked deboist ways; and thus you
become guilty before the Lord, both of their, and your own wickedness; then let
amendment of life be brought forth, that youmay become good examples to all
under you, in patience, in moderation, and sobriety, in your Words and Actions;
and that will be the way, whereby you may escape Gods sore Judgments, and be
freed from his wrath to come. For you being good examples both in word and
behavior, this will answer the witness of God in all you are over: and this
will reach more deeply into their hearts, and constrain more obedience then all
your cruel usage (in whipping them,) For consider, if you whip them for
drunkenness, and such like things, and you your selves be guilty of the same,
this greatly hardens their hearts against you, and provokes them to curse you
behind your backs. And thus you cause the Name of God to be blasphemed, through
your disorderly walking; and being bad examples unto them, whom in the Wisdom
of God you should rule over, and keep subject unto you; as I said, being bad
examples your selves, this looses your Authority, which otherwise you might
have, if you were kept in the Fear and Wisdom of God your selves: For that
would keep you humble before Lord; that though you had much of the earth, yet
you would not be exalted, nor lifted up in your selves, which indeed (Oh ye
Heads of the several Plantations) is your greatest sin. For in that which is
so exalted, and lifted up, by having much of the earth, is all iniquity
wrought, and all deceiveableness of unrighteousness: and thus the earth is made
a curse unto you, as it is unto all whose minds are not redeemed out of it. And
none comes to know, and have their minds redeemed out of the earth, but they
that come to know him revealed in them, who is from heaven, (to wit) the Son of
of God, the second Adam, who redeems, and leads out of the first Adams State,
who is of the earth, earthly. And so all whose minds are in the earthly
things, they are in the unredeemed State, drove into the earth from God, where
he rules that fills the earth with spoil, and violence, the old Serpent,
the Devil, and Satan, by whose power all are subjected, that knows not
something of God in them, to keep their minds out of the earth. For all
naturally in the fall and transgression, are inclined unto the earth, and its
Riches and Glory; and so it keeps them from seeking after the Riches, and
Glory, which is Eternal. And truly this is the State of many, who have much of
the earth, as you have, the Inhabitants of this Island: and truly the hearts of
many of you are greatly corrupted through the abuse of it, and your consciences
greatly burdened, through cheating, and cousening one another about it, that
your wickedness is grown to an exceeding great height; yea, as I said, it is
become even as a Mountain before the Lord; that long you cannot stand, except
repentance be sought, and amendment of life be brought forth. For the Lord has
spared long, and born much; for your sins exceeds both in greatness, and
number, the sins of many people; even as far as you exceed many people in
earthly riches, and honor; that though you become famous in the worlds eye;
yet you do not appear so in Gods eye; for he loathes your cursed practices, and
will assuredly punish you for them; that though you account it now pleasure to
riot in the day time, yet your pleasure shall be turned into sorrow; and all
your laughing and rejoicing into mourning, and howling; that it were good for
you to consider betime, upon what ground you stand, that if peradventure God
might grant you repentance to amendment of life; so that you might his sore and
great punishment escape, which no way you can escape, but by speedy repentance:
Therefore take yet a word of advice, oh ye great, and rich ones in the earth,
If you intend that God shall bless you, then put away far from you all
high-mindedness, cruelty, and hard-heartedness, which at this day abounds among
you in your several Plantations. And you the Heads and Owners of them are
deeply guilty of these things. Now to remove these, and such like things from
your several Plantations, this would be your way, Put such men in place, to be
Overseers of your Servants, as fear God, and hate drunkenness, and swearing,
and all such things, that they may rule over them in moderation, and not in
Tyranny, and hard-heartedness; and this will be the way to beget love in your
Servants unto you, and one to another; and so love being begotten in your
Servants unto you, and one unto another, this will stop abundance of cruelty,
and wickedness, which does abound among you; and let not your Overseers (I warn
you all) rule in such Tyranny over your Negroes; for if you do, you will bring
blood upon you, and the cry of their blood shall enter into the ears of the
Lord of Sabbath, (for he made them, and gives them life) and it shall cause
his wrath to break forth upon you, and if you thus provoke the Lord, by letting
them, who are your Slaves, be wrongfully entreated, and unmercifully used, it
is much, if the Lord bring them not, as a Rod upon you: however let the Lord be
clear, and me clear in his sight, in that I warn you of it now, while you have
time to mend it; and take heed you abuse not the long-suffering of God, but let
it lead you to Repentance, and amendment of life; for if the long-suffering of
God comes once to an end, that his Spirit leave striving with you, know then,
That your State is miserable; for no other way can, either high or low, rich or
poor, bond or free, come to be reconciled in peace with God, and escape his
judgments, but by giving regard to be led by his Spirit, which striveth with
them, in reproving of them for their sin, which separateth them from God: (Now
Mark) that which reproves you for sin, is of another nature then sin; for it is
the gift of God, which is come upon you, and all men, to give life unto all
that receive it, and walk as it leads. For it leads all that believes in
it, and obeyes it, from death, and all dead works unto life; and so redeemeth
from the earth; where the bondage is, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God: which Liberty is not to the Lusts, but to the Soul, which the Lusts wars
against; And from whence comes wars and fightings? Are they not from the Lusts?
and whence comes all pride, and arrogance? comes it not from that part, which
keeps the Soul in death? So consider, you who are exalted, and lifted up in
pride; and whose life stands in perishing things, your Souls are not
quickened unto God; for you reject, and hate the Light, an appearance of the
second Adam, who is the quickening Spirit; who is the bread of God which never
decays, which all that eats, has life in them, and lives for ever; and
none else have life eternal abiding in them, but they who live by this bread.
For alas, they are degenerated from God by transgression; they feed, and are
nourished up in the Lusts of Ignorance, which alienates their minds from the
life of Christ, and keeps them strangers to it, in the envious and murderous
Spirit. And no murderer has eternal life abiding in them, but is condemned
with Cain; of whose antiquity all murderers, and envious men are. So read your
stock, and offspring, you that are offering up Prayers for a Sacrifice, and
yet have slain the witness of Truth in you; that it lies slain in the streets
of the spiritual Sodom, and Egypt, where the Lord of Life was ever Crucified.
And you that are scoffers, and deriders of others, Ishmael is the root from
whence you spring, and your ground is cursed; for your, hearts are set to do
wickedness: And you that are scoffers, your tongues are set on fire on Hell;
that so long as they are not bridled, your Religion is vain, and your prayers
not heard with God, nor your Sacrifices accepted. For they are not by Faith,
(so long as you live in the scoffing nature) for you are like a wave of the
Sea, (that is your Figure) foaming out of your own shame, and sending forth the
bitter waters, as Envy, Wrath, Hatred, and Malice; and these all spring from
the corrupt Fountain, which corrupts the Earth, and defiles the the place where
God should dwell; (to wit) the heart and conscience; that so the strong man
keeps the house in peace, and persuades you all is well; and that Christ has
taken away your sins, and that his Righteousness is imputed to you in the ^ight
of God; and persuades you, that God looks upon you in Christ, and not as you
are of your selves: and thus feeds you with vain hopes; when as alas, you
neither know Christ, nor his Righteousness imputed to you; but are in that
nature, which is against his gift, which is come upon you to justification of
life. Mark, the gift which justifies life, condemns all dead works, and all
disobedience; for which sake, the wrath of God comes upon all men to
condemnation, and through the obedience and Righteousness of Christ, the gift
it comes upon all men. So you that are speaking of the Righteousness of Christ,
being imputed unto you; and you in disobedience to his gift in your
consciences; you are they that set up another faith then the Apostles did, who
witnessed the faith of Abraham, which was imputed unto him for righteousness;
by which faith he obeyed the voice of God; but you that are speaking of Christ's
Righteousness imputed to you, and obeys your lusts, and vile affections; you
are them upon whom the Righteousness of God is to be revealed in flames of
fire, because you hold the truth in unrighteousness. That I say, that which may
be known of God is manifest in you, and God has showed it unto you, that he
has enlightened you; and he does not desire the death of a sinner, but rather
all should come to his gift (which through the obedience of Christ, is
perfectly come upon them) and live; for the gift of God is life eternal, but
the wages of sin is death. All those who are in the pleasure of sin, they are
forth of the Righteousness of faith, and so forth of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; for by faith Moses denied the pleasures of sin, and so was
counted worthy to suffer affliction among the people of God; who ever suffered
by such as live in hard-heartedness, and in the lusts of Ignorance, and
according to the will of the flesh; For he that is born after the flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the Spirit. So all by the light, which you
are enlightened withal: Read your selves, and search your own hearts, and take
warning betime; for verily, if you live according to the flesh, you must die;
but if you, through the Spirit, mortify the deeds of the flesh, then you shall
live. And thus I have set before you, Death, and Life; and the way whereby you
may come to repentance and amendment of life, and so come to the knowledge of
the truth, and be saved; which is the whole desire of my soul: that though you
choose death, and do live according to your own lusts; I shall be clear in the
sight of God, in that in faithfulness I have written, what he requires of me;
which otherwise I could not be clear of your blood. For verily, the Lord has
let me see, that he will not spare you long, except the evil of your doings
you turn from. So take this as a warning unto you all; both high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free; though most it was upon me, to write unto the Heads,
and Owners of the several Plantations; yet it may serve as a warning unto all
the Inhabitants of this Island, or a sore judgment nigh at hand, if Repentance
be not speedily sought,

Barbados the 10 th day of the 8 th Month 1660. R. P.

FINIS.

