A LETTER Sent to the Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker of the
House of Commons, wherein is truly Related the great Victory obtained by Gods
blessing, by the Parliaments Army, Against the Kings Forces, Near NEWBERY, on
Sunday the 27. of this present October.

Which Letter was read in the House of Commons, and Ordered to be Printed.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London. Printed for Edw Husbands. October 29. 1644.

Honorable Sir,
THough our other Employments, in and about the Army, may excuse us in point of
News; yet being Eyewitnesses of this late Fight, and knowing your kind
acceptance of some presents, though without the Circle, and especially desirons
to express our joy for this success, which the Lord of Hoasts upon his own day
has vouchsafed us, We presume to press in with the crowd, and to make it more
clear, shall give you the preceding circumstantes: After a weeks tedious, but
speedy mareh of my Lord Generals Infantry, and one nights refreshment at
Reading, in two days further progress we drew up before Newbery, as near the
Town as the Enemies Canon would suffer. This was upon Friday the 25 of October.
the King kept within the town, guarded by his Artillery; but his body of horse
and foot drew out into Speenfield, the midway twixt the town and castle; both
to make his Army seem more numerous, and to embattle them in a plaer of
extraordinary abvantage; that day afforded nothing save an interview (the
interposing river hindered our desired fight, on their side appeared rather a
declining to be engaged, either that their numbers were not equal, or from an
expectation of Prince Ruperts advance with 3000 Horse or Dragoons, and the
return of the Earl of Northampton from Banbury with 1000.) The Enemies strength
is reported to have bin 8000 foot and 5000 horse, which albeit a gallant Army,
yet upon our drawing into a Battalia, they durst not take the field, but to
counterpoise our numbers with his stratagems; he fell mainly to fortify the
town, especial^y the Avenues, and having rats'd his batteries, and lined the
hedges, stood upon his guard, and with some great pieces, where he saw the
biggest bodies, and most advantage, liberally sent us some balls, which killed 2
or 3 horse, but hurt not their riders. For many hours some parties of Horse
skirmisht twixt both the Armies; in which play we had the best: Of our part,
but one man fell, of theirs four or five, of which, one was Knighted. It being
impossible to engage them, without much hazard, that night the greater part of
our Army marched to Cheveley. The Horse commanded by Sir Will. Waller, and Sir
Will. Balfore: The Foot, by Sergeant Major General Skippon, whilst the other
incampt before the East side of the Town, and ordered by the Earl of
Manchester, at one same time having agreed, to storm the Garrison on both
sides. That night, and the next, we quartered in the open field: but neither
the coldness of the Weather, nor want of usual Provision, any whit
disanimated the Soldier; the expectation of fight; swallowing up all other
extremities. Howbeit, most of them had three days Provision prepared by
Command in's Snapsack. By day break upon Sunday, the Horse and Foot commanded
by Sir Will. Waller, and Major Genesis Skippon, were upon their march, in four
hours surrounded Dunnington Castle, and made their approach toward the West of
Newbery. By the way we intercepted two or three Carts of their Provision,
intended they say for His Majesty; but in respect an unworthy race about Him,
share with Him, and that our men more needed it, we disposed it. And at the
same time took near 100. Horse and Foot of theirs, straggling. To recompense
which, they fell upon our Rear from the Castle, and took ten or 12. of ours
prisoners. Upon this march we received the report, that Newcastle was taken by
storm, and the Vlster Rebels totally defeated. Happy news: but of double use,
so near our engagement. It was one, ere the train and rear came up, and near
three ere we could be put into Battalia. With extraordinary shouts, and other
symptoms of courage, and joy, the Western Body advanced, and by the forlorn
hopes of Horse, quickly begun the fight, which with as much eagerness was
seconded by the Foot; so as for three hours the fight was maintained with as
much resolution and bravery on our side, and desperateness on the other, as
has been seen since the commencement of these Wars; the Canon and small shot
on both sides firing with as quick a motion as was possible; and amongst the
foot, to speak impartially, his Excellencies Regiment did eminently well, of
whom and of the rest we can speak very justly; We neither saw man or party,
horse or foot, either to dissert his duty or dis-hearten his fellow; but after
a long and hot dispute, we beat them first from their work, and then from their
Ordinance, 9 in number; in which Achievement we lost a few men, but with them
Capt. Gawler, a Glamorganshire Gent. who by an honorable and triumphant hazard
bequeathed it to us with his life, an expression sufficient to entitle him True
to his charge, notwithstanding his captivity in Cornwall. The day was of so
much discontent to His Majesty, that wrapping up his losses with the night,
auhour after midnight he marched out of the town with an Attendant-troop only,
toward Winchester, and sent up his Canon, Carriages and Baggage to the Castle,
where (at daybreak) we saw them placed. Upon the first intelligence of their
departure, Col: Cromwell followed the body of the Enemy two hours before day,
the issue of which as yet we hear not of. Our men are full of spirit, and
heightened by this Victory. The Enemy have little to support them, but their
Rodomonts. In the mean time, as an addition and signal of good success, we
have the Earl of Cleaveland prisoner, taken by a Lieutenant of Col: Berkleys,
he wonders how Gen: Goring escaped; but his brother paid his account, being
shot dead as he charged; most of his Troop were cut of: Major Trevillian, and
diverse other whose bodies are seen, but names as yet undiscovered: Above 200.
slain of theirs, and 300. more Prisoners; of which, Philpot, Mildmay, son to
Sir Humphrey and Nevyt. We hope for a prosecution of this victory. God direct
our Council, continue our courage, prevent our wants, and enlarge our hearts
with praise. For this silences their braves of Cornwall, and indeed it was
resented by our men, with that indignation, that very few of that County had
quarter afforded. The King at His departure hence, told the Mayor (as they say)
that they were wicked Roundheads: For since His being amongst them, they had
never furnished Him with any intelligence; whereof the Cornish had upon every
occasion given Him notice of every thing.

We have Ordered and Proclaimed hereupon a penalty, That every man that has any
of the Enemies Army, bring them to the main Guard, for the use of the Army. We
have commanded in also many Teems, and Horse to draw our new Train, and the
wounded men, and have assisted the Commissaries for provision: And
understanding that twelve Chests for Surgery are coming toward us, shall
carefully see them disposed according to your intentions. Surgeons are (...)
wanting; and such as be in pay, and absent, shall be noted against Musters.
This is all, save that by Divine Providence, this poor Town was saved from
firing by the Enemy, rather then we should possess it. Suffer only the
Addition, that we are

Sir, your Honors most humble and most faithful Servants, Martin Pindar,
Thomas Herbert John Prickman, Stephen White.

Newbery, 28. October. Monday. The Surgeons Chests of Medicaments are come
this day very seasonably, and we have distributed them to such as are here to
receive them.



FINIS.

