THE Inhumane CARDINAL, OR, Innocence Betrayed.

A NOVEL.

Written By a Gentlewoman, for the Entertainment of the Sex.

LONDON, Printed for John Harding, at the Bible and Anchor in Newport-street,
and Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

TO HER Royal Highness THE PRINCESS ANN, OF DENMARK.
MADAM,
GReat is my Confusion when I would approach; an humble Awe checks my Ambition;
and I am afraid to lay so mean a Trifle at the Feet of Your Royal Highness. But
as with Heaven, a devoted Heart attones for a worthless Offering; so Most
Excellent Princess, let the fervent Zeal, which inclines me toward your
Service, excuse this too too bold an Undertaking.

You are a Princess whose Presence creates an Universal Joy and Veneration in
all your pleased Beholders. We view in your Majestic Lineaments, the August
Air of Royal Ancestors: Whilst with this becoming Majesty, something so
agreeably affable is joined, that your humble Creatures find their Access both
easy and delightful: And those who have the Honor and Happyness to attend your
Royal Person, plainly discover those Moral and Princely Virtues, refined with
sincere Christian Piety, which Beautify and Reign in your Heroic Soul: and the
unequaled Character they give, raises the love of Virtue in the Breast of the
most stupid.

It Is said Example goes before Precept; and that of all Examples we are fondest
of those our Princes set before us. How incorrigible then are these polluted
Times, when You, Illustrious Madam, stand a Pattern most Excellently Glorious?

The Prayers of all good Men daily importune Heaven on your behalf, nor are
their Prayers in vain; nor do the bounteous Powers barely behold such worth,
without reward; Blessings crowd around, and leave (I hope) no wish unsatisfied.

Blessed in the Royal Partner of your Bed, that Great Good Man; words that but
seldom truly join; Blessed your Self, and blessing all, in that Lovely Blooming
Prince, the Duke of Gloucester; whose forward Youth Wings the breath of Fame;
and were her Tongues innumerable, when she reports of him, some wonder must be
left untold. Joy of the Present Age, and Darling hopes, on which the future one
depends. Oh may he Inherit the Extracted Virtues of all our British Kings; the
Courage of our Present Sovereign; but a Fortune peculiarly Great, peculiarly
his own; Conspicuous, and far above whatever went before: that Succeeding
Worlds, may to his Glorious Name, justly add the Epithet of Happy.

I ought now to say something, in reference to the following Sheets; but my
ravished Pen has been entertained upon so sublime a Theme, that it disdains to
descend; and my heart full of Rapture, that is, full of your Royal Higness,
will only give me leave to endeavor the expressing, how much I am,

Madam, Your Royal Highness's Devoted humble Servant, Mary Pix.

THE Inhumane Cardinal, OR Innocence Betrayed.
ALL that are conversant in History, must remember the unbecoming Sway Donna
Olimpia held in the Court of Rome, during the Papacy of Innocent the Tenth. The
Fiction of Hercules's changing Clothes with his beloved Mistress, ought here to
have been practiced; for that Pope gave himfelf wholly up to Laziness and
Effeminacy, whilst Olimpia governed both in Church and State.

If any person wanted Ecclesiastical preferment, Donna Olimpia received their
Presents and Address; if an Ambassador was earnest for dispatch, her Interest
alone could obtain it. Thus she remained courted, adored by all; Caressing few,
unless it were the Cardinals. Those she was very fond of making her Creatures,
that her Power might rule in all their Councils.

And amongst that Scarlet Fraternity, Antonio Barbarino was the Man she most
affected. He was wicked, as her vilest Wishes; and cunning as her subtlest
Thoughts, when they formed Revenge; Revenge which was her darling Pleasure;
Witness the Rage she, for years, maintained against her own Son, only because
his Wife was great and beautiful.

But to return to our matter: This Cardinal Antonio was something cold, and did
not follow her Measures so exactly as she desired; much she would have done, to
have obtained the absolute Ascendant over him; and Fortune, at last, became
obliging to her Wish: She had observed the Cardinal, in some of his late
Visits, to appear very sad and thoughtful; she often pressed him to know the
Cause, whilst he for some time continued to evade her Importunity; at length,
being alone with her, and she becoming again inquisitive, he ushering his
Discourse with a Sigh, began thus.

Madam, the fear that I shall stand wholly corrected, and condemned, by your
severer Virtue, has thus long deterred me from disclosing my Tortures. I know,
Madam, you have Designs which you would give the World to effect; prove but
then indulgent to those dear guilty Wishes I am going to discover: and here I
solemnly swear to assist you with my utmost power, in all your Commands, of
what nature soever. This Promise was too kind, not to gain the like Assurance
from Donna Olimpia; and the Cardinal proceeded.

Ambition only fired my Youth, and led me on to Greatness; but now a gentler
Flame has filled my Heart, yet more tormenting. I am in Love, O Olimpia;
raging mad with Love, to that degree possessed, that if I enjoy not the Object
of these violent Desires, life it self will become a burden insupportable.

Though Olimpia was declining in Age, and never any exact Beauty, yet so vain
is Woman; that she began to hope for a declaration of Love; sets her Face in
the best order; puts on affected Looks; turns her Eyes from Antonio's: and
seems in great expectation. But he quickly undeceived her, by adding: It is the
beautiful Melora, Daughter to the Marquess of Coure, now Ambassador from
France. Fair, charming as an Angel; her Eyes shoot amorous Fire, yet are
repleat with Modesty; and much I fear, no Temptation, though dressed with
alluring Pleasure, or dazzling Wealth, will overcome her. 'The vicious, answered
wicked Olimpia, yield of themselves; ^^or were it worth your care or mine, were
she not virtuous. 'Leave this business, added she, to my conduct; and, provided
your spoil not my Design with unseasonable Frugality; I Will engage to bring
Melora to your Arms. The passionate Priest was transported, fell at her Feet,
embraced her Knees, and promised her inestimable Treasures, if she made good
her Word. She asked him, if Melora knew him: he assured her, No; for there had
been a misunderstanding betwixt her Father and him; and he was the only Person
of his Rank, that did not frequent the Ambassador's House, nor had ever seen
her but at Church; where, added he, those lovely unheeding Eyes have never
marked me with a fixed regard; the brighter Stars that now alone must rule my
Fate. After other Discourses to the same purpose, the Cardinal took his leave,
and that night sent Olimpia a Dressing-table covered with Plate, valued at
eight Thousand Crowns; for he knew that Woman avaricious, and took the right
way to hasten her Endeavors for his satisfaction. Soon after, this bribed
Designer did the French Ambassador a signal piece of Service, in a business of
importance; and when he would have made her a Present for that Favor: she
refused it, saying, all she desired in return, was: That he would send his
Daughter, the fair Melora, to see her; for though a Woman, that Lady's Face had
so charmed her: she even longed to contract a Friendship with her. The good
Marquess was transported to hear what an Honor was designed his dear loved
Daughter; and delayed not sending her to wait upon Olimpia, who caressed her at
an unusual rate; discovered all her little insinuating Arts of Fondness, whilst
the deluded Maid was, beyond expression, pleased to hear her talk so kindly; to
see all her rich Cabinets, and those Millions of Curiosities she was Mistress
of. Many pretty Presents, (at the first Visit) Olimpia forced Melora to accept;
nor would she part with her without a firm Promise of her coming every day to
see her; which this innocent Virgin most willingly agreed to, and performed.
Nothing now was more talked of, or envied amongst the Ladies, then this new
Friendship: they appeared at every public place together; and Melora having a
Garb suitable to that Greatness, quickly added to the number of her Adorers:
but that was the only Restriction Olimpia gave her, not to entertain the
Addresses of any, still hinting at some wonderful Design she had for her; and
always saying to her, That Heaven had sure ordained that lovely Face, that
august Mien, for Sovereignty. Nor could Olimpia (as much as she was inclined to
it) flatter, in commending her, for she was really amiable to a Miracle.

She was of stature tall, shaped beyond the Art of a Description, and moved
with a Majestic Air. Her Eyes were black and shining; and awed the trembling
Lover from gazing long. Her Hair seemed to vie with them for Charms and Luster;
then her Skin was of that amazing whiteness, 'twould raise emotions in the most
retired Recluse. In fine, her Hands, Arms, and every agreeable Lineament of
that exact Frame, her Body, forced from the most envious of her own Sex, the
Appellation of a perfect Beauty. Nor did the bounteous Powers stop with these
Graces; but gave also a Mind composed of Harmony: wise, as experienced Age;
witty, as Youth, inspired with Poetry: and innocent, as harmless Childhood.

Oh Melora! after-Ages shall with pity read, even to the end of Time, that such
an Angel should be given to the Guardianship of a Devil; for so cursed Olimpia
proved.

Olimpia used a most engaging way to all Persons, where her Interest was
concerned; and though to the indifferent World, and those beneath her, she
seemed haughty, and full of pride; yet her inward Conversation was affable, and
to a wonder pleasing; the highest Charms of which she had even industriously
bestowed upon Melora; and so perfectly was that young Creature indear'd to her,
that she would as soon have died, and as willingly, as disobliged her.

The impatient Cardinal complained, and told Olimpia, she moved not half so
fast as his Desires. But this cunning Artificer resolved to lay a sure
Foundation before she began so difficult a work. And the first step toward it,
was the desiring Melora to let a famous Florentine Painter take her Picture in
Miniature; which was granted, as soon as asked. The Piece was exquisitely done,
and presented to Olimpia. All seemed now to favor her Designs; and she only
wanted an obliging Opportunity to introduce her well-laid Story to Melora.
Which thus happened: Olimpia coming from the Pope's Palace, called for her dear
Companion (as she termed Melora) who was at her Father's House, entertaining
Donna Brandina, a Roman Lady of Quality; but of a fantastic Humor: the chief
Business of her Life, being to find out all the loving Affairs amongst the
great Ones, either in Court or City. Nay, so eager was she at this
insignificant Curiosity, that she kept a Correspondency even with
Chamber-maids. After Olimpia came in, Brandina began again to tell over all the
impertinent amorous Adventures she had lately heard; but perceiving them not
much delighted with her foolish Relations: she, at length, took her leave, to
the wished desire of the two friendly Ladies, who longed to enjoy themselves
privately. For the accomplishment of which Donna Olimpia proposed taking the
Air a few miles out of Town: Melora being her perfect Devotee, with
cheerfulness agreed. As soon as their Coach was disengaged from the Hurry of
Rome, that sweet French Woman, looking upon Olimpia with a Smile: Madam, said
she, Donna Brandina came to me to day with important News; and has told me a
Story, which has extremely diverted me. What is it, for Heavens sake, answered
Olimpia, that talkative Creature could say to please thee, my Dear? It seems,
replied the fair one, your Highness, out of your immense Goodness, setting a
value upon the Trifle you commanded (my Picture) has ordered a Lapidary to set
it in Diamonds; which this inquisitive Lady finding out, concludes a piece of
Gallantry done by some Lover; and has placed me amongst her Virgins, that are
concerned in Heroic Amors, as yet to her undiscovered. For (continued Melora
laughing) she keeps a daily Journal of all the Intrigues that pass, and is now
almost distracted to know my humble Servant.

It is strange, said Olimpia, that empty Creature should guess at hidden
Truths; for since Chance has broke the Ice, I will own to thee, my dearest
Girl, it is an illustrious Lover, is giving that deserved Ornament to thy
charming Picture. 'How, Madam, said Melora! nay, if you resolve to rally your
Servant, I must remain dumb, and only answer with confusion and Blushes.

No, replied Olimpia, in a grave Tone, this is as true as you are fair and
good; there is a Person in the World is in Love with you. In Love with you! Oh
weak Expression! added she vehemently; is dying for you; suffers all the
violent pangs, Poetry e're feigned, or man e're felt.

His Quality is Supreme; yet his Ambition terminates in being your Slave; then
be not angry that I have given him your Picture: For though you are bright as
an Angel, and Mistress of unequaled Charms; yet he deserves, my Fairest, even
you, ended Olimpia, embracing her. Whatsoever is acted by my Divinest
Patroness, said Melora, bowing low, by me, with strictest Obedience and highest
Pleasure shall be observed; and when you, my ever honored Friend, grow weary
of my faithful Heart: dispose of it as you please, your Commands must needs be
easy. 'Be assured, Charmer (answered this designing Lady) I will never part
with that inestimable Jewel, but upon Terms that shall wholly redound to your
Advantage.

She paused upon this, and left the Subject for Melora to consider some few
days without farther explaining her self. Then seeming in a very pleasant
Humor, she takes Melora into her Cabinet, and asked her smiling, if since their
last private Conference, she had not dreamed of an accomplished Cavalier
sighing at her Feet, and dying for her Love? My Thoughts, replied that modest
Maid, so seldom frame an Idea of Mankind, that it is almost impossible that
they should disturb my Dreams.

But methinks, said Olimpia, one recommended by me, should make a little deeper
impression on that frigid Heart. of yours. 'Behold here, added she, (taking out
a gold Box, and opening it) your Picture which with much ado I obtained from
the Amorous Prince for an hour or two. Melora took it in her hand, and viewed
it with wonder; nor could she choose; for it was a dazzling Object, being set
Oval fashion in large Diamonds: Round the fairest, which was uppermost, these
words were engraven;

Dim, to the Luster of her Eyes. Now, Madam, cried Melora eagerly, you must
forgive my Curiosity, and permit me, like my Sex, to be wondrous inquisitive:
For the Title of Prince, which you have given this unknown, and the brightness
of these Jewels, strike me into amazement; I cannot believe your Goodness would
abuse my Credulity with fictitious Stories; nor can I have Pride enough to
imagine a Prince my Lover. 'What I told you before, I solemnly confirm, says
Olimpia, he is not only your Lover, but Slave; yet over part of the World an
Absolute Sovereign: All this is truth; but it is a Truth of such a consequence,
that I must lay upon you wonderful Injunctions e're I venture to unravel it,
your faithful Breast must lock this Secret up as safe as if my Life depended
upon disclosing it; or if there is any thing you hold dearer, by that I conjure
you, let not your own Father now the least Circumstance of this Discovery; and
if you dare trust me wholly with the Management of your Fortune, which 'twould
break my Heart to doubt; in earnest you shall suddenly appear the most
glorious, as well as the most beautiful Princess in Europe.

So perfectly did Melora confide in Olimpia, that she made no scruple to rely
upon her Conduct, and promised even with Imprecations, a most sincere and exact
Secrecy, to whatsoever she would relate.

Olimpia gave order not to be disturbed, and began thus: You must arm your self
with Patience to hear a Story, that will be of a long continuance before it
points at you. Melora, by a graceful bow, and continuing silent, let Olimpia
know her Expectation, and Attention; when that cruel Princess, seeming a while
to recollect her self, dressed up a true Story in the following words.

The History of Alphonsus and Cordelia.
Otho Duke of Ferrara and Modena had an only Son named Alphonsus, who was above
what I am able to describe; all the World acknowledging him accomplished to the
highest Degree. His Father was yet lusty, and stirring in State Affairs, which
gave Alphonsus liberty to follow many youthful Adventures.

Amongst the rest, he proposed to a Favorite of his, called Don Castro (the
beginning of a glorious Summer) taking a Ramble in the adjacent Countries under
borrowed Names: the Prince was very young and very brisk, when this was
mentioned, and his Companion being suitable for years and Temper, they soon
agreed, and put their Design into Action. Alphonsus calling himself Don Pedro;
and Castro, Philippo. The morning they began their Frolic, Alphonsus left a
Letter upon his Table for his Father, the Contents of which, only wished him
long life, health, and happiness, begging his Pardon for a youthful Excursion;
which should tend neither to his own, nor any persons prejudice, etc.

The Court was at first mightily alarmed; but Otho recollecting the Humors of
his own Youth, was at length content to hope this was only an innocent Folly.

These noble Rovers had past some weeks, and were got a great distance from
Ferrara, before any extraordinary Occurrence happened to them. They had visited
some Cities; but were now retired into the Country, where Don Pedro (for by
that Name you must understand the Prince) began to complain to his Friend of
the dullness of their Ramble, and inveigh against the fair Sex, for their
Civility in sparing them their Hearts and Liberty. It was such melancholy
Reflections as these, replied Philippo, caused me, at break of day, to fetch a
pensive Walk some distance from hence, where I met with a small Intrigue that
gave me a proportionable Diversion. 'Oh Churl, cried out Don Pedro, how could
you conceal it one moment; Be not so impatient, answers the other; for I think
it scarce worth your hearing: however thus it was, I entered a large Forest,
and after I had walked some time, listening only to the Harmony of the Birds,
and viewing the Verdure of those pleasant Shades, I saw through the Trees,
walking a swift pace, a Cavalier well dressed. After I had a while observed
him, I fancied by his haste, and the time of the day, he was upon some private
Design; therefore not to interrupt him, I left the path that led me after him,
and wandered into another. But Fortune resolved that should not be my last
interview; for in a quarter of an hour's space, I was come to a high Wall where
I percev'd my Spark some yards from me, waiting in a disconsolate posture, and
seeming to expect something from thence. I should he had not discovered me; and
my curiosity was such, I could not forbear observing the Event. To that end I
concealed my self behind a Shrub, where I could with ease view what passed. The
Gentleman began to grow very impatient, as I perceived by his Gestures:
sometimes he whistled, which I guessed to be the sign; then walked with a
perturbed pace. At length, quite tired, he cried out: Perfidious Creature!
false as thou art foolish! to squander away thy Patrimony only to satisfy thy
cursed curiosity! After he had raved thus, and vexed himself above an hour: away
he walks, still cursing his unauspicious Stars, and those greater Plagues,
deceitful Women. I laughed, and hugged my self, for being free from all the
Snares of that insinuating Sex. Entertained with these pleasing Thoughts I
hastened homewards; but e're I was got half way, a Fancy seized my Noddle to
return back, and visit the afore-mentioned Wall again, making such a sign as I
had already heard. The Whim pleased me; and methought I was assured, I should
finish the Adventure which this too hasty Gallant had left. Accordingly I
turned my steps, and having reached the place, I had no sooner whistl'd, but my
expectation was answered; for over the Wall came a Key tied to this Billet,
which he gave to the Prince who read these words.

The LETTER.
THE sight this Key procures you, I doubt not, will amply recom^ense your
Bounty and long Waiting; ^ome before day, and creep close along ^he thick
Arbours; if through any sinister accident, you should be discovered: rather
say, you scaled the Walls, or dropped from the Clouds, than own a Correspondency
with

Your humble Servant Lusetta.


There was a Postscript to this effect: I Suppose you have been so long viewing
the Wall, that I need not in form you the little door, whereof this (...) the
Key, is on the West side.

Well, said Don Pedro smiling, and what Advantage do you intend to reap by this
pretty Mistake? 'Truly, answered Philippo, I heartily wish the Gentleman, it
belongs to had it; for I have no mind to hazard my Life in our Italian Families
to see novel Sights. 'Nay, if yo^ are so indifferent, replied the Princ^ you
shall quit your Right in this Adventure to me; for I am confident there is a
fair Lady in the Case, and am resolved, if you desist, to see her.

In vain Philippo used a thousand Arguments, and talked till the Prince
commanded his silence. He was obstinate, nor could a fond Bridegroom long more
for the night's approach, than this rash Noble Youth did for the morning. As
soon as ever the first streaks of day appeared, he begins his Walk. Poor
Philippo parts with much reluctance and fear, resolving to follow him, and
watch thereabouts, till his Return. Don Pedro carefully observed the Directions
he had forced from his Friend, whom he would not suffer to go with him; his
Fate seeming to whisper the Prize he was to gain, would admit no Sharers. When
he had found the place, he softly unlocks the door, which he perceived was left
unbor'd on purpose, and enters a lovely place, beholding both to Art and Nature
for its beauty. He takes the first close Walk, which brought him to the
pleasantest Grotto, your Fancy can possibly represent. It was exactly four
square; and in every corner the knots of Trees were thick, mingling their
Boughs over delicate Marble Seats, whose backs were painted with several
Histories. Long Walks, with leavy Screens, that shut out the Sun's fierce
Beams, conducted you from every of these delightful Seats to the other. In the
midst was a large space adorned with a curious Fountain; that which made this
Fountain so admirable, was the Statue of Venus: at the head of it there was the
Goddess figured in Marble, with Adonis slain at her Feet, whilst from her Eyes
streams incessantly ran down, bathed the loved Youth, and seemed to fill the
vast Cistern underneath, which with an agreeable murmur still received them.
Beyond all this was an exquisite Garden enameled with choicest Flowers and
Fruits.

The Prince had entertained himself a considerable time in this Charming place,
and began to fear the Sight the Letter promised, was only these Rarities;
though, to comfort him, he could at a great distance espy a fair well built
House; and hoped a fairer issue from it. Nor was he disappointed; for e're he
had waited much longer, he through the Trees, discovers a Woman bringing four
crimson Velvet Cushions, which she lays, two upon the ground, and two upon one
of the Marble Seats. After she was gone, our Hero seeks out a place, as near
this Arbor as he could that would conceal him. There was no possibility of
looking into it, without being seen; so that he is forced to go behind, and be
a Hearer only of what the Persons would say, that were to possess those Seats.

He had scarce time to fix himself before he heard the rusling of Silks, and
sweet small Voices: which made him conclude his Neighbors, Ladies. After
general Discourses, not material, one of them said: I cannot but wonder, my
charming Cousin, that the wise Sulpitia should take delight to bury so much
Beauty as yours in obscurity, and confine your Youth to these melancholy
Shades; when but appearing at Court with you, would soon raise your ancient
Noble Family to its pristine Splendor. For I am convinced no Prince, of what
Rank soever, could look upon so lovely a Creature, without laying his Heart and
Crown at her Feet. 'Fy, Cousin, said the other, with a charming Voice, I must
needs chide you for your flattery, and condemn your blaming my Mother's
conduct. You are sensible, the riotous living of some of my Ancestors has so
impaired our Fortunes, that this Seat and a small Revenue, is all remains. In
this depraved Age, without Gold, what can I expect by this little stock of
Beauty, which you talk so much of but vicious Adorers? Would you have my Mother
then expose me to Courts? The thought shocks my Virgin Soul, and makes me start
when no danger's near. Oh! rather, let Cordelia's Name pass obscurely to the
Grave, forgotten, than be remembered, and Dishonor affixed to it.

A noble Resolution, thought our Listener, who now longed to see her Face. Some
time after, they rose to walk, the Prince then crept near as possible, and
putting the leaves aside, beheld the brightest Beauty upon Earth. He stood
immovable, and if the Ladies had looked that way, with half his Attention,
they must have discovered him. Cordelia was dressed in a Gown of green Damask;
the Sleeves were becomingly tucked up to her Shoulders; and trimmed round with
white and red Knots, like Roses. Her shining Hair, in careless Curls, partly
covered her lovely Neck; the rest exactly puffed: adorned with many pretty
Ribons, and some Jewels.

I have described her Garb (said Olimpia smiling, and pointing to a large
Looking-glass that hung in the Closet) but you must look in yonder Mirror to
see her Person. Melora blushed, and Olimpia went on. The Prince, at this
moment, banished from his Breast the Idea of all the Court-Beauties he had ever
seen, and gazed on this Masterpiece of Nature so long, till he had imprinted
Cordelia's Image too deep for time ever to deface. Whilst the Ladies, far from
guessing at an Observer, finished their Walk, and went in, leaving Alphonsus
like one who had seen a Vision, all surpised. When he began to think, he
summons his rambling Humor to his aid, and the improbability of obtaining his
desires. This, and much more, he thought, but all in vain; her Shape, her Mien,
her charming Face; then her noble Mind surpassing all, secured him her Slave
for ever. He resolved a thousand Projects in his working Brain, which way to
obtain access to her. Sometimes he tormented himself, because he had not spoke
to her when she was there; now pleased with the hopes she would return. In
these restless Cogitations he spent most part of the day. As the Evening began
to approach, Don Castro who had often visited the outside of the Wall, was in a
great Consternation; he feared some mischief had befaln the Prince; and knew
not what Method to take to be satisfied. At last not being able to remain
longer in suspense of his safety, he went boldly to the Front of the House, and
knocked at the Gate: the Porter came, and when he had opened it, says Don
Castro; Pray, Friend, what is become of a Gentleman that came this morning into
your Garden? If you have done mischief to him, all your Lives, even to the
highest of your Family, must answer it.

The Fellow all amazed, cried out; I suppose, Sir, you are either mad, or have
mistook the House; for we have no Gentlemen ever come within these Walls, since
my Honored Lord is gone to Heaven (at the mention of whom, the Lowt began to
make a Face, as though Tears would follow). Don Castro, whose Fears were
augmented by this Fellow's, as he thought, pretended ignorance: charged him in
a furious Tone, to be his Conductor to his Friend, or he would send him to a
place just contrary to that he said his Master was in. At this Noise the other
Servants came about them. One discreeter than the rest, ran and acquainted
Sulpitia with this strange story. Sulpitia, whose Daughter was the dearest
Jewel she had on Earth, hearkened to it with an emotion of Spirit, and desired
the Gentleman might be brought to her. When Castro came, he told the whole
matter, just as I have before related, as much as possible, excusing the
Curiosity of his youthful Friend. Lusetta was instantly called, who when she
had heard her Accusation, trembling confessed, That she was seduced by a
Kinswoman for a Sum of Money, to let one Don Ferado see the beautiful
Cordelia: Sulpitia only bid her retire, deferring her punishment to another
time, and hastened into the Garden.

Now whilst this had been acting in the House, the Ladies who were gone to take
their evening Walk, were not free from their surprise; for Alphonsus seeing
them return, resolved to appear and say, what his fierce Love should dictate.
Accordingly he walked toward them, Cordelia lifting up her Eyes at the noise
he made in walking, and seeing so brave a Cavalier in that prohibited place,
shrieked aloud, and would have fled: but he putting one Knee to the Ground,
took hold of her Garment, viewing her with a piercing Air: Divinest Creature,
said he, Heaven e're made, or Man e're worshipped! Fly not; your Guardian Angel
as soon will hurt you as your kneeling Slave. Fate, prodigious Fate, brought me
hither, and now a greater Power ties me at your Feet for ever.

As he would have proceeded, they heard people talking, and Cordelia saw
Sulpitia just by her: Oh Heavens, cried that lovely Maid, my Mother will think
me culpable, and that with consent I have entertained Discourse with this
Intruder. Alphonsus rose astonished to see his Friend there, and turning his
Eyes with anger upon him, was about to speak, when Sulpitia interrupted him, in
saying: Whatever your Designs were, this Gentleman (pointing to Castro) has
told such a plausible story, that I am content to dismiss you without farther
Examination, provided you instantly retire, and trouble our Repose no more.

Though you were a Goddess, answered Alphonsus, as being Mother to this Lady, I
esteemm you little less (bowing to Cordelia) I would not stir till this bright
Fair commanded; let her but speak; let her but say my Presence is an Offense,
and I Will fly fast as I would do, if Honor called; swift, as Cowards fly, when
Death pursues, else I am rooted here. Cordelia blushed; but the curious might
perceive it was not with anger. Her Mother bid her command him thence, and she
obeyed; yet not quite so readily as was expected. He respectfully took his
leave, told Cordelia, with his Eyes that he had left his Heart; turned back,
and seemed to wish she would use it kindly.

Oh, Castro, said the Prince, when they were disengaged, and walking homewards,
Thou have undone me. Thy officious Love has proved my ruin; robbed me of the
only happy moments my life will ever know: now I must wander over the World the
veriest Wretch that eye of time ever saw, whilst this bright Image I have thus
transitorily viewed, wracks my captivated Heart, and takes repose for ever from
my Soul.

I hope, says Castro, this Romantic speech is only to show your Highness's
Parts, and amuse me; for certainly no Idea, how beautiful soever, can ruffle
the calmness of your Royal Temper. 'Dull Creature, replied the Prince, could
thou behold the Miracle, and after that remain so stupid, to believe I am in
Jest? No, I swear it is unalterably fixed by Fate. I must neglect Interest,
Ambition, Glory, and all the noisy Pomp the World affords, since now the study
and business of my life is only to obtain the adored Cordelia. Castro seeing
him in this Rapture, thought 'twas to no purpose to interrupt him; and desired
to hear the story of the day, which the Prince related, and concluding with new
Protestations of his endless Love, they went to their Lodgings. But no Rest had
the amorous Alphonsus, plainly telling his Friend, if he did not contrive some
means, that he might see her again, he must expect to see him dead. Castro at
last began to believe it; for he scarce eat or slept, nor ever seemed pleased,
but when he was talking of Cordelia. In vain did his faithful Servant
remonstrate the necessity of returning to Court: nay, he could not mention it
without putting the Prince in a passion; who solemnly vowed he would never see
that, or his Father more, till he had again blessed his longing Eyes with the
sight of the beloved charming Cordelia. When Castro saw all Arguments, all
Endeavors to reduce his Reason, fruitless: he thought the only Expedient must
be, to procure this much desired Happiness; and in order to it, made inquiry
very strictly about the Village, what Persons resorted to Sulpitia's House. But
could hear of none, except a Friar who was a constant Guest there. He then
examined into the Temper of that Holy man; heard it was jolly, free from care;
that he lived the life of Sense himself, how severe soever his Doctrine was;
though before Sulpitia he carried himself with a becoming Gravity.

This Man Castro resolves to get acquainted with; and understood the way was
easy, only two or three good Treats, and he was yours for ever: he soon
effects his first design; grows wondrous intimate with the Friar, his only
Favorite; and taking his opportunity, cunningly interweaves his Discourse with
many particular Questions: amongst the rest, becoming inquisitive about
Sulpitia's Family, asking what her Resolutions were, concerning her beauteous
Daughter the fair Cordelia; At which the Friar blessed himself, wondering how he
had so much as learnt that Lady's name; in such secure Retirement her Mother
kept her; nay even he, whose Tongue sometimes run of all things, seldom
mentioned them. However this was too dear a Friend to be denied any
satisfaction his Knowledge would afford; and he immediately, at large,
acquaints Castro, how nicely virtuous; and withal, how high Sulpitia's Temper
was; that she rather chose to keep the unimitable Maid immured in the most
secret privacy, than marry her below her Birth, though equal to her scanty
Fortunes. Next that, she carefully avoided Courts and public Places, fearing
the censorious World, which always fixes its fascinating Eyes on the most
lovely Faces.

This Information Castro communicates to the Prince; yet both their industry
could imagine no advantage by it. At these difficulties Alphonsus abandons
himself to Despair; threatens to be rid of life, since no fairer Prospect was
in view to ease his Heart of Love's tormenting Fires. The young compassionate
Lord, distracted with his Master's griefs, proposed the Fryar's making the
motion of a Marriage, under the borrowed Name of Don Pedro. But the Heroic
Prince declined that Offer; resolving first to endeavor the engaging
Cordelia's Heart, and not force the gentle Maid to Bonds, she might think
uneasy. He told Castro he discovered small encouragement from his Acquaintance
with the Friar; unless his Interest could prevail so far, as to engage the
sociable Gownman to introduce him in some Disguise into the Family: then he
might hope to sound Cordelia's Inclinations, and also tell his own, in Terms
moving enough to touch her. Castro promised to undertake it, though he feared
the Task would prove hard to accomplish. In order to this Design, he desires
privacy with that Friar, and in the first place genteely forces a considerable
Sum of Gold upon him, beginning his Discourse with the Merit, Riches, and an
invented Title of Quality for his Friend; adding his desperate Condition
assures him, unless he inclines to pity, and assist, Death must certainly be
the Catastrophe of his Misery. The Friar considered all these Reasons, and
chiefly the Present; yet shrug'd, and said, 'Twas difficult, 'twas dangerously
difficult, desiring time for his Answer; which Castro allowed.

When they met next, the Priest tells him, there was but one possibility of
obtaining the Freedom of the House, and that did neither agree with the good
Man's Conscience, nor was consistent with his Friend's safety. Castro starts at
this; however was eager to know the dangerous Contrivance. You must understand
then (thee obliging Friar goes on) I have often mentioned, at Sulpitia's, that
I expected a Relation of the Dominican Order very suddenly. Now if Don Pedro
could personate him, which is Death by the Law, if discovered, he may have
admittance with me as often as I please; and I think it is impossible, they,
having had so short an Interview, as you speak of, can ever remember him in the
disguise of a Hood. Castro agreed to that; but could give no further Answer,
till he had acquainted the Prince, who seems to swallow his words, and with
swiftest haste returns with him to the Friar: gives the Priest more Gold to
mollify his Scruple of Conscience: and instantly prepares for his Disguise.

In my Opinion (said Melora, interrupting Olimpia) a religious Habit is both
unhandsom and unfit to carry on an amorous Intrigue. It is so, my pious Maid
(answers that Dissembler) and, for ought I know, the many Troubles that are
inflicted on their Posterity, may be punishments for this first mockery of the
Divinity.

However the Design succeeded to their Wish; for Don Pedro was with the Friar,
received free from all suspicion, and enjoyed often the agreeable Conversation
of the amiable Cordelia. Their Discourse was of various Subjects; he never
having had opportunity to speak to her alone. All Occasions he watches, which
may in the least advance his desires: and Love being mentioned by chance, our
disguised Prince falls into a Rapture, calling it, if a virtuous Flame, the
highest Perfection humane Nature is capable of; a resemblance of Heaven; adding
a thousand Fineries on that delightful Theme.

You always speak with much Rhetoric (says the fair Cordelia smiling) but on
this Subject seem inspired, and I should guess, did not your Habit contradict
it, Love has been no Stranger to your Heart; it is so familiar on your Tongue.
He only fetched a deep sigh, and stole an amorous Glance toward her; which she
not observing, went on. Pray, since you understand this passion so well, oblige
me with a description of it; tell me in what manner people are, when possessed
with the Frenzy: for the grave and wise give it no better Title.

The Task you enjoin (Madam) said the Prince, is none of the easiest; for
diverse ineffectually, though they felt its Torments, have essayed. I have the
greatest Reason then to fear falling amongst that number, being the most
incompetent. However I will venture, rather than disobey your Commands.

It is an Inclination, which being thoroughly fixed in the Heart, gets
predominant over all others. It Is the whole Employment of our Thoughts; for the
passionate Lover has not one intervening moment; his breast is for ever filled
with the beloved Idea. If they are asunder, a violent desire is joined to this
Inclination to be with the charming Object. These eager Wishes render nights
and days insupportable. If they are together, a trembling Fear, lest any word
or action should displease is ever present. Then too often Jealousy steps in.
Thus absent or present, still in fears. Such uneasiness attends the most happy
Lovers. But what Wrecks, what Tortures unexpressible seize the Wretch who
loves, and yet despairs! Who doats, yet has no room for hope. Cordelia sighed,
and cried, Alas! that is sad indeed.

Why, Madam, said the Prince, hastily; I hope such Misery has no relation to
your softer hours; 'Not much, she answered, with a Blush that increased our
Lover's fears to distraction. He was eager to pursue the Discourse, though it
might discover what he most dreaded; but she prevented him, by going to the
Company.

His Resentment and Grief was too great not to be perceived; therefore he took
his leave somewhat abruptly; and when he had shifted his Difguise (which he
always did at the Fryar's) he hastens to his dear Confident Castro, immediately
tells him his Misfortune, how Cordelia was prepossessed, had given that
inestimable Jewel her Heart to a Rival, a Rival beloved: there was the wound!
This obliging Friend said all that might assuage his Sorrows; yet nothing could
allay them: he passed that night in terrible Inquietudes, goes the next day,
without resolving any thing, to Sulpitia's: his inward vexations had made a
visible alteration in his Countenance, and he appeared with an Air of
melancholy disorder. Cordelia, who was allowed but little Conversation, finding
the Prince very ingenious, took great delight in it. She immediately observed
this alteration, and asked him the occasion. Herein, Madam, said he with a
Sigh, forgive the forfeiture of my devoir, and permit me to disobey you. 'I
will, replied Cordelia pleasantly, provided you quickly reassume your good
Humor, and thereby give me cause to think, that this fit of Dullness proceeds
from some slight Affliction of small moment. 'Of far less moment is my Life,
returned the Prince passionately, observing none near them, nor, if my fears be
true, can Time obliterate these Sentiments of woe, though it were possible that
I were forced to live ten Thousand years. Since nothing can mitigate your
sorrows, replied that Charmer, the best Wish your Friends can make is, your
fears may prove false. Alphonsus had neither courage nor opportunity to say
more; for the Friar and Aminda came up to them. Aminda was of a facetious
humor; Cordelia's Relation left to Sulpitia's care; The same Lady that was in
the Garden, when the Prince first saw the lovely Idol of his fond Desires.
Aminda briskly challenges the Friar, and bid him maintain his Opinion, if he
could. What novel Dispute is it, for Heaven's sake, cries Cordelia, you two are
engaged in? 'I aver, answers her Cousin, that no where but in Romances, Persons
fall in Love at the first sight; and only Conversation and a long Acquaintance
can produce a violent Affection. 'I grant you, replies the Friar, that Love
increases, and grows to a height by continual Conversation; but still I say, a
beautiful Idea seen once, may make an impression either in Man or Woman,
sufficient to take away their Repose. 'Ay, take their Hearts away also, to my
knowledge, said the Prince earnestly. The Ladies both laughed at that; and
Cordelia told Aminda, she must now acquiesce, since the Gentleman declared
against her Argument, upon his own knowledge.

The Friar hastened the Prince to take his leave, seeming impatient to talk
with him. When they were walking homewards, his Introducer told him, that the
time he had limited for his Kinsman's stay, was almost expired; and asked what
progress he had made with this desired Freedom, which his Industry had
procured? Alas! said the Prince sighing, Love has made a far greater progress
in my Heart, than I in my Designs. Adding his Reasons, to believe Cordelia was
already in Love with another, which was a Thought oppressed him more than he
could express. I believe you are mistaken, replied the Friar; for I have this
day heard from Aminda the whole story of the Garden-Rencounter. She tells me
her beauteous Cousin has often sighed since, and mentioned the Cavalier, she
there saw, with advantageous commendations. This Discourse occasioned the
beginning of that Dispute you heard part of, of loving at first sight.

No News ever surpised, and pleased Alphonsus like this Kind hope, which, like
its contrary, despair, is a Lover's attendant; began now to give him great
assurances. He embraced, caressed, and bounteously rewards the Friar; then
flies to communicate his Joys to his Friend. When Castro had heard him out,
and discovered there would be no great obstructions to a Marriage: he began to
consider the weight of the Concern, and take the freedom his friendship allowed
to tell the Prince, that though, when he saw him so passionate, that his life
seemed to be at stake, he had foolishly enough talked of a Marriage; yet now,
in cooler thoughts, reflecting upon Otho's Temper, who was ambitious beyond
measure: it must needs involve him in endless troubles. Besides, his long
absence from Court would give nourishment to such Factions, whose growth might
entangle him, past his best skill to disengage himself. But Alphonsus's heart
was too deeply prepossessed by Love, for such saving Counsel to enter; and if
the loss of one must be ventured, the Dukedom would be in danger of running the
hazard before Cordelia. However to sooth his Favorite, he alleged some
State-Reasons for his absence, minding him of his Father's jealous Nature, who
abhorred his Subjects should make their Court to his Son, whilst himself was so
well able to wield the Reins of Government.

This you know (went the Prince on) broke the heart of my elder Brother, whose
Actions still our Royal Parent frowned on, because the people admired them too
much. Then it follows; whilst I am absent from Otho, I am nearer in his
Affection; Therefore, dear Friend, says the Prince, embracing him tenderly,
assist me to obtain my Mistress; and I will return time enough to my Father.
Princes easily persuade, though their Reasons are weak; because all are willing
to oblige them.

He found it hard to speak alone with Cordelia, so that he resolves to write,
and get the Friar to deliver it. The way was easy to purchase his consent;
Gold and noble Entertainments did all things with him. After a thousand
alterations, Alphonsus, under the borrowed Name of Pedro, sent these words.

To the Charming Cordelia.
O Love! plead my Cause, and tell the Charming cruel Fair, she must forgive the
Effects of the most violent Passion Mortal ever felt! If I have took a
Disguise, which becomes me not, adored Cordelia, impute it to Love's boundless
force; and wonder only at the Influence of your Eyes; that with their first
Glances, could wound so sure, as to fix me your Slave for ever. The same person
who beheld you in the Garden, longed to gaze nearer at that resplendent Light;
and now, like the Moth, my liberty is lost, to fly. Since then my lovely
Captivator, you have laid me in such fast Fetters, make them easy with your
Smiles; lest your Rigor destroy one, who only lives to approve himself the

Faithfullest of your Servants, Pedro.


The Friar takes charge of it; and as soon as he comes to Sulpitia: Cordelia
asked him, if his Kinsman was returned to the Monastery? He answered her only
with a sign to speak with her unobserved: she understanding what he meant, goes
to a bay Window, and beckoned to him to follow her, examining what he had to
say. That Kinsman is not the Person you take him for, nor indeed any Kin to me,
begins the Friar, though in you he reposes a mighty Trust, when he ventures his
Life in your hands. It Is true, he has prevailed with me, to connive at things
which neither ought to have been done; nor, when done, revealed; as I suppose
this Paper will inform you, giving her the Letter. She paused at first, and was
about not to receive it, till considering her Ghostly Father was the Deliverer:
she condescended, and with an amazing Look retired into her Closet to peruse
it. When she came back, she told the Friar, with a composed Countenance, he was
culpable in a high degree, and that his guilt transcended the Genleman's; for
the severest part of the World sometimes winks at youthful Extravagance: but
that He, whose business it ought to have been to deterr men from folly, should
encourage them in it, was unpardonable. Then she urged his Infidelity, in so
horribly betraying that great Trust her Mother reposed in him.

When the poor Priest had patiently heard his Charge; for his Excuse he
alleged the danger the Cavalier was in, of making some desperate Attempt upon
his Life; how assured he was of the Honor of his Intentions, and the sincerity
of his Affection. Then he fell to extolling the Nobleness of his Temper, the
sweetness of his Nature; not forgetting the greatness of his Estate: and in
conclusion, pressed hard for a favorable Answer. But Cordelia, whose Wisdom
far exceeded her years, would return none; only said, she was content to
conceal their Crime, because they had made Love of Her, the pretext for it.
With this cold Comfort, the Friar returns to the impatient Prince; who with a
Diamond had just wrote this Distich in the Window.

How slowly do the tedious minutes pass,
That drop through expectation's narrow glass!
Our Messenger out of breath with haste, and heart-broken, his News was no
better, in a sorrowful Tone delivers his story. But the Prince, who received it
more contentedly than the Friar durst hope for; since his Mistress neither
banished him her sight for ever, nor was enraged to excess, did not wholly
despair of kinder moments. Then in his Arms he hugged the dear Procurer of his
Happiness, and told him he longed again to view that fair one's Eyes, now she
knew their Power. That Longing shall soon be satisfied answers the pleased
F^yar, consult your Pillow what to say, and tomorrow we will be sure to attend
her. When they came the next day, the young Ladies were both in the Garden, and
they, being priviledg'd Persons, went both to them. Cordelia blushed at the
sight of the Prince, yet in her heart could scarce harbor wrath, when she saw
his Countenance turn pale, and the visible pangs his fears put him into; so
that in spite of all his Courage, he had like to have fallen.

There was a silent Meeting; every one being busily entertained within. The
obliging Friar called Aminda aside, to behold the growth of a young Orange-tree
they had planted some time before. She observed the hint, having understood the
story from her Cousin: and knowing that, however she dissembled, she had an
inclination to hear him. Alphonsus took this opportunity to cast himself at her
feet, and tell her with what a zeal he worshipped her; that she was the
perpetual Image of his thoughts, the Object of his dearest Wishes, the Center
of all his earthly Happiness. Whilst he spoke, Love trembled in his Eyes, and
falter'd on his Tongue, giving greater power to his broken Language, than
choicest Eloquence. Cordelia forced him to rise; then told him he had already
been an Impostor, and that in the most serious matter in the World; therefore
he must give her leave to doubt him long; and also be very cautious of engaging
in an Amor, which she could hardly ever think would be fortunate: it being
begun with profaning a Habit that ought only to be wore by sacred Persons.
Besides, she added, she gave up her Will and Actions in a perfect resignation
to her Mother, and without her approbation should never proceed in so weighty a
matter, having no other Friend she durst rely upon.

In his Excuse for his Habit, he said, he hoped the purity of his Affection,
with came near to Religion, would in some measure extenuate his Crime; and for
her Mother's content, Heaven had so largely endowed him with the Goods of
Fortune, he had great reason not to despair of it: But her Love was wha^ he
begged to obtain, since without that, even enjoying the World o^ Beauty she
possessed, would prove unsatisfactory; and though no thoughts were so terrible,
as those which represented living without her; yet he would sooner undergo^
that exquisite Torment, than endeavor to procure Sulpitia's consent without
first knowing, whether he gentle Breast was compassionate enough to receive
sentiments of Kindness for him.

Cordelia gave him a Look, which severely checked him, for prying so narrowly
into her secret Thougths and told him, she had already impaired her Duty in
listening to such stories from a Stranger; nor could she, under much time,
digest thi^ odd beginning, if ever perswad^ her self to proceed further. At
(...) end of these words she went to (...) Company, not giving Alphonsus time
to answer. All the day after, the Prince could not perceive one favorable
Regard, which terrified him to a high degree; and returning to Castro, he
unloads his Bosom with Complaint. Tells him how cold that Sun of Beauty shone
upon his hopes, and such Romantic stuff, as Lovers talk. Castro, the raising
of whose Fortunes depended upon the favor of his Prince, seeing he was too
positively bent to be persuaded, resolved to concur with him, and contrive all
means possible for the obtaining his desires. The first Advice in order
thereunto (because the Prince would not discover himself even to Cordelia; so
fearful was he, lest his Greatness should tempt her, without Love, to be his
Wife) was the buying an Estate some miles distant, to satisfy the Mother. This
Alphonsus approved of; and he also ^hought it convenient the Friar ^^^^ld go
alone, to give Cordelia opportunity to examine him, whilst his Instructions
were often repeated to him, That he should say Don Pedro (as the Prince called
himself) was of a noble Family in Ferrara; had an honorable Place in the
Duke's Court, and came into that Country to view an Estate he had lately
purchased. All This for much loved Gold, the Friar went and affirmed with the
greatest confidence imaginable. Cordelia listened to it with much attention,
and, blushing, said, the Stranger had the Aspect of a Gentleman, and must make
his Address like one, if his Desires were so violent as he expressed: that
being the only way to obtain them. Great were the Assurances the Friar gave
Alphonsus, at his Return, of the good Inclinations Cordelia had for him.

But 'twas impossible at present the Prince should follow her Advice, in
appearing undisguis'd at Sulpitia's, both for want of Money to purchase an
Estate, as also his returning to Court, which was now grown absolutely
necessary. Therefore he resolves to leave Castro with Commission to inquire out
an Estate; visit Cordelia once more, then haste to Ferrara. When Cordelia saw
him come again in Priest's habit, notwithstanding the item she had sent him,
she turned pale, and feared he had deceived her. He guessed the cause why her
countenance changed, and blushed, which augmented her Jealousy. The Friar
observed their disorder, and quickly set all right again, by taking Sulpitia
away to consult of business, whilst Alphonsus told Cordelia, such pressing
occasions called him to Court, that he could not possibly evade, without
hazarding his utter ruin. He expressed this, and the inviolable Affection he
had for her, with so becoming a tenderness, that he obtained from the charming
Maid many words and looks of kindness; and as an instance of it, she promised
to repair early to a Lodge over the Gate, that she might see him pass Mounted,
en Cavalier. He said, the longest time of his stay should not exceed a Month.
Obligingly she gave her lovely hand, to preserve him in her Memory, which he
having ardently kissed, took his leave. The next Morning he appeared, attended by
Castro, before the Lodge; and Cordelia at a little Window; a place prohibited
her; though now by some contrivance, she had stolen to it.

The Prince looked extremely graceful; being a Man of an extraordinary make. He
sent up whole Volleys of Sighs to his fair Spectator; who in pity returned
many; and kindly resolving to bestow a mark of her Favor; took a blue Ribbon
from her Wast, that Color being the Emblem of Constancy; and threw down to
him. He passionately kissed it; returning his Obeisance with an admirable mien,
and fixing his Eyes upon her, full of Love and Tears, he seemed immovable;
till she, fearing some mishap, first held up her hands to Heaven, for his
safety: then waved them in sign she would have him go; her self also retiring,
forced him unwillingly to move forward. Castro accompanied him part of the way,
and taking all needful Instructions, returned, visited the Friar; and leaving
what money with him he could conveniently spare, gave him a great Charge to
observe all proceedings at Sulpitia's: and if any thing happened prejudicial,
to give Don Pedro notice at Ferrara, by directions they had contrived; which
still kept them concealed. The grateful Friar faithfully promised his utmost
assistance, and Castro began his Perigrination, to seek an Estate that wanted a
Purchaser. In this time of absence, there happened a Contrivance at Sulpitia's,
that was very near ruining all their Designs.

Lusetta, whom I mentioned at the beginning of the story, being discarded for
her infidelity, repairs to the Kinswoman who had set her at work, and meets
again with Don Ferado; where discoursing of these disappointments, she gives
such a lively Description of the Beautiful Cordelia, that rekindles his
Curiosity. So nothing now will satisfy him, without seeing her. But the means,
there was the difficulty. After many irresolutions, Lusetta remembered a humor
of Cordelia's, how she was always very fond of seeing the Trifles, straggling
Women carry about to sell.

In this dress Don Ferado is disguised; buys a world of litte Pictures, fine
Beads, and such Trinkets; goes with them, and has immediately admittance into
the House. The young Ladies, having notice, come about him; the was not a
moment to seek, which was Cordelia, but so amazed at her Beauty, that he stood
gazing without power to move. Cordelia blushed to see the Woman, as she took
her to be, look so earnestly, and minded her of her Things. This roused the
Spark a little from his Contemplation; yet still his Eyes could fix on no other
Object. When she had furnished her self with the Toys she fancied most; he was
dismissed. He returns in love, to that degree, that he thought of nothing but
proposing a Marriage; though it was absolutely inconvenient; his Circumstances
requiring a Fortune; having many Sisters to Portion. Yet so amiable, Cordelia
appeared; that whatever Consideration interest offered, Love turned the Scale;
and he follows his desires, with precipitation; employing a Friend the very
next day, to solicit Sulpitia; who approves of the matter; gives leave to his
Seranades; several of which were performed before Cordelia knew from whom, or
so much as guessed her Mother was consenting. Till that discreet Lady, thinking
it proper to sound her Daughter's inclinations, began to break the design to
her. First commands her to follow into the Lodge, and shows her Don Ferado,
bravely accoutred; prancing upon his great Horse. Words cannot express
Cordelia's surprise; her Mind was already filled with an Idea, too admirable
for Ferado ever to hope an Entrance; and compared to the Prince her partial
Heart, being prepossessed with Love; made him appear beneath her regard; much
less esteem. She pretends indisposition; and retires to her Chamber. Sulpitia
saw her much disturbed; but was wholly ignorant of the cause.

Cordelia instantly acquaints the Friar with this affair; declares her
aversion, and desires him to inform Don Pedro. The good Man goes about it with
speed, and dispatches his Intelligence to Ferrara, according to his directions.
This information comes to the Prince, just as Castro had sent word of an
Estate, he had pitched upon. The Priest's news heartily tormented Alphonsus;
however he was infinitely pleased, Cordelia ordered he should know of it. The
careful Friar had writ every circumstance of Don Ferado's Fortunes; and the
Prince, with reason, looked upon him, as a formidable Rival; being a Neighbor,
which, in all probability would induce Sulpitia to embrace his Interest, before
the Prince's; who must of necessity be often absent, that is, if he kept his
Quality concealed; which he could not, without running great hazards, avoid.
Therefore he resolves to remove this Don Ferado; and to that end gets, by other
hands, a Commission for a Regiment of Horse, and sends to him; with Orders,
that he should speedily repair to Court. Ferado could not imagine what secret
Friends had done him this favor; however he was advised by all his
Acquaintance, to embrace it: they convincing him, how much it would conduce,
both to his profit and honor. Great was the Conflict; Interest and Glory were
powerful Arguments; but eager wishes, and fierce desires all centr'd in
Cordelia, were more pleasing. These dear tormenting Flames he nourished; but
Cordelia blasted; for there he could discover only frowns, disdain, and
freezing coldness. All that love him, urge his going; and flattering hope
persuades he may return Crowned with Laurel; at which the Cruel Maid, overcome
by Constancy and Courage, may yield to longing love. Such thoughts at length
prevail with him; and he sets forward to the Court of Ferrara, just as
Alphonsus had left it; who posts away to Castro; takes care for the payment of
the Money that was to be given for the Estate; puts servants into it, with
orders to furnish the House neatly, and with riches, suitable to his pretended
Quality: though he spared Magnificence.

He had made himself very fine, and brought many considerable Presents for
Cordelia; and having put all things at his new Mansion, in their designed
Posture; he hastens, with Castro, to his Beloved Mistress. As soon as ever they
arrived at the Village, the Friar was acquainted with it, who flies with the
news to Cordelia; and humbly desires her from her Subject, yea and Slave, Don
Pedro, to prepare Sulpitia with a full relation of all the foregoing adventure.
The young Lady trembled at the Task; but Love manned her Resolution; and she,
on her Knees, relates the story to her Mother. Sulpitia's Amazement, when she
heard these unexpected Practices, is scarce to be conceived; however being a
Woman largely endowed with Wisdom, and Descretion; she perceived her
Daughter's Inclination, by her palliating the crime of his disguise, and
representing every action favorably of this cunning Lover's. Therefore she
considered, being ever indulgent to her Daughter, if she should now interpose
her Authority; she might sooner break her heart, than bend it. These thoughts
induce her to give way to his coming; setting her self to inquire after his
Estate; which finding according to his word, and being afterward, by his
Conversation, acquainted with his Merit, grew very fond of him; freely giving
her consent toward the obtaining his adored Cordelia. Whom he, with all love's
Oratory, pursues; falls on his Knees, embraces hers, weeps, and talks till he
forces a Confession; till she, blushing, acknowledges her Affection; owns she
has loved him from the first moment she saw him. The Transported Prince longs
for the Consummation of his desires, and presses with his utmost Rhetoric a
speedy Marriage. Which is at length agreed to, and performed, in Sulpitia's
Chapel, by the often-mention'd Friar, before Sulpitia, Aminda, and Castro.

None ever appeared overjoyed or fond, like this Amorous Prince, his doting
still increased, every time he saw her, he seemed captivated anew; and, as in a
well drawn Piece, the longer we gaze, the more graces we espy; so her charms to
the admiring Alphonsus were endless; yet still his interest bound him to keep
his Quality concealed being a secret, he durst not divulge to her. Thus
privately they lived and enjoyed themselves for two years, the Prince being
often absent, and long; which he always said was occasioned by his place at
Court. Just as the first Year of Wedlock was expired, Cordelia Crowned the
ensuing, with the birth of a Son, to whom the pleased Prince gave his own Name
Alphonsus. A continued series of uninterrupted Happiness attended these Ladies
for the preceding years; Sulpitia never parting from her Daughter, and Castro,
the example of his Prince, Loved, Courted, and married Aminda; a Lady of a
desirable Beauty, and agreeable Conversation. By the borrowed name of Phillipo,
he wedded her, and she still continued with her much Loved Cousin.

But Fortune now grew ashamed of longer confining such Illustrious Persons to
so dull a Sphere, as the Country. For Alphonsus, coming to the Dukedom, by the
death of Otho, after the first hurry of his affairs was over; dispatches Castro
to fetch the beloved Cordelia, Sulpitia, and his own Wife Aminda, to Court. The
Faithful Friar, no doubt would have attended them, and been sufficiently
advanced but unkind Death prevented his preferment; he deceasing, to all their
griefs, a little before. Castro arrives acquaints Cordelia with her Husbands
desires, to see her, and Sulpitia at Ferrara; still concealing, by the Duke's
Order, his Quality. The Ladies willingly embrace the offer, and as soon as
possible, begin their journey; and in good time concluded it. He brings his
fair Travelers to a House, near the Court, where, at night, the new Duke
comes; leaving the Court privately, and going to them in his usual dress, so
that they had not the least umbrage of suspicion.

The only design the Duke had in this, was, the pleasure of surprising
Cordelia; which is thus effected. On the morrow, Alphonsus leaves them betimes
on pretense of extraordinary business, but he tells them, to make amends for
his absence, Don Phillipo, when they are dressed, shall have them to Court, and
show them the Duke's Palace; which they are much pleased with. They prepare for
this fine sight, and Castro attends them. Through all those richly furnished
Apartments, he conducts his wandering spectators; where they behold the Chairs
of state, the Tables, Andirons, Pictures, Frames, Glass-Frames; all either
Gold, or Silver. They admire this Magnificence, and also are astonished to see,
with what respect, all that pass salute Castro. After they had tired themselves
with viewing various objects of Majestic Glorious Finery, he leads them to a
Garden; where in a lovely Banqueting House, a Breakfast is prepared of all
manner of varieties, and delicate cool Wines; which, whilst they are
entertained at, Cordelia discourses of the bravery they had seen; and smiling
upon Castro, said, I believe my husband, and you are Courtiers; but I begin to
doubt ye for Politicians: for now you have discovered to your Wife, and me,
the gaudy splendour of a Court: suppose we should fall in love with it, and with
reluctance return to our Country habitations. We are prepared for that, answers
Castro; your station, Madam, being to Reign here; nor will Aminda, I hope,
dislike hers. I know not what you mean says Cordelia, with a surpised look. I
mean, he replies cunningly turning it; that where ever Beauty, like yours,
appears, it, of necessity, must Reign, since all must quit their claims, for
soveraignity, when you approach. So, Daughter, cries Sulpitia pleasantly, you
believed Don Philippo a Courtier, and now I think he has proved himself a
great one, by his compliment. When their repast and discourse was ended, Castro
begins again to endeavor satisfying their unwearied Curiosity, in showing them
the delightful Gardens that belong to the Palace, which Italy can scarce equal;
though Italy is the Garden of the World. He tells them, that he has yet a
sight which exceeds all they have seen; that is the Duke at Dinner. This they
are wondrous desirous of, Cordelia grows very inquisitive, what mighty affair
detains her Husband, grieving much that he does not participate in this
Pleasure, and Entertainment. Castro promised to satisfy her in that also, in a
little time. When Dinner was near, he brings them to a Closet, where,
unobserved, through a Window, they might plainly see, all the Ceremony. After
they had a while admired the melodious Music, and stately order of the
Preparations: the Duke appeared environed with Nobles, so that at first, they
could not easily distinguish him.

But when they came to have their full views, each looked amazedly on the
other. At length, says Sulpitia, either we are in one of those enchanted
Castles, we read of in Romances, where all seen is Illusion, or that Person in
the Duke's Chair is really my Son in Law Don Pedro. Did not I tell you, Madam,
said Castro, smiling, and addressing to Cordelia, that I would show you your
Husband presently? What does he mean, answers that fair one gravely, to dazzle
thus ones Eyes, with Pageant-Greatness? Why does he usurp the place of his
Sovereign? It is no Usurpation, nor are you deceived, replies Castro, for the
same Prince that has proved an indulgent Husband under the borrowed name of
Pedro, no doubt will continue so; when he owns himself to be Alphonsus, Duke of
Ferrara, and Modena. Cordelia could not digest this unexpected scene of
greatness, without a visible alteration, both in her Countenance, and health;
so that Castro was forced to Conduct her back to her Lodging. Sulpitia and
Aminda accompanied her. When the surprise was over, and they were all
descanting on these proceedings; Aminda comes up very seriously to Don Castro;
pray my dear, said she, what must I call you? for I hope you have followed my
Lord Alphonsus's Example, and are some great person in disguise? This set them
all a Laughing; and Castro told her she would time enough know his Quality; his
greatest happiness being to have so kind a wife as her self, and so good a
Master as the Royal Alphonsus.

That Afternoon, several rich suits of Clothes and Cabinets of Diamonds were
brought to the young Duchess. The next day, she was, with great Pomp, received
at Court, and by Alphonsus owned, loved, carress'd beyond measure. That great
respect and kindness, the Duke always honored Cordelia with, taught all the
Court to do the same. And this Beautiful Lady was so framed, and composed for
her greatness; that she became it to a Miracle. Young Alphonsus was quickly
sent for, and nurtured according to his Quality. Eighteen years Cordelia graced
the Court of Ferrara, and blessed the Arms of good Alphonsus. But then, to show
us that Worldly happiness is seldom permanent, that Insatiate Tyrant Death,
whose inhumanity spares neither the Fair, the young, or brave, ravishes from
the fond Alphonsus, this soft Wife. Which irreparable loss, it being impossible
for time or nature to repay, the Duke mourns to that excessive rate, that the
ensuing Year he also dies.

Alphonsus, the only Son and Heir to this departed Hero; the person who has
occasioned this relation, is Proclaimed Duke of Ferrara, and Modena. He had not
long been in possession of it: before Ferado, who was now grown a popular Man,
and had a settled picque against the Royal Family, for the loss of Cordelia,
(so implacable and immovable is the hatred which proceeds from love refused)
starts a Question concerning Alphonsus's Legitimacy; and boldly affirms, the
late Duke was never married. He knew well, all the Witnesses were dead, except
Aminda; and one Woman's word, would never convince a World; that is generally
fonder of lies than Truth. This strange aspersion alarmed the whole Court, and
most of the Neighboring Princes. In all Courts there are factious persons, and
persons desirous of change; though they were sure 'twere for the worst. Many of
these ^oin with Don Ferado, and demand a clear proof of the Marriage, which
Alphonsus, not being able to give, they appeal to Pope Urban the Eighth; Who,
willing to ingross the Sovereignty himself, declares against the present Duke;
expels him to retire to his ancient Duchy of Modena; which their utmost malice
could not pretend to deprive him of.

This is the Prince, who, remaining privately at Rome, to solicit his present
Holiness for the regaining his right in Ferrara, has seen you: and left his
heart and liberty at your Feet. His many applications to me, for the
furtherance of his affairs, have given me opportunity to be thoroughly
acquainted with him: and I have discovered such a Noble goodness in his temper
that he does truly excel all others of his Sex. From him I had the foregoing
story, which perhaps to you might sound Romantic, because I so punctually
related each particular; but my hearing it often from this Prince Alphonsus,
had deeply impressed every circumstance in my memory. I would not undertake to
be his Advocate, especially, my Dear to you, (went Olimpia on, with the kindest
aspect in the world:) did I not know him well; and also know that my interest
with his Holiness, is of that large extent, as to Reestablish this Prince, in
the Throne of his Ancestors. But I am convinced, he is in love to that degree;
that all the Kingdoms of the Earth can never make him happy, without your
favor.

The Trouble his Father has involved him in, (answers Melora) by matching
privately, and below his dignity, ought, in common Prudence, to deterr this
Gentleman, from any such design. Oh, my fair one! (replies Olimpia) who can
behold you and be deterred from loving, by the consideration of interest? But
however repugnant it is to his interest (she proceeded gravely) I am sure it is
very conspicuous, it agrees with yours, to listen kindly to the proposals of a
Prince, who offers his Heart and Crown, without any other conditions, than your
acceptance of it. Yet with closest Secrecy, this must be managed: for many of
the Italian Princes will be drawn to assist him, in hopes of his Matching into
their Families. And I believe you your self would tax any person with egregious
folly, that should refuse to accept an inestimable present, because given in
the dark: when afterward they would have privilege to make use of it before all
the World.

A Scene of greatness strait appeared to Melora; and she with the Eye of Fancy,
beheld her self seated in a Palace, attended by persons, born above her. Women
are generally ambitious, and opinionated of their own merit; and though Melora
might justly boat she had one of the largest portions of Wit, and Discretion:
yet she was a woman pertook of the frailty of her Sex; was willing to believe
this fine story; and let these Glorious thoughts appear pleasing. Which Olimpia
perceiving, augments these towering Joys, describing the pleasures of Pomp, and
Splendour; extolling the happiness of being placed where Ten Thousand admiring
Eyes would be fixed upon her; all watching the Motion of hers; to fly at her
commands. Thus she cunningly turns the gaudy side of greatness to this young
Creature's view, hiding the thorns and fatal vicissitudes, which too too often
attend power, had her Lover been Duke of Modena. But (alas!) Unhappy Beauty,
thy Malicious Stars have pointed Thee a sad and gloomy Fate; which she is thus
conducted to. Olimpia takes Melora to a fine village of hers, near Rome, after
she had prevailed with the deceived Lady to see this pretended Prince. The
Cardinal, whose lust gave him Ideas, that every moment, put him into raptures,
comes, by Olimpia's appointment, in the night, to this Country House, attended
only by a young Gentleman, whose scanty fortunes the Cardinal had augmented,
and thereby indear'd him to his service. This Person is acquainted with the
whole design; which he brooks not well, being a Gentleman, and hating such
dishonorable proceedings. But interest overcomes these Heroic sentiments; and
Francisco (for that was his name) promises his utmost assistance. Antonio
Barbarino is adorned with a World of finery to appear amiable; his Hatband is
of Diamonds of almost an inestimable value, and every particular expresses as
much magnificence, as possible. He keeps himself concealed, by Olimpia's
advice, till next day; who thus contrives his appearance.

She takes this day to show Melora the fineries of the House, and Gardens. In
the midst of the Garden, stood a Banqueting House, painted by the most famous
of that ingenious Art. One side was Ida's Plain, and Paris the loveliest youth,
that pencil ever drew, standing with his sheephook, before three contending
Goddesses. He had just presented Venus with the Apple; who, by her pleasing
smiles, adds to the vast Beauty the Painter had given her. Then in Juno, Envy,
and threatening was so plainly delineated, that you could scarce view her
without fear. Pallas looked with a noble scorn, as she knew her own Merit, and
despised the Opinion of her Judge. When the Painter proposed this story to me,
said Olimpia, I forbad him doing it; remembering in the Fable, the Goddesses
appeared naked. The Limner guessed my scruple, and told me, I was mistaken in
his design: for he would dress them all in Garbs, so becoming, that should
sooner bribe a Judge, than naked Beauties. I think he has been as good as his
word, answers Melora, for that loose Sky-colour'd Robe of Juno's is admirable,
nor is Venus's Crimson of less finery; it gives a Luster to her Skin. In my
fancy, replies Olimpia the silver Armor of Pallas, which reaches to her knees,
and those shining Buskins, that discover her Graceful Legs, exceed far the
other. But behold here, added Olimpia, turning to the other side of the room;
and give me your opinion of this.

It was the Fable of Iphis's marriage; who, by his Mother's Prayer, was
Metamorphos'd into Man. First you beheld the Mother, devoutly kneeling; whilst
in Iphis, you began to discover the effects of her Prayer. His Looks showed
amazement, and his lovely Hair turned upon one Cheek, in short Curls, the other
hung down disheveled a little farther. He appeared jocund; his Face Manly; with
his fair Bride, and all the splendor of a solemn Nuptial. These excellent
pieces were encompassed with Festoons of Flowers, incomparably done. After
Melora had sufficiently praised, and admired this surprizingly fine Painting;
Olimpia desires her to sit down, in this delightful place, and requests her to
sing the song, she loved; saying there was an excellent Echo; which mightily
helped the voice. Melora, amongst her numerous perfections, had this in the
highest degree: for all the judicious that ever heard her, owned her skill and
sweetness unequaled. The Cardinal was conducted by Beatrice, Olimpia's woman,
to the door of the Room; where he stood. No Princess lived greater in Rome,
than the Princess Olimpia, and the had several Persons of good Quality her
Attendants: but this Beatrice suited best her inclination, and was her chiefest
Favorite. When the Friendship first began between Olimpia and Melora, this
subtle Woman grew very uneasy, fearing a Rival in her Lady's Heart. But when
the Cruel Olimpia entrusted her with the whole matter, and she saw this height
was only the Prologue to her ruin, the malicious Wretch was infinitely
pleased; and the Cardinal's Presents following, made her very assiduous in
these wicked practices. Melora, ignorant of any unseen hearer, immediately
obeyed Olimpia's Commands; and, with a charming Air, sung the following words.

A SONG.
AS young Aminta stood and viewed
The Beauties of the approaching Year,
She sighed to think how soon they would
Wither, grow old, and disappear.
Strephon, who long had asked relief,
But always begged and prayed in vain;
Hoped more Advantage from her grief
Than he before could er'e obtain.
Beware said he, my Life, my All,
Destroying Time comes on apace
Your fairest Charms must one day fall,
And Age and Wrinkles fill their place.
Improve your Youth now that remains,
For Age does too too fast pursue;
Be kind at last, requite my pains,
And give to Love, and me their due.
Then fly fair Nymph into any Arms,
Whilst Youth, and Wit, and Beauty last;
The Spring and Summer have no Charms,
Which envious Winter will not blast.
Just as she ended, the Cardinal steps forth; only bowing to Olimpia, whilst he
eagerly addresses to Melora; and fixing his Eyes upon her, cries in a
Passionate Tone; Ah Madam! I was enough your slave before; and in my ravished
fancy, called you all divine, but now I heard your Angelick Voice, I am
convinced you came into the World some extraordinary way; and are really one of
the bright Inhabitants of Heaven. Therefore, with Justice, you may despise the
sighs of grovelling Mortals. Melora was strangely surpised at his appearing
without the least warning; and turning to Olimpia, her face being covered with
blushes said; This is unkind, dear Princess, to let a stranger be Witness of
your Servants failings, and unprepared receive such palpable flattery. Nay,
Madam, returns Olimpia, bend all anger against the Prince, and I will join with
you; for I think it is inexcusable in his Highness to surprise us thus without
notice.

All Messengers seemed too slow for my impatiency, replies that Impostor, nor
could my own feet, though winged with desire, and love, conduct me half so fast
as my wishes, to throw my self before this adored Beauty. Cease Prince,
interrupts Olimpia, for I read displeasure in Melora's Eyes; this new strange
Theme disturbs her. Divert us with the news of Rome; sure that great City
cannot live a day without follies, ridiculous enough to make us laugh. If my
Tongue must, (answers Barbarino) leave the dear delightful subject of my Life
my Love; I hope you will give my Eyes and sighs the liberty to speak the Language
of my Heart. That we may venture to allow, I think, replies Melora; because we
can have the privilege, not to observe them, and only listen to your news;
which we both expect (adds Olimpia.) The freshest; I know, (begins the Cardinal
very gravely) is of a great judgment, that is lately fallen on a fair young
Lady. This Lady had an humble servant, whom the World called very deserving,
but the Cruel Maid thought otherwise; and, notwithstanding Days, and Nights,
and Months, spent all in Sighs and Prayers and Tears; yet her obdurate Heart
feels no compassion. Nothing the Amorous Youth neglected, either to say, or
act, that might have gained a kinder doom, though all in vain; which when he
plainly found, overwhelmed with love, and deep despair, he languish'd a short
time; then made his Everlasting Exit. Still the remorseless Maid was
unconcerned; only Civility and Honor obliged her to attend him to his Grave.
And lest her Spectators should there censure her guilty of Barbarity, she
cunningly conveys an Onion into her Handkerchief, to supply the defect of
Natural Tears. But now observe the Justice of her Fate; for, from that moment,
so violent a conflux of Rheum followed, that she, for ever weeps, spite of all
the Physician's Art. And if in any Company where Mirth prevails, then the
streams run down, enough to fright them with the apprehensions of a second
Deluge. Is not this, Ladies, (concluded the Cardinal) a sufficient warning to
deterr you from Cruelty? They both laughed at the Romantic News, and Melora
said pleasantly, the greatest Miracle she found in the story, was, the Gallant
dying for Love; that being, in these Ages, altogether unpracticed, and out of
fashion. In such Conversation they in secret passed their hours, whilst the
Cardinal forgot not to improve them; but by a Thousand Glances, Sighs, and
Whispers, told Melora, that he died, unless she in gentle pity saved him. Such
great Persons wanted nothing, that either Art or Nature could afford, for their
Pleasure, and Diversion: What they had told Melora of the Duke's being
incognito in Rome, took off her mistrust when she saw him cautious to appear
before any, but Olimpia her self, Beatrice, and Francisco. Every thing
contributed toward the deceiving this poor Lady; the general discourse of
Rome; which was, of the Duke of Modena's pretensions to the Dukedom of Ferrara;
and that Princes absence from his own Court, being often in the Courts of other
Princes, soliciting Aid, in case the Pope denied him Justice: But these many
circumstances were needless; for though Melora had a Vivacity in her Wit,
peculiar to her self; a Judgment perspicuous and clear; yet so cunningly had
Olimpia, by her seeming Fondness, and artful Insinuations, wrought upon the
goodness of her temper; that she believed whatever that false one affirmed,
steadfastly, as an Article of her Faith.

After two days the Cardinal takes leave with all the passionate dearness Man
can express; returns to Rome, whither the Ladies quickly follow: Olimpia still
pressing her fair Favorite to be kind to this deserving Prince, as she always
terms him.

Melora was now wholly in the Princess Olimpia's Palace, only going every day
to visit her Father; and every Night the Lovesick Cardinal paid his devoir to
her. Yet spite of all these constant Visits, and reiterated Oaths of continual
Love; Melora appears but cold, and expresses her self with a World of caution
and reservation. This Torments the Amorous Priest beyond measure. Now, though
Melora absolutely confided in Olimpia, her good Education had perfectly taught
her to obey her Father's Will; and to undertake so great a Concern, without his
Knowledge, shocked all her resolves, and dashed her with a Thousand Fears.
Olimpia strives her utmost to encourage the beauteous trembling Maid; and in
persuasive Arguments lays down the inconveniency of acquainting her, Father:
for he being a Loyal Man, and in a public station, would certainly discover it
to the King his Master; which would at present ruin the Prince Alphonsus in
all his designs. Melora listened to whatever Olimpia urged; gave obliging
Answers, but delayed complying. Nothing was so hateful to the Cardinal and
Olimpia, as this protracting time, because they lay liable to a hundred
accidents that might betray them; by which the Cardinal would irrevocably lose
his Fame; and, what was much dearer, Melora. Therefore the next time they are
together, he pleads with all his Loves Eagerness and Oratory; tells his fair
Mistress, his desires were grown to such a height of Violence, that without her
consent to the fulfilling them, they would certainly prey upon his Life, and
from her Adorer he should become her Martyr. Ah Madam! (went he on, sighing
passionately, and grasping her Knees) Why are you thus Cruel? Why do you force
me to live in these Insupportable Agonies, when it is in your power to raise me
to endless Worlds of Bliss? Is not the Appellation of Kind and Pitiful more
pleasing to you, than the Savage Names of Cruel and Rigorous? With what reason
(replied that Charmer sweetly) My Lord, can you Complain, or ask me more? Have
I not already broke the Sacred Laws of Duty, which I used to hold Inviolable,
and received you here Clandestinely: heard all the stories of your Love, and
only resolved to take such time as may confirm the Constancy and Faith, which
you, with so much Rhetoric, have Vowed.

In that resolve you give me Death (said he, with a sad Air) and ever my
probation ends, you will be convinced, by the sublimest Proof, that I am yours.
When he said this, he takes his leave, and before he left the House, relates
all this to Francisco; ordering him to stay, till Olimpia was at leisure to
hear it; and send him her advice in these perplexities. Through the Gardens,
and Walks of Donna Olimpia's Palace, the Cardinal always went home, only
passing a narrow Lane, he came to a back door of his own, where a Servant
constantly attended: One, who, many Years, had been acquainted with his
Debauchees, and Night Rambles, though he was not trusted with the story of this
Intrigue. Barbarino going Melancholy through the before mentioned Lane was
surpised, notwithstanding the darkness of the Night, and lateness of the hour,
to perceive the glittering of Swords; and stepping hastily to avoid them, one
immediately rushed upon him, and gave him a Wound in his Breast; at which the
amazed Cardinal cried out, Villains! Assassinates! Hearing his Voice they fled;
only saying, Damn it, we were mistaken in our Man.

'Twas very near the Cardinal's private Door, this accident happened, and the
Servant that waited for him, having skill in Surgery, he trusted him to search
the Wound; who assured the frighted Priest, that there was no danger; only the
loss of Blood would, for some Days, confine him to his Bed, and Chamber. He
then began to revive his Courage, and Commanded the Servant to say, his Illness
proceeded from a violent bleeding at the Nose; which took him in the Night:
this passed upon his Physicians; who only ordered him comfortable Cordials to
renew his Spirits.

The next Morning, the Cardinal found himself at ease enough, to consider his
Love affair, and accordingly dispatches Francisco, to acquaint Olimpia with his
Misfortune; and to beg, her Almighty Wit would make some advantage of it with
his Mistress. One would have thought, the Heavens sending the Mischief,
designed another, on the Cardinal's Head, might have deterred them from
pursuing further the ruin of that soft Innocent, the fair Melora; but they
were hardened, and Olimpia, resolving to fulfill the desires of the Friend of
her darling Lust, Ambition, managed with Woman's Cunning, her design.

Melora observed Olimpia Melancholy; and her fondness and particularity to her,
laid aside; and for three days only Complacency, and cold Civility remained.
This perplexed her strangely; fain she would have asked the reason; longed to
know the cause of the Duke's (as she thought him) absence; but Modesty, the
Virgin's constant necessary useful Guest, witheld her Questions a while. At
length, impatiency prevailed, and she desired Beatrice to let her know, when
the Princess Olimpia would be alone in her Closet. The same day, word was
brought her she was so, and wished to see her. Melora attends her the very
instant; and found that subtle Lady sitting upon a Couch, leaning her head upon
her hand, with an unusual sadness in her Face. As Soon as Melora entered, she
bid her sit down; then, fetching a deep Sigh, continued silent. The poor young
Creature surpised with this counterfeited sorrow, remained also dumb, for some
time, till her Tears made way for her words. She implored Olimpia to acquaint
her, if through any inadvertency, she had offended to that degree, as to lose
the honor of her Friendship, and be banished that dear Bosom, where all her
Happiness and Delight were Centered; Adding, with a World of sweetness and real
trouble, how willingly she would abate, participate; or, if possible, take off
those griefs, she saw overwhelm her beloved Princess, might she but know the
cause. Olimpia lifting up her head, answered very seriously; my Affliction will
perhaps occasion your rejoicing; I mourn the Prince Alphonsus, whom as a Friend
I loved. Your inclination caused him to be your aversion; and consequently his
Miseries will move no Pity; which made me forbear relating them.

Alas, Madam! (replies Melora) wherein has your Highness discovered that
aversion, you are pleased to charge me with? I have received the Prince's
Address, with all the Complacency imaginable, at any time, or any hour. If this
is hatred, I am mistaken; and must beg directions, how to express my Esteem to
my Lord Alphonsus; both as to his own merit, and what is yet more, a Person
recommended by you, (ended she, bowing.)

With such a height of Passion, such an excess of tenderness (returns Olimpia)
the Prince adores you, that your fatal Coldness has destroyed him. Signore
Francisco acquaints me, that, ever since his last parting from you, he has
Languish'd of a Fever; which his Physicians say, is desperate; whilst he, Foe
to himself, and Friend to his Disease, gives way to that, and slights all their
Applications.

Let me dye (cried out Melora eagerly; frighted with the apprehension of such a
Person's Death) rather than have a guilt like this, imputed to me; Ah Madam!
(went she on) if you have any sparks of that generous love remaining, which you
bestowed on this Ungrateful; teach me a way to expiate my Crime. I own whatever
my inclination was, I erred, to an extremity, in disobeying your Commands; and
to atone, I Will Visit him, I Will write, do what my nature has most abhorred; so
my Princess will again receive me into favor.

Do nothing against stomach (Answers Olimpia coldly) and though I know a line
or two might save his Life, yet a dissembled kindness is but a Reprieve; and to
relapse into despair, is irrecoverable, therefore I Will not ask it; it is to
desire a present Cordial, that carries with it, a future Poison. When she had
said this, she left Melora in the Closet, and went to Company, that stayed to
kiss her hand.

Nothing was more glorious, than the Friendship of Donna Olimpia; who enjoyed
it, participated of all the pleasures and grandeur of Rome. Then, to be a
Princess! Attractions, which may excuse Melora, if she committed an indecency
in writing to the pretended Duke. For after many struglings with her native
reservedness, she resolved it, and wrote thus.

To the Duke Alphonsus.
MY beloved and ever honored Princess tells me your Highness is unfortunately
seized with Sickness; and unkindly makes me the occasion of it. If I have that
power over you, which my want of Charms persuades me I am only flattered with;
I charge you, use your best endeavors to recover Health, and hasten to us that
I, through your mediation may be reestablished in the heart of my dear
Princess. Which Obligement can never sufficiently be acknowledged, or returned
by

Your Servant Melora.


Olimpia in haste dispatched her Visitants, those of Ceremony, and those of
Business. Coming back to the Closet, she found Melora reading; having left the
Letter open upon the Table. Melora stood up as Olimpia came in, and begged she
would please to peruse that she had written; saying, she was wholly ignorant of
those sort of Letters, and humbly prayed her approbation. When Olimpia had read
it; she, smiling, said; you have played the pretty Sophister, my dear, and so
kindly expressed your obliging sentiments of Friendship, that I know how to
resent your Cruelty, in discovering so little Love to a Prince, who perhaps may
want Life to receive it. Beatrice undertakes the conveyance, and with needful
caution has it delivered to the Cardinal; who began already to think of
speedily leaving his Chamber, and this favor added to his health, and his
desires. He, all night, contrives the kindest Answer, words could frame, and
the next Morning sends it to Olimpia; who, with her usual cunning, presented
it; first bewailing his weakness, then wondering at Love's Power, which had
given strength to answer her Letter so quickly. Melora, blushing, took it; and
to Olimpia read as follows.

Alphonsus to the Divine Melora.
WEre I dying, I Would force my trembling hand to write Melora thanks, but I am
better, returning from the grave. The charming Mandate, which brought me your
Commands to live, brought likewise power to obey them. Yes my Adorable
Mistress, I own you have saved my Life; and it is a mighty act of mercy. Yet
Pardon me, fair Saint, if I presume to say, there is Justice in it too; for it is
but just my Angel should preserve that Life, which is wholly dedicated to her
service.


How think you, Madam, cries Olimpia hastily; does he not write, as well as he
speaks; I own him Excellent at both, Answers Melora; therefore should not I be
guilty of Vanity, to imagine my self blessed with perfections great enough, to
Merit his endless Love?

Olimpia replied, in Compliments of her worth, and caressed her with new
Indearments. A few days after the Cardinal's Physicians advised him to the
Country Air, for the perfecting his recovery; and he let his Friends know, that
being weak, he desired privacy without Visiters, designing to spend this time
at Olimpia's Villa, (attended only with Francisco) instead of his own; though
the World was made believe he lay there retired.

As Soon as Olimpia understood the matter, according to the Cardinal's wishes,
she asks Melora to leave Rome a second time with her; telling her also, that
the Duke of Modena was advised to the Air for his Health; and she had given him
an invitation to her Villa; where he might remain undiscovered. I let you know
this, said Olimpia; that you may not seem supriz'd or displeased at his coming
to us. Melora received the News of his Company very agreeably; and they with
much pleasure began their Journey. Soon after the Cardinal arrives, and 'twas
then, and not till then, that Pity, Loves sure Forerunner, seized the
Compassionate Heart of that young soft Maid; when she beheld Antonio look as
pale as Death, and tremble, as he moved, with weakness. This, she thought,
Almighty Love had been the only cause of, and that the World would Tax her of
Barbarity, should she refuse to apply Cordials of Kindness, to such a consuming
Languishment. Therefore she receives him with smiles; and says obliging things,
that beyond measure charmed the Priest. They Supped together in Olimpia's
Closet; and being all pleased, their Conversation was extraordinary. Barbarino
had formerly been employed in several Negotiations, to the Courts of Foreign
Princes; he had good natural parts, and all the Acquirements of Learning, that
great Men are able to receive. No wonder then his Company was agreeable to
Melora; who was ingenious, and therefore understood the wit he delivered in
pleasant relations and discourse.

While they were at Supper, Beatrice brought Olimpia word, that there was a
Benedictine of the Neighboring Monastery, waited to desire the honor of her
Highnesses Presence at the Feast of their Patron; which was to be Celebrated on
the Morrow. I shall incur your displeasure, said Olimpia smiling, my Lord Duke,
if I take Melora with me; yet I would willingly have her see the Solemnity,
because I believe it will be very fine. I shall mourn your Absence, replies the
Cardinal, but should grieve more to hinder the fair Melora participating the
pleasure of beholding the Ceremony. We will endeavor to make my Lord amends,
at our return, with a full relation of our Entertainment, said Melora.

A Description from so sweet an Oratrix will charm me far beyond the gaudy
show, answers the Cardinal. Thus they talked away the Evening; and the next
Morning, the Ladies rose early, to prepare for the Festival. When they were
dressed, Barbarino was admitted to pay them a Visit in Olimpia's Chamber. Melora
looked surprizingly beautiful, and the Cardinal expressed his admiration, in
lavish Commendations; seeming to come nearer to view her: he, in a moment,
fixed a Crociate of valuable Jewels upon her Breast. She went immediately to
take them of; but Olimpia coming up forbade her; and she, blushing, let them
remain.

That Night several Persons of Quality conducted the Princess Olimpia, from the
Monastery home. The Ladies were obliged to stay and entertain them, so that
they could not see the Cardinal. The next day Olimpia resolved to have to her
self; and gave her Servants order to say she was indisposed, and would receive
no Visits. They chose a retired Grotto to spend the day in. This cool retreat
was very delightful; for 'twas with wondrous pains cut in a Rock, the Lights
were all covered with Vines; which looked very agreeable. One side of the
Grotto was hanged with Forest Tapestry, the other most artificially adorned
with Moss-work, which glittered with shining Shells and Pebbles; whose Luster
equal Diamonds. The Couch and Canopy was green Florence Sarsenet; at the end,
opposite to the Door, a full Curtain of the same hung down to the ground: along
the side of the Rock that was covered with Moss, a small Rivulet ran, whose
pleasing Murmur was able to inspire the most stupid, with tender Sentiments.
Whilst Olimpia said something to the Cardinal, Melora fixed her Eyes upon the
purling Stream; whose transparent clearness showed the bottom, stowed with the
Rock's Ornaments, Shells, and Pebbles. The Cardinal turning, observing her so
intent, stooped nearer; and with an Ingraving Pen, upon the Marble Pavement,
wrote thus: Should some small Water Deity to day
Be sporting here, and those bright Eyes survey,
With eager haste he would fly to Neptune's Court,
And tell the God the Place of your Resort.
Then, turn away those All-Commanding Eyes,
Lest this small Rill, should to an Ocean rise;
And Neptune vanquished by thy killing Charms,
Should bear thee hence within his Watery Arms.


See, Madam! said Olimpia, when she had read 'em: the Prince's Passion
penetrates the obdurate Marble; yet your harder heart still denies access.

Melora was amazed to behold the lines at her Feet; thinking they had still
been discoursing. She had, with blushes, just perused what was written, when
from behind the Curtain, they heard the agreeable charming found, both of
Vocal, and Instrumental Music. Ha! cried Olimpia, seemingly surpised, you
mentioned the Watery Deity, and I believe he has sent his Mermaids, to entertain
you. I rather suspect an Earthly Goddess, replied Melora, smilingly, looking
upon Olimpia; and the best way to express our thanks for the favor, is
silence. Whilst the Italian songs, with the most exquisite Music, was
performed, they dined; and after that, the Princess Olimpia gave her Commands
the Music should retire. The Curtain was drawn up, and the delicate Organs
discovered; which, from the Water received their incomparable Music; and all
the glorious painted seats, which held the tuneful Masters, whom they had heard
before.

In vain, cried Melora, in a pleasing transport, we hunt the World for
pleasures, when ransackt Italy, can never equal, what my charming Princess's
Villa gives. Ay but, my Life, returned the Cardinal, I expect the discharge of
your Promise, in describing the Entertainment you received Yesterday.

Indeed, went the fair one on, smiling, I think these Saints Festivals are
fuller of diversion, than devotion. To see a fat Abbot walk in state, covered
with Embroideries, and looking as great, as if the Triple Crown adorned his
Head; and all their Ornaments set forth in the greatest Pomp and Luster
imaginable; does it not resemble Pride, and Vanity? Be cautious, my dear,
interrupted Olimpia, lest you incline to the error of the Heretics; who care
not how fine their Houses are, nor how plain their Churches; tacitly
discovering they love, and esteem themselves, better then the Deity, they
Worship.

I submit, said Melora, and will admire their glories. But to what end should I
describe vast Banquets of Sweetmeats, and delightful Music; which is here
every day excelled. That only which deserves perpetual remembrance, was the
Lovely Duke and Duchess of Parma. Such a becoming tenderness he expressed,
such a sympathy of Souls there seemed, as if one could not do, what the other
did not like. How can you praise, what you refuse to practice, cried the
Cardinal in a Rapture; so would I gaze all day on those loved eyes; but then
the Night; the Night; burning, raging, sighing, clasping! Oh forbear my Lord! (
Olimpia stops him;) leave these strong ecstasies; till that happy Night arrives:
see how Melora blushes. Indeed said the Cardinal, cooling himself with a sigh,
I ought to have patience, since that Duke, you mentioned, waited long for one,
less fair, and through many hazards, at length was blessed.

Olimpia knew, Melora took delight in nothing more, then hearing the Histories
of Persons, where the Capricio's of Fortune had been most evident: and to
oblige her, asked the Cardinal, if his Highness was acquainted with the
particulars of their loves? He answered her that he could procure them a full
relation, if they desired it; for Francisco was bred, from a Child, in the Duke
of Parma's Court; and informed of each minute circumstance. Melora expressed
great joy at the proposal; and Francisco being called, the Cardinal commanded
him to sit down, and to the Ladies relate the Adventures of Emilius, and
Lovisa, Duke and Duchess of Parma. Francisco, after a moment's recollection,
with a submissive reverence, began thus.

THE HISTORY OF Emilius and Lovisa.
I Shall not attempt (most Illustrious Auditors) to describe the Persons of
this Prince and Princess, because my words cannot reach the height of their
Perfections; as your own Eyes may be witness; but must of necessity go so far
back, as to take a view of the late Duke and Duchess, Parents to this. He was
a great Soldier, and a great Politician, which of consequence rendered him a
great Man; yet of a humor so positive and absolute, that neither Sons nor
Subjects durst ever contradict his Resolution. Whilst the Duchess was all
sweetness and affability, as often as possible mitigating the sternness of her
Lord, and obliging all the World with Offices of Kindness.

He had two Sons, one elder than the present Duke Emilius, over whom he
exercised an Authority, wherein very little of the Father appeared; whomsoever
they favored he frowned upon, always denying them whatever they coveted with
eagerness. Few therefore durst make their Court assiduously to the young
Princes, lest they incurred the anger and jealousy of the Old Duke. Only Count
Bileront broke all these Rules of Policy, and openly professed an entire Service,
and humble unfeigned Friendship for the Prince Emilius, with whom he had been
nurtured. The Duke often stormed at that, often chid the Lovely Youths for
their so strict amity; and often Commanded Bileront's Father to send him
farther from Court. Yet all these shocks they stood; for Emilius, who had a
large share of his Mother's sweet nature, drooped so when they went to part
them, that before he reached at Manhood, they could not do it, without visible
danger to the Prince's Health. By that time Emilius had past his Eighteenth
Year, he grew quite tired of the Court; the harshness of his Father's temper
abridging him of all those Enjoyments, whereunto his Inclinations led him. He
sets all Engines at work to obtain leave, that he may join the Venetians, as a
Noble Voluntier, and see a Campaign; hoping to raise his Reputation in the
World, and quit, for some time, a place that disgusted him. After much
opposition, Emilius accomplished his desires; but the Old Duke not finding in
his heart to prove too indulgent, orders Bileront to stay behind; and
perceiving notwithstanding that faithful Youth, covertly prepared to follow
him, he without hearkening to the entreaties of his Friends, Imprisoned him
under a strict Guard. If Emilius resented this ill, he was very likely to meet
with the same treatment. So that being assured no other harm was designed him
but to hinder his Accompanying him; he smothered his smarting griefs, and went
on with his intentions. Several young Sparks, in whom the love of glory had
kindled a Warlike Fire, forsook the soft pleasures of the Palace, and waited on
the Prince. This Noble Cavalcade having left Parma, directed their course
toward his Holiness's Galleys, where they designed to imbark, after staying
some time at the Port, till the Fleet were ready to sail. As the Prince, having
all his things Embarked, was walking on the shore, he felt somebody take him by
the Cloak, and turning, he saw one in the garb of a Common Soldier; but
looking more heedfully, Oh how pleased was he to behold his loved Bileront;
such Joy filled their delighted Souls, there was no room for words. At length,
a hundred Questions throng together, which as confusedly are answered.
Bileront, whose sweet Eloquence could move things almost inanimate (for next to
that I account the stupid sort of Men) had with his Promises and Presents
prevailed upon a Centry to let him have his Clothes, in which he dressed himself,
the Fellow putting on the young Lords, and over them his own Cloak, and thus
they both escaped. Now Emilius's wishes were complete; and the faithful happy
Friends went in all haste aboard. I will not trouble your Honors with a
description of the War, only say of these, they were a second Pylades and
Orestes; always fighting by each other, always undertaking the greatest
dangers; and always Crowned with Glory. The Campaign ended, they with several
of the French Nobility, Volunteers likewise, went to France; and in that Court
spent their Winter. In the mean time, the Duchess of Parma longed to see her
Darling Son; and having at length, obtained Bileront's Pardon, she writes
earnestly to her dear Emilius, that he would return. He obeys his indulgent
Mother's reiterated desires, and again, with his Favorite Bileront, graces the
Court of Parma. His Travails had extremely added to his natural perfections,
and though he was not Heir Apparent, yet his eminent accomplishments drew all
admiring Eyes toward him. Nothing now was to be seen in the Palace, on the
Dutchesse's side, but Balls, Masquerades, and such other demonstrations of
Royal Pleasures. At one of the Balls, a young Lady, having danced in a Persian
Habit, with a particular mien and charming smoothness; Emilius asked who she
was, saying, he had not observed her amongst the Beauteous Train before, though
he thought she excelled them all. He was straight informed her name was Lovisa,
Daughter to Don Henrique, and Donna Elvira, who were, as he knew, both great
Courtiers and had, Dying, left this their only Child, to the care of the
Duchess; that her Fortune was very opulent, and her Person very taking. For
his not seeing her, the reason was, she had been some days in the Country, and
returned but the night before. This, adds the Prince's Informer, is an account
of the fair Lovisa, who is called the Dutchesse's Ward; and adored by all.
Emilius, getting near her, told her in a whisper that she was unjust, her
Beauty being enough to fix all Eyes upon her, she ought not to excel so
transcendantly in Dancing too; but let some more indifferent do that, and
obtain a glance. Lovisa, blushing at the Prince's praises, answered him; we
must expect your Highness full of the French Gallantry, and whatever Object you
are pleased to rally is obliged to bear it. That place was too public, for a
longer Conference, but the Prince was wonderfully pleased with her, and talked
of nothing else all the night, to his dear Billeront. Soon after, he paid
Lovisa a visit; and finding her Conversation as full of charms, as her lovely
Face, he was never so well pleased, as when with her. His Mother the Duchess,
saw this growing Friendship, but hating nothing more than venturing Emilius in
another Campaign; and considering Lovisa was a great Heiress, whose Ancestors
sprung from a Branch of the Royal Family, he also being the second Son; should
he fall in love with her, the match would not be so disproportionable. These
reasons made the Duchess not only connive at his often Visits; but also
conceal them from the Duke. Lovisa's Apartment lying through the Dutchesse's,
the Duke thought he had been with his Mother, whilst he and Bileront spent
their time more pleasantly.

They had formed a Party for their particular Conversation, which they called
the Friendly Society, and made several pretty Laws amongst themselves, with
suitable Penalties, if they infringed them. One was, to communicate to all the
Campany, every Letter they received, be it Love, or Gallantry. Nay if it was
business, some Person was to inspect it cursorily over, and witness to the
rest, that it afforded no diverson. Happy was he, that could partake the
satisfaction of this ingenious company; which was composed of the highest young
Quality. Their discourse was made up of pithy relations; or viewing the newest
works of the writing Wits; Censuring, or extolling those labors of the brain,
according to their Merit. Emilius, coming one day, before the usual hour for
their meeting, surpised Lovisa alone, reading a Letter, which she blushed at,
and hastily put up, when the Prince came in. Ha, Madam! cried he, eagerly
running toward her, have I caught you breaking one of our greatest Laws? She
blushing still answered, 'twas business. This augmented the Prince's curiosity;
and he said very gravely, you know, Madam, our Statutes are, that if Letters
are full only of business, one is just to overlook that, and report it to the
whole Body of our Society. Now I being here first, claim the privilege of
seeing it, and satisfying the rest. She insisted, 'twas in her power, to choose
the Person, she desired should see it; but finding the Prince really earnest,
unwilling to displease him, she gave it him, which he read thus; (for said
Francisco, I having the happiness to know each particular of this Intrigue,
took Copies of all the Letters to help my Memory.)

Don Alvarez, to Donna Lovisa.
Madam, My Dear Niece,
I Hope you will esteem the proposal I here send you, as a testimony of my
Kindness; and believe, that my continual study is for your Advantage, and
Honor. The young Count Lodowick is now preparing to kiss the Duke's hand, and
make a handsome appearance at Court, his Estate is large; and the World justly
calls him a Gallant Man. He is already in love with the report Fame brings us
of you. I don't Question but your Sight secures your Conquest; pray let me hear
your Opinion of him. I am, My Dear Kinswoman,

Yours Alvarez.


The Prince sighed, and (...) as he read this Letter; and giving (...) Lovisa
again, said, I don't like this Marrying, 'twill spoil our Society. I Will give my
Vote, that it shall be High Treason, for any of our Ladies to Marry. Nay then,
returns Lovisa, laughing, we shall have a very pretty Character Twenty Years
hence, a Company of Old Ill-natured Maids; better forsake the World quite, and
become holy Nuns. Well, answers the Prince, I find all my Joys are at an end.
You must be in Love now, and we bear all those absences of Mind, so frequent in
Lovers, Silent whole hours; or if you talk, Count Lodowick must be brought in,
by head and shoulders, at every Paragraph. You were the glory of our little
Select World: your Wit and Eloquence gave Life to all was said; now you forsake
us, I Will forsake the rest, and leaving an insipid Court, in the Camp forget
Lovisa; if that be possible; (ended he with a sigh.) My Lord, replies Lovisa, I
have endeavored to be rude, and interrupt your Highness; you talk, as if I was
to be Married to Morrow. The World (went she on, with a Majestic Air) knows
little of Lovisa's Heart, if they imagine it so easily gained; and that but
hearing of a Man, is likely to fall in love with me, I should begin first to be
so with him. More of the appointed Friends coming in, the Conversation became
general; yet still Emilius was harping on this (to him) ungrateful string,
Count Lodowick's coming. He asked Lovisa, whether she thought she should fancy
him, and what sort of Man she could like, begging her to express what
Qualifications she expected in the happy Slave, whom, amongst her numerous
Adorers, she would bless with her Smiles.

My Lord, said that charming Maid, were I to behold a Man Masculine, yet
Beautiful, Great, yet truly Brave; A Prince whose Virtues, brighter than his
Diadems, appear; one more glorious than boundless Fancy can to the thinking
Mind depaint; and, not convinced by signal proofs, his heart inclined, his
passion forced him to my feet: I might gaze on such a Masterpiece; but my Eyes
should let him no farther in: He never should disturb my Mind. You may, replied
the Prince, love wheresoe'er you look; nor need to fear they will not sigh for
you; at least, if I may judge the Soul of others by my own. Lovisa took this
for raillery, and pleasantly returned, such Hearts as yours will be most
glorious Trophies, and I shall grow exceeding proud, but that, to humble me, I
know Prince Emilius's way, and my own Imperfections.

That night Bileront, whose Apartments joined the Prince's, heard him, after
all was gone to rest, walking about his room. Fearing he was not well, he rose
and went to him. Pardon, said Bileront, if I intrude, and fly uncalled, to
learn what disturbs my Lord. Oh my Friend! (Answers the Prince) I Am sick at
heart, the Distemper revels there; and gives me pains that I never felt before.
Bileront, who was really frighted, began to call the Servants for the
Physicians; when Emilius hastily stops him, saying, it lay not in the power of
Art. None, none could heal his wounds, but the fair Causer. Then blushing, and
hiding his Head in the Bosom of his dear Friend, he told him he loved the glory
of her Sex, the sweet Lovisa. I mistrusted long ago (went on the Amorous
Prince) but durst not examine my heart on that point, till Yesterday
discovering another like to possess her: love and despair at once seized me;
broke the soft Chains of sleep, and set me here upon the Rack. Bileront said
all, excessive Friendship prompted, to calm the distempered Mind of his loved
Master; but he, witty to torment himself, studied impossibilities that might
arise, to bar his wishes, out of mere Chimera's: though indeed obstructions
there were enough. Thus spent the restless Prince the tedious Night. Next day,
he longed till the fatigue of Ceremonious Duty, business, all was over; that he
might find his darling Mistress, where all his thoughts were fixed. He saw her;
thought her more charming than ever since to himself he had owned he loved her.
Then he gave no bounds to his admiring Eyes; but helping forward his disease
set every thought at work; what Happiness, what Raptures she could give. When
he came near her, tremblings and sighs turned him pale; then a rising heart
covered his face with blushes. He tried to tell his love in whispers, but his
courage failed him, for he, who truly loves, beholds his Mistress stamped with
such divinity as awes his presumption. Nor dares he trust his tongue, lest that
too boldly should offend; leaves to his Eyes the sad silent Tale; and hopes the
Charmer will read it there. Lovisa, who thought the minds of others like her
own, free and gay, was brisk as Air; and often chid the Prince for his unusual
Melancholy; nor could she forbear asking Bileront if he knew the cause. He
answered her ambgiuously; suppose she her self was, would she promise a remedy?
That Is so unlikely, said she it is not worth my answering; for I never was
chearfuller in my Life; and I hope my mirth is not so ridiculous, as to work
just the contrary on the Prince. Bileront feared to say more; lest he should
incurr the danger of displeasing both.

A few days after, this expected Count Lodowick came, was very well received by
the Duke, the Eldest Prince, and indeed all the Court, except Emilius; who
notwithstanding his natural sweetness, could not forbear looking cold on this
young Nobleman; whilst Lodowick's only care was to dress well, and make a
Figure answerable to his Quality. Finding Lovisa the handsomest Lady; he was
most particular to her though he had a general complacency for all the young
and fair. Mean time Emilius's melancholy so visibly increased that every body
took notice of it. He complained to his faithful Bileront, that he thought
Lovisa took more care in dressing, since the arrival of Lodowick; and he
fancied she gave him favorable glances; then would he burst into a Passion,
and ask that fond Friend, wherein Lodowick deserved more than he? Thus, this
impatient Prince nursed up groundless terrors, till they robbed his days of Joy,
his Nights of rest. When Bileront could get leave to speak, he told the Prince,
that for his part, he discovered no such alteration in the dress, or looks of
Lovisa; then you talk (went he on) of her preferring Lodowick before you: when
alas, she is wholly ignorant, knows not the vast honor her Eyes have won;
think you, my Lord, being possessed of your Illustrious Heart would not satisfy
her Ambition; and were she assured of it, I dare believe Lovisa would prefer
you in her esteem, not only to Lodowick but even to all the World. Yet still
either a favorable opportunity was wanting, or his fears how Lovisa might
receive a Declaration of Love prevented him; and poor Emilius languish'd on.

Bileront met, one day, Lovisa, in a private Garden, belonging to the Palace,
in quest of a Favorite Female Friend; who, she was told, was gone to walk
there. Meeting Bileront, she asked him if he had seen her; Bileront had just
left the Prince Emilius alone, in a Grotto; and straight resolved, without much
consideration, to send his Mistress to him. Accordingly he directed this fair
Lady thither; tells her very confidently, her Friend was there. The Prince
started as she entered the Grotto, and Lovisa leapt back, with the surprise;
both blushed at this unexpected Rencounter; till Lovisa, taking it only for a
trick of that young Lord; recollected her self, and smiling told Emilius; she
would be revenged on Bileront; nay, said she, pleasantly, your Highness ought
to join with me, since he occasioned this interruption of your thoughts. Madam
(returned he bowing) you you might much more properly call it, an Elevation of
thoughts, for I assure they were full of you, in Courts, in Camps, in Cells, in
Grotto's. Answered that fair one, in a pretty Heroic tone: Emilius is still
the same; all Compliment; all Rhetoric. Yet not so to all, replies the Prince,
looking passionately upon her, it is only Lovisa merits more, much more, then I
can say were my tongue immortal and Tuned to naught but praise. Ah! sit Lovisa,
and hear the State of poor Emilius's Heart lest you find too late how fatally I
was in earnest.

Lovisa still smiling, said; Ha! it seems the Plot lies deeper than I imagined.
I am to believe your Highness is in love, am I not, to help the Jest? The
Prince vexed to see the real Language of his heart turned into raillery: threw
himself at her feet; and spoke with a moving Air, thus. If to have you the
perpetual Image of my waking thoughts; or when I sleep the charming Vision of
my Dreams: if it be greater pleasure to hide me from the inquiring World, that
I may shut out all but you, to fancy joys in you beyond the Crowns the united
Universe could give: to draw it Hell without you: to sigh, and wish, and
tremble, when I hear you named; if this be love, I Am sure I am in love.

Lovisa rising, and viewing the kneeling Prince, with a becoming Majesty, said,
Remember, Sir, as you are born a Prince, so I descend from the same Line; my
Soul as great as yours; therefore, if you vainly think, depending on your
Birth, the conquest easy; and I with open Arms must receive your offered love:
I say you are much deceived; for whilst there are Monasteries, or distant
Kingdoms, to the Earth's Verge I Will fly, rather then meet with Arrogance,
instead of that respect, which humble Love Creates. Am I arrogant? (replied the
passionate Prince) when prostrate at your feet I Lie? Carry these dying Eyes a
look of pride? Blasted be the Honors of my Birth unless it helps me forward in
my Love! And for yours to me, you are a Queen, a Goddess. Rise, my Lord, Lovisa
interrupts him; I have heard enough. This is a strange Theme; forget it Prince;
indulge not such desires, destructive to your Peace, and never like to be
fulfilled. 'Were I, said the Prince (as he lead her out of the Grove) so
wretched; convinced that destiny must attend me; Life so, tormenting I would
not bear too, long. They had walked but a few paces, when they met Bileront,
and the Lady Lovisa wanted, whom Bileront had entertained, that she might not
disturb Emilius. The Count soon read in both their Faces, the Minutes had not
been spent in common talk. Many Weeks this Amorous Prince employed in trying to
persuade Lovisa, that he loved her above all Earthly things; yet had obtained
no more than a bare permission to tell her this, whenever opportunity favored.

The Court was, all this while, ignorant of the Amor; they knew there was a
Cabal of Wits, and thought Emilius only went often for the sake of the
Conversation. Love's an unexhausted Spring; and still has something more to
say; nor could the Prince be satisfied with short Discourses, stolen at
Windows, or got some moments, before other Company came. He longed for whole
hours, and fancied, if he had time enough, he might move her heart to pity. To
that end, he sent Bileront (whom Lovisa had given him leave to make his
Confident) with this Letter (said Francisco, pulling out the Copy:) Emilius to
the fair Lovisa.
IF you have not Cruelly resolved my Death (thou dear unequalled Charmer) grant
me an hour when my longing Eyes may gaze without Control; where I may throw me
at the feet of my adorable, and say a thousand thousand tender things, that
Love, like mine, inspires. I do not ask a pitying word, or a kind look, in
answer to my sighs; I only beg a hearing, that sure the nicest Virtue will
allow; since Virtue guides, and honor dictates every Wish that fills the heart
of your poor wounded Slave

Emilius.




Lovisa was hard to be prevailed on, for this private interview; but the
faithful Count pleaded, with so much Zeal, for his Amorous Friend, that the
fair one almost compelled, yielded; and gave Emilius leave, after his formal
good night, to return with Bileront a back way; into her Closet. Lovisa also
brought the Partner of her heart, a dear loved Friend. When the Prince came,
the Lady and Bileront retired to the farther end of the Closet. Could any Man
win a heart only with the silent Language of the Eyes, sure 'twas Emilius; for,
in his, Lovisa might plainly read Sparkling Joy, for the permission she had
given him to see her; yet intermixed with so much awe, and fear; that the
charming confusion showed, her love had taught him, to forget he ever was born
a Prince. And Ambition's Lessons prompted him no farther, than to become her
Slave. His words were soft as flakes of falling Snow, his person lovely; who
then can blame that charming Maid, if she forgot her rigor, and heard, with
pleasure. He kneeled, and snatched her beauteous hand, and printed these his
Vows. He said, he loved her more, much more than Life. Oh! (went he on) were
all the pleasures of my past Years crammed into one happy hour, 'twould not
reach the least part of the Raptures, this blessed Moment gives; this dear
important Now. If then to have but one Minute, when I dare call you Mine, fills
my Heart with such Content; what would a Week, what would a Year, an Age? Oh I
fear the Cordial would prove too strong; and I should dye with Joy. These
Imaginary Visions (returns Lovisa gravely) exceed Love's real Joys. Love, like
a Course Picture set in an advantageous light, at distance we admire, and gaze
with wonder, but when nearer to our view, a hundred unthought of faults appear;
and the imperfect daubing's seen. Ah! No; there is nothing but perfection here,
cried he transported, and grasping her hand) I long, (said he, looking
earnestly on her) to break Conditions. I promised not to ask a look or word of
pity, yet my Soul is on the Rack, to know how your heart is toward me. If
constant love can ever gain admittance there; if you can ever feel a warmth; I
do not hope that it will burn and rage like mine. I must not, dare not hear you
( Lovisa stops him) yet I am well; but who knows not, it is dangerous, Prince,
listening to words like these. Why (said Emilius in a moving tone;) where lies
the danger? Heaven grant they prove infectious; and you Catch but the same
pleasing Fever possesses me. If I should (returns Lovisa blushing) if I should
(not that I do incline my Ear, to the soft story of your Love) place you first
in my esteem, and suffer my Virgin thoughts sometimes to be employed on you;
and after this, an offered Princess (state interest) takes you from me: where
should I hide my blushing face? For then, not Angels Eloquence should ever
persuade me to behold false men again. Emilius answered with Vehemence, By all
my hopes, were there an Empress, who brought the conquered World her dower; and
beautiful as painted Deity; me she would not move. You do not know Emilius, nor
Punishments, nor Pleasures prevail, when I am resolved. Lovisa would hear no
more, nor could she force him from her, till he obtained a Promise, in a little
time, to receive the same favor, such another Audience; and that procured
another. In short, the Prince, a thousand ways, so tenderly expressed his Love,
that Lovisa was content he should discover his Passion was not disagreeable,
that her Sentiments were kind; though Nicety denied her words to express it.

Mean time, Count Lodowick laid close Siege; the Duchess thought it a good
Match; her Uncle pressed her hard on his behalf; but she was deaf to all; nor
had scarce Patience to obey the Duchess, in letting him see her; Yet this
disturbed Emilius; he hated, Lodowick should view her, with such greedy Eyes;
or have the privilege to Visit her alone. As he was one Night in Lovisa's
Closet, complaining of this, that fair one chid him, and said, She feared he
was naturally Jealous; since he saw Lodowick was her aversion, and that all she
did was by compulsion, yet still he was displeased. It Is that compulsion,
answered the Prince, with a sigh, I fear; if you should be forced to Marry him
(Heaven avert that thought!) what would then become of wretched me? No, No, My
Lord (returned Lovisa) though I am not a Man, yet I am Mistress of such
resolutions, that I Will never Marry Lodowick. There is one way (said the Prince
kneeling, and turning pale, for fear of Angring her) one way secures my fears,
and makes me blessed above all humane kind. What Is that, says Lovisa, surprised?
I dare not tell you will promise not (returns the Prince) unless you will promise
not to be displeased, nor think that I presumed too far, and make too bold a
Suit, encouraged by the favors I to your pity owe. Since I know, said Lovisa,
(with a reserved look) Prince Emilius will not ask, but what is within the
strictest Rules of Honor; I give you free liberty to speak. Emilius trembled
as he spoke, and clasping her loved Knees, Would you, said he, but let the
Priest before these two (pointing to the aforementioned Lady and Billeront, who
were in the Closet) join our hands, knit that Sacred Knot, which only Death
unties; then all my fears would be removed. Know you the raging temper of the
Duke (says Lovisa, raising him) and ask you this without his consent, or
knowledge? No, let it suffice, I never will be another; and let us wait till
fate will smile, and Crown our Wishes without danger.

Then my fair Life will venture nothing on the score of Love, when I Would forego a
Crown for her (said he passionately) Oh! satisfy my fears; give me but the
Marriage Vow; I Will beg no more: At this awful distance still remain; nor offer
at the Crown of all my Joys, your Bed, till the Fate, you speak of, smiles;
till there is not the least shadow of a danger. Lovisa told him, she durst not
resolve on a thing of such a Consequence, lest he, or she, or both hereafter
should repent; but against the next meeting she would consider, and bad him
rest assured, all Lodowick's Efforts were vain. A few days after this there
happened a sad accident which altered the face of all things, in that Court;
the Eldest Prince of Parma dyed suddenly, of an Imposthume. You may imagine the
fright and confusion the Court was in; and that decency confined Emilius to his
Closet; yet in the midst of his Grief, he was not unmindful of his Love; but
sent Bileront, with a Letter, which contained these words.

Emilius to his Dearest Life Lovisa.
THE Lamented untimely Fate of the departed Prince, my Brother, fills my Soul
with Grief; and that I may not have a Glimpse of Joy; I dare not yet see my
fairest Mistress. But, Oh! Believe, Lovisa, no vicissitude of Fortune has power
to lessen Love. My Death only ends the Passion vowed by

Yours Emilius.


A short Postscript begged a line to bless his Solitude: She taking her Pen,
while Bileront staid, wrote thus: Lovisa to the Prince Emilius.
AH! Prince! why do you still persist in my Undoing: the distance was too great
before, now the Ducal Crown hangs near your Brow: Court Glory, that is the
Brighter Mistress; and gives Reward beyond the Power of

Poor Lovisa.




The Prince was tenderly touched with the kind Doubts of his Beloved, and in a
short time visited her, renewed his ardent Vows of Constancy, and Endless
Faith. Whilst Lodowick, whose Glass told him he was not Unhandsome; who Danced
well, Dressed well, had all the Perfections of a Young, Empty, Airy Courtier; and
Master of a vast Estate; raged to be Repulsed in his first Amor. One day he
grew so importunate to know the Cause of her Aversion; that she resented it;
and told him sharply, he was Troublesome; and were it not for the Commands of
those, whom Reverence taught her to Obey; she had, long ever that, forbid him
her sight. He Answered warmly, with an Air too haughty for a Lover: I see too
well your scorn; but I fain would find (what it is said, we cannot in Woman) a
Reason for it. Is your heart made of that impenetrable Mould, that Sighs and
Prayers are vain Batteries; or does some hidden happy Youth rob me of my
desired Prize? She blushed at that, and he observed it. Ah! it is so; (went he
on) your conscious Blushes reveal it. If I blush (returned she, with a look
full of Anger and Disdain) it is at your Rudeness. Go -- You are Insolent! Durst
your concealed Lover call me so (said he, thoroughly nettl'd;) I could Answer
him. As he spoke the last words Emilius entered, and hearing 'em so loud, he
stopped. When Lodowick turned to go away, Emilius came up to him, and looking
fiercely on him, said, Is this like a Man of Honor, to be Noisy in a Ladies
Chamber! I say it is Insolent, and Brutal. -- Now your Answer you threatened --
Not to my Country's Heir (returned he, Bowing) nor dare I contend for a Jewel,
my Prince lays Claim to. Soon as he had said this, he went out. Ah! what have
you done? (Cried Lovisa, looking with a Melancholy sweetness on him) this flies
like Lightening, through the Court, and I must never see you more! Never see me
more (answered he eagerly) Oh! I must ever see you; nor can it be concealed! My
Eyes, my Tongue betray it. How often, unawares, I start; mistaking every Name
for yours! My longing looks devour your Charms; my Sighs redouble at your
sight; and every Motion shows the Fires of my Soul! Oh! I Will cast me at my
Obdurate Father's Feet; nor leave his Sacred Knee, 'till he has given you to my
Wishes. Flatter not your self with vain Idea's (said she, sadly;) The Duke, I
know, will never yield; and my Foreboding Heart whispers, this is the last time
we ever shall meet in Peace.

Am I thus Blessed (cried the Transported Prince) to perceive such a concern at
the detested Thoughts of Parting! My, once severe, but now more Charming Fair!
What shall I say, or how Express my Joys! Lovisa, who had hastily discovered
more of her Heart, than she designed; felt her lovely Face glow with Blushes;
and walking from the Prince, a great Glass more plainly showed her this
disorder. Emilius following, smiled to see the becoming Confusion that
Excellent Maid was in. And forgetting that it was the public Room of State,
and the hour of Visiting; Caught her hand, and kissed it with a happy Lover's
Ardency; whilst two or three Ladies entered. The equal surprise of that Amorous
Pair, confirmed it to be more than a common piece of Gallantry. However the
Ladies, out of Respect, took no notice of it there; but once removed, the Blaze
was set abroad which Lodowick began; and it was grown the only News the Court
was full of. Every Body had got the story, Prince Emilius Adored Lovisa; and
happy was she could first Communicate it to her Friend. The Duke was last
informed, because all loved the Prince, and feared his being displeased. At
length an old Courtier, one who had lived even past the remembrance of his
Youth, thought this Match inconvenient, and politickly resolved to tell him. He
heard the Relation with a fierceness beyond that which his own rugged nature
gave. Unthinking, Unambitious Boy! said he (just as the other finished) have I,
for this, with pains obtained to bless his Nuptial Bed with Isabella, the
wealthy Princess of Mantua; and does the idle Slave to his Passions, worship
the fading Beauties of a Bauble; whilst the choicest Jewel of a Crown is
offered? With this, he flew to the Apartment of the Duchess. His Eyes carried
Rage, that every cringing Courtier shrunk into a Corner; and durst not meet
their Fury. The mild, and ever gentle Duchess, trembled at his sight, before
she heard the story. When with Frowns ushering in his words, he thus began:
You, Madam, I suppose, have fondl'd up your Son to this, like a true Mother;
but unlike my Wife indulged his humors, 'till inevitable ruin has got within
his grasp. Nor would you yet cry hold! rather than your Child should grow
uneasy, give it the Poison. I thought your Son haunted your Apartments not to
learn the Rudiments of Honor; they are seldom to be found amongst the Women!
Alas, my Lord! (interrupts him the Affrighted Duchess) I know not what you
mean! No, no; (went he on) you have not connived, nay, perhaps, desired that
Rebellious Boy Emilius, to make Love to your fair Favorite Lovisa! But, mark
me, Madam! For by Heaven I swear, let this be remedied, or you will find the
consequence will give you cause to tremble! I know the Maid is Virtuous (said
that good Lady, with all imaginable Mildness;) her Birth is Noble, since her
Blood is mixed with yours: but, that my Son, or Loves, or Courts her, witness
the Heaven you swore by, I know not. My Blood! (replies he, all enraged) the
stream has run too far; and all that is Royal is lost! But were she my Brother's
Daughter, and a Bar to my designs made me retrench my words, or promise given:
Cloister, or Death should force the stubborn Girl; and set the way clear before
me. Therefore I charge you, School your Son, and dispose of her; else I, who
have been the Partner of your Bed these Thirty Years, will ever after prove a
Stranger and a Foe! This said, he left the weeping Duchess.

Poor Emilius was just going to his Mother, there to open all his heart; and
beg her kind Assistance to mollify his Father. He sent Bileront before humbly
to pray the Duchess; she would, in her Cabinet, hear him on a subject, that
was to him important. Bileront straight returned, and told the expecting
Prince, the Duke was gone thither with an angry Brow. Emilius feared the worst,
and staid concealed till the Duke returned; then going to the Duchess, in her
melting Eyes, he reads his Fate; and stood a while immovable. That sweet
Princess no sooner beheld her Son look so pale, and deeply sad, but her Tears
increased. For the Duke had rightly charged her in that particular: She
excelling most Mothers in Fondness. The Prince first broke silence; and
respectfully asked her, if he might know what his Father had done, to cause
those Sorrows? First Answer me (says the Mourning Duchess) are you so Unhappy
to love Lovisa? Pardon me, my Mother (said Emilius in a moving tone) nor call
me Unhappy, in loving, and being beloved, by that Virtuous, all-deserving,
Noblest Maid! This Declaration touched the Duchess nearly; and she, word for
word, told that despairing Prince, what his Incensed Father had sworn.
Therefore (added that Wise, yet tender Mother) quit thou thy unauspicious Love,
before the threatened storm comes on: it hangs just breaking over our Heads; and
if thou persist, falls upon all. Quit my Love! (answers the Prince
passionately) Ah! Madam! Ever you resolve to be obeyed, please to hear, how
great a Villain you would make your then abject Son! Lovisa, most perfect of
her Sex, by nature reserved and cold, unapt to Love; One, who lays not out her
wondrous stock of Charms, to catch at Hearts; but declines her modest Eyes; nor
Triumphs, nor rejoices in her Conquests. This I saw, and loved her for it;
pursued her with a Passion violent and unfeigned: I sighed, I kneeled, I
prayed; nay, quite Unmann'd, I even Wept before her. She saw, I joy'd in
nothing but her sight: My altered Face showed the pangs, my aching heart
endured. Moved at last, she kindly healed my Suffering with gentle pity. And
shall I quit the dear relenting Saint? I, who drew her to love's bewitching
Mischiefs, against her Inclinations, almost forcing her tender heart, guarded
with an aversion to Mankind, now shall I quit her? Oh! never! sooner I Would quit
my Birthright, turn Lunatic, Naked travail the inhospitable World; feel first
the distracting grief needs must seize my Dear one, should I prove so basely
Wicked to forsake her? Leave me (said that tormented Mother) for this but
increases the Woe, that my heart is already too full of. The Duchess seeing
the Prince thus obstinate, resolves to try a gentler subject. He being gone,
she sent a Page of Honor, to call Lovisa to her. That Noble Maid had heard
nothing of these Disturbances; and readily obeyed; entering the Cabinet with a
cheerful Countenance. But when she saw the Dutchesses sorrow, her heart sunk
downwards, and she appeared just such another Statue, as the Unfortunate
Emilius did before. Come near, my Charming Charge (said the Disconsolate
Duchess;) thy dying Mother left thee to my Care. Have I not been careful of
thee? Speak boldly, Lovisa, and accuse me if I utter any untruth! Royal Madam
(answered the kneeling fair) were I to recount the Favors you have done, and I
received, long hours would unheeded pass; and yet the obliging story not half
be finished. Here, near your own Apartments, Lodged, Honored, Loved, and
smiled upon, as if I had been your Daughter. Rise (replied the Duchess) and if
your Soul is grateful, now is the time that you, by one great Act, may Cancel
all these Obligations, and leave me eternally your Debtor. Then conclude it
done (returned Lovisa) were it to Sacrifice the quiet of my future days, I Would
live my self in Torment to give my Princess Ease. My Son -- Nay blush not my
Lovisa, I know it all, nor, were I disposer of his Fate, would hinder the
Alliance. Thy Beauty, and Brighter Virtue, deserves a Crown; deserves Emilius:
But, Oh! his Father, whose Rage like Madness, cursed with Power, knows no
Bounds; whilst the poor Youth fixed to thy Charms, and fond to Death of Thee,
never will Obey. Think then the end of this Rebellion's Murder; thy ravaged
Country's Bowels torn; Thou the fatal Hellen that sets the World on Fire. Reply
not (went the Duchess on) I know you did not foresee all this, when first
Emilius, with a Lover's Eagerness, breathed his warm sighs around you, woed to
the sweets of Love -- Thou Weepst, Lovisa, and I pity thee; I my self have felt
thy Sorrows; torn from my Virgin Wishes; Compelled by Parents to wed this Duke;
I took my reason to aid, and time o'ercame it; so may you, if you will hotly
strive. Instruct me, Madam, (all drowned in tears, Lovisa cried) Instruct me,
Madam, for I am at a loss. The Heart of my Emilius is Heroic (said the
Duchess) and force is lost upon him: it is you only have Power to charm him to
Obedience. Take then your choice, be greater than a Sovereign Princess; Rule
your Passions, let your looks deny what is acting in your heart; and tell
Emilius, that your altered Soul abhors his Love; else unite with my Unhappy
Son, and meet destructive ruin both. Lovisa wiping her fair Eyes, and looking
as if she could accuse the cruel Powers: No -- the Prince shall not for me be
ruined; at least I Will do my best, he shall not (said she.) To morrow, with your
Highnesses leave, I Will see him; and after that, I hope, you will have no just
cause to blame me. Go, my best Girl, (returned the Duchess) and as an earnest
of thy truth, see not my Son to night; I know he will long to tell thee all his
Woes, but listen not to the sad story, 'twill melt thy best resolve, and leave
thee Spiritless. Lovisa took her leave, and promised the Duchess what she
desired. At the usual hour, Distressed Emilius sent Count Bileront the well
known way to gain admittance to his Beloved; but was surpised when he brought
him back word, she was not to be seen; not well, and gone to Bed. Not well; and
gone to Bed (repeated the Prince) return, my Friend, and tell her I have
Business of Importance. Oh! she has heard the Unlucky Story; and now, in Anger
will not see me! Tell her I am Innocent; tell her I cannot live beneath my
Griefs, unless the dear sight of her support me. To please the Prince, that
faithful Friend went, and came again with the same Answer. The Prince was
vexed, only he comforted himself, that, if she would not see him privately, he
before the World, resolved to profess his Endless Love. Next day, as he and
Bileront were walking in the private Grove, his surprise was augmented, when
Lovisa's Page accosted them, and said his Lady desired instantly to speak with
them both. As they crossed the Court which leads to Lovisa's Lodgings, the
Prince observed her Coach and Attendance stand ready. His Heart misgave him,
though he knew not why. When they came up, they found her sitting in her
Closet, with her fair Friend, who was always her loved Companion; both dressed
in Habits for a Journey. Lovisa's Eyes were full of Majesty and Resolution.
Love, overaw'd durst not peep, nor show a beam of pity. I sent for you (began
the Life of all Emilius's Joys, in a tone far different from the usual
sweetness:) I sent for you here before these two the constant Witnesses of all
our Follies past; to give you back your Vows, to free you from the luckless
Chains you chose. Recall your ill-plac'd Love, the hasty error of your Youth,
and think of it no more. Emilius viewed her with a piercing air, and falling at
her feet; the posture his humble Love had often used him to: In vain, said he,
in vain you give me back, what I can never take. What have I done? Why am I
doubly punished, with my Father's frowns, and yours? When I, but in thought,
consent to what he offers, may some God to you reveal that thought; and may you
then for ever, justly look as cruelly as now. I stand prepared (said Lovisa)
for all that you can say, foreseeing the horrid ills that may accrue, if we
should follow the blind track, rash, inconsiderate Love would lead us.
Therefore, obey your Father, Espouse the Princess Isabella -- Ha! (begun the
Prince) I beg you -- interrupt me not (went she on) If you will do this, I
instantly will go and remain with my Uncle, Don Alvarez, till this discourse,
which buzzes thus in every busy Mouth, is hushed. I Will still preserve you in my
heart; I Will see you when I may with honor; and my Friendship shall excel
vulgar Love -- Yet I have not done (she perceiving him go to speak) if you
agree not to what I Have said, at least consent; then I, this very moment, will
drive directly to St. Clare, the next adjacent Monastery, be straight immured,
Probation year and all; nor will I ever hear, see, or, if possible, think of
Emilius more. Do not hope Prayers or Tears can stir me -- May Poverty,
Diseases, loss of Fame attend me, if one jot I vary or change from what I Have
vowed! This is not sure, the ever gentle Goddess, I thus long have Worshipped
(said the Prince with Eyes all languishing) some Tygress has usurpt the Face
of my Adorable; and formed those cruel words, I last have heard! Lovisa rising,
and making a sign to the other Lady, who was to go with her, to be ready,
hastily catching hold of her Gown, Lovisa, (says he) my Life! See, Bileront!
See! How have I Dreamt! not worth a Look! a Sigh, a parting Word to think upon!
Ah, Prince! (returned that Self-constraining Maid) should I give the Deluge
way, it would overwhelm me! Go, inexorable, go; (said the Prince, letting loose
his hold) my Death I Am sure you will bear as Unconcerned as this! For I feel
greater Pangs, than bitterest Death could bring; though dressed in new invented
Tortures; exceeding all the old. Oh! Wrong me not (said she passionately) to
that degree! Believe thou I am unconcerned? Oh! No! I share thy Agony, my
Dear; my loved Emilius! Take from my Arms, the first, the last Embrace, that
ever you will receive from your Lovisa! He claspt her to his heart, and would
have spoke, but stifling Joys o'ercame, and left him almost Breathless on her
Bosom: When, she, fearing her Virgin Modesty had yielded too far, worked by the
Prince's Sorrows, and her Love; started from his Arms; and, swift as an Arrow,
passed the Chambers toward the Coach. Scarce could Bileront, and 'the Lady
overtake her.

Thus Lovisa left the Court of Parma, and went directly toward the Palace of
her Uncle Don Alvarez, which was many Leagues from thence. When Bileront had
put her into the Coach, he returned to the Prince; who, like one stupify'd,
leant against a Cabinet. Bileront roused him, and begged he would go; because the
Servants would observe him. He, by his Friend's persuasion, almost insensibly
removed from her Closet to his own; then throwing himself upon the Floor, he
said all a violent despair could prompt. Princes harder brook to have their
wishes crossed than other Men; their Birth, their Education flatter 'em; the
World was made for them. Emimilius was young, his desires fierce, his Mistress
fair; and, what pierced deepest, willing, on Honorable Terms, to grant the
longed for Bliss. The old Duke, who thought a great point gained in Lovisa's
being removed; left him to himself a while, in hopes he would Conquer these
Reluctancies, and prove Obedient: but he, wholly given up to Melancholy, found
the Passionate Thoughts, that possessed his Love sick Mind, too entertaining to
be dismissed. His Cabinet and Closet-walks, where none but Faithful Bileront
gained admittance, took up most of his hours. When he was forced to appear, his
Eyes carried the marks of his discontent; his words were few, and spoken, as if
his Mind was still on something else.

The Duke perceiving Emilius indulged his Passion, and yielded to his Bonds,
instead of struggling to get loose, sent for him, and beginning mildly said, I
well hoped, my Son, that before this, reduced by reason, you would have
acknowledged your Failings; rendr'd me just Gratitude, in a thankful Obedience.
-- Open your blinded Eyes, and view the dazzling glory of an Illustrious Birth,
and Royal Fortune. Is a subject to be preferred to Her? Far be it from me
(replied the Prince, respectfully) to derogate from the Princess of Mantua: She
may be, for ought I know, a Miracle. Would my Royal Father permit me not to
enjoy my Wishes, that were too mighty for my hopes; only leave me but free from
others, as I am debarred from her I love: That Is the humble All I ask!

This was not what the Duke expected; and as it was constraint on him, to make
use of Mildness, like a Bow bent backwards, he impetuously returns to Rage.
Says he (looking sternly) Am I to be thus dallyed with, Foolish Boy? Prepare to
Execute what I Command, with readiness; lest my Resentment, great as thy Folly,
reach thee! An Extraordinary Ambassador is now dispatching, with my last
Orders for the Court of Mantua; I Will send the Articles to be by you perused,
and expect your Letters; Letters fit for Emilius to write, and Isabella to
receive. 'Command my Life, (Answers that Afflicted Prince, kneeling) and
without a murmur, I Will Obey. Alas! Sir, I respect the Princess Isabella more
than you; I would not betray her to Faithless Arms, where she must ever meet
with Coldness, Neglect, nay Hatred, instead of Conjugal Affection. Thou
stubborn Fool (retorts the Duke, in a furious tone) born for my Curse, and thy
own Undoing! -- but I shall find a way, at least, to Plague thee, if thou dare
refuse the offered Blessing. By Heaven! -- I Will have thy Mistress Poisoned, or
else tried for a Witch, and so Condemned! Her Sorceries have ruined thee! Do
thou not fear me! As I am a Man, (replied the Prince, rising and looking with a
becoming Bravery) and (what'd yet more) your Son; my Soul has still a stranger
been to fear! heap tortures on my disobedient Head! Cast me from your sight,
and Throne: naught that is Unmanly; naught that is Seditious shall appear in all
my Sufferings. With Patience, I Will renounce all the glorious Honors that my
Birth provides; forsaking all at your Command: all but my Unhappy Love; whom I
am sure, what ever you have said, you will not wrong. Princes should not extend
their Power to hurt the Innocent, or force their Laws Interpreters to find out
Crimes where there are none; and punish where they should reward! Go from my
sight (cries the Angry Duke!) Blot and Contagion of my Blood! -- And if thou
do not Repent, and with my Will comply; unheard of Curses over take you! --
You, and your dear Destruction, Lovisa!

The Lords, that saw the Prince pass through the Anti-Chambers, from his
Father, perceived additional Vexations in his Face. Many, who loved him, would
have followed; but he forbad them all, and entered his Cabinet alone.

Bileront no sooner heard of his new Discontents; but making use of what the
Prince's Favor had allowed, a Key he had of the Closet; without Commission
ventured to disturb him. Good Heavens! what sorrows touched that Compassionate
Lord; when he beheld the same Hero, whom he had seen foremost Charge the
Turkish Troops, and last Retreat; now extended on the ground; giving way to
Griefs scarce fit to be recited of the great Emilius! See here (said he,
casting his sad Eyes on Bileront) the destined Bridegroom! the destined slave!
the People's Property! Who for their pretended Interest, and a cruel Father's
Arbitrary Will, must be, for ever, joined to what he hates; and lose the
Brightest Blessing, the softest Good, that ever Adorned the World! Many, and
tender were the Complaints Emilius poured into the Bosom of his loved Friend;
who comforted him with all the sweetness faithful Friendship could Inspire.

Next day, the Duke sent the Articles of Marriage to his Son; with Command that
he should examine them, and return his Answer. But Emilius absolutely refused
to look upon 'em. This gave fresh Rage to the already Incensed Duke; and he
resolved the Duchess should not lose her share of the vexation. Again he
storms at her; reiterates the cruel Vows of deep Revenge; whilst that
Distressed Lady seeks to her loved Son in vain; who only Answers her Entreaties
with far fetched Sighs, and looks of wild despair. She writes to Lovisa; and
conjures her to study some means to oblige Emilius to yield.

The retired Lovisa, who possessed her fill of Melancholy (though her Indulgent
Uncle, fond as a Father, studied to divert her) received this Letter, as the
extended Malice of her Fate, that knew no end. And, far from joying at the
Prince's Constancy, wept at the Mischiefs her resistless Eyes had caused.
Lovisa knew Emilius was not naturally stubborn or Disobedient; therefore in the
movingest terms her Soul could dictate; (her desire and wishes for his real
Good o'ercoming Love) she writ to him.

The Prince might more properly be said to be Immured, than Retired. For he
permitted none to see him, except Bileront, and Servants, just necessary to
wait on him. The Duchess first received Lovisa's Letter; and having perused it
was pleased. She Sealed it again, and gave it Bileront to deliver.

When Emilius saw Lovisa's hand, he kissed it eagerly; and transported, cried,
What Summons has my Goddess sent? Has she kindly reversed my Doom; and given
me leave to share her Banishment? Oh! Bileront (went he on, his Eyes sparkling
with the same Passion, his heart was full of) Methinks I could do wonders for
my Love, would she consent! With her, fly the ri^^^urs of an Inexorable Father!
Fly Ungrateful Parma! And in some peaceful Corner of the Globe, fix my
unimitable Fair; whilst for the loss of Crowns, Glory, Ambition, All,
bewitching, dear, delightful Love makes up, and far excels. He opened the
Letter, and Bileront saw his Countenance alter, as he read it; that short Beam
of Joy which so lately shone through his Face, Eclipsed with blacker Clouds of
sadness, than before. Read, my Lord, said the Prince, for sure my Eyes, only
used to sorrow, transform the words of Kindness into Cruelty; even from her.

Lovisa to the Prince Emilius.
WHen will my Malignant Stars have shed their Baneful Venom? Remorsless
Heaven! Must I with Justice complain of Emilius? Must he become my greatest
Persecutor? And, by his cruel Obstinacy, draw down the Curses of late Posterity
upon me? Will no Retirement but a Monastery, though never so remote, prove an
Asylum for this Tortured Wretch? I Have cause to think you wish me in a Cloister!
Now Prince, you shall have your desire! Conclude, within few days, I am a
Votaress! Since you dislike the offers I made at parting; since my Eternal Love
promised as far as Honor would allow, on the Condition of your Obedience, is
not acceptable: My next Task shall be, to banish you my Heart! This is the last
unalterable Resolve of

The Unfortunate Lovisa.


After Bileront had ended the Letter, the Prince remained half an hour silent;
then rising hastily from the Couch, where he had thrown himself, he took his
Pen and wrote; and giving it to his Favorite, bid him carry it to the
Duchess; saying, he supposed Lovisa's Letter came by her Approbation; and he
hoped she would like the Answer. Bileront did as Commanded, and the Duchess
found these words.

Emilius to Lovisa.
Banished Lovisa's Heart! That Is a punishment I cannot bear: Believe me, Madam,
I Would sooner chose to Reign Absolute Monarch there, than over half the Universe.
But since the unrelenting Fates deny, rather than be totally Expelled, give me
that cold Corner allowed for Friendship. Change your unjust Design of Quitting
the World, as I must do the happy Name of your Adorer; to that of

Your Eternal Friend and Servant, Emilius.


Think you my Son is real in this, said the Duchess; I know not, Madam,
(answered that young Lord) Indeed, in my Opinion, his looks discover a new
Resolution. The Duchess dispatched away her Letter; and straight put the Duke
upon sending the Articles again to the Prince; which he did; and Emilius
immediately signed them; and said his Letters to the Princess, should be ready,
in a day or two. He appeared publicly, looked pleasantly; and all, except
Bileront, thought the Alteration unfeigned. The eyes of Friendship, next to
Love, are the most Prying. Bileront alone observed his stolen Sighs; and those
Absences of Mind, which so often possessed him. And meeting him opportunely, he
with a concerned obliging Air, began. What Breach of Faith have I been guilty
of; wherein offended, that my Loved Royal Master hides from me his Soul;
conceals from me, as well as all the World, the Griefs that Prey upon his Noble
Heart! Griefs (replied the Prince Ironically) I Have none; Am I not to Marry the
Infanta! There, Beauty, Wealth and Merit join to Bless my future Reign. Ah!
Prince (returned Bileront) why will you use your Faithful servant thus? I would
not press, nor wish to know your secret thoughts, but only in hopes to assist,
to serve you. Be satisfied (said the Prince, going toward some Company, he
saw:) I conceal nothing from you, or if I do; it is because I Will not Involve my
Friend in the inevitable Woes, ordained for me. Bileront, could not answer
then; but he resolved to Watch him. That night Letters for Isabella were to be
delivered to the Duke; on the Pretext of writing them, Emilius dismissed his
Attendance; and shutting himself up in his Closet, said, when his writing was
over, he would sleep the remaining part of the Night, upon his Couch. Bileront, who
heard these Orders, hid himself behind a loose piece of hanging, till the
servants were all gone. Then stealing along, he softly Unlocked the Closet
Door. The Prince was writing, though not to Isabella; he heard Bileront stir
and turning with a furious Aspect, asked who was there! That Faithful Lord,
affrighted to see his Prince look so stern, cast himself at his Feet; and, with
Tears, implored he might share his Fate. For (said he) I Am sure you have
determined to abandon Parma, rather than your Fair Mistress. The Prince could
not but be sensibly touched to see the sincere Affection of the Count; and
Raising him, said with a sigh, why will thou not with Fortune, leave the
Wretched lost Emilius? I am a Barque, that is Bound for sure Destruction! All
near must share the Tempest; and meet the Face of horrid Ruin! Did I like a
Coward, (Answered Bileront) start from your side in War; that I am now
Discarded? No, No! (returned Emilius) nor did I then Deny thy Going. Alas,
Alas! It is not now the Field of Honor, Emilius seeks! Lethargick Love has
seized my Soul; and in a Cell I mean to Dream away my Life! Endeavor not
diswading me (went he on) showing him a Cordelier's Habit; near these, the only
Robes, that I shall ever wear, a Dagger lies; if I Am prevented, that sends me
to a long Eternal Sleep! Therefore, if, out of Zeal to my advantage, as thou
think it, this gets air, before I am past their reach, they take me dead, my
Bileront, unalterable truth is in my words; thou may believe me. I do
believe (said that Troubled Confident;) and only beg to participate. I can
brook the solitude of a Cell, as well as my dear Lord; nay the Court would seem
to me a Desert, were you absent. No; by our past Friendship, I conjure you,
stay (returns the Prince) on that condition, I Will, to you alone, unfold what
I Have designed. I Am informed, near the Palace of Don Alvarez, there stands a
Monastery of the Cordelier's, thither I direct my steps; speak once to my
Lovisa; then leaving Parma, Imbarque for France; and in some Cloister, I best
shall like, end my wretched Days. I tell you this (continued he, with a
resolved Countenance) and you know, what I have sworn, if you discover it. I am
not used to faulter or break my word, therefore, Dear Bileront, now retire.
I Will send you word of my abode in France; and shall accept a Visit kindly.
Bileront saw it then in vain to diswade him, and having learnt where he went,
designing to follow him, said nothing against it; only asked him, how he
thought to get admittance amongst the Fathers. That Contrivance is Comical
enough (returns the Prince; forcing a smile) for I have here (showing him a
Letter) with my own Hand and Signet, recommended my self, as a Friar of my
Acquaintance. I have also a Compound to turn my Complexion Yellow; and a Powder
to black my Eyebrows. All is ready; the Letter for the Duke my Father, and the
Duchess; whose troubles for this concern me nearest. Once more, my Faithful
Friend, Farewell, said he, Embracing Bileront; who unwillingly left him;
satisfied in nothing, but his design to see him again before he parted from the
Monastery of the Cordeliers. He gone, the Prince, about three a Clock in the
Morning, taking the Habit with him, lest any of the Centry, seeing him like a
Cordelier, should give Information, when the hunt was made for him. He passed
unobserved; or if any did see him, he was so used to walk early, and alone,
that there was no notice taken of it. The first Thicket he reached, he pulled
off his own Upper Clothes, and put on the Vestments of a Friar, and tying a
stone to his Coat, threw it into an adjacent River. You know, my Illustrious
Auditors, (said Francisco) Emilius is a very Fair Man, his Eyes sweet, and his
Hair very light; to alter which, he took his Compound, and washing his Face,
and delicate Hands in it; appeared just of a Sunburned Yellow. Then blacking
his Eyebrows, he looked so changed, his most intimate Friends could not have
known him. He had put up a considerable quantity of Gold; so, the first
convenience of riding he met with, he made use of; and passed securely; not so
much as hearing any inquiry made after him. Being arrived at the Cloister, and
showing Prince Emilius's Letter, the good Fathers received him with infinite
Civility. They observed him Melancholy, and unwilling to speak; and, out of
Respect; asked him few Questions. He saw the Turrets of Don Alvarez's Palace;
and after a repast had refresht him, he could not forbear asking one of the
Fathers to walk. He chose to go that way; and when near the House, the
Palpitation of his Heart informed him how Dear Lovisa was. He asked the Father,
who that Palace belonged to; and being answered, as he expected, to Don
Alvarez: I was told (said he) Don Alvarez was your Neighbor, and have a
Message from the Prince to him, which I design to Morrow to deliver. We have a
nearer way than this (said the Friar) which leads us from our Orchard-Walls,
through his Groves of Oranges and Jessamin, to his door. This pleased the
Prince, and he soon retired; all Night revolving in his Love-possess'd Mind,
how he should speak with Lovisa alone. He, at length, concludes to deliver a
Letter, as from Emilius to Alvarez; wherein the Prince should desire him to let
the Cordelier speak alone with Lovisa. Wished Morning being come, our Royal
Cordelier rose, and being by one of the Society directed, entered those Fragrant
Groves: whose sweets, wafted by the early breeze, would have Banquetted Senses,
less employed; but Emilius thought on nothing but Lovisa. When he was got
pretty near the Gates of the House, he heard a Clock strike Four; which as it
were awaked him out of his Contemplation; and made him consider, how improper a
time it was, to disturb a Nobleman's Family. This thought turned him again into
the Grove, and seeking out of the direct path, some Grotto suitable to his
Melancholy, he observed a part of the Grove enclosed; which looked extreme
shady; he, without much trouble, got over this Enclosure, and found the thick
gloomy shade, dark as he could wish. Vast aged Trees formed the grand Walk;
whose high meeting tops, and strait Trunks, looked Majestic; and a Myrtle Hedge
grew thick and even about their Roots, which added to the Beauty of the Place.
Behind this Hedge, upon high Grass, Emilius threw himself along. His Anxious
Thoughts, those usual Torments, a while employed him; till Nature's Reliever,
soft refreshing sleep, the effect of restless Nights, seized him. This proved
the very walk Lovisa loved; nor had the Prince reposed long, before the Voice
of that perpetual Object of his Soul waked him. He found 'twas she, and her
Companion: Love made him curious to listen if their discourse related to him;
and concealing himself, he heard the Lady, that was with her say, When, Madam,
will these Destructive Griefs leave your disconsolate hours. You shun the fond
Indearments of your Uncle, that you may take your fill alone of heartbreaking
sorrow: Your Eyes have lost their wonted Vigor; and your lovely Cheeks, like
gathered Roses, Fade; and in their prime, forsake their Native Luster. You
promised, when the Prince obeyed his Father, and instead of burning Love,
embraced cool Friendship: You would mourn no more. His Letter assures you this
is done; yet I behold no alteration. Still the days are tedious, and the Nights
are worse. When (I beg to know!) will your Woes have End? With my Life
(answered that Sighing Afflicted Fair.) Though, witness ye Powers (said she,
looking up;) who, with ease can view the inmost Recesses of my Soul; and
plainly see what is Acted there: Witness, I say, if I not rejoice, that Prince
Emilius to Duty, and to Reason yields; quitting the Weight, the Burden
insupportable of Blind impetuous Passion; that sinks Lovisa down to Ruin.
Mutual Love creates a pleasing Habitude of Joy; wherein the Mind transcendently
is Blessed: and which Time, that with Oblivion buries all things, can scarce blot
out. 'Twas not with ease the Usurper got Possession here (went she on; pointing
to her Heart) nor will he be with ease dislodged. All the Sighs and Tears it
cost Emilius to gain this Virgin Heart, to bind it in the Enchanting Chains of
Tyrannick Love; I must, with Interest, pay back, ever I can set the Throbbing
Prisoner free. Perhaps in the Conflict too the Rebel, engaged too far, may
break. I have also a part of Falsehood to Act: Think thou continued she,
looking on her Companion;) I design never to see Emilius more? No, no: spite
of the Promises, wherewith I Have flattered him; soon as he is happy in the Arms
of Isabella; the Cloister, to which I Have only seemed averse, hides me for ever.
The Prince, who could no longer bear his Mistress should think him guilty of
breaking Vows, he left a Crown to keep, met her at the end of the walk, and
falling at her Feet, he Embraced her Knees, and said, If Lovisa never became a
Recluse, till Emilius is happy in the Arms of Isabella, the Church will lose
its Fairest Votary. Who can express the surprise of Lovisa and the other Lady!
The Voice was the Prince's, but the Face, the Habit, contradicted that thought.
Heavens! (cried Lovisa, in raising him) it cannot be Prince Emilius! Why should
my Life (said he; looking passionately on her) wonder at the Metamorphosis? Was
this the hardest Task my cruel Love enjoined; My Fate reversed, I should only
talk of Joys and Blessings. Ah! Prince, (said Lovisa in a moving tone and air)
was this well done? Did thou fear I should too soon forget thee. Cruel Man,
thus to interrupt the Peace I am striving for! Go to the Royal Nuptials, thy
Fate prepares; and leave me! Leave me Emilius, to my Beloved, and chosen
Solitude. I do design to leave thee, (replied the Prince,) Thou Dear, thou only
Charmer! Excellent Woman! The First, the Last, that ever possessed Emilius's
Heart! I Am for ever going; push me not from thee, with precipitated haste; Let
me but gaze a moment, grasp thy loved hand, and bear it to my trembling Lips;
print my last Kisses there: I Will then pursue what, sure as Death and Fate, I
have resolved. What, dear Bewitching Talker, (returns Lovisa, her Eyes swimming
in Love and Tears) What have thou resolved? Even in these very Weeds to be for
ever shrouded (said Emilius) and far, far hence removed; at once forsaking,
what to Death I loath; and what more than Life I loved! This must not be (
Lovisa interrupts him): Rob not the World, and your Unhappy Country, of
Virtues, which as they are Exemplary, should be Conspicuous: that the Great
Example may encourage a degenerate Age; and make the Subject blush at Vices
which his Prince abhors. Ah! Do not vainly wast the last, and only precious
moments of my Life (cried Emilius.) Death, or a Cell, I Have swore, by all that is
Sacred! Therefore no more, my Love; look on me, as a Wretch that is dying, as
one Condemned; without the possibility of a Reprieve; with gentle pity sooth
the rugged'st blow of Fate, Eternal Parting. And for the Ease of my divided
Heart, which with unbated Passion still will heave and swell, and pant at
thought of thee, give me thy Promise to keep thy Faith inviolate. When, I, low
as the Dust, shall grovel in my distant humble Cell; let me hug this thought;
not Crowns, nor Youth, or Beauty, tempts Lovisa to entertain another Love; and
blot the lost Emilius from her constant Mind. Is this all, thou dear Deserver
(said Lovisa, looking on him with the kindest aspect in the World?) Ah! poor
return for so much worth; for so much Love, I Would be lavish in my Protestations,
were there need; but sure Emilius neither knows himself, nor me, when he
requires one. You are for a Cell, and where, think you, I am to be disposed?
Not in a Court, I Will promise ye! Distant, indeed, our Cells will be; but the
thinking Mind can travail, in one moment, many Leagues. I Will beg of Heaven, it
may be no Offense to dedicate, each Day, some loved peculiar hours to thee.
I Will think of every tender word, and look, and Blush, as it were Acting over
again. This shall be the Banquet of my Mind, all Times, besides those Devoted
to my Sighs, and Sadness! Oh! unequaled Charmer (answered the Transported
Prince) why do thou talk thus? Why did I beg for Kindness, when my foolish
nature cannot bear it! That I could now, this instant, fall a Victim at thy
Feet; and thereby Eternalize the greatest Flame, that ever possessed the Heart of
Man! But I will live; and suffer for thee! Yes, my Fair Saint! Judge thou thy
self, if it is not greater Pain to live than dye; to live without the
Wretched'st last Comfort, Hope; to rave; to love like me; even to Madness Love.
And in all these heights, to leave Thee! Parted by Seas, and Wilds, and Alps,
and what is yet a greater Bar, a Father's Curse! Thou Cold Benumming Hand of
all-destroying Death, seize me. Embalmed by my Lovisa's Tears! At her Feet
Expiring is a quick Conveyance to a quiet Grave; a Blessing I would court with
the same Eagerness, as others shun approaching Fate. His looks, which the very
Image and Impress of unartificial sorrow bore, gave terror to his words, and
would have pierced Souls more insensible than Lovisa's, or her fair Friend's.
That Friend, a sorrowful Spectator of this dismal Meeting, told Lovisa she
heard the Gates open; and believed it was for Don Alvarez, who was coming to
seek her. Lovisa Conducted Emilius away, to avoid her Uncle, out of this Inner
Grove. At parting, Grief grew too big for Words: A strict Embrace, and mingled
Tears, conclude the cruel Separation. Not that Lovisa feared Don Alvarez's
knowing the Prince in his Disguise: only the mutual Trouble, and Confusion they
were in, was too visible, and of necessity must have been perceived. This
occasioned her to hasten him away, before her Uncle reached the Place.

Disconsolate Emilius returned to the Monastery, inwardly bewailing his
Condition; esteeming himself the most deplorable of human kind. His Body
yielded beneath the Fatigues of these perplexing Inquietudes; so that he was
taken very ill. The careful Friars did their best to comfort, and refresh him.
He desired to be left alone to his Repose; though, in reality, 'twas only to
enjoy the Melancholy Cogitation, his disappointed Love suggested.

In the Evening, one came and told him, a Gentleman inquired for the Cordelier,
that came the night before. This put the Prince upon his Guard; he bid 'em
Conduct the Stranger to him; and contrived his Fatal Dagger in a readiness, to
give him liberty, if they offered to seize him. But he found those Thoughts
needless, when he saw Bileront enter. Emilius, with a sad Air, turned from him;
and said, Why do thou follow me? Thy officious Love is grown troublesome of
late. Condemn me not, till you have heard what I have to say (replied
Bileront:) Alas! there is an alteration of a fatal wondrous sort, since your
Departure. Our Duke -- Cruel though he be (interrupted Emilius) Heaven preserve
him ever from approaching Danger -- The Prince silent, Bileront reassumed his
Discourse. The Morning your Highness left the Court, the Duke prepared to hunt,
and inquiring for you, was told, that out of respect to the Princess Isabella,
with your own hand, you had been most part of the night writing. This pleas'
him, and he said, you should not be disturbed. He had not rode far, before his
Horse unfortunately threw him, and he received a dangerous wound in his Head.
He was brought back to the Palace, just as the Duchess was informed of your
being gone. This Completion of Misfortunes o'er-whelm'd her. The Duke fainted
several times at the dressing of his hurt; yet knows not of your Absence;
though, when he could for his intolerable pain speak, he has often asked for
you. Emilius looked earnestly in Bileront's Face; trying to discover whether
this sad Narration was Truth. Bileront perceiving his Doubts, with earnest
Asseverations confirmed what he had said, and convinced the Prince. He also
told him, how he had contrived to leave some Servants, with Clothes for him,
and directed him the way to enter the place privately; and get shifted without
discovery. Emilius, though indisposed, prepared to see his Dying Father; his
Nature was Tender; and notwithstanding Almighty Love, this sad accident touched
him nearly. Yet would he not forget his Mourning Fair, but contrived a Letter,
which being of necessity to be sent by one of the Cordelier's, he would not use
his own hand or name, but desired Bileront to write the following words.

Madam,
THE Cordelier, you saw to Day, in the Garden, begs you would defer all hasty
Resolutions. An Affair of weighty moment calls him back to Court; in a few Days
this shall be Explained. What I have said, is by directions from the -- What
remains, is only that I am

Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, Bileront.


Emilius gave a Friar this Letter, and charged him to deliver it that Night.
Then he took his leave of those Hospitable Fathers; saying, he was sent for in
great haste, to Court; and promised that he would acquaint the Prince, how
Courteous, upon his Account, they had been. Emilius fancied his Deportment so
odd in the Convent, that their Curiosity might prompt them to open the Letter;
which caused him to have it writ so ambiguously. But they, without the least
thought of such rudeness, accomplished his desires.

Lovisa had, the remainder of that Day, been discoursing with her Uncle of her
resolution to enter the Nunnery of St. Clare. That good Man used all the
Arguments, a tender Affection could Inspire, against it. Told her, that being
Childless, he had designed her for his Heir; which, said he, added to your own
Fortune, will, as to Estate, render you a Match for any Prince in Christendom.
And Beauty, Virtue, or whatever Graces else adorn your Sex, the World, that is,
the Happy World which knows you, with Justice, owns you, in Perfection,
Mistress of.

Alvarez said this, and a thousand more kind things, to no purpose. Gratitude
and Love possessed her Noble Soul; nor could she in honor act less; when brave
Emilius set the great Example. The Arrival of the Cordelier, with the Letter of
Bileront, surpised her extremely; and for the time desired, she remained in
wondrous Expectation; framing many Conjectures wide of the matter.

Prince Emilius and Bileront reached the Court, just as the old Duke had been in
another swooning Fit. Emilius went directly to the Duchess; who almost
Distracted with her Unexpressible Sorrow, beheld him as a Vision. After the
Duchess had chid him for his Disobedience; she, in Mourning Terms of real
Concern, related the Misfortune and Danger his Father lay under; adding, that
he had been, that Day, so earnest to see him; that they were forced to own his
Absence. Which News the Duke received with less Passion than was expected. The
next Interval, when his fainting Spirits were a little retrieved, Emilius
entered his Chamber, and going toward the Bed, he kneeled. Silence and a
sadness unfeigned stamped his Face, with humble Duty; and pleaded more in his
Excuse, than if he had offered at extenuating words. The Duke beheld him, but
with no signs of Rage, and with a weak Voice, said, Emilius, I know my past
Severity, rough Usage, and my positive Commands, thy tender Nature could not
kindly brook. Believe me, Son, 'twas well meant; I would have formed thee,
Youth, a perfect Soldier; but thy Mother's softness hangs about thy Soul; and
she has stamped thee all a Lover. And since I Am going to the Land of Peace; I
will not ruffle the Calmness I Have so late obtained, in struggling with Desires
violent as yours. With my Blessing Possess the Mistress, you with such an
Eagerness have Loved; and do not hate the Memory of your Departing Father, who
only for your Interest, opposed this Passion: too great, it seems, to be
removed. Oh! Heavens! (cries the poor Prince, overcome with Filial Sorrow) must
I never aim at Joys sincere! Live, my dear Father, live; though to continue
Cruel, divided ever from my Unhappy Fair, I fancy I could bear it now! No more,
no more, (the Duke stops him) on this Theme! Come nearer, receive and remember
the last Instructions of thy Dying Father. The Prince, being seated by him, he
gave him such Politic Rules, as he, by long Practice had found most useful;
the constant observing of which, has enlarged his Dominions, and augmented his
Power.

That Night the Duke Expired, Emilius was immediately Proclaimed, according to
his Right, Successor. The Young Duke managed his Affairs with a most uncommon
Prudence; being Affectionately Dutiful to his Weeping Mother; and obliging all
whom his Father had loved, and favored. Lovisa was, by his Order, acquainted
with all these Particulars; yet so fearful was he of committing any undecency,
that he denied himself the satisfaction of seeing her, for three Months. The
delight of reciprocal Love, being the highest Abstract of Joy, he justly judged
it improper to possess at a time, which in Duty, he ought to dedicate wholly to
Affliction.

All the Court looked on Lovisa, as a Person ordained for their Duchess; and
already gave her a profound Respect. Don Alvarez, who loved her entirely, was
so pleased with her Exalted Fortune, that he settled all his Lands and
Lordships on her, after his Decease. This rendered it Policy as well as
Pleasure, for the Duke to Espouse her; the Estate being too Opulent for a
Subject, without danger, to enjoy. The Duchess Dowager prevails with Lovisa to
return to Court, and the time of strict Mourning being over Emilius constantly
Visits her; his Love, if possible, still seeming to Increase. At length, the
Nuptials are concluded; and with great Solemnity performed. Billeront
deservedly remaining his dearest endless Favorite.

I think, I safely may affirm (added Francisco) Prince Emilius a happy Man. His
public Affairs are Prosperous, his Beauteous Duchess Fruitful in Issue, as
well as Charms; indearingly kind to him; and naturally good to all. Whatever
progress he undertakes, she, by his desire, still accompany's him, except to
the Camp; where he has done wonders, since his Accession to the Throne.
Demonstrating that a perfect Lover may be a complete Soldier.

Thus ends Francisco; By the Commands of your Highness (bowing to Olympia:) I
have, to the utmost of my knowledge, discovered each particular relating to the
Loves of that Incomparable Pair.

The Ladies were liberal in their thanks to Francisco; and infinitely pleased
with the Narration; especially Melora; her Sentiments were Delicate; and by a
Sympathetic Power, the Misfortunes or Blessings of others sensibly moved her
Passions. This the Cardinal observes, and improves by a thousand new
Protestations of everlasting Fidelity. Melora was so full of the foregoing
History, she did not seem to listen much to the Cardinal's Complements. Olympia
took notice of it, and said My Dear, you are mightily delighted with Lovisa;
but I don't perceive you intend to follow her Example: She did not maintain her
rigor half so long. True (added Barberino) Emilius, in all his Sufferings, had
the rich Cordial of Lovisa's Love for his support; but I pay all my Vows to an
obdurate Rock; to a fair Marble Statue; Deaf to my Prayers, and with my Sighs
unmoved. I thought replied Melora, (Blushing and looking on Olympia) my Royal
Governess would have chid me, as discovering my Weakness too far: and I assure
you, my Lord (went she on smiling) you cannot oblige me more than in comparing
me to Rocks and Marbles, and such impenetrable stuff: for I have a great vanity
to be thought Inexorable. Melora delivered this with an unusual cheerful air;
infinitely charming the amorous Priest. He snatched her lovely Hand, and
moulding it with burning Kisses, cried passionately, this warm softness is, I Am
sure, no Kin to Marble.

Unavoidable Business called Olympia next Day to the Court of Rome. For this
Politic Niece of the Pope's was as busy in the Ecclesiastical Affairs, as any
Favorite Nephew, before, or since. Most part of the last Night at the Villa,
they spent in woing Melora, that the next Journey to this convenient Solitude
should complete the Happyness of the pretended Prince Alphonsus. Reiterated
Prayers prevailed; and that Fair Sacrifice, by her sweet blushing silence,
gives consent. Transported with their Fatal Success, they all return to Rome;
the Ladies by themselves, and the Cardinal another way.

Fate, as if not fully resolved to destroy such Perfection and Innocence as
sweet Melora's, made offers at a Discovery; offers only they proved, and the
black contrivance went on. The first Prospect of undeceiving her, was
Francisco's falling in love with her. His being privy to the Design, gave him
often Opportunities of her Conversation. And you may as well suppose it easy to
dwell in Flames and not be scorched; as to be often near Melora, hear her talk,
and view her Charms, yet feel no warmth. Stifled Fire can never be long
concealed; much less the Hottest Flame, Smothered Love. Cunning Olympia caught
his unwary Eyes Rivetted to her fair Face; observed his frequent Sighs, his
Tremblings, and his change of Color, when she talked to him, or he, by
accident, was near. This in the first beginnings of his Love, Olympia informs
the Cardinal. He considered it as dangerous, and being sending dispatches into
Spain, makes him the Chief Commissioner, and hurries him away; giving him no
opportunity again to see Melora.

Francisco guessed the Cause of this new Employ, and was upon the rack. He knew
should he disobey, or give Melora caution of her approaching Ruin; if there
were Daggers or Poisons to be bought in Rome, his Life must satisfy the
revengeful Cardinal. Then, he justly thought Melora's hate would fall on him,
as well as all the rest of her Deceivers. He vainly hoped, diversity of
business would efface her Charming Image from his Breast. He knew his Fortunes
destroyed for ever, should he forsake a Prince Cardinal, whose Power was so
vast to raise him. Yet against these, gentle Compassion, increased by Love,
pleaded strongly; and always whispered him to save such Matchless Innocence.
But ever he had determined, the Impatient Cardinal forces him on Board. When
Melora asked for him, Barberino told her he was gone to Modena, by his Order.
Olympia now began to press her earnestly, for this designed Journey to the
Villa. Melora knew what they expected from her there; and her Virgin Fears
representing Marriage, without her Father's Knowledge, terrible still, caused
her to put it off, delaying with many excuses. Olympia had procured a Priest,
she having a hundred of them at her service; Preferment lying so greatly in her
Power. The Priest knew not the bottom of the design; was only told it was two
Friends of Donna Olympia's, who desired to be Married privately.

Whilst things remained thus, with no other stop, but Melora's delays; she
happened, passing through her Father's Hall, to drop a Letter of the
Cardinal's; which her Father, following her, took up, and read these words.

Divine Princess,
Each moment, that I see you not, seems to drag a heavy Chain. To live another
Day and Night without you, would be a Torment wholly Insupportable. When I see
you next, to read a little Anger in your lovely Eyes, for my long stay, will
please me more than the smiles of Empresses. So much is every word and look
prized by the Humblest of your Servants.


The Ambassador strait calls for his Daughter, and showing the Paper in his
Hand, asked her from whom that Piece of Gallantry came? It is observable that
Women are so ingenious and quick at nothing, as the Affairs of Love. And the
most ignorant and illiterate, commonly have cunning enough to manage an
Intrigue. I believe, the Reason is, Love being the most agreeable Passion of
their Minds, employs every Faculty of their Soul readily; no wonder then Melora
was so quick at an excuse. For she, without any hesitation, answers her Father,
it was a Letter of her own composing, and designed for Olympia. He suddenly
returns upon her, but how comes it then in a Man's hand? I have it always drawn
over by one of her Pages (replies Melora, without any visible discomposure) to
divert her the more. Though this sounded a little strangely, yet so unblemished
was the Carriage and Conversation of this Young Lady, that her Father gave her
back the Letter, without the least mistrust. Glad was Melora thus easily to
recover it, and going to Olympia acquaints her with the story. Who, thereupon
presses her again for the Marriage; assuring her that the Duke's Business went
on successfully; and that she would quickly be Proclaimed Duchess of Ferrara
and Modena; will you then (adds she earnestly) neglect the opportunity of this
proffered Glory; and by backwardness delay time, till some sinister accident
occur, that may frustrate all our designs? These Arguments, delivered by so
faithful a Friend, as Melora took Olympia to be; moved her to yield.

This joyful News is communicated to the Cardinal, who came that Night, and
expresses his transports by a thousand Extravagancies of Fondness. Now the
third Journey is made to the Villa, where these Unhappy Nuptials are
Celebrated; at which Hymen ought to have hid his Face; and only Portentous
Omens appeared.

Melora's Genius still whispers she has done ill; which foreboding Thoughts
take from her Eyes their cheerful Luster. Innumerable were their Prayers before
they could obtain a full Consummation: at length powerful importunity
overcomes; and the Cardinal has sacrificed to his Lust Nature's Masterpiece.
Who, if her Fate had equaled her Beauty, and other rare Indowments, might
justly have expected in reality, as much Greatness, as Olympia only flattered
her with.

Six Months this Insatiate Priest Revels on that Luxurious Banquet, Blooming
Youth, and yielding Beauty. By which time his fierce desires begin to cool in
that certain Cure for Love full Enjoyment. Then he, with vexation reflects on
the almost unaccountable sums, this short-lived Pleasure has cost him; besides
Melora's Pregnancy; which, spite of their utmost endeavors, would, in a short
time, appear; adds infinitely to his Terrors. These Thoughts take from his
Conversation that Vivacity and Livelyness which before made it pleasing. Melora
quickly perceives this alteration; and sensibly resents it. Her demeanor was
replete with Duty and Love; nor can she but with inexpressible regret, endure
this cold return. He excuses it with the crossness of his Affairs; which Melora
in part believes: for by the public Discourse at her Father's, she understands
the real Duke of Modena was near a Rupture, with the Pope; and that a War was
like to follow. She represents this to Olympia; who puts her off with fair
words only.

Whilst these unhappy things were Acted in and near Rome, the forementioned
Francisco, whose Soul was agitated with a hundred different Resolutions,
arrives in Spain. But neither the Sea, nor distant Climates, can Efface Melora
from his Memory. Slight Wounds, Absence and Time may heal, but this Charming
Beauty gives no such; and his pains augment. Then he Curses his Cowardice, and
calls himself a thousand Villains, for leaving the Lady exposed; first to the
Lust, and then the Cruelty of the Cardinal. For he knew Antonio's Temper too
well, to doubt Barbarity would follow his satiated Love. These Apprehensions
distract him to that degree, that he resolves to leave unfinished all his
Business, and return disguised to Rome; and rescue, if possible, the Guiltless
Maid from the Jaws of Ruin.

Pursuant to this design, he immediately goes on Board; but is unfortunately,
by contrary Winds, kept on the Seas, till the time is Elapsed for his doing any
service to Melora. At length, he lands, comes to Rome in the Habit of a
Pilgrim; discoloring his Face to that degree, that 'twas impossible any Body
should know him. He rejoices in his safe Arrival at Rome; and vainly hopes,
something has hitherto disappointed the Cardinal's Consummating his Wishes.
Then Love presents him, with the false flattering Joy (it being natural for
that Passion to deceive us:) that he, saving Melora from the dire Fate that
hung over her; she might, in recompense give him leave to own his Flame. Not
then considering, that, when Melora was convinced of the Treachery designed
against her, she must needs detest every Instrument of the Treason. Now the
difficulty that remained, was the getting an Opportunity to speak with Melora,
she being perpetually almost at Olympia's, where he not daring to venture, was
in a great Perplexity. He lurks in the Evening near Olympia's House; discovers
the Cardinal go in, by an usual door of the Garden, and resolved to watch his
return; but was amazed to find it not till the Morning's approach. Then his
fears began to inform him, all help was past; however delays must certainly
make it so. Therefore he designs the next time Olympia went to the Pope's
Palace, to ask boldly for Melora, and trust to his Disguise. But he was
prevented in this, by seeing Melora take Coach in the Afternoon, accompanied
only by Olympia's Woman; and inquiring whither the Coach was going, he was
informed to Olympia's Villa. He immediately follows them; and the next day,
with a Key he had preserved, got into the Garden; hoping he might find Melora
there; if he did not, he knew his Habit would protect him from Violence, should
any of the Family see him. But here his Wishes were answered; for ever he had
searched far, he beheld that sweet Lady lying on a Bed of Grass, near a
Fountain, whose murmurs joining with her own Sorrows, had lulled her into a
slumber. For sorrowful he perceived she had been, by the rich dew which wet her
Handkerchief, and yet hung upon her fair Cheeks. He could scarce view this
Mourning Fair, without joining in the Womanish Grief. After he had gazed, and
sighed, and talked things, sad as despair could utter; he spies her Table Book
open; where something seemed to have been just written. Taking it up, finds
these lines.

Happy's the Nymph born in a homely Seat,
Nor knows the troubles of the rich and great.
Wrapped in the Embraces of her faithful Swain,
Feels still new Joys with no allay of pain.
Ambition never disturbs their gentle Love,
Nor Cares, nor Fears, their harmless Mirth remove.
In Huts as humble as their Minds they lie,
And lofty Roofs despise that reach the Sky.
To these alone does Heaven true Joys dispense,
And with content rewards their Innocence.
Content a Jewel that is seldom known
To bless or beautify a Regal Crown.
Ah! How have my unwary Footsteps straid,
While noise and glory my soft hours betrayed.
My purchased Pomp my Happyness has cost,
So in pursuit of Toys the Gem is lost.
Alas! Unhappy Beauty, said he, with a sigh: (as he had done reading) if thou
art already sad, how will thou mourn with endless Wailings, when the bottom of
thy Fate is known! all the woeful truth discovered. This, Francisco, Transported
with his Passion, spoke so loud, that he waked the sleeping Fair; who seeing a
Man so near her, starts up and cried, who art thou, that thus rudely pressest
on my solitude, and disturb'st my quiet Moments? A Wretch (he answered, putting
one Knee to the ground) that is born to Curse himself; nay worse, one whom you
are bound to Curse, with direst Imprecations pursue, nor ever mention, but when
an Invective of the bitter sort must follow. Sure (replies Melora calmly) you
take me for some other Person, since I dare boldly say, my Conscience, my
Soul's faithful Register, does not accuse me with so much Injustice, as ever to
have an Inclination to Curse a Stranger, much less one who bears the Religious
Show; which I, in all Persons, venerate. Is this Voice wholly a Stranger to you
(he returned passionately.) Oh that it were; or that the Name of Francisco had
been blotted with Eternal Oblivion, rather than have reached the Ears of the
Adored Melora! Or that an avenging Bolt had struck me to the Center, before I
had been made the detested Instrument of deceiving you! Why do you perplex me
thus with Riddles, (says Melora; the Blood beginning to forsake her Cheeks) if
you are Francisco, my Lord's Chief Favorite, whom he sent to Modena: what
means this Habit? And why this strange Address? Your Lord (answers this feigned
Pilgrim hastily) -- then all my fears are true; and you must prepare to hear a
story, at which my Bleeding Heart sinks down, and my faultring Tongue almost
denies me power to relate. What does Alphonsus then design to abandon me?
(interrupts the fearful Creature, falling upon a Bank, her trembling Knees not
being able to support her:) has he cruelly resolved (went she on, all in Tears)
to deny his Marriage, and expose me, and his Offspring to endless Infamy? Oh!
haste! Deliver me from these Fears; or see me dead! And is (said she, before he
could speak) Olympia joined with him, in my undoing? Why do you not answer me,
and ease my Throbbing Heart? If the Duke and she are both false to Love, and
Sacred Friendship, pronounce my Doom, at once; let me not linger long in
Torments. Since Providence has Ordained you so unkind a Fate (replies
Francisco) take to you, Madam, the resolution, your Innocence affords: Let your
Injuries disrobe your Soul of Tenderness: Arm your self with a noble scorn; and
make your just Resentments overcome your Sorrows. Oh! Do not pause (cries that
weeping Fair) go on; though it give me Death. Heaven is my Witness (says he,
still delaying) I would not undeceive you, so sad's the task, did not I fear a
farther Mischief. But, to prevent that, know, Madam, your Husband is not
Alphonsus, nor Duke of Modena; but Antonio Barbarino, the Pope's Nephew. He
assumes most unjustly, the Title of Cardinal Patron; when in reality he is a
Destroyer of his Country, and an utter Enemy to all Goodness. As Francisco was
about to proceed, he perceived a deadly paleness to overspread Melora's
Beauties; and after some Efforts of struggling Nature, she fell into a Swoon.
Never any perplexity equaled this poor Lover's; he was unwilling to call any
of the House to her assistance, because he had not finished his Discovery; nor
given her a Caution of Barbarino's Cruelty. He runs to the Fountain, sprinkles
some of it is Waters on her Face, bows her Body gently forwards; at last she
revives. Casting her lovely Eyes, overwhelmed with Sorrows, upon him, she said
with a Sigh: Ah! Cruel Man! why have you brought me back to this detested
Light; which, I must never more view with Cheerfulness! Yet, how know I (adds
she, recollecting her self:) but you may be an Impostor, and forge this Story,
to abuse my Friend, and Lord. On that condition I would part with my right hand
replies this guilty Informer: No, Madam; what I averr, is too sad a Truth:
Antonio is the Man: I can bring you, where you shall see him in his Scarlet
Robes going to the Consistory. Behold here (went he on, pulling Papers out of
his Pocket) Dispatches written with his own hand; which, I believe you know.
Melora could not but own she did; having received a hundred Billets-Doux's, in
the same Character. Fly then Madam, (proceeds Francisco) from this most abhorred
of Men, and Basest of Women, whose degenerate Souls could Betray such Matchless
Virtue, to Unparalled Ruin. I am certain their wicked designs will not end
thus. For when the Cardinal who knows not to put a true Estimate on Beauty, has
satiated his Luxurious Appetite: your Death (Ah dismal Thought! cries he, in a
Tone wholly Passionate) your Death will follow: I have heard them so resolve.
Whither shall I fly (replies the Disconsolate Lady) with this Guilty Load! Not
to my Incensed Father; he will upbraid me with my Disobedience, and say, my
Punishment is a just Reward for my crime. Oh! Heavens! (said she) may I not
murmur, may I not Complain: that these Probations are too severe for my Frailer
Sex to bear! Consider, Madam, (replies the truly Afflicted Francisco) Parents
are Indulgent; and when he shall hear the Truth; which I will also, with my
Life attest; your Innocence, and Nature pleading in your behalf; will force him
to receive you with Paternal Tenderness: Therefore hasten from this Dissolute
Priest; whose many Lusts and Impieties to relate, would die your cheeks in a
modest Crimson: La Cecca Buffona was once his Mistress, and Gloried in her
shame. Then to a Courtesan, who dwelt in the Julian-street, he gave, to satisfy
his Lust but once, a Thousand Crowns: not to mention the more than Brutal
Passion he has often had for his own Sex.

My Soul sickens at these Black Relations; (said Melora) and Unborn Innocence
Dy's in my Womb. As she was speaking; a Page enters the Garden, and tells her
Donna Olimpia was just Arrived; at which Melora, composing her self as much as
possibly she could, prepares to go and receive her. But first she desires
Francisco to make her Father's House his Sanctuary; and tells him she will
Escape thither, if by none of their stratagems prevented, the next Day; adding,
that till she came, he should not mention any thing of these Unhappy
Circumstances. I will, in every particular, obey you, (answers that Dejected
Man) but ever I go, I would, on my Knees, implore what will, in you, be an Act
of Mercy, almost above a Mortal; and bring to my despairing Soul, the only
Balsam, that can heal it is rancorous Wounds, and deter my Desperate Hand, from
Committing on my Body the Violence, my Guilty Thoughts suggest: I mean,
Forgiveness. Madam, if from your fair Mouth I hear my Pardon Sealed, I shall
emboldened grow, and look toward Heaven for Mercy; else, I must sink to the
dismal Grave, covered over with trembling horror, and never hope with Joy to
rise.

Bear Witness Heaven (replies that lovely Creature; her intermingling Tears
almost hindering her Speech) I forgive you, and may that boundless store, from
whence Eternal Mercy flows, forgive you too! Yet give me leave, Francisco to
add, it was unkind, mighty unkind, thus to betray a harmless Maid; who never so
much as in thought harbored a wrong to you. 'Twas Barbarous; -- 'twas
something worse than I can give a name to (replies her Idolater,
almost-raving). Melora interrupts him, and Commands him to rise, and fly to his
intended refuge: saying, she knew Olympia would immediately be there. He obeys,
and departs with the saddest aspect in the World. As Soon as Olympia had
conversed with Melora, she discovered the pressure upon her Spirits; and
plainly saw she put a great constraint upon her self, to appear cheerful. At
first Olympia imputed it only to the Cardinal's Absence, and told her, in a gay
strain, she must not be so fond; but however to satisfy her longing, the Duke
would be there that Night. Will he, Madam, (Answers the other, with an Air of
scorn) and when shall we enjoy this glorious Splendour, my dazzled Eyes have but
in Fancy seen? Methinks I wish my Lord would quit his pretensions to Ferrara,
and be content with Modena; that will satisfy my Ambition. Melora delivered
this in a tone so different from that she used to discourse of his Affairs in,
that the cunning Olympia fixing her Eyes upon her, immediately guessed, she had
some Information of the Deceit; and making her a slight Answer, goes to inquire
who had been there; and understands by the Page that went into the Garden, a
Pilgrim was seen talking with her. Whilst she was busied in this Examination,
her Woman brings her word the Cardinal was in her Closet, and desired to speak
with her before he saw Melora. Olympia flies to him, but ever she could deliver
her News, Barbarino greets her with this: Madam (says he) I have this day had
Intelligence from Spain, that Francisco has quitted the Negotiation, I employed
him in there, in a disguise. Nay then the Riddle's Explained, replies Olympia,
and relates all the foregoing Passages. Upon this, they both agree to send a
couple of Trusty Servants in search of this Feigned Pilgrim; who should seize
him, and lay him fast; rightly conjecturing his design was to publish their
Crime. These Fellows overtake the wretched Man, before he was got half way to
Rome; his Afflictions hindering his swift traveling: They straight bind, gag,
and hall him back to Olympia's; where he is committed close Prisoner to a
remote Chamber. Now these two wicked ones, the Cardinal and Olympia, begin to
consult farther, and take Melora into their Consideration. After a thousand
Arguments and Reasons urged backwards and forwards, her doom is sealed.

Thus this Lovely Rose, the wonderful excess of extravagant Nature, whose
blooming sweetness would have given years of Rapture, to an honest, honorable
Husband: is now, by the very Possessor, Condemned to Fade, and wither in the
Thoughtless Dust. Nor could her Pregnancy, even by him (which would have made
Barbarians to have Melted;) move this Inhuman Cardinal. No; his Reputation is
concerned, and she must die. That ensuing Night accordingly Olympia delivered to
this most Cruel Man a Powder, whose fatal Power would, in Twelve hours time,
certainly dissolve that well appointed Union of the Soul and Body. At Supper
they conclude to give it her in a Glass of Wine and Water; they three always
eating in Olympia's Closet, without Attendance, except Beatrice, because the
pretended Duke was not to be seen by the Servants.

Full of these Hellish Resolutions Olympia goes to seek the intended Victim;
finds her in her Closet devoutly kneeling, directing her Pious Prayers to a
place, where Persons guilty of Olympia's Crimes, must never enter. A sight, one
would have thought, should have struck that Barbarous Woman with remorse. But
she, unmoved, proceeds, and with a seeming cheerfulness, asks Melora to go with
her to the Duke. This disconsolate Lady's Face was decked in Sorrow's chiefest
Robes; yet, through all that Clouded Sadness, such a World of Beauty shone, as
would have turned a Tyrant's Rage; disarmed the Fury of Irrational Creatures;
and preserved her in the very Paws of Lions. But the Bloody Barbarino views her
with relentless Eyes; and with his own hand presents her the poisonous Draught,
which the trembling Lady drinks: For every thing she feared; yet hoped they
were ignorant of her Information. Now, the Plot for the Cardinal's removal to
Rome must be Executed. To that end Olympia's Woman brings her a Packet, saying
a Gentleman, in great haste, had just brought it. In this Packet, there is a
Letter directed to the Duke of Modena; which he reads with show of great
concern, and tells the Ladies he must needs leave them instantly, and post back
to Rome. Poor Melora inwardly rejoices at his design; having resolved to deny
him her Bed, which she feared might betray her knowledge of their Treachery. He
takes his leave with seeming Reluctance, and returns to Rome, jocund that his
Lust is satisfied, and his Crime like to remain undiscovered. Melora retires to
her Chamber betimes; designing to make her Escape early the next Morning; and
then thinking her self out of danger, she resolves to leave a Letter, that
shall accuse Olympia of that perfidious dealing she has used toward her. She
writes the following Letter, and lays it upon her Table in the Closet; and
intends to leave, the next day, the Key in the Door.

To Donna Olympia.
IF Providence favor my Innocence, before this come to your hands, I shall
have escaped your Power. Think then, Madam, how the judging World, when they
know my Wrongs, and hear my Story, will Condemn you of Vnexampl'd Perfidy, that
you must for ever hide your guilty head; lest, as you pass, the Virgins Curses
catch you, and bring down swift Destruction. You have betrayed the most
trusting Maid Breathing: one, who would willingly have laid down that Life you
so unkindly pursue, for your service; and for that Lustful Satyr, whose Crimes
no Age can parallel. Tell him, when I appear, his conscious Cheeks shall outvy
his Scarlet. But if that unauspicious Fate, which has led me to this heavy
Misfortune, should still continue its Malignity; and let your Crimes Center in
my Death: know, I can meet that with undaunted Bravery; being assured at the
last day, I shall appear encompassed with Myriads of glorious Spirits; whilst I
behold you, and your black Accomplice, rouling beneath in Sulphurous Flames;
howling out dire Lamentations, for the Cruelties practiced on the most Injured

Melora.


The next Morning Olympia goes into her Chamber, and finds the young Creature,
according to her wish, dead; she makes a dismal Outcry; and having drawn all
the House about her, Counterfeits Sorrows almost to a Frenzy. The Marquess of
Cour, her Father, is immediately sent for; to whom she continues her Grief at
such an immoderate rate, that he is forced to neglect his own Sorrows, and turn
Comforter. Soon after is Melora's private Interment; where the poor Ambassador
left all his Joys; Mourning to that Excess, as would have moved a heart of
stone. She being his only Daughter, and a Person of that Beauty and Parts, I
must leave Indulgent Fathers to judge the Sorrows I cannot describe.

Now the Cardinal's next Business is to dispose of Francisco, which he does to
the Galleys; where he may tell his despair, and prate of Barbarino's Cruelty,
to the Winds and Seas for they as soon will hear him, as his Robust Companions.
The unusual Toils, and the intolerable Bastinado's which the Cardinal orders to
be given him, quickly end his days.

Yet these dark Practices are doomed to be brought to light, and that by one of
the Actors, Olympia's Woman Beatrice; who taking some deep disgust, flies to
the Ambassador, and relates to that Disconsolate Father, each particular of
this sad story. The unhappy Marquess then remembers a hundred circumstances,
that convince him of the dismal Truth. He immediately Petitions the Pope, lays
open plainly the Fact, brings the Maid to attest it; but all in vain. Antonio
and Olympia are Persons too Great, for him to obtain Justice against, in the
Court of Rome. So that he is forced to leave the last mentioned to the Terrors
of her own Conscience for her Punishment, and enter himself a Soldier in the
Duke of Parma's Army; who then made War against the House of the Barbarino's;
to be revenged of the first. But Heaven's Vengeance slept not long; the
Succeeding Pope Banishing Olympia to Orvieto, a City Twenty Leagues from Rome;
where she died miserably of the Plague, abandoned even by her own Domestics;
and the Cardinal soon after, loaded with Diseases, and Infamy, sunk to the
Grave; by all unpitied.

Thus, Ladies, you are brought to the deplorable end of the Beauteous Melora.
And as her Misfortunes must raise Compassion in the tender Bosoms of the Young
and Fair; so they may stand a lasting Caution to beware the Insinuations of the
designing part of your own Sex; who having themselves lost that inestimable and
never to be recovered Jewel, Reputation: endeavor to destroy Blooming
Innocence. Beauty, as we may call it, is but the Paint of Nature; which, though
it outlast the Lilly and the Rose; yet, sure as they, must Fade: whilst a
Fragrant Fame never dies. Melora cannot justly be taxed with any Miscarriage,
but venturing to Act weighty things, without her Father's Knowledge Yet her
hard Fate may fright all from Entertaining Motions of a Marriage, how specious
soever they appear; till they have taken the Advice and Consent of those, whom
God and Nature have appointed their Governors and Directors.

THE END.
Books Printed for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Proposal to the Ladies for the Advancement of their true and greatest
Interest. By a Lover of her Sex, 12 o.

Letters concerning the Love of GOD, between the Author of the Proposal to the
Ladies, and Mr. John Norris; wherein his late Discourse, showing that it ought
to be entire and Exclusive of all other Loves, is farther cleared and
Justified, 8 vo.

An Essay toward a natural History of the Earth and Terrestrial Bodies,
especially Minerals: As also of the Sea, Rivers and Springs. With an Account of
the Universal Deluges. And of the Effects that it had upon the Earth. By John
Woodward, M. D. Professor of Physic in Gresham-College, and Fellow of the
Royal Society, 8 vo.

A Vindication of the Truth of Christian Religion against the Objections of all
Modern Opposers. By James Abbadie, D. D. 8 vo.

A second Part of the Enquiry into several Remarkable Texts of the Old and New
Testament, which contain some difficulty in them: with a probable resolution of
them. The second Edit. 8 vo.

A Discourse concerning the Authority, Style, and Perfection of the Books of
the Old and New Testament; with a continued Illustration of several difficult
Texts of Scripture ^hroughout the whole Work. Both by John Edwards, B. D.
sometime Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, 8 vo.

The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians Love to it. The Second
Edition 8 vo.

Search the Scriptures. A Treatise ^hewing that all Christians ought to read
the Holy Books; with Directions to them therein.

A Discourse concerning Prayer, especially of frequenting the daily Public
Prayers. All three by the Reverend Sym. Patrick, D. D.

The Old Religion demonstrated in the Principles, and described in the Life and
Practice thereof. By J. Goodman, D. D. The Second Edition. 12 o.

The End of the Catalogue.

