Charles by ye grace of God Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwell, etc.
G:G:
portrait of Charles, Prince of Wales

PLINY'S Panegyricke: A Speech in Senate: Wherein public thanks are presented
to the EMPEROR TRAIAN, By C. Plinius Caecilius Secundus Consul of ROME.

Translated out of the Original Latin, illustrated with Annotations, and
dedicated to the PRINCE, By Sr ROB. STAPYLTON Knight, Gent. in Ordinary of the
Privy Chamber to His Highness.

OXFORD, Printed in the year 1644.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN, DVKE OF
CORNWALL AND ALBANY, etc.
SIR,
MY duty (that moves always to your presence, as the flame to heaven) is now
more imboldned, because in the present eruption of Licentious Pamphlets, I
conceive it seasonable to publish a modest work, and necessary to entitle it
to inviolable protection. Humbly therefore I consecrate to your Highness
Pliny's Panegyricke, which has lived many Ages with constant approbation in
his Dialect, and even in my rude expressions (being cherished with your
gracious smile) may have the honor to outlive all those abortives of the
Press, that (like their compeeres the vipers) are cursed into fruitfulness.

Such as his Book, such was the Author, universally approved of; for what
merit, appears by his advancement in those times when merit only was
preferred, his prudence, erudition, and integrity of life advancing him to the
Consulship of Rome, and yet higher, to the impartial estimation of his Prince,
for whose favors grateful Pliny to this day pays tribute: For now when
Trajan's Annals lie in fragments, when those imperial Statues and Triumphall
Arches, that should have immortalized him, have confessed their own mortality;
behold (in this Panegyricke) that best of Caesar's from his Ashes reascends his
Throne, where he still governes the world, as an example.

But, Sir, you have (and long may you have) a living example, the absolute
pattern of all virtues, His Sacred Majesty, whose Heroical and Divine
Principles we know are written in your heart, because we read them in your
actions. From hence flows your particular regard to the deserving, from hence
your general affability, and (which in your Spring of years we behold with
greatest admiration) your love to Justice equals your love to Men; and both
these Affections are steered by Judgment, great as your Birth and Spirit.

What fitter wish can I make to so much goodness, then that of the Roman
Senate to their Emperors? May you be Eutropius. Vsque ad nostra^ aetatem non
aliter in Senatu Principibus acclametur, nisi foelicior Augusto, melior Trajano.
happier then Augustus, better then Trajan: to whom you are now so just a
Parallel, that I present his Character as a mark of your own height in
honor; whereon if your Highness please sometimes to cast your eye, you may
discern how you out-grow him in those perfections, which render you the
Model of your Excellent Parents, and the joy of all their Loyal Subjects;
among the faithfullest whereof, as my study, so my hope is ever to be numbered:

SIR, Your Highnesse's most obedient and most faithful servant ROBERT
STAPYLTON.

The Preface to the READER.
THat the Book may present less distraction from the margent when you carry
the subject in your memory, give me leave to prepare you with a short view as
well of Trajan's private condition, and the public state of the Empire when
he was elected, as of his Conquest of the King of Dacia justly occasioned by
this Panegyricke, Vespasian Caesar had now declared the Jews Rebels, and
accordingly denounced war against them, when he sent L. Trajan (father to
Trajan the Emperor) then Tribune of the tenth Legion, with two thousand Foot
and a thousand Horse against Aphaca in Galilee, a City naturally strong, and
fortified with a double wall: The Galilaeans draw into the field, the Tribune
gives them battle, beats them within their first wall, and falls in pellmell
with them. The City, fearing he would do the like at the second wall, lock out
their own men, who were, by the Romans, all put to the sword to the number of
twelve thousand. Trajan hearing no more of the Garrison, and presently
apprehending, that either none remained, or such as durst make no resistance,
reserves the honor of taking Aphaca for the Emperor himself. Titus is sent,
who commanding the right wing, and Trajan the left, the Town is Stormed; and
the Tribune afterward honored with Triumphall ornaments, and made Consul of
Rome. This was the first eminent Rise of Trajan's Family. Nor did the Fathers
happy Star finish its course in him, but came to a higher elevation in his
son, whom he trained under his command, as the Eagle breeds his Eaglet, first
to look up at heaven, and then to govern as Viceroy to the Deity. Spain was
young Trajan's Country, war his cradle: when he was yet a youth he commanded
in chief against the Parthians* nor did Vespasian employ the father with a
truer intention to remunerate his service, then Domitian employed the son
only to speed his death upon the bed of honor, which was made for him in
several and far distant climates, Trajan being still sent away, where new
danger threatened Domitian, who was careful to pay the last hazard of his
Generall's life with a fresh occasion of a more desperate engagement; but in
vain he labored it, for a higher power both preserved and retributed Trajan,
not (like his father) with a Consulship, but with that very Empire under which
he so long and so injuriously had suffered. For Nerva succeeding Domitian, and
M. Trajan (now General of the German Legions) being at Colein, there happened,
in the Pretorian Camp near Rome, a dangerous mutiny; which shaking the
Imperial Crown on Nerva's head, made him settle it upon Trajan. The cause of
the insurrection was this. The Pretorians (the Emperors Lifeguard) which were
at first quartered scatteringly in Rome, had been drawn out into a standing
Camp, when Sejanus was their Prefect: who possessed the Emperor Tiberius,
that living in Town debauched the Soldiers, whereas fixed in a body they would
better observe discipline, and be readier for any present service. What this
cunning allegation meant, subtiller Tiberius soon found out, and Sejanus as
soon felt in his own destruction. Yet still the Pretorians continued in a
Camp, and howsoever the design failed in the Individual, yet it took in the
general; for though they made not Sejanus Emperor, yet they made Emperors
afterward at their pleasure. At this very time they were sensible of the
greatness of their power, and therefore expected answerable Donatives from
Princes, which Domitian poured into their hands. But Nerva was more provident
for the public, then to empty the Treasury to fill private purses, and the
loyalty of the Pretorians more weak, then to stand firm without a golden
buttresse. The ill humor, now stirred in them by their aged Emperors
frugality, was fomented by their Prefect Aelianus Casperius (made their
Captain by Domitian, and not removed by Nerva) who likewise missing his own
covetous hopes, quickened their inclination to rebellion, giving them for a
pious pretext the specious color of doing justice upon the conspiratours
against Domitian, not including Nerva in the number (for they knew him
innocent) but only requiring the lives of all that were actors in their masters
death; to whom Nerva had given a Prince's word for the indemnity of their
persons, which surely is a sufficient (...); yet to take away all Scruple
(which might breed jealousies, and consequently cause disturbances of the
public peace) he had likewise past his oath to an Act of Oblivion in Senate.
But the Prince's Act shall not bind them against their Captains Protestation,
Casperius is their Legislator, and according to his Fundamentalls, they oppose
the known Law, and clamor to have Domitian's murderers brought to condign
punishment, that is, they declare themselves judges of the matter of fact, and
in the same moment appear as executioners, and were a great deal fitter for
this office. Nerva withstands them, and when he sees no persuasion can
prevail, offers his own bosom naked to their fury, that death might free him
of his promise. But this was no part of their instructions, by which they
punctually proceed, and execute all the men their Prefect had marked out for
slaughter. Nerva now finding that old age rendered him contemptible to the
soldier, not having an heir of his own, considers only that which Electours
ought only to consider, merit, and having pitched upon the man that already
ruled in all men's hearts, he went to the Temple of Jupiter Capitolin, and in
the presence of a great multitude that followed him, uttered these words Bona
fortuna Senatus Populique Romani and mei ipsius, Marcum Ulpium Trajanum Nervam
adopto. May it be happy to the Senate and People of Rome and to my self, I
adopt Marcus Ulpius Trajan Nerva. Thus giving Trajan his name and adopting him
for his son in the Capitol, he immediately transferred his Sovereignty and
declared him Emperor in Senate: Nothing now wanted to perfect the
reestablishment of the late endangered Empire, but only to provide that an
example of rebellion so destructive to government might not with impunity be
past over, by his sons calmer temper. I should wrong Nerva to conceive that
his revenge could have any end but the public good; for had he been
vindicative, he had not suffered Crassus with the other Conspirators against
his own life to escape unpunished; whom be was so far from hindering in their
intentions toward him, that as they sat with him beholding the shows
presented in the Circus, he made swords be brought them, and said, Inspicite si
acuti sint, Look if they be sharp, plainly signifying (as Dion observes)
that he cared not how soon they would dispatch him. Without controversy
therefore it was the Empire, not himself he sought revenge for, writing with
his own hand to Trajan these words of Chrysis Apollo's priest (In Homer)
praying to his God against the barbarous Greeks, that denied him his
daughter's freedom upon ransom tendered.

Iliad. (...). Let thy shafts make the Greeks repent my tears. Every line in
Homer was then by the Romans accounted sacred; I am sure this proved
prophetical for Trajan, after his Father Nerva's decease, sent for Aelianus
and his Praetorians, who came expecting great employment which they deserved
not, and found the ignominious death which they deserved. Nor did the Emperor
Trajan only do exemplary justice upon rebellious Subjects, but likewise
punished a revolted Prince, Decebalus Kings of Dacia, who had formerly by his
Ambassadors sued for Peace, and himself in Person prostrate at Trajan's feet
accepted such conditions as he pleased to give, viz. to lay down arms, to
yield up his Engines and Engineeres, to deliver Fugitives, to slight all works,
to demolish all Fortifications, to depart from the lands he had entrenched
upon, and to esteem those friends or Enemies that were so accounted by the
Romans. In pursuance hereof, after Trajan's return to Italy the Dacian
Ambassadors come to Rome, and are admitted into the Senate, where yiedling up
their arms and joining their hands after the manner of servants they
supplicate in few words and so the peace being confirmed, their arms are
returned them, this done Trajan triumphs for his conquest over the Dacians,
and is styled Dacicus. But Decebalus cannot sit quiet, nature (custode
potentior omni) struggles to shake off the Roman fetters, to which he lately
had submitted; for he being (as Dion delivers him) ingenious, and of great
experience in the war, nimble to invade, or to retreat if need required, one
that knew excellently how to lay ambushes, and to give battle, to use a
victory to his best advantage, and moderately to bear an overthrow, and having
so often fought with the Romans, and evaded even their victories by his
stratagems, relying upon his own abilities (and conceiving that Trajan, whose
person he more feared then his armies, being now warm in the pleasures of
Rome, would hardly venture back into the Dacian frost and snow) he breaks all
the articles of peace, takes up arms, entertaines fugitives, fortifies, by his
Ambassadors sollicits his neighbors to revolt, and already had possessed
himself of some of the country of the Jaziges [now the territory of
Sibenburghen.] This news the Senate had, when the Consul Pliny made this
Oration to Trajan, whose spirits he so inflamed against that King for his
contempt of the Empire, that he would not substitute any General, but
undertook the war against Decebalus in person, and to accelerate the work
caused a stupendous bridge to be built over Danubius, in such a part of the
river where the torrent was so strong, that there was no turning of the water;
the Bridge consisted of 20 piles or pillars of squared stone, every pillar (not
reckoning the foundations) being 150 foot long, 60 foot broad, distant from
one another 170 foot, and arched above. Passing his army at this bridge he
fought securely with incredible celerity, and at last with much difficulty
conquered. Decebalus, seeing his palaces and Kingdom possessed by the enemy,
and fearing his own turn would be next, slew himself, and though he had
(according to his usual subtlety) turned a river to hide his wealth and drawn
back the stream again; for more security, causing the servants he had
employed in it to be put to death, yet all that vast treasure came to Trajan's
hands, being confessed by Bicilis after the fate of his great friend Decebalus,
whose head was brought to Rome, and Dacia by Trajan made a Roman Colony.

Secondly, Because Pliny, through the whole frame of his Panegyric illustrates
Trajan's virtues, by comparing them with Domitian's vices, lest you suspect him
to be a flatterer for praising a good Prince eloquently, or think him a
detractour for no less eloquently dispraising a bad, I shall give you the
characters of both those Emperors, as I find them in the most authenticke
Histories; and first of the first in priority of time. Domitian was a bold and
furious man, very full of tricks, and vain, so that he was rash on the one
part, and crafty on the other, for much he laid waste breaking in like thunder,
and again he destroyed much upon plot and and premeditation. He never truly
and with his heart loved any but a few women, yet he always made as if he
affected him whose blood he thirsted for. So diffident he was in those that
gratified or flattered him in greatest matters. that who presented him most
money, or accused most men, them he was sure to ruin, especially servants that
informed against their Masters. But though this was his carriage in his Empire,
yet he exceeded himself in casting aspersions on his father and brother, whom
he hated because they preceded him in honor: to avoid which infamy (as he
esteemed it) be bragged, that they left not, but restored the Empire to him,
which he had bestowed upon them. He would mention his brother Titus with
tears, as if he had been acting his part upon the Stage, and lament his
greatest share in the loss of that delight of mankind; but notwithstanding he
did all things contrary to his determination, and took away the Circensian
games, merely because they were celebrated upon his birthday; loving nothing
of his brother's but his daughter Julia, whom he forced to marry him, and his
Eunuch Earinus; yet because Titus had loved Eunuchs, in scorn of him he
forbad that any more should be made within the limits of the Roman Empire. Now
and then he made great entertainments, and his wine flowed in the nightime,
which as it was sure to please the people, so sure were some of the Nobility to
die for it, that he might recover his expenses with a confiscation: Men knew
not, safely, either how to condole, or congratulate with him, lest they should
or be a trouble to him, or seem to take notice of his dissimulation. Such his
impatience of labor, and his timerousnesse, that when he lead his Army against
the Dacians he himself never saw the face of an enemy, yet such his pride and
vainglory, that after the foul loss of almost all his men, he writ letters
of his conquest to the Senate, and by their decree the world was filled with
his silver and golden statues: But what in him was worst of all, though he writ
himself Lord and God, and coveted infinitely to be flattered, yet both they
that did, and they that did not adore him were equally displeasing, for in
those he held it to be flattery, and in these neglect.

Trajan had a spirit so well tempered, that youth made him not rash, nor old
age slow. He envied none, ruined no man, graced all good men with honors and
dignities. He gave no credit to detractours, had no furious passion, and was as
far from taking another's propriety, as another's life. His expenses were
vast, both in times of war and peace, wherein he finished many necessary
Works, as Highways, Havens, and Public buildings, yet never shed any ones
blood to defray the charges. He was by nature magnificent and magnanimous, and
therefore when he had enlarged, and beautified the great show-place, he set up
an inscription, that he had perfected the Circus, that it might contain the
people of Rome; from whom he more coveted love, then honor; carrying himself
with civility to the people, with nobleness to the Senate. He was dear to his
Subjects, terrible to his enemies. He hunted and feasted with the Romans, was
present at their serious and merry meetings, where he often sat down the
fourth guest, nay, many times, came without his guard to private houses, and
lay there all night. And though he affected war, yet he commanded so, that he
broke his enemies, and increased his friends; for it never happened so to him
(as commonly it falls out in Armies) that his Soldiers showed themselves
insolent, so well and rationally he managed his affairs: nor was he so
intentive to the War, that he omitted what belongs to Peace, but sat in
person in the Courts of Justice, and in the Forum of Augustus, Livia's Gallery,
and diverse other places heard and determined causes. To sum up all in his
own words attested by his actions, he was to private men such an Emperor, as
being himself a private man, he wished an Emperor should be to him.

Thus having endeavored to vindicate my author's work from obscurity and his
fame from censure, I shall have an eye in the last place to my self to prevent
the nicer Critickes, that will (I know) be busy with my very first words,
especially when so strong an objection lies against them, as that those very
Senators whom I call Lords, could not endure the title. I answer, the Romans
understood the word (Lord) in a twofold notion, first as it had slave for the
Correlative, and consequently signified Tyrant; and then as it related to
Subject or inferior, and was the style of one in Sovereign, or subordinate
authority. So that Pliny himself, who in the former sense abhorres the style
of Lord in his Panegyricke, in the second acception styles Trajan Lord in his
Epistles: and I by the same rule intitling the Senators Lords of the Senate,
shall (I doubt not) acquit my self to the Learned, whereas the Consul would
have spoken like a Roman newly landed, scarce intelligible, if I had used
Conscript Fathers in the Concrete; and when I had come to the Abstract
Fatherhood or reverence, I should have made a College of the Senate. As in
this part so in the whole take notice, I beseech you, that I as industriously
decline Latinismes, as Politian in his Translation of Herodian professes to
shun Graecismes. A. Politianus in Praefat. ad Innocentium viii. Ne inepta
peregrinitas, ne Graculae usqua^ figurae, nisi si quae jam pro receptis
habentur, Latinam quasi polluerent c^stitatem.
Lest foolish foreign words, should as it were stain the chastity of our
Language.

To conclude, I must desire this favor, that if the Latin of your Pliny differ
from my English, you will believe, that you and I have several Editions. So
leaving you to entertain your selves a while with Pliny's Life (his perfect
Picture in the Antecamera) that being perused, you may be pleased to open the
Senate house, and hear him speaking.

THE LIFE OF C. PLINIVS COECILIVS SECVNDVS.
THe Learning of the Romans and their Empire flourished together, for about
the time of Augustus and Trajan lived their most illustrious Writers, and among
them the two Plinyes, whereof the younger (Author of this Panegyricke) was
son to L. Caecilius by the sister of that other Pliny the natural Historian;
who having no child, and finding that his nephew would be heir to his
knowledge made him (by adoption) heir likewise to his name and fortunes. His
Tutours were Niceas the Priest, and Quintilian the Orator. When he was
military Tribune in Syria Euphrates the Philosopher read to him. He was much
delighted in translating Greek authors into Latin, and Latin into Greek,
which made him master of both the Languages. When he was very young he writ a
Greek Comoedy, and diverse Poems which the Grecians themselves applauded. At
one and twenty years of age he pleaded in the Roman Courts of Justice in the
Forum, and afterward in Senate defended Causes of high concernment. He was
patron to the Spanish in their accusation of Bebius Massa, and Caecilius
Classicus, and delivered the charge against the Proconsul of Africa, Marius
Priscus, whom his Province impeached of bribery and extortion. Being Praetour,
according to the duty of his place, he set forth the usual Plays and Shows,
but with more then usual magnificence; that he might appear to Domitian only
to intend his pleasures, wherein he disguised himself with better fortune,
than poor Domitius Glabrio, who fought naked with the Lions in the same
Emperors presence, for Pliny (though with much difficulty) escaped the jealous
and inquisitive eye of that cruel Prince, who made it his masterpiece, what
mask soever was put on; first, to discover, and then to cut off Virtue. With
great integrity and equal reputation, he discharged the Offices of the
Emperor's Questour, Tribune of the People, Prefect of the Treasury, and high
Commissioner for the reparations of the Aemilian Way, and the Bay and Banks of
Tiber. The Colleague of his military Tribuneship was Calestrius Tyro, of his
Praefectship and Consulship Cornutus Tertullus. In the Augur's dignity he
succeeded Julius Frontinus. He was sent with Proconsular power to govern the
Provinces of Pontus and Bythinia, from whence he returned to Rome: no less
honored for his prudence, then for his industry and moderation. An instance
whereof, to his eternal honor, is that noble testimony of the behavior of
the Christians living under him, which he certified to Trajan, writing to this
effect; that he perceived their number to increase, and lest so many should
suffer death without the guilt of some enormous offense, he had tried all
means and ways to discover the intent of their private assemblyes, and found
upon examination, That they met before day, only to sing hymns to Christ as
God, binding themselves by Sacrament, not against the Roman Laws, or to commit
any crime; but to renounce theft, robbery, faith breaking, and denial of
Depositums entrusted to them, eating together at those meetings, promiscuously,
but innocently. To his demand, what course he should take with these men?
Trajan answers. Conquirendi non sunt. His pleasure was they should not be
inquired after. Which gave a stop to that violent Persecution, the only spot
in that clear sky of Trajans fame; so prevalent with him were Pliny's words,
who obtained of his Prince many favors and honors for his friends, and for
himself whatsoever he would make his suit. The great estate that came to him
by inheritance, and was increased by his own prudent industry, his noble
nature munificently bestowed. Witness his bounty to his Tutour Quintilian, to
whom he sent five hundred thousand Sestercii, taking the occasion of his
daughter's marriage, that he might buy her wedding clothes, and set her forth
according to the quality of her husband; forcing the sum upon him, with this
further complement, that he knew his mind was great, but his fortunes small:
that is, if compared to those of Pliny: but that Quintilian (as some from that
Epistle do infer) wanted in his old age, I can hardly credit, when I remember
how another of his scholars admires his wealth.

Juv. Sat. 7. Vnde igitur tot
Quintilianus habet Salius?
How got Quintilian so much land then? Where Iuvenal makes him, for his
fortunes, the miracle, the white crow of Rhetorick-masters. I rather believe
therefore, and the magnificence of the gift it self declares, that this was
no supply of wants to Quintilian, but the expression of gratitude in Pliny.
Many great bounties he conferred, as upon Comus and Firmus, whose estates he
made up 3125 sterling, being the Census Equestris, and enabling them to claim
all the Privileges of Gentlemen of Rome. He was likewise munificent to his
nurse and to diverse other particulars, not forgetting the public, for at
Novo-Comum, the town where he was borne, he founded a Free-schoole, which he
liberally endowed, assigning a third part of the revenues to the Schoolmaster,
and building and furnishing a Library for the benefit of the students. Briefly
his Wealth was so far from needing addition, that when Cornelia offered him
two hundred thousand Sestercij, for a piece of ground, he conceived it a great
indignity that she should think any sum (how vast soever) could purchase the
least part of his inheritance. And as he scorned to sell ignobly, so he did to
gain unworthily, for in patronising Causes he not only forbore presents and
ordinary gifts, but refused New Years gifts. His house in Rome stood (where
the chief of the Patricians lived) in the Esquilian Mount, of all his Country
houses his favorite Villa's was that seated in the plain, which he named the
Comoedy: and that standing upon the rising of a bill, which he styled the
Tragoedy. He much delighted (like the old Romans, Numa Pompilius, the Pisos,
and the Fabij) in gardning and tillage, which was the reason (as I conceive)
that made him give for the impresse of his Seal, a Waine. He had two wives,
the first Calphurnia, the second Pompeia Celerina, with whom he lived very
contentedly, though without issue. The most learned of his friends were the
Poets, Virginius Romanus, Silius Italicus, and Valerius Martialis; the
Historians, Suetonius Tranquillus, and Cornelius Tucitus; the Civil Lawyers,
Pomponius Saturninus, Tious Aristo, and Cornelius Mutianus; Among which Tacitus
was his Counselor, Suetonius his companion, and Martial his Pentioner. Of all
his Freed-men he especially affected Zosimus, who has his masters testimony
for an honest, serviceable, and very learned man. His name is immortalised as
well in the History of Tacitus, as in his own works both Latin and Greek,
though (to the great prejudice of learning) of all their number now no more are
extant, but only this Panegyricke, his Epistles, and a little Treatise of men
famous for Military and Civil government. His constant course when he writ any
thing, was, first to censure himself, then to hear others read it to him,
after that to desire his friends opinion, if he were not then satisfied, to
consult two or three more; lastly he would read his works in a full Audience
of the learned, which they now challenge by prescription.

PLINY'S A Panegyric is a public Speech made in praise of any one (...)
signifying praise and convention.
Panegyricke.
My Lords,
WEll and wisely our forefathers instituted, that as our The Romans began
their Actions with consulting the gods by an ancient Institute. Val. Max l. 1.
That they so prefaced their Speeches, appears by those in Livy most of them
beginning Quod foelix faustumque sit SPQR.
actions so our speeches should begin with prayer; because nothing can be
rightly or providently begun by men, without the assistance, counsel, and
honor of the Gods. Which custom who is more concerned to practice, then the
Pliny.
Consul? or when should it rather be received and observed, then now, when by
command of Senate, and authority of the Republique we are enjoined to present
our thanks to the Trajan.
best of Princes. For what more excellent or greater bounty of the gods, than a
chaste, religious, and a godlike Prince. And were there yet a doubt whether
fortune or providence gave Rulers to the earth, it would be clear howsoever,
that the Deity (...). Princes are of Jupiter. Homer. Iliad. b. The Caesar's are
of God Vegetius.
bestowed our Prince upon us; for not by the secret power of Fate, but
publicly and openly he was pointed out by Jupiter himself, being elected
betweeen the The places for the 3 degrees of Roman Sacrifices were, to the
Infernal Denies Scrobieuli little furrows, to the Terrestrial, Arae the
sacred pavement or floor, to the Celestial Altaria named Altars from their
exaltation.
sacred pavement and the Altar, in the very The Temple of Jupiter in the
Capitol, which had on each hand (within the same walls) the Temples of Juno and
Minerva, and over all three one artificial Eagle spread his wings.
place where that God is as present and resident, as in the heaven and stars:
And therefore as common Religion, and this more particular Providence obliges
us, we pray thee, Jupiter the Jupiter was styled Best for his favors to Rome.
Greatest for his own power. Cicero pro domo sua.
Best and Greatest, formerly the Founder of the Empire so, as they esteemed him
fountain of the Deity, and primary Cause of all things.
founder, now the preserver of our Empire, that I may speak things worthy the
Consul, the Senate, and the Prince; that in all I say there may appear
freedom, integrity, and truth; and that the thanks I give may be as far from
show or color, as they are from the necessity of flattery. Indeed not the
Consul only, but the whole State should (as I conceive) endeavor to say
nothing of our Prince that may be applyable to another. Away therefore with
those expressions which our fear extorted, let us not speak as formerly,
because we suffer not as formerly: nor let our public addresses to the Prince
be such as once they were, because our private whispers are not such: let the
diversity of times be discerned in our Orations, and let the form and manner
of our thanks make it appear to whom. For hitherto they have been directed as
to a In the second Consulship of Vlpius Trajan, and Glabr^o (says) A Cassi
ador^^, the style Dominus et Deus, Lord and God, was assumed by Domitian.
God, now no place is guilty of that servile blasphemy. For we are not now to
speak of a Tyrant, but of a Patriot, not of a Such a Lord as Domitian, a Lord
of slaves.
Lord but a Father; he esteems himself one of us, and therefore transcends
and excells us more, because he esteems himself but one of us, no less
remembering that he is a man, then that he is to govern men. Let us therefore
understand our good, and prove our selves worthy such a governor, often
revolving in our hearts, whether we should tender more ready obedience to
Princes that delight in the servitude, or in the liberty of the Subject. And
accordingly with loud shouts the people of Rome applaud the election of this
Prince; with as perfect a consent, as before they called Domitian, who under a
fair outside disguised a tyrannous Monster.
another handsome, they pronounce this valiant; and with the same acclamations
wherewith they cried up the voice and gesture of Nero, who sung and acted on
the common Stage, both in Italy and Greece.
another, they admire in this, his piety, continence, and mildness. What shall
we our selves, (my Lords) shall we likewise celebrate (as love and joy
transported us) our Prince's divinity or humanity, temperance and facility of
access? Now, what so civil, what so The Senates decree for this surname of
Best, the Peoples shoutes, and Trajan's tears, in this place but lightly
touched are fully handled near the close of the Panegyricke.
Senatory, as that surname we give him of the best, which is made peculiar and
proper to him, by the arrogance of former Princes. For how just it is, that we
proclaim our selves happy and him happy, thus let him do, this he must hear,
as if we would not say it unless he would do it, so reciprocal are our votes,
whereat his tears and frequent blushes spring; for he is sensible, that it is
spoken to himself, not to the Prince; the measure therefore that we together
kept in these shoutes, the sudden heat of piety, let us severally observe in
our premeditated speeches. For we must know there is no kind of thanks more
sincere and acceptable, then to emulate those acclamations which have not time
to be dissembled. For my own part, I will labor to submit my discourse to the
modesty and moderation of the Prince, and will no less consider what his ears
can suffer, then what is due unto his virtue. A great and unusual glory of a
Prince, to whom being to present our thanks, I do not so much fear that he
should think me too sparing, as too prodigal in his praises; this care, this
difficulty only interposeth. For, my Lords, it is easy to give thanks to a
deserving man; because there is no danger that when I mention his humanity, he
should suspect I tax his pride; when I name his frugality that I mean his
luxury; when his bounty, his avarice; when his goodness, his malice; when his
continence, his lust; when his labor, his sloth; when his valor, his
cowardice. Nay, I do not so much as fear that I shall say too much or too
little, for I observe, the Gods themselves are not so much delighted with the
accurate prayers of their adorers, as with their innocence and sanctity, and do
better accept of him that to their Temples brings a pure and chaste mind, then
a studied verse. But we must obey the Senate, which have pleased to decree for
the public good, that by the mouth of the Consul under the title of Thanks,
good Princes may know what they are to do, bad what they ought to do. And this
is now more solemn and necessary, because our parent has forbidden our
private, and would likewise have discharged our public thanks, if he could
have taken to himself a liberty of prohibiting what the Senate has commanded.
In either ( The Roman Emperors had the style of Caesar from Julius, from
Octavius of Augustus or Sacred, which the Senate decreed him, placing in his
person the veneration and privilege of consecrated places, called l^ca augusta.
Augustus Caesar) you have shown your moderation, both that elsewhere you would
not suffer thanks, and that here you would. For this honor is not your
ambition, but the action of your honourers, you give way to our desires: nor
are we compelled to speak your deserts, but you to hear. My Lords, I have
often in my silent meditations thought of what composition he ought to be, who
at his pleasure should dispose of the Sea and Land, peace and war; but when I
formed and fancied to my self a Prince, I never, no not in my wishes, could
conceive the like to him we now behold. Some one has shined in war, but
gathered rust in peace; another wore his gown with honor, but not his sword;
another enforced the people to a reverence by terror, another courted them
with humility; that lost abroad the glory he had got at home; this at home what
he had won abroad; to conclude, there has as yet been none whose virtues
were not soiled by confining upon some vice. But in our Prince how great a
concord, how great a harmony of praises meets, insomuch as his severity takes
off nothing from his affability, his gravity nothing from his candor, his
Majesty nothing from his humanity. Now his strength and height of body, the
honor of his head, the noble features of his face, add to these the Pliny
follows their account that make only three divisions of the Ages of Man, to
wit, Childhood, Youth, and old Age, for Trajan was 41, or (according to Dion)
42 when he began his Reign.
prime of his years, nor without the special bounty of the gods, the These
gray hairs to his young face, almost cost Trajan his life, for the Agarenes
kn^w him in the battle by those marks, and shot so well, as they killed the
horseman next him, Dion.
ensigns of age thus early spread upon his hairs to increase his Majesty; do
not all these limne out a Prince in fairest colors? such he ought to be whom
not civil war, not the Commonwealth oppressed with arms, but whom peace,
and adoption, and appeased heaven would bestow upon the earth. Was it not fit
there should be a difference betwixt an Emperor, chosen by men, and one
created by the Gods? whose choice of and favor to you Caesar, even when you
were to go General to the army, appeared shining, and that in a strange
manner. For other Princes had their happy presages, consulting either the
overflowing blood of sacrifices, or the Here Sinister signifyes happy, for the
right hand was held fortunate only in humane things, but in Divine, the left.
sinister flight of birds; but you going to your Trajan (then a private man)
before he went to the Army being at his customary devotions in the Capitol, a
sudden impulsion of spirit took the people without the Temple who cried the
Best, the Best, meaning Jupiter, but designing Trajan afterward chosen in the
same place, and honored with the same title.
accustomed devotions in the Capitol, the people though not intending it, even
then saluted you their Prince, for the whole multitude that sat at the
Temple-gate, being shut when you were entered, as it was then supposed, saluted
the God; but, as the event taught us, you their Emperor; so all understood the
Omen, except your self, for you did refuse the Empire, and it was well for us
you did refuse one that would not be denied; you therefore were to be
compelled, but compelled you could not be, save only in the threatened change
of the Commonwealth, for you were obstinate not to accept of the Empire upon
any other terms, but to preserve it. And to that end I verily believe that
fury and By the Praetorian mutineers; See the occasion and carriage of that
tumult in the Preface.
commotion happened in the Camp, because a great violence, and a great terror
was to be used to overpower your modesty. But as whirle-windes and tempests
commend the calmer temper of the sky, so to augment the graces of the peace,
you brought, I do suppose that tumult to have ushered it. The condition of man
has these ebbes and flows, that adversity may be If it be good (says Seneca)
to know, then we must have both Prosperity and Adversity, because we cannot
know the one without the other.
known by prosperity, and prosperity by adversity; the seeds of both God so
conceales, that commonly the causes of good and evil lie hidden under the
contrary appearences. It was a great affront to the age, a great wound to the
State, that an Emperor the parent of mankind should be assaulted, laid hands
on, and kept prisoner, the power taken from the good old man even of giving Of
this in the Preface.
pardons; the Prince deprived of that which makes it happiness to be a Prince,
to be For Princes are liable to no earthly power.
compelled to nothing. But yet if this alone was the reason that brought you to
the public preservation, I could almost cry out, 'twas worth it. The
discipline of war was corrupted that you might be the reformer, the worst
example was brought in, that the best might be opposed to it. Lastly, the
Prince was enforced to condemn those he would have saved, that he might give
us a Prince that could not be enforced. You ought long since to have been
adopted, but we had not known how much the Empire is obliged to you, if you
had been adopted sooner. Opportunity waited for you, till it might be manifest
that you had not so much received, as bestowed a benefit. The trembling State
fled for sanctuary to your bosom, the shaken Empire ready to fall upon the
Emperor, was by the Emperor's vote conferred on you; you were implored and
sent for to your adoption, as of old, great Generals when they were called home
from a foreign war to assist their Country; so the son and the father in
one and the same instant showed their highest mutual gallantry: he gave the
Empire to you, you returned it to him. You being as yet the only man, that by
receiving so great a favor has requited it, and obliged the giver; for you
joining with Caesar, as his Imperial Adjutant, you became more troubled, he
more secure. O new and unheard of way unto a throne! not your own ends, not
your own fear, but another ends, another's fear made you a Prince. And
howsoever you appeared to have attained the highest point of humane felicity,
you did relinquish a far happyer condition, ceasing to be a private man under
a good Prince, being assumed to the participation of his pains and cares; nor
did the cheerful and prosperous, but the sharp and hard times of the Empire
compel you to accept it; you did receive it, when another repented him that he
had received it. No tie of alliance or of friendship betwixt the Adoptour and
the Adopted, but only that both were best; the one worthy to choose, the other
to be chosen. You therefore were adopted not as such, or such a one for his
wives sake, not a As Augustus, who adopted his step-sonne Tiberius
step-father, but a Prince adopted you into his family; the same mind made
divine Nerva to become your father, that made him father of us all: nor ought a
son to be otherwise assumed, that is assumed by a Prince. Were you to
transfer the Armies, Provinces, and Confederates of Rome, would you choose a
successor out of your wives bosom? and only look for an adoptive heir to the
supreme power on earth, within the walls of your own house? would you not cast
your eyes upon the City, and esteem him your nearest Kinsman, him your dearest
friend, whom you found best, and likest to the Gods? He that must be chosen to
command all, ought to be chosen out of all. For you are not then to give your
servants a master, that you must leave them to your There are in the Imperial
Law three sorts of heirs. The extraneus et voluntarius, who being a stranger
may accept or refuse to be heir. The Servant who is necessarius et
involuntarius, for he has not the liberty of refusing. And the son in
potestate patris, who is necessarius et suus, bound to be Heir by Law, but if
he appeal to the Praetour may free himself in Equity.
necessary Heir. But you an Emperor are to bequeath a Prince to Rome. It were
Pride and Tyranny to adopt any but one who you know must govern, if you had
not adopted him. This Nerva did, conceiving no difference betwixt generation
and election, if children should be chosen with no more judgment, then they
are begotten; save only that the people with more patience suffer the unhappy
issue, then the ill choice of Princes. He therefore, carefully declined this
error, nor men only, but even the Gods likewise, were of counsel with him;
not therefore in the Where Livia and Agrippina had wrought their second
husbands Augustus and Claudius, to adopt their first husbands sons, Tiberius
and Nero.
bedchamber, but in the Temple, not before the Geniall pillow, but before the
cushion of Jupiter the Best and Greatest was the Election past, whereon at
length, not our servitude, but our liberty, and preservation, and security is
founded. For the Gods challenge to themselves this glory, it was their work,
it was their command: Nerva was but their Minister, both, as well he that
elected, as you that were elected showed your obedience. A Letters of Trajan's
victory over the Pannonians or Hungarians, it being the Roman custom to stick
Laurel in Pacquets containing news of conquest, and feathers in such as
mentioned overthrowes, as I have noted in the end of the 4. Sat. of Iuven.
Laurel was brought out of Pannonia, the Gods intending to honor the
Inauguration of our invincible Emperor with a mark of his own victory. This
the Emperor Nerva stuck in Jupiters bosom, when on the sudden, there being
a greater and more reverend assembly, then usual both of men and Gods, he
assumed you for his son, that is, for the support of his ruinous Empire. From
thenceforth with what security, with what glory did he enjoy himself, having
laid down his Sovereignty? For what difference whether Sovereignty be laid
down, or divided, only this is the more difficult. Then leaning as it were
upon you, with your shoulders he supported himself and Rome; with your youth,
with your strength, he recovered his; immediately the tumult ceased, which was
not the work of the adoption, but of the adopted; and therefore Nerva had done
rashly had he pitched on any other. Do we forget, that lately after an
adoption, the sedition ended not, but began? It had been a provocation to
their fury, a firebrand to the tumult, unless it had fallen on you. Who knows
not, that Emperor cannot give away his Empire, that has lost his reverence.
This was effected by your authority, upon whom it was bestowed. You were made a
Son, Caesar, Emperor and Colleague of the Tribunitian power, all these
together, which not long since a real Vespasian, who is here called real, to
distinguish him from an adoptive father.
father conferred by parcells, only upon Titus, who only was admitted by his
father Vesp. (and that at several times) to triumph with him, to be his
Colleague in seven Consulships, his fellow Censour and Tribune, and to sign
letters and edicts with his name, yet Vespasian had another son, such as he
was, Domitian.
one of his own sons. A mighty argument it was of your moderation, that you
did not only please when you were a successor, but when you were a sharer and
companion in the Empire, for you must have been his successor whether you would
or not, but his companion not unless you pleased. Will posterity believe, that
one who had a Patrician, Consular, and Triumphall How Trajan's father merited
his Triumph and Consulship, see the Preface.
father, being himself General of a strong, mighty, and affectionate Army,
was not by that Army created Emperor? To whom when he commanded in chief our
German Legions, the name of Conqueror of the Germans. This Inscription in
Trajan's coin, Iuvenal commemorates Sat. 6. (in the Brides first night's
present) when shining in rich plate she must behold Dacian and German Caesar
cut in gold. How the other style of Dacicus was decreed him, see the preface.
Germanicus was sent from hence? he doing nothing to make himself Emperor,
but only that he deserved and obeyed: for (Caesar) you obeyed, and came to
your Sovereignty by duty, you never did any thing more with the mind of a
Subject, then when you became a Prince. Now you are made Caesar, now Emperor,
now Germanicus in your absence without your knowledge; and after all these
titles in what concerns your self a private man: It would seem strange if I
should say, you knew not you should be an Emperor, you were an Emperor and
knew it not. When the Messenger of your Fortune came, you had rather have
continued what you were; but it was not in your power; ought not a Subject to
obey his Prince, a Lieutenant his General, a son his father? or else where
were discipline, where the precedents showed us by our Progenitors of
undergoing contentedly whatsoever their Generals enjoined? What if he had
commanded you from Province to Province, from war to war? Do you think he
cannot use the same authority to recall you to the Empire, that he used when he
sent you to the Armies? no difference, whether he command you to go forth the
Emperors Lieutenant General, or to return Emperor; save only that the
glory of his obedience is the more, who does a thing against his will. It
increased the authority of the Commander, that his authority had been so
dangerously disputed, and it made you more Good subjects the more they see
others fail in their obedience, the more do they their duty.
inclinable to obedience; because you saw others so averse. Besides, you heard
the consent of the Senate, and the People: That election was not only Nerva's
Judgment, for, wheresoever there are men their votes concurred; he only by
the right of Princes preceded, and did that first which all were about to do;
questionless it could not universally have pleased when it was done, if it had
not pleased before. But, good Heaven! with what temper did you moderate your
power and fortune? an Emperor in style, effigies, and statue, but in modesty,
labor, and vigilance, a General, a In every Province the Romans had a
Praetour or chief Justice to hear and determine causes, and a Consul or
General for the war, who if he stayed the second year was called Proconsul.
Proconsul, a common Soldier; while even then, you lead on your colors and
Eagles by a long space the foremost man. Nor out of that adoption did you assume
any thing more to your self, then the piety and obedience of a son, you
wishing to that name a long life, a long glory. The providence of God had
raised you to the first place, yet still you were contented with the second,
and your prayer was that you might therein grow old: nor did you ever think
your self Emperor while the other lived. Your prayers were heard, but so
far as was consistent with the benefit of that best and Saint-like old man;
whom the Gods called to Heaven, lest after that divine and immortal act, he
should do any mortal business: for this veneration is due unto the greatest
work, that it should be the last, and the Author immediately Deifyed, that
hereafter posterity might inquire if he were not a God when he did it. Thus he
having no better right to the title of our common Parent, then by being yours,
now great in glory, great in fame, when by clear experience he had found how
well the Empire sat upon your shoulders, he left the earth to you, and left
you unto the earth; for that very reason dear and wished for by all men,
because he had provided that he might Which undoubtedly that good old Prince
had been, unless he had chosen an excellent successor.
not be wished for. Whom as a son you first honored with your tears, then
with a The deifyed Caesar's had Temples dedicated to them, and Colleges of
Priests named after them, of Quirinus, Quirinales, of Augustus, Augustales, of
Nerva, Nervales. The other rites of Deification read in Blondius his 2 book of
Rome Triumphant.
temple, not imitating those that did the same, but with a different intention.
Tiberius All that Tiberius did, was (it seems) thought to be done for ends,
when his religious offices escaped not just and probable censures.
Deifyed Augustus, but to intaile the Majesty of godhead upon the Crown. Nero
Deifyed Claudius, but to Witness Seneca's (...), [ Claudius his ridiculous
Deification or purging to Heaven by a poisoned Mushrom] written no doubt to
please his Pupil Nero.
laugh at him; Titus Who expected it, his words (when he thought he should dye)
being these, Vt puto Deus fio. I think I am turning God, Suetonius.
Vespasian, Domitian Titus, but that to appear the son, and Domitian who
after h^s brothers death deifyed him that he himself might in his lifetime be
worshipped as a Deity.
this the brother to a God. You have inserted your father among the stars,
not to beget fear in men, not to put an affront upon the Gods, not to honor
your self; but because you believed him to be a Deity. It takes off from such
an act, when it is done by those that think themselves are Gods. But although
you have consecrated to him Altars, Cushions, Carpets, and a A Priest, named
Flamen of his Miter or Tiara, which in old Latin was called Flama.
Flamen, you have not made or proved him a God in any thing so much, as that
you your self are like him; for in a Prince that dies when he has chosen one
to succeed him, the only and assured faith of his Divinity is a good
successor. But has this immortality in your father bred any arrogance in you?
do you imitate the late sloathfull and proud kinsmen to Divinity? or do you
emulate the Ancients that founded this Empire, which our foes have lately
invaded and scorned? of whose overthrow and flight, we have had no other
proofs, but merely the Domitian, under the name of conquered enemies,
triumphed for his own army lost in Daeia. Orosius.
sight of triumphs: therefore they have got spirit and shook off their yoke;
nor did they now contend with us for their own liberty, but for our servitude;
not so much as admitting of a truce, but upon equal terms, and gave whereas
they should receive the law. But now all return to their fear and terror, and
desire of obeying; for they now behold a Roman Trajan.
General of the old strain, one of those that gained the Imperator anciently
signified a General, or one that commanded in Chief.
Imperial title by fields covered with slaughter, and seas stained with
victories; therefore we receive hostages, we do not buy them; nor with infinite
loss and excessive presents do we make our peace. As if we had already
conquered them, they petition they supplicate, we grant, we deny; both
proceeding from the Majesty of the Empire; they give thanks if their suits be
granted, nor dare they if denied complain: for how should they dare, that know
you have curbed a hardy The Germans.
people in a season most favorable to them, most insufferable to us, when the
river of Known likewise by the name of Ister, and in old time called Mato^s.
Danubius made a bridge betwixt his banks, and being frozen over bore upon his
back a mighty war: when that fierce Nation was not more armed with their
darts, then with their air and climate. But at our approaches as if the season
had been changed, they kept within their holes and caves, and our parties
marched along the banks, and would you have permitted us to make use of their
advantages, we had with joy turned upon the Barbarians their own winter. You
were in this veneration with your enemies, what with your Soldiers? what
admiration did you gain, and how? when with you they were a hungry; with you
they suffered thirst; when in the very excercising of your Troops you mingled
the Generals dust and sweat with theirs, differing from the rest in nothing,
but in excellency of strength and spirit, freely charging, and receiving the
charge: now shaking your pile in a close encounter; now standing while another
darted his, encouraging the valor of your men, and rejoicing when they struck
the heaviest blows upon your shield or helmet. For your self commended the
bold charger, and praised him into farther boldness; and what did they not
dare, when they had you for a spectatour and judge of their first skirmishes;
you viewing if their arms were fixed, weighing their darts, and if any thought
his pile too heavy, throwing it your self? What! when you comforted the weary,
and releived the hurt? it was never your fashion to enter your own pavilion
till you had visited your Fellow Soldiers tents, nor to take repose, but last
of all. Nor should I so admire our General, if he had been such among the
These families (the Fabricij, Scipio's and Camilli) were not more famed for
valor, then formoderation, being in all their conquests only enriched with
honor.
Fabricij, the Scipio's, or Camilli, for then it had been the heat of
imitation, and happily some one better then himself might have inflamed him.
But after the profession of arms was fallen from the hand to the eye, from
labor to pleasure; when we had to The Romans were first taught to use their
arms by P. Rutilius the Consul.
train and exercise us no Veteran, [no old Roman Souldier] that had won the
The Moral Crown was bestowed on him that first scaled the walls, and therefore
resembled battlements.
Murall or the The Civicke or Oaken Crown, was given by the General to him
that rescued a Citizen of Rome, so its here understood; but in process of time
it was likewise given by the Soldiers to the General, if he spared a Citizens
life when it was forfeited by Martial Law.
Civick honor, but a pretty fine The Greeks ('it is Plutarch's note) studied
the arts of fencing and wrestling so long, till they lost their Country. And
now those wits live upon the little Gambers, that ruined them. Read the
Character of a hungry Greek, Juvenal. Sat. 3.
Greeke-Master, how strange it is now, to see one of all delighting in the
manners of his Country, and without a rival or example, striving and
contending with himself; and as he reigns alone, so he alone to deserve to
reign! Were not you (Caesar) bred up to these gloryes from your infancy? while
yet a youth, adding your Parthian laurel to your fathers honors, you even
then merited the title of Germanicus? when the borderers informing you of the
Parthian in roads, you quenched their pride and cruelty with a mighty terror,
joining in admiration of you the rivers of A river that runs through
Cappadocia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and the midst of Babylon. Tigris, this, and
Ganges are the noblest rivers of Asia.
Euphrates, and the The famous river that parts Germany from Belgia, and after
a course of 300 miles, falls into the Mose and the German Ocean.
Rhene; yet then, you never marched so far in Person, as in fame, appearing
still greater, and more glorious in your last quarters. Yet hitherto you were
not Emperor, hitherto not son unto a God: and though Germany is guarded with
a multitude of different people, made defensible by nature with infinite spaces
of desert earth, bulwark'd with the The Alps divide Germany and France from
Italy; the Pyrenaan mountains, Spain from France.
Alps, and Pyrenaean mountains, and diverse other mighty hills, if not
compared to these. Yet when through all this tract you lead your Army or rather
(such was your swiftnes) transported it, you never so much as called for your
Coach or Horse, which was a hunting nagge and followed after, not for use, but
ornament; for you had no service for him, unless upon a Stative day [when you
had pitched your battaile] you made it your recreation to gallop over the
adjacent fields. Shall I wonder at the beginning of your industry, or the end?
it is much you should persevere, but more that you never feared, you were not
able to persevere. Nor do I doubt but that Domitian.
he (who commanded you his best protection) then as far off as Spain, to
undertake the German war, he being a sloathfull General, and envying others
virtues, which himself had use of, conceived as great an admiration of you,
not without some fear; as once that Hercules, son to Jupiter and Alcmena, whom
the tyrant Erystheus enjoined those 12 labors that instead of destroying him
(as they were intended) immortalised his name, now given as a title of honor
to the indefatigable Conqueror.
son of Jupiter having performed his labors struck into his Prince, when
after all his hard commands he still returned victorious, and unwearyed: while
you being put upon one expedition after another were still found worthy of new
employment, When you were a Tribune in your tender years, you marched through
many several Countries, with the vigor of a man, fortune even then inspiring
you to know by degrees, what you should command at once. You not contenting
your self to view the Camp at distance, as with a prospective-glasse, and to
slubber over a short war, but performing the office of A M^litary Tribune,
whose office was answerable to that of our Sergeant Major General.
a Tribune, that you might immediately deserve to be a General; and that you
might have nothing to learn at the time wherein you should be called to teach.
By ten [annuall] This Pay called stipends, the Soldiers had either
half-yearly, or (as in this place) yearly.
stipends you knew the manners of people, situations of Countries,
opportunities of places; and by your patience made the diverse tempers of their
water and air as familiar to your body, as your own Country springs, as your
own Country climate. How often [as public presents to your merit] have you
changed your victorious horse and arms? the time shall come therefore that
posterity shall go themselves, and take their sons along with them, to see
what field has drunk your sweat, what tree has canopyed your meat, what
caves have been your bedchamber; lastly, what house has entertained so great
a guest, as then in many places you your self were showed the sacred steps
of mighty Generals. But this was long ago, now, he is accounted an old
Soldier, that has been your fellow Soldier. For where is he, whose fellow
Soldier you were not, before you were his General? This is the reason why you
call almost all your Army by their names: that you your self are the Chronicle
of every private Soldiers valiant acts; no one can show you a wound received
for his Country, to which you were not a witness, and a praiser when 'twas
made. But your moderation is rather to be insisted on, that you being bred to
wars, do yet love peace. Nor do you (because you had a triumphall father, or
because your own laurel was consecrated to Jupiter Capitoline on the day of
your adoption) on all occasions therefore seek for triumphs; you fear not
the war, nor provoke it. It Is a mighty matter, (most dread Emperor) a mighty
matter to stand upon the bank of Danubius, if you pass, certain of triumph,
yet not ambitious to force them to battle that decline it; the one whereof is
the act of valor, the other of moderation; for your moderation was the cause
that you would not fight; your valor that the Decebalus King of Dacia, of whom
in the Preface.
enemy would not: neither did any thing but the contempt of the Empire ever
make us conquerours. The Capitol therefore shall receive no counterfeit
Chariots, no false As those Statues (in the Preface) which for a false-named
Victory over Decebalus were decreed to Domitian, who made show of triumph after
his return to Rome, but (as Dion notes) the people said he celebrated the
funerals of his Army lost in Dacia.
pictures of victory, but shall be filled (our Emperor bringing home true and
solid glory) with peace, and the acknowledged homage of our foes, so, as there
will be no one to be conquered: this is beyond all triumphs. But if some
Meaning Decebalus.
Barbarous Prince shall grow to that insolence and madness as to merit your
indignation. Let him be sure whether he be defenced with vast rivers, or
mountainous precipices; he shall find all these as submisse, and yiedling to
your virtues, as if the rivers were This may seem high Hyperbole and mere
speculation at first sight, but it was gloriously reduced into act by Trajan's
miraculous bridge over Danubius, as in the Preface.
drained, the mountains levelled, the sea it self swallowed up, and our fleet
not landed, but our land it self brought over to him. Me-thinkes I now behold
a triumph not heavy laden with the spoils of Provinces, or gold extorted from
our Confederates, and allies; but with hostile arms, and chains of captive
Princes. Me-thinkes I hear our men running over alowd the high and mighty
names of Generals, and pointing to the bodies suitable to those names. Methinkes
while with their hands bound they pass on foot, you follow in your chariot, as
treading on the necks of conquered nations, and before you the sheilds, which
you your self have pierced. Nor shall you want the spoils The Spolia Opima
[the Conquered Generals Armes] were still by the Conqueror dedicated to
Jupiter Feretrius. Jove the striker, because it was believed that without
Jupiters special assistance, one General could not hit another.
Opime, [such as one General wins that takes another] if there be a Prince
that dares contend. Nor shall the casting of your darts alone, but of your eyes
and frowns, make all the field, and the enemies whole Army tremble. You have
deserved by your late moderation, that whenever the dignity of the Empire
forces you either to invade or to repel an enemy, that it should not be
thought you conquer, that you might triumph, but that you triumph because you
have conquered. One thing minds me of another; how noble a work it is that
you have revived the decayed and extinguished discipline of war, curing the
Evil of the former age, sloth and contumacy, and the scorn of obeying. It Is
safe to merit reverence; it is safe to merit love: nor is he a General that
fears not to be beloved, or that fears to be beloved; and so alike secure of
hate and love they view the works, are present when the Soldiers exercise,
they fix the arms, the walls and men. For he is no Prince that thinks those
stratagems designed against himself, that are prepared against his enemies;
which was a persuasion of theirs, that doing of hostile acts, feared the like
measure. In that time, therefore not only the military profession and men's
spirits languished, but their bodies too, swords were dulled, their edge taken
off with neglect; while our Generals feared not so much the stratagems of
foreign Kings, as of their own Princes; nor their enemies hands and swords
so much, as their own fellow Soldiers. It is the nature of the Stars, that
the small and meaner are obscure when the great ones rise; so by an Emperors
presence, the honor of his Lieutenants is eclypsed; but you were indeed
greater then all, but without diminution to any: every one retained the same
authority when you were present, as when you were absent; nay, many respected
them more, because you did respect them. Thus therefore you indeared your self
to the highest, and the lowest, thus you made your self a mixed person, a
General, and a common Soldier: so as you both took an account of their
exercises, and labors, as a Commander, and a Censour; and as a fellow and
companion releived them. Happy are they whose fidelity and industry is known
not by messengers, and interpreters, but by your self; nor with your ears,
but with your eyes: and that have gained this further favor, that when you are
absent, you will believe no censure of an absent Soldier sooner then your
own. Now the desires of Rome recalled you, and your love unto your Soldiers
was vanquished with the love you bare your Country. Your journey from the war
was calm and modest, as if you had returned from a well settled peace. Nor
indeed will I insert among your praises, that no father, no husband feared your
coming: others have affected chastity, in you it was inbred and natural, and
so to be numbered with those virtues you cannot style your own. No tumult in
exacting for your carriages; no nicetie in taking up your lodgings, such yours
as others diet; to this, your march was so quick, and so free a progress, as
one would think it to be some great General (and especially your self) going
to the army. Such little or no difference was betwixt our Emperor before, and
after his creation. How unlike to this was lately the march of Domitian.
another Prince (if it was a march, not a design of spoil and desolation)
when he dispossessed the owners of their houses, burned down, and laid wast
all on the right hand, and on the left, as if some enemy had fallen upon us; or
those very The Germans, Dacians, or Sarmatians, who had all foiled Domitian.
Barbarians from whom he fled? the Provinces ought to have been persuaded that
that was Domitians, not the Prince's Journey. And therefore not for your own
glory, but for the public benefit you commanded that your edict should
exactly particularise the expenses both of his and your own German expedition.
Let an Emperor accustom himself to reckon with his Empire, so let him go
forth, and so return, as if he were to give in his accounts, let him cast up
what he has spent; so he shall never spend what he may be ashamed to speak
of. Besides, thereby succeeding Princes whether they will or no shall
understand, thus much it will cost them: and two examples being proposed, they
shall remember that men will accordingly conjecture of their disposition, as
they shall choose this, or that. For these, so many and so great merits did you
deserve no new honors, no new titles? nay, you refused the name of Father of
your Country; what a long combat had we with your modesty? how slowly did we
overcome? that name which others instantly upon their Coronation day, received
as they did that of Emperor and Caesar, you put off so long, till you your
self, the severest Judge of your own merit, could not but confess that you
deserved it. And therefore of all, it was your only fortune, to be the Father
of your Country, before you were so declared. For, you were so in our hearts,
in our judgments: nor would the public piety have stood upon the name,
unless to our selves we should have appeared ungrateful, to call you rather
Emperor and Caesar, when we had by experience found you to be a Father. Which
appellation, with what bounty, with what favor do you exercise! That you live
with your people as a Father with his Children! That returning our Emperor,
you carry your self toward us, we behave our selves toward you, as if you
were that private person you went forth! you still think both your self and
us the same; you being such as we are all, only by so much greater then
others, by how much better. And in the first place, what a day it was, how long
wished for, and expected, when you made your entrance to the City! Nay, the
very manner of your entrance, how rare and pleasing! For, whereas former
Princes used to be brought and carried in, I do not say in their Chariots,
drawn with four milke-white steeds, but which is more arrogant, on men's
shoulders; You only more conspicuous, and more exalted then others by your
height of body, did not make your triumph over our patience, but over the
pride of Princes. Therefore no age, no infirmity, no sex retarded any from
feasting their eyes with so unusual a sight. The little Children were brought
forth to see you, the young men gloried in you, the old men admired you; even
the sick neglecting the commands of their Physicians crept into your sight. as
if that were their health. Some said they had lived long enough now they had
beheld you and waited upon you; others said, that now was the best time of
living. The very women then took the greatest joy in being Mothers, when they
saw to what a Prince they had bred Subjects, to what a General they had
brought forth Soldiers. One might see roofes of houses loaded, and laboring
with the weight of people; not so much as that place vacant, where the
adventrous stander seemed to fall; the streets all over-crowded, only a narrow
passage left for you: the multitudes of both sides cheerful, every where like
joy, like acclamations. The rejoicing at your coming (being in all men as
equal, as your carriage toward all) grew still more as you came on, and
increased almost at every step. It pleased all Rome that you returned that
kiss unto the Senate, which they gave to you at parting; it pleased, that the
Roman Knights received a greater honor then their order, while you saluted
them by their names without a remembrancer. It pleased, that you would not
only take notice of your Retainers to Trajan as a private man; for Clients
were dependent on the Nobility their Patrons, who were bound in honor to
protect them, as Clients were in duty and on pain of death to be faithful to
their Patrons.
Clients, but added certain marks of familiarity. But it pleased most, that
the people likewise were suffered to come near, nay even to come close to you,
that the very first day you trusted your person to us all: you were not
enclosed with your guard, but free and open for the whole town to flow about
you; now the Senate, now the order of Knights, according as either made the
frequencie of their addresses. Your Lictours followed silent and quiet; as for
your Soldiers, they differed not at all from the people in habit, civilitie,
or modesty. But when you came to ascend the Capitol, how comfortable to all
was the remembrance of your adoption, and what a particular joy to them who in
that place had first saluted you Emperor. Nay, I believe, the very God
himself took an especial pleasure in beholding his own work, but when you
stood in the same place where your father did when he published that great
secret of the Gods, how the assembly exulted through all the temple! how were
the old acclamations revived? how like was that day unto the day that did beget
it? how like were the Altars to themselves exalted with Sacrifices for him upon
whose health and safety ours depends, all knowing they pray for themselves and
their children, when they pray for you! Thence you went indeed to your Palace;
but with that look, but with that moderation, as if you had retired into your
private house, the rest to their dwellings, every one there iterating the
truest testimony of his joy, by rejoicing without witnesses. Some Prince had
been undone by such an entrance, but you daily grew more admirable, more
worthy. Such, in a word, you are, as other Princes only promise they will be;
you therefore are the only Emperor whom length of time commends and adds
unto you, joining and incorporating two formerly inconsistent things, the
security of a Governor, and the modesty of a beginner; you do not cast down
the embraces of your subjects to your feet, nor suffer them to kiss your hand;
our Emperor has the same Civilitie he had; he did use to go on foot, he goes
so still: he did rejoice in labor, so he does. Fortune has changed all about
you, but has not changed your self. It Is free for every man when the Prince
walks abroad, to stand, to meet, to wait upon him, to pass by him; you come
not by chance among us, and make your self familiar with us to upbraid us with
it. Every one has access unto your person; and his own modesty, not your
pride, puts an end to his discourse. We are indeed governed by you, and subject
to you, but as we are unto the Laws, for they regulate our wills and inordinate
desires, yet they converse with us, and remain among us. You are eminent and
do excel, as honor and authority, which are indeed above men, yet to men they
appertain. Formerly Princes in scorn of us, and out of a certain fear of
equality had lost the use of their legs, these therefore their servants necks
and shoulders carried over our heads: but you fame, glory, and the piety of
your subjects raises above those Princes; the earth lifts up you to heaven, so
intermingled are our Prince's steps with ours. Nor do I fear (my Lords) that
you will think I speak too long, since it is chiefly to be desired that the
things for which thanks are given to a Prince should be many, which I might
with more reverence leave untouched and entire to your memories, then pass
them over slightly and abruptly; because it often happens, that only what we
conceal is thought to appear in its just proportions. Unless you please to
give me leave to touch briefly his enriching of the Tribes, giving the people
their Congiary (a word derived from the measure Congius that held about a
gallon and a Pynt) was properly the bounty of the Roman Emperors to the
people, as Donative was their Imperial munifience to the Soldier.
Congiary, and that whole, when the Soldiers received but part of their
Donative. Is it an argument of a common spirit to prefer them in his bounty,
whom he might safer have denied? yet even in the making of this difference, the
rule of proportion was observed, for the Soldiers were equalled to the people
by receiving a part, but first; the people to the Soldiers by coming in the
second place, but receiving all at once. Nay, how bountifully was it
distributed? how careful were you that none should go without your bounty? It
was given to those it was not promised to, they being put in since your Edict
in the place of names crossed out. Some were detained with buisinesse, others
with sickness, he was at Sea, this upon the river, it was laid up for them,
and provided, that no one should be sick, no one employed, no one absent, let
every one come when he would, come when he could. Caesar, it was magnificent
and your own, as it were to bring together far distant Countries with a
miracle of bounty, to contract vast spaces with your munificence, to prevent
chance, to way-lay fortune, and by your power to make it so, that none of the
Commons, when you gave your Congiary, should be more sensible of his being a
man, then of his being a denizon of Rome. Upon the Congiary day it was formerly
the custom for swarms of Infants, the future people, to attend the Prince
coming abroad, the Parents took great pains to show him their little ones,
to set them upon their shoulders, and to teach them words of soft and
flattering Courtship, the children spoke as they were prompted, and many times
gabled to the deaf ears of the Prince with fruitless prayers; neither
knowing what they begged, nor what they had not obtained, till they grew so old
as to understand their wants. You did not so much as stay to be petitioned, and
though it was a most delightful object to have the Roman offspring in your
eye, yet before they saw you, or came into your presence, you commanded they
should all be taken notice of, and their names enrolled, that from their very
infancy they might have experience of your being their public parent by
their education: you would have them bred at your own charges, that were bred
for your own service, and so brought by your pension to your pay: and that
they might all owe as much to you, as every one does to his particular parent.
You do wisely. Caesar, to beat the charges of perpetuating the Roman name, for
there is no kind of expense more worthy a Prince, and that will more eternise
his memory, then what is laid out upon posterity. To breed up their children
the rich are encouraged by Tacitus l. 15. Fathers [in the Nobility and Gentry]
had right to stand for Magistracies, to cast lo^s for Provinces, to be heirs
by Will, being (says Juvenal Sat. 9) capable of all, whether pure Legacies, or
conditional. These privileges Bachelours wanted, and withal were fined for
their contempt of Marriage. The Law de maritandis ordinibus was prefer^'d by Q.
Metellus, revived by Aug. Caesar.
great rewards and equal punishments, but the poor to take care for theirs
have only one reason, a good Prince. Now children borne for his service,
unless with a munificent hand he cherish, feed, and embrace them, he hastens
the sunset of the Empire, the sunset of the State; in vain a Prince
neglecting the Communalty, like a head to a defective body, maintains a bulk
staggering with an unballanced weight. It Is easy to suppose what joy you
took, when the shouts of parents and children, old men and infants entertained
you. The first words that were ever spoken by your little subjects saluted your
ear, on whom, when you bestowed their education, you made your bounty
greater, by not suffering them to ask. But it is beyond all your goodnesses,
that you your self are such, that to breed up their children under you they
delight, nay they hold it necessary; no parents now fear their children,
unless they fear nature, and the accidents of humane frailty; nor among
incurable diseases is the Princes displeasure numbered. It is indeed a great
encouragement to educate children in hope of alimonie, in hope of Congiary, but
it is a greater to breed them in hope of liberty, in hope of security. And
therefore let the Prince give nothing, so he take away nothing; let him not
maintain, so he will not destroy, yet we shall not want those that will covet
to have issue. Contrarily, let him give and As Domitian. whose very feastings
(as in his Character in the Preface) were defrayed with bloody confiscations.
take away, maintain and destroy, truly in a short time he will cause all to
repent not only their childrens but their own being and their parents.
Therefore in all your Bounty I commend nothing more, then that you bestow the
Congiarie out of your own, the Alimonie out of your own, not feeding your
Subjects (as wild beasts their young ones) with blood and slaughter, and which
is most welcome to the receivers, they know what is given to them, is not
forced from any, and for the enriching of so many, no one is made poorer, but
the Prince alone; yet not he neither, for he who has what all have, he
himself has as much as all. Your numerous glory calls me another way.
another way? as how? Have I then sufficiently admired and honored your
bestowing so much money, not that conscious of a crime you might stop the mouth
of fame from following it against you, nor to divert men's black and sad
discourses by offering them more comfortable matter; you redeemed no offense
with your Congiary, no As Nero (after poisoning Germanicus and the murdering
of his mother Agrippina) who distributed money, set forth shows, and gave rich
presents to particular men. Tacitus. Dion.
cruelty with your Alimony; neither was it the cause of your well doing, that
what you had done ill might pass uncensured; with all these sums it was
love, not favor that you purchased, and the people of Rome departed from your
Tribunal, obliged not appensed; You offered your Congiary, joyful to the
joyful, secure to the secure, and what other Princes cast before the peoples
swelling spirits, to take off their odium, you gave the people with as innocent
a heart as they received it. My Lords, little less then five thousand
freeborn Romans were those whom the bounty of our Prince sought out, found,
and enrolled. These, the strength of war, the ornament of peace, are educated
at his public charge, and learn to love their Country, not as their Country,
but their Nurse. Out of these our armies are recruited, our tribes replenished,
out of these in time will spring such as shall have no need of Alimony. The
Gods give you Caesar the long life you merit, and keep you in that mind,
which they have given you, and the greater you see the bead role of the Infants
grown ever when you read it (for it swells and increases daily, not because
children are dearer to parents, but Subjects to the Prince) give them
Congiaries if you please, howsoever they are borne to serve you. As a
perpetual Congiarie I esteem the affluence of corn, the care whereof long
since added no less glory to Who to furnish Rome in a dearth, sailed to
Sicily, Sardinia and Africa, and returning wi h plenty, when the Pylot durst
not put to Sea the storm was so terrible, Pompey himself went first aboard,
commanded them to weigh Anchor, and cried. It Is necessary to sail, not
necessary to live Plut. in vita Pompeij.
Pompey, than his banishing ambition from the Campus Martiu^ the Fields wherein
Election of Magistrates was made where Pompey would not suffer the sale of
Offices.
fields, beating the enemy from the Sea, and purging the Where he finished the
war, subduing Domitius Jarbus and all Africa in 40 days, for which Sylla
surnamed him the Great: And for the West, he conquered Herennius Perpenna and
Sertorius in Spain.
East and West by Tryumphs. Nor indeed did he more civilly and humanely, then
our parent by his authority, counsel and trust, open the ways, clear the
ports, restore the traveller to the high way, the Sea to the shore, and shore
unto the Sea, so intermingling nations by commerce, as what sprung any where,
seemed to spring every where. Do we not evidently see that without injury to
any, every year plentifully contributes to our uses; because we rob not our
friends, as if they were the enemy, of their green and perishing harvest, they
bring to our granaries what their soil bears, what their star ripens, what
the year affords; nor pressed with new taxes do they fail in their old
tribute. The public Treasury buys what it seems to buy, from hence plenty,
from hence provisions of corn, the buyer and seller agreeing upon a price,
from hence satiety here, famine no where. Egypt so gloried in cherishing and
multiplying seed, as if it were not at all indebted to the rain or heaven,
being always watered with her own Nilus ^h^ River that waters Egypt like a
garden, and is worshipped as a God by the Egyptians.
river nor fatned with any other kind of water, but what was powered forth by
the earth it self, yet was it clothed with so much corn that it might (and
as it were eternally) vie harvests with the fruitfullest soyles of the whole
world. This very Country with unexpected drought withered even to barrenness,
because dull Nilus rose slowly and languishingly from his channel, he himself
being then to be compared with other mighty rivers, so that a great part of
the land accustomed to lie cool and overflowed, was parched into deep sands.
In vain then Egypt wished for floods, and lifted up their eyes to heaven,
when the author of their fecunditie, Nilus, being lessened and contracted, had
brought their plenty into as narrow a compass, as his own abundance. Nor did
that vast overflowing river so much as keep within his constantly usurped
bounds, but from his level and detaining border stole away like a fugitive
with a soft and gentle ebb, not moistning so much ground as would maintain
the scorched land. The people therefore being defrauded of their inundation,
that is, of their fertility, so implored Caesar's help, and invocated him, as
they use to do their river, nor were they longer oppressed with their
misfortunes, then till such time as they could signify them. So swift, Caesar,
is your power, and your goodness upon all occasions so intent and ready, that
if your times have any sadder accident, for the recovery and cure, it is enough
to let you know it. Truly to all nations I wish plenteous years, and
grateful earth, yet I must believe, that fortune by putting Egypt into this
condition, did it only that she might see a proof of your power and vigilance:
For though you deserve to be fortunate every where, yet is it not manifest, that
each sadder chance does but offer new matter and field-roome to your virtues?
since prosperity declares man happy, adversity great. It was (time out of
mind) a generally received opinion, that Rome without the wealth of Egypt
could not eat and subsist, which made that windy and insolent nation boast,
that yet they fed the conquerors of the World, and that in their hands lay our
abundance, or our want. We have poured back upon Nile its own provisions, it
has received the corn it sent, and exported the harvests it brought in. Let
Egypt therefore learn and experimentally believe that she affords us not
sustenance, but tribute, and know that she is to the people of Rome not
necessary, yet a servant. Hereafter let Nilus if he please love his channel
and keep within his banks, it is nothing to Rome, scarce to Egypt; only that
from thence their ships will lanch out empty and unladed, as if they were
returning, and go from hence with their full freight and burden, as they use
to come. And the Sea having changed the copy of both our wishes, they may now
pray for speedy winds and a short voyage hence. Caesar, it had been a miracle
should not the sloth of Egypt, and the fullennesse of Nile have had their
influence upon the provisions of this City, which by your help and your care,
has abounded in that measure, as proved at once, we could want Egypt, Egypt
could not want us. There had been an end of that most fruitful nation, if it
had been unconquered; they were ashamed of their unaccustomed dearth, nor
less ashamed of hunger that tormented them, when you together stopped both
their necessity and blushes. Their husbandmen, that saw the barnes full of
corn without their inning, wondered from what ground that harvest came, and in
what part of Egypt there was another Nile. Thus your bounty took away the
malignity of their soil, and Nile that formerly was serviceable to Egypt,
never flowed higher to our glory. How happy it is now for all Provinces, that
they are come into our subjection and allegiance, since the world has got a
Prince, that now hither, now thither (as time and necessity requires) can pass
and return plenty! that could feed and maintain a nation severed from us by
the Ocean, as if it had been part of the people of Rome. And while heaven is
never so benign, to cherish and make fruitful in one year all soyles, but if
not barrenness it self, at least the evil of barrenness aflicts them, he
imports, if not plenty it self, at least the good of plenty; he with
eternal intercourse ties the East unto the West, that what grows any where,
and is elsewhere desired, all nations together may enjoy, learning thereby, how
much one Master is to be preferred before discordant liberty. For whereas in
Countries where the good is severed, the evils are their own, being mixed and
associated, particular evils belong to no particular, but all good to all. But
whether there be a certain divinity in their earth, or a Genius in their
water, I hope that both their soil and river contented with this bounty of our
Prince, will hide our seeds in a soft bosom, and restore them multiplied; not
that we demand interest, yet let them think themselves bound to pay it; and
let the defrauded expectation of one year, for all future years and ages
excuse it self, so much the more because we exact it not. The necessity of
your subjects and allies being provided for, you make us spectators of no
weak, no idle Trajan set forth shows that continued 123 days, wherein
sometimes were slain 1000 beasts wild and tame, sometimes ten thousand;
likewise ten thousand Gladiators fought together Dion.
Show, that may effeminate men's minds; but such as may beget a love of
handsome wounds, and a contempt of death, when they behold a desire of praise
and ambition of victory, even in the bodies of slaves and men condemned to die.
In setting forth this Show, how great your bounty, and your justice, either
untouched, or above the power of passion! We obtained what we asked, nay that
was offered us we asked not, and he himself was earnest with us to prefer
our desires, but so likewise we had many sudden and unexpected sights. Then how
free was the beholders liking! how secure their favor! no impiety, as formerly
objected unto any that he hated a sword-player, no spectator made a Made a
Bestiarius, so they called them that fought with wild beasts; or forced to be
a Gladiator, as Proculus, whom they say, because he was very handsome, C.
Caligula commanded him to be taken from the sword-play which he sat
beholding, and compelled him 'th lists, first to fight with a Thracian, then
with one armed at all pieces, and Proculus having conquered both, Domitian made
him be stripped, bound, put into rags, showed to the Ladies and then executed.
spectacle, paid for his miserable pleasure, dragged by the hook unto the
fire. Domitian.
He was a mad man and ignorant of true honor that gathered up high treason
from the sand within the lists, interpreting that his Deity was despised and
contemned, unless we adored his gladiators, and that malignants in them
blasphemed his power and divinity; accounting himself the same with the Gods,
and his gladiators the same with himself. But you, Caesar, how fair a show
have you made us in stead of that execrable one? We see judgment passed upon
informers, such as upon out-lawes, such as upon thieves. They lately were
scattered, not in As in Juv. Sat. 4. For such a Turbut who durst sell or buy,
So many Inquisitors and Informers nigh. These Seaweeds scattered on the shore.
unfrequented places, but in the The Temple of Saturn, thought the fittest
place for the public Treasury, says Alex. Neop. because Saturn first
invented brazen money, but with relation to the in egrity of the Golden Age
when Saturn reigned* says Plutarch.
Temple and the Courts of justice, then no Testament would stand good, no
condition be secure, neither the childlesse nor the parent. The avarice of
Princes added to this evil, you took notice of it, and as before to the
Feilds, so you now restored peace to the The Forum Romanum containing the
Temple of Saturn with the Comitium or Justice-hall, the Rostra or pulpits for
Oration, etc.
Forum; you cut off this civil gangrene, and by provident severity took order
that the City established by law, should not by Law be ruined. Notwithstanding
therefore that as well your fortune as your bounty has bestowed, and still
bestows upon us, now mighty bodies of men with equal spirits, now the
hugeness of wild beasts, now their tamenesse never known before, now those
Hoorded by Domitian, bestowed on the public and upon the Gods, by Trajan.
Martial. l. 12. What in the Atcadian Palace shined, is to our eyes and Gods
assigned. And now with Jove we all are blessed, But late, alas when it is confessed,
Into our cheeks 'twill blushes call. We with poor Jove were beggars all.
hidden and secret treasures, first under you made public, yet nothing is
more pleasing to us, nothing more worthy of the age, then what is added to
these shows, the sight of Informers dragged through the streets with supine
faces, and necks wryed about, we saw and joyed, when (as Sacrifices to expiate
the solitude they had caused) they were drawn along with slow and grievous
tortures: They were crowded aboard ships, pressed upon the sudden and
delivered over to the Tempests, that should send them away and toss them from
the continent, wasted and made desolate by their informations; and if the
storms and billows should reserve any for the rocks, he should inhabit the
naked stones, and the inhospitable shore, and live hardly and painfully,
tormented with the remembrance of his being put out of the common protection of
mankind. A memorable sight, the Informers fleet, exposed to all winds,
constreined to spread their sails to embrace Tempests, and to go along with
the angry waves till they dashed them on a Rock. Oh it was a gallant prospect,
from the Port, to see that navy scattered, and in the very Sea thanking the
Prince, that preserving his clemency, had commended the revenge of the earth
and men unto the sea-gods. How much diversity of times could do, is now
especially known, when to the same In the Islands of the Cyclades, to which the
Roman Emperors banished many noble persons, Juv. Sat. 13. Or to the Aegaean
rocks that entertain great exiles.
Rocks where formerly every innocent person, now only the guilty are confined,
and all those desert Islands which late were filled with Senators are now
planted with Informers, which you have not only taken away for the present, but
suppressed for ever, making them liable to a thousand penalties. Do any go
about to cheat others of their money? they must lose their own. would they
out us from our houses? they must from theirs be outed. Nor (as formerly) do
they hold forth that bloodlesse and brazen forehead to be marked with a cold
Pointing to the act of Domitian, who grievously puished the Informers of the
Chequer, but encouraged the^ notwithstanding.
iron, laughing, and never hurt when they are stigmatized; but they see
damages paid answereable to the gayn that was expected, so, as they cannot
have greater hopes then terrors, nor be feared more then they fear. With a
noble soul did the divine Titus look upon our security and revenge; and we
therefore deified him, but how much more (a long time hence) will you be worthy
heaven, that have added so many things to those for which we have made him a
God? and it was so much the harder, because the Emperor Who banished Informers
from the City. Dion.
Nerva (most worthy to have you for his son, you for his successor) by making
so many superstructures to Titus his Edict against Informers, seemed to leave
nothing for you to do, who have so much enlarged it, as if nothing had been
done before. The dispensation of each particular whereof, how gracious would it
have showed you! but you poured them forth all together, as the Sun and Day,
whose light appears not in part, but in whole, nor to one or two, but to all
the world in common. What a blessing is it to behold the treasury silent and
quiet, and such as it was before there were Informers! Now the God is truly
there; now it is a Temple, not the spoliarie of the Citizens, and receptacle of
cruel and bloody plunder: In the whole orb of the earth, there is yet one
place where under a good Prince the good are too hard for the wicked. Yet still
the honor of the Law remains, nothing is taken off from the public benefit,
nor the penalty remitted to any one, but our revenge is added; and herein the
change consists, that now, not the Informers, but the Laws are feared. But
peradventure you restrain not your Exchequer with the same severitie as you
do our Treasury, yes so much the more, as you believe you may take a farther
liberty in what concerns your self, than in what concerns the public. It Is
said to your Actor and Procuratour were Officers of the Exchequer (as this
place imports) and the Procurator the greater, who was the Advocate, or Judge
Fiscall, and the Actor as I suppose the Emperor's Attorney general.
Actor and likewise to your Procurator, come into the Court, appear at the
Tribunal; for a Tribunal is now set up, that vexes them equal with others,
more, if you measure their torments by the greatness of their qualities. The
lot and Lots inscribed with names were put into an Urne for the choice of Roman
Magistrates, in imitation whereof at this day the Venetians have balls.
urne assign a judge to the Chequer-chamber, it is lawful to reject him, it is
lawful to cry I will have none of this, he is a timorous man, and understands
not well the goodness of the times; I will have none of him, because he too
passionately loves Caesar; principality and liberty use the same Law. And
which is your chief glory, the Exchequer is often foiled, whose cause is never
ill but under a good Prince. A mighty merit this, but that far greater, that
you have those Procurators, as commonly your Subjects desire no other Judges,
though it be free for any that disputes his title, to say, I will have another
Judge: for you annex no necessity to your gifts, as knowing the highest grace
of Princes favors is, if we likewise may not use them. The burdens of
government compel decrees of diverse Taxes, which as they are a benefit to the
generality, so they are an injury to particulars. Among these the When Augustus
had taken an account of the multitude of Roman Armies, finding much money
requisite for the maintenance of all those foot and horse, he ordained that
all inheritances or Legacies left by will to any (save to the nearest of blood
and to the poor) should pay the twentieth part, as if he had found this
tribute written in Caesar's Commentaries. Dion
twentieth part was pitched upon, a tribute only tolerable and easy to
Strangers that had no relation of blood.
extraneous heirs, but a grievance to domestic. Upon them it is therefore
Ausonius mentions some of the twentieth part to be retained by Trajan, and
tells us tha^ Gratian remitted the whole.
imposed, unto those remitted. For as much as it was manifest with how much
grief men would suffer (or rather men would not suffer) any thing to be pared
and shaved off from those goods, which by descent and sacred affinity they had
deserved, and which they never accounted as other men's estates, and as fortunes
to be hoped for, but as their own, as things ever possessed and still to be
transmitted to the next of blood. This courtesy of the Law was reserved only
for the old denizons of Rome, but the new ones, whether they came in by the
right of jus Latij, the right of Latium privileged those [Aliens] that
obtained it from taxes, Paulus de censibus F. l. and likewise put them into a
capacity of being Magistrates.
Latium, or by the favor of the Prince, unless they had therewith granted to
them the right of kindred, the Law looked upon them as greatest strangers,
where they were most near of kin. Thus the greatest right was turned into
the greatest injury, and the City of Rome was like to hatred, discord and
privation of children, since by it the nearest alliances (notwithstanding their
piety) were disjoined; yet some were found to bear so great affection to our
name, that they held the twentieth part, and the loss of their affinities,
fully recompensed with the title of Citizens of Rome, but it ought freeliest to
have been conferred upon those, by whom it was so highly valued. It was
therefore Decreed by your Father, that what out of the mothers goods came to
the children, out of the childrens to the mother (though they had not received
the right of It appears plainly that the stranger, notwithstanding his
Indenization was not freed from Augustus his Edict for the twentieth part,
unless he had sued forth the right of kindred, till Nerva dispensed with it.
cognation when they were made Citizens of Rome) should not be liable to pay
the twentieth part; the same immunity he granted to the son in the goods of
his Father (in case he were reduced into his fathers A son was reduced into
his fathers power two ways, eith erif (being freed and emancipated by his
Father) he did return of his own accord, or jure postliminij if (being taken
prisoner by the enemy) he came back to his Country, for that set him instatuquo
and his father might be his heir as before h s emancipation.
power) thinking it unhonest and insolent and almost impious to put taxes upon
these relations, nor that without a kind of sacriledg these holy ties could be
cut in sunder by the interposition of the twentieth part. And that no necessary
tax ought to be so pressed, as to make Fathers and Children strangers. Thus
far he, perhaps more sparingly then became the best Prince, but not more
sparingly then became the best Father, that being to adopt the Best, in this
likewise as a most indulgent parent, was content to begin, or rather but to
show the way, reservinge for his son a large and almost untouched matter of
well-doing. Immediately therefore to his bounty your liberality added, that as
the son in the fathers, so the father should be privileged in the sons
inheritance, nor in the same mo^ent that he ceased to be a Father, should he
lose his having been one. You have done excellently, Caesar, not to suffer the
fathers tears to be tributary. The father possesses his sons goods without
diminution, nor has he a partner in his inheritance, that has no partner in
his sorrow. None calls to account the fresh bleeding and astonishing loss of
Children, compelling the Father to set forth what the son left. Our Prince's
gift appears greater, when I show this reason for his bounty. For it may be
accounted ambition, vain glory and profuseness, and any thing rather then
liberality, that is not consonant to reason. It was worthy therefore your
compassion, Caesar, to lessen the affliction of parents now grown childlesse,
nor to suffer any that has lost his son to be stricken with another grief;
because it is misery enough, for a father to be sole heir to his son; what if
he have a Coheyre not of his sons naming? Besides, when divine Nerva had
decreed, that for their fathers estates the children should be free from
payment of the twentieth part, it was congruous and fit, that the same freedom
should be granted to parents in their sons estates: for why should children
receive more honor, then Progenitors? and why should not the same equity
ascend? You, Caesar, have taken away that exception, in case the son be in
his fathers power, having an eye (as I conceive) to the force and law of nature
that orders children to be for ever in the power of parents, nor gives,
among men, as among beasts, the power and command to the stronger. Neither was
our Prince content to privilege the first degree of blood from the twentieth
part, he likewise exempts the second; with a proviso that the brother in his
sisters goods, and the sister in her brothers, that the uncle and aunt in their
nephews and neices estates, and contrarily, should remain untaxable. And to
those that by the Right of Latium were free of Rome, he granted the same
privilege, and rejoyned the rights of kindreds according to the course of
nature. For which favors former Princes put particular persons to petition,
not so much with intention to grant, as to deny them. Whence we may understand,
how great an act of bounty, and nobleness it was, to collect and bind up our
scattered and (as I may call them) dilacerated familyes; to regraft, and bid
them, as it were to spring a fresh; freely to offer, what had been denied, and
give to all at once, what often severally they could not obteyn. Lastly to
bar himself of so many occasions of doing favor, and such a copious subject
for obligation to the thankful, and imputation to the ungrateful: I conceive
he thought it unfitting for men to ask, what the Gods had given. You are
sisters and brothers, grandfathers and grandchildren, why should you, [because
you are so] be impoverished with a tax? your relations are your privileges. The
Emperor according to the rest of his princely moderation, thinks it a matter
of no less envy, to grant upon petition your own inheritances to you, then to
take the^ from you. With alacrity therefore stand for honor, sue for office,
let this block of lopt-off kindred ly in no man's way, all shall enjoy the same
proximity of blood they did before, but in a better manner. The remotest degree
of late-ceasing affinity, shall not be compelled to pay in the least quantity
of the twentieth part. For our common Trajan, the father of his Country.
parent has set down a sum that is able to bear a tax. The twentieth part
shall not lie heavy upon a small and weak estate, nay if the grateful heir
so please, he may reserve it all for the sepulcher, all for the funerals; no
assistant, no superintendent to oversee him. For whatsoever consideration his
legacy was left him, he may securely enjoy and quietly For that purpose, to
bestow it upon the Funerals of the bequeather.
possess the money. The law of the twentieth part is now so penned, that there
is no coming within compass of it but by a great estate; injustice is turned
into joy, and an injury into a longing, the heir wishes the honor of paying
the twentieth part. It is likewise enacted by the same Edict that they who owe
and have not paid the twentieth part, should not bring it in. Truly the time
past the Gods themselves cannot help, yet you have helped it, and provided that
now they should cease to owe, what they should not owe hereafter. You have done
that puts us into such a Condition, as if we never had suffered under evil
Princes, and how willingly (if it were possible) would the same goodness of
your nature, to so many ruined and murdered men restore their blood and
fortunes. You have forbid the exaction of what begun not to be due in your
own reign. Another to show his fury against the contumacious would have
punished slownesse of payment with a double, nay, a quadruple fine. You esteem
it equal injustice, either to exact what is unjust, or to decree it. You take
upon you (Caesar) the Consul's care and solicitude; for when I consider, that
you alone have remitted our asseissments, given the donative, offered the
Congiary, banished Informers, mitigated our taxes, methinks I should put the
question to you, have you sufficiently cast up the revenues of the Empire? or
is there such virtue in the frugality of a Prince, as that alone can be
sufficient for so much expense, so much munificence? for what can be the
reason, why other Princes when they catched at all we had, and having caught,
retained it as if they had got nothing, wanted all things; you, when you bestow
so much, and take away nothing, yet have all things in abundance? Princes yet
never wanted those, that with sour looks, and supercilious gravitie, were
peremptory for the profits of the Exchequer; Even Princes themselves of their
own inclinations were sufficiently Coveteous and rapacious, and needed no
instructours; Yet still they learned many things of us against our selves. But
your ears, as they are obstructed to all insinuations, so chiefly avaritious
flattery can have no access. Therefore Informers are silent and quiet, and
after, there is none to be persuaded, there is none that offers to persuade.
Thus are we infinitely obliged to you, both for your goodness and our own.
The The Voconian Law forbad a woman (though an only daughter as S. Aug. 3. de
Civ. Det.) to be heir to an estate; that Julian Law which he meant (for there
were many) forbad adultery upon pain of death and w s revived by Domitian that
lived in Incest. see Iuv. Sat. 2.
Voconian and Julian laws, did not so much enrich the Treasury and Exchequer,
as that one and only crime of high treason in the Domitian to enrich his
coffers found many (upon strange Impeachments) guilty of high treason, some
merely because th y had gathered exc^ssive wealth, which begot disdain, made
them hold their heads high and be disobedient to the Laws, one because in his
public prayers for Domitian he did not style him Son to Pallas, another
because he went into an Island as if he had killed his Fathe. Philostratus l. 7.
innocent. The fright whereof you have absolutely taken away, not being jealous
of your greatness, which none has wanted more, then they that made majesty a
terror. Fidelity is returned to friends, piety to children, duty to servants;
they fear and obey, and once again have masters, for now not our servants but
we our selves are the Princes friends. Nor does the Father of his Country more
indeare himself to, and put more confidence in others slaves, then his own
subjects. You have freed us all from our domestic accusers, and giving the
word (as I may say) of public safety, you have put an end unto this He
compares the private bandying of servants informing against their masters to
the public war of slaves against Rome, begun in Sicily by Ennus the Syrian,
serville war: whereby you have not more obliged the masters, then the
servants; for you have made those secure, these honest. Will you not be yet
commended? well, put the case these were not commendable, sure they are
pleasing, to them who remember a Domitian who encouraged servants to swear
against their Lords and then (the just remarkable reward of Traitors) from
those hands that should pay them for their service, they (like Tarpeia)
received their fatal blow.
Prince that encouraged servants to swear away their masters life's, and pointed
them out the crime whereof they should inform, that he might punish it; a
great, inevitable, and still experienced Evil, as often as any had servants like
the Prince. It Is to be placed in the same rank rhat our last Wills and
Testaments are now Which had been invaded by former Emperors; Tiberius broke
the heart of the rich Augur Lentulus, because he durst not leave his estate to
any but the Emp. The Primipilarij or chief Centurions that dyed in the reign
of Tiberius and made not him heir Caius called ungrateful, and Nero ordained
that the Testaments of the ungrateful should be confiscated.
secure, nor do you carry away all, because you were once nominated an heir.
You are entitled to no false, no unjust Will; no ones anger, no ones impiety,
no ones fury flies to you for refuge, nor are you named because another has
offended, but because you have merited. Your friends put you in, strangers
leave you out, no difference betwixt your being a private person and a Prince,
but that now you are beloved of many more, because you love many more. This
course, Caesar, you hold, and experience shows, whether it be not more
beneficial to a Prince, not only in praise but profit, that to make him their
heir men should be rather desirous, then compelled. Many donations in this
kind your Nerva, who restored the rapines of Domitian, was bount full to the
poor even out of his own Estate, and so free to his friends that Philostratus
says when Atticus (father to Herod the Rhetoritian) writ to Nerva that he had
dug up a great Treasure and desired to know how he pleased it should be
disposed of, he writ back Use it. Atticus answered his letter, that 'twas too
great for a private condition, Nerva replied, then abuse it.
Father and you have granted: dyed he out of favor? yet dying so he leaves
them that enjoy his estate and you have nothing out of it, but glory. For a
grateful debtor makes bounty sweeter, an ungrateful, more conspicuous. But
who, until your time, preferred this praise before that profit? What Prince
but thought so much of our patrimony his own, as had been gotten under him? as
our Tyrants, so likewise our Princes bountyes were they not like hooks bayted
with food, like nets covered over with prey, till being swallowed and laden
with private men's fortunes, they drew back with the whatsoever touched them.
How beneficial it is to come to prosperity through adversity! You have lived
with us, been in danger with us, and in fear, (which was the life of the
innocent.) You know, and have experience, how much Princes detest evil me^,
though they themselves do make them such. You remember your old wishes with us,
and your old greivances, for in the bosom of a Prince you bear the judgeme^t
of a private man. Nay you are better then you wished another Prince should be.
You have so accustomed us, that whereas before our highest ambition was a
Prince better the^ the worst, now none will content us but the best. No man
therefore is so ignorant of you, or of himself, as to desire that place after
you. It is easier for one to be your successor, then to This was no prophesy
of Adrian, for he wished it, and by the favor of Plotina, wife to Trajan,
Adrian succeeded him in the Empire.
wish it; for who willingly would undergo your weight of care? who will not
fear to be compared to you? even you your self found how burdensome it is to
succeed a good Prince, and therefore would have been excused from your
adoption. Is it an ordinary Pattern easy to be matched, that no man redeemes
his safety with turpitude? all are secured both of life, and the dignity of
life. Nor is he now considerate and wise, that obscures himself and lives in
darkness, for virtue has the same encouragements under our Prince, which it
had in our liberty; nor is well doing only rewarded by the Conscience, but
farther recompensed. You love the constancy of your Subjects; and their lively
and erected spirits you do not (like others) deject and depresse, but cherish
and raise. Honesty preferres men that think it enough and more, if it hurt
them not. To these you offer Honors, Preisthoods, Provinces; these flourish by
your freindship, by your esteem and Judgment. They are quickened by the price
that is set upon Integrity and industry. The like and the unlike are attracted,
for it is the reward of good and evil that makes men good or bad. There are
naturally few by whom foul or fair ends are not proposed or avoided, as they
make for or against their benefit. The rest, when they see the wages of labor
paid to sloth, of vigilance to drowsinesse, of frugality to luxury, they aim
at the same rewards by the same Tacitus. l. 16. says that C. Petronius spent
the day in sleep, the night in waiting and wanton offices, and as industry
raised others, so sloth advanced him, who applying himself to vices, or the
imitation of vices, got to be one of that small Juncto that were in Nero's
favor.
arts, wherewith they perceive others have attained them; such as those are
such these desire to appear, and what they would only seem, they do really
become. And our former Princes, (your Father excepted) and one or He means
Augustus and Titus, whowere good, but Dion says, the Romans would scarce have
thought them so, if Augustus had died sooner, or Titus lived longer. For the
troubleso^e beginning of his Reign made Augustus more cruel, who when things
were settled proved gracious and noble; But Titus, at first styled the delight
of mankind, afterward did some barbarous acts; as when he caused Aulus Caecinna
(whom he invited to supper) to be murdered in his Dining room.
two (I fear I have over numbered them) rather delighted in the vices, then the
virtues of their Subjects. First because every one loves to see his own nature
in another, then those whom they found more patient of bondage, those whom it
would not have become to be any thing but Such was the Egyptian slave
Crispinus, only beloved by Domitian for the sympathy of his vices, you have
his graphike Character. Juv. Sat. 4.
servants, in their bosoms they heaped all their bounties; but the good, that
in a long vacation of employment were hidden, and, as it were, buried, them
they never brought forth to the light and day, unless by informations, and
with danger. You choose your friends out of the best, and truly it is just they
should be most in favor with a good Prince, that were most frowned upon by a
bad. You know that as tyranny and Sovereignty are of different natures, so none
love a Prince better, then they that most disaffect a Tyrant. These therefore
you advance, and give us proof and example, what course of life, what kind of
men you are best pleased withal. Therefore you have not as yet accepted of the
Censourship or Superintendency of manners, because you like better to work
upon our dispositions by benefits, then by remedies; besides I know not if a
Prince contribute more to manners, that suffers men to be good, or that This
touches the perpetual Censourships of Domitian, who being himself most
vicious compelled others to do well; thus as Censour he put Caecilius Rufinus
from his place in Senate, because he used to dance; and though Claudius Pacatus
was de facto, a Centurion, yet proof being brought that he was de jure a
Slave, Domitian by his Censour's power restored him to his Lord Dion.
compells them. We are all flexible and ductile where the Prince draws us, and
follow him where he leads, for we are ambitious to be indeared to, and
approved of him, which those that are not like him have hoped for in vain; and
by continuation of obsequiousness we are come to that pass, that almost all
live according to the precedent of one man's manners. Besides we are not so ill
natured, that we which can be imitatours of a bad Prince, cannot imitate a
good. Do you, Caesar, but go forwards, and your designs and actions shall
have the force and effect of a Censourship. For the life of a Prince is a
Censourship, and that perpetual, by that we are directed, upon that our eyes
are fixed, nor have we so much need of precept, as example: because fear is an
unfaithful guide to virtue; men are better instructed by examples, which
primarily have in them this good, that they show what is commanded may be done.
And what terror could effect that, which respect to you has brought about?
some one got the people to suffer the spectacle of The Pantomimes were such as
our fools in plays, or the Italian Pantalounes, Imitatours of all garbes,
postures and tones how wanton soever.
Pantomimes to be taken away, but yet he got it not as he desired; you
entreated what another enforced, and that became a favor which had been
necessity. Nor were you less unanimously petitioned to take them away, then
your Father was to restore them. And both your acts were well, for they ought
to be restored that were taken away by an evil Prince, and when they were
restored, to be taken away again. For in what ill men do well, this course is
to be held, that it may appear the author is displeasing, not the action. The
same people therefore that were sometimes spectatours and applauders of a
mimicke Caesar, now dislike the Pantomimes, and condemn effeminate arts and
studies misbecoming the Times. From which premises we may conclude the
discipline of Princes takes with the very vulgar, since if he alone do a
severe act, they all will do the like. Increase this glory, Caesar, won by
your gravity. And what formerly was called compulsion and command, shall be now
styled manners. Their own vices are corrected by them that ought themselves to
be corrected, and those very men are the reformers that should have been
reformed. None therefore complaynes of your severity, yet all have freedom to
complain. But notwithstanding that men do not less complain of any Prince,
then of him that allows them greatest freedom: yet [so far we are from
cause of complaint, that] there is nothing in your times that causes not a
general rejoicing. The good are advanced, the evil (which is the calmest
condition of an Empire) neither For they know the good will not be Informers,
and they themselve dare not.
fear, nor are feared. You cure our errors, but we our selves beseech you;
those whom you make good, you do it with this honor to your self, that it
appears you have not compelled them. What the life? what the manners of our
youth? how prince-like do you form them? what honor do you to Such as Pliny's
tutor Quintilian, who publicly taught Rhetorike in Trajan's reign.
Rhetoric Masters, what advancement do you give As that noble Philosopher
Plutarch Trajans Tutor.
Philosophyers! insomuch as under you our studyes have found Domitian
condemning Rusticus Arulinus merely because he was a philosopher and writ the
life of Thraseas, Herennius Senecio for writing the life of Helvidius Priscus,
and Pompusian for hanging up a Map of the world in his chamber, and reading
the Kings speeches in Livy, and other learned Professors he banished from
Rome. Dion.
life, spirit, and their native Country, which the barbarity of former Ages
punished with exile; when the Prince, conscious of a world of his own vices,
banished vice-persecuting arts, not so much for hate, as fear; but you have
those very arts in your Iuv. 7. Sat. Caesar is both our studyes cause and end,
For he alone is the sad Muses friend.
embraces, in your eye, and in your ear. For you do whatsoever they enjoyne,
and Iuvenal Sat. Youth^s study, Caesar's bounty spurrs you on, That seeks but
matter it may work upon.
love them as much as you are approved of by them. Does not every professor in
humanity admiring all things in you, especially extol your facility in giving
of access? With a great soul your father over the Palace gates set up the
title of public buildings, but vainly, unless he had adopted one that might
live as in public. How well do your manners suite with that inscription,
although indeed it looks as if no other had engraven the title. For what Court
of Justice, what temple is so open? not the Capitol, the very place of your
adoption is more public, more every bodies, no bolts, no degrees of contumely,
and having passed a thousand doors, yet to meet with an affront and be locked
out. A great stillness is before and behind you, but the greatest is about your
person, and every where such silence such Civility, that the Princes Court may
be a pattern of modesty and tranquillity to narrow Lares, and private
dwellings. But you your self how you receive us all, how you stay among us! so
that in so many cares of government you spend a great part of the day as if you
had no business. we therefore come not running to Court, as formerly, See the
Carriage of the Senators, when Domitian sent for them to advise him how the
great Turbut should be dressed. Iuv. Sat. 4. For which in such have and
astonishment, For them our mighty General had sent etc.
astonished; nor as if we should loose our head if we mended not our paces; but
secure and cheerful, at our own convenient leisure; and when the Prince
vouschafes his presence, many times there is something as more necessary that
detayneth us at home. Yet to you we are always to be excused, never to be
accused. for you know it is every ones joy to see you, to attend you
frequently, and therefore you do us this honor the freer and the longer. Nor
does Retirement, as when Tiberius Withdrew with the Asstrologers to Caprae.
Iuv. Sat. 10. where he sitts, Throned on a rock with his Chaldaean Wits.
retirement and Solitude such as this of Domitians which he proceeds to
describe.
solitude follow your admissions; we make you tarry for us, and stay with you;
as if the Court were a house common to us all, which lately that most cruel
monster had fortified with multiplicity of terror, when lurking as it were in
a kind of den, now he licked up his kinsmens blood, now sallied forth to
worry and devour the noblest Romans. Horror and threatening waited at his
gates, and the same fear seized the admitted, and those that were Which were
the noblest persons, this Iuv. observes Sat. 4. The presence hinges nimbly
turn about. The Fish goes in, the Senate wait w thout.
kept out. Then he himself was terrible to meet or to behold, pride in his
forehead, fury in his eyes, a feminine palenesse in his body, impudence in his
face floating upon much Tacitus l. XII. notes this Color in Domitian, and
says; by those that knew him not, his frequent blushes were taken for modesty.
sanguine color, none durst make approaches, none durst speak to him, still
keeping himself retired and in the dark, never coming abroad out of his
solitude, unless it were to make a solitude. Yet within those walls and works
he Maintaining in his house the Conspiratours against him, to wit, Stephanus
freed-man to his sister Domitilla (whom his tyranny had then made a widow)
Parthenius, Saturius Entellus, Claudius Cornicularius, and Maximus Parthenus,
his domestikes.
harbored plots and stratagems against his own life, and enclosed the
revenger of his mischiefs, God. His punishment broke through the guards,
through the narrow and obstructed passages as easy as if the doors had been
opened, and they invited over the thresholds, then he had no His style of
Dominus and Deus noster could not then protect him; Pliny might very well have
added, it was that Lord and God whose titles he usurped that destroyed him by the
hands of those wicked Instruments.
Divinity, no inaccessible and bloody withdrawing rooms where he retired for
fear, and pride, and hatred of mankind. How much safer, how much securer now is
the same house, since it came to be defended not with solitude and trenches,
nor the guards of cruelty, but of love. Do we not therefore learn this by
experience, that the surest guard is the Princ'es innocence. This is the
inexpugnable fort, this is the impregnable bulwark, not to need a bulwark. In
vain he incompasseth himself with terror that is not encompassed with love;
for by arms, arms are provoked. But do you only spend the serious part of the
day in our eyes and assemblyes? In your recreations is there not present the
same frequency, the same society? do you not always eat in public? is not
your table common? is there not a mutual pleasure when you feast us? do you
not invite and answer our discourse? your very meal time when your temperance
contracts it for your self, does not your humanity lengthen it out for us?
for you do not fill your self alone at For the ninth hour (being our three in
the afternoon) was the Romans meal i am.
noone day, and then stand over as supervisour and Censurer of your guests, nor
being Suetonius T. says. Domition used so to overeate himself at dinner that
he durst venture upon nothing at supper unless it were an apple or some little
running collation.
full and flatuous your self, do you not so much bid your friends to your
table, as affront them with the meats you scorn to touch, nor, hardly
disguising that proud hypocrisy of entertainment, do you hasten away again to
clandestine gluttony, and secret rarityes? We therefore admire not your gold
and silver plate, nor the exquisite wit and invention of your dishes, but the
sincerity and sweetness of your entertainment; in which is no satiety, all
your professions being sincere and true, and adorned with gravity. For neither
the mysteries of foreign Such as the Mathematicians instilled into Tiberius.
superstition, nor obscene Like to that which Juvenal excludes from his own
Table. Sa^. 11. perhaps thou do expect that I should bring the Spanish
Courtezans to dance and sing. ex paulo inferius. The poor house is not taken
with their joys. Their obscene Songs and Castinetta's noise.
petulancy waits at our Princes table, but a gracious welcome, free mirth, and
the honor of learning. Thus, your sleeps are sparing and short, and your love
to us makes you think no time more tedious, then that which you spend out of
our sight, but we that enjoy what is yours as freely as what we have our selves,
how absolute is our own propriety? For you turn not out the old Lords to
enclose every Like Nero, who designed a Fish Pond in Campana from that
Promontory now called Monte Meseno, to Lago di Tripergola, then Avernus or
Pluto's Lake, to be covered over head, and galleried about that should
comprehend all the warm water of Baiae, and likewise began a Lake, like a sea
shoared with a City, enclosing groves, vineyards, pastures, and woods,
replenished with all kinds of beasts, tame and wild. These disseisures kept by
Nero's successors, Traian restored to the right owners.
pond, every lake, nay every forest, making your title boundless. Nor do the
floods, the fountains, and the sea, serve now for one man's prospect. Yet what
does Caesar see that is not his? and now at last the Empire of the Prince is
greater then his Patrimony: For he bestows upon his Empire many things that
were his Patrimony, which former Princes kept in their possessions, not that
they might enjoy them, but lest another should. Therefore into the mansions and
seats of Noblemen, their noble Lords return; nor are the houses of great
persons possessed by a servant, rather spoiled then inhabited, nor fall they to
the ground in sordid ruins. We may see fair houses, their scituations brushed
up, rebeautified, enlarged, and flourishing: You merit highly Caesar, not only
of men, but even of houses, to arrest ruin, to expel solitude, and vindicate
great works from destruction with the same gallant soul wherewith they first
were built. Even those mute and senseless creatures seem to have a sense of
joy, that they are neat, that they are frequented, that at last they belong to
a Lord, not to a servant. Traian.
Caesar authorizes a vast Inventory of those goods to be exposed to sale that
were the detested avarice of him Domit^an.
that coveted so much when he had so much superfluous. Then it was Rich men, as
I have formerly noted, being sentenced only for being rich and consequently
dangerous to the S^ate.
death to have a larger house, a fairer Villa. Now the Prince himself seeks
out, and brings Lords into the self same houses. Those sometimes N ro's
Gardens.
gardens of a mighty Emperor, that no bodies but Caesar's He understands not
the very Suburbs of Rome, but the Town of Alba, distant from the City 140
furlongs, where Domitan usually kept his Court.
suburbs, we bargain for, buy, and people it. So great is the Princes
goodness, so great the security of the times, that he thinks us worthy of
imperial possessions, and we fear not to be thought so. Nor do you only
grant your Subjects leave to purchase, but you give and bestow upon them many
handsome and beneficial things, those very things, I mean, to which you were
chosen, to which you were adopted; you transfer what was judiciously made
over to you, and you believe nothing to be more your own, then what you enjoy
by the proxy of your friends. You your self are as thrifty in building, as
careful in preserving. Therefore the City is not with the carriages Juv.
paints out these carriages exactly, Sta. 3. Now meets he car^s where the tall
firre-trees quake; Now some that pine-trees at the people shake.

Suppose the axel-tree should break that bears Ligurian stones, if poured
about his ears.

That mountain should thy shivered slave intombe. What think thou of his
carcass would become. Where any limb lies who can find the hole? His body
sure would vanish l ke h s soul.


of monstrous stones, as formerly, put into an earthquake, our houses now stand
safe, nor are our temples feverish. It seems you think that which you
received as successor to a most frugall Prince, to be enough, and too much for
you that you can part with some of that he left as necessary. Besides your
Father when he debarred himself of what the fortune of the Empire gave him,
did it safely because he was Yours that would have provided for your father
Nerva, if he had given away all, as he did a great part of his possessions.
your Father. But how magnificent are you toward the public! Here Ports,
there Temples, are dispatched with that secret speed, as one would think them
not built, but repaired only: here those vast flankers of the In their great
Show-place, the Circus, the Romans beheld horse-matches, coach-races,
sword-play, with all kinds of presentiments. It was at first flanked with
pent-houses for the Spectatours, then galleried about with 30 distinct Fori by
Tarquinius Priscus, and now beautified and enlarged with five thousand benches
by Traian, with this Inscription. vt populo Romano sufficeret. Dion.
Circus that compare in beauty with the temples: It is now a show-place worthy
the Conquerours of the world, it self being a sight no less rare then what
from thence is seen. But to behold the Architecture shows not fairer, then to
behold the Princes and peoples benches of the self same model, since there is
now in the whole fabric but one face, all even and equal. Nor is Caesar's
seat more his own, then the spectatours seats are theirs. You therefore and
your Subjects freely view one another. They have not the honor now to see the
Princes private box; but to see the Prince himself sitting among his people:
his people, on whom he has bestowed the addition of five thousand benches, for
you have here increased their number as you did in the Congiary; and have thus
likewise encouraged them to multiply themselves hereafter, confident of your
Magnificence. If one of these Princely gifts had been vouchsafed by another, he
had long since worn a glory on his head circled about with sun beams, his
throne of gold or Ivory had been set among the Gods, and invocation made unto
him on higher altars and with greater sacrifices. You come not into the Temple
but to pray, the honors you let your Statues have is to wait without the
Temple, to stand centrie for the Gods, and to be preferred before the marble
pillars. So the Gods with greatest reverence are adored by men, since you have
not aspired to be a God. Therefore in the porch of Jupiter the best and
greatest, we see one or two of your Statues, and those brass, but not long
ago every door, every step the whole pavement of the Temple shined, or
rather was polluted with gold and silver, when the Images of the Gods were
grown sordid by mixing with the statues of an Domitian who (as I have noted)
lived in incest with his Niece Julia.
incestuous Prince. Therefore your brazen ones, and those but few, remain and
shall remain, so long as the Temple it self continues, but their golden ones,
and those innumerable are ruined, and dyed Sacrifices to the public joy.
'Twas gallant sport to knock the ground and those proud heads together, to pick
holes in them with swords, to hew them with hatchets, as if at every stroke
blood and pain had been to follow. None, at the too late arrival of his
comforts, was so modest in his joy, but he thought it a kind of revenge to see
their torn limbs, their dismembered joints; Lastly their cruel and horrid
Images cast into the flame and This melting of Statues for use, Juv. describes
Sat. 10. Their Chariot-wheeles groan under th'Axes stroke, And even their
Innocent horses legs are broke, The fire to crackling flames the bellows
turns. The head adored by the people burns; The great Sejanus melts, and of
the face, Which of the whole world had the second place, Basins and Ewres,
Pots, Frying-pans are made --
melted, their terror and threatening changed, and fitted for man's use and
pleasure: With like reverence to the Deity; you, Caesar, will not suffer us to
give thanks for your goodness to your Genius in your As Domitian commanded,
who caused a woman to be put to death for undressing her self before his
Statues Dion. who says he filled the world with his silver and golden statues,
but concludes (as Pliny here) that they were broke, and sold, and a vast sum of
money raised out of their conflation.
statues, but to the divinity of Jupiter, the best and greatest; what we are
indebted to you we pay to him, and acknowledge your well doing to be his gift
that gave us you. Whereas formerly mighty flocks of Sacrifices so crowded the
high way to the Capitol, that a great part of them was enforced to turn back
and and seek out blind Lanes to get thither, when our Domitian's whose Deity
was so entitled.
Lord's feirce Images were worshipped with as much blood of beasts, as he shed
blood of men. My Lords, all I have or shall speak of former Princes, tends
only so far as to show what customary and long corrupted manners our parent
has corrected and reformed. Moreover, those praises want their beauty that are
not shadowed with comparison. Besides, it is the general duty of pious
Subjects toward their best Emperor to tax those that were unlike him, for
they cannot sufficiently love good Princes, that disrelish not the evil. Add,
that no merit of our Emperor is more great and glorious, then that it is safe
under him to speak against ill Princes. Has our grief forgotten the late
Epaphroditus Nero's freedman, whom Domitian had once acquitted, he then
executed, charging him as accessory to Nero's death, that punishing him, it
might beforehand be a premonition of terror to his own freed-men not to assist
him if he should entreat them. Dion.
revenge for Nero? Can I conceive he would permit Nero's fame and life to be
censured that did revenge his death? and would not interpret that to be spoken
of himself, which was spoken of one so like him. Therefore (Caesar) you have
equaled, nay exceeded the most of your bounties, that you permit us daily,
both to vindicate our selves of our evil Emperors for the time past, and to
admonish future Princes, by their example, that there is no place, no time,
wherein the spirits of Tyrants can rest quiet from the execrations of
posterity: Therefore, My Lords, since we may as boldly utter our grief, as our
joy, let us likewise mourn for what we have suffered. We may do both together
under a good Prince; This let our secret discourses do, this our public
speeches, this our thanksgivings, and let us remember the living Emperor is
then highest praised when his ill-deserving predecessors are reprehended; for,
when succession says nothing of an evil Prince, it is manifest he that succeeds
him is the like. And what place, then, was left for miserable Flattery was come
to an incredible height in Domitian's time, as you may see by the Fisher man
that speaks to him in Juv. Sat. 4. With speed thy stomach clear of common
meat, And this until thy time kept Turbut eat, 'Twould needs be caught,
could any Rascal gloss More plainly? yet this Peacocks-feathers rose. Nothing
so gross but will belief incline, When that powr's praised equals the powrs
Divine.
flattery, when the praises of Emperors were celebrated in plays, at
banquets, and in jigges, with all kind of broken and effeminate voices, garbs
and fashions. But what shame, that at the same time they should be praised in
the Scene and in the Senate; by the Player and by the Consul? Far from your
praises you have removed all those mock-Arts; serious verses therefore, and the
eternal honor of our Annals, not a short and lascivious speech paies
veneration to your name; nay the stages themselves rise up to do you honor,
since the scenes were silent. But why do I make this a wonder? When those very
honors which we offer you, either you take them very sparingly, or not at all.
Of old, nothing so vulgar or trivial was agitated in Senate, but the
proceedings were hindered with the praise of Princes, a necessity lying upon
every Senator, first to pass his vote for them. We consulted about increasing
the number of Gladiators, about instituting a college of Smithes; and as if
the bounds of the Empire had been enlarged, we dedicated to the names of
Caesar's now mighty Arches with inscriptions which Temples scarce could hold now
the Because Domitia^ was born in October he named that month Domitian. Dion.
He likewise named September Germanicus, from the style which he had assumed.
months of the year, two or three at once; all which they suffered, and as if
they had deserved it, rejoyc't: But now, which of us, forgetting the cause in
agitation, passes his vote in honor of the Prince? This is the praise of your
moderation, and our constancy, that we obey you by assembling in Senate, not
to flatter you, but for the use and offices of Justice; and that being to do
our duties to you, we owe this to your candor and truth, that we may believe
that you accept Contrary to the practice of Tiberius and Domitian, whose
Letters and speeches were no remonstrances of their intentions.
what is pleasing, and refuse what you dislike. We begin and end our
consultations so, as we neither might begin nor end them under another
Prince. For true it is, there have been others that received not diverse
honors decreed by us, none before you was of so great a Soul, that we believe
he wished them vndecreed. And truly should we compare with the necessity of
former times, we should be much exceeded. For dissimulation is more ingenious,
then truth, servitude then liberty, fear then love; Besides, all invention
being long since spent in flattery, no other new honor remains for us to give
you, but only to take the boldness sometimes to say nothing. Notwithstanding
if at any time our piety break silence, it prevails upon your modesty;
Whatsoever we decree, you refuse not, that it may appear, you have not, out of
pride and disdain, waved the highest honors, that do not scorn the lowest.
This, Caesar, is more honor to you, then if you refused all; for to refuse all
argues ambition, but it is moderation to choose the smallest; which temper of
yours is both a benefit to us and to the Treasury; you thereby limiting the
expense thereof, not drayning it, to be replenished with the fortunes of the
innocent. Your effigies therefore stand, as those of old that were dedicated to
private persons for their glorious merits toward the public. We see the
Statues of our Caesar made of the same matter with the L. Brutus (that expelled
the Tarquins) had a brazen Statue set up in the Capitol. M. Brutus, that
conspired against Caesar) his Statue was at Millain. Plutarch Furtus Camillus
that preserved Rome from the victorious Galls, his Statue stood in the place
for Orations, Pliny lib. 24.
Brutuses, with the Camilli; nor does the cause differ, for they expelled the
tyrants, and beat the victorius enemy from our walls; you have banished and
removed tyranny it self and all the other fruits of our captivity, and taken
the place of a Prince, lest there should be room left for a Tyrant. And when I
look into your wisdom I less wonder at your shunning or moderating those
mortal and frail titles, for you know wherein the true and eternal glory of
a Prince consists, and where those honors are, over which no flames, no time,
no successors have power. For triumphall Arches and Statues; nay even Altars
and Temples oblivion ruins and obscures, posterity neglects and censures.
Contrarily the contemner of ambition, the conqueror and brideler of unlimited
power the mind flourishes in age, nor is by any more extolled, then by those
whom it cannot advantage, the succeeding times. A Prince therefore should not
covet fame which is eternal, for that he needs must have, but which is good;
and that is perpetuated, not by Images and Statues, but by virtue and merit.
But these trifles, the form and figure of a Prince, are not expressed so
lively and venerably in gold or silver, as in the hearts of men, wherein you
are engraven to the life, your amiable looks and cheerful aspect being
printed in the tongues, eyes and souls of all men. I conceive your Lordships
have already taken notice that I make no choice of my discourse, for my design
is to praise the Prince, not the Prince's actions; for the evil do many
things prayse-worthy, but the man himself cannot be praised, unless he be
excellently good. Therefore, dread Sovereign, you have no glory greater, then
that in the presentation of our thanks we need to conceal nothing, to omit
nothing. For what is there in your reign that any speaker should disguise or
pass it over? For what moment, nay what point of time has been fruitless in
benefits, or void of glory? Are not all of such a nature, that he appears to
praise you best, that speaks truth most sincerely. Which is the reason that my
Oration grows almost boundless, and yet I have not gone through your second
year. How much have I spoken of your moderation, and yet how much more
remains! as that of receiving your second Consulship, because the Prince your
In Trajan's first Consulship (under Domitian) his Colleague was Glabrio, in his
second Consulship the Emp^ Nerva his adopted Father Vitruvius.
Father conferred it. But after the Gods had transferred the Sovereign power
to you, and with all other things the free disposal of your self, you refused
a third Consulship, when you knew so well how to discharge the office. It is a
great act to wave honor, a greater to put off glory. Should I admire your
Consulship executed, or refused. Executed not upon idle Couches, and in the
private bosom of peace here in town, but upon the borders of Germany.
barbarous Nations, as That were both Consuls and Generals.
those were wont to do that used to change the long purple Robe, for the short
purple Cassocke, and to discover unknown lands by victories. It was honorable
for the Empire, glorious for your self, when our confederates made their
addresses to you, in their own Country, in their own habitations. How comely
showed the Consul's face, when for a long time his tribunal was erected upon
the living turfe, nor attended with our The Axe in the midst of the bundle of
rods, still borne by the Lectors, before the Consul, signifying the different
punishment of capital and petty offenders.
fasces only, but with the honor of our Javelins headed with a triangular iron
of nine ounces, a weapon peculiar to the Roman Foot.
Piles and Ensigns. The Majesty of the Judge, was increased by the various
habits of Petitioners; and diversity of language, scarce any speaking but by
his interpreter. It Is magnificent to give the law to your Subjects, what to the
enemy! It shows gloriously to hear causes in the settled peace of the Forum,
what then to set the An Ivory Chair, which because when the Consul or Pretour
went abroad, it was carried along in a Chariot, was called Sella Curulis, the
Curule or Chariot-chaire.
Curule chair in wild Campanias, on the ground which you had conquered? and to
overlooke the threatening banks of Danubius safe and quiet? what to despise the
fury of Barbarians, and to check their hostile terror, not more with the show
of arms, then of gowns. Nor did our legions reverence you only in your The
first Cohort ever bore in their sheilds the Emperors Image. Vegetius.
images, but saluted the General himself, that saw and heard them; and that
name which others deserved for conquering, you merited for despising of the
enemy. That is the praise of your executed; and this of your adjourned
Consulship, that it was the beginning of your reign, so as now full of, and
therefore excused from honor, you were enforced to refuse the Consulship,
which our new Emperors, when others have been elected, took unto themselves.
There was one, that in the end of his reign, had such a longing to the place,
as when the I suppose he means the Consulship of Traian's first Colleague, M.
Acilius Glabrio, whom Domitian banished, and himself supplied his place.
Consulship was almost ended he wrested the remainder into his own hands. This
honor therefore, which both at their beginning and ending Princes so covet,
that they snatch it away, you (when the place was void) left to Making Consuls
C. Socius Senecio 11. and A. Cornelius Palma. Vitruvius.
private men. Was it that you envyed Trajan the third Consulship, or the Prince
the first? For the second, it is true, that when you had it you were an
Emperor, but yet under an Emperor, and therein you can attribute to your
self nothing, either of honor or example, but in your obedience. So then in
this City, which has seen the same men the fifth and sixth time Consuls, not
such as were in our expiring liberty, created by force and tumult, but such, as
retired and Such as L. Quintius Cincinnatus (who Pliny presently names) who^
being at work in his grounds beyond Tyber was by messengers from the people of
Rome saluted Dictator.
absent, had the Consulship brought into the Country to them; In this very
City, have you, being Prince of mankind, refused a third Consulshippe. Was L
Papyrius for his unparalleld strength and agility of body surnamed Cursor, was
yet the most moderate man that lived, most favorable to the weaknesses of
others. This is the Papyrius whom L^vy endeavors to prove able to have
encountered Alexander, ^f he had attempted the conquest of the W^st.
Papirius himself, or Quintius more moderate? Augustus and Caesar, and Father
of your Country. But the Republique called them, what you? did not the same
Republique? did not the Senate, did not the very Consulship, that conceives it
self advanced and made greater by your acceptance. I do not set Dion, In
Domitian, says, he was so foolishly proud that he made himself Consul [which
Office ought but to continue for one yeare] ten years together.
him for your pattern, who by his continued Consulship, made a kind of long and
undistinguishable year, but I compare you to those who (we are sure) as often as
they were Consuls, were not so with relation to themselves. There was in the
Senate Virginius Rufus, who was Consul the third time with N^rva, and being
designed for his fourth Consulship by Trajan died before he was declared.
one that had thrice been Consul, when you refused your third Consulship. A
heavy task our votes would have imposed upon your modesty, that you the Prince
should be as often Consul, as your Senator; The refusal whereof would have
argued too much bashfulnesse, even when you were a private man, the son of a
Consular and a tryumphant Father: when he a third time is created Consul, does
he ascend? is it not his due? yea though he could plead no other merit, but
the nobility of his birth. Private persons therefore had the honor to open
the The Romans dated their Records and Deeds from Consulships, as we do from
kings Reigns, and the Consuls began with the year, in January.
year, and to unlock the The Roman Calendar began with the Consuls names,
proceeded with the Festivals, and Court days, which properly were the Fasti.
Calendar, and this likewise was an instance of liberty restored, that another
was Consul, and not Caesar. Thus the Tyrants being expelled, the free year
began, thus heretofore, servitude shaken off, our Calendar was inscribed with
the names of private men. Miserable they were in their ambition that continued
their Consulshippes like their Principality, yet seems it not to be more
their ambition, then their envy and malignitie, to ingrosse to themselves all
years, and not to put off that supreme ornament of the purple, but when it
was worn and soiled like their old robes. But in you, which shall I first
admire, magnanimity, or modesty, or bounty, It was magnanimity to abstain
from an honor so much affected by Princes, modesty to wave it, bounty to enjoy
it by others. But now it is time that you do a favor to the Consulship it
self, that by undertaking to manage it, you may make it greater; for still to
refuse, would bear an ambiguous interpretation, and rather signify, that you
thought it too mean. It is true, you refused it as the greatest, but none will
be so persuaded, unless sometimes you will likewise not refuse it. When you
excuse your self from triumphall Arches, from Trophies, from statues we may
pardon your modesty, for indeed those are dedicated to your self: But we now
make it our suite, that you will teach future Princes to renounce idleness, a
while to adjourne their pleasures, awhile, at least for a little while, to
awake out of their slumber of felicity, to put on our pretexted purple, (which
when they should have bestowed they have invaded) and to ascend the Sella
Curulis, [the Chariot tribunall] which it is fit they should possess; lastly,
to be indeed what they have coveted to seem, not to desire the name of Consul
only for the name. You have discharged a second Consulshippe, I know it, but
that you may allege, as a favor to our Armies, to our Provinces, to forreyne
nations, not to us. We have heard indeed, you have done all that concerns the
office of a Consul, but we have heard; It is reported you were most just, most
gracious, most patient, but it is reported. It Is fit, that sometimes we should
credit our own judgment, our own eyes, not always fame and rumor. How long
absent from one another shall we joy in you, give us leave to make trial,
whether that second Consulshippe have put no pride into you. Half a year has
much influence upon the manners of men, much more of Princes. Indeed, we say he
that has one virtue has all, yet we desire a proof, whether once again a
good Consul and a good Prince be one and the same thing. For besides the
difficulty of mannageing two, and both of them sovereign powers, there is
likewise diversity in the powers themselves, for that may become a Prince,
which a Consul must not do. But I see the cheifest reason that moved you, next
year, to refuse the Consulshippe, was, that you could not discharge it in your
absence; but now being restored to the City and our public wishes, wherein
can you clearlyer show us, what and how great the blessing was, that we
desired? It were little favor to Come into the Senate, unless you please to
assemble it, to be present, unless president, to hear us pass our votes,
unless you would give sentence. Would you as our Consul, in time restore to
i'ts majesty, that dread Tribunal? ascend. Would you have awefulnesse in the
Magistrate, authority in the Laws and modesty in the Petulant? sit in person
in the Senate. For so much as it would have concerned our Republike if you were
a private man, not to have you only our Consul unless you likewise were a
Senator, so much it concerns your self not to be only our Prince, unless you
likewise be our Consul. With these so many and prevalent reasons though our
Prince's modesty long strugled, yet at last it yielded; but how? not to equal
himself with private men, but to make private men his equals. For he a third
time received the Consulship, that he might a third time give it; for he knew
men's moderation, he knew their bashfullnesse that would not endure a third time
to be Consuls, unless a third time he were Consul with them. Anciently this
honor was bestowed and that sparingly upon adjutants to Generals, and
partners in their dangers, Vide sis (m)
which you have given to two particular men, that indeed have served you
faithfully and valiantly, but in the gown. Both their cares both their
industryes have laid an obligation Caesar upon you; but in a Prince it is rare
and seldom heard of, to think himself obliged, or thinking so to love. You
therefore, Caesar, owe and pay, but when a third time you make Consuls, you
think not in so doing, that you are a great Prince, but that you are not an
ungrateful friend. Nay even the low deservings of your subjects you raise
higher by the supremacy of your fortune, for you make every one thought to have
done you service according to the greatness of your retribution. What prayers
shall I make for such benignity? but that you may ever oblige, ever be obliged,
and leave it doubtful whether it were more expedient for your subjects to be
your debtors, or to have you theirs. Truly methought I saw that ancient Senate,
when one thrice Consul sitting, one a third time designed Consul stood to
desire suffrages. As great as they were then, so great are you. It happens
indeed that bodies though vast and high, approaching higher bodies then
themselves, decrease, in like manner the greatest subjects dignities compared
with your greatness, loose their height, and the nearer they ascend to your
elevation, the more they seem to descend from their own. Yet those, which
though you would you could not raise to your own height, you have yet placed
so conspicuously, as they appear as much above others, as below you: If a third
time you had made one Consul in the same year with your self, it had argued a
great soul. For as it is a declaration of felicity to have as much power as
will, so it is of greatness to have as much will, as power. Even he is to be
praised I must confess, that merited a third Consulshippe, but he more under
whom 'twas merited; he must be great and worthy of a history that received so
great a retribution, but he much greater that bestowed it. What shall I say
that in the year of your third Consulshippe you honored M. Corneliu Fronto
was Consul the third time when Traian entered upon his own third Consulship;
but who the other was, appears not to my reading.
two by making them Colleagues to your Sacred Majesty. That none can doubt, but
it was your only reason for proroguing of your Consulshippe, that it might
contain the Consulshippe of both, and make you awhole year Colleague to one of
them. Both received their second Consulshipps from your father, that is, how
much was that honor less, then what you give! Their but now resigned fasces
wandered yet before both their eyes, that solemn cry of their late ushering
Lictours rung yet in both their ears, when the chariot chair, when the purple
came again. As of old at the enemies approach, when the Republic brought to
extremity, required a known man of honor, we restored not the men to their
Consulshipps, but restored the very Consulshipps unto the men. Such is the
power of your goodness, that necessity and your bounty are excused from the
orders of the house. They have just now put off their pretexted purples, they
must on with them again, the Lictours were but now dismissed, they must be
called back. Is this the nature of a man? the power of a man? to renew our
joys, to revive our Iubily, and to give no rest to our gratulations, nor to
suffer a further intervall of reattaining the Consulshipps, then the very
instant time of resignation. This may you ever do, nor may your mind or fortune
ever be wearied in this action. May you give third Consulships to many, and
when you have given them to many, may there remain still more that deserve
them at your hands. In all the benefits that are bestowed upon deservers the
joy is not more their own, then theirs that are of like deserts; but from the
Consulships of these two not to any particulars, but to all the Senate flowed
so great joy as they conceived the same honor bestowed upon and received by
themselves. For indeed these were they that the Senate first elected, when they
chose men to bring down the public expenses. This is it therefore, this is it
that so much indeared them to Caesar. Have we not lately made too many trialls,
that the Senate's judgment could with the Prince do neither good nor harm. A
little while a go was any thing more fatal, then if the Prince had that way a
suspicion? This man the Senate approves of, this is in favor with the Senate,
he hated our favorites, and we his. Now the Prince and Senate contend which
should most love worthy persons, and indeare each other we make mutual
remonstrances, we give mutual evidence, and which is the greatest argument of
our mutual affection we both love the same. Therefore, my Lords, publish your
affections, and affect with constancy. You need not dissemble your good
opinion now for fear it hurt your selves, nor conceal your dislike lest it
profit others. For Caesar likes and disliketh with the Senate. When you are
present, when you are absent, he advises with you, he made those thrice
Consuls whom you had elected, and made them so, as they were elected by you.
Both his favors appear great, whether he love those best whom he knows
dearest to us, or preferres none before them, though he may love some better.
Rewards are proposed to old men, examples to young men: they may at length
freely go and give visits at their friends secure and open houses, every one
welcomes the men that are in esteem with the Senate; such a one most deserves
the Prince, for he thinks the honor that is done to any good man, done unto
himself, nor places he any glory in being greater then all, unless they also
be great that must confess him greater. Caesar, continue in the reason of that
resolution, and esteem us such as every ones fame is; To that vouchsafe your
ear and eye, regard not clandestine estimations and whispers, that do intrappe
none sooner, then such as listen to them. It Is better confiding in generals
then particulars. For particulars may cosen and be Cosened; none has deceived
all, all have deceived none. I now return to your Consulship, though many
things there be appertaining, yet antecedent to it. First that you were present
at your Election, not only as The Candidati (so named from their white or
chalked gowns which they wore in the Election time) were thos^ that stood in
comp^^ior for Offices. from h^re Quin^i^an draws his M^^^phor when he calls a
Scholar a Candidate of Eloquence; but his Scholar Pliny goes higher here, and
calls Trajan a Candidate of Immortality, and Glory, and Example.
Candidate of the Consulship, but of immortality, and glory, and example; which
good Princes cannot but imitate, nor evil but admire. The people of Rome
behold you in that The Justice-hall wherein stood the Tribun all erected on
high lik^ our Pulpits, and within that was set the curule or chariot chair of
Ivory.
place of their ancient power, where you patiently endured those tedious
Doubtless he means the prayers or Hymns at Election, which were (by
Institute) to be read by the president of the Assemblies; this appears
clearly toward the end of the Panegyric, where he says, You vouchsafed to
be President at our Election, and to read unto us those most sacred Verses.
verses read before Election, and that now not fained nor ridiculous demurr,
and you were made Consul after the same manner as you make one of us. Where was
a Prince among your Predecessors that either did that honor to the
Consulshippe, or to the people? Did not others dull with sleep and As Nero,
who (says Suet Tranquillus) spunne out his dinner from nooneday to midnight;
this fat Montanus remembered Juv. Sat. 4. Who the old court-riot knew And Nero's
mid-nights and a hunger new When Falerne wine inflamed the lights --
overcloyed with their last nights supper, make the messengers of their
Election wait? As Caligula who stepped not above; hours a night, and Domitian,
who walked much in the night time, whom all that follows here concerns, as you
may see by naming of Danubius and the Rheyne, incestuous nights etc.
Others waking indeed, and sleeplesse, but within the walls of their
bed-chambers ploting the banishment, and murder of those very Consuls that
declared them Consuls. O depraved ambition and ignorant of true Majesty! to
covet the honor thou so disdaignest, to disdaigne the honor thou so covetest;
and when out of thy gardens thou see the feilds and the Election, yet to be
so absent from them, as if thou were to pass a ford in Danubius, or the Rhene!
Do thou hate the suffrages of thy desired honor? and being contented to have
news brought of thy Consulshippe will thou not permit a free City to
dissemble bondage? lastly, do thou conceal and hide thy self from the
Election, as if they were not to give thee a Consulshippe, but to deprive thee
of thy Empire? Our proudest Lords had this persuasion, that they ceased to be
Princes, if they did any thing like a Senator Yet many kept away not so much
out of pride, as out of fear, whether (being guilty of adulterous and
incestuous nights,) they might presume to pollute the auguryes and with their
wicked feet to contaminate the sacred Campus Martius, the Election place
consecrated to the God Mars.
Feilds. They had not heaven and earth in such contempt, as in that spacious
plain they durst stand the darted eyes of men and Gods. On the contrary your
moderation persuades you to be present, both when religion is to be excercised
toward the Gods and sentence passed by men. Others before they received, but
you merited the Consulshippe in your very manner of receiving it; the solemn
form was needless if you had considered you self as a Prince, and now the
assembly was dissolving, when you (to the amazement of us all) came up to the
Consuls Chair, offering your self to take the The matter of the oath taken by
the Consul is expressed in the the words following, viz. that he devoted his
head and his house to the wrath of heaven, if (during the year of his
Consulship) he did any thing contrary to Law.
oath in words unknown to Princes, but when they enforced others to swear.
You see how necessary it was, not to refuse, for we should never have imagined
you would have done it, if you had refused the Consulshippe. My Lords, I am
astonished, nor can yet sufficiently credit my own eyes or ears, but now and
then I question my self if I have truly heard and seen it. Our The Roman
Emperors were invested in the Titles of Caesar Augustus Pontifex Maximus, and
had Tribunician and Proconsular power annexed to their crowns.
Emperor, and Caesar, and Augustus, and Pontifex Maximus rose up, and the
Consul sat while the Prince stood before him, and sat untroubled unmoved,
and as if he had been accustomed so to do. Nay sitting he administered the
Oath, and the Prince took it, and clearly uttered words wherein he devoted
his head and his house to the Gods wrath, if his Oath were violated. Your
glory, Caesar, is mighty and the same whether future Princes shall or shall not
do it, what words are worthy to express, that you would do the same the third
time, as when you first were Consul! the same when a Prince as when a private
man, the same when an Emperor as when a Subject to an Emperor. Now I confess
I know not what was most be coming, that you should do it without or with a
The ear of antiquity in things sacred, was so great that they ordained a
prompter or one that should read it softly to those that were to pronounce it
clearly, as you may perceive by the great Lady that made her offering for the
fiddler. Juv. Sa^. 6. She stood at the Altar, as the manner is. And spoke the
prompted words of Sacrifice.
prompter. In the Forum likewise you subjected your self to the Laws which no
Legislator ever made for Princes. But you will have your privilege no greater
then a Subjects, therefore we will have it greater then an Emperors. This is
the first time I ever heard, the first I ever knew; we have no For he has
descended to be a Consul.
Prince, we have Laws, but Laws Because as Consul he had subjected himself
by Oath unto the Laws
above the Prince; Caesar the Consul may not do what others may, he swears to
observe the Laws in presence of the Gods (for where are they more present then
with Caesar?) he swears in presence of the men that are to swear the same,
nor is he ignorant that none ought more religiously to keep his oath, then he
that is most concerned not to break it. And therefore when you were to resign
your Consulship, you made oath you had done nothing contrary to Law. It was a
great act to make such a promise, but a greater to perform it, Then to go so
often to our Courts of Justice, in the Forum, and make a new path to that place
unascended by the pride of Princes, there to receive, there to lay down your
Magistracy, how worthy your self, how different was it from their customs, by
whom their for a few days exercised (nay unexercised) Consulship was
disclaimed by Edict! The like they did for the convention of Senate, for the
Tribunal, for the Oath, that so the last might be agreeable to the first, and
they only known to have been Consuls, because others were not. My Lords, I
have not passed over our Princes Consulship, but I have brought together unto
this one place all that concerned his Oath. For we must not as in a barren
subject, spinne out and scatter the same species of praise, and handle one
thing twice. In the glorious dawning of the first day of your third
Consulshippe, when you came unto the Senate, now severallie, now universallie
you encouraged us all to resume our liberty, to take upon us, as it were, the
care of the common Empire, to be vigilant and intend the public benefit. All
before you said the very self same things, but none before you was believed.
There was yet floating in our eyes the shipwracks of many Senators, whom
(flattered with such promised Calmes) a sudden storm had sunk. For what Sea
so faithless as the You read in Domitian's Character (the words are Dion's) he
ever seemed to love him most, whose blood he most desired.
smiles of those Princes, that had so much seeming lenity, so much real
cunning, as it was easier to have them angry then propitious! But secure and
cheerful we execute whatsoever you command. You bid us use our freedom, we
take it; you bid us speak our thoughts, we do it; nor have we omitted it out
of any habitual sloth or natural dullness; It was terror, and fear, and
that miserable wisdom taught by dangers, that from the Commonwealth (but it
was indeed no Commonwealth) made us turn our eyes, our ears, and hearts. But
now strengthened by your hand, and relying on your promises, we open our lips
so long locked up in servitude, and let loose our tongues bridled in with so
many dangers. For you would have us such as you bid us be; in your
encouragements nothing is dissembled, or betraying; in short, nothing contrived
to undo the credulous, not without danger to the contriver, for never yet was
Prince deceived, but he himself had first deceived others. In this sense I
understood our public parent, when I observed his Hortatives, and the energy
of his pronunciation. For what imported that weight of sentences! How
inaffected was the truth of his words! What asseveration in his accent! What
affirmation in his look! What confirmation in his eyes, habit, meene, lastly
in his whole body! He therefore will be always mindful of what he has
encouraged us unto, and will remember that as often as we use the liberty he
gave us, we do but his commands. Nor will he hold them to be unwise that
confide in the freedom of these times, when he knew them to have done
otherwise under a bad Prince. We used to pray for preservation of the Empire,
and the subject, nay for preservation of Emperors, and for their sakes of the
Empire. We yet pray for the Empire in the same words, with these (worthy to be
noted) added to them, if you govern the Republicke well and for the benefit of
all. Vows for ever to be owed, for ever to be paid. The Republicke, Caesar,
has made a Covenant with the Gods of your own drawing, that their deities
should keep you in peace and safety, if you kept others so. If otherwise, that
they should draw away their eyes from the guard of your person, and leave you
to such prayers as are not made in public. Other Princes wished and endeavored
to survive the Republicke, to you your own health and safety is unpleasing, if
it go not along with the common health and safety. You suffer no prayer to be
made for you, unless expedient for those that pray it, and solemnly every
year you call a court of Gods (your Electours) to give sentence against you,
if you cease to be such as you were when they elected you. Thus with a great
and immaculate soul you article with the Gods to give you the protection you
deserve, knowing the Gods are the best Judges of your merit. Do you think, my
Lords, that day and night he considers not these, his own words, Truly if the
general good should so require, I have armed against my self the very hand of
the L. Licinius Sura from a Centurion, made Prefect of Praetorians by Traian,
to who^, when he put the sword in his hand, Traian said, Take this, and if I
govern well use it for me, if all, against me. And truly I do not wonder at
this personal confidence in one he so dearly loved (as you will see before
the end of the Panegyricke) when I consider Traian's nature, and how fa re he
trusted the very servants of Sura even when Sura himself was calumniated by
some other of the Emperors friends; for even then Traian dismissing his guard,
went to Sura's house, to supper, and calling first for Sura's Phisitio^ made
him wash his eyes, then sent for his barber and he shaved his beard, and next
day told those friends that suspected Sura, that if he had meant to kill him he
would undoubtedly have done it yesterday. Dion.
Captain of my Guard, nor do I either deprecate the anger of the Gods, or
pray for their connivance, nay I pray that I may command him nothing
prejudicial to the Empire, or if I do, that he may not obey it; Therefore
you, Caesar, reap the glorious fruit of safety by the Gods consent, for when
you condition the Gods should preserve you so long as you govern well, you are
sure you govern well so long as they preserve you. To you therefore shall the
day be joyful and secure, that distracted other Princes with cares and fears,
when in suspense and astonishment, not confident of our patience, from this and
that place they expected messengers of the public servitude; and if by chance
the waters, winds, or snow, had hindered them, presently they suspected what
they had deserved. Nor did their fear make any difference of persons; for when
by an evil Prince every worthy man is feared as a successor, there being none
but worthier, all must needs be feared. Your security no slownesse of
messengers, no stop of letters can suspend; you know that every where men are
sworn and bound to serve you, because you have sworn and bound your self to
protect them. No one but respects his own good. Indeed we love you for your
deserts, yet still we love you not for your sake, but our own. Nor ever,
Caesar, shall we see the day wherein our loyalty more then our benefit shall
engage our prayers. Protection for their own interest would derogate from
Princes. Let us now put the question why no Princes look into these secret
thoughts of ours, but only those we love not; for if the good observed us as
attentively as the bad, what joy, what exultation, what admiration of your
self would you find every where! what discourses of you even among women and
children in their private houses, sitting by their fires! you would know we
spare your tender ears, and that love and hate being contraries yet in this
agree that we love good Princes more intemperately, after we have more freely
hated bad ones. Yet you have had experience both of our affection and opinion,
as much as could be expressed in your presence, that day when you so prevented
the trouble and blushes of the Candidates, that no man's joy was encountered
with another sorrow; some went off the field with pleasure, others with hope,
many were to be gratulated, none to be comforted. Nor did you therefore
slowlier encourage our youth to stand for the Confulship, to supplicate the
Senate, and so to hope for honors from the Prince by their addresses to the
Senate. And if any want an example you have proposed your self to his
imitation. A hard example, Caesar, no more imitable by Candidates, then by
Princes. For what Candidate is more observant of the Senate for a day, then you
are for your life time, and then especially when you are to judge of
Candidates? Has any thing but that reverence you bear the Senate, moved you
to offer honors to our youth, due to their noble families, but paid before the
day? At length therefore Nobility is not obscured, but illustrated, by the
Prince. At length, Caesar nor terrifies, nor fears those nephews of great
men, those Descendents of Liberty, but amplifies and heightens them with early
honors, and restores them to their Ancestors. If there be any branch of an
ancient stock, he cherishes and brings it forth for the use of the Republicke.
Great names are now in honor with men, and fame recovered out of the
darkness of oblivion by Caesar's goodness, which has a property to preserve
and make Nobility. There was a Treasurer of a Province.
Questour of a Province among the Candidates, by whose care and industry a
great City had established their revenues by an excellent constitution, this
you your self in his behalf thought fit to allege unto the Senate. For in
the reign of our Prince whose virtue excells the greatness of his birth, why
should they be in a worse condition that deserve a noble Posterity, then they
that have had noble Ancestors? O you most worthy for ever thus to encourage
our Magistrates, nor do you make men good by the punishment of vice, but by
the reward of virtue. Our youth is enflamed and spirited to emulate what they
see you praise. Nor could any one be otherwise, when he knew whatsoever was
done abroad in the Provinces came entirely to your knowledge. It Is advantageous
(Caesar) for the Governors of Provinces to be confident there is prepared for
their piety and industry the greatest reward, their Princes love and suffrage.
But heretofore sincere and just natures were, though not depraved, yet
extremely dulled and cast down, with a miserable but true reputation. For
what difference, whether Caesar know not my good actions, or know but will not
take notice of them. This very negligence or malignity of Princes, when it gave
impunity to the evil, and promised no advancement to the good, deterred not
those from vice, yet deterred these from honor. But now if any one govern his
Province well, the dignity won by his merit is offered him; for to all li^^
^^en a field of honor and glory, out of which every man may reap his wishes,
and having reaped possess them. You have likewise, for the future, freed our
Provinces from the fear of injury, and necessity of accusations; for they that
give thanks to their Governors cannot possibly complain against them, and then
the Candidate knows, nothing can sooner advance him for the future, then the
good discharge of his past Magistracy. Magistracy by Magistracy, honor is
won by honor. I would not have Governors of Provinces to bring us the hands
of their friends, or flattering Petitions signed by courted persons, but to
show the Decrees of Colonies, the Decrees of Cities; That Cities, Countries and
Nations may not come to mix their suffrages with ours. The most efficacious
way of petitioning for a Candidate will be to give him thanks. Now with what
unanimous joy it affected the Senate, that still as you named a Candidate, you
met and kissed him, coming down into the fields as one that joyed them. Shall
I more admire you, or despise them who have made this favor seem so great?
When nailed as it were to their Curule chaires, they only vouchsafed their
hand, and that slow and stately, as if it were a never to be deserved honor.
A strange sight therefore was presented to our eyes, a Prince and a Candidate
standing on even ground, no difference between the receiver of honor and the
giver. Which act of yours with what unfeigned acclamations was it celebrated by
the whole Senate! You were so much more great, so much more sacred still; For
he that is supreme has only one way of rising higher, if he submit himself,
secure of his own greatness. Nor is there any thing that less endangers a
Prince's fortunes, then humility. To me, I must confess, your humanity seemed
not so rare as the way wherein you expressed it. Because when your eyes, your
voice, your hand were taken up with your Oration, yet as if you had commanded
another to speak it for you, you omitted not the least circumstance of
civility. Nay, when the names of the voted were to be approved of, you were one
of the approvers, and out of the Princes mouth passed the suffrage of a
Senator. And we that formerly rejoiced if the Prince would take our testimony,
the Prince's testimony was now given to us. Therefore while you affirmed the
men to be deserving, you made them so. Nor did you only approve of their
virtues, but of their election by the Senate, whose joy, even theirs, which you
had praised, exceeded not. Your very prayer, that the ordination of Magistrates
might well and happily succeed, was it not a prayer for your self? ought we
not to pay back those wishes? and lastly to beseech the Gods, that all you do,
or shall do, may be prosperous to you, the Commonwealth, and us, or (to
abbreviate the wish) to you alone, in whom both the Commonwealth and we
subsist? There was a time (and too long a time) when the Prince's and our
felicity and infelicity were contraries, with you we now communicate both joy
and grief; nor could we any more be happy without you, then you could without
us, and if you could, you had not (in the close of your prayers) added, that
the Gods would be so propitious to your vows, as you persevered to merit our
opinions. So primarilie sacred is your Subjects love in your esteem, that we
are in the first place, then the Gods; and you only desire the Gods may love
you, in case you be beloved by us. And truly former Princes ends have taught
us, that the Gods love them not, unless men love them. 'Twas hard to equal
this love of yours with praises, yet we have equalled it. What heat of love,
what fire, what flame raised in us those acclamations? It was not (Caesar) the
voice of our affection, but the voice of your merits, of your virtues, such as
no flattery e're invented, no terror ever yet expressed. Whom have we so
loved thus to counterfeit? Whom have we so loved thus declare our selves? You
know the necessity of servitude, when did you hear any thing of this kind?
When did you speak any thing like unto it? fear has a great and quick
invention, but such as appears done unwillinglie. Fear has one kind of wit,
security another; the invention of the dejected differs from that of the
cheerful, and that of the dissembler from them both: the miserable have their
dialect, the happy theirs, all proper and peculiar to themselves. Witness your
self, what joy in each man's countenance! neither the habit of the body, nor
the habit of the mind the same it was. Hence it was that all our houses were
made vocal, no place so secret so barricadoed, that kept out the clamor. Who
then leaped not over his threshold? who was sensible that he did so? many
things we did voluntarily, many things by instinct and compulsion (for even
joy it self has a compulsory power.) Was your modesty able to limit our
exultation? No; for the more you strove to quench it, the more it flamed, not
out of contumacie, but as it is in your power whether we shall rejoice, so it
is not in our powers how much. You your self testified the faith of our
acclamations, with the truth of your tears. We saw your eyes moistened, We saw
you blushing for joy, with so much blood in your cheeks, as you had modesty
in your heart, and this more inflamed our zeal to pray, that you might never
want the same cause of tears, never be less out of countenance. Let us to
these benches, as if they could answer, put the question; have they ever seen
a Prince's tears? the Senates tears they have seen often; you have burdened
future Princes, and undone our posterity, for they likewise will expect that
Princes should deserve like acclamations, and Princes will be offended that
they do not hear them. The world can speak nothing more proper to your
merit, then what was spoken by the whole Senate. O happy you, which we said not
in admiration of your fortune, but of your mind. For it is true felicity to
appear worthy of felicity. But, that day many things were spoken wisely and
gravely, this especially, Credit us, Credit your self. We spoke this with a
mighty confidence in our selves, but more in you; for one may deceive another,
but no one himself, let him but look into his life and ask himself what he
deserves. Besides, these very expressions gave us credit with the best Prince
which discredited us with the bad, for though we behaved our selves
affectionately toward them, yet they believed themselves they could not be
beloved. Again we prayed the Gods might so love you as you love us: Who would
pray thus upon a moderate affection either to themselves, or to their Prince?
We desired no greater good, but that the Gods would love us, as you do. Is It
not true, that with these acclamations we intermixed, O happy We! for what can
be happier then we are, that have now no need to wish our Prince may love us,
but the Gods equal with our Prince. This religiously devoted City, always
piously dependent on heaven's providence, conceives her happiness cannot be
increased, unless the Gods please to imitate Caesar. But why do I follow or
collect particulars, as if either my speech could contain, or my memory
comprehend them. Which, lest they should be intercepted by oblivion, your
Lordships have commanded they should be put into our public Records, and
likewise graven in brass. Heretofore Princes Orations only had such monuments,
but our acclamations were still enclosed within the walls of the Senate House,
for they were such as neither Senate nor Prince could glory in. But that these
acclamations should come to the cares of all men living, and be transmitted to
posterity, will suite both the public benefit and dignity. First, that the
whole world may know and be witness to our piety, then that it may appear we
dare censure both good and evil Princes in their life time; Lastly, that we
may experimentally demonstrate, that we have formerly been grateful but
unfortunate, not being suffered to express our gratitude. But with what
contention, what earnestnes, what clamor did we move you, that you would not
let our affections nor your merits be suppressed? Briefly that they might be
left as an example to the future, that Princes might learn to distinguish true
acclamations from false, and be obliged to you for the discovery. Princes now
are not to begin the way to good fame, but not to deviate from it, not to
remove flattery, but not to reduce it. They have a certain rule what they
shall do, and what they shall hear when it is done. Besides these prayers
wherein the Senate have joined with me, what shall I now pray for the Senate?
May that joy ever be inherent in your Soul, which then floated in your eyes.
May you love that day, but be the cause of one more joyful; may you deserve
again, and hear again (for the same words cannot be uttered but for the
same actions.) Then how like old Rome it was, how Consular; that the Senate by
your example sat three days together, and all that time you only executed the
office of a Consul? Every one might put to the question what he pleased, it was
free for any to dissent, to retract his judgment, to bestow his advice upon
the Commonwealth, we were all consulted, all numbered; not the first votes
carried it, but the best. But heretofore who durst speak, who durst open his
lips; save only those wretches that were first required to speak? the rest
dejected and astonished, did they not suffer a sedentarie necessity of
assenting with grief of Soul and horror of the flesh? One alone passed
Sentence, all complied with what they hated as unjust, and especially he that
did pronounce it; nothing so much displeasing a generality, as that which is
done (against their wills) as if it were generally approved of. Some Emperor,
happily for respect to the Senate brideled himself in this house, but no sooner
out of it, but he resumed the Princes power, scorning and disclaiming all
offices of a Consul. But our Prince was Consul, as if he had been nothing
else, and thought nothing below himself, unless it were below the Consul, and
so appeared in public as that he brought no show of State, no Domitian was
ushered with 24 Lictors
ushering tumult crowded up his way, he only stayed at door to consult the The
observation of the flight and chirping of Byrds was one part of the duty of the
Augur, who sat with his face to the East in his Laena (a gown lined with
furs, and bordered with purple and crimson) and having quartered the heavens
into regions, observed from whence the Byrds appeared, and pronounced not good
fortune without two lucky signs, but evil fortune with one unlucky token of
all the Roman Priests he only could not loose his office during life.
birds, and take admonitions from the Gods; none was disturbed, none thrust
aside; the passenger had so much freedom, the Lictours were so modest, that
oftentimes a crowd of strangers stopped both Prince and Consul: nay he himself
was so moderate in his office, so well tempered as we thought we saw the
comportment of some ancient and great Consul under the shape of a good Prince.
He went often to the Forum, but frequently to Marses fields, for he himself
discharged the Consuls office at the election of Consuls, and took as much
pleasure to declare them, as formerly he had done to be created. The Candidates
stood before the Curule chair of the Prince, as he had stood before the
Consuls, and the oath was given to them which had been lately taken by the
Prince, who knows the tie of that oath to be so great that he requires it of
others. The remainder of the day he spent in the Tribunal, and there, how great
a Religion of equity! how great a reverence of the Laws! some made addresses
to the Prince, he answered that he was the Consul. The right of no Office, no
ones authority was by him lessened, increased it was, for he referred many to
the Judges of Rome in the nature of our Lords chief Justices.
Praetours by the name of his Colleagues, not because it would be popular and
pleasing to the hearers, but because he so accounted them: he acknowledged so
much honor in that place, that he esteemed it no more for one to be styled
the Princes Colleague, then Praetour. Besides he sat so frequentlie in the
Tribunal, that he seemed to be new spirited and refresh't with labor. Which of
us has taken the same care, the same pains? such longed-for honors who
either attends or merits. And truly it is fit he should thus exceed all
Consuls, that makes Consuls, for otherwise he should be unworthy of his
fortune, if he could give honors, and could not manage them. When he makes
Consuls he instructs them, and when they are made teaches them to know that he
understands what he gives, that they may likewise know what they receive.
Therefore, with more justice the Senate beseeches and commands you to accept of
the fourth Consulshippe, it is the suite of the Empire, not of flattery; credit
your former obedience, that a greater favor the Senate neither can desire, nor
you bestow. For as in others, so in Princes (that are Gods) life is short and
frail, therefore it behooves every excellent man to endeavor and strive to
serve the Republique after death, by leaving behind him the monuments of
justice and moderation, which a Consul may best erect. This indeed is your
intention, to repeal and reduce liberty. What honor therefore should you more
affect, or what title oftener assume, then that, which by recovered After the
expulsion of the Tarquins, the Romans agreed upon two yearly Officers, first
called Praetors, then Judges, lastly Consuls. Rosinus Ant. Romans l. 7. c. 9.
liberty was first invented. It Is not more noble to be both Prince and Consul,
then Consul only. You likewise have regard to the modesty of your Colleagues
(your Colleagues I say, for so you your self do entitle them, and it is your
pleasure that we do so too) the memory of their own third Consulship would
have oppressed them until they had seen your fourth; for it cannot be but too
much for a private man, which a Prince thinks enough. You, Caesar, condescend,
and according to the greatness of your power, you still grant us our prayers,
as the Gods grant yours. Perhaps with your third Consulshippe you could rest
contented, but we so much the less, it makes us repeat and redouble our
requests that you will again be Consul. We should be more cold in our suite,
if we knew not how you would prove. It had been better to have denied us the
experience of you, then the use. Shall we once more be so happy as to see him
Consul! Shall he again hear and speak the same, and give as much joy, as he
receives? Shall he command in chief the Public Jubily, whereof he is the
cause and end? Shall he, as formerly, endeavor to restrain our affections,
nor have power to do it! Betwixt the Senate's piety, and the Princes
modesty, the combat is glorious which so ever conquers or is conquered.
Truly, I conceive, there will be yet an unknown joy; for who has so weak a
fancy but he must imagine him by how much the oftener, by so much the better
Consul? Another, if he had not given himself over to sloth and pleasure,
would yet have refreshed his labors with rest and idleness: This, when he was
respited from his Consular, resumed his Princely cares, so regardfull of just
temper that neither the Consul's Office enterfeired with the Princes, nor this
checked the Consul's. We see how he satisfies the desires of the Provinces with
recruiting their Garrisons, and securing every particular City. No difficulty
in giving audience, no delay in returning answers. They are immediately
admitted, immediately dismissed, and at length the Princes doors are not
besieged with crowdes of waiting Petitioners. What his whole comportment! how
gentle his severity! how judicious his mercy! You sat not to enrich the
Exchequer, nor had your sentence any end but Justice. Those that dispute their
rights and titles stand before you, not so careful to preserve their fortunes,
as your estimation, nor so much fearing your censure of their cause, as of
their manners. How like a Prince it is; how like a Consul! to reconcile emulous
Cities, and to calm swelling nations, not so much by command as reason! To
cure the iniquity of Magistrates, and to undo things that ought not to have
been done. In short, like the swiftest of the Planets, to see all things,
hear all things, and wheresoever invocated, instantly, like a God to be
present and assistant. Such Orders, I believe, are given by the creator of the
world, when he pleases to cast his eyes upon the earth and to number among his
divine works the actions of mortal creatures; a care you now discharge, while
he disposes the heaven, having to the race of men appointed you for his
Vicegerent. And you are such a Vicegerent as best pleases your great master,
since every day ends with our greatest benefit and your praise. But, when at
any time you make even with influent businesses, you esteem the change of
Labor a kind of recreation. For what is your recreation but to ride abroad,
to rowse wild beasts out of their dens, to climb up mighty mountains, and
to set foot on horrid rocks without the help either of the hand or track of
man; and as occasion presents it self religiously to visit the Woods were
accounted sacred places by the Romans who had scarce any Temple without an
adjoining grove, where they believed the Deities would give meetings to their
favorites, as Aegeria had done to their King Numa.
woods, and there to reverence the deities? This was of old the experience of
our youth, this was their pleasure, in these Of hunting, Xenophon says, that
by unting health is preserved, and men's bodies excellently trained for the
wars, and that hence they come to be both good Soldiers and Generals. The
most famous Huntsmen were Cephalus, Aesculapius, Melanion, Nestor, Theseus,
Hippolitus, Palamed, Ulysses, Mnestheus Diomed, Castor, Pollux, Adonis Machaon,
Podalirius, Antilo^hus, Achilles Aeneas.
exercises were our future Generals trained up, to contend in speed with the
swiftest beast, in strength with the fiercest, in stratagem with the subtilest.
Nor was it accounted a mean ornament of peace, to clear the fields from the
irruptions of wild beasts, and to relieve the Husbandman's besieged labors.
This glory likewise was usurped by those Princes that could not attain it, and
so usurped, that the beasts were dislodged to their hands as artificially as if
they had forced them from their trenches, being turned loose to the triumph of
a fained victory. Our Prince sweates as much in hunting, as in killing them,
and takes great but pleasing pains to find them out. And if sometimes he has
pleased to carry the same strength on Shipboard, he follows not the streaming
sails with his eyes or hands, but now sits at the helm now contends with the
ablest of his mates to break the waves, to tame the struggling winds and to cut
through the opposition of the sea. How different was Domitian.
he, that could not brook the stillnesse of the Alban It was no mervaile he
intimated formerly that Domitian feared to pass a ford in Danubius or the
Rhene with his Army, when it seems he durst not trust himself in a boat to
the smoothest of his own country waters.
Lake, nor the tranquillity and silence of the Port at Baiae, not being able to
endure the least shake or sound of oars, but at every stroke they made,
trembling with sordid fear? therefore all noise removed, with sails furled,
and sleeping oars, himself not so much as moving, he was carried like some
Something that had the pestilence or was so foul or unholy that none durst
touch it.
contaminated thing. A shameful spectacle to behold the Roman Emperor
following the course and steerage of another ship, as if his own had been
taken by the enemy. Nor did even floods and rivers escape this deformed sight.
Danubius and the Rhene rejoiced to carry so much of our shame. Nor was it less
dishonor to the Empire, that this goodly prospect should be shown to armies,
colors, and banks of the Romans, then to the armies colors and banks of the
enemy, the enemy, whose custom is to slide along those waters when they
freeze, and when they fall into their channel, to wade, row, or swim over
them. Nor should I for it self so much commend your strength, unless your
strong body was governed by a far stronger soul, which neither the
indulgence of fortune softens, nor abundance seduces into sloth and luxury,
so that whether his recreation carry him to the mountains, or to the Ocean, I
shall admire his body kept in health with exercise, and his limbs strengthened
with labor. For I find, that anciently the Goddesses As Peleus who for his
valor and skill in Navigation deserved to have the Goddess of the Sea Thetis
for his wife, of whom he begot Achilles; and Cephalus, and Hippolitus, who for
their Huntsmanship were beloved by the Goddesses Aurora and Diana.
husbands and the Gods children were not more honored by their marriages, then
for these arts of hunting and navigation. Withal, I consider when these are
our Princes sports and pastimes, what (those from which he retires himself to
these) his serious and intended pleasures are. For there are pleasures that
clearly show every ones gravity, sanctity, and temperance. Now who so
dissolute in whose recreations there is not some resemblance of severity?
Idleness betrays us. Have not diverse Princes spent this very time in diceing,
courting of mistresses, or riotous feastings, while their serious cares were
releived with a supply of opposite Vices? The very first article of a great
fortune is, that nothing shall be hidden, nothing secret. But the fortune of
Princes not only opens their Palaces, but even their bed-chambers, and
Cabinets, and proposes and explaines to fame all their mysterious counsels.
But you Caesar, have no nearer way to glory then to be thoroughly looked into.
Those things indeed are excellent which you do abroad, nor those less
excellent which are done within your Court. It Is glorious, Caesar, that you
keep your self from any infection of vice, but more glorious, that you
restrain all about you: by how much it is harder to make others good, then
ones self, by so much it is more admirable that you being the best have made
all like your self that have relation to you. Many have dishonored themselves
either with a wife inconsiderately taken, or with too tame a patience suffered;
So that men famous abroad were lost in domestic infamy, and this only hindered
them from being esteemed the greatest Romans, that they were Sylla surnamed the
happy had yet this spot in his felicity, that he was an unhappier husband to
the wanton Metella:
unhappier husbands. Chief Bishop, a title (as I have noted) inherent in the
Roman Emperors, declaring their supremacy in divine matters.
Your Plotina, who when she went up the steps to the Palace, turning to the
multitude said Such I go in hither as I hope to come forth, and so carried her
self all his reign as she deserved no kind of reprehension. Dion.
wife is your ornament and glory, for what more holy, what more sacred then she
is? If our Pontifex Maximus were to choose a wife he would choose her, or her
equal, but where is her equal? In all your fortune how she claims her share
in nothing, but the joy! How constantly she loves not your power, but your
self! you are both to one another still the same you were, equal in your
affections. Felicity adds nothing to you, but that now you know how well each
of you can digest felicity. How modest she is in her apparel, how frugall in
her train, how civil in her Garb! This honor is the husbands, that gives
these principles and instructions, for a wife comprehends all glories in the
glory of obedience. When she sees you go abroad with no terror, with no
pomp, must not she needs learn to pass without noise, and even your going on
foot, (as far as her weak sex permits) she imitates, which would become her
though you should do otherwise; but where a husband is so exemplare, what
modesty ought a wife to show for his honor, a woman for her own? Your
Martiana who^ for her virtues the Senate entitled Augusta, and after her
decease deified her.
sister likewise, how she remembers that she is your sister! how is your
integrity, your truth, your candor visible in her! so that if one should
compare her with your wife, he might doubt whether to a good life were more
efficacious to be nobly bred, or nobly borne. Nothing is so apt to quarrel as
Emulation, especially in women, nay it is begot by proximity of alliance,
cherished by equality, enflamed by envy, and terminates in hatred. Therefore it
must needs be thought more admirable, that two women, in the same house, of
like fortune, should have no difference, no contention; they love each other,
strive which should give place, and while both most passionately love you, they
think neither is concerned which of them you love best. They both propose to
themselves the same end, the same course of life, there is nothing whereby you
can distinguish them to be two, for with one soul they imitate and study you.
Both therefore have the same virtues, because both have yours. Nor can they
ever come in danger to be private persons, that will not be other. The Senate
presented them the titles of This style of Augustae was given to the wives and
sisters of the Roman Emperors by decree of the Senate, whereas that of
Augustus descended upon Emperors.
Augustae, but they earnestly excused themselves, so long as you refused the
appellation of father of your Country, perhaps conceiving it more honor to be
styled your Wife and Sister, then Augustae. But what reason soever persuaded
them to so much modesty, they are by so much more worthy to be, and in our
souls to be esteemed Augustae, because not so entitled. For what in women is
more noble, then to believe true honor consists not in the splendor of
titles, but the judgments of men, and to make themselves parallel with great
names, even by refusing them? Now, in the hearts of private persons, that old
felicity of mortals, freindship, was antiquated [growne out of date] in place
whereof there was sprung up flattery, complement, and (what is worse then
hatred,) dissembled love; especially in Princes Courts there remained only the
empty and laught-at name of Freindship. For what articles of freindship could
be drawn between Lords on the one part, and Vassals on the other? You Sir,
have repealed this banished virtue. You have friends, because you are one. Nor
can love (like other commands) be enjoined to subjects, for there is no
affection more free, more noble, more impatient of dominion, and that more
requires equality. Perhaps a Prince may be unjustly hated, nay hated by some
although he hate not them, but beloved he cannot be unless he love, we
therefore know you love because you are beloved, and which is in both most
princely, the whole glory is your own, who being superior in dignity
notwithstanding do descend to all offices of freindship, and from an Emperor
stoop to be a friend, and then are most an Emperor when you lay aside this
Title for the other. And since a Princes fortune stands in need of many
friends, it is a Prince's chiefest business to provide himself store of
friends. May this opinion ever please you, and as to your other virtues, so to
this be constant, nor let any thing persuade you, that a Prince can fall below
himself, unless he hate. To be beloved is the sweetest of all humane
blessings, nor is it less sweet to love; both which you so enjoy, that
whereas you most passionately love, yet you are more passionately beloved.
First, for that it is easier to love one, then many; then, because you have so
great a power and faculty of obligeing, that none but an ungrateful man can
choose but love you best. It Is worth our industry, to relate what torments you
put your self unto, that you might deny nothing to your friend. You parted
with a most excellent L. Licinius Sura the aforementioned Captain of the
Guards, to whom Trajan's affection is here at large described.
man, most dear in your esteem, unwillingly and sadly, and as if you could
not tell how much you loved him you tried it by absence, with much pain and
distraction yiedling to be separated. A thing never till this present heard of,
the Prince and the Prince's friend desire contradictories, and the freind's
desire carries it. O memorable freindship, worthy an immortal History, to
choose the prefect of the Praetorians not out of those that sought places, but
that declined them, and to restore the same man to that Rest which he so
passionately How Sura doated on a retired life appears by parting w th so
great, so affectionate and so unalterable a friend, as Trajan was to him, but
its especially manifest by that inscription which after his 7. years private
life he caused to be graven on his monument. Here lies one aged many years,
that lived but seven of them.
doates upon; and when you your self are overburdened with the cares of
Empire, not to envy another the glory of his quiet! We understand how much we
owe you, Caesar, for your own laborious and restless stations, since you
granted this petitioner a writ of Ease as the highest favor. What confusion
did they tell me you were in, when you brought him on his way, for you could
not forbear going with him to the Sea side, where at his very taking boat
you embraced and kissed him on the shore. Upon that vantage ground of
friendship Caesar stood, wishing him a safe voyage, and (if he so pleased) a
quick return: Nor could he leave him thus, but many leagues followed him with
his prayers and tears. I say nothing of his munificence, because no bounty can
equal this care and patience of a Prince; whereby you have deserved that he
should condemn himself as too pertinacious, too hard-hearted. And doubtless
he repented and was ready to bid the Pilot tack about, had he not conceived,
there might be almost as much happiness as in the Prince's society, to
desire the Prince. And truly as he enjoyes that greatest good he aimed at, so
he attaines a greater glory in the resignation of his place, to which when you
consented, you declared that you would tie no man to your service longer then
he pleases. This was Princely, and well became our public Parent to compel
nothing, but always to remember that so great a power [or place] cannot be
given to any, but he may before that power [or place] prefer his freedom.
Caesar, you are worthy to confer offices on such as shall wish to resign
them, and when they make it a suite, against your will indeed, but yet to
grant it; you are worthy not to conceive your self abandoned by your friends
that beg leave to retire themselves, but still to find those you may call
from, and those you may restore to Rest. You likewise, my Lords, on whom our
Parent daignes to cast a gracious and familiar eye, improve his opinion of you,
this is now your business, for the Prince having given us proof that he can
love, is to be excused if he love others in a less degree. But who can observe
a moderation in loving him, for as much as his love must not receive but give
the Law? This man would be affected present, and that absent, either shall have
his own desire: None by presence shall grow cheap, none by absence be
forgotten; every one holds the place he merits, and he may easier blot the face
of the absent out of his memory, then cancel from his heart the affection
which he bears him. Many Princes when they were Tyrants over their Subjects,
were yet their freed-men's As Domitian was to Crispinus and to the player
Paris, of whom Juv. Sat. 7. Many to honor in the wars he brings, With
summer annulets and winter rings He binds the Poets fingers; what there lives
No Lord that will bestow, a Player gives.
bondmen, governed by their counsels, by their wills and pleasures. Through
these they saw, through these they spoke, through these men's hands went
Praetorshippes, Priesthoods, Consulshippes, Nay unto them were made all
addresses of that nature. Your freed-men are indeed much honored by you, but
still as freed-men, and you believe, it may abundantly suffice them if they be
accounted honest and careful servants. For you know it is a demonstrative
argument of no great Prince, to have great freed-men. And in the first place,
you admit none of them to be near your person, unless you your self do, or
your father, or some good Prince did affect him. And these very men you daily
so mould and form, as that they measure themselves, not according to your
condition, but their own. So much more cause we have to respect them, because
we are not tied to do it. Have not the Senate and People of Rome upon just
ground conferred on you the Surname of the Best? It is true, it was a title
Ready indeed, for Suetonius says that Caius took the Title of Best and
Greatest, but Pliny here implies that Caeius only arrogated that style of Best,
whereas Trajan won it by his merit.
ready for you, wherewith our tongues were formerly acquainted, yet a new
title; we may be sure no other Prince deserved it, for else it had been Not
taken,
given him, as it was to you, without praemeditation. Was The Style of Sylla.
Happy a style comparable to it, which was bestowed upon the fortune, not the
virtue. Or The Surname of Pompey.
Great, which had in it more of envy then of glory. An excellent Prince adopted
you into his own name, the Senate into the name of Best, and it is as proper to
you as your paternall Surname, nor does he more distinguish you that calls you
Trajan, then he that calls you Best. So, anciently frugalitie denominated the
Piso was Surnamed the frugall, not because he was a good husband only for
himself, but because he was frugall that he might be beneficial to others.
Piso's, wisdom the C. Lalius, Serpio's friend, who intending to reform the
Lex Agraria (the Law for division of Lands proportionable to the qualities and
conditions of men) finding himself opposed by a strong faction of the richer
sort, he desisted and was therefore surnamed the Wise. Plutarch.
Laelij, piety the Metellus was surnamed the Pious for rescuing the Palladium,
or wooden Image of Pallas, when her Temple was on fire, in which service the
well-meaning man lost his eyes.
Metelli; all which Names are comprehended in this one. Nor can he be Best that
excells not every person in a peculiar way of merit. Deservedly therefore
after all your other apellations this was added, as most great. For, it is less
to be Emperor, Caesar, and Augustus, then of all Emperors, Caesar's and
Augustuse's the Best. Therefore that parent both of Gods and men, is first
adored by the name of Best, and then of Greatest. The more glorious still your
praise, that are known to be no less Best, then Greatest; you have obtained a
name that never can descend or be transferred to another, for in a good Prince
it will appear borrowed, in a bad Prince usurped; which should all your
successors assume, it must ever be acknowledged yours. For as the title of
Augustus, minds us of him to whom it was first consecrated, so this of Best,
man's memory never shall reflect upon without remembering you. As often as
posterity shall be compelled to style another best, so often they shall remember
him that merited that title. Divine Nerva, how much is now thy joy in heaven!
to see that he is Best, and so entitled, whom thou did elect as Best! how it
rejoices thee, that, compared with thy son, thou art transcended, for in
nothing more did thou declare the greatness of thy soul, then that, being
excellent thy self, thou did not fear to choose a better. And thou
likewise, L. Trajan of whom in the Praeface,
Trajan the father (for though not among the stars, yet thou have attained
the next place to them) what pleasure take thou to behold this thy Tribune,
this thy Soldier, so great a General, so great a Prince! nay thou have a
friendly contention with the spirit of his adoptive father, whether be more
noble to have begot or elected such a son. Both of you have infinitely
merited of the Commonwealth, on which you have conferred so great a good, who
though his filial piety can but give triumphall ornaments to the one, yet to
the other he gives heaven. Nor is your praise the less that you deserve them
by your son, then if the merit were your own. My Lords, I know all Romans,
but especially the Consuls ought to be so affected, as to esteem themselves
rather publicly then privatelie obliged. For, as it is better and more noble
to distaste ill Princes, for common then particular injuries, so the good are
more generously beloved for their favors done to mankind, then to men. But
forasmuch as it is grown into a custom, that the Consuls having presented the
public thanks, should likewise acknowledge in their own names the greatness
of their private obligations, give me leave to discharge this part of my duty,
not with more respect to my self, then to Cornutus Tertullus my Colleague and
formerly a Consular person. For why should I not likewise give thanks for him,
that am equally obliged on his behalf, especially since our most gracious
Sovereign has done that for both, which if one of us only had received yet
both had been obliged: that pillager and Domitian.
murderer of every virtuous man had blasted both of us by the slaughter of
friends; so near us fell the thunderbolt: for we gloried in the same friends,
and for the same lost men we mourned; as now our joy and hope, so then our
grief and fear was common. This honor to our sufferings divine Nerva did,
that he would Nerva making Pliny and Cornutus Tertullus Praefects of the
Treasury.
advance us, though peradventure less worthy, to let the World see them
flourish that before his reign only wished they might slide out of the Princes
memory. We had not been two years complete in that most painful and great
Office, when you (best of Princes, valiantest of Generals) offered us the
Consulship, that to the highest honor the glory of celeritie might be added.
So much you differ from those Princes, who conceived that difficulty set a
value on their favors, and that honors would be more welcome to men, if first
despair and dancing of attendance, and a delay resembling a denial, had
affronted and set a mark of disgrace upon them. Modesty forbids me to repeat
the testimony wherewith you honored us both, making us (both in our love of
truth, and love of the Republique) equal to those ancient Consuls; whether
deservedly, or no, I dare not determine; for it would be unseemly to contradict
what you affirm, and insolent to own the character you gave us being so
magnifique. But you are worthy to create such Consuls of whom you may report
such Miracles. Pardon it, Sir, that among your favors we acknowledge this the
highest, that you have pleased to make us once again Colleagues, 'twas the
ambition of our mutual love, of the agreeable method of our life, of one and
the same end of our endeavors; the power whereof is so great, that our
similitude of disposition takes from us the glory of our friendship, and it
were no less a wonder, should one of us dissent from his Colleague, then from
himself. Therefore it is no new or temporary thing, that each of us as much
rejoices in the Consulshippe of his Colleague, as if his own were again to be
renewed, only they who are twice made Consuls have a obligations, but at
several times: we have each of us received two Consulships together, we
discharge them together, jointly in the union of our souls, yet severally and
by Collegueshippe. But how rare it was, that while we were Praefects of the
Treasury, you gave us the Consulshippe, before you named our Successors! One
dignity grew into another, nor was the honor continued, but doubled, and (as
if it had been a mean favor to give us another office when this was ended)
you would not suffer it to expire. So great was the confidence you had in our
integrity, that you doubted not but to give a good account to your reason, if
you did not suffer us (after so great a place in the Republique) to become
private men. What? that you were pleased to make us Consuls in the current
year of your own Consulshippe! we therefore shall be in the same Roll that
records you Consul, and our names shall be added to the Acts you signed. You
vouchsafed to be President at our Election, and to read unto us those most
sacred verses. We were made Consuls by your judgment, that we might have the
honor both of your vote in Court, and declaration in the fields. But how were
we graced that particularly you would assign over to us the month which is
made glorious by your birthday! So that we had the happiness by our Edicts
and by our public shows to celebrate that Which being the same day with that
of Domitian's death, must be the 18 of Sept. for Suetonius records him
obtruncatum ad decimu^ quartum Kalendas Octobris. ij Nerva being crowned upon
the 18 of Sept.
day, blessed with a three fold joy, that rid us of the worst Prince, gave us the
best, and brought forth a better then the best. The chariot-Chayre, with more
then usual reverence carried us in your sight, and being in the midst of those
fortunate Omens and contentions of good wishes that thronged into your
presence, we were so over-joyed that we knew not whether the sound came to our
ears from the right hand or the left. Beyond all, it appears your greatest
nobleness, that you suffer those you have created to be Consuls, for no danger
no terror from the Prince debilitates or shakes the Consular power or spirits,
nothing is spoken against our wills, nothing decreed against our judgments.
The veneration is now and shall be inherent in the Honor, nor shall we by our
authority cancel our security. If the dignity of the Consulshippe loose any
thing, it must be our fault, not the times, for it is free on the Prince's part,
it is free for Consuls to be such, as they were before we had Princes. Can we
return you any thanks answerable to these favors, but only, ever to remember
we have bin Consuls, and your Consuls? So let us think, so judge as Consuls
ought, and so serve the weal public, as believing there is now a
Commonweal. Let us not withdraw our counsels or endeavors, nor conceive our
selves to be freed and severed, but tied and bound unto the Consulshippe;
keeping the same eminence in care and industry, that we do in reverence and
dignity. To shut up my discourse. I humbly beseech the governors and
guardians of the Empire, the Gods, our heavenly Consuls; in particular I pray
thee, Capitolin Jupiter, that thou will cherish what thou have bestowed upon
us, and to so great a bounty add eternity. Thou heardst our imprecations made
against the Worst of Princes, hear now our prayers for the Best. We do not
weary thee with Supplications, we pray not for peace, not for concord, not for
safety, not for riches, not for honors, all these are comprehended in one
single wish, the preservation of the Prince; nor do we ask new favors, for
thou did then receive him into thy protection, when thou did snatch him out
of the tallons of a vulturous Domitian, of whose subtle hatred to Trajan in
the Preface.
Tyrant; for not without thy special assistance, when every noble height was
battered down, could this of all the noblest have remained unshaken; being
passed over by the worst Prince, that the best might find him. Thou gave us
evident testimonies of thy approbation when thou did entitle him (then going
toward the Army) to thy own name, to thy own honor; thou speaking by the
Emperor's mouth did adopt to him a Son, to us a Parent, to thy self a
Pontifex Maximus. Wherefore in the very words, wherein he prayed for himself,
I pray, if he govern the Republique well and for the benefit of all, first
that thou will preserve him for our Grandchildren and great Grandchildren,
then that at length thou will give him a Successor whom he has begotten, as
happily as he himself has been adopted; or if fate deny him this, be of
counsel with him in his choice, and show him such a one as it may become him
to elect in the Capitoline Temple.

How much I am indebted to your Lordships is likewise recorded in our public
monuments. You have given me an authenticke testimony of peaceablenesse in my
Tribuneshippe, modesty in my Praetourshippe, and constancy in those offices you
enjoined me, in defending the causes of our Associates; and you approved of my
following Consulshippe with so many joyful expressions, that I conceive my
self engaged to my utmost power to cherish, confirm, and daily to improve the
reasons of your approbation. For I know it is then best judged whether one does
or does not merit honor, when he has attained it. Do you but favor this my
intention, and believe it, if I was once put into a way of advancement by that
subtle Domitian, who at first so dissembled, that he forbad the sacrificing of
Beasts, where as afterward be himself set up a shambles for Men.
Prince, before he professed his hatred to good men, if after he professed it I
retired my self; when I saw the compendious way to honor, I chose to go a
longer journey; if in bad times I be numbered with the sad and endangered, in
good times with the joyful and secure; to conclude, if I as much love the best
Prince, as I was hated by the worst, I shall ever serve your Lordships not as
Consul or a Consular person, but as a Candidate of the Consulship.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface Page 1. Lin. 5. for, Conquest of the king of Dacia. read Conquest of
Dacia. Panegyric page 3 lin. 5. for say too much, read please or displease as
I shall say too much. p. 4. l. 17. for that end. r. this end. p. 30. b. l. 33.
for succession. r. posterity. p. 27. b. for ex. r. et. marg.

Some such other small faults there are, which the Reader may with ease
discover and correct.


