PAPERS Presented to the Parliament, against the Lord Inchequin Lord President
of Munster in Ireland, sent from Captain Crowther, Vice Admiral of the Irish
Seas.

And the Lord Inchequins Declaration. With a DECLARATION Subscribed By several
eminent Commanders, late of the Army commanded by the Lord INCHEQVIN.

Read in both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

Die Sabbathi, April 15. 1648.
THese Papers concerning the Lord Inchequins disserting the Parliament, with
his Declaration, And the Declaration of the Officers, is appointed to be
Published.

Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbott.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1648.

PAPERS Presented to the Parliament against the Lord Inchequeen, Lord President
of Munster in Ireland.
Right Honorable,
I Am sorry I have so sad a subject as to occasion this, some time since,
having been at Sea, and absent from this Port, some few days, in my absence
the Council of War exhibited Articles against Sir William Fenton, Knight and
Colonel, Colonel Edm. Temple, Lieutenant Collonell Fair, and Major Docdum,
which Gentlemen they have committed close prisoners, to four several
Garrisons, not permitting any to have correspondence with them; upon my return
into Harbor here, where I presently understood of these sad divisions, I
immediately wrote to the Council of war (my Lord being abroad in the field)
that they would grant the imprisoned the liberty of Subjects for me to send to
them to see what they had to be transmitted to England, which from them I could
not obtain, which gave me cause of much suspicion of their actions, and
occasioned my present dispatch of a Letter to be posted to my Lord, to know
whether things were acted by his pleasure, and that his Honor would declare
his intention, in regard I heard a rumor he would make a Cessation with the
Irish, which I protested against, and that if he did, I would block up all his
Harbors, my Letter obtaining no Answer, till his return to Cork, in his way
home at Mayall his actions produced this enclosed, upon which I took Order for
shipping, to lie in all his Harbor mouths, and declared my best assistance and
succor, to my utmost power to all, whether Officers, Soldiers, or others,
that would desert him, two days since he sent me leave to send to the
Gentlemen in prison, which I suddenly did, and yesterday received two Letters,
one from Colonel Temple, the other from Sir William Fenton, the latter of
which desires me to impart to your Honor his request, that you would be
pleased to mediate to some of the honorable Houses of Parliament, that a
Letter may be sent from them to my Lord Inchequin, desiring his transmitting
the imprisoned Gentlemen into England, to receive their trial there, which he
desires you to be mindful of. And that he farther advices you, that he
conceives, that if the Houses would be pleased to send over Commissioners
speedily, with some moneys, that most, both Officers and Soldiers might be
obtained, and so consequently the Garrisons, which (Sir) truly is my opinion
likewise: forasmuch as I have heard from some Officers with whom I have had
some conference: which is all at present I have to communicate to your Honor,
only to subscribe my self,

Bonaventure Kinsale, April 5. 1648. My Lord, Your Honors in all service to be
commanded, JOHN CROWTHER,

THE Declaration of several eminent Commanders, late of the Army commanded by
the Lord INCHEQUIN.
IN obedience and difcharge of our trust to the Parliament of England, sitting
at Westminster: we give this information under our hands, to be presented to
them, which we shall be ready to make good in our persons upon oath, viz.

That the Lord Baron of Inchequin Lord President of Munster, having been abroad
with some part of his Army, whereof we are members: Did upon the third of this
month upon his return home, being at Mayalle send for us, who have hitherto
subscribed to appear presently before at his Quarters, which being performed,
and all of us assembled together in his presence Chamber: His Lordship declared
this unto us, that in order to the National Covenant, and to that particular
branch thereof, which concerns the re-investing His Majesty in his Thron: he
had with the advice of his Officers taken a resolution to oppose the present
pretended Parliament in England: who were forced by an Independent faction,
they having broken all Oaths and Covenants, which they had made both to God
and Man: and to that purpose, was now putting himself into a posture of
defense: And that for the managing of this Design, he had correspondency with
the King, with the Scots, and generally all the Presbyterian party that were
agreed with the King: who were resolved to endeavor to their utmost the
re-inthroning the King, and restoring a free Parliament, which he fully
declared this not to be: And for the better effecting and carrying on this
Design, he was resolved to join with the Lord Taff, and the whole Irish of
the Province of Munstor: who have assured him of their assistance, both with
their persons and estates, and that he had now sent for us, who were only the
suspected party of the Army to report this to us, and to require of us our
resolution whether we all would comply with him in this or no: To which we
answered, We stood for the King and Parliament, as we had ever done, upon which
he required us not to juggle with him, but to declare whether it was this
present Parliament we meant, for he said the truth was, they did not
acknowledge this to be a Parliament: To which we answered his Lordship, we
could not comply with him: He still using many aggravations, to make good what
he had said against them, and further said, He hoped to see this present
Parliament laid flat on their backs by Michaclmas day, and that this was no
rash resolution, but a premeditated action, he being confident, that let it
come to the worst it could, yet in spite of all, he would be able to procure
good terms both for himself and the rest that adhered to him: and that which
induced him chiefly to put it in practice at present was, that he was now
assured, he was before hand with the Independent party, which he never was
before; yet he had thought for some time longer to have forborne his
declaring, but yet some suspicions, the Vice admiral Captain John Crowther
had of him; could not permit him to carry it private any longer, in regard the
said Captain Crowther had protested against him, and blockt up his Harbors.
And his Lordship did further declare, that al which would not join with him in
this design, he required them to depart and go for England, for that he would
not permit any near him, or in his Army, that would not faithfully comply with
him in his intention; and as a motive to induce us to join with him, he
informed us that he was certainly assured, that Collonell Jones had by order
from the Parliament of England, made a cessation with Owen Roe Oneal, and that
faction; who chose rather to enter into League with the Parliament then with
the King: and in this respect he would now join with the Lord Taffe, and
Munster forces against the other. For the truth of all these we have hereto
subscribed our names this seventh of April 1648, aboard the Bonaventure, in
Kinsale Harbor.

Christopher Elsing. Alexander Barington John Gray. Thomas Davis Thomas
Chandlor.


WE under written having this present seventh of April, 1648, heard read unto
us the several heads made by the Lord Inchequin, to the respective Commanders
in his Presence Chamber at his head Quarters at Mayalle, the third instant
forementioned, do declare, that the said things were in the field upon the
same day propounded to us, and the other Officers then in the Army, whereupon
he desired our compliance, we refused the same, as inconsistent with our
duties to the Parliament, and thereupon disserted our several Charges and
Offices under his command.

John Benyworth, William Battle, Silliam Stotesbury, John Gettings.


FINIS,

