A Voice from Heaven: OR, A TESTIMONY AGAINST The remainders of Antichrist Yet
in ENGLAND: And in particular, the Court of Tryers For Approbation of MINISTERS.

Born by GUALTER POSTLETHWAIT, Pastor to a Church of Christ in Jews in Sussex.

LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-alley. 1655.

To the Saints and faithful brethren that are in England, Scotland, and
Ireland; especially to that little flock of God over which the holy Ghost has
made him overseer;
Gualter Postlethwaite wishes grace, mercy and peace from God our Father, and
from the Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Brethren and beloved,

SOme thoughts have of late (more then formerly, and more sadly (visited my
heart, that I wish may prevail more upon your hearts. First, the thought of
the greatness, the sovereignty and sovereign perfection of God: the
foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then
men. He is the only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and that
in the most undoubted right, that has made all things of nothing, by the word
of his mouth, for himself. Vain man would be wise, although he be borne like
the wild asses colt; he will provoke God to anger, transgress his Laws, change
his ordinances, and break the everlasting Covenant. But who is this that
darkens counsel by words without knowledge? shall he that contendeth with the
Almighty instruct him? He that reproves God, let him answer it. Do we provoke
the Lord to anger? are we stronger then he? Add not unto his words, lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. The world, yea, the hight of the people
do languish, because the earth is defilled by deniations from the laws,
ordinances, and Covenants of God: It Is man's deformity, to walk according to
his own invention in any thing, and will prove his own destruction. Can God
endure to be prescribed by creatures? Shall Man coin Laws for Rules of
acceptable walking with God in Spiritual, Civil, or Ecclesiastical things? It
would be and is horrible impudence for any to do it. All the sin and misery in
the world, brake in at this door, viz. by harkening to Reason* against
Institution. 'Twas Israel's sin, to do that was right in their own eyes, in
Civils, Judge. 17. 6. much more in Ecclesiasticals. The Apostle held a war with
reasonings and thoughts of men, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. These are no competent judges
of the doctrine of God in Christ, but must be overthrown.

Secondly, the thought of the fatal miscarriages of man managing any thing by
his own wisdom and strength. Eve became the mother of mischief to all living,
by trusting to carnal Sense and Reason in judging of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil. The sons of God brought the Deluge on the old world, by taking
such wives as they chose. Israel provoked God to anger with their own
Inventions, not only in point of Worship, but in the matters of their
Commonwealth, when they followed their own fancies, and the Customs of men; but
in determining what kind of Government to set up in the Nation; and were
convinced of their mistake by a sign from heaven, God thundering his
displeasure against them from heaven, and raining tokens of his wrath upon
them: and the tyranny that followed was as teaching of the same, God giving
them such recompense of their error as was meet. Gedeon would have a new way of
remembering the victory by a costly Ephod, and Israel went a whoring after it;
which thing became a snare to Gedeon, and to his house. Alas! 't is but a show
of wisdom, that is in Will Worship, Col. 2. 23. and by this means men are
beguiled of their reward, verse. 18. and righteousness exalts a nation, but sin
is a reproach to any people, Prove. 14. 34. We think by our own inventions to
get us glory among the Nations, whilst we conform our selves to the worldly
glory of their government: but our way were to keep to Gods statutes and
judgments, without adding or diminishing; then the Nations would say, Surely
this great nation is a wise and understanding people: Deuteronomy. 4. 6.

Thirdly, the thought of the perfection of the Scriptures: They are able to
make us wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3: 15. to teach us how to behave our selves
in the Church, 1 Timothy 3. 15. how to behave our selves in the Commonwealth:
David teaches the Church to pray, Give the King thy judgments, and thy
righteousness unto the Kings Son, Psalm. 72. 1. The Scriptures are able to make
the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

Therefore, my beloved brethren, accept no Lawgiver but Jesus Christ, neither
in Church nor Commonwealth. Let this be your profession: The Lord is our Judge,
the Lord is our Lawgiver, he is our King. And though other Lords besides him
rule over us, let us b^ him only make mention of his Name, that will in due
time save us from devilish government in the Church, when he shall give the
body of the Beast to the burning flame, and cast the Beast and false Prophet
into the lake of fire that burns with brimstone; and from all worldly
government in Commonweals, when the Stone cut out of the mountain shall smite
on the toes of the Image: Then not only the Clay, but the Iron, and the Brass,
and the Silver, and the Gold-government shall be broken to pieces, and be
carried away like dust by the wind, and no more place shall be found for them;
no, not for the goodliest Government that ever was invented by the wit of man.
And till that time, change of Governments will be the disease of the world,
whilst Crowns and Diadems are transposed from one Man, and from one People to
another. I must say it, although I delight in it (considered in it self) as
little as others that complain of the great cry of Overturnings, wherewith the
world is now Alarmed. There will be overturnings, till he come whose right it
is. Oh the stupidity of men! that apprehend not Gods displeasure against the
Governments of this world, by the often changes that are made: It Is to be
feared that this is Judiciary, that God may leave Europe, and the wise Nations
thereof, unto themselves, to walk in their own counsels, because they trust in,
and leave nothing of their own doings, nor of their stubborn way, whilst, he
passes over to America, and thence to the East Indies, to set up the government
of Jesus Christ amongst the Barbarous Nations. The Lords word, brethren, is to
me, to you, Love the Truth, and Peace: Let us not, of a fond affection to Peace
and Ease, lose Truth; yet in our striving for Truth, let us strive lawfully, or
else we shall not be crowned: Wherein I would have every one be wary, not with
a carnal, but spiritual wariness; walk in your Warfare by a divine Rule, act
from a divine Spirit, keep to a divine Frame of Spirit, and stand every one in
his place, striving for Truth.

I hope, in what I have done in this following Treatise, I have not exceeded.
As one of the Lords Watchmen, I must warn men. I hope I have spoken from the
Spirit of God; I am sure 't is after many prayers and tears; and so long I have
delayed, till Conscience made me speak, and the guilt of my delay began to
stare in my face; and I think I speak not beside the cause: that was the
Disciples fault, that they spoke beside the cause; and from this, Christ argues
the carnalness of their spirit, that would have fire come down from heaven on
the Samaritanes, Luke 9. 54, 55, 56. Is it not the time of Antichrists war,
whilst Christ is consuming him with the breath of his mouth? If any, judging of
my frame of spirit by my phrase, think me too bitter, let them but take this
along with them, That I speak not of persons, but things, that cannot be too ill
spoken of, when vicious, and contrary to the Word of God. And for the text I
have for what I say, if I abused it, I shall be glad the righteous should smite
me for it. Read, and judge; and as you see cause, correct my mistakes. My time
cuts my Epistle to you, shorter then I intended. I beg this, That as the three
thoughts before mentioned led me into this Treatise: so prepare to read it by
the meditation of them; and I shall pray to the Lord to make both profitable to
you, who am

Devoted to the service of your faith and holiness, Gualter Postlethwaite.

A Voice from Heaven.
Rev. 18. 4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my
people; that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.
THe Chapter begins with a most stately Proclamation, of the certain sudden,
and utter ruin of Babylon the Great; together with the Causes of it, verse. 1,
2, 3. But I shall not here insist.

There follows an Admonition to God's people, to come out of her* and this in
our text.

In this there is observable,

1. The means whereby this Warning is given; and that is, a voice from heaven,
to note God to be the author of it, Matthew. 21. 25. Here are not the like
stately circumstances accompanying this Voice, as accompanied the foregoing
Voice. It seems this Voice will not be so remarkable for any thing, as the
Divine Author of it; the impress of whose divine excellency stamped on it,
shall be the only thing observable, challenging our attention to it. As if God
meant to sound forth this Voice, not by silver trumpets, but rams horns; not
employing the choicest parts and gifts, nor men of greatest power and repute
among men, in this work.

2. The Admonition it self; wherein we may observe, 1. A duty required, viz. to
come out of her. 2. The argument moving hereunto, drawn from the consideration
of a double danger, viz.
1. Of fellowship with her sins. 2. Of sharing with her in her plagues.


There remains one thing to be enquired into, and that is, who is here meant by
the relative Pronoun [her.] The antecedent to this relative, must needs be
Babylon the great, verse. 2. and she is the same with that great Where in the
foregoing Chapter, as appears by the name written in her forehead, verse. 5. and
this is no other, but Rome Antichristian, as appears plainly from the Beast
that she rides on: neither is this at all controverted among Protestants.

But the great Question will be about the extent of the signification of
Babylon, or Rome here. Surely we are to extend it to signify not only what
lies within the walls of Rome, but whatsoever is comprehended within the Par.
in loc.
territories of the Roman jurisdiction. And my reason is, because the same
that are called to come out of her, in the text, are by the same voice called
upon to execute vengeance upon her, verse. 6. and this work is laid out for the
ten horns, or Kings over which she reigns. Chap. 17. 16. And besides, we know
there was the like extent of signification in the Prophets words, from whence
the text is taken, Jer. 51. 45. My people, go ye out of the midst of her; that
is out of all places within the Babylonian Jurisdiction.

But still there remains as great a Question, viz. How we are to conceive of
the Romish Jurisdiction, and under what notion to consider the Territories of
it.

To which I answer, that we are to look upon them in their Ecclefiastical
considerations, as they are formed into Antichristian Churches. Certainly,
Antichristian Societies are here meant, because they are distinguished from
their sins; it being made a cons^quent of abiding in them, to be partakers of
their si^s. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins.

Now 't is not like that Civil Societies should be meant: for Babylon here, is
the same with the great Whore, Chap. 17. 1. that is out of doubt Rome
considered Ecclesiastically. For if we take the Beast for the Secular State, on
which she is said to ride then apparently she is distinguished from the Secular
State, as the Beast she rides on, verse. 3. And if (with Mr. Cotton on Chap.
13.) we take that Beast to be the Catholic visible Church of Rome, we must
needs take Rome Ecclesiastically: for Rome Civil does not ride on Rome
Ecclesiastical; but Rome Ecclesiastical rides the Universal Church of Rome, as
the reference of her Universality to Rome makes plain; and by virtue of this
reference, Come out of Rome is as much as to say Come out of all the several
territories of her jurisdiction.

Having thus made way unto it, I come to the thing that I intend viz.

Whosoever would avoid fellowship Doct.
with the sins of Antichristian Churches, must see to it that they depart from
the fellowship of such Churches, and cease to walk in Antichristian order.

There be many examples in Scripture, that show how the people of God have
degenerated, through unwarrantable Civil cohabitation and association with
wicked men and false worshippers: how much more dangerous is Ecclesiastical
communion, in the times of the Gospel, unwarrantable to be held with wicked
men, 1 Cor. 5. Heb. 12. 15. especially in ways strange to the Word of God?

The sons of God lost their Religion, by marrying the daughters of men, Genesis 6.
Israel was defiled with the idolatry of the Egyptians in Egypt, Ezekiel. 23. They
were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, and served their
idols, Psalm. 106. 35, 36. And in their Captivity, this comes into their mind:
We will be as the heathen, and as the families of the countries, to serve wood
and stone, Ezekiel. 20. 32.

But if Civil communion be so dangerous, how much more dangerous is
Ecclesiastical communion? The daughters of Moab called the Israelites to their
sacrifices, and the people did eat, and bowed down unto their gods. Numb. 25.
2. yea, Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor, verse. 3.

Take one place for all: Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31. the Lord warns the people that they
should not imitate the Heathen in their worship; not only that they did not
worship their gods, but that they did not worship their God in that way. And
here note, that though the means of Worship be only changed, yet 't is a going
to another God. Take heed (says God) that thou enquire not after their gods,
saying, How did these nations serve their gods? And that the means of Worship
is only minded, is plainly apparent from what follows: Thou shall not do so
unto the Lord thy God. To worship God with a strange worship, is, to worship a
strange god: neither will God accept of any other interpretation of false
worship, or worshipping in a false way, but that a new God is devised for the
object of it, that Ames. Medul. l. 2. c. 13. S. 42.
is delighted with such worship. So long therefore as we worship God in the
Antichristian way, we do interpretatively worship the gods of the
Antichristians.

Steven the Proto-Martyr lost his life in defense of the Gospel-way of
worshipping God, in opposition to the Legal worship, earnestly contended for by
the Jews, his antagonists; amongst the rest, for preaching against the Temple,
and so consequently against their National Church, the bond of which was their
meeting together at the Temple in one individual worship, Acts 6. 13. For Call.
in loc.
although the witnesses are said to be false witnesses; yet, as Calvin says,
this reproach was not objected to him for nothing; for he taught the abrogation
of the Law. But in this they were false witnesses, and suborned to lie, because
they wittingly depraved that which was well and piously spoken.

I shall now explain what I mean by Explic.
Antichristian Churches.

And first, I mean Parish-Churches.

To prove which to be Antichristian, I shall first show what I find storied of
their original.

Potter, in his interpretation of the number 666. p. 131. quoting Onuphrius
Panvinius de praecipuis urbis Romae Basilicis, cut of him writes thus: Whereas
originally there was a small uncertain number of Presbyters at Rome* they were
brought to a certain number and order, by Cletus and Evaristus Popes of Rome.
First, Cletus reduced the Presbyters of Rome to the number of 25: afterward,
Evaristus, about the year of Christ 100 appointed and prescribed a several
Parish to every one of these Presbyters; which Parishes were afterward
enlarged, and had their bounds and limits more perfectly, and more exactly
prescribed unto them, by Pope Dionysius, about the year of Christ 260. After
which time, Marcellus about the year of Christ 305. limited the number of those
Titles, which anciently were first given to the Presbyters by Evaristus, and
did by Decree constitute that there should be in Rome 25, as it were so many
Dioceses, for the more convenient baptizing of such Gentiles as were daily
converted to Christian Religion. Thus he.

Seldom, in his History of Tithes, Chap. 6. S. 3. writes thus: For
Parish-Churches, it is plain, that as Metropolitan Sees, Patriarchates,
(Exarchates in the Eastern Church) and Bishoprics, these greater dignities,
were most usually at first ordained and limited according to the distinction of
Seats of Government, and inferior Cities that had been assigned to the
Substitutes, or Vicarii, of the Praefecti-Praetorio, or Viceroys of the East
and West Empire: so were Parishes appointed and divided to several Ministers
within the Ecclesiastical Rule of these Dignities, according to the
conveniences of Country-towns and villages; one, or more or less (of such as
being but small territories might not by the Canons be Bishoprics) to a
Parish; the word Parish at first denoting a whole Bishopric, (which is but as
a great Parish) and signifying no otherwise then Diocese; but afterward being
confined to what our common language restrains it. The Curates of these
Parishes were such as the Bishop appointed under him, to have care of souls in
them, and were called Presbyteri-Parochiani, i. e. Parish-Presbyters.

These Parishes arose from the limitation of the Ministers function. Afterward
there arose another kind of Parishes, from the limitation of the Ministers
maintenance; of which Seldom in his History abovesaid, Chap. 9. S. 4. thus:
Afterward, when devotion grew firmer, and most Laymen, of fair estates,
desired the Country-residence for some Chaplains that might be always ready for
Christian instruction among them, and their families, and adjoining tenants:
Oratories, and Churches, began to be built by them also; and being hallowed by
the Bishops, were endowed with peculiar maintenance from the Founders, for
Incumbents that should there only reside: which maintenance, with all other
Ecclesiastical profits, that came to the hands of every such Incumbent, (in
regard the Lay-founder had, according to the territories of his Demesnes,
tenancies or neighboring possessions, made and assigned both the limits within
the which the holy Function was to be exercised, and appointed those that
should repair to the Church and offer there; as also provided a special Salary
for the performance) was afterward also restrained from the common Treasury of
the Diocese, etc.

And thus you see the Pedigree of Parishes; set aside some few that have been
made by the special Orders of Popes or Princes in the dividing or uniting of
Parishes for conveniences sake; of which, Seldom, p. 276.

Out of what has been said, 't is evident, that Parish-Churches are not plants
of our heavenly Fathers planting; and so shall be plucked up. Mat. 15. 13. They
are of man's making, and have sprung out of his pride, ambition, and usurpation.
They have been bred in the womb of the Apostacy of these latter times, and
brought forth by the working of the mystery of iniquity. The best that can be
said of the mother of these daughters, is, to call her Ignorant devotion. They
are therefore things that may be shaken, and that God has promised to remove,
Heb. 12. 26, 27. and therefore it behooves all to flee out of them before they
fall on their heads.

But lest what has been said be useless to the more heedless, consider,

First, that Scripture speaks nothing of Parish-Churches, if we cut out the
scantling of them by what has been alleged. We have nothing of such
Parish-Churches in Scripture, as we have spoken of. There is nothing of
limitation of Churches by the Ministers Function, or maintenance by the Edicts
of Popes, Bishops, or Princes of this world: and it is enough against a thing
belonging to the Worship of God, that there is no institution for it, that the
Scripture says nothing of it. Heb. 7. 14.

Secondly, that these Parish-Churches derive their Pedigree from Rome; There
was the copy set, after which all the world wrote, wondering after the Beast:
neither does it help that they derive their Pedigree from times so near the
Apostles; for the mystery of iniquity did work even in Paul's time, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
7.

Thirdly, consider what Babels of confusion and superstition they be. Here you
shall see Christ and Belial confounded Saints and Sinners jumbled together,
without any kindly separation of the precious from the vile. Civils and
Ecclesiastics confounded, whilst the Civil power of a Magistrate bounds a
Church, or the privilege of a Patron by Civil Precincts. Here you may observe
great care that all should be consecrated, the walls within which they meet,
yea the ground that they tread upon, except the worshippers; as if God were
pleased with an holy house, and holy ground, without an holy people: which
kind of superstition Steven rebukes in the Jews, Acts 7. 48, 49, 50.

Fourthly, When the pretended reasons of these constitutions of men are, the
convenient baptizing of converted Gentiles, and taking care of souls in the
Country: There lies poison hid under these herbs. For the necessity of Curates
arose from the exorbitant pride and ambition of the Bishop, affecting a
spiritual Dominion, parallel to the Civil Dominion of the Civil Governor. And
again, the Curates are the Bishops creatures, for the managing of their
monstrous Ecclesiastical Dominion; and so appointed, as not to infringe the
Dominion of the Bishop, nor detract from the dignity of the Bishopric; and
that not only before, but since Lay-founders and Patrons, the Bishop still
reserving to himself, Ordination of Ministers, Consecration of Churches, and
Excommunication of Delinquents: and so as the devotion that made men desire a
Chaplain to reside with them in the Country, was ignorant and superstitious,
like the then-Popish times; so was it satisfied with as superstitious a mean;
which therefore lays no good foundation to the Churchdom of a Parish.

Fifthly, these Parish-Churches have continued unto our times, witness the
presentation of Patrons, institution and induction by the Bishops; who also
consecrated the Church, as often as any new one was built. And here we may
mind the known distinction of the Common Prayer Book, viz. of Ministers into
Bishops and Curates; whereby it plainly appears, that our Parish Ministers
were reckoned still to stand but as Curates to the Bishop. Now though there
has been some change made by the fall of the Hierarchy; yet there has not
been a kindly Reformation. For the most standing to their old Principles,
though their practice be lamed by the fall of the Hierarchy, wait with hope
that the deadly wound that that Image of the Beast has received, may be cured,
and he live again; and therefore while the Head labors of the deadly wound,
they do what they can to defend the extreme parts. Others, though they would
have some reformation, yet delight in some broken pieces of the shattered Image
of the Antichristian structure, setting up their threshold by Gods, and their
posts by his posts; Ezekiel. 43. 8.

Sixthly, if we would make a kindly reformation, we must not build on
Antichrist's foundation; but laying aside all thet is of men, return
immediately to Gods institution, and primitive practice, Matthew. 19. 8. As for
instance: when the National Church of the Jews was to cease, and the floor of
Christ to be purged; this was the Apostolical practice, viz. to preach faith
and repentance unto their audients; and especially, that they save themselves
from the untoward generation they lived amongst, that not only were
unbelieving and impenitent in general; but resisted the Reformation that Christ
had set afoot, and with tooth and nail defended their Temple, Law, and Customs,
Acts 6. 13, 14.

This done, those that gladly received their word, walked in the fellowship of
the Church, Acts 2. And when Antichrist has raked the National Church out of
her grave, and set up Parish-Churches, her daughters, or rather, divided her
into Curacies, as so many members of her, who cannot derive their Pedigree from
Apostolical institution; I know no reason but that in our Reformation we should
imitate the Apostolical practice. And concerning the Antichristian
Church State, it is plain that is spoken, Rev. 11. 2. The court that is without,
cast out, and measure it not. That is, says Bullinger, God will not edify, but
destroy it: and those that God acknowledges for Churches during the time of
Antichrist, under the notion of the two Candlesticks, verse. 4. which in the
language of the Revelations are Churches, Chap. 1. 20. these are witnesses
against, and separatists from the Antichristian Church State, as we see by the
context precedent, verse. 1, 2, 3. Christ's Church State is set down in the first
verse, Antichrists in the second; the witnesses against it are empowered, verse.
3. and specified to be the two Olivetrees, (noting Magistracy and Ministry)
and the two Candlesticks (noting Churches) that arise against the Antichristian
Church State; at least, at the later end of his Reign, shall the testimony be
managed, by separating Congregations: I say, separating: for 't were absurd to
conclude that they witness in word against, and comply in practice with the
Antichristian Church State, that is to be utterly slighted and demolished, like
a Castle that is to the damage, not the defense of the Commonweal. And how the
holy Ghost could speak plainer, for separation, not only from the corruptions
of the Antichristian Church, but from the Antichristian Church State it self,
(which is also a corruption) then in the text, I cannot tell: Come out of her,
my people, that ye be not partaker of her sins.

Thus far for the rise, and original nature of Parish-Churches: We come now to
consider them in their present state.

Does not the character of the Antichristian Church State agree very fitly unto
them, as you have it, Rev. 11. 2? Are they not given unto the Gentiles? Do not
men of uncircumcised hearts and ears, stand seized of the power of the Keys in
those Churches; the major part by far (everywhere, for ought I can observe)
being such? Finally, does not this present party of Gentiles in all
Parish-Churches, tread the holy City under foot, and trample upon the sacred
Polity of Jesus Christ? Will they endure the reformation of their Christian
Gentilism? or the breaking of the Image of the first Beast, wherever their
Churchdom is acknowledged, and an answerable interest in the managing of their
Churchaffairs allowed them?

Look on the condition of those Parishes, where the Minister pleases his
Parishioners, and ye will find that verified that is written, Lam. 1. 11.
Zions adversaries there spread out their hands on all her pleasant things. Cast
them out therefore, and measure them not.

The Samaritanes pretend the same Religion with the Jews, and therefore desire
to be admitted to re-build the House of the Lord with them. But the Jews reject
their motion, saying, You have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto
our God: but we our selves together, will build an house unto the Lord God of
Israel, Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3. Let our answer be the same to all those Christened
Gentiles, that would, on pretense of being of the same Religion. yea Church
with us, being of the same Parish: to them that would, I say, upon this
pretense, equally with us, interess themselves in the re-building of our
Gospel-Temple; let our answer be the same: They are adversaries; they have for
these many hundred years trodden under foot the holy City; and to this their
Genius leads them: and therefore there is no probability that they should
further the work but hinder and mar it; especially if we continue our
fellowship with them in the Parish-Churches, where they are the greatest part
by far.

Saints of late, and heretofore, have expressed their sense of what I have
said. Mr. Caryl, Mr. Oxenbridge, and Mr. Sidenham, in the Epistle Dedicatory to
Mr. Lockyer's Little Stone, thus: The first part of his work, that pleads for
the holiness of Church Members, (say they) may put you upon enquiry whether you
(viz. those of Scotland) have dealt kindly with Christ, to obtrude as imperious
and selfish Guardians or Tutors, such a Spouse upon him, as is not according to
his choice, mind, or liking. The experience of the true and discerning
Shepherds here, (who are as dear to their brethren, as sheep to the wolves)
does tell them, that almost nine parts of ten, of their flock, are not sheep,
nor fit (say they) of Civil, much less (say we) of Spiritual privileges; and
then they are rather a Herd or Drove, then a Flock: for few (as the Shepherds
themselves think, now their driving power cease) will be willing to be kept by
them; nay, many (as they already know) do turn again, and would gladly rend
them. And afterward, thus: If Saints will not (say they) but in the company of
this multitude walk with God or his people what Gospel-communion can there be
expected? As for the purging of this body, we suspect it to be (as the body)
supposed, and a diversion from a real duty: for besides what we apprehend how
impossible it is, for the far lesser in number (retaining their present
constitution) that they should regularly cast out the greater part therefrom;
we are informed by our experience, that the worse and greater part, is more
able and willing to a formal ejection of the better, then on the contrary: And
therefore this ten years talk of the lips (about purging) has tended only to
penury, and the last years are farther from that work then the former. Thus
they.

I add a notable Prophecy of John Hus that you may read in Foxes
Martyrologie, Vol. 1. page 830. Moreover (says he) hereupon note, and mark by
the way, that the Church of God cannot be reduced to her former dignity, or be
reformed, before all things first be made new. The truth whereof is plain by
the Temple of Solomon. Like as the Clergy and Priests, so also the people and
Laity: or else unless all such as be now addict unto avarice, from the least to
the most, be first reclaimed, as well the People, as the Clergy and Priests.
Albeit, as my mind now gives me, I believe rather the first, that then shall
arise, a new people, formed after the new man, which is created after God; of
the which people, new Clerks and Priests shall come and be taken, that shall
hate covetousness, and the glory of this life, hastening to an heavenly
conversation: notwithstanding, all these things shall come to pass, and be
brought by little and little, in order of times, dispensed of God for the same
purpose. And this God does, and will do, for his own goodness, and the riches
of his great longanimity and patience, giving time and space of repentance, to
them that have long lien in their sins, to amend and flee from the face of the
Lords fury; whilst that in like manner, the carnal people and carnal Priests,
successively and in time shall fall away, and be consumed as with the moth.
Thus far John Hus.

Neither let it seem harsh to any that admire the antiquity of Churches in
England, which they conceive began to be planted by Joseph of Arimathea, or
Simon Zelotes; that I press the casting out of the Parish-Churches, the deemed
successors of them. It was a saying of William Rufus of the Popes of Rome, the
pretended successor of Peter; Quod Petri non inhaerent vestigiis, praemlis
inhiantes, non ejus potestatem retinent, cujus sanctitatem probantur non
imitari. The like may I say of Parish-Churches, that 't is conceived were
planted by either of those Worthies above mentioned: They retain not their
privilege, whose neither constitution nor conversation they can be found to
imitate. And we know that the holy Ghost teaches us to say of as few as may be,
to give a valid testimony against the Antichristians, of two witnessing
Churches, witnessing against, and separated from the Church State, and
corruptions of the holy-City-trampling Gentiles: of these, I say, the holy
Ghost teaches us to say, These are the two Candlesticks (i. e. Churches)
standing before the God of the earth, Rev. 11. 4. whereby the Churchdom of
these witnessing separated Churches, is not only established and approved, but
the much-claimed Churchdom of others rejected, whiles 't is appropriated unto
those two witnessing separated Churches, that they stand before God; whereby is
plainly implied, that others stand not before God: but such a God as must be
conceived to delight to be worshipped in such an order.

Thus much for Parish-Churches: We come now, in the second place, to interpret
Antichristian Churches by Episcopal Churches, that are the greater territories
formed into Diocesan, Provincial, and Ecumenical Churches, under the several
Orders of Bishops; of which Amefius thus: Superstitio secundi Med. lib. 2. c.
13. S. 44.
generis est in humanis Ecclesiae formis, etc. That is, A superstition of the
second kind, is in the humane forms of Churches; of which sort are Churches
visibly, integrally, and organically Ecumenical, Provincial, and Diocesan,
brought in by men, as also in the Hierarchy agreeable thereunto. For Jesus
Christ has instituted no other visible, integral, organical Church, or Church
with Officers, for the practice of his visible, public, and solemn Worship,
but one particular Congregation, that may meet together ordinarily in the same
place, to worship in all the Ordinances of Gods house. Such was the Church at
Jerusalem: There were added to the Church about three thousand souls, Acts 2.
41. The number of the men was about five thousand, Chap. 4. 4. Yet they were
all with one accord in Solomon's porch, Chap. 5. 12. Multitudes of men and women
were added, Chap. 5. 14. yet the Apostles call them together unto them, Chap.
6. 2, 5. And Chap. 15. 4. Paul and Barnabas were received of the Church: by
which (says Calvin) he understands Plebem ipsam and totum corpus, the whole
body of the people, in distinction from the Apostles and Elders, as appears
from the immediately following mention of them: and in verse. 12. All the
multitude of the Church (that it seems were present at the disputation of the
Apostles and Elders, verse. 6, 7. and it is very plain they were, by their
concurrence with them, immediately upon the conclusion of James his Speech, in
choosing brethren, and subscribing Letters to the brethren of the Gentiles,
according to the declared sentence of James) gave audience to Paul and
Barnabas, declaring what miracles God had wrought among the Gentiles by them.
And whereas the Apostle speaks of myriads of Jews that believe, Chap. 21. 20.
it is not to be restrained to Jews dwelling at Jerusalem, since it was the
time of Pentecost, (Chap. 20. 16.) when Jews and Proselytes came to Jerusalem
out of all nations: and we have express mention of the Jews that were of Asia,
verse. 27. Neither is it impossible for Myriades (in the language of Luke, at
least) to come together, and to hear at once the same Preacher. To show which,
Mr. Norton urges Luke 12. 1. However it be, it seems that the Church of
Jerusalem did at this time ordinarily come together in one place, as occasion
required; for verse. 22. it is said, The multitude must needs come together. This
cannot be meant of the Officers; for besides that they are the Speakers, it
would be incongruous, to call them the multitude: neither can it be meant of
others besides believers; for this speech of the Elders, is to be speak some
condescension in Paul, to some Legal rites, thereby to take off the offense of
these, that believing, were yet Zealots of the Law, as is plain; and so such an
understanding would not agree to the scope of the Elders. Neither does it seem
congruous, that it should be said of any other but the Church of Jerusalem.
What other multitude should the Apostles and Elders expect, that they should
come together (unto them, as is implied) much less determine their coming
together, (as some understand the speech) about the Apostles being come to
town? To this agree Calvin, Beza, and Diodate, on the place.

We may add to this instance, that of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
and Antioch, Acts 15. 30. But I find no contrary instances.

And this I say, not only against the Episcopal; but also Classical Churches,
which are put in the room of those Episcopal Churches, by the effectual working
of the mystery of iniquity.

These are combinations of many Congregations united by subjection to one and
the same Court of Elders, chosen out of the whole to govern them. These are
pressed so far, (at least by some) as to take away power of Government, and
exercise of Ecclesiastic Discipline from the Congregations, and not only
infringing of it; so leaving them but as the Curacies under the Bishops, and
their Ministers, to have no more power then the Parish-Ministers had, under the
Bishops, at least considered as the Ministers of such Congregations. See Mr.
Wood, in his answer to Mr. Lockyer's Little Stone, Part 2. Sect. 1. S. 4.

I will not (says he) question the an sit, or being of the subject of this
assertion, whether there be de jure and of divine institution, an Eldership or
Presbytery within a particular Congregation; that is, a College of Elders,
belonging to one single Congregation, by it self, having power of Government,
and exercising Ecclesiastic Discipline: although I know, men learned, and much
exercised in the study of the Questions about Ecclesiastic Government, are of
the judgment, that there is not such an Eldership or Presbytery. And I
confess, it is right hard to find in Scripture either precept or example for
it.

Let us consider the judgment of these Learned men, to which Mr. Wood seems
to incline; and more too, as appears in his foresaid Treatise, p. 369. where
expressly he gives his judgment. The fixing (says he) of single Congregations
under appropriated Officers, is not necessary by any divine institution, etc.

Observe, first, that they appropriate the power of Government, and exercise of
Ecclesiastic Discipline unto the Eldership, That is implied in what has been
quoted, and we need not search their Writings, that are of that Way much, to
find it expressly denied, that Popular concurrence in acts of Government, is to
be proved by the Scriptures. Vide Mr. Wood, Part 2 of his aforesaid Treatise.

This how well it agrees with the institution, Matthew. 18. 18. let it be
considered. When Christ says, Whatsoever [ye] bind on earth, etc. does not he
include the offended brother, to whom he directs his speech, from verse. 15, and
of whom, and whose act to the offender, he had last spoken? Especially
considering that this verse contains the confirmation of the last clause of the
foregoing verse, mentioning the said act of the offended brother, to the
incorrigible offender, that amounts to the casting him out of the Congregation
of Christ's Church, and making an Heathen of him: which that we may conceive
that it was done, though by him, yet not by him alone, but with the Church;
Christ, adding the confirmation of this act, speaks in the plural number, and
says, not, Whatsoever [thou,] but [ye] shall bind, etc. yet withal keeping the
second person, that the offended brother be not excluded: not saying,
Whatsoever [he] or [they] but [ye] shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven. And when Christ promises the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven unto Peter,
his whole discourse looks on Peter as a lively confessor of Jesus Christ; his
confession being the occasion of all that Christ speaks unto him, and nothing
coming in between the beginning and end of his Speech, that may make us think,
that Christ considering Peter as a confessor of him at the first, did
afterward change his Notion, and look on him otherwise. Read Matthew. 16. 16. etc.

Secondly, they exclude the single Congregations considered severally, each one
by it self, from having an Eldership having power to exercise Ecclesiastic
discipline; and so consequently the several single Congregations are excluded
from having power of Government, which they say resides wholly in the
Elderships. How likely this is, let it be judged. Is it likely that Go tell the
Church, Matthew. 18. 17. should mean, Go tell the Elders of the combination? Is
it likely that our Savior, so tender of the offenders credit, and wary of
offending him, by making his fault public, that he must be told of it first
alone, then only before so manay as may be sufficient to give a Satisfactory
Testimony according to the Law: Is it likely, I say, that he should appoint no
mean, between the two or three witnesses, and a court of Elders of many
combined congregations? But not to stay here; it has been proved already, that
the Church of Jerusalem and Corinth were single congregations, that met
together ordinarily in one place: And that the Church of Jerusalem had her
appointed officers, and that the Church of Corinth exercised Ecclesiastic
discipline who, can deny? But how unwarrantably soever, hard they press their
Classical way against the congregational; even as has been said, to the utter
taking away of power of Government from the several single congregations;
neither do they stay here, but translate the power of Government to their
Elderships subordinate one to another till they come to an Occumenical
assembly, to the officres of the whole Catholic visible Church of Christ, as
united in lesser and greater combinations, even to an occumenical assembly. As
Mr. Wood in the aforesaid Treatise, page 371.

This is altogether strange to Scripture: for if we grant that single
congregations with their Eldership be excluded from the power of Government,
and exercising Ecclesiastic discipline; yet will it not appear from Scripture
that there are any higher Elderships, or larger combinations of Churches then
those of the first form and of the first step from the single congregation; yea
the contrary apears, in that the Churches of Asia, grant them collective,
Churches, (Rev. 2. and 3 chapters) do severally receive of Christ the praise of
their good, and blame of their evil carriage, each single Church for her self,
without any reflection on superior combinations; notwithstanding some of them
lay situate within eight or ten miles of each other; and those that were
farthest distant, not above 200 miles each from other (as some have computed
the Journeys between them.) This is strange, if there were superior
Combina^ions: and if there should have been, it is much that Christ should not
blame them, after so long continuance of Christianity, for not setting up his
ordinances; especially considering the defection of diverse of the Churches, to
whose charge it might well have been laid, as a thing wherein they were
accessory to their own Apostasy, that they had not set all up Gods means to
preserve them.

If it be objected that we read of an higher Eldership, exercising acts of rule
over a Proportional combination of Churches, viz, a Synodical assembly, Act. 15.

To this I answer, We read not of any combination, of any such combination of
the Churches there mentioned, viz. of Jerusalem, Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia,
whereby they should become Subject unto the rule of one superior Eldership, in
matters conceived to belong, firstly to their cognizance, or that may be
referred unto them, or in which there may be appeals made unto them; nor when,
and how the said combination was made and established.

Secondly, here was no Synod, by which our adversaries understand, an assembly
of Officers, resulting out of many inferior Presbyteries: I say here was no
Synod, in this sense. For we read of no foreigners that came to this Synod,
(if we must call it so) but these that came from Antioch, of whom we find
nothing that may import their concurrence in the decrees of it, but these
proceeded from the Apostles, Elders, and whole Church, that must needs mean the
Church at Jerusalem; and when it is said, With the whole Church, there is a
reflection in the expression, on the Apostles and Elders, as related at least
in their present residence and action, (which is all can be said of the
Apostles, being general officers,) unto that Church only. So that upon the
whole, the result is, that the decrees here made, were of the Church at
Jerusalem, and the officers of it only.

Thirdly, here was no appeal from the censure of the Church at Antioch. For we
read not of any Ecclesiastical censure, that the Church at Antioch had passed,
either concerning the persons disputing, or the things disputed: but only of
dissension, and disputation had betwixt Paul and Barnabas and those that came
from Judea. Neither were there any refers made from Antioch unto Jerusalem, as
though the matter were too high for their Cognizance, or beyond their ability
to determine. For the Churches of Antioch and Jerusalem were alike,
congregational, I say, more then Classical (in that strict sense wherein the
next to Congregational is meant) our adversaries cannot say:) and furnished
both with extraordinary Officers; to which appeals, and refers, in the sense
before recited, cannot agree.

But the reason of sending from Antioch unto Jerusalem, seems to me, most
probably, to be this, viz. to take off the scandal that came to the Church of
Antioch, and at least might come to those of Syria and Cilicia also by these
false teachers: by whose coming out of Judea, it may be also, bragging of the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, that they taught the same doctrine to the
brethren there, yea moreover, and it may be urging them to go and see if it
Vid. Bez. in. oc.
were not so; by these means, I say, the Church of Antioch had (as it is
probable) at least twice taken some offense, and been staggered in their faith,
as though Paul and Barnabas had taught otherwise then the Apostles and Elders
at Jerusalem. And so the errand of these Messengers, from Antioch to
Jerusalem, was primarily to get satisfaction that there was the same doctrine
taught at Jerusalem that was at Antioch, for the establishing of such as might
be staggered, and preventing of farther danger, by the pretenses of these false
teachers. And this seems to shine forth clearly, in the return of those at
Jerusalem, in the 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. verses. Because some had gone out from
them, that had offended the brethren of Antioch, etc. therefore they send
chosen men of their own company, that might take off the offense, by assuring
them of the contrary judgment of the Apostles, to what those false teachers
taught.

Fourthly, here was no rule exercised over the Churches, to which they of
Jerusalem wrote the result of their conference occasioned by the Messengers
from Antioch; wherein they thoroughly weighed the controverted point, to give a
sound resolve for the establishing of the staggering brethren. There was no
rule exercised, I say; for Paul is so embarked with the Church of Antioch by
his residence there, and deep hand in carrying on the controversy with the
false teachers, that I cannot see how without diminution of his Apostolical
authority, that the decrees of the Apostles should be more then materially
binding, viz. because Gods word only. How Paul, that in the defense of this
same point, causes whomsoever should preach otherwise then he with the rest of
his persuasion Gal. 1. 8, 9.
had preached: how he, I say, should submit unto any Judicature on earth
Authoritatively determining of his doctrine whether sound or not so as their
decrees should be formally binding, viz. as the decrees of such a court, this I
cannot conceive.

And again, it is a joint act, to make these Dec^ees, a joint act of the
Apostles, Elders, and brethren; the whole Church concurs to the making and
sending of them* and that under the same Notion, verse. 22, 23. 25 28. It
pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church. It seemed good unto us,
being assembled with one accord: It seemed good unto the holy Ghost and to us:
which us must be interpreted by Apostles, Elders, and brethren, mentioned in
the inscription of the letter.

Now it will not be granted that the brethren did join with the Apostles in an
act of rule over another Church or Churches. Neither will it help to say, that
the concurrence of the Apostles and Elders, and of the brethren, was of a
different nature. For the text is so full as to the involving them together in
the same act under the same expressions, even the highest, with so much
punctualness, in signifying their joint concurrence, that it will not admit
such a plea. Difference in the order of their concurrence we shall grant, viz.
that the Apostles and Elders did lead the Church in these acts: but difference
in nature we cannot grant.

If it be said, that by the whole Church is meant only the Synodical Church:
the reason that is given for this, falls to the ground. For it is grounded on
the Impossibility of the meeting of the Church of Jerusalem together in one
place, that has been refuted from clear texts of Scripture.

But be it that we shut out the brethren from a concurrence of the same nature
with the Apostles and Elders, to the making of these decrees, and let our
adversaries make the most of verse. 6. of this chapter, and verse. 4. of the
following chapter: will they say these decrees were Authoritative and formally
binding the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Cilicia? I trow not, when they have
better considered of the matter, according to what has been said. Will they say
that the Elders of a Classical Presbytery at Jerusalem (for they assert no
more of the Presbytery there: see Mr. Wood in the aforesaid tractate, page 371.
and the Messengers of Antioch are excluded from the decision of the
controversy and Decrees here made, by the text it self, chapter 16. 4.) did
exercise rule over all these Churches, so far distant, that could not therefore
be of their combination?

Neither is it to be conceived but (if classes were then in fashion) they had
their classical combinations, and Presbyteries too; and shall Presbyteries of
the same order rule over one another?

It may be it will be said that the presence of the Apostles, being
Extraordinary Officers, constituted this a Synod. I answer, it is sooner said
then proved: The text rather represents the Apostles condescending to act with
the Church, then elevating the Church to act with them, verse. 22, 25.

If against what has been said against exercise of authority by this meeting
over the Churches, that (verse. 28) of laying a burden of necessary things upon
them, be objected; Let it be considered whether there be not as much said of
the Assertion of the Pharisees verse. 5. whether therebe not as much said of
their Assertion, verse. 10.

And thus you see how hard it will be to grant any more with Scripture-warrant*
if we should grant classical Elderships, and combinations: but we shall not
grant these for want of instance in Scripture, or any other sound ground for
them. For the most Numerous of Churches that we read of, we have already showed
at large, that it was Congregational, viz. the Church at Jerusalem, And I
conceive that the Numerousness of the Churches we read of in Scripture called
severally (even the most Numerous, but) by the name of Church in the singular
Number, without the mention of any more then one company of Elders; I conceive
that has occasioned the conceit of classical Churches, and Elderships; but
without warrant from Scripture, as may appear, I say, from that the Holy Ghost
has been so punctual in showing that the most numerous Churches have still met
together in one place. To the Church of Jerusalem, we may add that of
Corinth. It Is plain that the Apostle writes to the body of the congregation,
by the epither he gives them in the inscriptions of both Epistles: These he
hints their ordinary coming together to join in the same individual acts when
he enjoynes them the casting out of the incestuous person: When ye are gathered
together, to deliver such a one to Satan, 1 Ep. chap. 5. verse. 4 5. A like hint
we have in the same Epistle. chap. 14. verse. 23. And here we may take notice,
not only that this Numerous Church of Corinth (how Numerous soever pretended
to be) was congregational: but that this Church had and exercised the power of
the Keys, for neglect of exercising which she is blamed, 1 Cor. 5. 2. although
Paul had not before this written to manifest his determination: and that the
exercise of this great piece of the Power of the Keys, viz. Power of
excommunication; I say, the exercise of this Power is put upon the body of the
congregation by Paul, without any distinct application of his speech to the
Presbytery. And in the same manner that the Power of binding is put upon them,
in the same manner is the Power of loosing put on them, 2 Cor. 2. 6. etc.
without any mention of their Eldership in particular, but wrapping up Elders
and People together, as which were both to concur, in this exercise of
Ecclesiastic discipline, and that with a concurrence of like nature as to the
substance of the matter, leaving to each their due place in the body, the one
going before, the other following in the Lord.

But to return, if these most numerous congregations, were congregational, not
Classical; I cannot think there were any Classical Churches, except there be a
Scripture produced, as plain for their Classicalness, as these are that I have
quoted, to the congregrationalness of these that I have instanced in. For
reason will carry any man to think, if the most Numerous Churches were
congregationall, that the less Numerous were so too: and nothing but a plain
Scripture can stop the course of such a reasoning.

And thus the whole fabric of the Classical way falls to the ground, in my
Judgment. Their appropriating all authority, and power of exercising
Ecclesiastic discipline to the Presbytery; the secluding the Presbytery of a
particular congregation from such authority; together with the whole course of
subordinations of combinations of Churches, and Elders, from the Classical
(that is, the lowest) to Ecumenical (that is, the highest) combination: they
can none of them show their genealogy, nor derive their Pedigree from
Scripture.

And what difference betwixt the Episcopal, and Presbyterial Government?
wherein does their constitution differ, except in the exorbitant power of a
Chairman that the Presbyterians cut by the height of the rest of the
Presbyters, in the several combinations? And what difference betwixt the
Universal Church of the Papists and that of of the Presbyterians? is it more
then Circumstantial? The Papists refer the Root and head of the Universality
to Rome; the Presbyterians do not: the Papists subject it unto the Pope, the
Presbyterians do not, but unto a general Council; and some Papists plead for no
more, save in the interim of the general Council. Vide Ellis Vind. Cathol. Page
16.

Let it be seriously considered, that the Bishop of Rome is not reckoned the
Antichrist from what time he got the peaceable possession of his Universal
Bishopric, with all the exorbitant Power thereunto belonging; but from what
Vide Cot. in Rev. 13. Page 36.
time he aipired to, and carried it ambitiously, and had it yielded usually
unto him, to sway Bishops, and Churches at his pleasure: and from this time, at
least before he proceeded farther, he is reckoned Antichrist, and the seventh
head of the Monstrous Beast, Rev. 13. 1. etc. That is no other then the
Catholic Visible Roman Church, as Mr. Cotton has learnedly demonstrated in an
exposition of his on that 13 of the Revelations, lately published. And this
reckoning of the beginning of Antichrist, is suitable to that description of
him that is given 1 These. 2. 4. That he opposes and exalts himself.
Accordingly we may easily gather, that the ambition of a Chairman, with the
fond devotion of some Elders and people, may soon turn Presbytery into
Episcopacy. There needs not an act of State for settling such power on a
Chairman, and putting Elders and people in subjection unto him, to constitute
either Papacy or Episcopacy. Thus you see there is little difference betwixt
Presbytery and Episcopacy and an easy transition from Presbytery to
Episcopacy, yea Papacy: and Vide Perk. Probl. Page 235.
they agree much also in nature, being an usurpation of Authority over the
particular Congregations, the visible Churches of Christ's institution; and
therefore I have put them together, as also Mr. Bain's Diocesan trial, qu. 1.
page 21. Those who subject themselves to a Presbytery, says he, as being under
it by subordination, may in effect as well be subject to an Episcopal (and by
consequence, I say) to a Papal consistory.

Let it be seriously weighed, that the Apostle gives us this Character of the
Spirit of Antichrist, that such a Spirit confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, John 4. 3. We must not understand this of a confession of
words only, but it is sufficient if practice speak it: For Antichrist
acknowledges that Christ is come in the flesh in words, but he denies it in
practice, whiles he brings in Judaism, or any other way of worship that Christ
has not instituted, into the Churches, according to that uncontrolled
expectation of the Woman of Samaria, John 4. 25, 26. When the Messiah comes, he
shall tell us all things, viz. about worship, that was the matter in discourse;
for that Practice contradicts Christ's being come in the flesh, when men do not
look only to Christ's institution in matter of worship. And this is the
expectation of the Jews even at this day, that Christ will at his coming give
in a suitable platform of his worship, suitable to his being come into the world,
to who^ therefore the practice of Judaism must needs be a stumbling block.
Though men may think they differ from Rome, they are of the same spirit, if
they walk not according to the Gospel-institution of Christ.

Before I come to the reasons of the

And first, 'twill be said, This way of separation that you press to be made
from the Parochial and Episcopal, yea classical Churches nulls all (at least
the most part of) the reformed Churches in the world.

I answer: This tends not to null or Babylon mixed with the Gentiles in the
outer Court unmeasured, and nourished hitherto in the wilderness of abominable
confusion, where the great whore sits President: when, I say, such as these are
called out of the Babylonish corruption and confusion by the name of Gods
people, they are plainly acknowledged to be of the mystical Church: And yet
they are implicitly denied to be of a right order, when they are called and
warned to come out of Babylon, that must needs mean order, since their faith is
approved; for that being done, there remains nothing to be disapproved but
order: for under these two, the Apostle sums up all to be approved or
disapproved in the Church, Colos. 2. 5. I deny accordingly that the Churches
before mentioned, are such visible Churches as Christ has instituted, and
their polity such as he has appointed; and assert, Though their faith be
Christian, yet their order is Antichristian* I deny them not to be the Woman
nourished in the wilderness, Rev. 12. 6, 14. But I deny them to be the
Candlesticks that stand before the God of the earth, chap. 11. 4. And this need
not be grievous, since the Holy Ghost has foretold us of such a distinction of
Christians. Some are content to walk with the nations in the outer court, with
so much as will keep life and soul together, and to bite hard in the
Wilderness, and straggle there, from one green path to another, so they can
but get a living. Others God gives power to be his witnesses against the
Gentiles, and to set up Christ's own order in the face, and to the teeth of the
Beast that ascends out of the Bottomless pit, though they be slain for it, and
will not be content to serve God as Pharaoh will give them leave. Such was the
Congregation in Queen Mary's time which Mr. Fox mentions Gods preservation of,
in his 3 Vol. page 921. and those of which Mr. Cotton makes mention in the way
of Congregational Churches cleared, page 4. These were in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and were remembered by some amongst us, but lately dead; they were about
an hundred, and they refused the common Lyturgie and Congregations attending
thereunto, and used prayer, and preaching, and Sacraments among themselves, and
suffered imprisonment for it, and pleaded for their separation before the Lord
Mayor, Bishop Sands, and other Commissioners, Jul. 20. 1576. and in this they
behaved themselves as faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ.

It Is one thing for Churches, to be looked upon as Churches in point of
salvation, and another thing for them to be looked upon as Churches in respect
of outward constitution, and visible order: In the former account, we cannot
but give the right hand of Fellowship to all that look to no other way of
salvation but by the blood of the Lamb: in the latter account, we can give the
right hand of fellowship only to those that are after the heavenly pattern,
laid down in the Word: we must not for respect to a right faith, swallow a
wrong order. Has not the letting go the right order, let in a wrong faith?
Does not the great beast, Rev. 13, Blaspheme God and his Tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven? meaning the Catholic Church of Rome, as Mr. Cotton on
the place shows at large.

Secondly, 'twill be said, this lays a ground to question all the ordinances

To this I answer, there is a double degree David for bringing up the Ark* in a
Cart, that should have been borne on the Priests shoulders: but we cannot
reject the ordinance, no more then the Israelites could reject the Ark, because
it was carried in the cart of the Philistims making. When it is promised that
the woman shall be nourished in the wilderness, Rev. 12. 6. it must needs imply
that there shall be some ordinances preserved from corruptions in their
essentials, and that Gods, people shall be accepted in the use of them, and
have benefit by them: yet that is no argument against coming out of the
wilderness (expressing (as is plain) the condition of the Christian world,
during the reign of Antichrist) when they have light and might todo it;
neither can it be more an argument against separation from the Images of the
Beast or relics of them, then it was against separation from the beast. Will
any say, that because Baptism was valid that was received in the Catholic
Church of Rome, that therefore they should not have separated from her that are
called the reformed Churches? Why then should any say, that because Baptism is
valid, and other ordinances that have retained their essentials, in the
Episcopal Churches, and classical Churches the Images of it, and in the
Parochial Vide M. Cotton in 13 Rev.
Churches, that are but relics of the Image of the beast, that therefore we
are not to separate from them?

But to speak no longer in general, let us come to that which is mainly drived
at in this last objection, viz, whether this separation do not require
rebaptization. I am for the negative, as appears by what has been said; and
shall add these arguments against rebaptization.

First, the Scripture speaks nothin of it; Jesus Christ has left us no
institution for it, who yet was expected to tell us all things, and this
expectation owned without the least exception, by our Savior, John 4. 25, 26.
That of the 19 of the Acts of the Apostles, is all the instance that I know,
has at any time been given to prove rebaptization; and this Scripture has been
quoted to this purpose in the fourth age after Christ by the Donatists: but in
my Judgment Cent. Magd. cent. 4. cap. 5. page 377.
so long abused. When, say they, Paul found certain at Ephesus, that said they
were baptized with the baptism of John, he commanded them to be baptized in
Christ. After the same manner do our Anabaptists interpret this Scripture
through mistake, applying verse. 5. to Luke, as his relation of what Paul did;
whereas indeed it is to be looked on as the relation of Paul of what John did.
And so is to be joined unto the former verse, as one entire Speech of Paul to
the Ephesine disciples. To prove which, Beza argues thus: For, says he, Beza in
loc.
the particle (...), which in all Greek copies is read with greatest concent,
and necessarily answers to the particle (...), does by no means, by no means,
I say, suffer that we should break the series of this speech asunder, as
though the first part were to be attributed to Paul, and the latter part to
Luke the writer. And besides, if there were here a rebaptization of the
Disciples that had been baptized with the Baptism of John, it will be employed,
that Christ's Baptism that he was baptized with, (being baptized of John) and
the Baptism of all his members, is not the same: that sounds very harsh. These
considerations persuade me to think that here was no rebaptization; and upon
this account there was none, because Paul upon deliberation finds the
essentials of a Gospel-Baptism in John's Baptism. And let it be proved that
any thing else was deliberated of by Paul, as to the solving of the Question,
whether he should baptize them or no, before he laid his hands on them, after
that their Ignorance of the gifts of the Holy Ghost brought their Baptism into
question; and whether the text will afford any thing to say upon good ground
for the former Baptism of these, but that they had the essentials.

Secondly, We must either own our Baptism received in the Catholic visible
Church of Rome the mother, or in the Diocesan or National Churches the
harlot-daughters and Images of that strumpet; or else we must conclude that the
Churches that shall be, and be owned of God, during the 42 months of
Antichrist, of which see Rev. 11. 4. shall want utterly the initiatory seal of
the New Testament: and of this we find no president in Scripture, that a
Church should utterly want the initiatory seal of the Covenant of God; neither
do I find any hint that these Churches should want it, and be in this case
unparalled, or know of any that pretend to any such thing, that there should
be a Church utterly without the initiatory Seal: or else there must be an
extraordinary way of reviving the lost ordinance of Baptism in these Churches;
and of this I know neither promise that we should expect a second Baptist, nor
experience for these hundreds of years, since there have been such Churches,
that any such have been raised up; yet this must be received, or the former,
that these Churches must want Baptism, if that be null that we have had in the
Catholic visible Church of Rome, or the Images of it: for if receiving it in
those false Churches null it, every one I think will readily grant that there
was not a Baptized person left in the world when the Wilderness first began to
set up particular visible Churches. For from the Churches rest till those
Waldenses and Albigenses, it is very rare to find a man that would acknowledge
any other Churches then the beast, or his Images, that would acknowledge a
particular visible Church, as Mr. Cotton observes in his exposition of the
Revelation, Cent. 4. cap. 5. de Heresi^.
chap. 13. page 123, and we are indeed minded of an act of Constantine, by his
Imperial Edict reducing all to the Catholic Church, to walk in communion with
her Holiness (as his language is) by the Centuriatores Magdeburgenses, Cent. 4.
page 315. by which Church that he means the Catholic visible, is plain by the
means he uses, viz. the delivering up the meeting houses or oratories to the
Catholic Church; as they that please may read in the place above cited.

Thirdly, 'twill be said, But many Obj. 3.
godly men have worshipped God Zealously in this way, and do still; and God
has, and is still no Question found of them.

In answer to this, let me propound Answ.
this to be weighed by every serious soul, that this must be looked on as an
indulgence of God unto sincerity, owning what is of himself, mingled with much
of man. After that God had declared his mind, about the place where he would
put his name, and David had preached it, 1 Chronicles. 22. 1. yet Solomon and the
Children of Israel neglected to build the house, the foundation of which was
not laid until the fourth year, 1 Kings 6. 1. and 37 verses: and perhaps this
came to pass through Solomon's too much intensness on the building of his own
house: because this is named before the Lords house, chap. 3. 1. immediately
before the people are blamed for sacrificing in the high places, that is done,
verse. 2. neither can I tell how to make the connection betwixt these two verses,
but that Solomon was so intent on his great match, and providing a Suitable
Palace, that in the mean while the building of the Temple was delayed, not
being carried on with that speed, that it might have been; and this prolonged
the peoples sacrificing in the high places, that turned unto sin unto them, and
Solomon too; and is made an exception in the religion of them both, 1 Kings 3.
2, 3. And yet Solomon's Zeal of God is approved too, and God is found of him,
verse. 4, 5. etc. but for all that, 't is not 1000 burnt-offerings that can make
God wink at the neglect of Gods institution. Men think because they love God,
and are abundant in duties, that God will not take notice whether they come to
Jerusalem, or go to the high places, what Churches they worship in: but believe
it, they are deceived; and they are as much deceived that think it is enough to
say for a way, that they have found God in it, or rather in something of his
that is practiced in it.

But there may be good done this

I answer, The good that God brings Peter Martyr in his Pet. Mart com. loc.
Clas. 4. cap. 6. ss. 42.
common places, page 570. I transcribe not the Latin (as also neither in other
quotations) for haste. Godly men, says he, so long as they were compelled to be
in the Papacy, neither could have their meetings otherwhere, if they thought
they should any way profit in amending manners, or any way procuring the glory
of God or the Salvation of others, were to show what was necessary to the
Bishops and pastors for that time given, if they could not do it amongst their
own. But when it pleased God to raise up Heroic persons, such as Luther, and
Zuinglius, which have planted innumerable Churches: leaving the graves, and
ashes, and small Relictis Bustis.
footsteps of the Church; it was meet they should betake themselves thither
where they might both live and do according to the word of God, and by this
means continue among themselves by succession the Apostolic faith and life,
by joining themselves to their predecessors* which lived rightly, and
sincerely in the primitive Church.

But shall we do it without the Authority

I answer, that which is pressed is but Jer. 51. 45. is a parallel place: Go ye
out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every one his own soul from the fierce
anger of the Lord burning against false worshippers.

If the Magistrate will further reformation, it is a mercy, so that he keep to
his own power, and do not infringe the power of the Church, for these two
powers must not be confounded; which yet few of the objectors attend unto: but
the text has no such provisoe, as, If the magistrate bid, or give you leave,
then come out of Babylon. And therefore we are to resolve with Pet. Martyr, We
must Com. loc. Class. 4. cap. 14. S. 29.
worship God holily, and piously, though all the Magistrates in the world
gainsay it. I may add to this what Wollebius Wol. lib. 2. cap. 5. Can. 11.
says: If the magistrate be an enemy of the Church, the reformation of
religion cannot be obtained of him; then reformation of religion lies upon
those as their duty, whom God has furnished with necessary gifts for it;
neither is the consent of Bishops to be expected. And because of this last
clause, I shall add what Peter Martyr, (a little above the place above quoted
in the margin) says:

There are some which may say, says Before we depart from the obedience of the
Magistrate in point of religion, the consent of the Church is to be expected.

They which say these things, let them every one is for himself firmly bound
to the law of God, whether others assent or dissent. If a Master have many
Servants that he commands to work in the field, and some of them in the
Masters absence will be idle, ought therefore the rest to be idle too, because
the others do not at all consent to the common work? for this he quotes Gal.
1. 15. and adds, So ought we also to do; after God has made known his truth,
we must not delay. Consent indeed is to be expected, if the matter be dubious
and obscure (viz. to him to whom it is revealed, as the course of his speech
makes manifest.) Let those therefore whose hearts God has raised up, go up and
build his house, Ezra 1. 5. and be as the he-goats before the flock, Jer. 50.
8. get we our brethren, if we can, along with us, but let us not delay our own
work and duty, but with David make haste, and not delay to keep Gods righteous
Judgments.

And so much for explication.

The reasons of the point are, first, because Antichrist Churches are sin, The
great beast, Rev. 13. 1, 2. represented in so monstrous a shape, to show h^^
ugly he is, in the fight of God, is the Universal visible Church of Rome: For
it cannot be meant of the Roman Pagan Empire, because of the crowned horns,
Rev. 13. 1. and being in the wilderness, Rev. 17. 3. Nor the Roman Christian
Empire; for the Devil gave not the Seat to the Christian Emperors, neither
were they admired of all the world, after the healing of the wound, by Charles
the Great; neither is it a note of perdition to yield subjection to them; which
things are said of this beast, Rev. 13. 2, 3, 8. Nor Antichrist, which is the
other beast, verse. 11. he is indeed one of the heads but not the beast it self;
differing in number, original, shape, and exercise of power: Vide Cott. in 13
Revel. p. 4. etc. what then can this beast be, as he concludes, but the
Catholic visible Roman Church? and this beast answers to, and is most fitly
thought to succeed in the place of the Roman Empire.

It Is reckoned also amongst the detestable sins of Antichrist, that he causes
an Image to be made to the first beast. Rev. 13. 14. that is to set a Church in
every Nation, etc. that may have the likeness of the Roman Church, viz.
Metropolitan, National, Diocesan, Cathedral, and Provincial Churches, as Mr.
Cotton shows, page 233. And indeed, if the first beast be the Catholic visible
Church of Rome, these are the living Characters of her, and so may well be
thought to be the Image; they are as like as mothers and daughters, and the
Parishes are but relics of them. Now these being sins of Antichrist, the
Doctrine cannot be doubted of; and those that will meddle with this sin, it
will draw in more sin upon them, even as the needle draws in the thread, Rev.
18. 5. Her sins have reached unto heaven; the holy Ghost gives this a reason of
our text. Take Beza's criticisme, on the word rendered by reaching. He uses,
says he, the word (...), whereby is signified sins mutually following one
another, and springing one from another, at last to grow unto such an heap,
that they have reached even to heaven. And how naturally Antichrists blasphemy
of the Tabernacle of God, Rev. 13. 6. (that in the language of the Revelations
best signifies the Church) follows on the continuance in his Churches, Let all
men judge; and whether that be not the reason why the Congregations of Christ
are so evil spoken of.

Secondly, because they are harlots, and will entice, as the harlot, to draw us
away to their lewd courses, Rev. 17. 5. She holds forth her abominations, and
filthiness of her fornication, in a golden cup. Babylon has golden pretenses
for her abominable idolatries: The prevention of Schisms and Heresies, for a
Catholic Church visible; Reverence to the womb that bare us, and the paps that
gave us suck, for Metropolitan, National, or Diocesan Churches, and
Parish-Churches: Decency, for the Surplice, etc. She has the alluring smell
of a Leopard, to draw people after her. 'T is dangerous to come near her, lest
they be ensnared, being besotted with her Cott. in Rev. 13. verse. 18.
sweet smell to the carnal sense. She contrives all things should be very
sightly, a comely proportion in the number of the Beast is contrived; 't is
pleasing to the fancy, and easy to remember; 't is 666. She is Mystery
Babylon, subtle of heart; her ways are such, that thou can not know them.
Therefore hearken not to her. A void her, pass by her, turn from her, and pass
away, Pro. 4. 15. And she is stubborn; if you will return to to her, well: but
she will not return to you. Gods people would have cured her, but she is not
cured, as 'twas said of old Babylon, Jer. 15. 9. I never knew any that would
have a through Reformation, that durst take along their whole parish with them
to the work: but have been forced to lay aside the most of them, as the Jews
the Samaritanes, Ezra 4. 1. etc. when they would prepare for distinguishing
Ordinances (as their phrase is) knowing right well, that there were dogs enough
(if indifferently all were admitted to the management of that matter,) to
snatch the bread out of the childrens hands, and drive them from the Table. Why
should they be washed in the same Laver, (at least their children that must be
washed in their right) that may not eat at the same Table? Let us take the
Prophets counsel; forsake we Babylon, and go every one to his own country: let
us wash our hands of her, and expect what God has determined of her, Mist.
iniq. page 660.
as Du Plessis once said of the Roman Church. So much for the reason of the
point. A word or two of application.

Let all according to their places farther Isa. 62. 20,

Be wise, Oh ye kings be instructed, ye judges, of the earth serve the Lord in
this work; cast ye up, cast ye up an high way for the people of God, and take
away the stumbling block, and gather out the stones out of the way of Gods
people.

First, take away Parishes by an act of State, viz. the Ecclesiasticalness of
them, and all that may represent them to be of Ecclesiastical consideration:
leave not so much as a broken piece of the Image of the beast, such are the
parish, and its Ecclesiastical appurtenances, as Hozekiah made the brazen
serpent Nehushtan a piece of brass, and brake it to pieces; because the
Children of Israel unto those days did burn intense unto it, 2 Kings 18. 4. So
do ye, make them common civil things, and leave no shape of the fomer
Ecclesiastical state in them. Take Josiah's example in demolishing the Altar of
Bethel, and the high place there; he brake down and stamped to powder the high
place. Parishes are our high places, in this apostasy of the latter times;
temples of man's invention. Away with all those consecrated places for worship,
those holds of Mahuzzim, Demons, or Saint-Gods, as Mede expounds them opening
the 39 verse of the 11 of Apost. page 104.
Daniel, as a part of the description of Antichrist. He renders the text thus:
He shall make the holds of the Mahuzzims, with all, or jointly, to the
foreign God. He paraphrases thus: And though the Christian God, whom he shall
profess to acknowledge, and worship, can endure no compeeres, yet he shall
consecrate his temples (Ecclesiastical holds) jointly to the Christian God, and
his Mahuzzims, Deo and Sanctis, i. e. to God and the Saints.

This may seem a nicety to most, that I should inveigh so against these. But
is not God as Jealous as ever? And should not Saints be as zealous? May
monuments of Idolatry be better endured then heretofore? Sure I am, the
argument for the demolition of these, is perpetual; and why the precept should
not, I know not. Daniel 7. 5, 6. and also verses 25. 26. The true reason why
these are suffered, is hinted by Mr. Cotton, when he says, Vial the 7. page 14.
When the zeal of God lifts up the hearts of people, Says he, then they will
not endure a consecrated place, in all the world where they come. And when this
vial is poured out, then the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God, and
then all the chapels o^ ease, and Churches of State, and temples of glory,
wherewith the world has been deluded, shall be thrown down; they will not
leave them a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down.

It Is to our shame, that we have no more knowledge of God, then to suffer such
plain monuments of Idolatry. I confess, were it not to cry out against the
Altar of Bethel, and gain an advantage of speaking to them, that otherwise I
cannot have, after the example of the Churches meeting in Solomon's Porch, after
the temple was abolished, Act. 5. 12. I would never more preach or perform any
holy duty in them.

A way with Patrons, or lay-founders, those most abominable usurpers: They
usurp the prerogative of Christ, they will found Churches; not only build a
Synagogue, but appoint the Church and the minister; and herein they usurp over
the Church too. Is it not wisdoms privilege to build the house, and hew out
the 7 Pillars thereof, Pro. 9. 1.? is not Christ Jesus the builder of the
house? and is not this his prerogative founded in his Godhead? Heb. 3. 3, 4.
Durst Paul and Barnabas exercise such tyranny as to impose a minister on the
people, as these do with the help of the Bishop formerly, of the Commissioners
for trial of ministers now? See Act. 14. 23. Mr. Calvin on the place, having
rendered the text thus: When by suffrages they had made them Elders in every
Church; He comments thus: The word (...) is to decree something by up-lifted
hands; by which form of speech, is best of all expressed the right way of
making Pastors. Paul and Barnabas are said to to Choose Elders: Did they do
this alone by their own office? but rather, they put it to the suffrages of
all, etc. Away therefore, I say with, these abominable usurpers. And although
this usurpation appear not so clearly in the continuance as in the beginning
of patrons, and though it lie under more restraint now then formerly, this will
not salve the matter: For the Patrons now a days hold their right to present,
by virtue of the first usurpations of their Ancestors, which yet they also
imitate and uphold; and so now all the wickedness of them: and withal,
Scripture will not bear a mincing reformation, Lopping and plashing of bad
plants: Neither will the blood of Christ bear it, and the power of his Spirit.
When the fountain is opened for sin and uncleanness, the names of the Idols
shall be cut off, and be no more remembered, Zach. 12. 1, 3. 'Twas evil to
sacrifice and burn incense on the high places, though it were unto the Lord
only: God will be served only in his own way, and wisdom will send forth her
maidens, Pro. 9. 3. which she cannot be said to do, when men will minister to
her in a strange way in the doing of it. And mark, these maidens are such as go
abroad to them that are without, that are simple, without understanding, and
walk with the foolish, verse. 4. 6. let the world, as well as the Church, be
supplied with ministers according to Christ's institution. That which is stuck
at much, is the rights and properties of Patrons; the taking away these, is
looked on as a piece of injustice. Remember Pharaoh King of Egypt, and Sihon
King of Heshbon, how their hearts were hardered by abuse of righteous
principles, urging them against Gods commands and his Churches good. Do you
ever find when Images are broken and burnt, groves cut down and burnt, and
high places destroyed, that there is any regard had unto the right that any had
to the materials? The great Proprietarie of all the world calls in these
rights; who shall withold them?

I am sorry for men in these days, See the Narrative of the Parlaments
dissolution on Dec. 12. 1653. with the Ordin. for impowering the Commissioners
for trial of publik preachers, p. 1.
that make it a ground to break up Parliaments, and make Ordinances, to
preserve the rights and properties of Patrons: God calls for them, and they may
yield them without any damage; except that they shall want a way to oblige
Ministers to daube them with untempered mortar, and sow pillowes under their
elbows, that they may lie easily in their sins, and go in ease to their
everlasting pains.

A way with Tithes, that old-Testament-maintenance, that seems to me plainly
distinguished from the new-Testament-maintenance, in that argument of the
Apostle for the maintenance of the ministers of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
it is plain he argues a simili, from the like; and like is not the same. And to
this suffrages judicious Mr. Hooker, in his Survey of Church Discipline: Part
2. chapter 1 page 31.
This way of raising maintenance, says he, appointed in the Gospel, is far
differing from that way of the tything in the Law, etc. Mr. Mede has this
passage touching difference of the Lawmaintenance of ministers, and the Gospel
maintenance. That which was only required for acknowledgment of the divine
dominion under the bondage of the Law, is now turned into the nature of an
(...), or gift for good tidings, but this does not fully teach the difference,
betwixt law, and Gospel-maintenance of ministers, which differs not only in
the motive and end, but in the very kind. For one is a legal Ceremony, and the
other is a Gospel-institution; the one is Jewish, the other is Christian; the
one reformed, the other popish, according to the epithers I find put on the way
of tything by Mr. Hooker, calling it the popish Jewish way of Tything. Survey,
part 1. chap. 1. p. 29.
Concerning the popery of it, I shall only add what Mr. Cotton speaks,
opening the number of the beast. The foundation, says he, is six, that he
opens by the six books of Decretals: now, says he, if you would know why this
six comes to be multiplied by ten; If you observe it, all the Government and
maintenance of the Roman State is by tenths, by tithes; all the people must
give the tenth to the Priest, and the Priest to the Bishop, for the maintenance
of the Catholic Church, and so the whole Government comes to be multiplied,
maintained, and established. All the Roman Catholics are built upon popish
Laws and decrees, all which require subjection to the popish Church, and
submission to that Church, and to the Pope as the head of that Church;
receiving doctrine, and worship, and discipline from that Church; and that was
founded in six, in the six books of their decrees, and it is multiplied (viz.
by tenths) according to the same books to maintain all the Clergy, from the
Pope to the lowest Parish Priest. But my argument that I would follow, is, that
Tithes are Jewish; that is much to be suspected, because they are Popish: the
Papists being so much addicted to be the Jews Apes; and the rather, because
they have seemed to make much of the Jewish Church Government, in composing
theirs; and so their Maintenance was most suitable to uphold it. But, which is
more, the maintenance by Tithes had reference to the Temple: They that minister
in holy things, do live of the things of the Temple, 1 Cor. 9. 13. that is a
shrewd hint to their Jewishness: for they have reference to, and so imply a
Temple, Priest, Sacrifices; which have been revived by the Papists, with this
maintenance. But yet farther, either Tithes are paid by the light of Nature, or
Moral command, or else by a Ceremonial precept. For as for the Judicial Law, it
contains but appendices, explications, and functions of the Moral and
Ceremonial Law; and so I need not mention that in this dis-junction. And also I
know none that fly to another mean, to prove that Tithes were not Ceremonial,
that may hurt this my Argument, besides this of Natural light or Moral command.
I assume therefore, Tithes are not paid by Natural light, or Moral command.
Those instances of Abraham and Jacob paying Tithes before the Law of Moses, are
not sufficient to evidence so much. Circumcision was not of Moses, but of the
fathers, Joh. 7. 22. yet was it so incorporated into Moses Law, that it did
oblige a man to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3. Sacrifices also are as old as
Cain and Abel, Genesis 4. yet part of the Ceremonial Law, and abolished by Christ,
Heb. 10. 8, 9. 10. But the Assumption is manifest, because no Law appointed in
the Gospel, is inconsistent with any Natural or Moral Law of God. But the
institution of our Savior, Luke 10. 7. urged by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 14. and
explained, Gal. 6. 6. will not stand with Tithes: These are out of the seed of
the land, the fruit of the trees, or of the herd of the flock, Lev. 27. 30, 31,
32. Deuteronomy. 14. 22, 23. The Gospel-maintenance is raised out of all good things
that the person taught has. Tithes were paid, the first Tenth to the Levites,
and they paid the tenth of the tenth to the Priest, Neh. 10. 38. And those
Levites that taught in the particular Synagogues, paid to the Priests who
administered in Jerusalem; the Gospel-maintenance is to be paid by all that are
taught. I conclude therefore, that Vide Hook. Survey, part 2. chapter ^.
Tithes belong to the Ceremonial Law; which to practice, is to dig Christ out
of his grave, and a character of Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3. Neither will it avail
for any to say that they take them not as Tithes: for the Corinthians could not
be so excused, as to their eating things sacrificed unto Idols, neither in the
Idols temple, nor otherwhere, having taken it from the shambles; if they eat
with the offense of their brother. And if they eat in the Idols temple, it was
not only evil, for the offense its sake, but for it self, as in which they
committed idolatry, and had fellowship with devils, 1 Cor. 10. 14 etc.
notwithstanding they made no conscience of the Idol, or the things offered to
Idols, but went to eat, as to the civil feast of their friend, verse. 19.
compared with chap. 8. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. When we join in the same action
with others, our different opinion will not save us from the guilt of it, as
the Apostle hints, verse. 20. These Tithes were sacrificed to Idols, either
directly, whilst in honor of the Saint the Patron with them endowed the Temple
that was consecrated unto him, or her; or interpretatively, by worshipping God
with other worship, and setting up other things (yea contrary things) then what
he has appointed in his Church; worshipping God in a Messiah to come, and
exchanging institution, Gal. 6. 6. for Tithes. And these are still fixed to the
Temples of the Saints, to whom Temples were built in every Parish: and though
they be not now looked upon so much, as Temples of the Saints, yet as Temples
of God they are looked upon generally, and the Service thought to be the
better, because performed there; and this comes to the same pass, since to
worship God in a false manner, is to worship a false Observant Saints see it to
their grief, and talk to one another of it.
god; for God has now no material Temple. Neither has there been any thing
done, by way of public Act, of the Nation, against this Superstition, received
by tradition from our Fathers. Upon which I could not meet with the Parish,
were it not that I come as a Prophet from Judah to Bethel to them, to cry out
against the altar there; or upon the account of the Churches meeting, not
theirs primarily. There is a thing like that eating things sacrificed to idols,
that the Church of Thyatira stands, as Rev. 2.
a bush in a my^y hole, to warn us lest we fall into it. And they that oppose
it, shall it may be fare the worse for it with the Nations; but Christ will
give them power over the Nations at last. Let us not deceive our selves, God
will not be mocked; All the Churches shall know that he searches the reins and
the heart, and will give to every one, not according to his pretenses, but his
works. Let us esteem our knowledge by humiliation, and the love of God, 1 Cor.
8. 1, 2, 3.
whereby we submit unto him, and are zealous of his glory, and afraid of
offending him; not by the enticing words of man's wisdom: God will acknowledge
him that loves him, and submits unto him, though his brethren may hate him, and
cast him out for trembling at Isa. 66. 5.
his word, through which he becomes in their eyes more nice then wise: but he
shall appear to his joy and they shall be ashamed.

Away, I say, with all appurtenances of a Parish Church. Let us not desire the
Silver and Gold of the Idol, lest we besnared,, and become an abomination like
it, and accursed like it. Deuteronomy. 7. 25, 26. Let us not be confident of our own
strength: how easy is it for us, or at least our Children, to be reduced to
the former Popish Church Way, when we have Cathedral and Parish-Churches,
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Churchwardens, etc. still continued? people are apt,
upon such occasions, to be taken with such things, and to ask kow their
Fathers, or the Nation has worshipped; and this is a step to idolatry, and
forbidden of God, Deuteronomy. 12. 30. that therefore would not have any of the
relics of the Canaanites idolatry survive them. Oh that God would turn
England into a Bochim, weepers, (as 't is in the margin) that we might become
weepers for this, That we have not yet abolished the memory of our Fathers
superstition, lest the Lord leave us to our enemies, to be thorns in our sides;
and to their gods, to be snares to our souls. See that sad story, Judge. 2. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. meditate on it sadly: we have been parallel to Israel in
deliverances, answerable to them in neglect of duties; why should not we expect
to be like them in the judgments that came on them?

If to this I should say, Take away Episcopal Churches, you would say it were
needless: but what then means the Cathedral Temples? other things may be found,
't is like, if you search as God will, viz. with candles, every dark hole. But
give me leave to say, Take heed, take heed, that you set not up Episcopacie
again. Saints are afraid what the Commissioners for trial of Ministers will
come to at last. Some spoke out their fears at first sight, and wished it came
not to another Episcopacy. Let it be seriously enquired into. I confess that at
first I was pretty well satisfied with the Ordinance for their sitting, save
that it is grounded, in part, on the defense of Patrons rights and properties:
but since, my scruples increase. That which most satisfied me at first and made
me think favorably of these Commissioners, (I mean, as such Commissioners)
was, that their Commission gives them not power to invest into Office: but that
will not answer all my scruples now. For though they are not to invest into
Office, yet they are to take the beginnings of their proceedings from the
presentation of the Patron, that presents to Benefice with care of souls
originally; and I know no qualification that is put on his presentation, but
only care taken to preserve his rights and properties; and so when they do
confirm this presentation, they do in effect invest into Office, and supply the
place of the Bishop, to give the Complement to the Parish Priest.

And again, is there not the same-kinde of Tyranny exercised over the elections
of the people that was formerly? even as whom the Patron and Bishop could agree
in, he was the man for the place, let the people be never so much grieved: even
so now, if the Patron and Commissioners agree, that brings in a Minister into a
Parish in spite of their hearts. But 'twill be said, that they are not looked
on as Churches. But I answer, There cannot be denied, but in many of them there
are some relics of a Church, some poor Saints that are nourished in this
Wilderness, that should not be imposed on. Let it be considered what Temple of
God that is, that Antichrist is described by usurping over it, 2 These. 2. 4.
was it not the woman in the wilderness? Rev. 12. 6. with 17, 3. Antichrist
raigns over the universal visible Church, during the wilderness-state of the
Church, that is hid in the confusions of Antichristian order, and lurks among
the crowd of Gentiles in the outward Court, that God owns not as a Church, Rev.
11. 2. and therefore his Remnant is this Temple, during the confusion of
Antichrist, lurking secretly among the Gentiles in their corrupt order.

Lastly, does not the Ordinance for empowring these Commissioners provide for
the propagation and continuance of our Parish Priests? for though the
Commissioners are not to make them so, yet they approve them that are so,
without any alteration Apost. page 104.
of their standing. Aaron would have excused his making the golden Calf if he
could, when he said, There came out this Calf: but Aaron should not have cast
the metal into the fire over such a mould, and then the Gold would not have
come forth in such a shape: so the aforesaid Ordinance should not cast
Ministers in the fire of examination over the Parish-mould, that is not taken
away, and then when any come out of this fire, they shall fall into that mould,
they become Parish-Ministers, or are continued to be so.

Let things be seriously weighed; I make not cavils, but speak out of
conscience, and the fear of the Lord. The fear of his Majesty makes me stand
upon such things as these, whose Name should be sanctified, his Kingdom be
submitted to, and his will be done in earth as it is in heaven. The Lord make
his people of quick understanding in his fear, not judging by the sight of the
eyes, and the hearing of the ear. Things may have fair faces, and be well
spoken, that are very foul, filthiness, of the fornications of Mystery Babylon,
whose abominations are in a golden cup. I cannot but look upon what Mr. Goodwin
once said, speaking of the Vid. a late tract of the world to come. page 28.
World to come, in opening Ephesians. 1. 21. viz. That Christ will not cease till he
has thrown down every rag, all that dross and defilement that Antichrist and
Popery brought into the World. I cannot but look on this, as comprehending as
much in brief as I have said, Jesus Christ will never rest (says he) till he
has thrown out all the dross of this world, both of doctrine and worship, that
conformity to the World has brought in.

I know the great Objection against what has been said is, that Ministers will
want their certainty: but for all this, they that trust in the Lord will say,
Cast up, take away the stumbling block, and that with a great deal of fervor,
because of the promise, They that trust in the Lord shall possess the land, and
inherit my holy mountain, Isa. 57. 13, 14. God has kept me, I bless him, from
many a snare, by enabling me to take the promise for my maintenance; and when I
first entered into the Ministry, that Psa. 37. 3. was set on my heart; When I
was in doubt whether to serve the Lord with a little means, or go to seek more;
yea, rather accept more, for I was offered it in more places then one. And I
have been tried whether I would stick to i^: God has kept me to it, though
with much experience of my frailty: and through this comfort of the promise, I
have refused livings when I might have had them, and laid the^ down when God
called for them, in the witness of the Truth. That I say in the strength of
God, is, Vincat veritas, ruat coelum. Let us gain Truth with the greatest
damage; for he that is the fountain of truth, is the fountain of good, that
has riches of glory to supply all our wants.

I proceed now unto a Use of exhortation viz. Isa. 52. 11. it is an
exhortation, Diodate on the place.
says Diodate, to the people to come out of earths Babylon, and not to be
allured and enticed by the unclean and profane benefits thereof; And to all the
Church, redeemed by Christ, to separate it self from the communion and
affection of the world, and the corruptions and Idolatries thereof, 2 Cor. 6.
11. If any say, We are in a captive state, yet hear what Calvin says on Call.
in loc.
the place; he admonishes them, says he, that although they be captives, yet
that they do nothing for the sake of their lords, that their condition may be
the better, that they suffer not themselves to be drawn away from the pure
worship of God, that they be not polluted with their rites; that they seem not
to worship their idols, etc. assent to their religion: The Prophet does not,
says he, exhort the Jews, to be clean, when they shall be free, but whiles
they shall be held captive, and undergo the peril of their lives. Add Jer. 50.
8. and 51. 6. and 51. 45, 46. Strive to be foremost in reformation, as the
hee-goates delight to go before the flock. Deliver every one his own soul;
stay not for others so as to lose your selves. These are not commands only,
but have the force of a promise, that the people of God shall come out of
Babylon. And it is as much as to say, Ye shall come out, if it be not your own
fault. And this is a Cordial not to be neglected, as in the Type, so neither in
the Antitype, that the Lord gives his people. But what hopes of Deliverance?
one rumor comes one year, and another year comes another rumor, and in the
land is violence, ruler upon ruler, (as some render this last clause.) The Lord
endeavors to defend our heart against such discouragements as these, Jer. 5.
46. before quoted. Take Calvin in loc.
Calvin's note on it. I doubt not, says he, but the Prophet here bids the Jews
be of good and cheereful heart; although the earth do often change the Lords
thereof: because that mutation althought it be manifold, cannot at all detract
from Gods rule, viz. swaying all things to the accomplishing of his promise, to
his peoples good in their Season.

My dear brethren, whom I long to see upon mount Zion, and meet in the
Rendezvous of the 144000, there following the Lamb, and singing the new song:
I beseech you suffer the word of exhortation, in these following particulars.

First, reform not only substance, but circumstance; hate the garment spotted
by the flesh. Under the Law a man might not only be defiled by a leprous man,
but by his clothes. Jude alludeing to this type, exhorts us to hate the garment
spotted by the flesh, verse. 23. Calv. in loc.
Jude is so far from suffering evil to be cherished by indulgence, that he
commands to cut off all preparations, and all accessaries (as they call them)
that they avoid whatsoever is of any affinity or near to vice. Willet on the
place Willet on the place.
gives us this exhortation. We that profess, says he, the glorious Gospel of
Christ, are taught that we should not, neither in opinion, or in any external
usages, rites or customs, which may breed offense, conform our selves to the
carnal and spotted profession of popery, but to decline in all things the very
shadow, show, or least suspicion thereof.

Secondly, take away, not only Idolatrous Notions, but the things. The Lord
commands, that the graven Images of the heathen Gods, be burnt with fire, Deuteronomy.
7. 25. But it might be objected, The Silver and the Gold is never the worse we
will therefore save that, and call it silver and gold; we may put it to a good
use, so we look upon it as of no holiness, but common silver and gold:
Therefore the Lord adds, Thou shall not desire them, nor take them unto thee,
lest thou be snared. Dod and Cleaver on the Commandments, give this comment on
the place: God, say these reverend lights, labors with the people of Israel,
that when in the land of Canaan they met with Idols covered with gold and
silver, they should not covet or touch one parcel of the plate, or meddle with
it: for if they did, it would ensnare them, and make them remember the Idol;
and from remembering, fall to likeing, and at last to worship it. Therefore it
is an abomination to God; and he that will keep a piece of gold of the Image,
it is the next way to make him a worshipper of the idol.

This is that which the Apostle means, when he bids us purge our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit. We must not only purge our selves of
evil intentions, as the Corinthians that eat things sacrificed to Idols in the
Idols Temples, that said they went to the civil Feast of their Friend, and
acknowledged but one God, and one Lord: but as the Apostle teaches them, they
must not eat the things sacrificed to Idols, nor sit at meat in their temples;
even so we must lay aside all superstitious things and actions, and have no
fellowship with wicked men in them.

Thirdly, return not only to the true object of worship; but to the right
means that are instituted in the word of God. Enquire not how others have
worshipped their Gods, Deuteronomy. 12. 30. we should in reformation take no notice
how idolatrous superstitious people have done before us, but what thing God
commands, observe to do that, ver. 32.

This is that spoils reformation, that men's eyes do not look right on, and
their eyelids look straight before them, Prove. 4. 25. and so as the Serpent
beguiled Eve, by drawing her eyes from institution to carnal considerations; so
are men beguiled from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3.

Lastly, Beware of Antichrist's brokers, and buy nothing of him at second-hand.
The Prophet reproved the Hypocrites of his time* who though they would not eat
of polluted and unclean flesh, yet the broth was found in their vessels. It
Will et on Jude 23.
has been the old stratagem of the Dragon, and his vicar Antichrist, to
deceive men by an image; and men that will not abide Papacy, are yet well a
paid with Episcopacy; and those those that cannot bear with Episcopacy, fall in
Presbytery; which how near of kin to it, ye have seen before. As there is the
strength and juice of the swines flesh in the broth, though not the outward
form; so is there the force, and strength, and nature of Episcopacy in
Presbytery, although it in shape shape be somewhat different. Therefore Epist.
^^ vind. C^^^
Mr. Ellis. once Popery, says he, rective or in point of Government, I showed
was very probable (for the substance though not the formality of it) to follow
upon the Presbytery, on the ground that its now endeavored upon. I do not
scornfully upbraid any, ('it is far from my heart) but I faithfully warn men of
the devils method, whereby he goes about to deceive.

I shall conclude all with that noble Speech of the noble Lord Du Plessis, May
we not Mist. iniq* p. 660, 661.
lawfully say with the Prophet, We would have cured Babel, but she would not be
cured. Forsake her, and let us go every one to his own Country, let us now wash
our hands of her, and expect what God has determined of her, especially since
her judgment is come unto heaven; on the contrary, the Lord has set forth our
righteousness. And what then do we wait for from the same counsel, the same
prophecy, and therefore from the same certainty; but that those Kings and the
same States who have worshipped her, finish the work of God, who will put into
their hearts to fulfill his will and his pleasure, to execute his sentence? and
let not the present state of things astonish us in one day, in one hour, in a
moment are his works performed, and this work must without doubt be performed.
And long ago, as of a thing already done, near at hand, and most certain, the
Angel cried out* and redoubled it, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon. But God
forbid we should forget that other cry that follows, Go out of her, my people,
ye to whom God has given power to know her, ye which know her but too well,
take heed it be not your damnation.

Can any man now pretend an excuse? that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues; lest being defiled by the contagion of her
Idolatry and Enchantments, ye be made partakers of the sentence long ago
pronounced against her, of eternal fire that remains for her.

But because we are for the most part incredulous and stupid; let us pray unto
God of his mercy to draw us as a Lot out of this spiritual Sodom, as St. John
calls it, to pull us to himself by the hand of his Angels, to grant unto us,
that we look not back again, and that we may, before he pour down his
judgments on Babylon, get to that holy Mountain, to that little Segar Zoar.
his Church, how small and contemptible soever it be in the eyes of the world.
Is it not a little one, (says Lot) and my soul shall live? Now to him, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, for the bottomless depths of his Judgments, and of his
Graces, be Praise and Glory World without end, Amen.


