THE TRADES-MAN'S JEWEL: OR A safe, easy, speedy and effectual Means, for the
incredible advancement OF TRADE, And Multiplication of RICHES; SHOWING How men
of Indifferent Estates, may abundantly increase both their own and other Men's
Trading and Riches, Without parting with Money, or any Stock out of their own
hands: By making their Bills to become current in stead of Money, and
frequently to revolve through their Hands, with as much in Money as the Sums
therein mentioned do amount unto.

Eccles. 10.19. They prepare bread for laughter, and wine comfort the
living; but money answers to all. London, Printed by Edward Husband and John
Field, Printers to the Parliament of England, 165^.

TO THE Judicious Reader.
THe Encouragement which I have found (Courteous Reader) by the approbation of
my Endeavors, from such Judicious Men as have perused the same, in a late
Treatise (Called The Key of Wealth, or, A new way for Improving of Trade, etc.)
has induced me to compose this Abbreviate, as an Abstract thereof; to the end,
That the truth of what is there at large demonstrated, concerning the manifold
Important Consequences of the Enterprise therein mentioned, might here in some
measure appear unto those who have not yet read the aforesaid Treatise, to be a
thing of so Considerable Value, as (without Arrogance, I may say) deserves not
only the serious thoughts, but even much (if not most) of the time and
endeavors of such as are employed in highest places of Authority.

I have therefore here Collected some brief and general Observations, whereby
to discover, not to Merchants alone, but chiefly to Statesmen, and all others
that are Rational, the true Seed of Riches, and how it might be sown throughout
the whole Land.

And in order thereunto, do here publicly Assert, That to make the Generality
of the People of England (now much Impoverished) exceeding Rich, (and that very
speedily) is neither Impossible, nor yet Difficult, if a few men that are
eminent in this Commonwealth, will vouchsafe sometimes to afford their Presence
and Countenance, to the carrying on of so public and needful a Work, at a
convenient place of meeting to be appointed shortly for that purpose; And if
the welfare of this Nation be a thing that deserves (indeed) not to be talked
of, but pursued, I hope I shall be required to make good what here I say, which
I shall account my happiness so to be.

I acknowledge that this enterprise may be both begun and carried on (as I have
hereafter declared) by a very few Men agreeing together; yet the Influence of
such as are of Repute, will doubtless make the practice thereof to become
Universal (to the abundant enriching of the whole Nation) much more speedily
then otherwise; which as to all that are truly ennobled, must needs be a strong
Motive to act therein accordingly; and (if that were any Argument) it would
exceedingly rejoice him,

Who desires to be yet further useful, W. POTTER.

THE TRADES-MANS Jewel, etc.
SECT. I.
THe Advancement of Trade, consists chiefly in the great and quick Revolution
of Commodity from Sea or Land, through the hands of Tradesmen, to each
particular person for his private use.

This Revolution of Commodity, is proportionable to the Revolution of Money, or
that which goes for such For men cannot afford to sell more Ware in the year
(upon Credit, or otherwise) then one time with another they receive money for.
.

Such Revolution of Money is according to the plenty thereof not hoorded up.

All the Houses, Ships, Goods, Land, etc. in a Nation, are usually much above
One hundred times more in value, then all the Money therein It is verily
believed, that all the Houses, in and about London alone, are worth ten times
more then all the Money in the Land.
.

The Multiplication of Money amongst any People, does through the Revolution
thereof The quantity of Goods taken in from Land or Sea, is proportionable to
the quantity of Money yearly revolving.
, draw in so much Commodity amongst them, (and put men upon Building Houses,
Ships, and Improving Land in such sort) as their Estates in other things do
soon exceed such multiplied stock of Moneys, according to the aforesaid
proportion.

Hereby it appears, That if Money could be increased so, as to be always equal
in velue to what Men's Estates are otherwise worth Whereby for every twenty
shillings that men have in their hands, one time with another, they would then
have above One hundred pound, to the abundant Multiplication of Men's expenses;
and by consequence of Trading.
, (though never so much multiplied by such Increase of Money) it would be a
means suddenly to Ingross all the Trade and Riches that the World could afford
for Money.

Object. But would not such plenty of Money produce some notable Inconvenience?

Answ. If Men's hands were never so full of Money, the Inconvenience must either
be, That there is so much the more kept by, or so much there more laid out.

The Money kept by, does but imbolden Men to live the more comfortably, whereby
Trade is the quicker.

The Money laid out, likewise does no more harm, then what it does by
Increasing Trade and Riches.

Object. But such plenty of Money would raise the price of Commodity.

Answ. No otherwise then by occasioning more Commodity to be sold in the year
then formerly; in which respect any Increase of Trade whatsoever, is as much
liable to raise the price of Commodity.

This Objection might be much more fully Answered, but that I here intend all
possible brevity, refering to the aforesaid Treatise.

SECT. II.
IF it be demanded how Money may be multiplied amongst us here in England, and
how it can be kept from being hoorded up?

I answer, If Men's Credit may be transmitted each to other in Bills, and settled
upon such firm Security, as Men may be willing (of their own accord) to accept
thereof in stead of Money (as sometimes they do Bills of Exchange) it must
needs follow, That the Revolution of such Bills would Increase Trade as much,
as if the same were ready Money;

The rather, because those Bills are not like to be hoorded up as Money is.

And this (seeing Men's Credits are equal in value to what their Estates are
otherwise worth, in Houses, Lands, Ships, Goods, or whatsoever) must needs tend
to Increase Trade and Riches, according to the proportion already premised.

To this end therefore, let it be admitted,

1. That some effectual means be discovered, for preventing the falsifying of
the said Bills, which I shall undertake to demonstrate in due time.

2. That the security for making good any of these Bills (or all of them at
once, if required) be as firm as that of the Chamber of London, Bank of
Amsterdam, or any Bills of Exchange; viz. To make them good either in Money at
the end of six Months, or in Commodity immediately: The way to effect which, I
shall here discover.

And then (I say, in this Case) Men would be willing to accept of these Bills
for Commodity in stead of Money, as I come now to prove.

SECT. III.
THat in the Cases before mentioned, Men would be willing to accept of Bills
for Commodity in stead of Money, is manifest, if we consider,

1. That in Flanders this way of Trading upon Bills, is ordinary, and much
preferred before that way of dealing upon Credit, here used.

2. If Men be willing here to part with their Ware upon the private Credit of
one another (as now they do) they would much rather accept of such security for
their Ware, as that of the Chamber of London, etc.

3. Though Bills or Bonds be slighted, when the Security for Payment of them is
not good; yet if the Security be unquestionable, Men are willing to part with
Money, much more with Commodity upon such Security.

4. If the Security for making good these Bills in Money within Six Months,
were equal to that of the Chamber of London, Monyed men would advance ready
Money for them, upon Rebatement of Interest; neither would any Man refuse to
take them for Commodity, at the rate they would yield in ready Money.

5. If most Men should refuse to take them, then the Trading would go all to
those that should accept of them.

6. Hereby the Wiser sort of Men would account it their great advantage, to
publish themselves willing to take them with Rebatement of Interest, seeing at
least they have sufficient Security for making them all good within Six
Months; and, rebating for Interest, are able to procure ready Money for them.

7. As in these Respects few would refuse them, so those that should accept of
them, might easily put them off upon those they constantly deal with, much
rather then their own single Credit: And if some be willing to take them,
others will not refuse them, because they know whither to go with them.

SECT. IV.
IT were a weak Objection to allege, That this were no other then to Imbase
the Coin, or put Paper in the place of Money; For

1. These Bills need not be made current by Law, (as base Money must) but by
the Peoples Consent.

2. Brass or Leather Money has not an Intrinsecal value; whereas there being
sufficient Security given to make good these Bills when required, it is
equivalent to an Intrinsecal value.

3. The Counterfeiting (and by consequence the Multiplying of Brass or Leather
Money beyond all bounds) could never yet be prevented; which as to these Bills
may effectually be done, as I have already undertaken to make good.

4. There is no Inconvenience in this way of Trading upon Bills, which is not
much more liable to the ordinary way of dealing upon Trust.

For, if a Man can take up Ware upon his bare word to pay at a certain time;
what hurt can it do the Creditor, to take a Bill under his hand?

If a third Person knowing the Debitors Sufficiency, will accept of this Bill,
with rebatement of Interest for that time in stead of Money, and thereupon
furnish the Creditor with Commodity; it not this better then if he had been
forced to stay for the Money?

If this third Person take up as much Ware from this Debtor, as the Bill, with
Rebatement of Interest, amounts to, and returns his own Bill for satisfaction;
has either the one or the other any prejudice thereby?

And thus, though Men's words cannot, yet their Credit in Bills may be
transmitted to the second, third, fourth, fifth hand, etc. whereby fully to
supply the place of so much Money, to the abundant Multiplication of Trade and
Riches; and that without the least Inconvenience, other then what is already
Incident to the ordinary way of Trading on Credit.

SECT. V.
IF any doubt how the security for making good these Bills, should be made as
firm as that of the Chamber of London, or rather as any which on earth can be
given.

Before I can resolve this Doubt, I must propose the principal terms of an
Agreement amongst several Tradesmen, in order to the settling of such a
Security.

Admit therefore, that several Tradesmen agreeing together, do cause a certain
number of Bills to be printed, and putting a value upon them, as suppose ten
pound the piece, do lend the said Bills each to other, upon no less security
then if the same were so much ready Money:

That is, let the whole Company lend to each particular Member, so many of the
said Bills, as for which he shall put in sufficient Security: First, to repay
in Money or Bills, within four Months after the demanding thereof: Secondly,
To stand bound with the rest of the Company in manner following; viz.

That the said Company do enter into Bond, as Sureties each for other:

1. To accept of half Bills, half Money, for their Ware.

2. To make payment of these Bills in Money, if demanded; viz.

That they appoint an Office, where, upon delivering in of the said Bills, they
will give Bond for the payment of them in Money within six Months.

And that each of the Members be bound to make good his proportion of the Bills
brought in to the said Office, within (suppose) four Months time, after notice
thereof left at his house in writing.

Now, this being the substance of the Engagement (to omit other things) it will
be needful in the next place, a little to open the nature thereof.

SECT. VI.
In case this Security for making good these Bills, either in Money within six
Months after the demanding thereof, or in Commodity with half Money, will be
found to be as good as that of the Chamber of London, or rather as any which on
earth can be given, as shall be proved in the Section following:

I say in this Case, it cannot be doubted, but that each Member of this Company
may procure Wave upon these Bills, far more easily then otherwise he might upon
his own single credit; and consequently that they will go about for Commodity
in the place of Money, as is manifest by the several Reasons already given to
that effect:

The rather, for that few men will trouble themselves, either to sell their
Bills to monyed men, or stay six Months for their Money, when few will refuse
them for Commodity, at the same rate they will yield in ready Money, who for
the same reason will put off the trouble of exchanging them upon others, and so
ad infinitum.

Now, seeing this Company is not bound to make good any of these Bills in
Money, until they be brought in to the said Office, and from that day, have six
Months time allowed for payment of them: It follows,

That so long as any of them go about in the place of Money, the said six
Months time does not commence, but the Money due upon these Bills from the
said Company, is forborne.

And when the Bills shall be brought in, then they have six Months time to pay
for the Ware which they did procure upon such Bills.

And though all these Bills should be sent in at once, yet the security will be
abundantly sufficient to make them good within six Months, as shall be
immediately proved.

Neither will the Company be any thing prejudiced thereby; for having procured
Wave upon their Bills, before they parted with them, they are hereby only
required to pay for the same in Money, within the time appointed.

Yet it is not probable, that any considerable number of them will ever be
brought in together; and those that shall be so brought in, the Company
exchanging for Money, may make use of immediately in stead of such Money.

SECT. VII.
THat the security for making good these Bills, may be as firm as any which on
earth can be given:

Let (if it be thought needful) a whole Company of Insurers (bound each for
other) have one per Cent. for Insurance, and permitted to have a Negative voice
in the Loan of these Bills.

And then considering, First, that the whole Company of Undertakers are bound
each for other.

2. That the whole Company of Insurers, are bound for the Undertakers.

3. That each of the Undertakers puts in such security for himself, as the
Insurers are willing to insure for one per Cent.

I say in this case, it can hardly be imagined, That one of the Undertakers
amongst an hundred, could so fail, as neither he nor his Sureties should be
able to make good the loss.

2. It is not the failing of one in an hundred, that can make the loss so
considerable, but that the one per Cent. given for Insurance, much more the
whole estates of all the Insurers, yea, and the estates of all the Undertakers,
together with their Sureties, are fully able to make good.

3. It cannot be imagined, That those few failers can both in themselves and
Sureties fail so, as not to make good the most part of what was borrowed by
them.

Now, except the loss be so great, as neither the sailers with their Sureties,
nor the whole Company of Insurers, nor yet the whole Company of Undertakers
with all their Sureties, be able to make good by their whole estates, the
security for making good these Bills, according to the terms proposed, is a
firm as any which on earth can be given.

And how any such loss should happen without some general confusion, (by
surprisal of an enemy or such like) cannot be imagined; To the danger of which,
the security of the Chamber of London, men's trading on credit without these
Bills, nay their estates in their own hands, is no less liable.

SECT. VIII.
IF the difficulty of producing security for borrowing of these Bills, be
pleaded;

I answer, When any of the Halls of London proffer to lend Money to young
beginners gratis, it is accounted so great an advantage, as there are few but
will make all possible shift to procure any security that shall be demanded.

Yet I say, That the Loan of these Bills shall be much greater advantage to the
borrowers, then if they were proffered the Loan of so much Money gratis.

For hereby the deal in such a kind of Money, as will be sure not to go far
about, without returning with as much in other Money upon their own hands (they
being the only persons that are engaged to take it;) whereas those that borrow
the usual current Money now abroad, so soon as ever they lay it out, are never
like to see it again.

Now this quick and thick Revolution of Bills (with as much in Money) through
their hands, shall multiply their Trading to the utmost degree that they are
possibly able to manage, as is fully cleared in my aforesaid Treatise.

If the hazard of being bound each for other, be objected:

I answer, The hazard is no whit greater then to be bound for the Chamber of
London, or Bank of Amsterdam, in any thing wherein a whole Company of Insurers
should be bound to save them harmless: For,

1. The whole Company of Undertakers have sufficient Security from each
particular Member.

2. If one Member amongst many should fail, both in himself and Sureties, the
Insurers must save the Undertakers harmless.

3. It is not to be doubted, but the Insurers will be careful enough to take
such Security as the one per Cent. given for Insurance, shall on time with
another, more then make good all the losses incident to this undertaking; The
contrary to which must not be granted.

4. If it might be admitted, that any such thing could happen once in an age,
wherein neither the one per Cent. nor yet the whole estates of the Insurers,
would be able fully to make good the loss, yet not any one person alone, but
the whole Company of Undertakers, are to discharge the rest proportionably,
wherein each man's share would scarce be considerable.

5. The ordinary way of Trading upon Trust, is liable to much greater hazard,
which by this means will be made altogether needless.

For in the said ordinary way of Trading, men use not either to take Security
from their Debtors (muchless to insure that Security) or to have any to bear
the least share of the loss, that frequently happens by trusting them.

Whereas those of this Engagement, seeing they may have as much Trading with
ready pay in Money and Bills, as they are able to manage, shall not need to
trust any man whosoever.

Yet if the difficulty of procuring Security, and the hazard of being bound
each for other, do stick in men's minds;

I shall propose a way for removing of both, to those whom it concerns, when
need requires.

SECT. IX.
THis Enterprise is demonstrated in my aforesaid Treatise, to be of such a
nature, as whereby

First, A very few men may both begin and continue the practice thereof; and
that so, as if others do not join with them, they will suddenly be able (by
underselling them through their quick returns) to ingross all the Trading into
their own hands.

2. Hereby all the Tradesmen in the Land would be both encouraged and
necessitated to join in the same Practice.

3. Seeing the number of Bills would thereby be increased proportionably, it
would produce as much Trading to the Generality of men, as they could possibly
manage.

4. Besides the things formerly mentioned, viz. Their having as much lent them
(without paying Interest) as they are able to put in Security to borrow, with
as much Trading as they are able to manage, and all that with ready pay, either
in Money or Bills:

Their Estates being increased by such quick Trading, with such doubled stock,
they may procure greater Security, whereby to borrow more Bills to the doubling
of such increase, and so ad infinitum.

Now, this perpetual doubling the Increase of their stock, is of so great
concernment, as though men's Trading should be but ordinary; yet it will make an
Estate of 1000 l. to amount in 40 years to 500 Millions, as is cleared in the
said Treatise: And by consequence, it would make the people of this Nation to
be worth in 40 years (the World affording but Commodity enough for Money) five
hundred thousand times more then now they are; that is, he who is now worth but
twenty shillings to be worth five hundred thousand pounds, and so of others
proportionably.

Further, If this would be the consequence, although men Trading should be but
ordinary, what may we think will follow, when their dealings shall be
perpetually as great as they are able to manage?

Many other considerable Advantages would follow from this Enterprise (without
any inconvenience to counterpoise the same) as is particularly demonstrated in
the aforesaid Treatise, which I earnestly desire that all men will seriously
peruse, who tender the good of this Commonwealth.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

