INNOCENCE APPEARING, Through the dark Mists of Pretended Guilt.

OR, A full and true Narration of the unjust and Illegal Proceedings of the
Commissioners of Berks, (for ejecting Scandalous and Insufficient Ministers)
against John Pordage of Bradfield in the same County.

In which he is justly vindicated from the unjust and horrid Aspersions Of
Blasphemy, Divelism or Necromancie, Scandal in his Life,


And all things else falsely objected against him by his Enemies.

Published for the clearing of Truth, and the detecting of Malice and Subtilty,
and for the prevention of all misapprehensions that may be caused by any
scandalous Pamphlets, and false relations of the proceedings in his Case.

As likewise for the information of all sober-minded Christians touching his
judgment in many things of high concernment, and particularly concerning
Chastity, Virginity, Apparitions of Spirits, Visions, Communion with the Holy
Angels, The Invisible Worlds, Magistracy, etc.

Written by the said JOHN PORDAGE.

Mat. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

Mat. 16. 2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the time comes that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God good service.

Mat. 10. 22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake.

Isa. 66. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at this word, your
prethren that cast you out for my names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified,
but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

Rev. 17. Behold he comes with clouds, and every Eye shall see him, and they
also, which pierced him, and all the kindreds of the earth, shall wail because
of him, even so. Amen.

(...).

Chrysostom. Hom. 1. (...).

Idem. Hom. 18. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle,
at the West End of Paul's. 1655.

To his Highness the Lord PROTECTOR, and to his Honorable Council.
My Lord, and you of the Council,
I Am moved here, humbly to present you with one piece of the Council of God,
which concerns the disposing of the external condition of his Saints, who of
all people, are most near and dear to him: For they are his anointed ones, his
firstborn, his blessed seed in the midst of States and Kingdoms; what are
Christians, but the parts and members of Christ? They are as the very apple of
his eye, his Jewels, his Prophets, and Royal Priesthood. And has not Gods care
and protection of his people, in all ages been most eminent, though few for
number, though weak for power, and contemptible for their outward state and
condition? Yet by his omnipotency has he preserved them in the midst of
devouring Lions. And has not Gods proceedings with all States, Nations, and
Kingdoms, with all Kings, Emperors, Rulers and Governors, been according to
their dealing with his people and their Families: If they have dealt gently
with them, and have suffered them to dwell quietly amongst them, their Thrones
have been established in mercy; but when they have dealt unkindly and rigidly
with them, it has been their ruin. It is not simply the having of Gods
Saints, nor the multitude of them, nor the best of them amongst you; but it is
your using of them kindly, and your countenancing of them, which is your best
and most considerable interest: Even as it is the greatest danger to Rulers,
and to the interest of Government, to deal cruelly and unjustly with them; who
being as the salt of the earth, keep it from corruption and ruin. Now this
truth you shall find clearly held forth throughout the whole Scripture, that as
States and Kingdoms have prospered by their care and protection of the Saints,
so have they been broken in pieces through their cruel dealings with them.
Remember the four Kings overthrown by Abraham, remember Edom and Tire, with the
Assirian, Grecian, Persian, and Roman Empires; was it not for their Tyrannies,
cruelties, oppressions, persecutions, and for their rigid and cruelly severe
usage of Gods Saints, that they were destryed? I beseech you consider what a
great body of Saints is committed to your care in this Nation; by these I mean
not one party of men, for I could not express the title of Saints to any one
Sect or Society of men, but apply it to all that are called, chosen, and
faithful, who show their interest in Christ's death and resurrection, by their
conformity to his pattern and example; these are your richest treasure, and
your highest interest. If then the Saints of England are the best strength and
interest of England, O then maintain, defend, and preserve this interest, by
cherishing and countenancing of them, by suffering them in their various ways
and appearances, freely and comfortably to serve and enjoy God.

Be like Cyrus, Gods anointed Chirub, stretching your wings of tenderness and
protection over all good people, that none may have cause to complain, or mourn
through oppression.

Consider that it is the will of God that the Saints should live a godly and a
peaceable life under Magistrates. This they are to pray for, and this is their
due, according to the Law of God, and the light of nature; the first of which
commands us to love our neighbors as our selves; the second, to do to others,
what we would have done to us again. In what these two meet, they make up but
one Law, which is the will of God; which ought to be the only rule, both of
your public and private actions* for in the performing of this only, you will
find the true peace and tranquillity of spirit.

For a Christians will is perfected no where but in the will of God; and
nothing creates perplexity and disquietness of spirit, but the contrariety of
motion betwixt the will of God and the will of man: For when man's will runs
cross to Gods will, he fights against his Maker, and brings trouble, guilt and
misery upon himself.

How cautious then ought you (especially who sit in the high places of
Government) to be in the creating and making of Laws, which are of public
influence and concernment, lest you publicly oppose the will and interest of
God, especially in reference to the freedom and just liberty of the Saints,
which is a thing of very great moment, and that which is tenderly eyed by our
most wise God.

Now these things I have been pressed in my spirit to present to your Highness
and your Council, first, in regard there have been, and still are so many
parties on foot, who design and carry on their own particular interests; some
of which make it their work to insinuate and creep into the favor of the
Highest Powers, to draw them to countenance their particular interests, and
discountenance others whom they have an antipathy against, though it may be,
far more innocent and righteous then themselves; and really, to give such men
much power and liberty, who are so much confined to people of their own stamp
and model, and so ready to entrench upon the just freedom and liberty of
others, is neither safe nor reasonable.

2. In that you have made an Ordinance for the Ejecting of Scandalous and
Ignorant Ministers, which by the abuse of it, has been, and still is made an
Engine of persecution, to condemn Saints, and throw them out of their Estates
and livelihoods; and really I cannot see what else was like to come of it; it
being entrusted into the hands of many fierce, rigid, narrow spirited men, who
have in some things a kind of unlimited arbitrary power; as in their Judgment
of Ignorance and Insufficiency, and this without any Appeal for the redress of
those who may be unjustly condemned and ejected by them. Now what sad
inconveniences may yet flow from this Ordinance thus established is apparent,
by considering the rigid temper of those Commissioners who are most active, and
the late prastices of some of them, against those who in spiritual knowledge,
and a holy conversation, are beyond themselves. And in truth you will find by
experience, that the Commissioners, who are most active, will, as they now do,
and have done already, I say will turn the edge of their power against those
that enjoy any glorious discoveries of God, above and beyond their systemes and
forms of Doctrine, and judge those Scandalous and Ignorant, that differ from
them in judgment, though they be of ever so holy a conversation. And thus many
precious Saints will lie under the misery of Ejectment, pretended scandal and
ignoaance, because they see not by the same measure of light, nor believe in
one proportion of faith, nor give such interpretations and glosses of Scripture
as suit to their darkness: And thus the civil power received from God for the
punishment of evil doers, is, and will be used against the more spiritual
administrations of God, and the all-glorious Spirit of Revelation, pure Wisdom,
and Prophecy must be made subject to the Laws, Ordinances, Forms, Measures, and
Wills of men: And is not this to limit the holy one of Israel? And will not the
establishment of such Laws, left to the arbitrary use of such Judges, without
any further appeal, destroy that due Libeity, both civil and spiritual, which
is the best Interest of States and Nations? How much then does it concern you,
who are entrusted with the Government of this Nation, seriously and speedily to
reflect upon, and consider the Ordinance, and those in whose hand it is put,
being it has been, is, and is like further to be made use of against the
Saints of the most high; I say, how much does it concern you, by reflecting
upon these things, to make some speedy redress, either by limiting the
arbitrary Power of the Commissioners, and granting an Appeal, or breaking and
nulling the Ordinance. And that there is great reason for the speedy
performance of some such thing, will appear by looking into the subsequent
Relation of my Trial, in which you may see envy and subtilty meeting in my
accusations, partiality and prejudice appearing in managing the Examinations,
with injustice and cruelty concurring in sentence and condemnation. And I
really believe, had you seen this true Narration of my Case, before I had
appealed for a re-hearing, it would have been so different from these false and
abusive insinuations of my enemies (by which they have subtly endeavored to
prejudice you, and all others against me) and so much tending to clear my
innocence, that certainly you would have favored a righteous Cause and me so
much, as to have granted are-hearing. But my addresses have yet been frustrate,
and my Petition rejected; but upon what grounds, is best known to your
consciences. I must here therefore take the boldness (being pressed in my
spirit, by reflecting upon the cause of God, the just interests of many Saints,
and your own good) to put you in mind of those solemn protestations and
engagements, made before this present Government, and of that solemn and
public Oath, taken at the beginning of this Government, to see Law and Justice
equally administered, and the Saints due Interests and Liberty preserved, and of
some passages in your Highnesses late Speech, viz. That you desired not to keep
the Government any longer then you may preserve England in its just Rights, and
may protect the people of God in a just Liberty of their consciences. And that
p. 20, 21.
it is your glory that you know a cause, which yet you have not lost, but do
hope you shall take a little pleasure rather to lose your life, then lose;
which Cause your Highness had before expressed, to be the interest of those who
have an interest in a better world, and their liberty to worship with the
freedom of their consciences, and freedom in their Estates and persons. Now
these Engagements, Protestations, and Declarations, are eminently good and
righteous, and worthy to be recorded in Characters of Gold, to be seriously
reviewed by you, and I hope may prove instrumental to stir you up to the
taking of some course (in reference to the Ordinance for Ejecting of Ministers;
made by you) which may be suitable to, and correspond with all these open
protestations, and solemn engagements. For, whether the leaving it, as now it
is established without any appeal, though in point of the greatest injury; I
say, whether the leaving of it so, be not contrary to the former protestations,
I appeal to your own consciences. For when subordinate Governors shall turn the
edge of it against the meek lambs of Christ's Fold, who walk faithfully before
God, and righteously toward their neighbor, and make use of it to ruin them
and their Families against the Law of this Nation, the rule of equity, and the
just liberty of men's consciences and persons: I say, when these things are so,
and yet no Appeal admitted by the higher Powers for redress, it is clear that
Justice is not equally administered, and neither the Spiritual nor Civil right
of Christians preserved. And truly if this should continue, some of the dear
Saints of God would find their conditions more sad (as to this particular) then
it was in the time of the Bishops Persecutions, when there were Courts of
Appeal for those that were oppressed and injured, and would be driven as in
those times His Highness Speech, p. 18.
to seek their bread from strangers, and live in howling Wildernesses, and be
otherwise abused and made the scorn of the Nation. And truly there be some
already, who are of sound Principles, and an unblameable conversation, that are
persecuted as Blasphemers, and evil doers, and so oppressed by those, who in
the Bishops times cried out for Liberty, as then oppressed themselves: The
baseness and evil of which practice, your Highnese condemns in your late p. 18.
Speech. Except then, that you and your Council either break the power of those
fierce men, or grant an Appeal to some of more large and tender spirits, all
the evils and heinous sins, which cannot but be committed in the persecuting,
condemning, and ejecting some of Gods precious Saints, must unavoidably revolve
and bring guilt upon you all, because they act from your power, and may be
strained when you please. But whatever you shall hereafter act in reference to
this (though many cannot but expect either the nulling or limiting the
Ordinance by an Appeal) I have discharged my conscience in presenting these
things to be considered of in reference to your own happiness, and the good of
others, who may (by sufferings) be concerned in it, as also performed my duty,
(as to my own Case) in appealing to you, and presenting my grievance, in
expectation of redress; but whether the present necessity and justness of my
cause, did not call for more then a rejection of my due request, let all sober
Christians and your own consciences judge. And I pray God this denial be not
laid to your charge in the day of visitation. And if you yet persist in the
resolutions of granting me no Appeal, and giving me wholly up to the oppression
and cruelty of my enemies, I shall appeal to the great Judge of men and Angels,
resigning my self and Family into his hand, who (I hope) will deal more
mercifully with you in the time of his Judgment, then you have yet with me and
mine in the time of our distress: Which is the cordial and sincere desire of,

Your Servant in the love, and under the Cross of Christ, JOHN PORDAGE.

To my Judges the Commissioners, and their Assistants the Ministers.
Gentlemen,
REmember Christ's command, Judge not, that ye be not judged But ye have judged
already, and therefore must be your selves judged. The same measure you have
given me, shall once be retaliated to you your selves, when their unjust
sentence and proceedings, come to be weighed in the just balance of the Lord,
who has certainly a great controversy, with those who pretend Justice, and
call upon his name, yet deal unjustly, and persecute his nature, appearing in
his children. I shall desire you therefore to forbear your persecutions, as
much for your own sakes, as for those who do and may lie under the scourge of
it, for they will assuredly draw judgments upon you, and cry aloud in the ears
of Jehovah, for due vengeance. You know God did not bring that last and utter
desolation upon the Nation of the Jews, until they had filled up the measure of
their sins, by conspiring against, and murdering Christ, and his Disciples
after his death, under the pretense of zeal, and Gods-service. Now what is done
to the least of his, is done to Christ himself: And are not you found doing the
same work with those who killed the Prophets, and stoned those who were sent to
them? For, as much as in you lay, you have slain those who are the anointed of
Christ, and so have condemned him in his members, and overclowded him with all
manner of reproaches and railing-accusations. Remember the four Kings
overthrown by Abraham: and was it not because they had led captive one Saint,
even righteous Lot. The Heathen Princes little thought what a prisoner they
had, they took him in the crowd amongst the most wicked of People, yet God was
so tender of him, that he was delivered, and they that took him ruined; being
forced to part with his person and goods, which they had unjustly taken away,
and many of them with their own lives. For the Lord knows how to deliver the
righteous, and reserve the wicked to the day of vengeance. O remember this you
that drive so furiously against the pure Life of God, imbodiea in his Saints.
Take heed lest this your persecution proves a National sin, and brings guilt
upon all who through mistakes or otherwise permit or countenance it, how was
Abimelech and his Family punished for his unjust, though involuntary,
prejudicing of Abraham? and how had the whole Nation suffered, had he not
repented and returned Sarah? How graciously did God deal with Joseph, after the
execution of his Brethrens malice, in preferring of him, and making him a
preserver to those who had dealt so cruelly with him? And certainly the time is
at hand, when the Saints who have been judged and condemned for their Testimony
to truth, as Heretics, and evil doers shall judge the world, and possess the
kingdom, and shall have power over the Nations, to execute judgment and
righteousness in the earth; but I mean not in a fleshly way of force and
violence with the material sword, but in a spiritual manner, by the power and
Majesty of Gods Holy Spirit, which must destroy Antichrist that man of sin,
that has so long sat in the Temple of God, as God. This day will destroy and
break your power, by and from which you have unrighteously sentenced me. And I
may ask you, for which of my good works have you condemned me? Though I know
you are ready to answer me, as the Jews did Christ; Not for thy good works, but
because thou art a Blasphemer. Was not Christ thus judged as an evil doer,
though he never committed any evil? Was he not condemned as a blasphemer and a
Conjurer? And was not the Civil and Ecclesiastical powers combined, in his
condemnation? Pontius Pilate, and the High Priest, with the Scribes and
Pharisees, consenting to it. Though the Magistrate was excited and drawn to it,
by the Ecclesiastical men and their adherents, even as it was now. And have you
not said to the Civil powers, O ye Ministers, that it was expedient for me to
be civilly put to death, by Sentence and Ejectment, or else the whole Nation
and Tribe might perish and be brought into contempt? And have you not followed
the steps of your forefathers in thus arguing, that if the Magistrate let me
alone, many would follow me and my Doctrine, and so your Ministry and names
would be eclipsed and disappear? and did you not cry out to the Magistrates
that if they let me go they were not Gods, nor Caesar's friends? But you will
say to me, Do you make your self Christ? God forbid! I mean not so: But this I
say, that every Saint being a member, and so a part of Christ, what is done to
the least of his, is done to him: and therefore what you have acted against
that life of Innocence, purity, and simplicity, which (by the grace of God)
dwells in me, you have acted against the Christ, the Son of God. And therefore
what can be said, but that ye are the children and followers of those, who
killed the Prophets, and slew those that were sent to them from God, not
sparing his only Begotten Son, who came to save them from their sins and
transgressions. But these persecutions, brought judgments and desolations upon
the Authors, according as the Prophets and Christ himself praedicted, and the
event showed; and let me tell you, to whom I write, that if you follow this
trade, if you persevere in this way of persecution, if you thus lay your hands
on your fellow servants, and abuse them by scandals, reproaches, censures,
Ejectments, and illegal sequestrations, you will speedily bring Judgments,
Commotions, and Desolations upon your selves and others. Do but look into the
book of the Revelations, and you shall find, that the oppressions and
cruelties acted upon those who were slain for the witness of Jesus, and for
their testimony to the truth, were a cause of those viols of wrath and
vengeance poured upon the kingdom of the Beast. And what can you expect, but
the like judgments, if you continue in such fierce persecutions. For have you
not civilly put me to death, having killed my name and credit, and blasted (as
much as in you lay) the purity and integrity of my life? Have not you by
sentence cast me out of my Estate, and so ruined (as much as you could) my
person and family, making both contemptible by your calumnies, aspersions, and
cruel Sentence? But what shall I return to you for this? Shall I pray for fire
to come down from Heaven to execute Gods just wrath upon you? No, no, God
forbid! For though the Law of Nature prompts us to preserve our selves and our
own just rights and interests, though by the prejudicing of our enemies, as
requiring an Eye for an Eye, and a tooth for a tooth, yet the Law of Gra^^
^ommands to take up our crosses, and deny Name, Life, Liberty, Estates,
Relations, in whatever they may draw us to Cross the Royal Law of Love, which
bids us love our enemies, and bless those that curse us, and pray for those
that despightfully use us, and so return good for evil. However I could not but
discharge my duty, as a Christian, in thus presenting your sin before your eyes,
that so you may search and try your hearts, and return again to the Lord; and
that you may judge your selves, and so escape the fierce Judgment of God. I
shall therefore commit you to the Eternal Essential Word, which is able to
convince you of this heinous sin of persecution, and cry in your Consciences,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Touch not mine anointed and do my
Prophets no harm. This is the engraffed word, which is able to save your souls,
by giving you true repentance, and remission of sins, with a total change in
your Spirits from wrath to love, from strife to concord, from the nature of the
Serpent to the Innocence of the Dove, which is the cordial desire and prayer of

Yours to serve you, not in the will of the wrath, but in the righteous will of
God, JOHN PORDAGE.

To all my Christian Friends and Acquaintance in Berkshire and elsewhere
scattered.
Christian Friends,
IS it not a sweet thing for Brethren to dwell together in Unity? But we live
in such perilous times, wherein we see not only Egyptian against Egyptian, and
Formalist against Formalist, but even Christians against Christians, and those
of the Ministry, we see at civil war amongst themselves, the more rigid and
legal against the more spiritual and tender, yea in their particular interests
against one another. Surely therefore the kingdom thus divided against it self
cannot stand long. Especially if we consider, that the greatest part of them
are not able to bear any amongst them, that exceed their ordinary forms and
systemes of Doctrine, with more pure, spiritual, and divinely-rational
discoveries of God and Christ. And how many others are there, who profess
Religion, of this rigid confined stamp, and model, that think they please God,
in judging and persecuting all those who are not like themselves, though more
knowing and spiritual. And really we find that the holding forth the most pure
and precious truths of Christ, begets much envy and persecution. And though a
Christian were ever so innocent and inoffensive in his conversation, yet this
were not a sufficient guard to preserve him from the tongues, and uncharitable
practices of such men, as the following narration will demonstrate, for nothing
will satisfy the Lusts of these persons, but such dainties as the very gifts
and graces of the spirit, which they prey upon by rash censures, and
invectives, terming those things divelish, which are divine, and the very glory
of a Christian; and those persons deceivers, who live most in truth, and least
in the deceiveableness of unrighteousness. O what a sore judgment is this for
true Christians to be so stygmatized by the malice of those, who would be
esteemed so, as to be printed, Heretics, Blasphemers, Familists, Enthusiasts,
Antiscripturists, Sorcerers, and what not? And to be proceeded against as such,
by Mulcts, and illegal Sequestrations, and all because the true Christian
cannot bow down and worship the Golden Calves and Images that the pretended
Christians set up from the Invention of their own Imaginations. Christian
Friends, the world, yea, you your selves have wondered at my long silence, and
well you might, for I have wondered at my self in it. For I have long lain under
the rods of men's tongues, the stripes of reproaches, and the burdens of sad and
heavy censures, and condemnations; I have seen my self in the prison of men's
dark Imaginations and narrow Conceptions: yea, which is more, the truth of my
Faith, purity of my principles, and innocence of my conversation, have (as it
were) been dashed in pieces against the Rocks of ignorance and darkness, by the
mistakes or malice of my enemies. So that truly, I may say, I have fallen into
the hands of spiritual thievs and robbers, who would have plundered me of that
holiness, integrity, and uprightness, which the Lord has bestowed upon me. Yet
hitherto I have not opened my mouth, nor pleaded the least, for my own
Innocence, I have not wrote nor Apologized for my self in print; but have sat
down in silence, resolving to enter into its secret Chamber, till this
Indignation was overpast, believing that by quietly lying down under this
wrath, enmity, opposition, condemnation, and contradiction of sinners, I might
in time overcome, and wear it out. Looking upon this as a better way, then to
have entered into contest by setting Scripture against Scripture, and Argument
against Argument, which might have more awakened the Fiery Passions of the
adversaries. Whereas quiet retired silence, was more likely to have quenched
the violence of these fires, and stopped the mouths of those Lions: Hence in
this passive retiredness, I have long suffered, to see whether it might be a
shelter to me, from the hotter and more weighty persecutions of my enemies. But
now this season is past. And as there has been a time to be silent, so now
there is a time to speak, that truth and innocence may no longer suffer under
the notion of error and guilt. For my enemies having proceeded so far, as
formally, and actually to sentence, and condemn me, and (as it were) to
crucify me between transgressors, Heretics, Familists, Ranters, Sorcerers:
and endeavoring in print to justify their actions, by representing me as
guilty of all they lay to my charge, that so I might be made a public
spectacle, and as a prodigious sign to be gazed and wondered at; I say, they
having done all this against me, and that life and truth of God, I own and and
live to; I could not but publish and present you with this following Relation
of the proceedings, wherein I shall put an Even balance, and a just weight,
into your hands, that by it you may be enabled to weigh all passages betwixt us
in Justice, and Equity, and so discern that subtilty, cruelty, and envy of my
enemies under which I have suffered and do still suffer. -- But, come my
Brethren, and fellow-travellers, gather your selves together unto the Supper of
the great God. The day of your refreshment is at hand, the Bridegrooms coming
is even at the door, when all injustice will be condemned, and all persecuting
Nimrods summoned to judgment, when they who now Lord it over Gods inheritance,
and solace themselves in the things of this life, shall stand trembling and
quaking before the Judge, calling for the rocks to fall upon them, and the
hills to cover them from the wrath of the Lamb, then all their blaspheming,
railing against, and reviling the Saints of God, and God in his Saints, will
rise up in their Consciences; then they will wish they had had no being, rather
then offended the little ones of the kingdom But in those days we shall lift up
our heads, and sing for the Majesty of the Lord, and give glory to our
Redeemer. But in the mean time, it is enough to consider, that thus persecuted
they the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs in ages past, speaking all
manner of evil against them for righteousness sake. It is enough to remember,
that thus, even thus, must all Christ's eminent witnesses be civilly killed in
their honor, names, and reputation; thus condemned, thus cast out of the
Synagogues, and thus injured in their estates. But through all these sufferings,
the spirit of glory will be honored: our royal gifts and graces, as our faith,
love, meekness, humility, patience, courage, perseverance, tried, exercised,
and strengthened. Precious friends, Labor to see Christ coming toward you in
all these clouds of dark persecutions; and know that Christ has his way in
these whirl-winds, troubles, and confusions; and that all these storms and
tempests, raised up by the powers of darkness, imbodying themselves in the
natures of men, are but the fulfilling of those Scriptures spoken by our Lord
Christ, in which he prophesied of the Saints suffering, as preparatory to his
second coming in power and glory; by which these mountains of opposition will
be removed, and these Hills of contention melt away, and the wicked earth, that
brings forth these Briars and Thorns of fleshly strife and passion be burnt
up and consumed. Oh who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand
when he appears? who shall ascend into the Holy hill of the Lord, or abide in
the Tabernacle of his Glory? They that walk uprightly and work righteousness,
and speak the truth in their hearts, they that backbite not with their tongues,
and do no evil to their neighbors. They that do these things shall never be
moved. Now you heirs of salvation, to this kingdom of glory, to this
incorruptible inheritance, to this exceeding, excessive, external weight of
Glory, I desire you to turn your Eyes; that having such great and precious
promises, you cleanse your selves from all the filthiness of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, that so you may be presented holy,
unblamable, and unreproveable in his sight at the Great Day. Which is the
earnest prayer of him who remains

Yours in the Love and Truth of Christ, JOHN PORDAGE.

To the Trial it self, I thus present it to view.
I Was first warned by this subsequent Summons, to appear before the
Commissioners.

Berks. ss. Monday the 18, September. 1654.
By the Commissioners appointed by an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord
Protector and his Council, for the ejecting of Scandalous Ministers.
WHereas several scandalous Articles have been exhibited against Dr. John
Pordage of Bradfield, in the said County of Berks; which said Articles lying
now before the said Commissioners: It is thereupon Ordered by the said
Commissioners, that the said Dr. Pordage do make his personal appearance before
the said Commissioners, on Thursday the fifth day of October next, at the Bear
in Spinhamland by Newbery, at nine of the clock in the morning, to answer the
said Articles exhibited against him, whereof he is not to fail.

Given under our Hands and Seals in Reading, the day and year above said. Chr.
Whichcot. Sam. Wightwick. Ri. Fincher. William Strowde. William Natkine. Will.
Cook.


Accordingly at the time prefixed I appeared, about nine of the clock in the
morning, in the place above expressed, where I waited till betwixt three and
four of the clock before I was called in; then came the Doorkeeper to tell me,
that the Commissioners called for me.

I presently obeyed, and followed their servant, with two friends, that
accompanied me; then the Doorkeeper commanded my two friends to go forth of
the Room; I told him they were to be there: he replied, that he was ordered by
the Commissioners to let none in but my self, and therefore they should be put
out; and so began in an uncivil manner by violence to thrust them forth:
whereupon I applied my self, to the Commissioners, telling them these two were
my friends, and that I brought them as Eyewitnesses of the proceedings, and
that it was no reason I should be alone: To which it was answered, they must
depart, it being resolved upon by them to have none but my self there present.
Then the Doorkeeper began with violence to pull them forth, crying out, Do you
not hear the sense of the Commissioners? I turning toward them again said, I
desired none present but these my two friends, it was replied it should not be
so: upon this I was necessitated to ask them, against my will, what they were,
whether a public Court of Justice, yea or no? for if they were, I demanded the
liberty of a Subject, that their Doors might be opened, for all to come in that
would, that so their proceedings might be open; moreover I showed how this was
the Custom of all Committees above, and of all such Courts of Judicature:
whereupon the doors were opened, and the people came in; Mr. Wrightwick, openly
averring, that I should fare the worse for it; thus was I necessitated to
contend for this just and reasonable privilege, for which my cause was
unjustly threatened.

The Commissioners then sitting, were these, with one or two more, Mr.
Fettiplace Chairman, Mr. Samuel Wightwicke, Mr. Samuel Dunch, Major Fincher,
Major Allin, Mr. Cox, Mr. Stroud, Mr. Angel Bell. The Ministers were these,
with some other, Mr. Hewes, Mr. Tickle.

But to proceed, as I stood silent before them, Mr. Dunch turned to me, and
with much seeming bitterness and passion, spoke thus, Dare you deny Christ to
be God? and again, how dare you deny the Godhead of Christ? To whom I replied,
I came to know my charge, which was exhibited against me, and that I hoped, he
had not judged my cause before it was heard.

Hereupon the Chairman commanded Langly the Clerk, to read these following
Articles in open Court.

Articles against Dr. Pordage of Bradfield.
1. That the fiery Deity of Christ, mingles and mixes it self with our flesh.
2. That the imputative righteousness of Christ, is a sapless righteousness. 3.
That the discoveries of the sinfulness of sin, the terrors of the law, the
death of Christ, the free grace of God, are fleshly and flashy discoveries. 4.
That the liberty and freedom spoken of, purchased by the blood of Christ, and
applied by the dinging and cleaving of the soul to, is not a liberty or freedom
from the guilt of sin, the curse of the law, the wrath of God, but the fiery
Deity of Christ in the center of our souls. 5. That by Male and Female, Genesis 1.
we are to understand by Male, the Deity, by the Female, the humanity, and that
these two became one flesh; these things were delivered without any limitation
whatsoever. 6. That gifts and graces of the Spirit, are but flesh. 7. That
Christ is a Type, and but a Type. 8. That Christ is not God. 9. That Christ is
not Jehovah. Tickle witnesses.
After these Articles were read, the Chairman demanded my answer; to whom I
replied, That I had been acquitted from all these, four years since, by the
Committee of plundered Ministers, and that after a full hearing and debate;
therefore I desired that (according to Law) they would pass by these old ones;
but if they had any that were new, told them, I was ready and willing to
receive and answer them. I further replied, I hoped they would give me the
liberty of a Felon, who after trial and acquitment, cannot be questioned for
the same thing again; to which Mr. Dunch replied, with much seeming fierceness,
You are worse then a Felon, for ought I know. Which language, coming from a
Judge to the Defendant, before trial, let all sober persons judge of, who are
acquainted with the rules of civility, morality, or Christianity.

Here Mr. Hewes the Minister interposed, affirming, That a Felon might be
acquitted at one Assizes, and hang for the same thing at the next; of which he
gave an instance in a story not worth the relating. To which I replied only
this, That it could not be for the same he was acquitted of before; but I
seeing that he had gone ultra crepidam, beyond his Office, and beyond reason,
said no more to him, though he was very bitter and pragmatical, speaking often as
Judge, although he was but an assistant, and that only in reference to
ignorance and insufficiency.

But afterward applying my self to the Chairman, I further urged, that these
Articles were not within the cognizance of the Commissioners, in that I had
been discharged from them, by those who had full power and authority to do it.

After this, all were commanded to withdraw; and about an hour after, I was
called in again, and asked for my discharge: I answered, I came now only to
know my Charge; and that I had not my Discharge there, but would bring it when
they would appoint me.

Then they declared, That notwithstanding my Discharge in another Court; yet it
was the judgment of the Commissioners, that they had power to take cognizance
of the Articles exhibited, whence they made this Order, viz.

BERKS. By the Commissioners for ejecting of Scandalous Ministers etc. October
5. 1654. At the Bear in Speenhamland.
Dr. John Pordage Rector of Bradfield in this County (has in obedience to our
Warrant) dated the 18 of September last to him directed, this day attended, and
pleads that he has been already discharged from the Articles that are
exhibited to us against him, by the Parliament, and the late Committee of this
County; and therefore not again to be questioned or proceeded against for the
same by these Commissioners. But the said Doctor has produced no such
Discharge.

Resolved upon the Question, That by virtue of the Ordinance of his Highness
the Lord Protector and his Council, for ejecting of scandalous, ignorant, and
insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters; The said Commissioners have power to
question the said Doctor upon the said Articles: and that notwithstanding his
Plea as aforesaid of a former Discharge.

And it is thereupon Ordered, That the said Doctor do give his positive answer
to the said Articles unto us on this day fortnight, being the 19 instant at
this place, whereof he is not to fail.

Now this was the substance of the things which were transacted the first day
of my appearance, which I have here presented in truth and righteousness to the
impartial Reader.

My second appearance before them, was the 19 of October at the same place.

The Commissioners then sitting were these, M. Wightwick Chairman, M. Danch,
Mr. Evelyn, Mr. Bell, Mr. Mils. The Ministers, Mr. Woodbridg, Mr. Fowler, Mr.
Hughes, with some others.

The first thing they demanded was my Answer to the Articles exhibited against
me: But I desired them to receive my Discharge, which I hoped would be instead
of a full and satisfactory Answer: So I produced it, and it was received by
them, and delivered to the Clerk, who after it was read, took a Copy of it, and
then returned it to me again.

The Tenor of it was as follows,

At the Committee for Plundered Ministers, March 27. 1651.
Upon hearing the Cause in presence of parties and Council on both sides
concerning Dr. Pordage, Minister of Bradfield in the County of Berks: And upon
reading the Papers and Examinations depending against him before this
Committee, and full hearing what could be said by both parties. This Committee
have taken the said Cause into serious consideration and debate, and do
thereupon Order that the said Cause be dismissed; and the same is hereby
dismissed.

GILB. MILLINGTON.

Afterward they asked me how they should know that this was a true Copy? I
returned answer, I received it from their Clerk, there present, who knew it to
be true: And besides, I had a friend by, who being with me when I received it,
could attest the truth of it by Oath. Then they waved my Discharge, and called
for my particular Answer to the Articles; alleging, That notwithstanding the
Discharge, the Commissioners had judged the Articles under their cognizance: So
that after I had pressed my Discharge with as much earnestness as in modesty I
could, they still hastily calling for my further Answer, I was necessitated to
give in this which follows.

My Answer to the Articles exhibited against me, consists in these Particulars.
1. Partic. I Humbly conceive, that none of the Articles exhibited against me,
are comprehended in the Act, Entitled, An Act against several Atheistical,
Blasphemous, and execrable Opinions, derogatory to the Honor of God, and
destructive to humane society; without the sense and meaning of the words
expressed in the Act, be stretched and wrested beyond the litteral scope and
drift of the Act. And this is not my judgment only, but the judgment of some
pious and judicious Lawyers of this Land: Which thing in all humility, I leave
to your serious considerations.

2. Partic. I humbly conceive that the forementioned Act cannot take into
cognizance those Articles exhibited against me, because they are acknowledged
by the accusers, to have been uttered a year before this Act had a birth in the
world. Now can any guilt be legally imputed from any Law, before the original
being of it? This seems contrary to reason. Now those Articles were charged
upon me Aug. 16. 1649. and this Act made and published Aug. 9. 1650.

Moreover these Articles are not punishable by that Act, because according to
the conclusion of the said Act, no person is to be impeached, molested,
troubled, or punished for any offense mentioned in that Act, unless he be for
the same offense accused, presented, indicted, or convicted within six months
after such offense committed: Now it is six years since some, and four since
any of these expressions were pretended to be uttered by me.

3. Partic. I humbly conceive that the forementioned Act cannot take into
cognizance the Articles exhibited against me, because upon examination of
Witnesses on both sides, I was cleared by the Vote of the honorable Committee
of Berks, who had full power by an Act of Parliament, to put out, and to put in
Ministers in this County.

4. Partic. I humbly conceive that the forementioned Act cannot take into
cognizance the Articles exhibited against me, because after examination of
Witnesses, and after a full hearing, I have been dismissed and acquitted from
all guilt and offense charged upon me from them, by the honorable Committee of
Plundered Ministers, who had full power to put out, and to keep and put in
Ministers. Now the judicious Lawyer says, that these Articles having had their
original dependence before two Committees of Parliament, who had an absolute
power by Act and Ordinance of Parliament, to put out, and put in Ministers; and
they having cleared and acquitted me from the pretended guilt of such Articles,
it is not according to the liberty of the Subject, or tenor of the Law, that it
should be within the cognizance of this Act, or of this Committee, it being
against that fundamental maxim of Magna Charta, Nemobis pumetur pro uno delicto.

Moreover it seems contrary to the sixth Article in the Instrument of
Government, published by his Highness the Lord Protectors special command, in
which it is expressed, That the Laws shall not be altered, suspended,
abrogated, or repealed, but by consent of Parliament, save as it is expressed
in the thirtieth Article: Therefore my former legal Discharge according to the
former Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, is still in force, and holds good,
not being abrogated by the Government, or by any thing expressed or included in
the said 30 Article of Parliament.

I shall now proceed to answer each Article in particular.

Artic. 1. That Christ is not God, That Christ is not Jehovah.
Ans. 1. Part. I do acknowledge that such expressions were uttered by me; but I
hope the bare expressions of such Negations, does not make me come within the
guilt of the Act; for it must be known what words preceded such expressions,
and what followed: To say in Preaching, There is no God, does not make the
Preacher guilty of Atheism, if the words going before be but annexed, The fool
has said in his heart, there is no God: so do but annex the subsequent words
to the former expressions, That Christ is not God, viz. the Father, That Christ
is not Jehovah, Jehovah taken strictly for the Person of the Father, the first
person of the glorious Trinity; I say, add but these words, and there is
nothing blasphemous or culpable in such expressions.

Ans. 2. Part. Though I do acknowledge that such expressions fell from me, yet I
never avowedly uttered or maintained such Propositions; for they were only
uttered by way of dispute, and that upon this occasion. Mr. Daniel Blagrave
then being Chairman of the Committee, demanded of Mr. Tickle what Blasphemy
was? This relation I give to the best of my remembrance, as true, though Mr.
Tickle denies it, as you shall see afterward.
He answered, Evil speaking against God the Father. I replied, A lame
definition of Blasphemy; had Mr. Tickle said, Evil speakings against God, which
is a word implying the Trinity in Unity, then there had been no occasion given
of contest; for the ground of these expressions arose from the weakness of his
definition of Blasphemy, in that he said, Blasphemy was evil speaking against
God the Father. To which I replied, His definition of Blasphemy does not reach
that of which he accused me; for that which he charge me with, is not
Blasphemy against God the Father, but against Christ, God the Son: And I have
uttered no evil speakings against God the Son; but seemingly to my accuser, in
saying that his imputative righteousness would prove a sapless righteousness,
to all those that had not the Fiery Deity of Christ in the center of their
souls, burning up their lusts and corruptions. Mr. Tickle then replied to the
Committee, Pray take notice that the Dr. denies that Christ is God, which I
prove out of John 1. 1. To which I replied, Christ was not God the Father, but
God the Son; Christ is Jehovah, and so called the Lord our righteousness, said
Mr. Tickle. To which I replied, Christ is not Jehovah, if you take Jehovah for
the person of the Father. And this is the truth, as the whole Committee of
Berks then present, can testify, by whose Vote I was then cleared of all these
unworthy aspertions, and dismissed; and since upon proof of Witnesses acquitted
and dismissed, and that after a full hearing by the Committee of Plundered
Ministers.

3. Part. Ans. I do humbly conceive, that although the former Act did expressly
adjudge and condemn evil speakings, or blasphemy against Christ, yet my
delivering such expressions in an extempory dispute, viz. That Christ was not
God, or Jehovah, did not make me obnoxious to the guilt and penalty of that
Act, because p. 980. and 981. they only are condemned as guilty, who shall
avowedly profess, maintain, or publish in word or writing, such or such
execrable opinions; which I never did: Nay I profess avowedly the contrary, and
do declare in the sincerity of my heart, that the thought never entered into my
heart, to deny the Godhead or Deity of Christ; but I have avowedly in words
maintained, and published by Preaching, That Christ is God, out of that Text
John 1. 12. The word was made flesh, etc. From whence I did maintain and
publish, That Christ was God, coequal, coeternal, and coessential with the
Father, contrary to all those blasphemous and execrable opinions, that deny
Christ to be God. So that now I hope the mere uttering of such expressions, by
way of dispute before a judicious and understanding Committee, does not make me
a transgressor, according to the true sense and meaning of this Act.

2. Article. That the imputative righteousness of Christ is a sapless
righteousness.
Ans. I thus deliver the truth: As I was paraphrasing on that portion of
Scripture mentioned in the 9 of Dan. 24. of everlasting righteousness I did say
words to this effect, That the imputative righteousness of another, was a
sapless righteousness to all those that had no right or interest in it. I shall
desire a little to explain my self on this Proposition, that the imputative
righteousness of Christ in this sense will prove a sapless righteousness: For
he that has not the Spirit of Christ dwelling in his heart by faith,
notwithstanding all this application of Christ and his merits, yet to him it is
but a sapless righteousness; so says the scripture, He that has not the
Spirit of Christ, is none of his, notwithstanding his application of the
imputative righteousness of Christ to himself; but here I do not deny the
imputative righteousness of Christ, nor his active and passive obedience to be
the material cause of his justification; yea I own and acknowledge Christ's
righteousness to be the souls righteousness in point of justification, when it
is applied upon a true ground, according to the true sense of the Spirit in the
Scriptures.

3. Article. That they should look to the fiery nature of Christ's Deity in the
center of their souls, burning up the dross and chaff of their lusts and
corruptions.
Ans. For the explanation of this Article, we must consider these are
Scripture-Metaphors, and Christ is often clothed with a garment of fire,
according to that of Paul, Heb. 12. 29. Our God is a consuming fire; and in
another place, Christ shall come in flaming fire: None, or few understand these
Scriptures, or the like, of elemental material fire; but either of the fire of
his divine love to burn up our lusts and corruptions, or the fire of his divine
justice or wrath in destroying sin and sinners.

4. Article. That the fiery Deity of Christ mingles and mixeth it self with our
flesh.
Ans. I was then speaking of the mystical union betwixt Christ and his Church:
And in the illustration of this union, I applied that expression out of the 5
of the Canticles, He mingleth his Wine and his milk together: so in this union,
Christ's divine nature mingleth it self with our humanity, his spirit with our
flesh. This expression Mr. Tickle was pleased to charge with blasphemy; asking
me what I meant by flesh? I answered in conference, By flesh, I understand not
the sinful and fleshly part of the soul, that lusts against the spirit; for
with this there can be no union. 2. By flesh, I mean not the outward elementary
flesh of the body; but by flesh, I understand our pure humanity, the pure
regenerated part of the soul, the converted part of our spirit; and thus the
spirit of Christ and regenerated part are really in union one with the other,
according to the Apostles phrase, We are made partakers of the divine nature.
And against this answer he had nothing to reply.

5. Article. That Christ was a Type, and but a Type.
This was in conference: He asked me whether Christ was a Type or no? I
answered, Christ was a Type, so expressed 1 Timothy 2. 21. How was Christ a Type,
replied Mr. Pendarius? I answered, His life and conversation was a Type, that
is, a pattern and example for us Christians, to square our lives and
conversations by: Who denies this, said he? Why, I affirm no more, said I, then
that Christ is a Type. Is he but a Type, replied Mr. Pendarius? I answered, Why
lie you thus on the catch? I say Christ is a Type; but I will not affirm Christ
is but a Type. And this they both confess in their Answers.

6. Article. That the gifts and graces of the Spirit are but flesh.
I confess I said the common gifts and graces of the Spirit were but flesh; but
this I opened after this manner, That they were but fleflly, weak, and carnal
in point of justification, in point of trust and confidence in regard of
salvation and life eternal; and no otherwise, as their own Witnesses on
examination confessed before the honorable Committee of Berks.

To conclude: As for these Articles, especially all the latter, I look not upon
them as under the cognizance of the Act; yet for your satisfaction I have
transcribed my former Answers, and do here present them again to your
consideration, by which you may clearly see my innocence in reference to the
horrid opinions for which I am accused.

John Pordage.

This being read by the Clerk, we were all commanded to withdraw. About an hour
or two after I was called in again; and they told me, if I would, I should have
an Order to fetch in my Witnesses to prove what they could on my behalf, in
reference to that Charge. I replied, That I hoped my Discharge and Answer were
sufficient, and that they would not put me to the trouble and charge of
traversing this business (viva voce) by my Witnesses again, in that (besides my
Discharge) I had brought all their Depositions delivered by Oath to the
Committee of Plundered Ministers; which I desired might be then read before
them, because the Witnesses could but say, viva voce, what was there wrote down.

Hereupon I delivered them to be read; and so being handed to the Clerk, the
Commissioners asked me how they should know them to be true? I replied, The
Clerk delivered them as a true Copy, and I would affirm on my Oath, that they
had not been altered since I had them. But notwithstanding this, they rejected
them, alleging that they would not take notice of any written Depositions
taken out of another Court; but that I must again bring in the former
Witnesses, to testify what they could by word of mouth; so that all the
reasons and arguments I could use, could not prevail with them to free me from
the charge and trouble of From the first to the last, I could not have the
least civil, just request granted me, which might either advantage my cause, or
free me from trouble and expense.
bringing in my Witnesses again; for which the Clerk was then commanded to draw
me up an Order.

BERKS. By the Commissioners for ejecting of Scandalous Ministers, October 19.
1654. At the Bear in Speenhamland.
Dr. Pordage of Bradfield has this day again attended, and has exhibited an
Answer in writing to the Articles exhibited against him. Ordered that the said
Dr. do attend again before us on this day fortnight at this place, at which
time he is to give answer to the additional Articles now exhibited against him,
and to produce his Witnesses, if he have any, for proof of his defense, and
Summons are to issue out for that purpose, if he desire the same.

Then they told me they had a new Charge of Articles against me; which were
these that follow; then openly read by the Clerk.

Articles against Doctor Pordage, Parson of Bradfield, to prove his ignorance
and insufficiency for the Ministry.
1. IMprimis, One Mistress Lewin being with child, and near the time of travel,
sent for Dr. Pordage his Mother to be her Midwife, but he would not suffer her
to go, saying, they would not be guilty of such a beastlike life, meaning
Mistress Lewyns being with child by her husband.

2. The said Dr. Pordage coming to the house of Mistress Lewyn, in his
discourse with Mrs. Lewyn, blamed her for having children by her husband, and
argued with her the unlawfulness of having children by her husband.

3. In his discourses to Mrs. Leayn concerning the same subject, endeavored to
maintain the unlawfulness of their having children, and said that Adam was made
male and female in himself, and had he not fallen, he had brought forth
children himself; and seemed to maintain and prove the same by Scripture, and
otherwise.

4. In his discourses with Mrs. Lewyn, which was about the time that one
Everard was with him in his house at Bradfield, who was generally reputed to be
a Conjurer, he asked Mr. Lewyn whether he would not be afraid if he should see
his own Picture, or shape, intimating that he himself had used to see his.

5. The said Dr. Pordage has had for some weeks together in his house the said
Everard, and one Tawny, who styled himself King of the Jews, who had been
questioned (as it is generally reported) for holding dangerous and unsound
opinions: as, That there is no Hell, and the like.

A True Copy: Math. Langley Regist.
Joseph Cook.

After these were read, I desired the Court in the first place to finish the
first Paper of Articles, urging, that if they were sufficient, they might save
both them and me much trouble. But this they denied, though I much urged it:
Whereupon they commanded this subsequent Order to be drawn up, viz.

BERKS. ss. By the Committee for ejecting of Scandalous, Ignorant, and
insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters in this County, October. 19. 1654.
ORdered that Mr. John Tickle, Mr. John Pendarvis, Mr. Francis Pordage, John
Higgs, Gifford Luinton, Richard Luinton, Mary Pocock: and Roger Stevens, do
make their personal appearance before the said Commissioners on Thursday the
second day of November next by eight of the clock in the morning, at the Bear
in Speenhamland by Newbery, to testify their knowledge of all such matters as
shall be propounded unto them concerning Dr. John Pordage of Bradfield in this
County; whereof they are not to fail.

Given under our hands and seals, the day and year abovementioned. Samuel
Wightwick Ar. Evelyn Ed. Mills. Samuel Dunch Angel. Bell


But this I must speak on the behalf of Mr. Wightwick and Mr. Evelyn, that by
their presence, things were transacted that day with much more seeming modesty
and calmness then at other times; the Ministers then containing themselves
within the limits of due silence, which gave me some hopes that the latter part
of my Trial might be transacted in some moderation, equity, and civility; but
these two sitting no more after that day, there broke forth much confusion,
rashness, and incivility in their carriage; some Ministers (who were bitter
enemies against me) acting the part of Commissioners, and seeming to have great
influence upon all their proceedings, being suffered to break forth into
uncivil scoffs, and railings against me in the open Court, as it will afterward
appear.

But thus much for my second days appearance, here represented according to
the line of truth and equity.

On the second of November I appeared before them again at the same place,
according to their last Order, at which time Major Fincher was Chairman,
besides whom, there were present, Mr. Dunch, Mr. Stroud, Mr. Cook, Mr. Bell,
with two or three more Commissioners; the Ministers were, Mr. Fowler, Mr.
Woodbridg, Mr. Hughes, Mr. Tickle, etc.

The first thing they demanded of me was, to give in my Answer to the second
Charge of Articles exhibited the last day against me: I replied, that my Answer
was ready; but I desired that they would keep to their own Order, and first
hear my Witnesses, and so finish my first Charge, that we might not run into
confusion; but they would not hearken to this rational request, importuning me
for my Answer, resolving to hear nothing till I had given it in; so being
necessitated to yield to their command, I gave in this subsequent Answer.

My Answer to the second Articles exhibited against me, is as follows.
IN the first place I shall take liberty to reply to the Title of the Articles,
which is, to prove my ignorance and insufficiency for the Ministry, by the
Articles produced.

1. Part. Ans. I do here humbly desire that ignorance and insufficiency for the
Ministry, may be preserved as distinct Heads from Scandal and Heresy,
according as it is intended by the Authors of the Ordinance: for certainly it
is against the judgment of the Lord Protector, and the intendment of his
Council, who made the Ordinance, to confound that which may be called scandal,
or heresy and insufficiency together: We see it is usual this day amongst us,
for knowing and learned Ministers to differ in their Judgments, both in
Doctrine, Worship, and things indifferent; who yet thereupon are not accounted
ignorant and insufficient for the Ministry: So that although these Articles
could be proved true, they are to be referred either to scandal or heresy, and
not to ignorance and insufficiency.

2. Part. Ans. If ignorance and insufficiency for the Ministry, be taken for
the want of an inward special gift, as it is qualified with humane Arts and
Sciences, attained by much pains and industry, in relation to Academical
Learning: Or if ignorance and insufficiency for the Ministry, are taken for the
want of inward abilities, qualified with spiritual gifts, as with those of
prayer, utterance and Preaching. Or if ignorance and insufficiency be taken for
the want of a saving principle of grace, manifesting it self in convictions of
sin, Legal terrors, or Evangelical illuminations into the free grace and love
of the Father, or into the meritorious death of Christ for the redemption of
lost sinners. Or if it be taken for those effects flowing from such a saving
principle of life, as that of saving faith, true repentance, pardon of sin,
peace of conscience, a holy life in all universal obedience, to the holy will
and righteous commands of God, Then I humbly conceive, that mere ignorance and
insufficiency, without the pretensions of Heresy, and Scandal, will be found a
bed too short, and a covering too narrow for my Ejection out of the work of the
Ministry, according to the true intent of the Ordinance.

3. Part. Ans. Hence my humble desire to you for time to come is, that you
would not make your Ephah of ignorance and insufficiency so small, that Heresy
and scandal may not stand distinct in it; and that you would not make your
Shekell of ignorance and insufficiency so great, as to swallow up Heresy and
Scandal, into the boundless and endless extent of it: For what is this but to
falsify the Balances of justice and equity, by a deceitful weight, in not
preserving insufficiency as a distinct head from scandal and Heresy; which in
time may prove very prejudicial to that Liberty of Conscience, which of late
years has been, and is still preserved and asserted by the Rulers of this
Nation.

In the second place to the Articles themselves, I thus reply.
Ans. 1. As to the four first, I know not how, or what positively and directly
to answer to them, till I see them first proved by Oath, and that by such
persons who are without just exceptions, and then I shall be capable of
returning a more full and complete Answer.

Ans. 2. Neither do I see, that seemingly to maintain and argue by way of
dispute only, the unlawfulness of Mrs. Lewins having children by her husband,
for the sifting forth of truth from error, could it be proved that I did so,
could argue or evince my ignorance and insufficiency for the Ministry: For
this, though it were evinced to be my crime, cannot in justice and equity be
referred to that Head of Insufficiency; but to scandal, except ignorance and
insufficiency be resolved into the boundless liberty of the wills of the
Judges, that what they deem ignorant and insufficient, must be ignorant and
insufficient, whether ignorance and insufficiency be real in such a Subject, or
not.

As to the fifth Article, which concerns my giving entertainment in my house to
one Everard, reputed a Conjurer, and to one Tawny, reported to hold unsound
opinions, I thus answer.
As to the first part of it, I confess that one Everard about four years since,
was received into my house at Bradfield, for the space of almost three weeks,
and no longer; and that after this manner: He came in Harvest-time with a new
pair of Harvest-gloves on his hands, to show his willingness and readiness to
work; and asking to speak with me, told me, That if I pleased to employ him in
Harvest-work, he came to offer his service: Hereupon I entertained him as a
workman. And thus you see both the manner of his coming, and the cause of his
entertainment.

Whereas it is said he was generally reputed a Conjurer.
1. Ans. I answer, I never heard any the least intimation from any, that he was
ever suspected to be a Conjurer, till after his departure from my Family; if he
was a Conjurer before he came, it was more then I knew, or had heard of; but
after his departure I confess there arose a general report up and down the
Country that he was a Conjurer. But from that time to this, I have never seen
him, nor known what is become of him.

2. Ans. After his absence I do further affirm, That I was strongly inclined to
believe, according to the general rumor, that he was a Conjurer: Hereupon I was
in a great strait in my own spirit, whether I should prosecute him, or not, my
zeal for Gods glory, and my obedience to the command of God, that says, Suffer
not a Witch to live, giving me some impulsions to do it. But after serious
debate and consideration within my self, I resolved this case or scruple of
conscience thus, that my own persuasions and jealousies, though they had some
ground of probability, yet being not certain, afforded me not a sufficient
ground of prosecuting him as a Conjurer, or of swearing positively he was such.
Now I leave it to your serious considerations, whether this tenderness of
conscience keeping me from prosecuting of him, or swearing against him, for
fear of that heinous sin of perjury, makes me either ignorant or insufficient
for the Ministry.

As to the second part of the fifth Article, which concerns my entertainment of
one Tawny, reputed (as it is there expressed) to be one that holds unsound
Opinions.
Ans. I answer, It is well known, as I invite none, so I turn away none that
come to visit me, though their Principles in matter of Doctrine, Worship, and
Discipline be different from mine. I will here show you briefly my grounds and
ends: My grounds are these; I look upon it as my duty, according to the Gospel
of Christ, to entertain all strangers that be in want and necessity, professing
the name of Christ. If enemies hunger, we are to feed them, if they are naked,
we must clothe them; and as for strangers, we are to lodge and entertain them,
Heb. 13. 2. And as in the practice of this I break no Law of God, so no Law of
man. And you may remember, that in the 37. Article of Government, it is
expressed, That all such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though
differing in Judgment, from the Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline, publicly
professed, so as they abuse not this liberty to the civil injury of others, nor
to the actual disturbance of the Public Peace, shall be protected, and then
surely their hungry bellies may be fed, their backs clothed, their wants
supplied, and their persons lodged and entertained.

And further, my ends are these, which are pure and Evangelical, That I may
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, that I may try the spirits,
for many false spirits are gone forth into the world. Now how are they to be
proved and tried? Not by carnal weapons, as by penalties, mulcts,
imprisonments, and other external punishments; but by convincing of them with
sound Doctrine, Christian discourse, spiritual arguments, and by the example of
a good conversation: And thus Gods glory, and the good of others are my only
ends, in giving entertainment to all strangers that come in civility to visit
me.

Now the cause of many strangers coming to me as Guests from all quarters of
this Land, arises from these lying printed Pamphlets, which have hardly a word
of truth in them, these draw all seeking enquiring minds to visit me, for
diverse ends best known to themselves: Let it but be proved that ever I gave
entertainment to any common swearer, or to any open drunkard, Sabbath-breaker,
or to any known profane person, and I shall judge my self obnoxious to your
Censure; but all that I give free entertainment to, appear clothed under some
show of Godliness or other; but if they have not the power, it will be their
own misery.

In a word, the strength of this Article does but amount to thus much, That as
Christ was supposed to be a friend of publicans and sinners, so am I supposed
to be a friend to all people that profess Religion, and walk orderly, be their
opinion in matter of Doctrine or Discipline never so much differing from mine
own, or from those commonly received; yet this does not argue my ignorance or
insufficiency for the Ministry; but if in it any thing be culpable, it is to be
referred to the head of Scandal: but here being no Law of prohibition, I cannot
see any transgression in it, either against the Law of God or man.

To conclude, I cannot give a more direct Answer to these Articles, being
matter of fact, till I see them proved, and each Article referred to its proper
place, either of Scandal or Heresy, or Ignorance and insufficiency.

John Pordage.

This being read, we proceeded to the proof of the first Charge of Articles
attested by Mr. Tickle, one of the Assistants, whom I desired to see sworn in
the open Court; alleging that I was altogether ignorant whether he had sworn
or not; but the Clerk affirmed that he had done it already; but after much
dispute, it was granted that I should hear him sworn in the open Court. Then I
craved liberty to cross examine him openly, and began to put my Interrogatories
to him; but this just prinviledg they peremptorily denied me, though I used
many reasons and arguments to show the equity and reasonableness of it. Then
they commanded me to write down my Interrogatories, which should be proposed
and answered in private, without my presence, according to their fixed
resolution. Then all being commanded to withdraw, I wrote down my
Interrogatories; and when I gave them in, I desired they might be asked in the
open Court; but it was denied. Then I requested that I my self might be present
at the cross-examination, though all the rest withdrew, urging, that although I
had given in my Interogatories, yet there might be many necessary circumstances
and questions emergent in the Examination, which I could not then give in in
writing, nor make use of without I was present, which yet might serve very much
to clear the truth; but notwithstanding this, and more which was then said, I
could not prevail, but was commanded to withdraw.

After this I was called in again, and as I thought to receive Mr. Tickles
Answers to my Interogatories, which though I pressed it with much earnestness,
was denied, they resolving, as it seemed to me by their Answer, to keep them
private till publication, which appeared to me very partial dealing, in regard
I could not know how the Questions were answered, against the time of making my
defense by Negative Witnesses.

But afterward importuning the Court to examine my Witnesses according to their
own Order, I was interrupted by their commanding of the Clerk to read a third
Charge of Articles exhibited against me by Mr. Fowler, an Assistant Minister to
the Commissioners, whose zeal moving swifter then the Clerks slow reading of
the Articles, caused him to take them out of his hands, and to read them
himself, with much courage and resolution; The Articles were these that follow.

Further Additional Articles Exhibited against Dr. Pordage, by Mr. Fowler,
Minister of St. Mary's in Redding.
1. THat the righteousness of Jesus Christ was a poor, vain, sapless
righteousness. The wisdom of the Commissioners, and the Piety of the Ministers
their assistants, rejected all my Witnesses against this Charge of 37 Articles,
except one whom they examined two or three questions concerning the most
inconsiderable Article.


2. That Jesus Christ was not perfect, alleging that Text to confirm it,
because he cried out, My God, my God, Why, etc.

3. That the blood of Christ was not meritorious of any man's salvation.

4. That it was a poor thing to live upon the blood of Christ; and fetching it
over again, in a contemptuous kind of speaking: Pish, said he, thou art a babe,
thou know nothing; to live upon the blood of Christ, is a poor thing.

5. That one speaking to him of the glorious persons in Trinity, he he replied,
Persons in Trinity, Pish, there is no such thing; and again, There is no such
thing as persons in Trinity.

6. That it was a weakness to be troubled for sin.

7. That he might say any thing to the men of the world. Nothing said at all to
prove this Article.


8. That he asserted he knew nothing to the contrary but that a man might
company with more then one woman, being taxed with keeping carnal company with
a woman in London.

9. That he has very frequent and familiar converse with Angels.

10. That a great Dragon came into his Chamber with a tail of eight yards long,
four great teeth, and did spit fire at him, and that he contended with the
Dragon.

11. That his own Angel came and stood by him while he was expostulating with
the Dragon, and the Angel came in his own shape and fashion, the same clothes,
bands and cuffs, the same bandstrings, and that his Angel stood by him and
upheld him.

12. That Mrs. Pordage and Mrs. Flavel had their Angels standing by them also,
Mrs. Pordage singing sweetly, and keeping time upon her breast, and that his
children saw the Spirits coming into the house, and said, look there Father:
And that the Spirits did often come into the Chamber, and drew the Curtains
when they were in bed.

13. That the said Mr. Pordage confessed that a strong enchantment was upon
him, and that the Devil did appear to him in the shape of Everard, and in the
shape of a fiery Dragon, and the whole roof of the house was full of Spirits.

14. That Mrs. Margaret Pendar acquainted with this Doctrine of Spirits, and
pretended to be converted by Visions of Angels, does think This was the one
only Article of this whole Charge which they would examine this my Witness
unto, being one of the most inconsiderable.
that she was bewitched by them of Bradfield.

Her Confession.
SHe was taken ill upon Wednesday in the afternoon in July 1653. about nine of
the clock the same night, there appeared the vision of a man standing at her
beds feet; on Thursday the next day he had a book in his hand, and stood by her
all that day and said nothing. On Friday it spoke audibly unto her, saying, Why
art thou so discomforted? I answered, A wounded conscience who can bear? He
replied, He that has wounded thee, will make thee whole. I spoke much of mine
own unworthiness; he answered, There was worth in Christ, and he had paid a
ransom for me. Then he told me that that book in his hand, was the book of the
Lamb, and that my name was written in it: I saw the book, a broad book with a
parchment-cover, and I saw writing in it; and then was I lifted up with a great
deal of joy. About four of the clock the same Friday, the dark Angel came and
stood by the other Vision, with a knife in his hand, and said, thou have had a
great deal of joy; and offering her the knife, bid her dispatch her self, and
she should enter into that erernal rest her soul so much thirsted after. Upon
this she trembled, the bed shook, and my Mrs. held me.

The same Friday I had visions presented upon the Wall, I saw the world, and
the resurrection of the dead, and the Son of man appearing in the clouds of
heaven.

She saw clearly the vision of a friend of hers in London in her Chamber at
Southcot, her friend was much inclined to this way; she much wondered at it, and
told Mrs. Pordage of it, who answered, alas so do we see abundance of those we
never knew before, when once they come into our way.

On Saturday Dr. Pordage came to her, being sent for, and prayed in a very
strange language, she did not understand well what he said; she heard him say,
Lord; but nothing of Jesus Christ, but the abiss and bottomless eternity.

She heard a great noise of Drums and Trumpets, she asked the Dr. what the
rattling of Drums and Trumpets meant? He answered, it was an alarm to the
Spiritual War.

One of the nights she saw the vision of young Mr. Daniel Blagrave which came
to her bedside; she took him by the hand, and it felt cold: She asked the
Doctor what it meant? He answered, The coldness of the hand did signify his
beginning to be cold to vanity.

She asked Dr. Pordage what the Visions meant? He answered, They durst not
reveal one another Visions, he did not question but God would discover
himself, and reveal wonderful things to me.

She was from Wednesday noon till Monday noon, and did not eat one piece of
bread, but sometimes a little water and sugar; and she says she was not sick
at all after the first two hours: and when she was about to eat, she had a
voice come to her; We are not to live upon bread, but upon every word of God:
And upon that voice she did not eat.

She says that she has oftentimes seen at London, flashes of light in her
Chamber, and at last heard a voice which put her into a very great fear and
sweat, saying, Thou have married a lump of clay; but thou must return to thy
first husband, who is thy Savior, and thou must go to Joppa.

And upon this she was convinced that these visions were of the Devil, because
the voice was clean contrary to the Scriptures. She says that she has heard
it reported at Southcot, that ere long Doctor Pordage should have power from
him to bestow saving graces on whom he pleased: as also, that marriage was the
way of beasts.

Francis Knight of Wallingford says,
That discoursing with some of Blewbery that use to Dr. Pordages, they speak
very much against the lawfulness of marriage, he wondered at it; Nothing said
at all to prove this Article.
and asked them whence they now came? they answered, We came just now from the
Doctors from Bradfield.

16. Doctor Pordages Chamber at Bradfield has sometimes been almost Not proved
at all.
filled with spirits.

17. That Doctor Pordage Preached, That Water Baptism was not Not proved at all.
the Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

18. That about Michaelmas, in the year 1653. he was commanded by his Angel, or
from heaven, to give off Preaching, and take no more Not proved at all.
Tithes; but since he conceives he has had a dispensation.

19. That in July last 1654. he was to be taken up into heaven; and it is said
by some, he has been there, and dismissed again about his business. Not proved
at all.


20. That in the midst of these Visions he is scandalously covetous. Not proved
at all.


21. That he cursed the people of Bradfield in his Pulpit, and their posterity
Not proved at all.
for ever in this world and in the world to come.

22. That he Preached at Bradfield, and afterward did labor to defend Not
proved at all.
it pertinaciously, That the little horn in Dan. 7. v. 8. was Christ; and being
told that the little horn made war with the Saints, yet he persisted to say it
was Christ, and endeavored to make his hearers believe that he was falsely
charged.

23. That he says Goodwife Pocock sings the highest hymns very sweetly, that
she knows not a word when she begins, but is taken with Not proved at all.
a burning about her heart, and when she has done, she cannot repeat a word of
it, if it were to gain the world.

24. That Goodwife Pocock lately came to Col. Eveling, and told Not proved at
all.
him she had a word to him from God, viz. Have nothing to do with that just man.

25. And that on or about the tenth of this month Mr. Dr. Pordage sent to
invite Mr. Snelling, and his wife and children to come to the Dr. Not proved at
all.
that day; and the same day Mr. Snelling and his wife did go to the Doctors
house; and when he came, Mr. Snelling desired to know wherefore he sent for
him? Dr. Pordage told him, to go with him and meet his Bridegroom. And then Mr.
Snelling told the Doctor he knew not what he meant, and so departed. And the
next morning Mr. Francis Pordage met with Mr. Snelling, and told him he had
lost his part in heaven, being he did not wait upon the Doctor at that time.

26. That Dr. Pordage sent his man Bolt, in a very rude and uncivil Not proved
at all.
manner to fetch Mrs. Forster to his house, that she being frighted at the
message, and enquiring to what end she was sent for, the said Bolt answered,
she should there see the heavens opened, and the Colors flying in the air, and
hear the Drums beat, and the Trumpets sound.

27. That Mr. Fostrer going to the Doctors house, he told him at his first
coming in, that he should see such things, as if he were Emperor of a Not
proved at all.
thousand worlds, he would give them all to see it. After asking him for his
wife, and he answering, she was not well, and could not come, the Doctor called
to them to send forth a winged messenger to fetch her, for she must come.

28. That two days after one Goodwife Pocock coming from thence to Mr.
Forsters house, and they enquiring of her what was the cause of those
behaviors in the Doctors Family? she answered, they had a foul spirit sent
amongst them, and the Doctor had fought many hours with the black power, and
had overcome it; for which she should ever think him a bright man. That all his
Family had been strangely acted, the power taking them, some in their legs, and
others in their arms, and that then they spoke very glorious things.

29. That Mrs. Flavel was in a trance, and when she came out of it, spoke many
precious things which she had seen in that trance, what was the Philosophers
stone, that so many learned men had sought after, which she knew to be the
Divinity in the humanity, and many other things to the same effect.

Further Articles preferred against Dr. John pordage, Minister of Bradfield
Parish, by some of the Inhabitants of the same Parish.
1. THat Dr. Pordage about eight years past, did carry Mrs. Flavel behind him
on horseback on the road to London, and about Hounsloe did enquire for a
private house, and was directed to one Goodman Loaders a Smith, who lives in
Hessne Parish, half a mile out of the road, between Hounsloe and Brainford; and
when he came, asked if his friend behind, being sick, might have entertainment?
'twas answered, yes: A lie, and not at all proved A lie, and acknowledged by
their own witnesses to the contrary:
Then the Doctor left her there, but never owned she was with child, till she
was in travel.

2. Mrs. Flavel in a short time fell in travel, and then desired no company
might be called in; yet the woman of the house, Goodman Loaders wife called in
three or four.

And Mrs. Flavel was then brought to bed of a daughter, having then no husband
that the world knew of, Mr. Flavel being dead. Not proved by any.


3. That Doctor Pordage came to that house and Christened that child, and named
it Hannah; and the Doctor came often to visit her there, and always alone by
himself.

4. That the child being put to nurse in the same Parish, the Doctor Not proved
by any. The Nurse denied all these particulars before Witnesses, and affirmed
them to be un^ruths.
moved Mrs. Flavel to Kensington, and paid the Smith for her being at his
house. That a little while after the Nurse went to Kensington to enquire for
Mrs. Flavel to pay her some money; but she was removed: and the Nurse saying
she left a child with her, the company smiled, and said, they thought she was
such a woman.

After this the Nurses husband wrote a Letter to the Doctor to Bradfield, that
he was twenty weeks pay behind, and could not forbear; Not proved The Nurse
affirms this to be most untrue before Witnesses, and affirmed the contrary,
that no Letter was ever wrote, nor ever one penny received from the Dr. nor by
his order. Not proved by any.
whereupon he was paid: and shortly after sent for the child away from the
Nurses.

5. That a little while after this Mrs. Flavel came again to the Doctors
Family, and a little child called Hannah, it was also brought thither, and Mrs.
Flavel took the care of it ever since. And Mrs. Flavel being by neighbors
asked whose child it was, said, a dear friend of hers; but none could ever hear
in the house whose child it was. And some telling Mrs. Flavel that the child
was so like her, that they should take it to be hers, had she not said the
contrary; she answered as before, 'Twas a dear friends of hers; but never named
whose.

6. That this child who was called Hannah, this last Summer they changed her
name, and called her Ruth, they have also changed all their names, the Doctor
is called Father Abraham, his wife is also called Deborah, and old Goodwife
Pocock is called Rahab, and so the rest.

7. That Goodman Loaders son being a Soldier, saw Mrs. Flavel in Bradfield
street, and spoke to her, but she took no notice of it. Afterward Mrs. Flavel
coming to his Fathers house, his mother in discourse, Not proved by any.
asked whether she lived at Bradfield? Mrs. Flavel answered, she knew no such
place; I will call my son in, who saw you there; Mrs. Flavel said, people be
given to lying, and would not have him called, and presently called for her
horse, and went away, though before she had resolved to stay all night; and
never since was there, except since the Doctor has been questioned.

31. That Dr. Pordage is extreme covetous, and has exacted five shillings at a
time to marry one man, or else told him he would not marry him; the man told
him he could not justly demand so much; the Dr. not proved by any.
answered, without five shillings he would not marry them; and took five
shillings.

32. That his Preaching does not tend to Edification. Not proved by any.


33. That he is a very ignorant and insufficient man for the work of the
Ministry.

September 9. 1650.
34. I came into Bradfield Parsonage in the evening, and there I heard a very
mournful cry, as if it had been one in extreme pains; but what it was I know
not; for it continued all the time I was at the door, which was well near the
quarter of an hour, and so it continued when I went away. And then the 10 day
in the morning I came unto Mr. Francis Pordage at the Parsonage of Stauford
Dingley; and he enquired of me what I did think of the noise that I heard? I
told him I could not tell. Then he related to me that the Lord was about a
great work in this Kingdom, and to this Nation; and the cause of this cry was
one in travel, and the pain was so extreme, that had I stayed there a little
longer, I might have heard it as far as the Town; but now she was delivered of
a man-child, and the travel was at an end, and that he and others were
eyewitnesses to it.

The Testimony of Richard Seward.
35. That in Dr. Pordages house in Bradfield, lately the new Jerusalem has
been seen to come down from heaven, all of precious stones; and in the new
Jerusalem was a Globe, which Globe was eternity, and in that eternity were all
the Saints.

36. That at the said Doctors house the face of God has been seen; not as
Moses saw him, but the very face, as one man may see another.

37. That one being in the said Doctors house in a trance, the said Drs.
daughter being by her, said that she saw two Angels all in white, with Crowns
over her head.

The Examination of Goodman Seward concerning Mr. Pordage.
THis Deponent says that Mr. Pordage did affirm marriage to be a very wicked
thing, contrary to the word of God; Goodman Seward telling the aforesaid Mr.
Pordage that a friend of his had buried his wife, and intended to marry again;
Mr. Pordage replied, that it was a very wicked act, and wondered at it: The
Deponent replied, that he took Marriage to be an Ordinance of God; then
demanding if his wife should have died, what he should have done? he replied,
Would you be so wicked as to marry? This the abovementioned Deponent will
averr with his Oath.

A true Copy, Examined by MATH. LANGLEY Regist'.

After he had done, it seemed not enough to him to have read such a horrid,
scandalous, confused Charge to the people against me, but he proceeded to speak
to them, desiring them to take notice what a strange person I was, representing
me to be guilty of Blasphemy, Devilism, and of looseness in my conversation,
promising to prove that Charge of Articles, or to be counted a Slanderer: after
which prevaricating speech, he suddenly departed.

After I further urged the Commissioners to hear the Testimony of my Witnesses
in reference to the first Charge of Articles, that so it might be dispatched,
that so I might be freed from the trouble of answering so many together, which
would unavoidably bring confusion and disorder to mine and their proceedings. I
further showed, that according to their appointment, my Witnesses were present
and ready, desiring them to consider that I had been at trouble and charges in
bringing them, and that I must unavoidably be at more if they would not then
hear them; notwithstanding this, they denied to hear them at that time, calling
for two Witnesses, which they had summoned to attest my second charge of
Articles. Here I desired that as my charges had been openly read to the people,
so the examination of the Witnesses might be open, that so the people might as
well hear the proof, as the accusation; but this could not be granted. Then I
requested that I might be present; this was also denied: So two Witnesses were
privately examined to the second Charge, whose examination concluded that days
transactions in reference to me, and I received an Order to appear before them
again the 22 of November at the the Bear in Redding.

BERKS. By the Commissioners for Ejecting of Scandalous Ministers, November 2.
1654 at the Bear in Speenhamland.
ORdered that Dr. Pordage of Bradfield (now present) do appear again before us
on Monday the 22 instant at the Bear in Redding, as that he then give in his
Answer to the further additional Articles now exhibited against him. And it is
further Ordered, That the said Dr. do then produce his Witnesses, and bring in
his Interrogatories in writing, upon which he will examine the Witnesses in his
defense, or cross-examin them, produced for proof of the several Charges
against him.

On the day prefixed, I appeared at the appointed place, the Commissioners then
sitting being, Mr. Dunch Chairman, Major Fincher, Mr. Trapham, Mr. Stround, Mr.
Cook, Mr. Nutkins. The Ministers, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Lee, Mr. Woodbridg, Mr.
Tickle, Mr. Hughes, with two more.

Just as they were going to Dinner, I was called in, and asked for my Answer to
the last Charge of Articles: I told them it was ready, but I should be very
long in delivering it; but if they thought fit, I would give it in before
dinner. At this one Mr. Trapham a Chyrurgion and Commissioner, began to be very
ruff, pressing me to give in my Answer, and to leave it with them. I replied,
that it was in my power whether I would give it in in writing only; or by word
of mouth, and that I resolved of the last. So I was commanded to withdraw.

After dinner, being called in again, I read this Answer following, and then
delivered it to them in writing.

My Answer to the third Charge of Articles, I present in this form following.
I Shall first present something by way of general Preface, and so descend As I
was expressing the first part of it, I was much interrupted by Mr. Dunch. who
passionately cried out, they would not hear it, bidding me come to my
particular Answer, though they would often hear me railed against by the accuser
and others in open Court, without the least reproof.
to particulars.

In the first place then I look upon the first Articles charged upon me by
young Mr. Tickle, to be as the casting of my innocent person with Daniel into
the Lions Den; but those Articles, as the mouths of the Lions, I conceive,
were stopped, so that they could not hurt me, because the Authority and just
proceedings of two former Committees, authorized by Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament, with some other legal Privileges, had sufficiently muzled the
mouths of those Lionish Articles.

And as for the second subscribed by an unknown name, I believe there has not
been, not cannot be any thing proved, which may render me obnoxious to any
legal guilt.

As for my third Charge, brought forth by Mr. Fowler, who is both my Accuser
and my Judge; I look upon it, as the design of the evil one, to cast me with
the three children into the hot fiery Furnace of unparalleld wrath and envy;
for I know it will one day appear that these Articles were raked together from
a spirit of bitterness and spleen, which seem to me as the furnace heated seven
times hotter by the fire of wrath to burn up and consume my name, Liberty,
Estate, and Posterity.

But be it known unto you oh you Judges and Commissioners, I am not solicitious
what the event may be, I know the God whom I serve in the integrity of my
heart, who is Jehovah, the true and only God, is able to deliver me from this
hot fiery furnace, and to punish those who cast me in: But however God as yet
may order and dispose of me, in reference to the execution of my enemies
intents; I believe my strict and holy conversation, with my holding forth what
God in the riches of his grace has bestowed upon me, will clearly demonstrate
that I am no such person, as the false and unworthy aspersions of these
Articles represent me to be.

As to the particular Articles (which are raked together in much confusion,
without reducing of them to their particular heads, of Scandal or
Insufficiency, many of them being incapable justly to be referred to either) I
thus begin my Answers.
Art. 1. THat the righteousness of Christ was a poor, vain, sapless
righteousness.
1. Part. Ans. This Article was in my former Charge, and I was cleared of it by
two Committees, who had power legally to acquit me, even as they did.

2. Part. Ans. I do cordially acknowledge, That Christ's righteousness is not a
poor and sapless righteousness; but very precious, being the material cause,
and spotless robe of a Christians justification, and that every Saint ought to
be found in this righteousness of Christ in point of justification, and not in
his own self-righteousness.

3. Part. Ans. I deny that ever I spoke such words, without some limitation,
which limitation, if annexed, would free me from any guilt resulting from such
expressions; and though any one should swear I spoke those words, yet that
could not render me justly guilty, it not being declared what preceded, or
followed in the series of my discourse: And I have many Witnesses sufficiently
known, and pious, who being constant hearers of me, have testified by Oath, and
will upon occasion again, that the scope of my Ministry drives not against the
due application of Christ's righteousness to the souls of believers, but against
the misapplying it to those who have not the spirit of Christ living in their
hearts, purifying their consciences, and subduing their lusts.

Art. 2. That Jesus Christ was not perfect, alleging that Scripture to
confirm it My God, my God, Why have thou, etc.
1. Part. Ans. I do nakedly without any vails, profess that I ever did, and
still do look upon Christ as a most perfect copy and pattern to square our
lives and conversations by, yea and to be a perfect Mediator, in reference to
that work he undertook for the redemption of the world, being free from the
least tincture either of original or actual sin, and truly the thought of any
such thing, never lodged in my heart.

2. Part. Ans. But suppose I uttered such expressions as these, yet the manner
of it will sufficiently free me from that guilt my accuser may hope and believe
I am obnoxious to by it, I confess I uttered these or the like words, yet it
was only by way of relating what I heard in a Sermon of Mr. Erberies in
Somerset House, who at that time endeavored to enumerate Christ's (supposed)
imperfections, whereof he made his crying out on the Cross, in those
expressions one. Now I leave it to your considerations, whether my relating to
some that were wise and knowing, what I heard from another, with much grief to
my soul, makes me any way culpable or guilty.

Art. 3. That the blood of Christ was not meritorious of any man's salvation.
Ans. I call heaven and earch to witness, that such thoughts never entered into
my soul, nor did such words ever come out of my mouth. For my judgment ever
has been, and still is, that the blood of Christ is satisfying, reconciling,
cleansing blood, that it is interceding, redeeming, meriting blood, in relation
to all those who through faith and patience come to inherit eternal life.

Art. 4. That it was a poor thing to live upon the blood of Christ, and
fetching it over again in a contemptuous kind of speaking, Pish, said he, thou
art a babe, thou know nothing, to live upon the blood of Christ is a poor
thing.
1. Part. Ans. I acknowledge that about four years since such expressions were
uttered by me to one Mrs. Grip, but without any such intent as may be supposed
by my accusers, and not with that circumstantial aggravation of repeating it in
a contemptuous manner, which is but a supposition of my adversary, and cannot
be attested by an Oath, without this Witness pretends infallibly to know my
thoughts and purposes.

2. Part. Ans. Again, this being spoken to a particular person, on a particular
occasion, might be true, if the circumstances of the discourse were accordingly
added; though as here presented it seems very monstrous.

3. Part. Ans. Therefore to make things clear, I shall here insert some
particular circumstances, which may present this Article, though in a new, yet
true face. I coming to Mrs. Grips house, she took me into a private room to
have some conference with me alone, where she brake forth into a violent
passion of tears, weeping and wringing her hands, and pouring sorth bitter
complaints, and invectives against Mr. Fowler, as that he was a graceless man,
a Liar, a Slanderer, not worthy to come up into a Pulpit, or to have the name
of a Minister of Christ, with other such bitter expressions: The cause of which
was, as she then told me, Mr. Fowlers reporting about, that she then lived in
Adultery, and after her passion was somewhat allayed, she brake forth into
these or such like expressions of high assurance, Christ has loved me, and
dyed for me, and justified me by his blood, from all guilt of sin, I am an
elect person, a justified person, and what is this Fowler to charge sin upon
me? These and other expressions fell from her to this purpose, from some of
which, I feared she was drenched with Antinomianism, and told her more then
once, it was a poor thing to live upon the blood of Christ, and to look so much
upon that, except she had the nature of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ,
asking her where was the meekness of Christ, and the patience of Christ, to
suffer as an innocent lamb quietly? but still she crying out, she lived on the
blood of Christ, I told her it was a poor thing to be thus exalted with notions
of the blood of Christ, without mentioning sanctification, and those holy
graces which flow from Christ's nature dwelling in the soul: Now by these
expressions of mine, my scope was to make Mrs. Grip see the necessity of
sanctification, and of a pure and holy life, and not to make void the blessed
effect of the blood of Christ, applied according to the mind of God, and the
true meaning of the Scripture. And now, having related the circumstances, as
near as I can remember, I believe a sober and knowing Christian will not judge
me either scandalous or ignorant for these expressions:

Art. 5. That one speaking to me of the glorious persons in the Trinity, I
replied, pish, there is no such thing as persons in Trinity:
1. Part. Ans* I do here profess and avow from the sincerity of my heart, That
I believe the Trinity of persons as an Article of my faith, viz. That there are
three persons distinct from each other, the person of the Father, the person of
the Son, the person of the Holy Ghost; yet not so as to prejudice the unity in
essence, and I so believe the unity, as not to confound the Trinity of persons.

2. Part. Ans. I never uttered such expressions in that way, as to give any
just ground of suspicion of my denying the Trinity: But I remember about four
years since, being before the Committee of Berks, Mr. Fowler or Mr. Gilbert, I
remember not which, desired the Committee to give them liberty to ask me two or
three questions, amongst the rest, they asked me whether there were three
persons in the Deity? I answered them, I believed the Trinity, as it is
recorded in 1 John 5: 7: There are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. Thus you see I believe the Trinity: But
do you believe the Trinity of persons, said they? I replied, I find not the
term Persons in the Text, but to put you out of doubt, I do not stumble at the
word Person. And this afterward I told to the abovementioned Mrs. Grip, in a
private conference, some years since, to whom I affirmed that I found no such
expressions as persons in Trinity, in the Scripture, and that the word Person
being a School-term, was very difficult to be apprehended by common capacities;
but I never spoke thus to prejudice the true notion of the persons in the
sacred Trinity, which I do cordially believe, but only to show that ordinary
Christians should not be too curious in prying into that deep mystery of the
three persons in the Trinity, but rather content themselves with what the
Scripture plainly affirms of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as distinct, yet
one. But to conclude this Answer, pray consider what hard measure it is, thus
to pick a broken sentence out of a long discourse, and so to accuse one without
relating the circumstances, which might serve to clear, what otherwise may seem
very strange to prejudiced persons.

Art. 6. That it was a weakness to be troubled for sin.
Ans. I do not remember that any such expression as this ever dropped from my
mouth, either publicly or privately, and I am persuaded that none one dare
assert it with an oath, which if they did, would not make much to the purpose;
for with a charitable qualification it might thus be made forth, That it is a
weakness for one to be troubled for sin, who has the assurance of Gods love,
his sin pardoned, his person justified, sanctified, and his will converted
from, and crucified to sin, for such a one should be triumphing in the power of
faith and love, enjoying sweet heavenly communion with God, and saying, O
death, where is thy sting! and there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: Whereas
trouble for sin thus pardoned and mortified, may be an engine of Satan to make
a soul question Gods love, and to bring it out of a blessed, spiritual
enjoyment of God, into slavish fear and disturbance.

Art. 7. That he might say any thing to the men of the world.
1. Part. Ans. I answer to the best of my remembrance, I never uttered any such
unchristian Maxim, much less ever held it as my judgment, and I confidently
believe there is no one on the earth that dare witness it with an Oath.

2: Part. Ans. I know very well that Mr. Fowler has been, if not the author,
yet the reporter of my holding this monstrous Tenent, for he has confidently
averred, and often insinuated into some of the Gentry of this County, and into
his own Proselytes, that I am a Familist, and that it is my principle to say or
unsay any thing that may make to my own advantage; which God knows is a sad
scandal, and a monstrous untruth; and clearly appears to those who know the
integrity of my Principles and conversation, to be a blur cast upon me from the
contrivance of subtle Machiavillian Policy to prejudice all I say or answer to
those horrid things objected against me: For if this be once settled in those
who are my Judges, it is vain for me to answer, deny, or avow any thing: But
the Lord forgive my adversary for this his unchristian dealing, and grant he
may repent of it before he comes to give up his last account before the great
Tribunal of Christ.

Art. 8. That I asserted, I knew nothing to the contrary but that a man might
company with more then one woman, being taxed for keeping carnal company with a
woman in London.
Ans. I never kept scandalous company with any woman in London, neither was I
ever taxed for any such thing, except once by Mistress Grip, who I believe is
the Witness against me, and that upon this occasion.

At the time I had my former conference with her, the heat of her passion being
over, she told me that I was also taxed for keeping of carnal company with a
woman in London. I replied, I am a man born to all kind of sufferings, and told
her that she saw and knew the manner of my conversation, asking her whether she
believed it? and she answered, No truly; and then I solemnly protested the
contrary: And this was all the taxing I ever had from any one, at which time I
was earnest with Mrs. Grip to discover to me from whom she heard it; but she
put me off, telling me she did not believe it, and that she would tell me some
other time: But from that long discourse I had with her, fearing, as I said
before, she was deeply tinctured with the Principles of Antinomianism; and not
knowing whether she might not be tainted with some notions of Rantism, which at
that time were every where frequently discourst of, I took this occasion to try
her, telling her (as near as I remember) that there were some that affirmed they
knew nothing to the contrary, but that a man might company with more then one
woman; but to speak the truth, she let it fall, without seeming to approve of
any such thing: And this I solemnly avow to be the truth, as near as I can
remember. And I believe Mrs. Grip dare not swear that I maintained any such
thing as my judgment, or produced one Scripture or Argument to defend it.

I profess to the whole world, in the presence of that eye that sees through
all hearts, that all such loose principles, which turn the grace of God into
wantonness, and that run opposite to the Laws of Morality, Civility, Modesty
and Sobriety, or that any ways indulge wantonness and lasciviousness, are as
inconsistent with my Principles, as heaven and hell, light and darkness, are
opposite one to another, which will one day clearly appear to the world,
whatever I am now thought of.

Art. 9. That he has frequent and familiar converse with Angels.
Ans. As this Article is presented in general terms, without expressing whether
the Communion be visible or invisible, I do not see how it can touch me, though
my enemies were my Judges, because every true Christian has frequent communion
or converse with Angels, as you may see solidly and clearly proved from
Scripture by the Lord Lawrence, one very learned and pious, now President of
the Lord Protectors Council, in his Book Entitled, Our Communion and War with
Angels.

Art. 10, 11, 12, 13. Concerning the Vision of a Dragon, and the Apparition of
Spirits.
Ans. 1. I may deny these four Articles as they are taken together, and
expressed in those terms, and in that manner in which they are set down in my
accusation, for I believe none dare swear the measures and teeth of the Dragon,
with the appearance of my own Angel, etc. without the crime of perjury.

Ans. 2. I will not confess any Apparitions in particular till they be proved,
lest I should seem to accuse my self, they being brought in as a crime against
me, and as instruments to condemn me.

Yet in general I acknowledge, that some four years since, there were many
strange and wonderful apparitions seen in my house: But what can these in
justice amount to, though attested by oath, and confessed particularly by my
self, when brought before those who profess themselves Christians, and
acquainted with the History of the holy Scriptures? Pray was not Job a pious,
sincere, and eminent righteous man? yet how was he scared with Dreams, and
terrified through Visions, cap. 7. v. 14. Did not Zachariah the Prophet (Rev.
3.) see Satan standing at the right hand of Iostuah to resist him? Did not John
(ver. 12.) in a vision behold a great red Dragon that made War against Michael
and the holy Angels? And was not Christ himself tempted of the Devil, by voice
and visions, Mat. 4. 6. 8.? Now the servant is not greater then the Lord, John
15. 20. and therefore not exempted from the like attempts of the Devil; I
beseech you consider whether this earth be not the place where the Devil walks
up and down, seeking whom he may devour: How then can Bradfield, or any other
place be exempted from his appearing, when God permits; and may not all this be
for the manifesting of his Glory, Goodness, and Power? And who can tell whose
Family may be next exposed by Gods permission, to be tried and proved by the
representations of Satan? And I desire you seriously to consider how any such
apparitions raised by the Devil, and permitted by God, for his own glory, argue
me either scandalous, ignorant, or insufficient? Surely it rather argues that
he has blessed me with a strong faith, in that he permitted such great trials,
and made me instrumental to overcome them by prayer and fasting: If it can be
proved that I ever so much as looked toward the unlawful Art of Black Magic,
or that any evil Spirits were raised up by any compact of mine, explicit, or
implicit, or that those evil apparitions were subdued and overcome by any
other means then by Gods blessing upon our fasting and prayers, I shall judge
my self worthy of punishment; but otherwise it is hard measure to be prosecuted
and prejudiced for the malice of the Devil toward me, inflicting what I was
passive in, and could not help, especially by those who profess the Christian
Religion, and know that the God of heaven rules over all, permitting and
disposing of what ever comes to pass.

Art. 14. That Mrs. Margaret Pendar does think she was bewitched by them of
Bradfield.
1. Part. Ans. Here is a long and tedious Relation, in which truth and untruths
are mixed together, the whole structure of which Relation, so far as it
concerns me, depends on this weak Basis and foundation, That she thinks she was
bewitched by them of Bradfield: But what a sad thing is this for my accuser to
impeach me for that which might endanger, if true, my Estate and life, upon the
thoughts of a discomposed maid? because she thinks I sent those visions,
therefore I must be thus arraigned. But for my part I do not believe she dare
say so, much less swear it, having no ground at all for it.

2. Part. Ans. I shall briefly relate some circumstances which concern this
business, and may serve something to clear it up. Before these visions of hers,
I had never seen her as I know of, nor exchanged so much as a word with her; in
the time of her visions Mr. Daniel Blagrave, whose servant then she was, came
for me himself to fetch me to his house, to visit her: To which motion I
yielded, being suitable to the Law of Christian Charity; and when I came I had
no conference with her, but in the presence of Master and Mistress Blagrave,
with others that were then present. And from this visit there arose a rumor
that I was a Conjurer, and a Sorcerer; which report was spread abroad by two
that carry the name of Ministers of Christ, Mr. Fowler and Mr. Ford; the last
of which, so exceeded the bounds of Charity and Christian moderation, as in his
Sermon at the Assizes, to call me a horrid blasphemer, asserting that the Devil
was as visibly familiar in my Family as my own servants, and so excited the
Magistrates to persecute me.

3. Part. Ans. As for those untruths which are mixed in the Relation, I shall
not trouble my self to answer them, for I know when they come to be sworn to,
and to be cross-examined, they will appear to be but the fulfilling of that
wicked Maxim, Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit: Calumniate and asperse
boldly, something will stick. Which being a piece of Jesuitical policy, has
been practiced by my accuser, in this confused Rapsodie of Articles.

Articles of one Francis Knight of Wallingford.
Art. 1. THat some of Blewbery who spoke against Marriage, said they came then
from my house.
Ans. I hope I have enough to do to answer for my self, what need the
assertions of others be alleged as Articles against me? They spoke against
Marriage, having lately been at my house; therefore I must be guilty of it;
surely this Consequence is neither according to natural, artificial, nor divine
reason.

Art. 2. That my Chamber has been filled with Spirits.
Ans. I hope none will be so unadvised as to swear to this Article, being
Spirits are immaterial, and cannot take up place, or fill a room.

Art. 3. That I Preached, That Water Baptism was not an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ.
Ans. It was never so Preached by me; all that I then affirmed was this, That
Water Baptism could not be proved to be the Ordinance of Christ, by way of
eminency so called, from that Text of Scripture, Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; for
that Baptism may very well be understood of the Baptism of the Spirit, which by
the Disciples was instrumentally administered to all Converts; yet I denied not
Water Baptism to be a Gospel-Ordinance, instituted by John, as the chief
Instrument under God, from whom he received his Commission. And that this was
the sum of what I then Preached, I can prove by Oath.

Art. 4. That about 1653. I was commanded by my Angel, or from heaven, to give
off Preaching, and to take no more Tithes; but that since I have had a
dispensation.
Ans. I believe no one that has the fear of God before his eyes, dare attest
this Article by Oath, which is here stated. This is answer enough to such a
thing, which is merely brought in as an odium by my accuser, the more to
prejudice me.

Art. 5. That in July 1654. I was taken up into heaven, etc.
Ans. If Paul were now upon the earth, he were in danger to be accused by my
accuser, for his rapture into Heaven or Paradise; but this concerning me, will
prove but some idle dream, created by some bodies fancy, to make people wonder
at me.

Art. 6. That I cursed the people of Bradfield in my Pulpit, and their
posterity for ever, etc.
Ans. This Article was one of those heard and examined four years since by the
Committee of Plundered Ministers, from which I was acquitted by them, these
Witnesses, viz. Richard Luington, John Hambleton, Mary Pocock, Richard Holmes,
with four more attesting by Oath that I did not curse the people of Bradfield,
so as is expressed in the Article: The Testimony of these Witnesses was this,
That they being present September 29. the Dr. expressed himself thus, Bradfield
is a place partly made famous, partly infamous, by reason of the false and
lying reports that are abroad; but I say, Cursed be the tongue and the mouth
that shall say, That what is done by the power of God, is done by the power of
the Devil. What one Parishioner is here cursed by me, except any ones
conscience accuses him of the guilt of that forementioned Blasphemy?

Art. 7. Concerning the little Horn mentioned Dan. 7. to be Christ.
This Article was four years since exhibited against me, from which I was
discharged by the Committee, Richard Higs, John Higs, and Richard Luington,
attesting on Oath, that I paraphrasing on the seventh of Daniel, and speaking
on the little Horn, said, That some Interpreters would have the little horn in
the letter, to be meant of Antiochus Epiphanes, a bloody and persecuting
Tyrant; others think the little horn to be the Turk, who is a great persecuter
of Christians; but in the mystery, in regard of its power, we will apply it to
the power of Christ in a Christian, who is often in Scripture resembled to the
horn of David, and to the horn of salvation, and that upon three Considerations.

Consid. 1. In regard that Christ's power in the soul does appear to be a little
horn, a small despised instrument, to sense and reason, for flesh and blood
look on it as a poor instrument, in regard of bringing down the strength of sin
in us.

Consid. 2. In regard of sin and Satan, who laughs the power of Christ in the
soul to scorn, yet before him his accursed Kingdom must fall.

Consid. 3. In regard its birth and beginning in the soul, is at the first a
very little grain of mustard, seed, yet in due time it will destroy the Kingdom
of sin, and set up the Kingdom of holiness in us.

Having thus drawn away the vail from this Article, I hope it appears with a
more tolerable and innocent face.

Art. 8. Concerning Goodwife Pococks singing Hymns and Spiritual Songs.
Ans. She acknowledges it as her gift bestowed by God, being according to the
gifts of Christians in the primitive time. But this does not directly concern
me.

Art. 9. Concerning the same persons coming to Col. Evelings, and saying she
had a word from God, viz. Have nothing to do with that just man.
Ans. She owneth these words, and looks upon me as a just man, and a true
Christian, and believes that Colonel Eveling will one day know she gave good
council upon good grounds.

Art. 10. Concerning Mr. Snelling and his wife coming to my house, etc.
Ans. This Article has as little of truth, as sense or force to prejudice me,
and I believe none will be found to swear it, however I think it not worthy of
a larger Answer.

Art. 11, 12. Concerning the sending of my man Bolt in an uncivil manner for
Mr. Forster, with his speaking of strange things there to be seen, and of my
telling Mr. Forster he should see very wonderful things, etc.
1. Part. Ans. These Articles were heard, and I acquitted four years since by
the Committee of Plundered Ministers, and are of so little consequence, that
they might well have been omitted, but that my accuser thinks he has never
enough against me.

2. Part. Ans. I believe Mr. Forster dares not swear to these particulars, some
of which are very untrue.

3. Part. Ans. The forementioned Robert Bolt asserted on Oath that I sent him
not with any message, but that it was his Mistress that sent him to desire Mr.
Forster and his wife to come to my house

Art. 13. Concerning Goodwife Pocoks coming to Mr. Forsters, and saying the Dr.
had fought with, and overcome an evil Spirit, and that the Family had been
strangely acted, the power taking some of them in one part, some in another,
and that they spoke glorious things.
1. Part. Ans. This was another of the Articles heard, discussed, and I
acquitted by the forementioned Committee, because nothing material could be
made of it.

2. Part. Ans. The said Mary Pocock attested on Oath she saw no apparitions in
my house, being cross-examined concerning that particular; and though she did
say God gave extraordinary power to sustain both our spirits and bodies in an
extraordinary trial; What hurt was there in that? why should it be brought as
an Article against me?

Art. 14. That Mrs. Flavel was in a Trance, and in it saw the Philosophers
stone, which she knew to be the Divinity in the Humanity.
Ans. Not to speak any thing concerning the Mystical writings of the deep
Hermetick Philosophers, or what the judgment of some of them is concerning
this secret, I my self being not here accused to have seen it, or to have
affirmed it was the Divinity in the Humanity, all that I shall answer is this,
I wonder that this is brought in as an Article against me, to prove me
Scandalous, Ignorant, or Insufficient, it not directly proving any thing
against me, being affirmed of another, and being one of those Articles I was
discharged of by the Committee for Plundered Ministers.

Art. 15. Touching Sawoods Depositions of the birth of a child, and one being
in travel.
Ans. 1. This was one of the Articles of which I was acquitted by the
forementioned Committee.

Ans. 2. Mrs. Elizabeth Pordage and Mary Pocock asserted on Oath, That there
was no woman in travel, nor any child born, nor any other cry heard, but of
those at prayer, which was also witnessed on Oath by Mr. Francis Pordage.

Art. 16. That in my house the new Jerusalem has been seen to come down from
heaven, and that in it was a Globe, in which Globe was Eternity, and in that
Eternity all the Saints.
Ans. As to the substance of this Article, If God have favored any with such a
vision, surely they would be no more ashamed to own it, when called to it, then
John was when to write, Rev. 21. 1. That he saw the Holy City, new Jerusalem
come down from God out of heaven, where he also describes it by all the most
precious stones in the Creation; but in reference to my Family, I believe none
dare attest they heard this spoken by any of them, which I believe will prove
but some groundless imagination.

Art. 17. That in my house God has been seen face to face, etc.
Ans. As this Article is stated, I shall give no other answer but this, That I
shall wait to see who dare swear to it, or what proof can be brought of it.

Now I am come to the Articles exhibited against me by some of Bradfield Parish.
And as to those which concern Mrs. Flavel, I shall answer,

1. Somewhat in general touching their import and nature, 2. By way of negation
3. By way of acknowledgment or affirmation.

Ans. Genesis This Charge of Articles has no legal reference of charge at all to
me, but is merely scandalous, importing but a Libel, nothing of fact really
criminous being laid to my charge, which will more clearly appear when the
erroneous circumstances of it are detected, by which also the subtilty and envy
of my adversaries will be discovered, who positively alleadg nothing against me
that may bear any action of damage at the Common Law, by which they might
suffer for their injurious dealing, yet by plausible prevaricating
circumstances, would seem to make me highly criminous and guilty.

Now I shall answer negatively to many erroneous prejudicing circumstances,
which are by design heaped together to put a plausible face upon an envious
Libel, or illegal Charge.
1. Circ. Its said it was some eight years since I brought one Mrs. Flavel to
Goodman Laughtons, etc.
Ans. neg. Which is an error, though one of the smallest, brought in to
prejudice the more, for it was some nine years since.

2. Circ. Its further said, this was carrying her to London.
Ans. neg. which I deny; for it was coming from London, where she had for some
time been.

3. Circ. That I asked whether my friend behind me, being sick, might have
entertainment, etc.?
Ans. neg. This I also deny, she was not then sick, neither did I use any such
expressions.

4. Circ. That I never mentioned she was with child.
Ans. neg: Though I did not, it not concerning me to do it, yet she her self
did not deny it.

5: Circ: That in a short time she fell in travel:
Ans: neg: A short time may seem to imply some few days, or weeks, being
brought in as an aggravating circumstance, whereas it was some four or five
months after.

6: Circ: That she had no husband then as the world knew of:
Ans: neg: She owned then to the people where she was, and does still, that she
had had a second husband, which some in the world knew of very well, whose
testimonies she can and will produce when she has sufficient occasion offered
by a legal call thereto; who is also able and ready to give a sufficient
account, when occasion serves, of her not openly assuming her second husbands
name, her Estate then standing as it did, which having concealed for that time
she was in Law, she thought good ever since to be called by her first husbands
name: But this subtle dealing of her adversaries by Libelling scandals,
without positively asserting she was not married, makes her incapable of
recovering any damage of those who now enviously, yet indirectly asperse her;
which the Commissioners ought to take notice of, who should not receive such
Libels, which tend to the blasting of ones credit and good name, which all
sober Christians ought (for the Gospel sake) to vallue, and yet absolutely
prove nothing of such criminous fact, which they design seemingly to prove,
nor yet give sufficient ground of calling them to an account for such evil,
malicious scandals: But this not directly concerning me, I shall omit much
which might be spoken of it.

7. Circ: That I came often to visit her.
Ans: neg: This is not true, it was rather seldom, being but three times in
three quarters of a year, and that in Term time, upon urgent occasions at Law.

8* Circ. That I removed her to Kensington:
Ans. neg. This is false, for I knew not when she removed thither:

9. Circ. That I paid the Smith for her being at his house:
Ans. neg. This is another untruth, I never paid him a penny, neither did I
ever agree with him for her being there:

10: Circ: That the Nurses husband wrote a Letter to me at Bradfield, for money
for the child's nursing:
Ans. neg. This is a mere lie, for no such Letter was wrote, neither did I ever
agree to pay for the nursing of it, as the Nurse and her husband can witness.

11. Circ. That shortly after he sent for the child away.
Ans. neg. This I also deny, it containing two untruths in it: For first, the
child was not shortly after sent for away, neither did I send for it at all,
for it was fetched away by the mother her self.

12. Circ. That a little while after the said little one was brought into my
Family.
Ans. neg. This is also false.

13. Circ.
As to the seventh Article of this Libelling Charge, in which many
circumstances are produced to scandal the Gentlewoman, as though she had told a
great untruth, it deserves no other answer but this, That it is compacted of
many lies, nothing being there true that really tends to prejudice her, as I
believe will appear by the event.

Thus in this short Relation, wherein there is some truth, pray take notice how
many untruths and mere lies are mixed with it, to put a beautiful face upon an
envious and unchristian design: And is not this to bear false witness against
ones neighbor? May not any ones innocence and integrity, be in this manner
undeservedly clouded, aspersed, and wounded? Which I leave to the serious
consideration of the Judges.

As to my affirmative Answer, what I acknowledge is this.
Ans. Affirm. ABout nine years since I brought behind me from London the
forementioned Mrs. Flavel, who had been of ancient and near acquaintance with
me and my Family, to one Goodman Laughtons a Smith in Hessen, where some four
or five months after she was brought to bed of a daughter, which she owned to
the people where she then was, to be by a second husband, even as she still
acknowledges: And further, that I visited her three times in the space of
three quarters of a year, at Term time, being then engaged in a Lawsuit that
concerned her, that one of those times I Christened her child, and called it
Hannah: That afterward her occasions not requiring so much privacy, she came to
live with her ancient acquaintance at my house, where also for some years her
daughter has been with her.

Now to take away any thing that may seem to reflect upon me in this my
acknowledgment, pray consider these subsequent particulars.
1. THat I and Mrs. Pordage being of very near and long acquaintance with her,
it was but a friends courtesy, for me upon her desire, to carry her to this
house behind me.

2. That she had sufficient ground to retire into some such place in the
Country; first in that the City air was offensive to her health; secondly in
that by the council of able Lawyers, she was advised to retire into some
private place, she being then in Law-ingagements, and continually subjest to
Arrests, by the entanglement of her first husbands Estate, her brother in Law,
who was her adversary, then threatening to ceaze on her if she were above ground.

3. In reference to my engagement in her Law-business, I think it material
briefly to relate the ground and occasion of it. In the time of her widowood,
her brother in Law began a Suit with her in the Common Law, which fearing he
should there be overthrown, he removed to the Chancery; now she being very
unfit and incapable to manage this her self, she earnestly desired me, as an
ancient and trusty friend, to undertake it; Upon this I went to Judge Rowles
and Mr. Chute with her, who looking into her Evidences, and into the will of
her late deceased husband, found that for want of one Clause in it, she was
liable to many Suits and Arrests, and to great intanglements, and that her
Interest could not be established, but by much difficulty; and at length this
was the result of the Council, That she must let all her Estate which was under
Mortgage, be forfeited into the hand of some faithful friend, and so sell it
away; hence I through much importunity, laid down some hundred pounds, rescued
the Mortgage, and so became interested in a Suit at Chancery, which lasted
three years.

Now from this may further appear sufficient ground why I brought her to that
private house, secondly why I came to her in the time of her retirment, I then
receiving money from her to follow her Suit; thirdly, why I came alone, it
being then her Interest to be concealed, being subject to Arrests.

I shall now proceed to add some few circumstances more, which may serve to
clear me before all sober persons.
1. AT my coming, I told the people my name, and that I dwelt at Reading, and
that I was Minister of St Lawrence Church, knowing the Gentlewoman to be sober,
and pious. Now had I been as my enemies enviously pretend, I might have
concealed my name, quality, and place of Residence.

2. We discovered to them that the Gentlewoman, had an estate in the Bulwark at
London, and Rents there to receive, which they might enquire after (as they
did) for their security; now this was not the way to cover a work of darkness.

3. She sometimes went to London to the Lawyers, whilst she was there, some
belonging to that Family accompanying her, who found, that as she had related,
she was in great troubles at Law, and were convinced that she returned on that
account.

Now in reference to most of these particulars, in which I have contradicted,
and denied the alleged circumstances, and further vindicated my self, they are
exactly agreeing with what I have in writing, confessed and acknowledged, by
Laughton himself, from whom this charge is pretended to be received, and by the
Nurse of the child, subscribed by them both before witnesses, which
acknowledgement I shall produce when I see occasion.

And by this I hope it may appear, to moderate, sober, and judicious men, that
this Libelling charge, drawn up so falsely, enviously and yet so subtly,
calling from the dead a business past some nine or ten years since, (which
though it were criminous (as it is not) were invalid legally to prejudice, by
the Act of Oblivion, or General Pardon, as all other things pretended to be
spoken or acted by me before 1651. according to the judgment of judicious men,
which I leave to the Commissioners to consider of), I say; that this is but the
effect of the evil and wicked policy of my Accuser brought forth to prejudice
and overcloud that pure, and innocent principle, which I profess and faithfully
live to; and the better to cover that evil design they have against my person
and livelihood.

And now I appeal unto you the Commissioners, and to all that are pious and
sober minded, whether my enemies, do not deal very unreasonably, enviously, and
unbeseeming Christians, from this business, so long since past, in which
nothing criminous is positively objected against me, to draw such horrid
conclusions, as commonly to report, that I now live in base Lust and
wantonness, notwithstanding my commending of, and owning the Virgin-Life, I
say, whether this be not exceeding hard measure, and ungodly dealing, let all
judge. But I see the design of the Devil in it, which, my enemies may be
ignorant of, which is to overcloud, and darken, by monstrous lies and scandals,
which are the smoke of the bottomless pit, that Life of Purity, Chastity,
Mortification, Selfdenyal, and heavenly enjoyments, which God has favored me
to live in, and so to affright all, from my acquaintance, which otherwise might
very much prejudice, and overthrow his Kingdom. For the old Serpent knows very
well, as also my near friends and acquaintance, that for these four years, even
since the time of my great trials, by the extraordinary Temptations, and
Representations, of the devil, that I have been abstracted more then ordinary,
from all outward things, giving my self up wholly, to Prayer, Watchfulness,
Mortification, and constant self-denial, in dying to all earthly pleasures,
even to things permitted, and accounted lawful, as finding many things which
ordinarily, are embraced, to be great hindrances of the souls progress to God,
and great burdens to a spirit which has tasted much of that tree of Life,
which grows in the midst of the Paradise of God, and great clogs to a soul,
that sees through the vail of the sensitive Nature, into the Spiritual Glory of
Eternity: but what I have enjoyed, and experimented in this time of my
extraordinary mortification, and self-denial, in the death of the Animal man,
and rising of Christ's Image in me, is not seasonable now to declare, yet for
the glory of my God, and the undeceiving of those who strangely mistake me,
this much in all humility, I must say, that did my accuser, and my enemies
know, what I have enjoyed in this way of the cross, of the secret hidden
treasures of Eternity, and of the outgoings of divine goodness, were they but
acquainted with these discoveries of celestial Glory, instillations of the
heavenly dew, and secret touches of the Holy Ghost; did they but know those
bright irradiations of Eternal Light, those strong motions of divine Life, and
pleasant streams of eternal Love, together with those deep sufferings in
bearing Christ's Cross, which I and many in my Family have in this time
experienced, they durst not thus condemn me and judge me as an evil doer, and
one that lives in the Lusts of the flesh. But my God has taught me, to Bless,
whilst they Curse, to pray for them, whilst they design to ruin me, and to
love them, whilst they hate me; and to say with Christ, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do.

This I thought fit, in all humility to annex, to that Libelling charge
concerning Mrs Flavel, from which I have undeservedly suffered so much, by the
malice of the devil; and now I shall proceed to answer the remaining Articles,
one of which is intermixed with the former seven that concern Mrs Flavel; which
is this.

Art. That we have changed our Names.
Answ. It Is well known that we own, and subscribe our Names in our civil
converse with the world, as this, and my former Answers testify, I shall
therefore wait to see, whether any one dare swear to this Article, and though
we did in our own private family, call one another by Scripture names, yet I
conceive it did not concern the civil Magistrate to take Cognizance of such a
thing, it being not practiced to make any disturbance or confusion in the State.

Artic. 8. That I am extremely covetous, taking five shillings at a time to
marry one.
Answ. I wonder my accuser should let this Article pass, whose Consequence is
so much against Reason, as to argue me extremely covetous for one such poor
inconsiderable act done six or seven years since, and I appeal to the
inhabitants of Reading, and Mr Fowlers own Conscience, whether he has not
taken ten shillings oftener then five for marrying.

Art. 9. That my preaching does not tend to Edification.
Answ. I can bring those that are knowing, spiritual, and sober Christians, who
will assert that my preaching does tend to Edification, and to the building up
of souls in the true knowledge and Love of Christ; and I believe these my
accusers will be found, to be like those of Chorazin and Bethsaida, of whom
Christ said, that if the mighty works which were done amongst them had been
done in Sodom and Gomorrah, they had repented long since in dust and ashes: and
was Christ's Ministry ineffectual, because they did not believe but remained in
the hardness and impenitency of their hearts? neither does it follow that my
preaching does not tend to Edification, because those that bring this Article,
through their unbelief, are not edified by it: For there are many, that come
from places round about, that are edified, strengthened, and refreshed by it:
and there are many that have been enlightened, convicted, and converted by it,
who still receive quickening growth and comfort under it, confessing that God is
in it of a truth, as finding it instrumentally effectual to the pulling down of
the Kingdom of sin and satan, and to the erecting the Kingdom of Christ in
their hearts; for which I bless God, and praise his Grace, by which it is, what
it is.

Artic. 10. That I am very ignorant and insufficient for the work of the
Ministry.
Answ. I believe those that exhibit this Article against me, upon trial will be
found very ignorant and insufficient to judge of it, and as to those that are
to be my Judges, I hope they will not make their own wills the rule of
ignorance, and insufficiency; but proceed according to the Canons of pure
Reason, or supernatural Revelation, in giving judgment concerning this
particular. The event of which I leave to God.

Now to conclude, though in reference to this, and the two last charges of
Articles, I stand free from any guilt in the sight of God, and I hope by my
answers to them in the sight of all judicious and sober men, yet to leave any
inexcusable that may design whether by Law, or without Law, absolutely to
condemn me, I crave the benefit, and privilege of the Act of General Pardon,
in reference to all those things that are pretended to be spoken or acted by
me, before the year 1651. as most of these are that seem to be of any moment
and consequence.

John Pordage.

After this was read, not knowing but that the Commissioners, retained their
former resolution of examining their witnesses in private, I pressed them to an
open examination, for the satisfaction of all parties, and for the more full
discovery of the truth, alleging that I hoped they would not deal worse with
me then the Jews did with Christ, and the Ethnic Romans with Paul, who
suffered them to hear their accusers face to face. So after some dispute it was
granted, and agreed upon.

But before I proceed to give you an account of the Depositions taken pro and
con. I must inform you, that the 22 of November was the time of my fourth
appearance, which continued three days, all which three days were wholly spent
in taking the Depositions of my accusers witnesses, to make good the first and
last charge, and when they had ended their examinations on the 24 being Friday
late at night, they called upon me to produce my witnesses, if I had any. I
answered them I had witnesses, but they were not then present, neither had I
received any summons for their appearance; whereupon I desired a summons to
call in my witnesses, which they after much debate, and many outcries against
me for not having them ready, granted; together with an Order, by which I was
to appear at the Bear in Speenhamland at Newbery the 30 of that month, which
was just a week after, to make proof of my defense by witnesses; I seeing they
had prescribed so short a time for making my defense, alleged that it was
impossible for me to be ready with my witnesses so soon, and desired a
fortnights time: which, though I urged it with many Reasons, could not be
granted me.

But I was afterward prevented by a vehement cold, in reference to my appearing
at Newbery on the day prescribed, whereupon I sent three friends to attest my
inability to appear on that day before them, who likewise presented the
Commissioners with a Letter from me, in which I gave them an account of my
great distemper; whereupon, the truth of my extraordinary weakness being
attested by those I sent, this Order with a new Summons was granted by the
Commissioners.

BERKS. By the Commissioners for Ejecting of Scandalous Ministers. November. 30.
1654.
WHereas Doctor Pordage was required this day to appear before us in the cause
depending concerning him, And it is now attested that the said Doctor is sick,
and cannot without further danger of his health this day appear, It is
therefore ordered that he shall have further day given till the seventh of
December next, at the Bear in Reading, which day is to be peremptory unto him.

According to which Order I appeared at Reading the seventh of December, with
my witnesses, where two days were spent in Examination (now this was my fifth
and last time of appearance) the transactions of which cannot distinctly be set
down by themselves, in regard of my joining the Depositions then taken, with
those of the adverse party, according to this subsequent method.

Now then I shall proceed to the merits of the Cause, secundum allegata Here I
must be forced to change the method of the distinct work of every days
appearance, because I must balance the Depositions taken this 4th time of
appearance against me, with those taken the 5th and last time on my behalf,
from my witnesses.
and Probata.

Here then I must present you with the Depositions of the witnesses, and first
with those that concern the first Charge of Articles; in reference to which Mr
Tickle gave Evidence by Oath against me, first at Newbery the fifth of October,
and again at Reading the 22 of November, being the day in which my Answer was
read.

Now to the first Article.
John Tickle Minister of Abbington, sworn at Newberie the fifth of October
deposed, that I delivered in the Pulpit, That the Fiery Deity of Christ
mingleth and mixeth it self with our flesh.

On farther examination upon Oath at Reading, November 2. Mr Tickle affirmed,
that he charged Blasphemy on the former expression, and that I repeated my
sense to be thus, viz. That I did not mean with our corruption, but with our
flesh Mr Tickle would here infinuate that I meant the corrupt flesh of our
Elementary bodies, because I held my hand over the Pulpit, in preaching* but
the consequence is as far from Reason, as his gloss from my meaning
, holding my hand over the Pulpit.

The said Mr Tickle being cross-examined touching this Article, upon this
Interrogatory. viz. (Whether he did swear positively to this Article, as thus
delivered by me in the very same terms, and order, without any addition or
diminution; or only so according to his best remembrance) thus replied, That
the sum and substance of that Article was clearly and fully delivered by me,
and as far as he This is no legal Evidence, for his memory might fail him and
he nor swearing to these words syllabically, might change them, and so mistake
the sense.
could remember in these words, or words to that purpose.

The same person being sworn again, and further examined at the Bear in
Reading, November. 22. after some expostulation with me, in which he grew
somewhat passionate, further said, that after I had held up my hand, as he had
formerly deposed, I said, I did not mean our flesh, but with the soul of
Christ, and that this was delivered without any the least limitation as to the
Mr Tickle still fails of a positive proof, and goes beyond my words, judging
of my sense and meaning, or else he means his own, which is nothing to me; but
all this was only his single Testimony.
sense of it.

Now these last Depositions were taken by the Court from Mr Tickle occasionally
(after he had answered the cross Interrogatories by writing) when Mr Tickle was
sometimes raised into seeming passion against me, from accidental discourses
that fell in upon examination.

But I shall here discover my own meaning, and bring in the intended evidence
of my witnesses in reference to this Article, my meaning then (notwithstanding
Mr Tickles rash allegations) was this, by flesh I meant the pure regenerated
part of the soul, with which the spirit of Christ is united, according to that
of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, etc.

My Evidence was this, there were present three witnesses, viz. Mr. Francis
Pordage Minister, Mrs Mary Pocock, and one Robert Bolt, who offered to attest
upon oath, that they being present at the Committee of plundered Ministers,
about March 27. 1651. heard me upon the interpretation of this Article, That
the Fiery Deity of Christ mingles it self with our flesh, explain my self thus:
That by flesh, I understand not the sinful and fleshly part of the soul, that
lusts against the spirit, for in this there can be no union, for these are
contrary; neither by flesh did I understand the outward Elementish flesh of the
body, but by flesh I understood, the pure Regenerated part of the soul.

But this Testimony they rejected, and would not receive it as Evidence,
denying to examine the witnesses, in regard they were not present at Ilesley,
where Mr Tickle alleged, this was spoken, But I believe the Judicious Reader
will find this Testimony to be more pertinent to the clearing of the truth, in
reference to my sense in the former Proposition, then what Mr Tickle has
uncertainly, according to his best remembrance, asserted.

To the second Article.
Mr Tickle says, That I delivered, That the Imputative righteousness Taken
October the fifth at Newbery. November 2.
of Christ is a sapless righteousness.

And being further examined by interrogatories, he answered to the first of
them, That this was fully and roundly delivered in my Sermon at Ilsley.

But to the second Interrogatory, which was this, Whether it was with a
limitation or without he thus answers, That he does not Though he remembers
none, yet it was spoken with a limitation, as you shall see afterward.
remember any addition therein, unless it were in opposition to the
righteousness, which (as he said) I called sapless.

Being further examined Nov. 22. the same Deponent said, that I did not deliver
any such Limitation, as I made in my answer thereunto, and that there was no
such word as except spoken, nor any thing like it.

Roger Steevens sworn to the same Article, deposed, that I delivered November
22.
in a Sermon at Ilesly, That the righteousness of Christ was a sapless
righteousness,

And that he does not remember any thing to the contrary, but that the same was
an entire sentence, and only so. And that to his apprehension, the This man is
known to be a great proselite of my accusers, and one exceedingly prejudiced
against me, and one of a sharp rigid spirit.
drift of my Sermon was to take away the strength and efficacy of the
righteousness of Christ.

And this deponent further said, that in the aforesaid Sermon at Ilsley I
delivered these words, that you are not to look to this (meaning as the
Deponent These are not positively delivered, and therefore no legal Testimonies.
apprehended, Christ's righteousness) but to the Fiery Deity burning in the
Center of our souls, consuming and destroying sin there. Which said words did
not immediately follow the words that I used, when I said the righteousness of
Christ was sapless, but the same were further off in my Sermon, To his best
remembrance.

Now I shall present the Depositions of my own Witnesses touching the second
Article.
Mrs Mary Pocock being sworn and examined, December. 7. was asked At the Bear in
Reading.
by me whether she heard me deliver the second Article at the Sermon at Ilsley
viz. That the imputative Righteousness of Christ was sapless, she replied she
was then present at the sermon, and did hear these words delivered, then being
further asked, Whether delivered with a Limitation, or without a Limitation,
she answered that it was with a Limitation Then she was further asked, what
that Limitation was? She reanswered, that it was with this Limitation This
proof, being positive, is of more weight in Law and according to Reason, then
both the former.
, except the Fiery Deity of Christ be in the Center of our souls burning up our
lusts and corruptions: And, being further asked whether these last words were
spoken together with the other words to make up one sentence? she said yes in
these express words, vez. That the Righteousness of Christ was sapless, Except
the Fiery Deity of Christ be in the Center of our souls, burning up our lusts
and corruptions.

After this I brought three Mr Francis Pordage, Mrs Mary Pocock, Robert Bolt.
witnesses more to be sworn touching this Article.

Their Evidence was this, which every one in particular, intended to give in,
in writing, after this manner, viz. I do confess I was present before the
Committee of plundered Ministers, the 27 of March, 1651 where I did hear the
Doctor upon his examination touching that Article, That the Imputative
Righteousness of Christ is a sapless Righteousness, deliver himself to this
purpose, That to him that has not the spirit of Chtist indwelling in his heart
by Faith, notwithstanding all his application of Christ and his merits, it is
but a sapless Righteousness, so says the Scripture, he that has not the
spirit of Christ is none of his.

But this Testimony and Evidence the Commissioners rejected, and would not
suffer the witnesses to depose it upon oath.

In the next place I certified the Commissioners, that I had present diverse
knowing Christians that were constant hearers of me, who were ready to depose
on oath what the scope of my Ministry was, and what they had frequently heard
me hold forth in it, touching Christ's Imputative Righteousness.

But the Commissioners rejected this Testimony also, and would not hear the
Evidence of these intended witnesses; saying, that it was not to the purpose,
but merely dilatory. To which I replied, that although the proofs were weak and
altogether impertinent, yet being Judges, they ought to hear them, and
afterward to judge of their force or invalidity, and I further told them, that
this proceeding of theirs, in thus preventing and rejecting the testimony of my
witnesses, in not suffering them to depose what they could; did much strengthen
my belief of the common report spread abroad the Country, That they had
resolved beforehand to condemn and eject me, whether by right or wrong. At this
Mr Traphams choler seemed much to be stirred, that the Court of which he was
one, should thus be charged, saying with much passion, that this should be
looked upon as a contempt and an affront against the Court.

But the Commissioners peremptorily resolving not to take the Evidence of the
forementioned witnesses, because it contradicted not Mr. Tickles Testimony,
quoad idem tempus, in reference to the same particular time, I was forced to
tell them that I must subject to the determinations of the Court, but I hoped
they would be more ingenuous and Christian-like, then condemn me for a word or
expression, though Which this was not, the witnesses not being positive, having
some reserves at you may see before
proved ever so clearly, if the drift and tenor of my Ministry were otherwise.

But I shall here insert and so leave it to the judgment of the Reader, what
Mr Francis Pordage, Mrs Mary Pocock, Mary Allin, Mr Samuel Pordage Robert Bolt,
Richard Higgs, John Higgs, John Wickins.
eight substantial witnesses, who almost constantly hear me would willingly
have deposed upon oath, touching this Article, viz. That the scope of my
Ministry is not to take away the due application of Christ's Righteousness, but
the misapplying of it in reference to those who have no interest in it.

After this I further pressing the Commissioners to hear those witnesses, which
were to attest this, they seemed somewhat to change their resolution, and to
admit one or two of them to be examined. So I mentioned Mrs Mary Pocock, a very
pious and experienced Christim, and so known to be in the place where she
lives. Against whom it was objected, that she was one of my own Tribe, Then I
mentioned another discreet prudent Christian, by name Richard Higgs, who is
known to be one of a very good conversation. Against whom Mr Fowler having
somewhat to object for his supposed judgment, was willing to have him called
to examination.

So this Richard Higgs being sworn, deposed, That he had been a The Examination
of Richard H^ggs.
hearer of me at certain times for five or six years last past, and that during
that time for ought the Deponent knew, the scope of my Ministry, has not been
against the right and due application of Christ's Righteousness, but against the
misapplication thereof, for ought he knew or ever understood, and being asked
whether he had been a constant hearer of me, he said, he had heard me very
often, but that he was usually at his own Parish in the morning, and that some
times he was absent, but had often heard me.

And being Mr Fowler and some of the Ministers falling upon him with many
questions, he had not here liberty to speak his full mind. For it is seldom
that a day passes, in which he does not hear me once, and take notes as all
the inhabitants of the place can testify.
further asked what he had usually heard me preach, concerning the Imputative
Righteousness of Christ, he said, he could not charge his own memory, but had a
note to which he would reflect for recollecting his memory, and thereupon
produced a note, which he confessed was given him from the Doctor.

(Here, upon this, were many Outcries against me, from the Accuser, and others
of the Ministers and Commissioners, as though I had committed some heinous act
in suborning a witness to swear what I pleased: whereas there was no such
thing, for this man and two more, meeting at my house, compared their note
books together, out of which this was taken, which was in that paper, which he
after mature deliberation and reflection upon it, could with a good Conscience
swear to; as looking upon it more safe then to swear upon sudden memory.)

But I shall now proceed to the further examination of this witness, as it was
taken by the Clerk, but very partially, as you shall see presently.

This Richard Higgs being asked what he meant, or what the Doctor meant by the
righteousness of Christ, he says he cannot depose; but the Doctor interposing
said, Christ's Righteousness was his active and passive obedience, and thereupon
the Deponent being Here the Accuser and other Ministers fell upon him so
fiercely, and asked him so many questions that the Deponent, being a modest
man, seemed to be somewhat danted, telling them it did not concern him to
answer to many of their questions.
asked what was Christ's active obedience, presently denied his words again.

To this he refused to subscribe.

The Clerk has left out something, touching Richard Higgs his answer, to that
question about Christ's active obedience, which answer being caught up by the
This Clerk was very partial in his taking the depositions, as all that were
present saw.
Clerk, before he had Liberty, to express his meaning, he might very well deny,
though the Clerk had wrote it down, it being not according to his meaning, and
purpose, and so not fit to be subscribed.

After this Mr Fowler, the Accuser, openly attested against this Deponent, That
he denied the Bible to be the word of God, and said that the same was but old
declaratives, which the said deponent denies.

Here the Clerks partiality is again apparent, who left out a weighty
distinction, which the deponent made concerning the word of God in answer to Mr
Fowlers accusation, which was this; that he never denied the Scripture or Bible
to be the written word, but had said it was not the essential word: And this
very distinction the Deponent had formerly given to the Minister of the Parish,
who being present, confessed it before the Court, acknowledging that he walked
like an honest and sober Christian in his conversation.

But to proceed; although this Deponents written evidence would not be
received, yet I shall here present it as it was to be given in, and attested by
seven more Witnesses besides himself. The form of it was this, I do confess I
have heard the Doctor Preach at Bradfield about the year 49. Since the Sermon
at Ilsley for which is now accused.
out of Dan. 9. 24. thus, Quest. What is meant here by this righteousness? Ans.
By this righteousness is meant Christ's righteousness, Io. 23. 6. The Lord our
righteousness, And Paul desires not to be found in his own righteousness, but
in the righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3. 9. Christ's righteousness is the souls
wedding robe, Isa. 6. 10. He has covered me with the robe of righteousness. As
to the nature of Christ's righteousness, it is a pure, spotless, perfect and
complete righteousness Ephesians. 5. 27. That he might present to himself a glorious
Church in this righteousness of his not having spot or wrinkle.

This which follows was also intended to be given in, and was to be attested by
John Higgs, John W^^kins, Mary Pocock.
three Witnesses; I confess I heard the Doctor Preach in Bradfield Church out
of Luke 1. 68. That the free grace of God the Father, is the first cause of the
souls justification.

Quest. What is the matter out of which a sinner comes to be justified in the
sight of God? Ans. It is righteousness; as a man cannot live without a life, so
a sinner cannot be just without a righteousness, and this This testimony would
not be received.
righteousness is called Christ's righteousness; no other righteousness, but the
righteousness of Christ can justify the soul: Therefore he is styled, Jer. 23.
6. The Lord our righteousness. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, that is for our justification. This righteousness of Christ in
its own nature, is an everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. 2 Cor. 5. That we
might be made the righteousness of God, in being clothed upon with Christ's
righteousness. Phil. 3. 9. We are not to be found in our own self Pharisaical
righteousness, but in Christ's righteousness, which is the righteousness of
justification. And the formal cause of a sinners justification, is their union
and communion with this righteousness of Christ, through faith and believing on
it. Romans 10. 6. The righteousness of faith speaks on this wise, etc. that is,
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith.

This was also intended to have been given into the Court in writing, being
transcribed out of three or four note-books compared together, and afterward
seriously considered and weighed, to which the Witnesses could swear with good
consciences, notwithstanding all those outcries were against this Evidence by
some of the Ministers and Commissioners; as though I had prescribed what they
should swear, and that we were all combined to commit a heinous sin, and bring
the guilt of Perjury upon our selves: whereas we all stood in innocence as to
this thing, having no other end in it, but the stable assurance of the truth of
what was to be attested by serious reflections upon it, after the comparing of
diverse note-books together, which served to help and strengthen the memory of
the Witnesses, together with the avoiding of the Clerks prevarications in
writing, by partially taking the Depositions, in which we often found him
defective.

But to conclude this Article, I have produced these testimonies to show my
judgment touching Christ's righteousness, which (with the positive Deposition
of Mrs. Mary Pocock, That I spoke that of the imputative righteousness of
Christ with a limitation) may in justice outweigh the Depositions of the other
two Witnesses against me, being neither of them are positive, and so not
effectual in Law or reason.

Now I shall pass to the third Article.
To which Mr. Tickle being sworn, says, that I delivered, That the Newbery,
October. 5.
discoveries of the sinfulness of sin, the terrors of the Law, the death of
Christ, the free grace of God, are fleshly and flashy discoveries.

Afterward being cross-examined by me to this Interrogatory, Whether this
Article was delivered in the same express words, and in the same November. 2.
order? he answered thus,

That the very sum and substance of this Article was delivered fully and
roundly by me, and in the express words He dares not swear syllabically to
this, but keeps two reserves in the express words for substance.
for the substance of them, and to To the best of his remembrance; which
clauses keep him from perjury, and this from being a legal testimony, in regard
it is not positive.
the best of his remembrance.

Now I not remembering that ever I said that these were but fleshly and flashy
discoveries, and knowing that it was but his single testimony, and not
positively sworn to, and so no legal evidence to condemn; and besides, that it
was not comprehended in the Act of Blasphemous Opinions, to which the Ordinance
refers; I passed it by formerly without any answer; but now to satisfy knowing
Christians concerning my judgment in this particular, I shall here present
this Answer; That I then held forth, and do still own it, That the discoveries
of the sinfulness of sin, the terrors of the Law, the free grace of God, the
death of Christ, were but preparatory works under the Fathers dispensation, to
the higher and more powerful workings of God under the dispensation of the
Son, in changing and transforming the heart into his Image, and so but weak in
comparison of the more full and clear manifestations and operations of God upon
the soul, in bringing it up into divine union and fruition.

To the fourth Article.
Mr. Tickle says that I delivered, That the Liberty and freedom spoken Taken
October. 5
of, purchased by the blood of Christ, is not a liberty and freedom from the
guilt of sin, the curse of the Law, the wrath of God, but the fiery Deity of
Christ in the center of our souls.

Mr. Tickle being further examined on this Article by me, to this
Interrogatory, viz. Whether this was delivered first in the same express
November. 2.
words? Secondly, and in the same order? Answers,

First, The very sum and substance of this Article was delivered fully and
roundly by the Doctor. Secondly, That it was delivered in the express words for
the This is a mere shift, to make the evidence seem positive and syllabical,
though in reality it is not so.
substance of them.

To a third Interrogatory proposed by me, viz. Whether this Article was thus
expressed by me, without any addition or diminution of his own? He thus
answers, This is still no legal evidence to condemn one in Law or reason, for
his memory might fail, as really it did.
To the best of his remembrance, without any limitation, addition or diminution
of his own.

But here courteous Reader, you must give me leave to show you Mr. Tickles
uncertainty and disagreement with himself in delivering this Article, which
cannot but make it invalid in the eyes of those that are judicious.

In his attesting of this Article three several times, he never agreed with
himself, but either diminished or added. The first time he swear to this
Article, he had this clause (and applied by the clinging and cleaving of the
soul to Christ) as you may see in the first paper of Articles, which being
sworn again October 5. he left out, and neither of these agreed with his own
Deposition given under his own hand some four years since to the Committee of
Plundered Ministers, when it was more flesh in his memory, and yet not
delivered so fully and positively as now, which you may see by his own words
(taken out of his former Depositions) which were these.

This was the repeating of some passages in my Sermon, though in a mistake, as
you will see afterward.
Another preparation was the instating of the soul into a glorious liberty and
freedom in these expressions: Which liberty and freedom is not that liberty and
freedom from the guilt of sin, the curse of the Law, the wrath of God, brought
about (or in an expression of the same signification) by the death and blood of
another, and applied (or a word like it) by the clinging and cleaving of the
soul to Christ.

Now you may take notice that in the two former, this clause was added, viz.
(But the fiery Deity of Christ in the center of the soul) which here is not
mentioned: Moreover the order is changed, and some doubtful expressions are
inserted, which showed his uncertainty four years since; all which compared
with that Answer of his, given by oath at my late Trial, that this Article was
delivered in the same express words for the substance of them, cannot but show
that he has almost if not altogether, incurred the sin of perjury. Now all
this being well weighed, cannot but demonstrate that this testimony is of no
force at all.

And although I formerly gave no answer to this Article, because it was not
sworn to positively, but with reserves and alterations, and that by one Witness
only, and came not under the Act of Scandalous Opinions; yet I shall now speak
something to it, and show you the Deponents mistake, which was in leaving out
this word (only) which inserted, makes it appear with a more innocent face.

But now I shall further answer, That I delivered this sentence thus, which I
still own, viz. That the second preparatory work that Christ did in the soul of
a true Saint, for the manifesting of his glory in it, was the instating of the
soul into a glorious liberty and freedom, which does not only consist in the
liberty and freedom from the guilt of sin, the curse of the Law, the wrath of
God, but also in the enjoying of the spirit of Christ in the center of the
soul, there purifying our natures, mortifying our lusts, and restoring us into
the Image of God: And so this truly presented, is a glorious truth, though as
Mr. Tickle by mistake delivered it, it seemed monstrous.

To the fifth Articli.
Mr. Tickle says that I did deliver, That by male and female, Genesis 1. October. 5.
we are to understand by male, the Deity, and by female, the Humanity, and that
these two became one flesh; This seems to relate to all the former Articles, as
well as to this, as may be seen in the Charge; but how well it agrees with the
answers to the cross-interrogatories, let the Reader judge.
These things were delivered without any limitation whatsoever.

Mr. Tickle being further examined on this Article, to this Interrogatory, viz.
Whether I spoke this as my own avowed judgment, or as the judgment of some
other person? Answers thus, That I delivered those expressions of the Article
with approbation; and that therefore he had cause to believe it was my
judgment, and as far as he remembers, it was delivered as my judgment.

Here the Reader may observe that Mr. Tickle does not answer directly and
nakedly as a Christian should, but subtly and indirectly, like a Sophister:
For he answers, that I delivered this with approbation; but whether this
approbation was from my self, or from some other (I might then cite) he does
not express, passing it over in silence. Afterward he says he has cause to
believe it was my judgment; which is a mere prevarication, but no answer to
the question; which was not, Whether he believed it to be my judgment; but,
Whether I delivered it as my judgment, or as the judgment of another? To
which in the last clause he answers somewhat, viz. That I delivered it as my
own, as far as he remembers: But though this be somewhat to the question, yet
not much to the purpose, it being no legal proof or evidence, for his memory
might fail him.

Now the reason of this Interrogatory was, in that Mr. Tickle, some four years
since, when this was better in his memory then now it can be, gave in this that
follows, under his own hand, to the Committee of Plundered Ministers, viz.
This is taken out of the Depositions then taken before the Committee.
That Genesis 1. By male we are to understand, says Mr. Pordage, The Deity, by
the female, the Humanity. This he gave from a Rabby, with that approbation.

Now how consistent this is with his late answer to my Interrogatories, let all
judge, especially with that part of it in which he affirms, that as far as he
remembers, I delivered it as my own judgment.

But now to answer something positively to this, which may give satisfaction to
judicious and knowing Christians, I acknowledge that in the Sermon before
mentioned, I delivered for substance, this which follows, viz.

That another preparatory work that Christ did in the soul of a true Christian,
for the manifesting of his own glory in it, was the bringing up the spirit of
the soul into a glorious, mystical, yet real union with himself; and after I
had proved the truth and substantiality of this union betwixt Christ and a
Christian, from several Texts of Scripture, which directly evinced it, I came
by way of illustration to speak of that Scripture Genesis 1. out of which I said,
that by male and female, according to the judgment of a learned Rabby, The
Deity and pure Humanity might be shadowed forth, which by union become one; the
male representing the Deity, the female the pure Humanity, or regenerated part
of the soul, which by union is made partaker of the Divine nature.

By this you may see, that if Mr. Tickle had been but a charitable and knowing
Christian, he needed not have troubled himself and me about this Article.

To the sixth Article.
Mr. Tickle says, that he heard me deliver in discourse with Mr. Pendarvis,
That the gifts and graces of the Spirit were but flesh. Taken October. 5*


Being further examined he says, that to this sixth Article there was no He
dares not swear there was no explanation of it in the discourse; but how this
agrees with M. Pendarvis his Deposition, let the Reader judge, especially in
point of charity, in reference to me.
limitation whatsoever in the delivering of it.

Here the Reader must know that Mr. Pendarvis was summoned by me to witness to
the truth in this particular, but he came not, alleging that he could say no
more then what he had already deposed. Whereupon I desired the Commissioners
(after information that I had summoned him) to hear his former Deposition read;
but they peremptorily denied it: By which I clearly saw that they had more mind
to take all occasion of advantage against me, then to be fully informed of the
truth of things.

But Mr. Pendarvis his Deposition given in before the Committee of Plundered
Ministers, was this, viz. That the Doctor in conference did say, That the gifts
and graces of the Spirit were but flesh; and I opposed him; but then the Doctor
replied by way of Compare but this with Mr. Tickles Answer, and judge whether
he did not much vail the truth by it.
explanation, that he understood them only to be flesh, that is, weak in point
of rest and trust on them for eternal life and salvation, and in this I agreed
with him.

Correspondent to this, was my answer to, and explanation of this Article
before the Committee of Plundered Ministers, which three Witnesses were ready
to depose on Oath before the present Commissioners, who refused to hear their
testimony.

To the seventh Article.
Mr. Tickle says, That he heard me deliver in discourse, that Christ is a
Type, and but a Type.

Being further examined, he says, That I endeavored to prove that Taken
October. 5 November. 22:
Christ was but a Type, out of Peter, where he is called (...).

Further, Roger Stevens being sworn to this Article, deposes, That November. 22.
the Dr. in dispute with Mr. Pendarvis, delivered, That This Deponent mistakes
the business; I endeavored to prove him a Type; but not only a Type, as may be
seen in my Answer.
Christ was but a Type, and went to prove it by that Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. He is
our example. To which Mr. Pendarvis replied, That is not meant by way of
righteousness to justification, but by way of example, as to reproaches. To
which the Dr. answered, you understand it one way; and I another,p or words to
that effect.

Now to balance these Depositions, the Reader must take notice,

1. That my true sense of this Article may be seen in my Answer to this first
Charge, in which I have truly showed in what sense I owned Christ to be a
Type, viz. as he is a pattern and example for us to imitate and follow.

2. That this discourse being with Mr. Pendarvis, it is requisite I should here
insert his Deposition taken by the Justices of Peace of that County, and
afterward presented to the Committee of Plundered Ministers, which was as
follows.

This examinant (which was Mr. Pendarvis) further says, that the said Dr.
Pordage, in a Conference had with him at the same time after his Sermon at
Ilsley, said that Christ was a Type; and but a Type; but this expression was
immediately waved by him, but he constantly affirmed that Christ was a type.

But because Mr. Pendarvis could not be there to witness vivavoce, the
Commissioners would not admit this evidence.

But Mrs. Mary Pocock being sworn and examined on this Article says, December. 7.
That she heard the Dr. maintain in that discourse with Mr. Pendarvis, That
Christ was a type, and proved it out of Peter (he was an Example) and that she
heard the Dr. say, He would not stand to the word But.

And further,

Thus the Deposition was wrote by the Clerk.
John Pordage, son to the Doctor, aged between 19, and 20. years, December. 7.
and examined December 7. This Deponent says, that in dispute between the Dr.
and Mr. Pendarvis, about five or six years since, about Christ's being a type;
the Dr. said that Christ was but a type: To which Mr. Pendarvis asked; Do you
say but a Type? Whereupon the Dr. answered, He did not stand to the expression,
But a Type; it was but the slip of his tongue; but he maintained that Christ
was a Type.

You see here are three Witnesses that attest I never owned or stood to that of
Christ's being But a Type.

Correspondent to which Testimony, I gave in my Answer before the Committee of
Plundered Ministers, which I offered to prove by three Witnesses then present,
who heard me, who were ready to attest Mr. Francis Pordage, Mary Pocock, Robert
Bolt.
this which follows, viz.

That they being present (about the 27 of March 1651.) before the Committee of
Plundered Ministers, heard me touching this Article, That Christ was a Type,
and but a Type, Deliver my self thus, That I had owned Christ to be a Type,
that is, a pattern and example for us Christians to square our lives and
conversations by; but that I had not owned him to be but a Type, or a Type
only; But the Commissioners would by no means hear this Evidence.

After this I earnestly pressed them to hear what my Witnesses could further
say touching what I had publicly delivered in my Mynistry about this Subject,
telling them that such evidence was in justice more to be respected, then a
mistake in sudden speaking, presently retracted; but they denied all such
evidence, and would not hear; which clearly showed their partiality, and that
they little regarded what my When I brought such testimonies as these, Mr.
Dunch the Chairman said, It may be Dr. you have changed your opinion since
that, and are now of another mind; but we must judge by what you then spoke.
Thus he said two or three times.
avowed judgment was.

Notwithstanding I shall here insert what some were ready to witness, in
reference to this Article, who had been constant hearers of me: Whose Testimony
was this, We confess we have heard the Dr. Preach out of Luke 1. 68. First,
this by way of Doctrine, viz. That Gods free grace is the first and chief cause
of our redemption: Then he proceeded thus, That the inward man was redeemed in,
for, and through Christ, Romans 3. 24. Through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: How through Christ? Ans. Through Christ's death and passion, Isa. 53. 5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities; 1 Pet.
2. 24. Who bare our sins in his own body on the Cross; Romans 4. 25. Who was
delivered for our offenses to the death of the Cross, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us

Now this clearly shows that Christ is more then a type, and that he is a
complete redeemer. So much for this Article.

To the eight and ninth Article.
Mr. Tickle says, That he heard me deliver berore the Committee of Taken
October. 5
this County, sitting at Redding, That Christ was not God, and that he was not
Jehovah.

Being further examined to this Article, my Interrogatories to him were these.

1. Whether these words were not expressed in a hot dispute before the November.
22.
Committee? To this Mr. Tickle replied, That I This was no direct answer to my
question; but he must every where show his bitterness.
endeavored in dispute with great seriousness before the Committee, to
maintain that Christ was not God, that Christ was not Jehovah.

My second question was this, Whether in the same dispute this Article was not
limited and explained by me?

But this question was wholly waved and passed over in silence; but whether
voluntarily by Mr. Tickle, or by the Clerks deceit, the Interrogatories being
given in in writing, I do not know; but this I am sure, it was much to the
prejudicing of my Cause to let such a weighty question pass without an answer.

3. Whether this Article was held forth by me as my avowed judgment?

Ans. To this he thus answers, The Dr. did maintain and defend No otherwise
then this, That Christ was not God, viz. the Father nor Jehovah, taken for the
first person in the Trinity.
this Article as his avowed judgment.

Here Mr. Tickle is very peremptory in a rash answer, though that Interrogatory
before could be slided over in silence, the answer to which, if Mr. Tickle had
not easily incurred perjury, would have much cleared the truth, in regard I
meant and explained my self, of God the Father, as you shall see afterward.

This Deponent Mr. Tickle, further deposed to the eight and ninth Article,
November. 22.
That there was no Mr. Tickle swearing this so peremptorily, it is not for me
to contend whether this word, Father, were in or not, it b^^^ng so long ago;
but this I pro^^^^ as in the sight of God, that I so understood it, and do
still believe it; and if it were not, it was that mistake which was the growed
of the dispute.
such expression of the Father used in the definition of blasphemy as is
mentioned in the Doctors answer; but says that the definition was, That
blasphemy was an evil speaking against God, derogating from his glory, either
in his name, nature, word, or works. Mr. Tickle further affirms, that my
immediate words thereupon were, Hark, he answers, Blasphemy is an evil
speaking against God: and in his Paper charge me with blasphemy against
Christ, as if Christ were God: And hereupon we began a hot dispute about the
Godhead of Christ.

The Reader must here know, that upon Mr. Tickles defining Blasphemy to be an
evil speaking against God the Father, as I then really apprehended; I
immediately cried out, Hark, he defines blasphemy to be an evil speaking
against God the Father; and in his Paper charge me with blasphemy against
Christ, who is God the Son. Whereupon began a dispute; in reference to which
Mr. Tickle further, deposeeth.

That he asked the Doctor if Christ were God? who did did I never denied him to
be God, but as God is taken for the person of the Father.
deny it, and put the Deponent upon This was a work of supererrogation, in
which Mr. Tickle proved what I never intentionally denied; but this he
earnestly did, to make the Auditors believe that I denied the Godhead of Christ.
proof of the same; whereupon he cited that Scripture (In the beginning was the
word, etc. To which the Doctor replied, He is called God, but he is not When
ever I said Christ was not Jehovah; I meant, as it is taken for the Fathers
person; and this in reference to Mr. Tickles definition of blasphemy. November.
22.
Jehovah. To which the Deponent replied, He is Jehovah; which the Dr. likewise
put him upon proof of; to which he answered that Scripture, His name shall be
called, Jehovah our righteousness; and as he remembers, the Dr. did disallow of
that proof, as being out of the old Testament, to which he cited that
Scripture, He that was, is, and is to come, as of the same purpose with Jehovah.

It Is well that Mr. Tickle adds, according to his best remembrance, which saves
him from perjury; for I esteem the old Testament to be Scripture as well as the
new; neither did I disallow of that proof as being taken thence, as he would
insinuate; but I said that Jehovah in the old Testament most commonly signified
the Person of the Father.

But now we shall pass to the next Witness.
Thomas Trapham, one of the Commissioners, sworn and examined, deposes,

That to his remembrance, the word Father, was not in Mr. Tickles definition of
Blasphemy; and that the Dr. did then It was no wonder that Mr. Trapham mistook
me, being of so fierce a spirit as he is, which he showed when he deposed this,
by openly relating that he told the Committee before whom I was them examined,
that he could as willingly run his sword (upon which he then, as he said, clapped
his hand) into the bowels of such as I was, as into the bowels of a common
enemy. Now whether such (...) are fit to be Judges, let wise Christians judge.
deny Christ to be God; which the Deponent did acquaint Mr. Blagrave with; to
which Mr. Blagrave said, If he say Christ is not God, we must take further
course with him. To which the Doctor replied, Christ is not Jehovah; and that
when Mr. Tickle had confuted him in that Argument (I must now tell the whole
truth) the Dr. replied, he was not God the Father.

Note, This was rather a confutation of Mr. Tickles own apprehensions
concerning me, then of my meaning in what I then spoke; and if he swears truly
that the term Father was not in his definition, then as he mistook me, I
mistook him upon which mistakes, his needless proofs were grounded.

But now to the next,

Mr. Roger Stephens of Redding, sworn and examined November 22. deposes, That
the Dr. did confess in the Deponents hearing, in a Sermon, That Christ was not
Jehovah.

Note, Before I proceed any further, I cannot but desire all sober Christians
to take notice what a bitter and envious spirit this Deponent is of, which will
appear by what follows.

After his before expressed Depositions, I put these Interrogatories to him;

1. Where did you hear me Preach this? To this he replied, In a Sermon at St.
Lawrence's Church.

2. I asked him before whom? He answered, Before the Committee of Berks.

3. I demanded of him how I explained my self, when in the Sermon I affirmed
openly, That Christ was not Jehovah? He replied, He did indeed explain himself
thus, That he had said that Christ was not Jehovah, in This Mr. Stevens
delivered with this addition: and see what sense this is, not understanding
that there is oppositio relativa even between the persons in the Trinity: For
Jehovah taken for the Father, is not Jehovah, as taken for the Son; for then
there were no personal distiction; which there is; and so a relative
opposition: which much troubled Mr. Stephens, as he then expressed.
opposition to the Father.

Note, here the Reader must know that this Sermon was delivered at Redding by
the appointment of the Committee (before which we had the dispute about the
Godhead of Christ) in which Sermon I openly cleared my self from that dismal
aspersion, of denying the Godhead of Christ, which so satisfied the Committee,
that upon this, they judged me innocent in that particular, and by vote cleared
me. And now considering the scope of my Sermon at that time, together with the
Deponents Deposition, viz. That he heard me in a Sermon, confess that Christ
was not Jehovah, without adding any more to show how I said it, till I
cross-examined him. I say, weighing these well together, the judicious Reader
cannot but see this Deponents envy and partiality; and unfitness to take Oath,
or be much regarded after Oath, who swearing to speak all the truth, dares yet
take one sentence out of a whole discourse, without adding any further
explanation of it, to make the Commissioners believe that I accused my self of
blasphemy at that time, when my whole scope was to vindicate my self from the
undeserved imputation of it.

Now I shall present you with the Depositions, and Evidence given in on my
behalf touching the eighth and ninth Articles, viz. That Christ is not God, and
That Christ is not Jehovah.
BUt in the first place I referr you to my Answer to these Articles, in which
you may see the occasion of the discourse before the Committee, touching the
Godhead of Christ, and that I never owned any such monstrous Positions, as,
That Christ is not God.

In the second place I come to the Witnesses, the first of which was Mr.
Francis Pordage, brother to me.

Now this Deponent being asked, Whether the words (That Christ December. 7.
was not God, and that Christ was not Jehovah) before the Committee at Redding,
were not delivered in a hot Dispute? He says they were.

And being further asked, Whether in the same Dispute these words, That Christ
was not God, were not limited by me? He says the This is full and clear.
Doctor did express it with this limitation, That Christ was not the Father.

Now follow the cross-Examinations of the Accuser, and some other of the
Ministers.
Mr. Pordage being asked by them, the ground of this Dispute, he thus answered,
That the Dispute arose upon a definition of Blasphemy, which Mr. Tickle gave to
Mr. Blagrave, That it was against God; to which the Dr. replied, He says it is
against God, and yet charge me for speaking against Christ.

Note, Here are some things prevaricated by the Clerk, the Ministers at that
time being very hot in examining this Deponent.

I must here therefore a little correct it by the line of truth.

Mr. Pordage indeed said that the dispute arose upon a Definition of Blasphemy,
which Mr. Tickle gave to Mr. Bragrave; but then a Minister Correct.
asking him whether the Definition was not thus expressed, That Blasphemy was
an evil speaking against God? He replied, he could not tell whether it was
expressed against God, or against God the Father. But now I shall proceed as
the Clerk took them.

Mr. Pordage being further asked by me, Whether in that Dispute I did deny that
I held Christ not to be God? He says the Doctor did declare to Mr. Blagrave,
That Christ was God.

Hereupon he was asked by the Commissioners and Ministers, Whether there was
not so much distance of time at the least between the Doctors denial of I never
denied him to be God, in my enemies sense, and as they think.
Christ to be God, and his correcting of it afterward, as required proof of
Mr. Tickle, to prove him to be God and Jehovah? the Deponent does acknowledge
the same.

And the Deponent being asked whether he did hear Mr. Tickle speak any word of
God the farther in that dispute? He says he does not remember that Mr. Tickle
used any such expression.

This Deponent being asked by me, Whether frequently in that dispute, when I
spoke of denying Christ to be God, I did not speak it always in relation to
God the Father? He thus answered, The Doctor did then speak it in relation to
God the Father; but he cannot say frequently or always.

Moreover the former Deponent being asked by me, How I did explain my self in
St. Lawrence Church concerning the Divinity of Christ, when I was commanded by
the Committee at Redding, to explain my self in a Sermon there? Mr Tickle was
very forward to prove what I never denied, viz. The Godhead of Christ, as I
afterward told him and the Committee.
He says, in that Sermon the Doctor did clear himself concerning the Trinity
of Persons, and that Christ was God, and did assert the same as his avowed
Judgment.

After this, being asked by the Commissioners, Whether the Doctor did not make
his limitation, if any Was not this sufficient to free me from any further
trouble touching this point?
after he was confuted by Mr. Tickle, concerning the Deity of Christ? The
Deponent answers to this, That it was after Mr. Tickle had cited many
Scriptures to prove the Deity of Christ.

But last of all, being asked by me, Whether he understood me at that time to
be confuted or mistaken? He says, Mistaken.

Francis Pordage.

The next Witness is Mary Pocock, sworn again, and further examined. December. 7.


Who being asked by me, Whether this expression, That Christ was not God and
Jehovah, was not spoken in a dispute before the Committee at Redding? She says
she was before the Committee of Berks, where she heard the Dr. in a dispute
with Mr. Tickle, concerning Christ, in which dispute she heard the Dr. say,
Christ was not the Father; but she did not hear him deny that he was God the
Son, neither then, nor at any other time, but owning him to be perfest God, and
perfect man.

And being further asked, Whether she did not hear the Doctor express that
Christ was not God, with a limitation? and with what limitation? She answered,
yes, and that the same was thus, He was not God the Father.

And being further asked by the Doctor, Whether she did not hear him deny in
that dispute, that he held Christ not to be God? She says she did apprehend
him so, viz. That he did deny he held Christ not to be God, and so far as she
was satisfied with it.

And being asked by the Commissioners, Whether she did not hear the Doctor in
that dispute, deny Christ to be God? She answers, she heard him deny Christ
to be God the Father.

And being further asked, Whether the words of God the Father were not spoken
by the Doctor, after Mr. Blagrave did tell him, If he held such opinions, they
must proceed against him? To this she says, Mr. Blagrave put some questions to
him, what it was, she cannot remember.

And being further asked, Whether the Doctor did not bring in the expression of
God the Father, after many Scriptures cited by Mr. Tickle to prove Christ to be
God? To this she says, some Scriptures Mr. Tickle did bring, but she is not
able to say it was before the Doctor did express God the Father.

Mary Pocock.

After this, I desired the Commissioners, that if they were not yet satisfied,
they would hear my Witnesses which I had there ready to be sworn, that I had
formerly cleared my self of holding Christ not to be God and Jehovah, and that
I had held forth the contrary as my avowed judgment, viz. That Christ was God
and Jehovah, in a Sermon before the Commit of Berks at Lawrence Church in
Redding, and how afterward I was cleared by their Vote from these Articles now
in debate, and particularly from this, of holding Christ not to be God: But
they would not suffer me to produce the Evidence of these Witnesses; replying,
They had nothing to do, what other Committees before had done, they would
proceed according to the proofs of the i. e. of those that they pleased to hear.
present Witnesses.

But nevertheless I shall here present to the judicious Reader, the Evidence
which they through prejudice rejected.

Which was this that follows. I confess I heard This was to be attested by four
several witnesses which were present at the Sermon, one or two of which wrote,
and had this in their notes.
the Doctor deliver himself in a Sermon at Redding in Lawrence Church, where
the Committee of Berk was present, out of Ezekiel. cap. 9. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. after
this manner, viz. That Jehovah taken late, largely, including the Trinity of
persons, so they are all Jehovah; but take Jehovah stricte, only for the
person of the Father, and then Christ is not Jehovah. And hereupon he further
said, What dealings have I had from my fellow-Ministers, but as Jacob had from
Esau, Obad. 10. 12. who spoke proudly against his brother Jacob in the day of
his distress; and there he avowedly declared, that the thought of denying the
Deity or Godhead of Christ, never entered into his soul.

Moreover, These following Witnesses were present to attest on Oath their
former Depositions taken before the Cmmittee of Plundered Ministers, which were
these.

This Deponent (Mr. Francis Pordage) further says on Oath, That he was present
before the honorable Committee of Berks; when the Doctor was cleared by the
Vote of the whole Committee, touching the business at Ilsley, and concerning
those Articls, That Christ is not God and Jehovah.

This Deponent (John Hambleton) says on his Oath, That he was present before
the honorable Committee of Berks when the Doctor was cleared by the Vote of
the whole Committee, concerning Ilsley business, and these Articles of Christ's
not being God and Jehovah.

And this Deponent further says on Oath, That he was at Redding before the
Committee of Berks, where the Doctor was cleared of the business at Ilsley, and
from the false aspersions laid to him, as if he denied Christ to be God or
Jehovah, and that by the Vote of the whole Committee.

But the Commissioners not receiving these Testimonies, I earnestly desired
them they would hear the Evidence of some Witnesses there present, touching the
tenor of my Ministry since that dispute concerning Christ's being God, which I
looked upon more considerable then one expression uttered in a dispute upon a
mistake (if Mr. Tickle swears the truth) but they denied this reasonable
request, saying they were in haste, and that these testimonies were but
delatory, and impertinent: which notwithstanding I shall here present to be
weighed by the judicious Reader.

These four Witnesses) M. Francis Pordage, Richard Higgs, Mr. Samuel Pordage,
John Higgs) were ready to attest this which follows, upon their Oaths, which
was writ down in some of their Note-Books.

We confess we heard the Doctor Preach out of Matthew. 1. 23. in the year 1652.
concerning Christ's birth, at which time he speaking of six wonders, delivered
the four last after this manner.

The third Wonder in Christ's birth, was this, That he was born a perfect man, a
true natural man, Luke 1. 42. Where Christ is called by Elizabeth, the fruit of
the Virgin Mary's womb, Gal. 4. 4. made of a woman, 1. 1. not only in or
through a woman, but out of the substance and nature of the Virgin. Fourth
wonder, That Christ was born perfect God, John 1. 14. The word was made flesh;
Who is meant by this Word? The eternal Word, the Word Christ, Heb. 1. 2. Fifth
wonder, Behold two distinct natures born in him, viz. The Deity and Humanity,
the Godhead and the Manhood, Romans 1. 3. 4 according to the flesh he is of the
seed of David, and according to his divine nature, he is the Son of God: These
two natures remain distinct in Christ's person, John 8. 58. Before Abraham was,
I am, according to his divine nature he was before Abraham, and according to
his humane, after. Sixth wonder, Behold two natures Hypostatically united in
one person; these two natures do not make two persons, two Christ's, but both
these natures hypostatically united together, make up but one person, Matthew. 1.
23. Immanuel, God with us.

The nature of this union was after this manner explained,

It was an inconvertible union, an indivisible union, an inconfused union, an
inseparable union, a substantial and real union, yet a mystical union.

We also heard the Doctor in Bradfield Church, at another time aabout 1653.
deliver himself (out of Joh. 1: 14. concerning the words being made flesh)
thus: viz. That this word was Christ, the eternal word, that is coeternal.
coessential, and coequal with the Father, Prove. 8. 22, 23, 24, 25. I was set up
from everlasting, etc. Joh. 10. 30. I and my father are one.

Besides, we can with a good Conscience testify, that in his public Ministry
out of diverse Texts of Scripture, we have heard him clearly hold forth Christ
to be God.

So much for these Articles, as to the Testimony of witnesses.

And now we must inform the Readers, that I have hitherto in truth without
partiality toward my self, or passion and prevarication toward my adversaries
presented the Depositions and Evidence on both sides, touching the first
Charge, I would therefore request, that these following particulars drawn
together by way of Recapitulation, may be seriously weighed and considered.

Part. 1. That to most of these nine Articles they have but one witness,
without any concurrent Testimony, which is not sufficient proof according to
the Ordinance they are to act by, in which it is expressed that at least there
must be one witness with concurrent Evidence.

Part. 2. That wheresoever the Accuser has two, I have also two to balance
them.

Part. 3. That although many of the Articles are in gross sworn to positively,
yet in the cross examinations, you will find such Limitations as these,
according to our best remembrance, and according to our apprehensions, in the
same express words, for the substance of them, etc. which cannot therefore
amount to legal evidence, being invalid in point of Law, because as the
judicious Lawyer says, if the deponents swear not positively, and
syllabically, they may by changing, adding to, or taking from the express
words, usurp the place of Judges, and so prevent their work and duty, which is
to judge whether such express terms are criminous or not, which they cannot do
after the terms be altered, and made criminous already by the witnesses
misrepresenting them.

Part. 4. That my witnesses, in reference to the most substantial questions,
are positive in their Answers.

I shall here also further present you with some more Considerations, taken
from the justice of Law, and particularly of those Laws and Ordinances by which
the present Commissioners were obliged to act.
Consid. 1. THat the present Commissioners had no legal Authority to question
me again, for this Charge of Articles, especially the In regard I publicly in
a Sermon before the Committee renounced the denying the Godhead of Christ, and
averred the contrary, as my cordial judgment, which had been sufficient,
though I had formerly denied the Godhead of Christ, which I never did, to have
prevented further trouble about that.
eighth and ninth, in regard I was cleared from them, by the vote of the
Committee of Berks, who had legal power by an Act of Parliament to do it.

2. That this Charge of Articles, was not within their cognizance to traverse
over again, because after a full hearing and examination of witnesses on both
sides, (as the discharge runs) the Cause was dismissed by the Committee of
plundered Ministers, two and thirty then sitting, who had an absolute power by
an Ordinance of Parliament, to put out and to put in Ministers, and that
Objection which through ignorance or craft some of them made against the
discharge: viz. That the cause was but dismissed, and so I not legally
discharged, is looked upon by judicious Lawyers to be a mere cavil arising from
ignorance of the Law, or envy to my person, or both: Now the proceeding of the
Commissioners in this against former Laws and Statutes unrepealed, especially
that weighty one of Magna Charta, Nemo bis punietur, pro uno delicto, is of
dangerous consequence, and much against the Liberty of the subject, and fit to
be taken notice of by the highest power of this Nation, that so future
inconveniences by the infringing of Laws and the exercise of Arbitrary power,
to the prejudice of tender Consciences, and the Liberty of the subject, may be
prevented.

3. That not one of the Articles of this Charge, comes within the Cognizance of
that Act against several blasphemous, Atheistical opinions, according to the
litteral, and so the legal sense of the Act, to which the Commissioners are
limited as the rule to judge of scandal: for first, That of Christ's Imputative
Righteousness being sapless, which is the only Article they can pretend to
come within the Act, is not justly within the reach of it: for though the Act
speaks against those that deny the Righteousness and Holiness of God, yet
certainly by the scope of it, it does not concern the former Position of
Imputative Righteousness, for this Act being purposely made against the
Ranters, who entitled God to all unrighteous and evil actions, confounding
good and evil, righteousness and unrighteousness, saying that all was good, and
all God: and so made God as unrighteous as themselves; I say considering this,
the words before expressed cannot without unnatural wresting of them, come within
that of denying the righteousness of God; for though one should be so mistaken
as to deny the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, yet it did not follow that
one denied Gods Righteousness, for one might believe God and Christ to be
righteous, eternally righteous, nay to be righteousness and holiness in the
abstract Though one should deny the Imputation of this righteousness; which is
only a relation of that righteousness, as to Saints, and not the righteousness
it self abstractly considered: and further, if the Commissioners should wrest
every reserve, the forementioned Clause to Imputative righteousness, as they
did in my case, they might judge any one scandalous that differed any way from
themselves in point of Justification and Application of this righteousness,
alleging their denial of Christ's imputative righteousness, which might prove
a dangerous snare to many tender Consciences.

But secondly, none of these Articles are within the cognizance of the Act,
because all that are judged criminous by that Act must avowedly maintain,
profess, or affirm, the things there prohibited, as you may see, in page 980,
and 982. where the term avowedly is thrice expressed, now I never avowedly
maintained the particulars of these Articles, as they are there presented, but
have solemnly and publicly avowed the contrary, as you may see before, and as
my protestation will show, which I gave in before the Commissioners, now how
contrary is the practice of the present Commissioners to the intent and scope
of the judicious composers of that Act; who judge none criminous but those that
avowedly hold or maintain, etc. whereas these endeavors to make men offenders
for a word, and so to deprive them of their estates, though against Law,
Scripture, and pure Reason.

4. That this Act was first made August 9. 1650. and the Articles pretended to
be delivered by Mr Tickles Confession, in August 1649. a year before the being
of the Act, now how unreasonable, and illegal it is for me to be tried, and
accused from a Law, for words spoken, or pretended to be spoken a year before
the original birth of it, let all sober persons judge.

5. According to the conclusion of that Act (p. 934.) no persons are to be
punished, molested, impeached, or troubled, for any offense mentioned in that
Act, unless the same persons be accused, presented, indicted, or convicted,
within six months after such offense committed; now Mr Tickle confesses in his
Answer to my General Interrogatory touching the time when the particulars of
this Charge were uttered, that according to his best remembrance it was about
five years since; now I was not accused within six months after that for these
Articles, which therefore are not within the cognizance of the Act, nor of the
Commissioners by that Act; for their Ordinance (p. 613.) runs thus, such
Ministers shall be accounted scandalous in their lives and conversations, as
shall be proved guilty of holding or maintaining such blasphemous and execrable
opinions, as are punishable by the Act entitled, An Act against several
Atheistical Opinions, etc. Now these Articles are not punishable by that Act,
for the Reason before expressed, and therefore the Commissioners cannot
legally, though they were clearly proved, judge me scandalous for or by them.

6. According to the Ordinance by which the Commissioners are to act, they can
adjudge those only scandalous, who (p. 613.) shall be proved guilty of holding
or maintaining, such and such blasphemous opinions; by which you see they are
limited to the present time, in reference to any ones judgment and opinion;
How unjustly then have they adjudged me scandalous, for things pretended to be
spoken so many years since, whenas I gave in a solemn and cordial protestation
to them, in which I denied and renounced those Opinions they accused me of, and
owned the contrary as my real avowed judgment, which How clearly does this
evince their unjust prejudice and great partiality, and cruel dealing with me.
protestation, though made from the integrity of my soul, they would not suffer
openly to be read, but consulted of it in private, and afterward seemed not at
all to regard it.

7. That the Act of General Pardon, dated Feb. 24. 1651. takes away all legal
guilt from these Articles, according to the judgment of all judicious Lawyers;
which also clearly appears, by that of page 1547 in that Act in which it is
expressed, that all offenses and trespasses committed or done, before the third
of September in the year 1651 in that Act, not afterward excepted, nor
foreprised, are pardoned, which extends as well to words as deeds, as may be
seen in the said Act; now the particulars of these Articles were pretended to
be uttered long before 1651, and are therefore ineffectual legally to prejudice
me. And I seeing the bitterness and cruelty of my Judges, by their unjust
proceedings against me, to stop their mouths, and to leave them altogether
inexcusable, craved the privilege of this Act of General Pardon though in my
own Conscience I stood free from the guilt of those things, they alleged
against me. But now having passed over my first Charge, and having
reeapitulated some particulars, which may serve to clear the Case in hand, I
shall leave it to the judgment of the Reader, whether I stand not in my
innocence in reference to this Charge, and whether my Judges are not guilty,
for condemning me; for some particulars of this Charge, as the chief grounds of
their sentence.

Now I come to the second Charge of Articles in reference to the proof, being
exhibited against me by one Joseph Cook an unknown person.
Artic. 1. ONe Mrs Lewin being with child, and near the time of travel, sent
for Dr. Pordages mother to be her Midwife, but he would not suffer her to go,
saying they would not be guilty of such a beast like life, meaning Mrs Lewins
being with child by her husband.
Depos. Mr John Lewin of Hamsted Norris sworn and examined the To every Article
I shall here annex what-was deposed by the witnesses.
second of November, at the Bear in Spinham Land before the Commissioners to
this Article says he cannot oppose.

Ann Lewin wife of John Lewin Minister of Hamsted-Norris sworn and examined to
the second paper of Articles exhibited against Doctor Pordage, says to the
first Article she cannot depose.

Artic. 2. The said Doctor Pordage coming to the house of Mr Lewin, in his
discourse with Mrs Lewin blamed her for having children by her husband, and
argued with her the unlawfulness of having children by her husband.
Depos. To this Article Mr. Lewin says he cannot depose.

To this second Article Mrs Lewin says, that the Doctor told her, when she had
two children, a boy and a girl, she had enough, one for her husband, another
for her self, to which the Deponent answered, as it shall please God, Then the
Doctor replied, pish, it is as your selves will. But she says the Doctor did
never persuade her to live from her husband.

Art. 3. In his discourse to Mr. Lewin concerning the same subject, he
endeavored to maintain the unlawfulness of their having children, and said
that Adam was Male and Female in himself, and had he not fallen he had brought
forth children himself, and to maintain and prove the same by Scripture and
otherwise.
Depos. To this third Article Mr Lewin says, that about three years since, the
Doctor and this Deponent had some discourse at the Deponents house, about some
Principles of Religion, the Doctor did urge that place in Genesis, That he made
them Male and Female, but whether he meant Adam singly, or what mental
reservation he had the deponent knows not, and further to this Article he
cannot depose.

To this third Article Mrs Lewin says, she heard the Doctor and her husband in
discourse to the purpose of the said Article, but what the words were she
cannot depose.

Artic. 4. In his discourse with Mr Lewin, which was about the time that one
Everard was with him in his house at Bradfield, who was generally reputed a
Conjurer, he asked Mr Lewin whether he would not be afraid, if he should see
his own picture or shape, intimating that he himself had used to see his.
Depos. To this fourth Article Mr Lewin says, that about the time mentioned in
the Article, the Deponent met the Doctor in London, in discourse with him the
Doctor asked him if it would not be terrible to see apparitions, but did
intimate nothing, that he used to see any himself.

To this Mrs Lewin says she cannot depose.

Artic. 5. The said Doctor Pordage has had for some weeks together in his
house the said Everard and one Tawny, who styled himself King of the Jews, who
had been questioned as it is generally reported, for holding dangerous and
unsound Opinions, as that there is no Hell, and the like.
Depos. To this Mr Lewin deposes nothing, and Mrs Lewin says she cannot
depose.

Now all that I shall say to this Charge and the proofs of it, consists in
these three subsequent particulars.

Part. 1. What Paul says Act. 24. 13. neither can they prove the things
whereof they now accuse me, I may say here, for many things are laid to my
charge, but nothing proved by this unknown accuser: But it is an act of subtle
policy, to charge boldly, though they prove little of it, which has been
practiced against me in this trial, as every one may see:

Part. 2. For the further satisfaction of the Reader in reference to this
Charge, Let him look back upon my former Answer, given unto it before the
witnesses were examined.

Part. 3. I look upon my self in some measure obliged, here to give a short
account of my judgment concerning marriage, the holding forth of which may
have occasioned my enemies to have framed some of the precedent Articles
against me. I must therefore acknowledge, that I prefer Virginity before
Matrimony, The single state before the conjunct; and that persons though in a
married state, yet assured by grace of the gift of Continency, may by consent
abstain from the enjoyments 1 Cor. 7. 28.
of that state, and so be in it; as though they were not in it, living as
single though in an united form. This now is my judgment and deliberate
practice, being according to that of Christ, Matt. 19. 12 He that is able to
receive it, let him receive it; where he speaks of the the Law of abstinence,
and Christian Eunuchism, which these words immediately going before show, viz.
There be Eunuchs that have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of Heavens
sake; Here is the practice and the end of it, which ought to be the growth and
increase of Gods kingdom in the heart, to which the mortifications of the
affections, and the abstraction of the soul from the corrupt sensitive nature,
does make way. And, certainly it were well, if Christians, in this corrupt
declining age of the world did more eye and imitate the pattern of Christ's
life, who as he was born of a Virgin, so lived in virginity, and the single
devoted life, leaving an example to all that are able (Mat. 29. 12.) to tread
in his steps, and follow him. And further, it is fit for all that are either
single or married to consider, that all private Bonds, Laws, and Engagements,
ought to strike sail to our Highest Laws and Engagements to God, and that
whenever, they cross one another, the highest and supreme Law by which we are
obliged to live to God in purity and integrity, must have the precedence. Now
my holding forth and declaring this my judgment, together with my own
practice, has given occasion to many (who are as the Generation before the
flood, eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, and taking
complacency in the delights of the flesh) to speak evil of me, as one that
breaks Bonds between Relations, though no such thing can (in truth) be proved
against me: for it is not my design to make proselites to my judgment, being
willing to leave all to the rule of light in their own Consciences. Though I
have said, and cannot but say, that it were well if Christians would more
labor after, and pray for the gift of Continency, and not in involve
themselves in the entanglements of the world, till they had used all means of
mortification prescribed in the Holy Scripture, to subdue their natures, and it
were happy if the present Generation, could clearly distinguish betwixt those
marriages that are Idolatrous, Adulterous, and Beastial, and those that are
Holy, Pure, Divine, being made in the Lord, according to his Will, and so
lawful, and honorable: but alas, most people now, are as those in the days of
Noah, who being insensible of Gods intended Judgment, by the deluge, solaced
themselves in the pleasures and delights of the earth, till the flood came and
destroyed them. Hence there is much need of some at this time, to call people
to selfdenyal and imitation of Christ's life, to live up to the highest and
purest Rules of Christianity in the mortification of their flesh, and in the
complete devoting of themselves to a constant attendance upon the Lord, as
waiting for his coming in spirit, to destroy the Man of Sin; and overthrow
Babylon with all its Idols. So much for the third and last particular, which
shall conclude the things of this Charge.

Now I am come to the Depositions of my third and last Charge, some of which
were taken Nov. 22. being the fourth time of my appearance, the other December.
7, and 8. being the fifth and last time of my appearing before the Court.

But before I present the particular Depositions, I must here inform the Reader
of two things, which relate to the last time of my December 7, and 8.
appearance, and to this last Charge, one of which shows the Cruelty, the other
the injustness of the Commissioners. The first then is this. The seventh of
December having been taken up in the examination of my witnesses to the first
Charge, From an hour or two before dinner, till it was near nine at night.
which continued till it was late in the night, the Commissioners called for
more lights that they might proceed to the examination of witnesses in
reference to the third Charge, whereupon I replied it was late, and I had many
witnesses to examine upon the last Charge, at this Mr Fowler the Accuser rose
up, and urged the proceeding to the last Charge, saying, it would quickly be
dispatched, then the Commissioners cried out, fetch us more Candles, we will
make an end of it this night; to which, I replied, Gentlemen, I have here stood
very long before you, and having not dined (through the urgency of my business)
I am not well, being very faint, and much spent and wearied, I desire you would
therefore stay till the next morning; but they peremptorily denied this just
request, and resolved to proceed. But they permitting me to withdraw for a
little space: through emptiness, and weariness, I fell very sick, and was
forced to go into my Bed, at which the Commissioners were very much troubled,
seeming to consult whether they should proceed to Judgment. The second thing
is this, on the morrow the Commissioners requiring me, against many Objections
which I made, to give in my Interrogatories by writing, afterward judged most
of them dilatory and impertinent to the business, and so not fit to be
examined. To which I objected, whatever my proofs were, they ought in justice
to hear them by examining the witnesses to my Interrogatories, and afterward
to judge of them, whether valid or invalid. But nothing I could speak prevailed
with them, to obstruct their rejecting They suffered but one of my witnesses to
be examined.
most of my Testimonies.

But now as to the particular Depositions, relating to the third Charge,
exhibited by Mr Fowler, I shall here present them to be weighed in the scales
of Justice by the Reader. The first Article has no proof brought of it.

Artic. 2. THat Jesus Christ was not perfect, alleging that Text to confirm
it, he cried out My God my God, why etc.
Mr Christopher Fowler sworn and examined (at Reading, November 23) to this
Article says, This Deponent was the Accuser, and so should not have been
witness, it being against Law. And this Testimony of his is a mere heresay, or
story, weighing nothing in Law, being not so much as a concurrent Testimony.
Here you may see the Clerks partiality.
That about five weeks or a month since, he acquainted Mr Daniel Blagrave the
younger, that the Commissioners did intend to summon him to testify what he
knew of Doctor Pordage in relation to Jesus Christ, and the Deponent asked him,
if he heard the Doctor say, That Christ was not perfect, to which he answered,
Yes.

Now as to my Defense against this Testimony, not repeating the illegality and
invalidity of it, I have these things to say,
1. THat the Clerk has left out some cross Interrogatories, which were
proposed by me to the Accuser, in reference to this his Deposition, As first,
Whether he asked Mr Blagrave, whether I spoke it from my self, as my judgment,
or related it as delivered by, and heard from another? Which question the
Accuser waved. And secondly, If he did ask it; What was replied to it by Mr
Blagrave? Which likewise was waved by him, without any positive Answer,
whereupon I said to the Commissioners, I hope you will not take this Deposition
as Evidence against me, without summoning Mr Blagrave himself, who only can
resolve the truth of these particulars.

2. In the second place I shall refer you to my Answer to this Article, in
which you may see, that I only related what I had heard another speak, at a
public meeting in London, the thing it self being much against my judgment.

In the third place, I must tell you that I had three witnesses ready to depose
on oath, that after my coming from London they heard me relate this, as spoken
by Mr Erbery in a public Sermon at Summerset-house, which Testimony, was
according to my Answer to this Article, though accounted impertinent by the
Commissioners, and so rejected, without examining the witnesses.

4. Farther to clear my innocence in this particular, I desired them to hear
what my witnesses could say, as to the tenor of my Ministry, Touching Christ's
being a perfect Redeemer. But this was also rejected as impertinent: but
whether this subsequent Testimony intended to have been given in, was not as
weighty, as the Accusers deposition or heresay, let the Reader judge.

We have heard the Doctor preach in Bradfield Church (about Test. Richard
Higgs, John Higgs.
1652. out of Colloss. 1. 14* In whom we have Redemption, etc.) after this
manner. These words he divided into three particulars, 1. Into the Redeemer, in
whom. 2: The Redeemed, We. 3. The act it self, Redemption. As to the first
particular he thus enlarged himself, Who can this Redeeming person be, but
Christ? Act. 1. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no
other name given under Heaven, whereby we must be saved, 1 C^r. 3. 7. For other
foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, as to the
second particular, The persons Redeemed, he said they were the whole mystical
body of Christ. Thirdly, As to the third particular, the act it self,
Redemption, he said it employed a deliverance from a state of bondage, into a
state of Liberty, which he opened at large in every particular, setting forth
the riches of this Redemption to us by Christ.

And we heard him further preach in Bradfield Church, about Test. Richard
Higgs, John H^ggs, with fix more.
1654, from these words out of 1 Timothy 1. 15. That Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, viz. That Jesus Christ was a perfect Savior, in
reference both to his Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly Office, every one of
which heads he opened at large.

Now let the Reader but impartially weigh, the Accusers illegal Deposition,
with the particulars here recited on my behalf, and judge whether the
Commissioners have not broken their own Law, the Law of Nature, and the Law of
Scripture, in taking this Deposition of my Accusers into their sentence of
ejectment, in which they expressly condemn me for holding, That Christ was not
perfect.

Artic. 3. That the blood of Christ was not meritorious of any man's Salvation.
To this Mr Christopher Fowler sworn and examined, deposes that about three
weeks or a month since he asked Mr Daniel Blagrave the younger, whether he did
not hear the Doctor say, That the blood of Christ was not meritorious of any
man's salvation, he answered he heard him to that This Testimony is to no
purpose.
purpose.

To balance this Deposition, let the Reader Consider,
1. THat the Accuser is here Deponent, which is against Law. 2ly. That the
Deposision is but a story or heresay, and no legal Testimony. 3ly. That the
Deponent was not able to answer to any of This the Clerk has omitted.
my Interrogatories, so as to declare where, before whom, or on what occasion
this was spoken; only protested as he was a Minister of the Gospel, that Mr
Blagrave told him so. 4ly. That I am not guilty of holding any such thing, as
my Answer to this Article shows. 5ly. That seeing I had no other way of
clearing my innocence, but by showing my judgment, and producing proofs of the
tenor of my Ministry touching this particular, I desired them to examine some
witnesses that were there ready to attest this which follows.

We heard the Doctor in Bradfield Church, (about 1652, out of This was the
Testimony of four witness^s,
Coloss. 1. 4. viz. In whom we have Redemption thorough his blood) deliver
himself thus. That the fourth particular in this Text, was the means of this
Redemption, expressed in the last words, thorough his blood, to be understood
per modum meriti, thorough his meritorious blood, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought
with a price, that is the price of blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Forasmuch as ye
know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with Silver and
Gold, from your vain Conversations, but with the precious blood of Christ, Act.
20. 28. Which he has purchased with his own blood.

We Mr Francis Pordage, John Wickins, Mary Pocock, Mary Allen.
also heard the Doctor in Bradfield Church, about 1654. (out of these words,
Isa. 25. 6. In this mountain will the Lord of Hosts make a feast of fat things,
etc.) speak thus: That one dish amongst the dainties of this feast was the
blood of Christ, which he opened, to be cleansing, purging blood, 1 John 1. 7.
having cleansed us from all our sins through his blood. And Reconciling blood,
Coloss. 1. 20. Reconciled through his blood. And pardoning blood, Coloss. 1. 14.
Through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins.

This was attested by six witnesses.
and we have often heard him in his Ministry thus set forth the efficacy of the
blood of Christ:

But you must know that this Testimony would not be received, for they judged
it invalid, though they received the Accusers heresay, as Evidence against me.
Now whether this dealing was not more suiable to corrupted Ethnicks, then to
such professors of Religion, let knowing persons judge.

Article 4. Pish, It is a poor thing to live upon the blood of Christ.
Depos. Susanna Grip, wife of John Grip of Reading Joyner, sworn, deposes,
This Deponent told Doctor Pordage, This as I meant and applied it is a real
truth, as may be seen in my Answer, for I did not level it against true
justification by Christ's blood, but the erroneous building upon it to the
neglect and disregard of sanctification, mortification, and the real change of
the heart, which I feared this woman was guilty of, when I thus spoke to her.
And they that saw in what a passionate vaunting, and mimick posture she deposed
this, could scarce think any otherwise of her. And she not very long since
being in talk with a friend of mine, a sober man, about Free Grace, Asked him
what he would say to one that was justified, and acquitted from all sin 1600
years ago, seeming by the discourse to apply it to her self. Now some such
discourse as this was the occasion of my speaking thus to her, notwithstanding
her rash Oath.
that is was a high thing to live upon the blood of Christ, to which he
replied, to live upon the blood of Christ, that is a poor thing, and repeated
the same again, and said, Thou art a babe, thou know nothing, to live upon
the blood of Christ, that is a poor thing, whereupon the Deponents heart fell
almost dead with fear at his words, and being asked by the Doctor whether the
same were delivered in the same very words? She answered yes in the very same
words: Being asked where, she replied in the Kitching, being further asked
when, she says four years since to the best of her remembrance, but who was
then present she does not remember, and being asked by the Doctor upon what
occasion the same was spoken, she says, The Doctor was speaking something in a
rambling manner, which she did not understand, but she said she thought she
would speak something to him, that he should understand and rejoice with her
for it, and that was the occasion of the discourse, and that the Doctors words
were without any explanation. This Deponent being ready to faint, said, what
then Doctor? He Answered, I know not what the matter is, that I must speak to
you, I do not use to discover my self, but he told her something, of the man
that dyed at Jerusalem, which she did not remember, being then so amazed.

The Lord pardon her for her rash swearing, and undoubted Perjury; when she
deposed this I desired the Commissioners to give me my oath to confirm the
truth of the substance of what she so desperately denies. I hope it was for
want of memory, for then her sin is the less.
The Doctors Answer to the eighth Article, being read unto her, she says that
all the circumstances mentioned in the said Answer, are all of them false and
untrue.

Now as to this Deposition, what is further to be added, to give the Reader
more light to judge both of the Article and Deposition: Is this.
NOt to speak any thing of the levity and rashness of this woman, which is well
known to the Inhabitants of Reading, and may make her Testimony the less to be
valued; She in her rash denial of the Circumstances of my Answer, confidently
spoke a known untruth upon her Oath, and so made her self guilty of open
perjury.

Whereupon, when I came to make my Defense, To invalidate her Testimony, I
presented four witnesses, who were ready upon oath to prove her perjured.

The first of these was one Mr Richard Stockwel, esteemed by all moderate
persons that know him, to be a sober and pious Christian. Although he was
excepted against by Mr Fowler the Accuser, as an Erberist, as this subsequent
deposition shows.

Though Accuser, yet here admitted as a witness against my witness. Mr
Stockwell, offered openly in the court, to prove Mr Fowler a liar, and as to
his Deposition perjuted. But they would not hear him.
Mr Fowler being sworn, as to his knowledge of Mr Stockwell, deposes that he
conceives the said Stockwell is an Erberist, because that when the Deponent
(being charged to be a slanderer of him) did offer to make a public
Recantation, and to confess himself to be a slanderer, in case the said Mr
Stockwell, would deny the Doctrine and Opinion of Mr Erbery, which he refused.

Notwithstanding which, the Commissioners would examine him, if the Dr would ask
him any material question; but do not think fit to exaamin him to their i. e.
The Clerks due of undue taking of them, who here omitted a weighty circumstance.
due, or undue taking of Mr. Grips Examination, which the Dr. insisteth on.

Now let the Reader judge whether the question was not material which this
Witness would have answered to by Oath, viz. Whether This Mrs. Grip denying on
Oath, many circumstances o^ my answer concerning Mr Fowler, said she never
railed against him; for which she had been proved perjured, had not the Court
by the persuasion of the accuser, against reason and equity, rejected my
witnesses.
Mrs. Grip did not averr on Oath in open Court, that she never railed against
Mr. Fowler? To this one Mr. Tench was ready also to be sworn in the
affirmative; there were also many others which heard it: And further, I had two
more substantial Witnesses, who offered to swear they had heard Mrs Grip rail
against Mr Fowler in public meetings before many Witnesses; Mrs Elenor
Burleigh was willing to depose that she heard Mrs Grip say, That Mr Fowler was
a son of Belial, etc. and one Mrs Kent would have attested that she heard her
rail against Mr Fowler in the same and the like speeches, with much more. Now
because the Clerk had not taken that expression of hers, That she never railed
against him, therefore the Commissioners made it their pretense, of not
examining the Witnesses to it, as a thing impertinent, though by the
attestation of that, with the testimony of the other two Witnesses, she had
been proved directly perjured; but Mr. Fowler the accuser, being a great friend
of the woman's, and seeing she was in danger to be proved perjured, and so an
insufficient Witness in all her Testimonies, prevailed with the Court against
the importunate, rational, and legal Pleas of my Council, to reject these
forementioned Witnesses. The unjustness, palpable partiality, and illegality
of which action I leave to be weighed in the balance of equity by the
impartial Reader; who in justice may esteem this woman as really prejured, as
though the Witnesses had proved Which was hindered only by the will of the
Judges.
it, and value her testimony accordingly. And truly some of the Godly party at
Redding, hearing with what impudency and rashness she affirmed on Oath, she
never railed against Mr Fowler, confessed they could not but wonder at her,
being it was so commonly known.

But to conclude, let the Reader take notice, first, That this Article may be
either true or false, according to the applying of it to particular persons.
Secondly, That though it were taken in the worst sense, yet it were not within
the Act of Scandal. Thirdly, that there was only one Witness to it, to whose
testimony what credit is to be given, let the foregoing particulars declare.
Fourthly, That I had witnesses ready to depose, That in the tenor of my
Ministry, I had often held forth Christ's blood to be of a cleansing, redeeming,
and justifying nature. Fifthly, That in my Answer to it, I have given the true
ground and oceasion of it.

Art. 5. Pish, there was no such thing as persons in Trinity.
Depos. The former Susanna Grip says that the Doctor came in to her Kitchen at
another time, as she thinks, from the Committee, and said, That whereas
Ministers spoke of Persons in Trinity, there is no such thing In that
Scripture, 1 John 5. 7. she leaves out, This I spoke in reference to the terms
of persons in Trinity.
There are three that bear Record in heaven; but there is no such thing as
Persons in Trinity -- Note, In that Scripture, 1 John 5. 7. would be added, and
that in reference to the terms, as it is in the Margent.

Now my Interrogatories to her upon this Article, were these, first, 1. When I
spoke these words? she says, When I came from the Committee, which was two or
three This was four years since my transactions before that Committee being a
year or two before the time she speaks of.
years since, or thereabouts. Secondly, Before whom? She answers, whether her
maid, or any body else, or who was present, she does not remember. 3. Being
further asked whether this expression was delivered without any further
limitation or explanation? she replies, without any, as This, As she remembers,
makes her testimony invalid in Law; and in truth her memory fails her, for I
spoke it in reference to that Text, 1 John, 5. 7. intimating that the terms of
persons in Trinity were not in it, as I have before expressed.
she remembers.

Now what I have more to add to clear the truth in reference to this
Deposition, is this.
1. I refer the Reader to my Answer to this Article, in which you may see that
I made a relation to this woman of what had passed before the Committee, where
some questions were proposed to me, concerning the holy Trinity. Secondly, I
had a Witness present to testify on Oath, That what I said before the
Committee, was only this, That there was no such word as persons in Trinity in
that Text, 1 John 5. 7. a relation of which I made to this woman, who as it
seems, mistaking my meaning, comes now four years after to accuse me, though at
the very time she seemed to assent to what I spoke, and made no exception
against it, nor so much as asked me to explain my self for her satisfaction,
though she had a very convenient opportunity. Thirdly, she is but a single
Witness, and her testimony not positive, she adding, as she remembers, 4. I
desired the Commissioners to hear what my avowed Was it not real partiality in
the Commissioners, to regard an expression spoken to a person subject to
passion, and mistake, more then the declaring of my avowed judgment. Test.
Richard Higgs, Mr. Francis Pordage, Mr. Samuel Pordage.
judgment was, from the testimony of some Witnesses who were ready to depose
what I had held forth in my public Ministry, touching the persons in the holy
Trinity: But the Commissioners refused to examine the witnesses, whose evidence
was this.

We heard the Dr in Bradfield Chuch (about 1653. from these words, John 14. The
word was made flesh) deliver himself thus, For the understanding of the person
that was made flesh, you must consider the unutterable mystery of the holy
Trinity, the unity distinguishing it self into three persons, The Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 14. Baptizing them in the names of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, 1 John 5. 7. There are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost. Now which of these three persons are made
flesh? It Is not the first person, the Father, nor the third person, the holy
Ghost; but it is to be understood of the Son, the second person in the Trinity.

We have also heard him out of these Texts, Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 110. 1. The
same witnesses, with 4 more, attested this last.
Mat. 28. 19 1 John 5. 7. deliver in Bradfield Church, the distinctions of the
persons in the Trinity, as that the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the holy
Ghost, and the holy Ghost neither the Father nor the Son, but each distinct.

So much for this Article.

Art. 6. That it was a weakness to be troubled for sin,
Depos. Mr. Benjamin Woodbridg, Minister of Newbery, sworn and examined
deposes, That Mr. William Twiss of Dorchester told the Deponent, that Dr.
Pordage maintained it to him, or spoke in his hearing in company, that he was
no Christian that could not commit the greatest sin, and not be troubled for
the same, or words to that effect, to his best remembrance.

To this I replied before the Court.
I knew not the said Mr. Twiss, and to my knowledge I never saw his face: Being
then engaged in the business of examining my Witnesses, I said not much to the
vindication of my self, as to this horrid imputation; the testimony being but a
mere hearsay, and the Deponent rendering it more invalid by these expressions,
viz. Or words to that effect, and to his best remembrance.

But I desire the Reader here to take notice of the weakness or envy of He is
an assistant to the Commissioners.
Mr. Woodbridg, that he should thus with a hearsay only, which he himself did
not exactly remember, thus endeavor to asperse me, and render me odious, when
he saw there were so many horrid things laid to my charge before; but I believe
he will one day be touched in his conscience for dealing thus with me; for the
Lord knows I am innocent, as to the acting or holding of what he says.

I therefore (for the satisfaction of the Reader) solemnly protest in the
presence of Almighty God, That I never held any such opinion, for it is
diametrically opposite to my Principles, neither did I ever utter any such
expressions as my judgment, and am confident, were that Mr Twiss brought to my
face, he durst not averr any such thing.

To the seventh Article nothing is deposed, being contrived and reported abroad
by the accuser, to draw an odium upon me, as you may see in my Answer to it.
Art. 8. That he asserted he knew nothing to the contrary, but that a man might
company with more then one woman, etc.
Depos. Susana Grip says she told the Doctor, that she heard it was She was
the first that ever told me of any such thing; and being urged then, and
afterward before the Court, to tell me of whom she heard it; she denied to do
it.
reported of him, he should keep unlawful company with a woman in London, and
asked him if it were true? To which the Doctor asked her, who said so? The
Deponent replied, she would not tell him; whereupon the Dostor smiled, and was
not troubled, but denied it, saying, no; but he made her a further answer, that
he did not disallow of any such thing, as she She did not understand me aright,
for it was then, and is still against my judgment.
understood him. But what his express words were, she cannot remember.

Note, This last clause makes all invalid, and shows her rashness in swearing
that I did not disallow of any such thing, being she has forgotten my words,
by which only she can judge of my sense.

And the Answer of the Doctor to this particular, being read to her, she thus
replied, She does not remember the Doctor uttered any such passages as are
therein mentioned, to wit, that he should say, I am a man born to all manner of
sufferings.

It was further read to her, That the Deponent knew his life and conversation:
This she could remember, and does confess, she did then reply, See how
unconstant she is to her self; before she said I smiled, and was not troubled,
seeming to allow of it; and now her conscience forces her to say, she did not
believe any such thing.
she did not believe any such thing of him.

Being further asked by the Doctor, Whether this was expressed as his own
judgment, or the judgment of some other? She thus replied, As far as she
conceived, the Doctor did speak that passage of allowing that a man may have
more then one woman, as his own judgment, not as another man's.

Note, she did conceive amiss; for if ever I spoke it, it was in reference to
the Ranters, who then were much talked of: for such carnal principles are very
much against my judgment, and questionless against the truth.

Being further asked where it was spoken? she says, In the Deponents own
Court: being asked before whom, she answers, A single witness, without other
evidence, is insufficient to prove any thing by the Ordinance.
No body else was then present; being asked when, she says it was about three
or four years since.

But let the Reader here take notice.
1. That this Article is not within the limits of the Act. 2. That her
testimony is not legal, in that it is single and not positive, she confessing
that she has forget the express words. 3. That this is against my avowed
judgment, to prove which, besides my own assertions, I had present three The
Commissioners rejected their testimony.
Witnesses who were ready to depose, that I had often affirmed in conference,
That although this Principle was owned by the Ranters, yet it was much against
my judgment, as you may further see in my Answer.

Article 9. That he has very frequent and familiar converse with Angels.
Depos. The accuser is here again admitted to be a witness, yet all his
testimony f^llowing is a mere here-say, being no legal proof, and so very unfit
to have been received by the Commissioners; but they delighted to hear any
thing against me, though no legal evidence
Mr. Christopher Fowler of Redding, sworn and examined deposes, That about
three weeks or a month since, he asked Mr Daniel Blagrave the younger whether
he could not speak to the Doctors converse with Angels? He answered (as far as
the Deponent remembers) he could speak much.

Mr. Christopher Fowler sworn again, and further examined November 23. at the
Bear in Redding before the Commissioners, deposes, That about Michaelmas last,
the Deponent speaking with Mr Daniel Blagrave the elder, concerning the visions
of Angels that were at his house; in reference to Mrs Pyndar. The Deponent told
him, he the said Mr. Blagrave was able to say much to the purpose, it being in
his house, and desired him thereupon to speak his knowledge of the truth, both
in point Note, Mr Fowlers subtle insinuations into Mr. Blagrave, to engage him
to witness somewhat that he might accuse me of.
of conscience and reputation, being censured for supporting such a man as Dr
Pordage.

The said Mr. Blagrave answered, why, the Doctor does converse with Angels, and
I believe when he comes before the Commissioners, he will not deny but he does
converse with Angels.

If the accuser had lived in the time of Christ's Disciples, or did they live in
this age, what an accuser of the brethren were he like to be?
The Deponent thus replied to Mr. Blagrave, If the Dr will confess them Angels,
we will prove them Devils.

Note, How full of pride and rashness was this speech of Mr Fowlers, and how
unsuitable to the Scriptures, and the Law of Charity? For there are two sorts
of Angels and Spirits, good and evil, light and dark, holy and wicked, which
are continually tending upon men in this world; 1 Pet* 5. 8. (...).
the evil to tempt and draw men into the same condemnation with themselves; the
good to guard and preserve from the evil influences, and malicious designs of
the other. But does not the accuser seem to forget, that the Ministration of
the holy Angels still abides? who are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister
for those who shall inherit salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And the Psalmist says The
Angel of the Lord pitcheth his tent round obout those that fear him. How then
dare Mr Fowler affirm, that if I confess I have communion with Angels, they
will prove them Devils. How dare he thus limit the holy one of Israel? and shut
up his favors within the narrow limits of his own conceptions and enjoyments?
And why may not God for the support and comfort of some precious Saints, who in
humility, self-denial, and abstractedness of spirit, serve him day and night, I
say, why may he not afford such a sweet, and heavenly converse with the holy
Angels? what Scripture is there that speaks against it? Is it not suitable to
what he afforded the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and the primitive
Christians? But if my accuser lives so much in his senses, as to have no sense
or knowledge of it, yet why should he thus rashly condemn others?

But the accuser proceeds in his Depositions.

And further this Deponent says, That he has credibly heard something tending
What an invalid, illegal testimony is this? a mere hearsay, from he knows not
who; and his adding, to this purpose, makes it to no purpose at all.
to this purpose, That Doctor Pordage has seen the vision of the said Mr.
Blagrave, somewhat a bright vision.

But here I put in a question, which was this, Mr. Chairman, I do confess in my
answer, communion and converse with Angels; but pray ask Mr. Fowler, What
conversewith Angels M. Blagrave understood, visible or invisible?

To this the Deponent further says,

That the entrance of this discourse with Mr Blagrave, was in reference to
visions that were seen with the bodily eye, and mentioned the visions of Mrs
Pindar, that were by her reported to be such; upon this he understood Mr.
Blagrave, that the purport of his answer was a visible converse with Angels.

And the Deponent further says, That he delivered a Summons for Mr. Blagrave
to attest these things Mr Blagrave was then at London, engaged in very weighty
affairs, who told Mr Cook, they had no power to setch him by summons, being out
of the County.
in person, to Mr Cook, one of the Commissioners; who sent the Deponent word by
Letter, That he had showed the same to Mr. Blagrave, who has notwithstanding
refused to appear.

And further, he spoke thus in open Court against Mr Blagrave, though the Clerk
did not take it, viz. I do He speaks against him, because he was not so cruel
and unjust as he and others are; for the former Committee, Mr Blagrave being
Chairman, clearedme by vote, after my public renouncing the denial of the
Godhead of Christ, for which the present Commissioners, against Law and Reason,
have unjustly condemned me. Now whether the accuser does not speak more like
Rabsheca, then a Christian, in saying it was the plague of the County, to have
such a cursed Committee, let all moderate persons judge; it being the use of
such to anathematise all who serve not their cruel designs.
verily believe, such a Judge as he was in this case before, such a Witness he
would have been, were he now present; But I say, It was the plague of this
County to have such a cursed Committee.

Note, Mr Fowler here asked me some questions to ensnare me, as, Whether I had
not seen the vision of Mr. Daniel Blagrave? To which I answered, To this
profound question I will answer when I see it attested upon Oath. And further
asking me concerning converse with Angels.

The Cleark took this answer.

The Doctor does confess that he has daily converse with Angels; but he
desires Mr. Fowler to declare what converse with Angels Mr Blagrave did inform
that the said Dr had.

The Dr does further say, That he heard it credibly reported, that he has
every day two Angels dressing of him, to which he added, that they that
reported it to him, said they had it from the mouths of two Godly Ministers
that would not lie, viz. Mr Fowler and Mr Ford.

Note, I brought in this story to show the vanity and invalidity of such proofs
as the accuser had before produced, as that he had credibly heard somewhat to
that purpose, that I had seen the vision of Mr Blagrave: And for all the
accuser knows, that which he heard so credibly reported, might be as great an
untruth as that which I heard reported of my self, as coming from him and his
brother Ford, whose function seems very unsuitable to that of lying and
slandering.

Afterward Mr Fowler asked me again whether I had seen the vision of Mr Daniel
Blagrave? I answered, as long as it is attested only upon report, I would not
answer to it.

Artcle 10, 11, 12, 13. Concerning the apparitions of Spirits, and of a great
Dragon.
Here I must entreat the Reader seriously to weigh the following Depositions,
from which my enemies have charged me to be a Conjurer, and a Sorcerer, that so
it may be seen whether they have any better ground thus to esteem me, then they
have to esteem Job, who was terrified through visions, and Christ, who was
tempted by voice and vision in the Wilderness, and John, who in visions saw a
great red Dragon, and terrible Locusts go forth of the bottomless pit, and
three unclean frogs, the spirits of Devils going forth to deceive the word, I
say, then they have to esteem these Conjurers and Negromances for such sights.

But now to the Depositions.
Depos. Susanna Grip, wife of John Grip of Redding, sworn and examined,
deposes, That the Doctor told her, that a great many Spirits hovered about his
window, and kept a noise; but the Dr said, he told the company there Here she
m^stakes, I said there did com in but one at a time. Remember, how I showed
before that this woman was perjured.
should come in but one at a time; and that a Dragon did come in with a long
tail, and great eyes and fangs, and did spit fire at him.

And this Witness further says, That his Angel stood by him in his own shape,
in the same clothes, band and cuffs, and did protect him.

Note, Where this woman speaks truth, I shall not contradict her; but where she
mistakes, I must inform the Reader of the truth, and show that she rashly
swears untruths. This then I told her, that I had an Angel They being
ministering spirits emplyed for the Saints good, may in ext^aordinary trials, be
sent of God to afford extraordinary supports.
of God that stood by me, assisted me, comforted me, and protected me, when
that dreadful apparition was before me, and that the Dragon was then overcome.

And I further told her, That the Angel or Spirit of one Everard appeared in
his own shape, clothes, band and cuffs, etc. which compared This makes no more
for me, nor against me, then hers; but I only show the truth.
with Mrs Grips Deposition, shows her mistake. This Everard I suspected to be a
Conjurer, and to be instrumental in the ^^ising of those apparitions, though I
was not so sure of it as to prosecute him, or to swear he caused them, for the
Devil may take up any ones shape by Gods permission, as it is generally thought
he did Samuels.

Further this Deponent says, That the Doctor likewise told her, I remember not
that I spoke about their Angels to this Deponent; but that such a thing might
be in an extraordinary trial, is not against Scripture; which clearly intimates
that there are Angels peculiar to persons, Act. 12. 15. It is his Angel.
that Mrs Pordage and Mrs Flavel had their Angels standing by them; and that he
overcame the Dragon, and that he said the children saw the spirits, and said,
look there father, being not afraid, after they had fasted and prayed; and that
the Dr further said, That the spirits did afterward come into their Chambers,
and drew the Curtains, and looked on them; but they would not take notice of
them. And that the spirits did come about three days after he had fasted and
prayed, and flashed open the Curtains, and looked upon them.

Note, For three weeks or a month there were very many, and very strange
apparitions; but the Curtains were never drawn but once, and that was by a
spirit in the shape of Everard. For some other particulars of this Deposition;
I do not remember whether I spoke them or not.

Depos. The Dr. being aked by Here that accuser took so much authority upon
himself, as to examine me on these questions.
Mr Fowler what he says concerning the apparition of the Dragon? The Dr. does
cenfess before the Commissioners, That This I speak in reference to that three
weeks space, in which I and my Family were so much exercised by the permission
of God, who turned it much for our good and spiritual advantage.
he has seen very many dreadful apparitions of Devils at his house; and that
some of his Family did see them; and that a Dragon did come into his house with
a long tail, and great teeth; but that he said his Angel did protect him, he
denies. But he further says, That about four years since he had apparitions
both of good and bad Angels, for three weeks together at his own house; but
from that time to this, they have ceased in that manner.

Being further asked by Mr Fowler, the Dr does deny that ever any Angel
appeared in his clothes, bands, and cuffs, and further says, That his Angel
never did appear to him in any visible shape.

And being asked, Whether he ever saw Mrs Pordages and Mrs Flavels Angels
standing by them? He answers, He never saw them standing by them; but it does
not therefore follow that they might not stand by them; and though he can, yet
he will not answer to any questions, but such as concern himself immediately.

And being further asked by Mr Fowler, Whether he did not relate to Mrs Grip,
that Mrs Flavel and Mrs Pordage had their Angels standing by them? He
answers, He can neither affirm nor deny it, for he does not remember whether
he did or no.

And being further asked by Mr Fowler, Whether he did not relate to the said
Mrs Grip, That his children saw the spirits come into his house, and cried,
Look there Father; and that the spirits did often come into his chamber and
drew the curtains when they were in bed.

To the first part of the question he answers, He cannot affirm or deny it;
for in truth he does not remember whether he did or no. To the second part of
the question he says, For whereas the Deposition says, they came often into the
Chambers, and drew the Curtains, it is not true, for it was but once, and that
by a spirit in the shape of Everard; and Mrs Grip had been proved perjured, had
it not been unjustly hindered by the Commissioners wills.
he does deny it positively, and he will prove the Deposition to be perjury.

And the Dr being further asked, Whether or no he knows that the children did
see the spirits come up and down the house or no, and whether they thereupon
did say, Look there father.

To the first part of this question he says, He cannot know what the eyes of
children do see, and otherwise he will not answer. And to the other part of the
question, he answers, He cannot remember whether the children did say so or no;
and therefore will neither affirm nor deny it.

2. Witness. Susanna Grip, daughter of the foresaid John Grip, aged 21 years,
sworn and examined, deposes,

That about three or four years since, in her mothers Kitchen she heard Dr
Pordage say, That a Dragon came into his Chamber, and that he expostulated and
contended with it, and that he said the Dragon did spit fire at him, and that
his Angel did appear to him in the shape of a This was spoken of Everard, and
not of my self.
man, with his band This was but once, as I said before.
and his clothes, and band-strings, and did support him while he contended with
the Dragon. And the Deponent further says, That she heard the Dr say, that the
spirits did come into his Chamber, and drew Thorough fasting and prayer, God
gave us faith suitable to our great exercises.
the Curtains, and looked upon him, and that the Dr likewise said, they were
affrighted at it at first; but afterward, when they were used to it, they were
not.

She says she heard several other things to this purpose, which she cannot now
remember to depose.

And being I was moved in pity to ask the maid this question, because I was
unwilling to let her lie under the sin of perjury, this being the first oath
she ever took; and her adding, To her best remembrance, frees her from the
positive swearing of an untruth.
asked by the Doctor, Whether the Doctor said that the Angel that appeared with
the band and band-strings, was the Doctors own Angel, or the Angel of some
other? She says, to her best remembrance, he said it was his own Angel.

3. Witness. Elizabeth Benwell, servant to Mr Ellis of Shinfield, and formerly
servant to the Doctor, sworn and examined, deposes,

That she saw something like a starr in the red Chamber in the Doctors house,
by the beds leg, it was light, and somewhat like a starr; but the Deponent
cannot say it was a starr; yet it was in the night, and no other light in the
room, to the best of her remembrance.

She further says, That she has heard Music at several times at the Doctors
house, when she did not know that any Instruments or Musicians were in the said
house. She says she has heard it in the Kitchen, and in her Mistrisses
Closet, did apprehend the same to be near her; but saw none playing.

This was after the great apparitions amongst us, and occasioned by them; but
you may here see the malice of my enemies, to ask such questions to the maid,
to defame me; who from Mrs Flavels lying in the same Chamber with me and my
wife, after these affrighting appariti ons, have reported abusive lies of me.
But the time will come when God will justify our purity and innocence, when
their lusts and carnality will be condemned.
She further says, That Mrs Flavel did usually lie in the Doctors Bedchamber,
during the time the Deponent was servant there, which was about a year and a
quarter.

But immediately to this the Maid added; But I never lived in such a Family for
piety and holiness, as that was, and I believe never shall again, except I
return thither.

But this by the Clerks knavery was left out; although I stood by, and asked
him why he did not write down those words? To which he replied, If you will
have me, I must. I said, I will have it; yet he neglected it; and I believe by
the command of some of the Court, who were troubled at any thing that seemed to
make for me. But what unjustness this was, let the Reader judge.

But from these proceeding apparitions of Spirits in my Family, in which we were
merely passive, and by which we were excited the more to wait upon God in
prayer and fasting, my enemies have scandalized me for Conjuration and Sorcery,
reporting so confidently that I am a Conjurer, that many who are not acquainted
with my principles and conversation, believe it so in earnest. But these horrid
scandals I take up as my Cross, and see my self in them, conformable to Christ's
sufferings, who was reckoned amongst Conjurers and transgressers by the Jewish
Zelots.

But the Lord has given me peace in my Conscience, whilst my enemies have
railed against me in their Pulpits, as Mr Ford in his Sermon at the Assizes
held at Redding, Feb. 28. 1653. In which page 22 he says, That there is one of
the most eminent Church Livings in the County possessed by a blaspheamer, and
in whose house the devil is as visibly familiar, as any of the family, and
shall the horns of these Beasts never be pared off by the Civil Magistrate?

Here you see he endeavors to brand me for a Conjurer, and calls me
blasphemer, exciting the Magistrate to persecute me; and this was he who was
chosen by the Commissioners to make a speech in the Court before they gave
Sentence against me, who there by envious prevarication, showed himself a
second Tertullus, though no Orator.

But for the further satisfaction of the Reader in reference to the former
Deposition.
1. I Desire my Answer may be seriously weighted, which I gave to that Article
of Apparitions,

2. That what I have preached publicly against witchcraft and Conjuration, may
be well considered; which I offered to the Court, as Evidence to clear me from
the imputation of Sorcery, but they rejected it, by denying to examine, the
witnesses who were ready to depose this that follows.

We heard the Doctor in Bradfield Church about 1653 out of Psalm. Richard Higgs,
Mr Francis Pordage, Mrs Elizabeth Pordage, Robert Bolt, Mary Pocock, Mary
Allen, John H^ggs Test.
51. deliver himself thus: From the subtilty and craftiness of the Fireroot,
through the prying and searching of it does arise all Necromancy, Witchcraft,
Sorcery, and all manner of Conjuration, and all prying into such curious and
forbidden Arts, springs from the Fiery essence in the will of men and women,
that stirs them up to pry and to search after such hidden and secret
curiosities: this is the gate and the door through which all your witches,
sorcerers, conjurers do enter in at, Exodus 7. 11. Then Pharoach also called the
wisemen, and the Sorcerers, and the Magicians of Egypt who did in like manner
with their Enchantments, Dan. 2. 2. Then the King commanded to call the
Magicians, and the Astrologers, and the Sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to
show the king his dream; so they came and stood before the King.

Thus you see there have been such in all ages; you read also of Elymas the
Sorcerer, Act. 13. 6, 8. were there no such, God would never have given a Law,
that they should not be permitted to live in the practice of their Sorceries,
Witchcrafts, and Enchantments.

In the second place consider how often in many and sundry places of Scripture,
does God mock at the uncertainty of these Arts? because he can disappoint them,
Isa. 47. 12, 13. Stand now with thy Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth, thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy Councils, let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
monthly Prognosticaters, stand up and save thee from these things, that shall
come upon thee: Behold they shall be as stuble, etc.

Let me now entreat every one of you as you love your own souls, to take heed
of this door, the subtilty of the dark Magic; beware of meddling with
edge-tools, of prying and searching into the forbidden Arts, and for this cause
take these two or three Scriptures with you, Mal. 5. 3. I will be a swift
witness against all Sorcerers, Rev. 21. 8. Behold all Sorcerers are to have
their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstom, Rev. 22. 15. For
without are dogs and Sorcerers.

We further heard the Dr in the same place, about 1654. out of Mat. 4: To this
Richard Higgs, John Higgs, Mr Francis Pordage, Mr Samuel Pordage Mary Pocock,
Mary Allen, Test.
5. thus deliver himself, That one Pinnacle of the Devils Temple, was the
pinnacle of unlawful Arts and all forbidden Sciences: and here he showed at
large the vanity, weaknesses and insufficiency of all unlawful Arts and
Sciences, commonly known and called by us the black Arts, as all Witchcrafts,
Sorceries, Necromances, and all the knowledges of Conjuration which are
forbidden by God, by the Prophets, and Apostles in the Holy Scriptures: and
therefore forbidden by all Magistrates, and by the Laws of Kingdoms and
Nations, to be looked into and searched after: But the Dragon, the Devil, that
subtle serpent does labor to carry up the mind of as many as he can, to the
top of this Pinnacle of unlawful Arts, and to elevate up the mind to pry and
search into these curious and forbidden Arts of dark Magic: therefore consider
how the Scriptures do condemn the lusting and prying mind, for searching into
these forbidden knowledges, Act. 19. 19. Many also of them which used curious
Arts, brought their books together, and burned them before all men, and they
counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver, for
mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed.

This I intended to have given in to the Court, by the Oath of those witnesses
who heard it, as a Testimony, discovering my cordial judgment touching
Necromancy and Witchcraft, but they unjustly refused such kind of Evidence,
and would not examine the witnesses.

Thirdly, I do judge that God does call me forth to make a free and open
discovery of those wonderful Apparitions, Visions, and unusual things, which
somewhat above four years since, were seen, and permitted by the Lord to be in
my family, and if all that read this, can but receive and judge of it by that
rule and principle from which I write it, They will be so far from judging me,
as that they cannot but bless God for his favor and mercy to me, and the more
admire his wonderful works, and the greatness of his power.

What I intend here to declare, I shall dispatch in these three particulars.
1. IN relating what I have acknowledged to many persons, I have Discoursed
with. 2. Many considerable things which I have never discovered, but to some
friends. 3. The good effect of this, upon my self, and others of my family.

Part. 1. I confess that in August 1649. there appeared in my Bedchamber about
the middle of the night, a spirit in the shape of Everard, with his wearing
apparel, Band, Cuffs, Hat, etc. who after the sudden drawing of the
Bed-Curtains, seemed to walk once through the Chamber very easily, and so
disappeared.

2. That very night there was another appearance of one in the form of a Giant,
with a great sword in his hand, without a scabbard, which he seemed to flourish
against me, having the figurative similitude of a great Tree lying by him.

After this had continued for the space of half an hour, it vanished; And there
succeeded a third appearance, which was very terrible; being in the shape of a
great Dragon, which seemed to take up most part of a large room, appearing with
great teeth, and open jaws, whence he often ejected fire against me, which came
with such a Magical influence, that it almost struck the breath out of my body,
making me fall to the ground. Now you must know that these three were dreadful
Apparitions, and very terrible to the sensitive Nature, and might have caused a
great distemper in it, had I not been supported in an extraordinary way, by the
Ministration of the Holy Angels, against the evil effects of those
extraordinary, unusual, Apparitions; The last of which continued till the day
began to dawn, and then disappeared.

Par. 2. In the 2d. place I shall proceed to declare those extraordinary
things, which few have been yet made acquainted with, which yet were then seen
and experimented amongst us.

I say then there were two invisible internal Principles opened and discovered
to us, which may be called Mundi Ideales, being two spirial (...). By whom also
he made the worlds, Heb. 1. 2. and Heb. 11. 3. By faith we understand that the
worlds were made by the word of God.
worlds, extending and penetrating throughout this whole visible Creation, in
which many particular beings were discerned, suitable to the nature of these
worlds. Now these two Principles or worlds, seemed very much different one from
another, as having contrary qualities and operations, by which they work upon
this visible Creation, which we see distinguished and differenced into variety
of Creatures, some poysonful and noxious, others wholesome and harmless,
according to the difference and contrariety of things in the internal worlds,
Quicquid est in externo est etiam in interno.
upon which the External does in some measure depend, as standing in them or
rather proceeding from them: Now these could not have been seen had not that
inward spiritual Eye which has been locked up and shut by the fall, been
opened in an extraordinary way in us.

Besides, we had our other internal spiritual faculties, Heb. 5. 14. Who by
reason of use have their senses, ((...)) exercised, eo discern both good and
evil.
of spiritual sensation, opened to discern their various objects within these
worlds, which objects by reason of their qualities, may be differenced, into
good and evil.

But I shall here first present the Objects.
OF that internal world which may be called Mundus tenebrosus, or the dark
world, which objects, by our correspondent inward faculties, or senses, were
then discerned and made known to us.

1. Then as to the objects of the It Is a great mistake to think that all
visions are objects of the external eye.
internal sight, when this principle or world was opened, we beheld innumerable
multitudes of evil spirits or Angels, presenting themselves in appearing
distinctions of order and dignity, as Which is answerable to Scripture. Ephesians. 6.
12. Jude v. 8.
powers, principalities, dignities; my meaning is there seemed to be
inferiority and superiority, Governors and governed, The Princes of this dark
(...). The Rulers of the darkness of this world. Ephesians. 6. 1^.
world, and their subjects, which presented themselves as passing before our
eyes in state and pomp; all the mighty ones appearing to be drawn in dark ayery
clouds, Chariots with six or at least four beasts, to every one, besides every
figured similitude of a Coach, was attended with many inferior spirits, as
servants to the Princes. But concerning the shapes and figures of the spirits,
you must know, they were very monstrous, terrible, and affrighting to the
outward man, Those that drew the clowdy Coaches, appearing in the shapes of
Lions, Dragons, Elephants, Tigers, Bears, and such like terrible beasts;
besides the Princes and those that attended them, though all in the shapes of
men, yet represented themselves monstrously misshapen, as with ears like those
of Cats, cloven feet, ugly legs and bodies, eyes fiery, sharp, and piercing. Now
besides these appearances within, the sperits made some wonderful impressions
upon visible bodies without: as figures of men and beasts upon the
glasswindows, and the Cealings of the house, some of which yet remain: But what
was most remarkable, was the whole visible world represented by the spirits,
upon the Bricks of a Chimney, in the form of two half-Globes, as in the Maps:
after which upon other Bricks of the same same Chimney, was figured a Coach and
four horses, with persons in it, and a footman attending, all seeming to be in
motion, with many other such images which were wonderful exactly done; Now
fearing lest there might be any danger in these Images, through unknown
Conjuration and false Magic, we endeavored to wash them out with wet clothes,
but could not, finding them engraven in the substance of the Bricks, which
indeed might have continued till this day, had not our fear and suspicion of
witchcraft, and some evil design of the Devil against us in it, caused us to
deface and obliterate them with hammers. Now what the devils end in the former
Apparitions, and these figurative representations was, The Lord knows, but it
was certainly evil: even as it was against Christ, when he showed him (in
vision) the kingdoms and glory of the world, to make him fall down and worship
him, but Gods end in permitting it, was very good, even to bring us nearer to
himself in a stronger dependence upon his eternal power, and to make us more
watchful against the subtilty and power of Satan, as you will see afterward
when I come to speak of the effects of these things in reference to our
spirits. But to thut up this relation of the objects we saw in this dark world,
I must add this, That were but the eyes of men opened to see the kingdom of the
Dragon in this world, with the multitudes of evil Angels which are everywhere
tempting and ensnaring men, they would be amazed, and not dare to be by
themselves, without good Consciences, and a great assurance of the love and
favor of God, in protecting them, by the Ministration of the Holy Angels.

2. As to the objects of the inward and outward smell, I must let you know,
that within the three vveeks space in which these wonders appeared, at
several times the evil Angels or spirits did raise up such noisome poisonous
smells, that both the inward and outvvard part, of those that were exercised
with them, became much disturbed, and offended, for thorovv the sympathy
betwixt the body and the soul. The sulphurious hellish smells, much exercised
both, by magical tincturation.

3. In reference to the objects of taste, you must know, that sometimes both
in the day and night we were exercised with the loathsome hellish tastes of
sulphur, brimstone, foot and salt mingled together, which were so loathsome to
our Natures, as that they were ready to cause great distempers, and
nauseousness in our bodies; but the invisible power of Jehovah, supported us
beyond our own strength.

4. In relation to our inward and outward These things may be strange to those
who do not know that the soul has fivefaculties of spiritual sensation, which
are natural and proper to its essence.
touch we were much exerciced both in body and soul, as to our souls we
sometimes felt such strange magical wounds and piercings by the fiery darts of
the devil, that none can express, but those that have been exercised in some
measure as Job was, who felt the poison of those invenomed Arrows which came
upon him, by the permission of the Almighty; which like the Scorpions in the
Revelations, sting and pierce those they touch, as to our bodies, we felt
material impressions, from the powers of darkness, very noxious, in themselves,
to our natural spirits and life, but cheerfully born, by invisible support, and
quiet submission to the Will of God.

I shall not speak of the internal faculty of hearing, till I come to the
objects belonging to the other internal world.
But to Conclude, by these wonderful and strange exercises we could not but
have strong apprehensions, and lively resemblances of the torments and miseries
of Hell, where sulphur, fire, brimstone, poisonous smells, darkness, monstrous
horrid shapes, and sights, are the entertainment of the imprisoned spirits.

But now I come to the other internal world, which we may term Mundus
Luminosus, or the light world, which with its various objects, was then
likewise opened to the inward Senses.
1. THen I shall here set forth the objects of the inward eye, which were then
seen by us. There appeared then to our inward sight multitudes almost
innumerable, of pure Angelical spirits, in figurative bodies, which were clear
as the morning star, and transparent as Crystal, these were Mahanaim, or the
Lords host, appearing all in Genesis 32. 1, 2.
manly forms, full of Beauty and Majesty, sparkling like Diamonds, and sending
forth a tincture like the swift rays, and hot beams of the Sun, which we
powerfully felt to the refreshing of our souls, and enlivening of our bodies.
Now in the beholding the multiplicity, variety, and beauty of these spirits,
with the various wonders and objects of this world, clothed in the purest
tincture of Light and The Angels in Scripture appeared often in the variety of
the purest colors, Dan. 10. 6.
color, we could not but bless the God of heaven, who by the eyes of wisdom,
and hand of power, brought forth such glorious Creatures, and now showed them
in their several beauties to us in a time of trial and temptation.

2 In relation to our inward sense of hearing, There were many musical sounds
and voices, like those which John heard upon Mount Sion, then heard by us, the
sweetness, harmony, and pleasantness, of which cannot be expressed, nor that
spiritual joy and delight which by them was infused into our souls, uttered by
the tongue, being ready to ravish our spirits into the high praises of eternal
Jehovah.

3. In relation to the faculty of smelling, the tongue can hardly express those
Odours of Paradise, and heavenly perfumes, which then were smelt, piercing into
the very spirit with a cherishing tincture, besides that quickening virtue which
by them was communicated and insinuated into the spirits of our outward bodies,
which like a Cordial had been able to have renewed the strength of our
languishing nature.

4. Our sense or faculty of tasting, was very pleasantly entertained, with
those invisible dews which were sweeter then honey or the honeycomb; and
therefore deserve to be called the Dews of Heaven, with which instead of food,
we were many times wonderfully refreshed.

5. In relation to the sense of spiritual contaction, that was also delighted
with its heavenly objects, for none can utter that pleasing impression which
the burning tincture of this Light World afforded us, coming like a hot cordial
into the center of our spirits, being sensibly felt in the inward parts, so as
to cause much joy and heavenly pleasure, which penetrated through our souls,
giving us occasion to bless, praise and magnify the Lord.

Thus for the space of three weeks or a month were we exercised inwardly and
outwardly through that great conflict which was betwixt those two worlds and
their inhabitants; the dark world sometimes afflicting us with dreadful shapes,
abominable smells, loathsome tastes, with other operations of the evil Angels,
The light world at other times opening, and relieving us with odoriferous
perfumes, most sweet dews, glorious visions and Angelical harmony, which the
Lord favored us with, to show his extraordinary love in thus succouring us in
extraordinary exercises and trials.

Thus much for those two internal worlds, spread throughout the visible
world, in which the evil and good Angels are more immediately, then in this
visible air, to which they cannot be commensurate, by reason of their
spiritual natures, each of them abiding in their distinct principle, the one
sort being in joy, the other being in torment, the one in light, the other in
darkness; according to the Scripture.

But besides these two worlds, we had an opening of the eternal world,
called in Scripture the (...), Heb 2. 5.
world to come, from the futurity of its full and clear manifestation, and a
precursory entrance (...). Heb. 10. 19.
into the most holy place, by a divine transportation into the glory of the
Majesty, agreeable to that of John 17. 24. Father I will that they also whom
thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which
thou have given me, etc. Here were seen heard and selt the unutterable
mysteries of that kingdom, which are not yet to be 2 Cor. 12. 4. Where its said
that in Paradise Paul heard (...). Things or words, not to be worded or
uttered, which it is not lawful for a man to speak.
divulged, in regard of the pride, ignorance, prejudice, and envy of many in
the world, being reserved for those humble, gracious spirits, which are waiting
in silence for the second coming of the Son of Man.

Part. 3. But now it is time to come to the third particular, which was the
effects and impressions, left upon our spirits, by these wonderful exercises,
and manifestations.

After this we began more clearly to see that straight and narrow way which
leads to Life Eternal, which we call the Virgin life, or the life of purity,
and righteousness in its perfection, being the life of fixed love. In any thing
short of which. The perfection of the Virgin life cannot consist.

So that merely to abstain from the concupiscible lustings of Venus, under the
spirit of this great world, is but the life of outward Chastity, and but a
particular branch of the other.

For the Virgin life is not attained till the Will of the soul is brought
through death to be so passive as to will, desire and act nothing but what the
Essential essence of love wills, moves, and acts through it; for till then the
soul cannot be a pure Virgin, nor live without all desire, lust, and
imagination, which must all cease, before the pure life of God can come to be
all in all.

2. This life of Virginity was placed fore-right as to the inward eye of the
mind, being that mark of persecution, at which we were to aim in our pressing
toward the Resurrection of the dead. To this, Wisdom that eternal virgin (Prove.
8. 20. 23.) as a leading star, invited us, calling to follow her in the way of
Circumcision, Resignation, and the Cross, in the way of total self-denial and
forsaking of all for her sake in the way of annihilation and conformity to
Christ's death, By which we saw undoubtedly, we should come to Christ's
Resurrection, Ascension, Glorification, and Fixation in the love of the Holy
Ghost; the third and last dispensation. Here we clearly saw the danger of
looking back to the external world, and of putting out our imaginations into
the inward world or the kingdom of the Dragon, or of resting in the openings
and delights of the inward light world. For by turning back into the delights
of the senses, we saw the soul would become beastial, by turning to the left
hand, and imagining into the kingdom of the Dragon, in awakening the fire of
wrath and subtilty: divelish and dangerously wicked; by turning to the right
hand, in imagining into, and taking too much complacency in the visions,
illuminations, tinctures, and Enthusiasms, of the light world, we saw the soul
might become elevated into self-conceit, and tinctured with pride, and be in
danger of neglecting that death of the Cross, which is the only safe path,
into eternal rest, and Fixation.

Here then we were showed, that the way which lead up to the virginessence The
new Jerusalem, was strait and narrow; as upon the breadth of an hair; so that
we were to turn no way, either on the right or left hand, but stand without
lust, with our eyes fixed upon the Being of love, pressing forward after
fixation in the external house of God, there to become immovable pillars, no
more to go out, but there always to bear the name of God, and the name of the
City of God, which is the new Jerusalem.

And now for the space of this four years, ever since the time of these great
manifestations, we, by the Grace of God, have enjoyed the exercise of our
spiritual senses, which never since have been shut, neither ever will be,
except through voluntary transgression and disobedience, we apostatise and run
back into the earthly nature, or turn aside to center in something, short of
the pure life of virginity, which calls us from the external, through the
internal, into the Eternal world, which is that kingdom prepared for us from
the beginning of the world.

3. But thirdly after the extraordinary time of Grace and Mercy to us we
enjoyed not only a clear leading convicting light upon our understandings, but
likewise received from the Lord a stamp and strong impression of power moving
our Wills to follow this light through the death of all things, to come up into
the perfect life and image of God, that so we might be transformed into that
righteous nature which we so clearly behold through divine Light: hence we came
to live in a greater abstraction from our sensitive nature, in a more constant
watchful practice of the Cross, in reference to all external and internal
objects, which might by entertaining our Affections, hinder our progress to
God. Hence also we came to live a more devoted, strict, dedicated life,
sequestring our selves from the world and wordly things giving our selves
almost continually, to prayer, fasting, and waiting upon God, in dying daily to
all self-ownments, relations, and proprieties, in which most are entangled, to
the great prejudice of their spirits; and in this way we have ever since
continued, endeavoring to be wholy conformable to the death of Christ, in
renouncing our own lives, and proper wills, as opposite to the life and will
of God, experimenting those profound mysteries of the Cross of Christ, which
are hidden to most in the world. But what joy, peace, life, power, divine
pleasure, and heavenly Communion, the Lord has blessed us with in this our
dying resigning progress, I shall vvrap up in silence, together with those
blessed secrets of the kingdom; which in these fevv last years past, we have
been acquainted with to the comfort of our spirits, in this sad time when we
are judged and condemned of the world, in the participation of Christ's
sufferings.

Now ye Ministers and Commissioners my prosecutors, Is this to be vile? Then
let me be more vile. Is this to be contemptible? Even to be resigned and
mortified in the Affections and Passions of the soul, to give up ones self to a
retired devoted life to God in prayer and continual watchfulness. I say, Is
this to be contemptible. Then let me be more contemptible.

Now, you have seen that I have declared those wonderful visions, and
exercises, which have caused so many scandalous reports, together with the
effects of them on our spirits, and I must tell you had I a thousand names,
lives, liberties, and such livings as Bradfield is; I should rather sacrifice
them all, upon the Altar of obedience, then being called to it, deny those
great and wonderful things, before declared, which the Lord permitted, and
ordered for his glory, and our good.

But some may say, why did not I before this, declare this great manifestation
to the world? I Answer, 1. The Will of God was hid from me whether I was
to manifest it publicly to the world yea or no; not knovving but that he
might afford it as a peculiar mercy to our family, for our private vvalkings
before him. 2. That which weighed much with me was this. I knevv this
manifestation was but the light and vision, and not the life it self, and that
there was light enough in the world already, hence I desired to keep it
private, and not to publish it, that I might not have a name without the thing,
nor declare the light and manifestation, without possessing the life it self,
and had not this providential occasion drawn me forth to bear testimony to the
truth, the world had not known so much of these secrets till the name and the
thing, the light and the life, the manifestation and possession had met in
union together. 4. We have seen sad and lamentable examples, of many tall
Cedars, who after great manifestations and high discoveries of light, have
fallen, and as it were come to nothing. And many stars that for a time shined
bright in the Firmament of visions, revelations, and powerful declarations, we
have seen swept down by the tail of the Dragon, and the subtle insinuations of
the Beast; so that they are now become like other men, living in the earth, and
the corruptions of it; now certainly this has come to pass for want of
perseverance in the crucifying their natures in conformity to Christ's death;
and by imagining themselves through Satan's subtilty, to be what they saw,
before the change and death of their evil natures, whence pride and security
arose, and that fall come, in which many now lie: who are as Beacons upon a
hill, and torn ships upon a rock, to admonish us of these dangerous passages,
in which they themselves were lost: now from these Considerations, I intended
not to have held forth to the world as yet the things I have here declared, but
with my family, to have walked close with God, in pressing after that life,
power, and holy nature; which in the coming forth of it, might have convinced
all gainsayers, that the light and life were in Union together; but as I
before said, this occasion has given me some call, to open many of the
wonders, then beheld before that time; in which nevertheless, the Lord may have
some blessed end, which I may not yet see.

And now ye Ministers of Berks, my persecutors, tell me, what wrong or injury I
have done you; have I lusted to preach in any of your Pulpits? Have I privately
gone from parish to parish, or from house to house to get followers, or make
proselites of your hearers? Have I publicly or privately railed against you or
your Doctrines? Have I not lived privately in my own place, only holding forth
that strict, dying, resigning life, as the way to life eternal. Why then am I
persecuted with so much fury, and violence, as though I were not worthy to live
amongst you. The Lord judge betwixt you and me, and give you to consider and
repent of what you have done; in procuring and subscribing the unjust sentence
of ejectment, by which as much as in you lies, you have taken away that with
which we have clothed and fed our selves and many others, who have been in
want, and so exposed me and mine to outward cares, and troubles, which are very
disagreeable to that life of silence, abstraction, and of continual waiting
upon God. In which we live, and are called to live. And what is this but like
the task masters of Egypt, to force the children of the Covenant, to make Brick
without straw? but the Lord is coming to judge himself, who will make all these
things work for my good, which others have designed for my hurt.

And truly this is all that the Lord Protector and his Council, with the
Nation, are beholding to you for, even for hastening and inviting the pouring
forth the vials of wrath upon the Land, by the persecutions in this time, when
some or other are continually sent forth to prophecy up and down the streets,
denouncing war, plagues, desolations, famines, and all sorts of judgments, and
confusions in Church and State; which will certainly come to pass, except
prevented by a speedy and general repentance in turning to the Lord. But these
days may be shortened by the wonderful appearing of Christ in the power of his
spirit, to convince and convert sinners to himself, by the preaching of the
everlasting Gospel spoken of Rev. 14. 6. And really the eyes of many are opened
by the Lord to see, that the birth of the eternal love and power of the Holy
Ghost is near at hand, and that the womb of the eternal love of God is in
travel to bring forth Christ again in the acting power of his Godhead, which
will be that wonder of wonders, prophesied of the Prophets and Apostles, by
which only the days of tribulation, anguish, and distress, can be shortened,
and the utmost extremity of the vials of wrath and desolation prevented, when
once they begin to be poured forth upon the earth. And they who are now waiting
and groaning in their spirits, and sending up the incense of continual prayers
and intercessions, for the breaking forth of this power, to heal and bind up
all the wounds and breaches amongst Christians, to take away the Curse from the
earth, and restore the pure love and unity to the Church, I say, they that
travel and wait day and night for this great blessing are those whom you
contemn, persecute, and reject, as enemies to the kingdom and interests. But
take heed lest ye offend one of these little ones, and so bring a curse and
judgments upon your selves, and beware of persecuting in the way you are now
in, lest in the day of your distress, the Lord reject you, and give you up to
those spoilers, who will spare neither root nor branch.

So much I thought good to add to those Depositions, concerning the Apparitions
of spirits, for the satisfaction of the spiritual Reader, and information of
many who through reports have imbibed much prejudice against that life and
truth, which I own and live to.

Artic. 14. That Mrs Margaret Pendar acquainted with this Doctrine of spirits,
and pretending to be converted by Visions of Angels, does What a weak ground is
this for to accuse me of Necromancy.
think she was bewitched by them of Bradfield; etc,

Depos. Mr Christopher Fowler sworn to this Article, and examined, says that
Mrs Pendar being asked by him This is a mere heresay, and no legal Testimony,
and moreover deposed by the Accuser himself, which is against Law.
did acknowledge on Thursday last at London: that at Mr Blagraves house at
Southcot, she heard a great noise of drums and trumpets, which Dr Pordage (who
was then sent for to her) told her was the alarm to the spiritual war. And
that one night she had the Vision of young Mr Daniel Blagrave, come to her bed
side, and she took him by the hand, which hand felt cold, which Dr Pordage
expounded to her thus, That the coldness of his hand signified that he began to
be cold to vanity, and that she asked the Dr what the visions meant, and he
replied to her, we do not use to reveal one another visions.

The Deposition taken on my behalf was this that follows:
MRs Elizabeth Blagrave, wife of Mr Daniel Blagrave sworn and examined, This
Deponent says she This Deposisition is here placed in opposition to Mr
Fowlers; and though of the same nature, yet somewhat better, because this
Deponent was not a party as Mr Fowler was.
never heard Mrs Pendar say that she was bewitched by them of Bradfield, but
the said Mrs Pendar told the Deponent that her Visions were from God, and that
the said Mrs Pendar told the Deponent she i. e. Before her Visions.
never spoke with the Dr in her life.

This Deponent further says, That Mrs Pyndar told her she had been at Mr
Fowlers house, and that Mr Fowler examined her touching her Mrs Blagrave was
the only witness examined in the last charge of Articles; for it was the will
of the Judges to admit no more.
visions; and the Deponent asked her what she said? To which she replied, she
was sure she had said nothing to him that could hurt the Doctor. Hereupon the
deponent asked her if she told Mr Fowler that the Dr did send these visions? To
which she answered, she could not say the Dr sent them for a world.

This Deponent further says, That Mr Pyndar told the Deponent, That his wife
said, when she came to London, she would not say what she had said to Mr
Fowler, if it were to do again; for she perceived it was a snare or a trap.

This Deponent further says, she was by, when the question concerning the
coldness of young Mr Blagraves hand was put; and the Deponent asked it her self
to one in the room? And the answer was, That the coldness of his hand, as far
as they knew, signified his dying to vanity, which was delivered in a jesting
manner; which answer was not delivered by the Dr. And the deponent says, the
Dr never gave such an answer in his life, as she knows.

Here follow the Depositions of John Grip of Redding, Ioyner, All this man
deposes, is but an hearsay, and so of no force at all yet admitted* as
evidence, and pertinent, when more considerable testimonies on my behalf were
rejected, as impertinent.
who being sworn and examined, deposes.
That he was at Mr Blagraves when Mrs Pyndar saw the visions that are mentioned
in her confession, and that she said she saw a man in white (as she thought)
with the Lambs book, and that the said man told her, her name was written in
the Book, and that she heard a Watch going; and that there appeared another in
the likeness of a black man with a knife, which he offered unto her.

And this deponent further says, That at another time at the deponents house,
the said Mrs Pyndar did inform the deponent that Dr Pordage had said he had
power to bestow the gifts and graces of the Spirit on whom he pleased. The
Commissioners were ready to admit any thing, though ever so illegal, to defame
me, and raise prejudice against me.


Note, That this disagreeth from Mrs Pyndars confession, under the head of the
14 Article, where she says that she heard it reported at Southcot, that
erelong the Dr should have power -- to bestow saving graces on whom he pleased.

And this deponent further says, that another time he was at Mr Blagraves
house, when the said Mr Blagrave was ill and kept his Chamber, and Mr Blagrave
and the deponent fell into discourse concerning Dr Pordarge, Though the matter
of this Deposition be weighty, yet the proof is but an hearsay, and the things
themselves either false, or much mispresented, as you will see presently.
in presence of Mrs Blagrave, that in the said discourse Mr Blagrave said to
his wife, That the Dr held strange opinions, such as were not agreeable to the
word of God; for he did maintain that Jesus Christ was not God, and that he was
a Type, and but a Type; man, and not God; a shadow, and not the substance. And
Mr Blagrave did labor very much to take off his wifes affections from the Dr
and and his ways; but could not prevail. This was about three quarters of a
year since, to the deponents best remembrance.

In reference to these two last particulars touching Mr Blagrave and his wife,
consider this following Deposition and Evidence.
Mrs Blagrave, sworn and examined, deposes,

THat she never knew any thing of the Drs Judgment, neither did he ever bring
the deponent into any Judgment; and that she had never any discourse with the
Dr till she did first begin with him; and that if ever he had confirmed her in
any thing, it was in nothing disagreeable to the word of God.

As to that part of the former deposition, which concerns Mr Blagravs relation
of what opinions I held, I had a Summons for his personal appearance to witness
the truth in that particular; but he being detained in London by earnest
business, could not appear according to the Summons, and therefore wrote this
following Letter to the Commissioners, which was exactly copied out by a friend
of mine, who had the favor from Mr Blagrave to read it.

Gentlemen,
Understanding by this Bearer, Mr Samuel Pordage, That one John Grip of
Redding, upon his examination against Dr Pordage, did affirm upon Oath, That
having discourse with me lately touching the Drs opinions, I should say that he
denied that Christ was God, and that he held him to be a man, and not God; a
Type, and but a Type; a shadow, and not the substance: The things were highly
blasphemous, if true. But this I assure you, If ever any such language fell
from me (which truly I do not remember) it was spoken as relating to that
Charge he lay under at that time, raised by some who seem to know men's meanings
and opinions better then I do. In short, this I do affirm, and shall readily
attest upon Oath, when required, That the Dr has several times most solemnly
avowed the contrary, and to me by Scripture under his own hand, evinced it. For
the truth is, I have with much boldness charged the Dr with things of that
nature having received them upon report; but upon debate he has given me such
clear satisfaction, both touching the Divinity of Christ, and other matters of
faith, of the highest concernment, that I have stood silent, having nothing to
object against him; I did therefore apprehend it a duty incumbent upon me, thus
to write; for as I will never be instrumental to clear him in what he is
guilty, so not to condemn him wherein I believe he is innnocent.

Thus desiring the just and all-knowing God to direct you in this great work, I
remain,

Gentlemen, Your friend and servant, Dan. Blagrave.
28 November. 1654: Westminster.

I desired that this Letter might have been read in the open Court, but they
denied it, though I alleged that it was evidence on my behalf: But whether
this was not more considerable, and so more fit openly to be read, then Mr
Grips stories and hear says to be openly received as evidence, let the Reader
judge.

But Mr Grip further on Oath deposes,
That at other times he has often had conference with Mr. Blagrave; and at one
time above the rest, walking over the fields toward Southcot, Another story
unfit to have been received by a judicious impartial Court.
we fell into discourse concerning Dr Pordage; and the said Mr Blagrave did
then tell him, that the Dr did go about to persuade him to leave off all
employment, and to sell his Estate, and retire to his house, for his house was
the Ark, as Noah's Ark was to receive all those that must be saved. This was
some time the last Summer; and that Mr Blagrave did seem very much to slight
and scorn it, and asked the Deponent what he thought he should have got by it,
had the Dr prevailed? To which the Deponent replied, That he thought the Dr had
a grand design in it: For Mr Blagrave being taken notice of to be one of the
wisest men in the County; if the Dr had prevailed to draw him away, he might
likewise have drawn away most of the County, and then the Dr would have set
himself up like a Mahomet.

In opposition to this story, Mrs Blagrave sworn and examined, deposes, That
she had heard a muttering, that Mr Grip should say, that the Dr had persuaded
Mr Blagrave to leave all, and come and live with him,

Whereupon the Deponent asked Mr Blagrave about five or six weeks since,
concerning it; and the said Mr Blagrave answered to the Deponent, that he did
not remember that the Dr ever said any such thing.

This Deponent John Grip, further says, That Mr Daniel Blagrave They received
any thing, (though ever so impertinent or ridiculous) to disgrace me. You may
see in the Depositions and answer to this Article, how much this was mistaken,
and is here misrepresented. To Art. 15, 16, 17; 18, 19, 20, 21 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27. there are no Depositions.
the younger, told him, when the spirit came upon the Dr he could leap over
Pales of a great hight, about five foot and an halfhigh, as the Deponent could
conceive by his Relation, and that this was told him within five months last
past.

This Deponent further says, That Mr Charles Blagrave told him sometimes the
last Summer, that Dr Pordage should say that Christ was not perfect, and that
he quoted that place of Scripture, mentioning our Saviors passion, when he
cried out, My God, my God, etc. to prove the same.

Art, 28, 29. Concerning Mrs Mary Pococks Relation to Mrs Forster, of what was
acted in my house. And of Mrs Flavels being in a Trance, and seeing what was
the Philosophers stone.
The Depositions of Mrs Mary Pocock, taken at the Bear in Speenhamland November
30. before the Commissioners for the proof of the two former Articles.

Mrs Pocock sworn and examined, deposes,
The question being asked her, Whether the Deponent did not tell Mrs Forster
and Mrs Evelin, That the Dr had contended with the dark Power in his shirt two
or three hours? She answers, It is so long since, that she cannot remember
any thing positive she then said; but she says there was some great power then
amongst the Drs Family.

And being asked whether she did not say to the aforesaid parties, that when
the Dr contended with the dark power, there was such an expostulation between
them, as, Thou lie; and thou lie, etc. she answers, She cannot tell.

And being further asked, Whether upon this conquest of the dark Power by the
Doctor, she did not tell the aforesaid parties she should think the Doctor to
be a bright man? To this question she answers, If she did not say so, she
hopes she shall, when he has the victory.

And being asked whether she did not tell the aforesaid parties, the Drs Family
were strangely acted, some in their legs, thighs, and arms? To this she
answers, she cannot tell.

And being further asked, Whether she did not tell the said parties, That Mrs
Flavel did see in a trance the Philosophers stone? She says she cannot tell.

And being further asked, Whether the Philosophers stone, seen by Mrs Flavel in
a trance, were not the Divinity in the Humanity? She answers, she knows no
such thing.

Art. 30.
This consists of seven particulars, being the first that relates to Scandal in
my Conversation.

Depos. Roger Laughton of Heston in the County of Middlesex, Locksmith, sworn
and examined, deposes,

That about nine years since, or upwards, Dr Pordage brought to the You may see
in my answer to this Article, the reasons of her private retirement, being by
the advice of Council, as also of her keeping private her second marriage, and
that I did no more in this, then what a faithful friend might in justice and
honesty do.
Deponents house, Mrs Flavel behind him, under the name of Mrs Fruin, and that
both the Dr and the said Mrs Flavel did ask for entertainment for her, and that
they did ask what they should give for her board and her son Stevens; and that
they did bargain for eight shillings a week, and then he carried her away, and
she came not till after Christmas; but he says, how she then came, whether in
a Cart with her Trunk and Clothes, or otherwise, he knows not; but the Doctor
did not then come with her: and after she had been there awhile, the Deponents
wife conceived she was with child; which she This crosses his own confession
at another time.
denied, saying, it was a Tympany, and that she remained there till betwixt
Easter and Whitsontide, where and when she was brought to bed of a daughter,
and she did not desire any store of company to come to her labor, though the
Deponents wife did desire it; and after she had been a short time delivered,
the Dr came and baptized the child in the Deponents Chamber, and named it
Hannah; and after that, the Dr called the Deponent aside into his Orchard, and
prayed him to find out a private place, two or three miles from the Deponents
house, where the said Mrs Flavel might come now and then to see her child. The
Deponent said it would be inconvenient, because it was a time of Soldiers, and
the Corn was high, and thereupon the Deponent did not look out as he desired.
And he further says, when the Nurse did bring the child oft-times to see the
said Mrs Flavel, she would not permit her son Steven to call her sister,
saying, Steven, it is Nurses child. Afterward the said Mrs Flavel departed
from the Deponents house to Kensington, where she remained about a month, and
that the Deponent having occasion to go to London, called at Kensington by the
way, to speak with her but she was gone; whereupon the Deponent said her child
was not well: Then two Gentlewomen of the house told the Deponent, that They
that do know, and have known this Gentlewoman for many years past, are so
assured of her integrity, and watchfulness over her words and actions, that
they cannot but look upon this, and such other relations, as mistakes, or
wilful scandals.
she denied unto them that she had any other child but her son Steven. And the
Deponent further faith, That the Dr came to the Deponents house three or four
times, in term-time only, and that both the Dr and the said Mrs Flavel did
inform the Deponent that she was married to one Mr Fruin a Minister, but was
now a widow, as both of them said when they came to the Deponents house.

For the clearing of truth in reference to this Deposition, I shall here annex
the Confession of the same person, as subscribed by him, and owned before two
sufficient Witnesses, which is as follows.
THat about nine years ago Dr Pordage brought a Gentlewoman, by name, Mrs
Fruen, behind him from London, as he said, to one Roger Laughtons house, a
Smith in Heston Parish; that the said Mrs Fruen agreed with him her self for
her boarding.

How much does this particular thwart that in his former Deposition.
That she told his wife at her first coming, she knew not certainly whether she
were with child, or not, but thought she was.

That her first husbands name was Mr Flavel, and that she had had a second
husband, by name Mr Fruen, who also was then dead.

That the cause of her private living there was, in that her brother in Law
threatened he would have her body, if it were above ground, she being then in
Law with him.

That at the same time the Dr owned that he dwelt at Redding, and that he was
Minister of St Lawrence Church, and that he knew the Gentlewoman to be sober
and godly.

That she told him, for his security, he might enquire at the Bulwark by the
Tower of London, where he might know that she had there an Estate in houses.

That after she had been in the said Roger Laughtons house about four months,
she was brought to bed of a girl, which was christened by the said Doctor, and
named Hannah; that the time of her continuance with him, was about three
quarters of a year, in which time the said Dr visited her some three times, or
four at the most, and that in Term-time, when he went to London.

That by enquiry he came to know she was in great troubles at Law.

That the said Dr never agreed with him, nor paid him for her board, This
contradicts the former.
nor removed her, so far as he knows, to Kensington from his house.

R. L.

This was delivered into the Court after Laughton had finished his deposition;
but they would not suffer it to be enrolled among the depositions, it in some
particulars crossing Laughtons present testimony, and in others, tending to
clear the truth, in reference to the occasion of Mrs Flavels being there. But
the accuser asking him whether he would not stand to his present Deposition? He
said, yea. Whereupon the Clerk returning me the Paper again, wrote this at the
bottom of it, Mr Laughton acknowledges the two Letters, R. L. to be his
writing, but will stick to what he has now deposed.

There was not a word altered after he had subscribed the Paper, as two
Witnesses then present could attest by Oath. Now the particulars in which he
crosses himself, cannot be all true. And if a man will solemnly own and
subscribe an untruth, he may after swear an untruth: But the confession here
wrote last, is much to be regarded, being he owned and subscribed it before the
other, being then in a calm, sober posture: But the other he deposed after my
adversaries had been a whole day tampering with him at the Bear in Redding, and
possessing him with prejudice against me, which he openly showed in the Court,
by bitter expressions, and by those circumstances in the former Deposition,
which tend to blast the Gentlewomans good name and reputation.

But for further satisfaction, 1. I refer you to my Answer, in which I have
largely showed the reasons of her private retirement there, which may in justice
clear me from that undeserved aspersion my enemies have cast upon me.

2. Consider that this, as to me, is no legal proof of any crime, but a mere
circumstantial thing, brought to raise suspicions and prejudices against me,
being but of the nature of a Libel, and so unfit to have been received into a
judicious Court; for, whose name and reputation may not be blasted, if such
libellous illegal things, so long past, should be received into Courts of
Judicature, as accusations to condemn them?

3. Though that crime which my accuser would render me suspected for, by this
circumstantial Deposition, had been ever so clearly proved, yet the date of it
(being 9 or ten years since) had put it quite out of the cognizance of the
Commissioners; not only by the Act of general pardon, but also by another Law
made particularly by the Parliament, in reference to things of this nature,
which takes away all legal guilt from any persons that are not accused within a
year after the commission of any such crime, besides the Act to which the
Commissioners are confined, as their rule to judge of scandal, was made many
years since; therefore I say, they neither had, nor have any power to take a
business so long past, though otherwise ever so criminal, into their
cognizance.

But notwithstanding these things, the Commissioners sent a Summons for Mrs
Flavel, though they had no positive Charge against her; In the answer to the
third Article, you may see a reason why she has since been called by this name.
and after her appearance, would have forced an Oath upon her, and examined her
to questions concerning her self; but she, as in justice she might, refused to
answer them, alleging, that if any one durst lay any positive crime to her
charge, she would answer by the mouth of her Lawyer. Whereupon the
Commissioners threatened to send her immemediately to Prison, though they durst
positively accuse her of nothing.

Art. 33.
That he is a very ignorant and insufficient man for the work of the Ministry.

George Hastlet of Bradfield, Weaver, sworn and examined deposes, That he
heard Dr Pordage in a Sermon in the Church of Bradfield, about This Deponent I
objected against as a Drunkard, and so an insufficient Witness in things of
such high concernment; and as he confessed, he wrote not down the particulars
he here attests, and so might easily mix truths and mistakes together, as
really he does.
two years since, deliver, That it was a vain thing to trust in the blood of
him that died at Jerusalem 1600 years since, or more, unless it were acted in
me or in thee, for that was but in the Type; the substance must be fulfilled in
us; and that Christ must be crucified in us, we must have the Jews and Pilat to
put him to death in us, otherwise it was a vain thing to believe in him that
died at Jerusalem 1600 years since without us.

Note, As I own and embrace the Historical birth, life, death, and resurrection
of Christ without us, with the blessed effects of them, clearly held forth in
the Gospel, so do I also believe the mystical birth, death, and resurrection of
Christ in us, according to the Scriptures, Mat. 12. 50. Gal. 3. 1. Ephesians. 2. 5.

And to say that both these are necessary to be known, at least experimentally
enjoyed by all that will be saved, and that it is vain to depend upon the
first, without some sense and feeling of the last, as it is to depend upon a
notional justification, without a real sanctification; I say to averr this is
not against, nay altogether according to the holy Scriptures: For we know that
Christ Jesus is in us, except we be reprobates; and if we have not his Spirit,
we are none of his.

This Deponent further says, That the said Dr about a month since in
Bradfield Church, did deliver, That doubtless the Apostles by that This is but
the single testimony of an insufficient Witness, as I hinted before.
Text (Know you not that your bodies are the Temple of the holy Ghost) did not
mean these earthly bodies.

Note, I never denied our elemental bodies to be the mediate Temples of the
holy Ghost, but the immediate; for the immediate Temple of the Spirit, is the
Image of God in us, which is renewed in righteousness and true holiness, and
may truly be called the Body of righteousness and life, in opposition to that
body of sin and death, Romans 7. 24. which has many members, Colos. 3. 5. being
the evil corrupt inclinations and habits of the old man. This inward body,
which is the immediate Temple of the Spirit, is called, Rev. 16. 15. our
garments, which we are exhorted there to keep, lest we walk naked; and the
armor (...).
of light Romans 13. 12. which we are there commanded to put on, in opposition to
the works of darkness, which we are to cast off. This may also be called our
pure flesh, in opposition to that sinful flesh spoken of Romans 7. 18. And as in
the last there dwells no good thing, so in the first nothing but good, being it
is the immediate Tabernacle of the Here was no concurrent testimony, and so not
a valid proof according to the Ordinance.
holy Ghost, Joel 2. 28. I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh.

And this Deponent further says, The Dr did deliver, That by that Text (Genesis
18. 19. (I know him that he will command his children and his household after
him, etc.) was not meant the outward household of Abraham, but his inward
household, his will and affections, which he was Lord Paramount over; and he
quoted that Text in the last of Joshua (As for me and my house, we will serve
the Lord) which he likewise said was the inward house, and not the outward.
This was about two years since, as far as this Deponent can remember; and the
Deponent says he judged the same contrary to the mind of the holy Ghost.

Note, Had the Commissioners allowed me so much time as to have brought in what
evidence I could, against this man's deposition, I should have proved, that in
the tenor of my Ministry, I never denied or rejected the historical and
litteral sense of the Scriptures, for which there can be no just ground. As in
the forecited place, where I said, that by Abraham's household in the letter, was
meant his external household, viz. his wife, children, and servants; but in the
mystery, his internal, viz. his mind, will, affections, and inward motions.
But that I have usually joined the litteral and allegorical interpretation
together, even as Paul does, Gal. 4. 24, 25, 26. which sweetly united, cannot
but make an amiable harmony. And the Deponent mistakes in saying I excluded the
History; for I had before opened it in the plain Historical sense; and
afterward came to open it mystically, in making a spiritually moral use of
those Scriptures, in applying them to the work of God upon the inward man.

Let the Reader further know, That the Commissioners could not in justice take
this as evidence against me, because it was all brought the very day of my
sentence, I having no time allowed me to make my defense by the testimonies of
some other that constantly hear me, who might have certified this deponents
mistakes, in misrepresenting both my words and meaning, by showing I excluded
not the litteral meaning of the Texts produced. 2. In regard I objected against
him as a Drunkard, and so an insufficient Witness. 3. In that there was no
concurrent testimony. 4. In that he wrote not this down, and so could not
exactly deliver so much, word for word, as I spoke it, especially so long after
some part of it was delivered; and so by a little mistake, might prevaricate my
sense and meaning.

This Deponent further says, That Goodwife Knap told him about a month since,
that she being at the Drs house, Mrs Flavel was very angry This was part of
this Hastlets Deposition, though it concerned not the former head. What a sad
thing it is, that such a libellous hearsay as this, should be received as a
testimony against me.
with her, and threatened to have her whipped, for saying the child Hannah was Mrs
Flavels child; and that she then denied she had any other child, except Steven
her son; and that when the said Goodwife Knap denied she had said any such
thing, and began to be outrageous, both old and young Mrs Pordage desired her
to be pacified, saying, happily it might be another woman might speak so.

Note, The woman here mentioned, has under her hand, before Witness, denied
what the Deponent here relates of her; so that either the Deponent is perjured,
or this woman ashamed to stand to so gross an untruth, as the deponent pretends
she related to him: But the sentence being given the day in which this
deposition was taken, I had not time to bring this woman face to face to the
deponent, so to see where the guilt of perjury, or a lying slander lay: Though
as to the strength of this testimony, there was no such thing necessary, it
being a mere hearsay.

Art. 34. The testimony of Richard Sawood, who was neither sworn nor examined
in public Court.
I came into Bradfield Parsonage in the evening September. 9. 1650. and there I
heard a very mournful cry, as if it had been one in extreme pains; What a
plausible story is here framed from two or three expressions, intended to hint
out the spiritual travel of the soul, as you will see afterward.
but who it was, I knew not, for it continued all the time I was at the door,
which was well near a quarter of an hour, and so it continued when I went away.
And then on the tenth day in the morning I came to Mr. Francis Pordage at the
Parsonage of Stanford Dingly, and he enquired of me what I did think of the
noise that I heard? I told him I could not tell; then he related to me that the
Lord was about a great work in this Kingdom, and to this Nation; and the cause
of this cry was one in travel, and the pains were so extreme, that had I stayed
there but a little longer, I might have heard it as far as the Town; but now
she was delivered of a man-child, and the travel was at an end, and that he and
others were witnesses of it.

Mr Pordage, Minister of Stanford Dingly, sworn and examined to the former
Deposition of Richard Seywood.
This Deponent being asked who it was that was in travel of the child in the
said Deposition mentioned, and what became of it? To this question he
answers, That it was one Mrs Flavel; and he further says, that above four
years since Mrs Flavel was very earnest in prayer, on a day when they were
fasting, which was at the time when one Seywood came to the door; the said
Seywood knocking, the Deponent went to the door to him: And he says he does
acknowledge that Richard Seywood did come to him (about the time mentioned in
the Examination of the said Seywood) to the Parsonage of Stanford; and he says
it is probable he did ask the said Seywood what he did think of the noise he
heard in the Drs house the day before? And that when the said Seyword answered
to this foregoing question, he could not tell, it is very probable the Deponent
did relate to him, that the Lord was doing a great work in this Kingdom, and to
this Nation, and does confess that unadvisedly he told the said Seywood, that
the cause of the foresaid cry was one in travel; but does not remember he spoke
any such thing, as that the pains were so extreme, as that, had he stayed
longer, he might have heard it as far as the Town; but does confess that he
said she was in travel of a manchild, and that he and many others were
eyewitnesses of it.

And being asked who it was that was in travel? He answered, Mrs Flavel. And
being further asked what became of this manchild? He The Deponent in this
Examination, was set upon by the Ministers with so many questions, that he
could scarce come to the business which was to declare whether this was a
natural, or a spiritual travel, which at last he clearly expresses, by showing
it was no natural travel.
answers, it was the birth, death, and resurrection of Christ in her nature.
And being asked how the birth, death and resurrection of Christ, in the nature
of Mrs Flavel, was so great a work, that God was doing to this Nation? He
answers, he never said any such thing: And being further asked, whether
himself (being demanded what this manchild was) did not answer, The child of
Reformation?

To this he answers negatively.

He further says, That this travel of a manchild was not any natural birth of
a child out of the womb; but the cry that was then made; was nothing else but
the groanings and intercessions of the Spirit in her prayer.

Note, This last part is the real truth of the business, which I could have
proved by many Witnesses more, who were present in my house at the time, and
whom I had ready before the Court, to attest upon Oath, that there was no
natural travel, nor any natural birth, nor any such child born; but only the
Gentlewoman was then very earnest in prayer; but this was thought superfluous,
being that the Deponent Mr Pordage, from the mistake of whose discourse, this
came to be made an Article against me, cleared the business himself by Oath.
But how my name has suffered from this groundless business, is known very
well, both to my friends and enemies, some of which, as the accuser Mr Fowler
for one, in open Court, scoffed at me, threatening to prove great things against
me from this Deposition of Seywoods.

To the 35. and 37. Articles.
Mr John Tickle of Abbington, sworn again, and further examined, deposes,

That a Summons being issued for the appearance of Susanna Day, the Messenger
went for her, and met with her on Tuesday night last, being the fifth instant,
at the Deponents house, and that she was willing to come, and could not in
regard of her distemper at present; but the said Susanna (having reported to
several people in Abbington, and particularly to the Deponents wife, that she
was at Dr Pordages house, and that the people there told her her eyes were
opened, and she said she saw at that time the new Jerusalem to come down from
heaven all of precious stones, and so on, according as in the Article.

The said Susanna told the Deponent on the said Tuesday night, that the last
time she was at the Drs house, she saw the new Jerusalem to come This
Deposition being but a mere hearsay, and so no legal evidence, is not of any
force, and so deserves not any answer.
down from heaven, a City four square, with borders and precious stones; and
being asked whether it was not her fancy only? she answered, she saw it really.

The Deponent says that he asked the said Susanna whether she saw any Angels
in the Drs house? To which she answered, no; but she said the Drs daughter did
see two Angels holding a Golden Crown over her head.

Thus have I finished this last Charge of Articles, being in number 37. Of
these, 21 were passed by without any Depositions brought to prove them; and of
those Articles to which somewhat was said to prove them, most part was attested
but by hear-saies and reports from others, as the Depositions of Mr Fowler the
accuser, of Mr Woodbridg, Mr Tickle, and John Grip, clearly show, which cannot
be accounted so much as concurrent testimonies, being they are not any way
testimonies in Law. The rest were attested but by a single Witness (except
those of visions and apparitions; which I acknowledged my self, and which are
no way criminous, This is much cavilled against (by a late railing Pamphlet)
being an expression in that Pa^er, lately wrote by a friend of mine, though, as
there spoken, it is very true, having reference to those words in the foregoing
Paragraph, viz. That which was of most weight, was some words, etc. by which
may be seen, he respected not that of visions and the apparitions (which was
confessed by my self, and attested by two) as not of weight, either by their
own Law, or Gods Law, to prejudice me. Other things she attested were witnessed
by none but her self, as it is there and here expressed.
nor under the cognizance of those Commissioners) viz. Mrs Grip, who in her
testimony is not wholly positive, though she did swear very desperately to two
or three of the Articles, the particulars of which are no way included in the
Act of Scandalous Opinions, as to their nature or time; for as to the last, I
was so far from being accused within six months after the pretended speaking
those words, as it was four years before they were alleged against me;
besides, this woman speaking an untruth upon Oath, was really perjured, and had
been so proved, had I had just dealings from the Commissioners, whence in
equity her testimony is to be accounted invalid, as in Law it might have been,
had my Witnesses been but examined, who were ready to prove it.

Now as to that Article of Ignorance and Insufficiency, I have before showed,
That the Depositions of George Hastlet, brought to prove it, cannot in Justice
and equity, weigh any thing to condemn me, for the reasons before expressed.

And now let the Reader consider whether Mr Fowler was not very rash to
proclaim in the open Court at Newbery, That if he did not prove the greatest
part of these Articles, he would be accounted a slanderer. Which Title, whether
he deserves or not, I leave to the judgment of the judicious Reader.

But to proceed, the Depositions on both sides being ended, I presented into
the hands of Mr Dunch the Chairman, this following Protestation, to be read
publicly before the Court and the people; but they privately consulting of it,
would not suffer it openly to be read, but suppressed it, as before they did Mr
Blagraves Letter.

My Protestation was this.
I John Pordage do solemnly avow and protest, before the all-seeing eye of
Almighty God, That I do maintain, hold, and embrace, these following Principles
of Divine truth, as my real and avowed judgment.

1. That there is a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, viz.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, distinct from each other.

2. That Christ is God, coeternal, coessential, and coequal with the Father,
and therefore Jehovah.

3. That Christ is a perfect Savior and Redeemer of his Church, and so more
then a Type.

4. That Christ's righteousness is a most holy, pure, spotless, complete, and
perfect righteousness for the satisfaction of lost sinners.

5. That the blood of Christ is not only redeeming and ransoming, in reference
to Hell and Damnation, but also purchasing in reference to salvation, as having
purchased an open gate and way to glorification and life eternal for purified
Saints.

6. That all Arts of Necromancy, and black Magic, all compacts with evil
Spirits, whether explicit or implicit, direct or indirect, are unlawful, being
against the holy Scriptures, and never looked into, or practiced by me; but on
the contrary, abominated, even as they are to be detested and abhorred, not
only by all Christians, but by all mankind.

7. That Polygamie, and all such practices that tend to the indulgeing of the
flesh, are contrary to the mind of God, and not to be owned by Christians.

I do moreover disown and reject these subsequent Positions, which are contrary
to the former Principles.

1. As to maintain that there is no such thing as Persons in the holy Trinity:
2. That Christ is not God, That Christ is not Jehovah. 3. That Christ was not
perfect, and that he is no more then a Type. 4. That Christ's righteousness is a
poor, vain, empty, and sapless righteousness. 5. That the blood of Christ is
not meriting and redeaming blood, or that it is a poor thing to live upon the
blood of Christ. 6. That is lawful to have communion with evil Spirits, or any
compact with them, explicit or implicit. 7. That it is lawful for a man to keep
company with more women then one.
Now this most solemn protestation I make in all humility and reverence, before
the Divine Majesty, the omnipresent God, the searcher of all hearts, that from
a true intention, without any vail or covering, as I shall answer it at the
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed. And now if you my
Judges have not so much as a grain of faith, to believe this my cordial and
solemn protestation, let God, Angels, Saints, and all here present, bear
witness that I have left every one of you inexeusable.

And now having performed what I could, and what I thought my self obliged to
do in reference to the vindication of that pure truth I own and live to, I am
as ready to receive any sentence from you, whether of acquitment or ejectment,
as you are to deliver it.

Now although the Commissioners would take no notice of this solemn declaring
of my Judgment, yet it is of great moment, as you may see by that passage in
the Ordinance, by which the Commissioners are to act, page 613. where it runs
thus, Such Ministers shall be deemed and accounted scandalous in their lives
and conversations, as shall be proved guilty of holding and maintaining such
blasphemous and Atheistical Opinions, etc. In which you see the time present is
only respected; what then have the Commissioners to do to judge any for things
many years past, though then guilty, as I never was, if now they disown them,
and own the contrary as their Judgment.

But to proceed in relating the transactions of the last day of Trial, after
the particulars before recited. Mr Dunch the Chairman said to me, If Mr Starkey
(being of Council for me) had any thing to present on my behalf, he might have
liberty to speak: Whereupon Mr Starkey being desired by me, recited all the
Evidence, with much acuteness, method, and judgment; showing, That if they
squared their proceedings by the rules of Law they were to act by, they could
have no ground to give sentence against me; which he demonstrated so clearly,
by ennumerating both the testimonies on both sides, and also the particular
Laws and Privileges which freed me from the imputation of any legal guilt,
that many, though prejudiced persons, were much staggered, doubting of the
issue, in reference to sentence. But after this Speech, we were all commanded
to withdraw; and about an hour and an half after, we were called in again, and
the Register was commanded to proceed to publication: Whereupon all the
Depositions on both sides were read. Which being done, Mr Ford was ordered by
the Commissioners, to make a Speech in justification of their intended Sentence
against me; which Office he performed as wretchedly, as he undertook it
willingly, mis-representing the Evidence with confused Paraphrases and
mistakes, laboring to refute the Law of my Councels Speech, with such
assertions as these, viz. That although many of the proofs brought against the
Doctor, were not proofs according to Law, yet to the Commissioners, who are a
Court of Equity, and of an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and so not obliged to
judge according to positive Laws and Statutes, they were, and might be esteemed
sufficient proofs.

Many such speeches as these he used, contrary to the Liberty of the Subject,
the rule of Reason and Scripture, endeavoring to persuade the people, I was as
monstrous, as he and some others had represented me in their Pulpits and
discourses; but I shall say no more of him and his speech, leaving them both to
the righteous Judge of all things, who one day will justify, whom he, and
others of his way have condemned.

After this Speech of Mr Fords was ended, I desired liberty of Mr Dunch, the
Chairman, to speak something to the people, in reply to some things Mr Ford had
untruely said against me; but it would not be permitted.

Then I desired them to receive in this my last request, and to weigh it
seriously, before they proceeded to sentence; which though it was returned into
my hand again before it was read, I shall here present for the satisfaction of
the judicious Reader.

Gentlemen,
BEfore you proceed to Judgment, and pass sentence, I desire you seriously to
consider these subsequent particulars.

1. That I was according to Law acquitted of that Charge attested by Mr Tickle,
whence I produced my Discharge before you, which according to the judgment of
judicious Lawyers is undoubtedly legal, and will hold good, notwithstanding all
pretentions to the contrary.

2. That the matters of the same Charge are acknowledged by the Witness, to
have been spoken a year before that Act was made, Entitled, An Act against
several Blasphemous, Atheistical Opinions, to which the Commission refers, as
the rule to judge of scandalous opinions, which make a distinct head from
matters of ignorance and insufficiency, according to the tenor of the
Commission.

3. That the same Act cannot take into cognizance any crime for which the
offender was not accused within six months after the committing of it;
therefore nothing in either the first or last charge that has been any way
proved, can be judged as an offense against that Act.

4. In reference to my third or last Charge, there has been nothing directly
proved against me; but some words and expressions dropped from me in a private
discourse to one single Witness: Which expressions, as you Mrs Grip, who had
been proved perjured, had I had justice
see, are capable of an harmless interpretation, being never owned in that
sense the Witness took them; as my avowed judgment, but solemnly disowned, as
contrary to it, and therefore incapable legally to prejudice me; for the former
Act does not make one an offender for a word, but for avowedly maintaining or
holding forth in words or writing, any thing there prohibited

5. That in reference to those words in both my Charges, which have been any
way proved to have fallen from me, I never owned them as my Judgment, in that
sense my accuser takes them; but have openly denied and disowned them, which
therefore cannot render me guilty, either by the Law of that former Act, or by
the Law of Scripture, which denounces judgment against those who make a man
an offender for a word, Isa. 29. 20, 21. which deserves your serious
consideration.

6. That the particular Articles both of my first and last Charge, that seem to
be of worst consequence, cannot justly be brought within the cognizance of that
Act, according to the litteral and genuine scope of it, being chiefly made
against the Principles and Practices of those called Ranters.

7. That nothing of scandal in life and conversation being proved against me,
my free owning and confessing the appearance of evil Spirits for some time in
my Family, permitted by God, opposed and overcome by the Christian weapons of
Prayer and fasting, ought not in equity to prejudice any against me, so as to
sway them in their Sentence or Judgment, I having cordially, solemnly, and
sincerely protested my innocence, as to any communion or compact with evil
spirits, and that you would consider that things of this nature, though
criminous, are not under the cognizance of the Act, but to be tried by the
common Law, according to the usual custom of this Nation.

8. That the Act of general pardon does clearly take away all legal guilt from
things done or spoken before 1651. that are not excepted in the said Pardon.
Now the particulars of my first Charge, and all those of my third or last,
which seem to be of moment, and to be any way proved, were spoken or done
before the year 1651. And therefore made invalid, by its not being there
excepted.
Now this being the positive Judgment of able Lawyers, who have seen it
experienced in things of more dangerous consequence, may give you the
Commissioners sufficient ground of serious reflections upon it.

9. That (according to the judgment of wise, judicious, and knowing men, your
Commission having been long since, and being now again under consideration and
debate, Whether to be confirmed or altered) You the Commissioners in the
interim have not complete power to act, especially in reference to Sentence,
Judgment, and Execution; which I believe is the reason why so few of the
Commissioners have sat, and why others that were at first so earnest in their
proceedings, have since withdrawn themselves.

10. That in reference to Judgment and Sentence concerning me, Scandal ought
to be preserved as an absolute distinct Head from Ignorance and Insufficiency,
according to the Letter of your Commission, and the undoubted Judgment and
intent of the Authors.

11. That the Testimony of any one, though by Oath, concerning what another
related to him touching a third person (i. e. the Defendant) is no proof at all
according to Law, being not so much as concurrent testimony if the Defendant
deny it, and do not own it himself: Moreover, That the Testimony Mr Fowler
gave, is not legally valid; because, besides the former reason, he is the
Accuser, and incapable to be witness, according to Law.

12. That in the day of sentence, Mr Dunch and Mr Trapham, cannot by Law sit as
Judges, because they condemned me long before proof, All here excepted against,
sat as Judges and Assistants at the time of sentence.
threatening me before Witness, to turn me out of my Living, at the sitting of
this Parliament; and the last was a Witness against me. That Mr Fowler, Mr
Woodbridg, and Mr Tickle, cannot by Law, fit as Assistants to the Judges, or
give their Votes in the day of Sentence, the one being my accuser, the other
two Witnesses against me.

After I had delivered this to be read, and had received it again, we all
withdrew; and about two hours after were called in again; when the Room being
full of people, one Mr Lee a Minister, the gravest man amongst them, began a
very formal speech to me, in which he very Rhetorically expressed what a grief
If this was so, why was I sentenced against Law?
and trouble it was to them to pass Sentence against me, and that he durst not
judge that I then was guilty of holding those monstrous Tenants I was accused
of; yet they must proceed secundum It had been well if they had done so.
alegata, and probata. Afterward he proceeded to give me many exhortations, and
secret reproofs, in which he with much artifice made me guilty of all I was
accused of. Whereupon, after I had heard him for a pretty space, being very
sensible of his disguised prejudicing discourse, and his design in it, I was
forced to stop him, by replying, That if he had any brotherly exhortations to
give me, he might come in private with me; but thus to pretend to admonish and
exhort me, yet really to represent me as guilty of all I was accused of, and
that before the people, was the custom of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were
wont to hide foul designs under such fair colors; witness their dealings with
Christ: whence I desired him to spare his admonitions, and to leave off
twisting such silken halters, saying I was prepared for Sentence, and that I
desired him and the rest to take heed of condemning and betraying the
innocent,: Upon this, the man being struck somewhat silent, Mr Dunch the
Chairman, commanded the Register to do his Office; who presently read the
sentence of my Ejectment in the open Court, which was then very brief, though
afterward enlarged with many circumstantial aggravations, and great untruths,
as this following Copy sent to me from the Clerk, on the next day after my
sentence, clearly shows.

BERKS. ss By the Commissioners appointed by Ordinance of his Highness the Lord
Protector and his Council, for Ejecting of Scandalous, Ignorant, and
insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters. Redding, December. 8. 1654.
Whereas several Charges have been exhibited to us against Dr John Pordage
Rector of Bradfield in this County, who has given in several answers in
writing thereunto; and thereupon we have proceeded to examination of several
credible Witnesses upon Oath, for proof of the said Charges in open Court;
which Witnesses the said Dr has been permitted fully It Is well known that I
earnestly requested that I might cross-examin Mr Tickle, viva voce, upon the
Interrogatories I was forced to give in writing, but could not obtain it.
and freely to cross-examin: And the said Dr has been required to produce his
Witnesses for his justification, and to bring in his Interrogatories, upon
which he would examine his said Witnesses: and has had day after day assigned
him for that purpose; but notwithstanding has peremptorily refused so to do,
persisting in his own way, and refusing to observe our direction in his
proceeding, and has publicly by his evil and contumacious expressions,
slighted and affronted the said Commissioners, and instead of producing his
Interrogatories in writing, according to our Order, he has now verbally
offered several questions which he desires to have propounded to several of his
said Witnesses, which the Commissioners (upon consideration of) have judged
impertinent to clear him from the matters charged against him, but merely to
delay and weary out the said Commissioners; and therefore they have examined
only to two of the said questions which they conceived might somewhat tend to
his justification: And upon full hearing what the said Dr could say, and Who
with other judicious Lawyers, know and confess, that I am not by Law, guilty of
any of the particulars I am here sentenced for.
Mr Starkey, of Council in his behalf, upon the whole matters: And upon due
consideration, it appears that the said Dr is guilty of denying the Deity of
Christ, and the merit of his precious blood and passion; and has asserted and
maintained, That Christ was a Type, and but a Type, and not perfect, and that
his imputative righteousness was sapless, and several other hellish opinions,
and is otherwise scandalous, as by the said Depositions may more fully appear.
And it is likewise declared, under the hands of six of the said Commissioners,
and several Ministers their Assistants, That upon the matters proved against
him, The said Dr Pordage is Ignorant, and very Insufficient for the Work of the
Ministry. It is therefore Ordered that the said Dr Pordage be, and he is hereby
Ejected out of the Rectory of Bradfield aforesaid, and Profits thereof; But the
said Commissioners do grant him time to remove himself, Family, and Goods, and
Chattels out of the said Parsonage-House, till the second of February next; and
further time to remove his Corn out of the Parsonage Barns, till the 25 of
March next.

A true Copy, Math. Langley, Regist.

I must be forced to make some observations upon the chief particulars of this
Sentence, that so it may appear how prejudice or envy veiled the eyes of those
that subscribed it.

Sentence.
1. Particular. The said Dr has been required to produce his Witnesses for his
justification, and to bring in his Interrogatories upon which he should examine
his said Witnesses, and has had day after day assigned him for that purpose;
but notwithstanding, has peremptorily refused so to do.

Observation. It Is much their consciences will suffer them to alleadg this
against me, when as they know, that according to their Order given me the first
time of my appearance at Newbery, I brought in my Aainst Mr Tickles Articls.
Witnesses at the day prefixed, being a fortnight after (though I told them, if
they gave me but a week, it were all one to me:) But they refused to examine my
Witnesses, though it was according to their own appointment; whereas I pressed
them to it, by urging the charges and trouble we had been at in bringing them;
further alleging, that it might prevent much confusion and distraction, to
dispatch this Charge first. But they would not hearken to me, but proceeded to
have the third Charge read, commanding me to bring in my Answer the next day of
my appearance at Redding, speaking also of producing my Witnesses then to both
Charges; which was impossible: for how could I know what Witnesses to summon,
in reference to my last Charge, before I knew what Articles of that Charge
would be proved, or by whom?

Sent. Persisting in his own way, and refusing to observe our directions in his
proceeding.
Mr Fowler and the Commissioners agreed that all the Witnesses should be This
Agreement. That was the fourth time of my appearance.
openly examined in the face of the people; accordingly the accusers Witnesses
were examined the fourth time of appearance, viva voce, neither were there any
Interrogatories given, or ordered to be given in writing, I observing the
method in examining his Witnesses, which was prescribed by the Court: By which
also I took pattern in the Examination of mine, according to former consent,
the last time of my appearance; the first day of which (appearance) was spent
in examining my witnesses, to the first charge of Articles, which was done
according to Mr Fowlers pattern, and the Commissioners Order and Agreement. But
at night I falling sick, was necessitated to go to bed, it being late, which
put a stop to the Commissioners intentions of proceeding that night to the last
Charge; whereupon about ten or eleven a clock at night, an Order came that I
must be ready by seven of the clock, with my Interrogatories written forth; so
an hour before day, and before I was ready I was called for, it being told me
the Commissioners stayed for me; hereupon I went to them as soon as I could,
who presently asked for my Interrogatories in writing, to which I replied,
there was an impossibility of fulfilling their Order, being sick. Now this they
call aperemptory refusing of observing their directions.

Sent. And has publicly by his evil and contumacious expressions slighted and
affronted the said Commissioners, and instead of producing his Interrogatories
in writing according to our Order, has now verbally offered several questions,
etc.
Obs. They should have mentioned those evil and contumacious expressions, I do
not remember any such that ever I gave them. It Is true I sometimes spoke my
Conscience in dislike of some speeches and actions I saw amongst them, which Mr
Hughes and some others were ready to interpret as affronts, breaking forth in
such language as this, You must not revile the Gods; by which they would have
more stirred up the Commissioners against me, But I shall not here mention how
the Accuser Mr Fowler, and others were suffered to abuse me and my Family in
open Court with railing uncivil expressions, and names. But to speak to that
touching the Interrogatories. I confess I pressed the Commissioners very much
to observe the same method in examination, the last day of my trial, as they
had used the day before, and in examining the Accusers witnesses; which was
viva voce, without writing down the Interrogatories, it being also according to
their former allowance and Agreement. I further alleged that I could do it
without, as I apprehended, much prejudice to my business; not being able to
write down many occasional questions which might much clear things; and that it
would be a trouble of two or three hours long for me to transcribe out of
Shorthand, the Questions I had already wrote down, which for me to do when I
saw them so resolved against me, I thought unnecessary; Telling them if they
pleased they might proceed to Sentence without examining the witnesses at all,
for I could not nor I here confess the truth.
would not put my self to so much unnecessary trouble, to my own prejudice,
which last expression of denial, was much quarreld at, at the time, and I
believe gave the chiefest ground of their saying I used contumacious
expressions against them. As to the last Clause, in which it is expressed; That
I verbally offered several Questions, etc. The truth is this, they seeing I had
denied to write them out, commanded me to read them out of my Shorthand, that
so Langley the Register might take them, which was accordingly done; This they
call a verbal offering of several Questions, etc.

Sent. Which the Commissioners upon consideration of, have judged impertinent
to clear him from the matters charged against him, but merely to delay and
weary out the said Commissioners, and therefore they have examined only to two
of the said Questions, etc.

Obs. Here you may see the Snake hid under the grass, and discern a reason why
they were so earnest to have my Interrogatories in writing, viz. That so they
might censure them as impertinent, without suffering them to be openly proposed
before the people, cutting off all but two, without hearing them examined. Now
whether it was not a palpable piece of injustice, thus to stifle, and censure
my Interrogatories as dilatory, many of which concerned, The Holy Trinity, the
perfection of Christ as a Mediator, the unlawfulness of Black Magic, and all
compacts with evil spirits, and yet receive the heresays of Mr. Fowler, Mr
Woodbridge, Mr Tickle, John Grip, as pertinent evidences against me, and not
dilatory; I say whether this was not a palpable piece of injustice, let all
judge who are acquainted with reasonable and equitable proceedings.

Sent. Upon due consideration it appears that the said Doctor is guilty of
denying the Deity of Christ.
Obs. I cannot but much wonder how they dare aver this so confidently, seeing
first, That I have two Mr Francis Pordage, Mary Pocock.
witnesses, that swear positively, I limited the propositions of Christ's not
being God and Jehovah, in that dispute in which they were spoke, explaining
them as relating to God the Father, even as Mr Trapham, though a witness
against me, acknowledges in his Deposition. Moreover, My witnesses
acknowledged, that I owned Christ to be God in the same discourse, before the
Committee. Secondly, After this, in a Sermon before that Committee, I
vindicated my self from that aspersion, owning Christ to be God and Jehovah, as
my cordial and avowed judgment, upon which the Committee cleared me by vote;
and truly this had been enough to have freed me from any future prejudice as
to that particular, though I had before been guilty of holding that monstrous
Tenent, as I never was. Thirdly, In my Protestation I have solemnly owned the
Deity of Christ as my judgment, renouncing the contrary Opinion; Fourthly, If
I were guilty of this, it must be as it is an offense against the Act of
Scandal, which is the Commissioners rule in things of this concernment, but it
is not an offense against that Act, in regard the words I am accused of, were
spoken in the year 1649. and the Act made 1650 Fifthly, My Discharge, together
with the Act of General Pardon, free me from the pretended guilt. Now let these
particulars be weighed together in the balance of equity, and the great
untruth of the Commissioners Assertion, cannot but clearly appear.

Sent. And the merit of his precious blood and passion.
Obs. The falsity of this will be discovered, if we do but consider, that this
Assertion must be grounded, either upon the Accusers or Mrs Grips Testimony,
The Accusers was this, That one told him, that I had said the blood of Christ
was not Meritorious of any man's salvation, now this was as untrue as illegal,
being a mere scandal and a mere hearsay of the Accusers, which therefore is of
no force. and can give no just ground to the former Assertion. The Testimony of
Mrs Grip was this, that I told her it was a poor thing to live upon the blood
of Christ. Now that this is no sufficient ground for their formen Assertion,
viz. That I am guilty of denying the Merit of Christ's precious blood, will
clearly appear if you consider, First, That this Assertion in the whole
latitude of it is not false. for if it be applied to those who erroneously so
live on the blood of Christ as to neglect the following of Christ in
Mortification, and self denial as I feared this woman did, and on that account
applied it to her, I say, if it be so applied, it is a real truth. Now I
averring that I delivered this not in general, but with a particular respect to
Mrs Grip and others that I apprehended abused the precious blood of Christ, how
dare they pretend so to judge of my inward thoughts and intentions as to
condemn me as guilty of denying the Merits of Christ's blood for such a speech.
Secondly As you may see before. My Protestation also shows, that I do not hold
and maintain this, and to am not guilty by the Ordinance, which respects the
present time.
These words were attested but by one single witness, who committed Perjury,
and so invalidated her own Testimony. Thirdly, These words are no offense
against the Act of Scandal, whether you consider their nature or time, as to
the last it is clear they are not within the reach of the Act because I was not
accused within six months after they were spoke, it being above four years
since, as to the first, there is nothing about the blood of Christ expressed in
the Act, which was chiefly made against the opinions and practices of the
Ranters. Fourthly, They were spoken before the Act of General Pardon came
forth. Now these things laid together clearly evince the untruth of the former
imputation, of my denying the merits of Christ's blood.

Sent. And has asserted and maintained, that Christ was a Type, and but a Type.
Obs. If you consider the evidence on both sides, you will find that the
Commissioners have no reason, to say this: viz. That I asserted and maintained,
etc. for though there be two witnesses to this Article, yet one of them swears
only, that he heard me deliver, that Christ was a Type, and but a Type;
whereas I had two witnesses who swore positively, that in the discourse in
which these words were spoken Though the words were spoke, yet I presently
gathered them up, confessing, it was Lapsus Linguae, or a slip of my speech, as
one of the witnesses deposes.
I said I would not stand to the word, but, nor assert Christ was but a Type;
which is also agreeable to the written Deposition of Mr Pendarvis (with whom I
then discoursed) who says I waved the word But, constantly affirming Christ
was a Type. Now I wonder how they that pretend to proceed secundum allegata and
probata, considering the Depositions on both sides can say I asserted and
maintained, etc. Secondly, Though this had been so, yet the Commissioners could
not have touched, or condemned me as guilty for it; 1. Because this was one of
the Articles I was acquitted of by the Committee of plundered Ministers. 2. It
was spoken some Besides, what is here alleged, I own Christ to be more then a
Type in my Protestation.
years before the being of the Act against blasphemous Opinions. 3. I was not
accused within six months after; and so not liable to any guilt by that Act. 4.
It was long before the Act of Oblivion came forth. So that whether you weigh
the Depositions of the witnesses, or the several Laws, against which the
Commissioners cannot in justice act any thing, you will find there is no
reason of putting this into the Sentence.

Sent. And not perfect.
Obs. Here the Judges show their unjust judgment, and great partiality, so
palpably, that I cannot imagine what Fig Leaves, they can sow together, to
cover this their so open nakedness, they say here, as one ground of their
Sentence, That I maintained Christ not perfect, of which there is no proof at
all nor shadow of proof. For not to speak of the illegality of Mr Fowlers being
permitted to be a witness, being my Accuser, all that was said to this, was by
Mr Fowler, who deposed that young Mr Blagrave told him I had said Christ was
not perfect; which as I have often said, was a mere story: weighing nothing in
Law, and so much the less to be regarded, in that it was brought in by the
Accuser against me; now for my Judges to insert this in the Sentence, as a
thing proved against me, is such a piece of injustice, nay of weakness, as to
their own cause, that I cannot but wonder at it.

Sent. An that his Imputative Righteousness was sapless.
Obs. If we compare the Depositions together, we shall find that the Evidence
is not a true and sufficient ground for that which is here alleged; For
although there were two witnesses here against me, yet upon cross examination
(whether this was spoken without any addition, and as an entire sentence) one
of them answered, he remembered no such Addition as was mentioned; the other
said, He remembered nothing to the contrary, but that it was an entire Sentence;
now neither of these are absolutely positive, for though they depose that they
remembered not any addition, yet they do not swear positively there was no
Addition; now my witness absolutely deposed that I delivered this with an
Addition, and that the Addition made up one entire Sentence, with the preceding
words, and that what I delivered was this, That the righteousness of Christ was
sapless, except the Fiery Deity of Christ be in the center of our souls,
burning up our lusts and corruptions; which is but equivalent to that
Scripture, He that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his. Now whether
the absolute positive proof of this witness be not stronger in Law, then the
proofs of the other two, which are not positive and absolute, let the wise
judge. But secondly, Admit I spoke, even as my enemies pretend, yet the
Commissioners had no power to retrospect to words spoken six years since, for
the Ordinance by which they are to act, judges only those who shall be found
HOLDING OR MAINTAINING etc. Now they cannot say that I hold or maintain this,
being I have declared otherwise in my Protestation. Thirdly, What I did then
speak, was some years before the being of the Act of Scandal, of which I was
not accused within six months after it was spoken; and therefore it is not
within the reach of that Act. Fourthly, This was long before the Act of
Oblivion* Fifthly, The discharge I received from the Committee of plundered
Ministers, takes away all legal guilt from this Article and puts it past the
Cognizance of these Commissioners. And although the late railing abusive
pamphleteer pretends that in the Order of the said Committee, There is not the
least mention made of discharging Named M. L. Clerk to the Commissioners,
though it is certain the paper was not of his composing.
me from the fact, and that it does only dismiss the cause out of that Court,
The Reader must know this vail and pretense, comes either from ignorance or
subtilty; for it is not there expressed, that the cause was dismissed out of
the Court, but Ordered that the Cause should be dismissed, which is general,
and it is there added, The same is hereby dismissed; Now the dismission of the
Cause on the Defendants part, does really discharge from the fact, as those
that have knowledge in the Law, and are acquainted with the proceedings in
Chancery, and other Courts known very well, and if you read the discharge (page
4.) you will find it very full, for it is there expressed, That upon hearing
the Cause in presence of parties and Council on both sides, -- and upon a full
Hearing what could be said by both parties, This Committee order the said Cause
to be dismissed, etc. And though it be pretended the reason of dismission was
because they had no proper cognizance of the cause, and were not invested with
power to Eject; It is a great untruth, for the reason was because they could
prove nothing worthy of ejectment against me, for had they found sufficient
ground, I had as surely been ejected, as I was acquitted, as it is well known
to those who were at the trial. But to conclude, the thirty two members of
Parliament, who were of that Committee at my trial, many of which came much
prejudiced against me by the false reports of my adversaries, knew better their
own power, then to receive such a formal trial of a cause they had not proper
cognizance of, and to give such a serious and full dismission of it. Thus much
I thought fit to add to this last particular, to show the vanity and error of
their exceptions against my discharge, which as able Lawyers tell me, is
undoubtedly firm.

Sent. -- And several other hellish Opinions, and is otherwise scandalous; as
by the said Depositions may more fully appear.
Obs. Here their bitterness manifests it self in thus Arraigning me without
cause. Why are not those other hellish Opinions expressed? And why is it not
mentioned in what I am otherwise scandalous? For I am sure the Depositions show
no such thing as they pretend, nor give instance of one act which may be truly
called scandal.

Sent. And it is likewise declared -- that upon the matter proved against him,
The said Doctor Pordage is ignorant and very insufficint for the work of the
Ministry.
Obs. The Commissioners never proceeded to examination, in reference to this of
ignorance and insufficiency, contrary to their own Ordinance, page 624. for
they have not the privilege of that exception made in 624. where this
disjunctive proposition is. Upon such examination or proof made upon oath.
the same page, as to me notwithstanding their pretensions in this part of the
Sentence. For 1. if they ground this their judgment upon the Opinions before
mentioned, their ground is not firm, for we see those Opinions have not been
legally proved against me, and besides this is a confounding the distinct heads
of scandal and ignorance, etc. against the tenor of their own Ordinance. 2. If
they bottom it upon He was brought to witness to that Article, viz. That I was
ignorant and very insufficient for the work of the Ministry.
Hastlets Deposition, it is a notorious piece of Qui statuit aliquid, part
inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud. aequus fuerit. Sen.
injustice. 1. In regard he was not examined till the day of Sentence, I having
no time given me to make my defense. 2. In that he was objected against as a
Common Drunkard and so an insufficient witness. 3. In that his testimony was
single (without any concurrent evidence,) and so not legal. Whence it appears
that my Judges in thus aggravating my guilt (with the terms of ignorant and
very insufficient, etc.) aggravate their own condemnation in the eye of the
Righteous Judge of all things.

Sent. It is declared under the hands of six of the said Commissioners, and
seven Ministers their assistants, etc.
Obs. I shall conclude my Observations on this Sentence, with some things it is
requisite for me to discover, and lay open, touching the Qualifications and
Dispositions of some of those Ministers and Commissioners, which agreed to this
Sentence of Ejectment.

Here I shall begin with the Ministers.
ANd first with Mr Tickle, who some years since has showed himself a bitter
and professed enemy against me, in a Pamphlet Entitled, The bottomless pit
smoking in Familism, put forth by him 1651 In which he bedivels me all over,
calling me Familist, page 49. There is one Pordage a Familist, who cares
neither for Scripture nor Reason, and page 81. The God of the Familists, whom
they generally serve is the Devil, The sink of sin, and in his Epistle brands
me for one that will say and unsay any thing, giving a mistaken instance in
these words. And at the same time at Redding, could call in all with These men
will not permit me to explain my meaning, when by speaking either short, or
obscure, I am mistaken by any.
I meant not so. This he speaks in reference to that dispute about the Deity of
Christ, and here confesses that I did not stand to the ownment of what he then
and has since accused me of, about the Deity of Christ; How then durst they
Sentence me for denying it, when in the discourse I said, I meant not so, as he
here confesses. Now whether this person so much imbittered and prejudiced
against me, was was fit to be both Judge-assistant, witness, and as far as I
knew, Accuser, I never seeing any other name to his Articles, nor any one so
much sustaining the person of Accuser in managing the first Articles, as he
himself, I say whether in Law, or Equity, he was fit so to be, let moderate
Christians judge.

The second I shall present is Mr Fowler, whose bitter and fierce spirit
against all that he calls Sectaries, is well known to the inhabitants of
Redding, and in truth, can scarce be exrpessed in words; now what terrible
Invectives, undue slanders, and passionate Revilings he does ordinarily use
against many Christians he does not approve of, though I could, under the hands
of some that can attest it, yet I will not here relate: Only I shall give you
a short hint of his ungodly dealings toward me; which he has expressed, with
all manner of slanders and revilings, both in his Pulpit and out of it;
laboring to persuade all he meets with I am a Familist, a Blasphemer, a
Conjurer, one that practices uncleanness, and can say and unsay any thing; and
that I am as wretched a creature, as ever was; now by these wretched scandals
and monstrous untruths, which he and others of his spirit have with much
industry blazed abroad, many are persuaded, that I am not only unworthy to
keep my place where I am, and to have due mercy showed me by those in power,
but unworthy of Life, or Being in the world. Now was it not a sad thing, that a
man of this spirit, should be one of the assistants, acting the part of a Judge
all the trial, with great influence upon the proceedings; and be also witness,
and accuse altogether? Which is against all Law and Reason. But thus it was,
and to this I was fain to submit.

A third was Mr Woodbridge, who I confess is a man of a more sober spirit, and
of a more wise carriage, then the two former, yet one, who was wonderfully
prejudiced against me, not by As he expressed in the Court when he was sworn.
knowledge, but by the horrid abusive reports of others, as you may see in his
Deposition, where he by oath attests some fearful and ungodly expressions;
which one told him came from me; though the Lord knows, and my own Conscience
witnesses, I was never guilty of any such thing. But whether he, being a
witness, could properly be a Judge, as in consenting to the Sentence he was, I
leave it to those who understand Law to judge of.

Now besides these three who had been Witnesses and Accusers, there were but
four more, who are not a sufficient number according to the Ordinance, to
subscribe a Sentence; and, to say nothing of the other, being strangers to me,
one of the four was Mr Hughes, a man very bitter, who often showed the evil frame
of his mind by ejecting of scoffs and taunts against me. Now the Ministers,
some of them, being professed enemies, and others, prejudiced persons, or swayd
by those that were so, what could I expect from them, but what I received, even
Sentence against me?

But now I come to the Commissioners, who were in number six, as the Sentence
expresses.
FIrst I shall begin with Mr. Dunch, who was Chairman, being a man exceedingly
prejudiced against me, by reports, as the instances of his telling me I was
worse then a Felon, and asking me passionately, How I durst deny the Godhead of
Christ, the first time of my appearing before them, clearly show, which is yet
more apparent by another instance, which was this. At Abbington Sessions, being
some considerable time before my trial, he threatened me, that at the sitting of
the next Parliament, he would throw me out of my Living, This he spoke in the
hearing of two witnesses who can attest it by oath, which I objected against
him before Sentence; as a reason why he ought not to be judge, having designed
to condemn me before he had heard my cause. And as the Counselors tell me,
this was sufficient to have put him past the capacity of Being a Judge, both in
equity and Law, yet he was Chairman at Sentence, and was very industrious and
rigid a-against me thorowout the trial; and to speak my Conscience of him, I
believe that through the over persuasions and prejudicing insinuations of some
Mr Fowler, Mr Hughs, Mr Tickle.
Ministers, before named who made it their business to represent me to the
Court as some monstrous person, on whose judgment he much relied. He was
carried in the managing of this business out of that path of Justice, Mercy,
and Righteousness; which, in other things, many say, he walks in:

Secondly, I shall present Mr Trapham, whom if we impartially reflect upon and
consider, either in relation to his intellectuals, or affections, we shall
find him unfit to have been a Judge in my case. As to the first, Let his own
words, uttered with much zeal in the open Court, speak for him, which were
these, I never heard of any other death or Resurrection of Christ, but what was
at Jerusalem, Which showed he had never read, or at least understood these
Scriptures, Heb. 6. 6. Gal. 3. 2. Ephesians. 2. 5. Secondly, As to the temper of
his affections, that has been clearly discovered, by his saying, He q could as
willingly run his sword into the bowels of such as I, as b This was spoken four
years since before a Committee, and related again by himself at my trial, at
least three several times.
into the bowels of a common enemy; as likewise by his practice since the
trial, in which he has continually endeavored to possess all he discourses
with, that I am so monstrous, as scarce worthy to live upon the earth: But
besides these things, he was a witness against me, and so upon that account,
unfit to be judge, according to the common course of Law. Now besides these
two, there were not enough to make up a Court according to the Ordinance, there
being but four more.

Thirdly, One of which four was Mr Cook of Wallingford, of whom I shall say
no more but this, that his late action of supplanting and outing of Mr Wire by
subtilty, who is a godly honest man, shows what he is, which business is
very well known to the godly party about Wallingford, being much resented,
and condemned by them.

A fourth was Mr Nutkins, whose blind zeal and rigidness of spirit, is well
known to tender moderate Christians, and was clearly discovered by his
carriage to me, and bitterness against me in my last trial. The inconsistency,
and contradiction of whose actions, show his unfitness to be a Judge in such
cases of weight and concernment; for some four years since being of the
Commit of Berks, and after a Sermon preached before the said Committee, I had
vindicated my self from that of denying the Godhead of Christ, he gave me his
vote to clear me of that Imputation, confessing he was satisfied, after he had
asked me a question or two touching some particulars in my Sermon; who now,
notvvithstanding this, has condemned me for the same thing he then voted me
clear of; although nothing more touching the Godhead of Christ has since been
proved against me, which is the chief thing they stood upon, as they
themselves have confessed; in reference to this Sentence. But whence these
contradictory actions have proceeded, whether from the late persuasions and
insinuations of my Accuser and others, I do not know. But this I am sure of,
with those that carried things tenderly and justly he appeared so to; and
with those, that have since carried themselves rigidly and unjustly, he is one
likewise in his actings. But how these carriages of his can be truly
reconciled, I do not unsterstand.

Two more there were, who though appearing more moderate then the rest, yet
subscribed the Sentence, being carried away by the stream of the others
violent persuasions.

But before I conclude and shut up this part concerning those that subscribed
the Sentence, I cannot but speak something of Mr Arthur Evelin, who though he
was not present when Sentence was given, yet was a Commissioner, and sat
amongst the rest one day of my trial, seeming to carry things very fairly,
though in truth he was a chief contriver of the design against me, who after
he had laid his plot and set the wheels of others passion and false zeal in
motion, vvithdrevv himself, as though he were not engaged in the business; but
he knovving there were enough to serve his design, in carrying things against
me all the trial, prejudiced me another way, in preparing both in the Country,
and London all he met with, to believe I was so abominable and monstrous, as
to deserve, if not death, yet at least that sentence of Ejectment, which he
knew would be passed against me; and really it is not to be uttered what wrong
and injury he has done me, by his railing accusations, for it is well known that
he has been industrious in representing me as one of the worst of men, making
me more vile and base, if it be possible, then the Jews and Ethnicks, by false
and dark aspersions, made the Apostles, who yet were esteemed by them, as the
(...), 1 Cor. 4. 13.
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things. This I have been
forced to speak, that I might do justice in defending innocence, and
discovering subtilty, having not the least envy against the person of Mr
Evelyn, whom I so far love as to pray for his conviction, and the right
informing of his understanding, touching that innocence which he now condemns
as guilt, that so he may repent and turn to the Lord, and receive the remission
of his sins, before he goes hence, and be no more seen.

Now I have finished the Trial, and all those circumstances relating to it,
which might any way serve to clear the truth, and so dispose the Christian
Reader, as to be able to give true Judgment in my Case; and I question not but
by what is here related, out of no other end, but to discover and lay open both
truth and falsehood, innocence and subtilty, it will clearly appear, that my
enemies, both in their accusations, management of the Trial, and Judgment,
after evidence on both sides, have neither observed the Law of Nature, the Law
of this Nation, nor the Royal Law of Love; but have steered their proceedings
by prejudicate resolutions, and arbitrary determinations, which were as
illegally concluded by their sentence, as uncharitably set on foot and begun by
interest, mistake, and blind zeal and envy; which I am confident will one day
be as manifest as the light, when the vails and pretentions with which they
have covered their own eyes, and the eyes of many others shall come to be rent
away. In the mean time if what I have here wrote, is not through that
prejudiced, which is sucked in by most, sufficient to clear that truth and
innocence I own and live to, I shall contentedly lie under the censures and
condemnation of men, as that in which I am conformable to Christ's sufferings,
waiting for that righteous judgment of God, which will justify the truly
innocent, and condemn the really guilty.

An APPENDIX to the former RELATION.
HAving in the former Discourse dispatched my Trial before the Committee of
Berks, I shall now present you with something more, referring to the same
business, in which I shall inform you, 1. What I have proceeded in since my
Sentence, 2. I shall lay down some Grounds or Reasons why, in answer to those
who have much censured me for it. 3. I shall show the issue and event of it,
and so conclude all.

1. You must know then, after the Sentence of Ejectment was passed against me,
being sensible of the injustice and illegality of it, and that great injury,
which by it was done to that Cause of God, and Life of Christ which I own and
live to, I was moved from my own spirit, and encouraged by others, to address
an Appeal to his Highness the Lord Protector, who (with his Council) made the
Ordinance by which the Commissioners were empowered to act. So I came to
London, and framed a Petition in the usual way, in manner of an Appeal, in
which I presented my grievance to the Protector, believing it very reasonable,
in case of oppression and wrong, to appeal from an inferior Court, to that
Power which Constituted them, and gave them being. Now in the time of my
waiting upon, and expectation of the delivery of my Petition, I met with many
who were much against it, as a thing too conformable to the custom of the
world, and too slavish for those who are to live to the life of Christ, out of
the ways and observations of Babylon; so that I have been excepted against, 1.
in reference to the person, or persons to whom I appealed, as to my owning of,
and bowing to such a Power. 2. In reference to the ends for which.

1. Particular. As to the first, touching my owning of, and appeal to the chief
Magistrate for the execution of Justice, and relieving the oppressed, I shall
here show my grounds upon which I go.

1. It Is my Judgment then, That in every Principle according to natural Order,
and Gods Will, there should be Superiority and Inferiority, Rulers, and Ruled,
Higher and Lower, even as there are.

For first, If we look into the Kingdom of darkness, we shall find there great
distinctions and degrees amongst the fallen Angels, there being (Ephesians. 6. 12.)
Principalities, Powers, and the Rulers of this dark world. And Dignities, Jud.
1. 9. There is also one Supreme Prince, Mat. 12. 24. Beelzebub, the Prince of
Devils, called (Rev. 9. 11.) (...), The Angel of the Abyss, or bottomless pit;
and Rev. 12. The Dragon, who with his Angels under him, war against Michael; he
is also called, Apollyon, Satan, etc. These are they, who as Jude says, are
reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, being the Lords Vassals. But
that their order, their superiority and inferiority, is not peculiar to them,
as they are fallen, is clear, in that, before they fell, they were invested
with a Principality, Iud. 6. The Angels that kept not ((...)) their
Principality, as in the Original.

2. That there is superiority and inferiority, and great distinction in the
Angelical World, or Heaven of the Angels, is clear from Scripture, so Dan. 10.
13. there is mention made of Michael, who is called one (or the first) of the
chief Princes, for that there are more chief Princes besides himself, of which,
Gabriel, who spoke this to Daniel, questionless was one: And Christ speaks of
more then twelve Legions of Angels, which Legions must have their chief
Captains and Leaders. Now Gods Host of Angels has many names of distinction in
Scripture, suitable to their offices, strength, or beauty: As 1. We find
Angels, which may be a general name belonging to all, as they are the Lords
Messengers. 2. Archangels, Iud. 9. 31. 3. Cherubims, Ezekiel. 10. 20. 4.
Seraphims, Isa. 6. 2. 5. Thrones. 6. Dominions, 7. Principalities, 8. Powers,
Col. 1. 16. 9. aVertues. Ephesians. (...).
1. 21. where the distinguishing appellations of the Angels are in the
singular, as Col. 1. in the plural number: But by this we see there are
degrees, distinctions, superiority, and inferiority, amongst those who
perfectly enjoy and obey God.

And further, if we look into this outward world, we shall find there ever have
been, and still are, Governors, and Governed, Superiors and Inferiors, though
in several forms and models of Government; and these distinctions we find not
only in those States, whose policy is continned by the rules of man's reason,
but even amongst the Jews, once the peculiar people of the Lord, who by his
immediate designement, ordained Moses, Joshua, Gideon, David, Solomon, etc. to
rule and govern the Israelites.

Now things being thus ordered by Divine Providence, we may, nay should own all
distinctions and degrees, according to the nature of that principle in which
they stand, and from which they spring. We are not to revile the Devils
themselves, nor to speak evil of those Dignities which Jude 8.
are in the Abyss or dark world; for, Iud. 9. Michael the Archangel durst not
bring railing accusations against the Devil, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.
Truly the fallen Angels are Gods Vassals, and the executioners of his wrath
and fierce anger, and so are to be owned as Dignities, Principalities, Powers,
and Rulers in their own sphere and principle, even as the Scripture
distinguishes them; though all their wickedness, subtilty, malice, and
temptations are utterly to be rejected, as opposing the righteousness and
holiness of God.

Now if we are to own, i. e. to take notice of, and not contemn and revile the
Dignities, Principalities, and Powers of the dark world; how much more the
Orders, distinctions, and degrees of this world, though made according to the
rules of the spirit of the world? i. e. according to the wise Canons of
rational policy and humane foresight. And though Governors and Rulers may be of
three sorts; as first, such who are immediately constituted and invested with
honor and power by the Lord, as Moses, Aaron, Joshua, etc. 2. Such as are in
power and honor, by a lawful succession, or a free Election of the people, or
their Representatives, etc. 3. Such who out of necessity, policy, or ambition,
etc. assume power and Authority to themselves; I say, though there are these
three sorts, yet we have no warrant from reason or Scripture, to resist,
revile, slight, or not to own, i. e. acknowledge any of them, to be in their
own sphere, what really they are: for, Romans 13. 5. We must be subject, not only
for wrath, but for conscience sake. And this extends to every individual, Romans
13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers. From this due sub^ection
it comes that we ought to pay Tribute, Romans 13. 6. and afford them that honor
which is due according to their place, v. 7. Honor, to whom honor is due.
Whence we may, Especially when we apply our selve to them for execution of
justice in protecting us.
and ought in a civil respect, to bow our bodies to them; which, though the
power be usurped, or not according to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, may be done
without subjecting to the evil of that Power, or owning of them any otherwise,
then to be persons of great power, quality, and trust in their own spears and
places; but how they came to this, let they themselves look to it. Concerning
the Saints bowing Although those who out of conscience scruple it, ought to be
tenderly dealt with, being we find not that our Savior used these customs
before Pilat, whom some may believe we a^e to imitate in this, as in other
things, though indeed our Savior had a peculiar ground for it, being the King
of Kings, and the Judge of the world.
their bodies by way of civil subjection, not to speak of Nehemiah, Daniel,
etc. The instance of Abraham, Genesis 23. is very pertinent and clear, who though
he was owned by the Ethnicks, the sons of Heth, v. 6. to be a mighty Prince, or
Prince of God, yet v. 7. its said, He stood up, and bowed himself to the people
of the land. And again, v. 12. And Abraham bowed down himself before the people
of the Land. Hence also we may, and should give them their Titles, if we have
occasion to address our selves to them, which is part of that honor we are to
afford them, Romans 13. 7. This was Paul's practice, Acts 24 2. where he speaking
to Agrippa, styles him, King Agrippa, and v. 13. O King, v. 19. O King Agrippa,
v. 27. King Agrippa. And in the same speech, applying himself to Portius Festus
the Governor, he styles him, v. 25. (...): The same title with which Tertullus
greeted Felix, Acts 24. 3.
Most noble Festus.

And furthermore, when we are oppressed and injured by any inferior
Magistrates, we may appeal to the superior Power, for the execution of Justice.
Thus Paul knowing the malice of the Jews, and seeing what influence they had
upon the Provincial Governors to sway them, appealed to Caesar, the Supreme
Magistrate, Acts 25. 11. No man may deliver me unto them, I appeal unto Caesar.
Where you see he made use of a Law or custom of the Romans, to free himself
from oppression and cruelty. And As appears from the end of Magistracy, Romans 3.
3, 4. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 2. 2, 3. For these ends subjection is requisite
to their Laws and Ordinances prudentially made for the preservation of States
and Commonwealths in peace.
certainly it is very reasonable for the Saints of God, when they are injured
against Law and equity, to present their grievance to superior Magistrates, for
the execution of their own Laws upon those, who pretending to act from them,
break and violate them.

Now in the performing of those three particulars before expressed, it does not
follow, that we own and make our selves members of Babylon, or the external
bodies of confusion and irregularity; for here is no evil Idolatrous compliance
with it, in acting the things before expressed: For, as Abraham could bow in
civility to the Heathen people, and Paul give the Ethnic Princes their Titles,
and appeal for Justice to Caesar, a Heathen Tyrant, without sinful compliance,
or owning himself of and in union with their corrupt societies; so may we do
the same things, though we were amongst the worst and most corrupt Babylonian
Magistrates in the world, without any sinful union and compliance with them.
And though Rev. 18. 4. the Lord thus calls, Come out of her my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; which is
enough to stir us up to a serious enquiry, what it is to come out of Babylon,
and how far it extends; yet I say, some things are absolutely requisite whilst
we live in the place of Babylon, even as these before expressed, and are really
consistent with our obeying that Scripture, in forsaking the evil of Babylon,
though we live in the place of it. For as there was no necessity for the Jews
that lived in Ethnic Babylon, to partake of the sins of Babylon, Nehem. 2. 7,
8. Dan. 4. 19. My Lord, 22. O King.
though they performed the civil acts before mentioned; so there is no
necessity for those who are in Christian Babylon, to partake of the sins and
iniquities of it, though they perform those civil and necessary actions before
recited, which are required of us in reference to the external commerce, and
protection of our bodies, in the places where we live.

But now having showed the just grounds of appeal, in case of wrong, to
superior Magistrates, and the reasons why they are to be acknowledged and
submitted to, I shall proceed to give an account of those ends in my Appeal,
which are so much excepted against by some.

1. End. The first end then which is so much decryed against, is my petitioning
to keep and be longer possessed of a Parsonage and Tithes, which is a scandal
to many, as being a legal and forced maintenance, and a continuing my self in a
way of Preaching for hire.

To which I answer, 1. In reference to Tithes, which I confess heretofore I
have much doubted of my self, as to the receiving of them, and that upon
several accounts, as that there was no such maintenance in the primitive time,
when Christians and Churches were pure, and that they were forced by a Law,
without the good will of many that pay them, etc. Upon which confideration, and
some others, which heretofore seemed weighty to me, I have thought good to This
is a thing well known to many, for which I have been much censured by those who
knew not the innocence and integrity of my soul in it.
return them to the Magistrate from whom I received them; but by providence
have been prevented beyond my expectation; since which I have been clearly
satisfied, and I believe, from the light of pure wisdom, that the former
reasons, and many others, which ordinarily are alleged, are no sufficient
grounds of throwing them away, especially to those who see the best grounds on
which they may be received, and the best ends for which they may be used. As to
my I neither plead for, nor against them in general, but leave them to stand or
fall, as providence shall dispose of them by the Magistrate.
self then, I confess I receive them not upon any Levitical, Legal institution,
nor as a maintenance by Divine Institution, due to Ministers or Parsons, nor as
a reward and recompense for Preaching; but as they are the Lords by right and
undoubted M^c. 4. 13. The Lord of the whole earth Heb. 1. 2. Whom he has
appointed heir of all things. his from the Lord, that was from his
determination and donation.
interest, whose (Psalm. 24. 1.) is the earth, and the fullness thereof, as well
the tenth, as all the rest, and all the rest as well as the tenth; and as they
have been 1 King. 2 15. For it was
his undoubted gift to me, though providentially handed through the Magistrate,
who had a legal right to dispose of them; so that I look upon my self but as a
1 Pet 4. 10. As a good steward, whether it be of outward or inward gifts.
steward under the Lord, to dispose of them as the Lords goods to maintain his
life in flesh, to feed the hungry, and clothe the naked, and entertain
strangers, using them as Gods goods in Gods way, out of the selfish propriety
of the earth, in a way more suitable to the Royal Law of love: Thus having Mic.
4. 13. I will consecra^e their substance to the Lord. 1 King. 7. 51. And
Solomon brough in the things which David his father had dedicated, even the
silver and the gold, and the vessels did he put among the treasures of the
house of the Lord.
consecrated them to the Lord, to honor his name in the use of them, according
to that, Prove. 3. 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance. I do not see how I
could be faithful in my trust, if I should make them a sacrifice to some who
might use them far worse, or to others who would certainly abuse them to the
dishonor of God. Now this which I look upon as the Lords gift, being unjustly
sequestered from me against the Laws of this Nation, I could a not satisfy my
conscience, without using a lawful means, in appealing to the higher Powers,
for the maintaining and making good their own Laws, which the Commissioners
infringed in sentencing and condemning me; that so I might try, and follow
providence, in endeavoring a just recovery of the Lords possessions out of the
Dragons hands; to whom I might apply that of Naboth to Ahab, 1 Kings 21. 3. The
Lord forbid that I should give the Inheritance of my Fathers unto thee. And by
this, all are left inexcusable; so that no one who accounts himself (...), Romans
13. The Minister or Steward of God for good, shall have occasion to say, you
did not apply your self to those who were armed with power and resolution to
relieve the oppressed, and do you justice.

But to add a little in reference to that part of the Objection which hints at
my Preaching for hire; I must say, that it is uncharitable for any so to judge,
who knew neither my principles, progress, nor intentions; 1 Pet. 4 101
May not one exercise ones talent for the edification, conversion, and
quickening of spirits, and so for the glory of God, notwithstanding the
receiving of Gods outward gifts and blessings for ones necessityin this life,
and for the helping and relieving of others? I confess I believe there are too
many, who wanting the oil of love and life, sell their words for their
livings, and really twill be a happy day, when the subtilty and deceits of such
come to be laid open to all; that so none may dare to speak the words of life,
without the eternal word of life speaking in and through them. But because
there are very many such, it is uncharitable to conclude that all are so; and to
those that judge me as one of those, I shall only return the answer of Paul to
the Corinthians, chap. 4. 3. With me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's (...).
judgment, or day, yea I judge not mine own self, For I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not hereby justified, For he that judges me is the Lord. v. 5.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, till the Lord come.

End. 2. Another End which is excepted against, both in my appealing and
writing is, the vindicating of my own person and cause, from dark and false
aspersions; as though it argued weakness and irresignation in me; in not being
able to suffer the scandals, censures, and reproaches of the world, without
such endeavors to vindicate my self and the truth, which God in his time, as
they say, will clear.

But to this I answer, To every thing there is a season, Eccles. 3. 1. There is
a time to keep silence, and a time to speak, v. 7. Some years last past have
been a time of silence to me, in which I have suffered under all manner of
scandals and reproaches, through the malice of the Devil, without any
endeavors of vindication; but the enmity of my enemies growing to such a
height, as not to contain it self within the limits of railings, revilings,
slanders and reproaches, but that also breaking forth into a formal accusation,
trial and illegal condemnation, and Sequestration of that external livelihood
which the Lord has bestowed upon me, and that under the pretense of justice,
merit, and desert: I say considering this, I esteemed it just and righteous, to
appeal for a re-hearing, that truth and inocency might not lie wrapped in the
vails of unjust condemnation, and lying reports, and that malice, subtilty, and
illegal proceedings, might come to be detected, and no longer blind the eyes of
many, who judge both of my enemies and my self, according to the false glass of
their reports, which I believed might tend much to the glory of God, and the
shame of him who is the father of lies, who has ever endeavored to strengthen
his false interest, by raising undue prejudices against the truth, and the
sincere owners of it; so that the endeavoring a re-hearing, and the publishing
the truth of things, for the ends before expressed, is according to the rules
of pure wisdom, and Christian prudence, being according to Paul's practice, who
after he had appeared two or three times to answer for himself before the Roman
Governors, and seeing Festus swayed by the Jews, and upon that account willing
to try him at Jerusalem, amongst them, where he believed they would have
condemned his innocence, and made him suffer as an evil-doer: I say, on that
account, Acts 25. 10, 11. he appealed to Caesar, desiring to be tried at his
Judgemenseat, hoping there to have his innocent cause and person cleared. And 2
Cor. 10. 2, 3. we find Paul vindicating himself against the unjust aspersions
of those who thought he walked according to the flesh: So that where these
things are done from a good and sincere principle, they are good, and not
justly to be excepted against.

And whereas it has been objected, that we should leave those things to God:

I answer, Our performing these things for his glory, and in obedience to his
will, does not take them out of Gods hands; for what good we do in obedience,
he does it in and through us (Ephesians. 2. 13.) who are but his instruments, and
obliged to use lawful means for the accomplishing of lawful ends, 1 Cor. 11.
24.

And having now exhibited the grounds and ends of my Appeal, and demonstrated
the reasonableness of it in reference to both, I shall proceed to show the
issue and event of my appealing.

You must know then, that after I had waited about seven weeks, my Petition was
delivered by Mr After it came into his hands, he suddenly delivered it.
Sadler (one of the Masters of Requests) to his Highness the Lord Protector,
who granted a reference to the Council; on Friday morning, Feb. 9
and shortly after, my Petition, with the Reference subscribed, was delivered
by a worthy friend into the Council; which after a great debate, though some of
the greatest eminency were for it, rejected it, and would by no means grant a
re-hearing of my Cause.

Now this was the issue of my eight weeks waiting in London; which, I confess,
though in submission to providence, I with many others, looked upon as very
hard and unreasonable; because in point of wrong and injury, it is according to
the Law of Nations, and the rule of pure reason and justice, that there should
be an Appeal granted from inferior Courts of Judicature, to that Power which
gave them being, especially in a thing of so great concernment, as the Ejecting
and throwing men out of their Estates and Livelihoods.

But here I cannot but inform the Reader how subtly and cruelly my enemies
have dealt with me, not only in condemning me against Law, but likewise in
using all means possible, to prevent the granting of an Appeal for the
re-hearing of my Cause, for it is very well known that they have industriously
labored to possess all (in whose power it is, and who ought in this sad and
extraordinary case to relieve me, and grant a re-hearing) with unspeakable
prejudices, insinuating into them, that I am so guilty and vile, as unworthy to
be regarded in my addresses to them.

Now to a discerning eye, this course of theirs, in laboring so much to
prevent a re-hearing of my Cause, speaks thus much, That they are afraid their
unjust and illegal proceedings will be detected by it, and many of them proved
great liars and slanderers, for reporting I am guilty of such horrid crimes, as
they commonly say they proved against me. Now if they did not fear this, why
should they be so much engaged in striving by these insinuations, to prevent
the granting of an Appeal? For if I were really as they represent me, all that
I should get by a re-hearing, would be, to be twice condemned, and that with
double disgrace, and an open justifying of their sentence against me; whereas
now I have this to say, That they condemned me unjustly, steering their
proceedings neithey by Law, Reason, nor Scripture.

But being as yet rejected of men, and deprived of the just privilege of an
Appeal on earth, I shall appeal to heaven, from time to eternity, from the
double eye of the Creature, to the single eye of God.

O Eternal Majesty, thou art that high and holy one who see clearly, and
judge truly thou searchest my heart, and tryest my reins, pierceing into my
inmost thoughts, and most secret motions with the single eye of thy glory: All
things within and without stand naked and unvailed before thee, being more then
transparent to thy all-discerning sight; I therefore appeal from man's day,
Judgment, and condemning Sentence, to thy day, Judgment, and acquitting
voice; from man's dark erroneous sight, to thy penetrating, clear, all-seeing
eye. Thou know I am not guilty of these Blasphemies and horrid things laid
to my charge; Thou know that my solemn protestation is from the sincerity of
my heart; Thou know that it never entered into the intention of my soul, to
deny the holy Trinity, or the Godhead of Christ, whom I own to be God coequal,
and coeternal with the Father; Thou know I am not guilty of holding that
Christ was not perfect, or that his righteousness is not a fruitful,
powerful, everlasting righteousness, or that his blood is not cleansing,
meriting, reconciling blood. Thou see how my innocence, in reference to these
things is overshadowed with the dark clouds of false aspersions, and undue
accusations. Othou bright Eye of Divine Glory, do not thou see and behold the
innocent sufferings of my person, name, Estate and Family for thy sake? Do
not thou know that I have been often cast into the Den of Lions, and into the
fiery Furnace of wrath and envy, for thy names sake? O gracious God, how often
have I been reviled, numbered amongst transgressors, made as a scorn and odium
amongst men, looked upon as the offscouring of the earth, and now at last
civilly put to death, cast out of their Synagogues, and by unjust entence,
ejected out of that Estate which was thy gift, and all this for thy truth and
life? O blessed Majesty, do not thou behold the naked simplicity, and simple
innocence of thy servants spirit? who to the utmost of his power, resigns up
his body, soul and spirit, to follow the righteous Law of Sanctity, Purity, and
Virginity, through the mortification of the senses, the crucifying of the old
man, and the casting away of the body of sin, in conformity to the cross, death
and resurrection of Christ, that so at length by the supply and virtue of thy
spirit, there might be an actual conquest attained over sin, hell and death. O
thou Eye of Eternity, thou beholdest my will resigned to thine, without moving
this way or that, as to the permanency of, or freedom from these sufferings. O
my God, thou know I can neither desire the continuing censures and
condemnation of the world, nor the justification of my person and thy cause
from the mouths of the just, though in pure obedience to thy will, calling me
to it; I have addressed my self to the higher Powers, that they might be left
inexcusable, and have by writing exhibited the innocence of that life, imbodied
in flesh, which by the envy and subtilty of Satan, has been so much levelled
at, and overclouded by the mists and arrows of wrath and darkness. And now I
stand resigned in obedience to thy will, the true rule of righteousness, to
continue a public sign, and witness-bearer of Christ's sufferings, and to be
made yet more vile and contemptible for his sake, who enduring the Cross, and
despising the shame, now sits enthroned at thy own right hand. O omniscient
Majesty, thou know we are neither the better nor the worse for the
justification or condemnation of our fellow creatures; there is no satisfaction
in man, or the things of man; therefore the spirit of thy servant flies to
thee, like a dove into the true Ark of rest, to be caught up into thy eye, and
to be taken into thy heart, and bosom-love; for in such union often lies union of
hearts, union of wills, and union of spirits, there is satisfaction only. O how
my soul groans after this union with thee, and presential enjoyment of thee, O
my God, even to feed continually on the tree of life, to live in the day, and
light of thy glory, to see and behold the beauties of thy inmost holy
habitation, to eat, yea to banquet on Christ's flesh, and to drink, and that
abundantly of his holy blood, to be replenished and drencht throughout with the
wine and oil of the holy Ghost; for the full enjoyment of which, thy servant
shall continually wait upon thee, retiring from the broken Cisterns of the
Creature, to thee the Fountain of all good, to whom, with thy eternal Son and
holy Spirit, be rendered of Saints, Angels, and all creatures, glory, praise,
and Halleluiahs for ever.

Now I have run through the substantials of my Appendix, in which I have
exhibited the reasons, grounds, and issue of my appeal, the last of which has
been a denial of affording me a re-hearing, whence I am forced to appeal to the
just Judge of heaven and earth, who will certainly render to every one
according to his works, even reward and honor to the innocent, but judgment
and disgrace to the guilty; and though my adversaries may yet proceed to add
iniquity to iniquity, even to justify by writing, what they have most unjustly
acted against me, yet I shall have much peace in my conscience in what I have
here done, to show impartially the truth of things, however the prejudiced
world steer their judgment of me, which cannot but be very hard and
injurious, if they believe that late Named M. L. Register, etc. Though it is
certain he never made the Pamphlet, nor Epistle to it.
Pamphletier, who reckons me guilty of Sorcery, uncleanness, blasphemy, etc. as
though they had been proved against me referring the Reader to the whole
proceedings, which (as he says) are shortly to be made public. Now if we may
judge of these by their Praecursor, I can expect nothing but such a
misrepresenting of the proceedings, as M. Ford produced before sentence, and to
be condemned for what I was accused of, and for the horrid things exhibited
against me, which was the rule of the Commissioners proceedings, as the Author
of the Praecursor, in page 5. expresses in these words, Who were to proceed,
secundum allegata and exhibita, as really they did, for they gave sentence
according to the crimes alleged and exhibited against me, not secundum
probata, or things legally proved: and really, by the false reports of some of
the Commissioners, since And by the bitterness and untruths of the Author of
the Praecursor.
sentence concerning what has been proved against me, I cannot expect any
thing better then to be represented guilty of blasphemy, sorcery, uncleanness,
Rantism, and all things that may seem to make me vile and contemptible, and
worthy of death, or See the Praecursor, page 1. in the last notes upon the
Epistle, and page 3 at the latter part.
banishment. But in reference to this, I desire only the Reader seriously to
weigh the proofs on both sides, which have faithfully been transcribed by me
from the Depositions, together with those other evidences I produced, to clear
things which the Court would not admit of, though in equity they ought to have
done it, I say, I desire these may be seriously weighed together, because it is
unsuitable to that devoted silent life and way I desire to live in, to make
rejoinders, and frame replies, by way of contest and dispute, being willing
rather to enjoy my God in the retired silence of abstract contemplation, and to
lie under the reproaches, sladers, revilings, and passionate censures of my
adversaries, then trouble my spirit with any more things of this nature,
especially in this time, when Christ is entering into a severe Judgment with
all Isa. 66. 16. Isa. 65. 18.
flesh, and making way for his coming in power and glory, to make all things
new, and cause old things to be no moree remembered.

JOHN PORDAGE.

FINIS.
Reader,
Whereas by the sides of most Articles in the third Charge it is wrote, not
proved at all, the sense is, That nothing was said at all to prove them. And
further know, that my affairs not permitting me to attend the Printing, many
faults have escaped, the most considerable of which, thou may here take
notice of.

ERRATA.
Page 5, r. Punietur, l. 15, 16. a fine, for Government, r. Parliament, and for
Parliament, r. Government, p. 7. l. 9. dele his, l. 5 and 9. a fine, r.
Pendarvis, p. 11. l. 12. r. the want, p. 26. l. 2. r. chap. 3. l. 3. r. Rev.
12. p. 27. l. 8. a fine, r. As it is here stated, p. 30. l. 1. dele when, p.
33. l. 11. for returned, r. retired p. 36. r. further time, p. 41. in marg, (d)
for is, r. I am, p. 41. l 8. a fine, dele were, p. 54. l. 6. a fine, dele
reserve, p. 56. l. 7 ab. Art. 1. r. depose, p. 68. l. 8. mid. Paragh. for word,
r. world, p. 73. marg. (a) r. (...), marg, (f) r. (...), p. 74. l. 1. r.
cloudy, p. 77. l. 14. for persecution, r. perfection, l. 23. del. out, l 9. a
fine, for external, r. eternal, p. 79. l. ult. r. your persecutions, p. 80. l.
13. r. of, by the Prophets, l. 23. r. your kingdom. p. 88. l. 9. for certified,
r. rectified, p. 91. l. 6. ad fin. r. that it is, p. 92. l. 2. r* and that, p.
94. fig. 22. l. 2. r. the first, p. 96. in marg. del. that, p. 97. l. 22. r.
could not do it, p. 102. l. 6. a fine. r. accuser, p. 101. l. 3. r. know, p.
107. l. 25.. r. polity is contrived, p. 113. l. 28, 9. r. union of eyes.


