The Popish Forgery Detected.
^EMARKS on the PAPER delivered by Margaret Martel to the Undersheriff at the
Time and Place of her Execution, at Suffolk-street End, July 16. 1697. ^or the
Barbarous Murder of Elizabeth Pullen, Wife of Paul Pullen, Esquire
Published by Special Order.

HAD the Papists been well advised, they would have published nothing
concerning the Execution of Margaret Martel; for though she was of their
Communion, no body would have charged their Religion with the hideousness of
her Crime, there being no Christian Society that may pretend to be free from
Wicked and ^rate Villains. But the Genius of Popery, is to improve every thing
to their own ^ntage; and it being a common Maxim amongst them, That the most
notorious Lies (...) be sometimes very useful, though they should impose upon the
World but for an Hour, (...) have ventured to lay the Crime, committed by
Margaret Martel, upon Protestants; (...) at the same time, to recommend the
Doctrine of their Church to the People.

^his does manifestly appear from the Prayer she delivered to the
Undersheriff; where^ he says. That God had forsaken her, because she had
forsaken her Religion to embrace ^ther; [In the Profession of which, I have
always been a bad Liver, as having no Obligation ^o me to declare my self to
any Person who could hinder me from following my irregular Incli^ons.] This is
certainly a Masterpiece of Malice; and the Contrivers thereof must ^ds be
stocked with an unparalled Impudence, to face it out to the World, as it
(...) appear by the following Considerations.

It is not true, that the said Margaret Martel has abjured Popery to turn a
Protestant; (...) we defy those who framed this Prayer for her, to name the
Minister who received her ^ration, or the Church wherein it was performed,
either French, Dutch, or English. ^at this Assertion, which is laid down here
as a Matter of Fact, is a faceless, ground^ Forgery, (after our most diligent
Enquiry, and according to our best Knowledge,) at^ed with a horrid Impiety,
considering the nature of the Paper wherein it is con^ed, and the Circumstance
of the Dying Person; for they oblige her to call God Al^ty to witness a Lie.

But supposing she had turned Protestant, which is manifestly false, Does it
follow (...) thence that she was inspired with any bloody Principles in the
Communion of the ^stant Churches? This is more than they can make out. Whereas
we can easily prove, (...) God Almighty being represented every Sunday, in the
reading of the Ten Command^ts in vulgar Tongue, as thundering his Judgments
against Murders and Assassinations, (...) shall do no Murder; and our Divines
expressing themselves every where against those ^es, they are (God be thanked)
somewhat scarce amongst Protestants, and very com^ in Popish Countries. We may
observe further, that the Protestant Churches of France (...) so severe in this
Particular, that though a Murderer had obtained their King's Pardon, (...) would
not admit him to the Participation of the Lord's Supper, till after several
Years ^ance.

I. We need not go out of the Church of Rome to look for the Masters who, in
greater ^hood, have taught her Murder and Assassination. The Famous Caramuel
gives leave, (...) to Priests, to kill those who Slander them; and Molina owns,
that he dares not con^ such who kill those who endeavor to Rob them, even when
the thing attempted to (...)bed should be worth only a Crown. These two Doctors
are sufficient to make an ^n probable: And Father Bauni has positively decided,
that a Priest would be guilty (...) great Sin, did he refuse to Absolve a Man
whose Actions should be grounded on a pro^ Opinion.

(...). It is therefore in the Romish Church, and not among Protestants, that
Margaret Martel become hold with the greatest Crimes. We have several
Presumptions of it; but she ^d her self upon her Body an undeniable Proof of
this Truth; for when she was put in^ Grave, they discovered she had been
branded upon her Shoulder with a Flower-de-^. This Punishment was certainly
inflicted upon her while she was in France, and a Papist; therefore she was
used to great Crimes before she came into England, and the ^testant, as they
will suppose. She has owned that her Father was banished out of R^ Murder; no
wonder then that she was able to frame the horrid design for which she
suffered, having inherited that bloody temper from her Father, and been
confirmed there^ the Doctors of the Church wherein she was educated.

V. There is all the likelihood imaginable to believe that Popish Priests do
not insist e^ on the hideousness of Murder; for Margaret Martel does not speak
a word, in her Po^ of the Murder she committed on Mrs. Pullen; contenting her
self to say in general (...) she was agreat Sinner. So great and barbarous a
Crime did certainly deserve a particular (...) public Confession; but since
she has not done it, Who is to be blamed? Charity oblig^ to believe, that she
did not think of it in the Circumstances she was in; but her Di^ ought to have
put her in mind of it, considering that she had not owned her Crime to the
^ges. A Sinner who is truly penitent, and sensible of the grievousness of his
Crime, will (...) hide it under some general terms; but on the contrary,
proclaim it to all the World. This (...) be made out by a great many
illustrious Examples.

VI. The other design the Authors of this Prayer proposed to themselves, is, to
show the ^vantages and usefulness of the Auricular Confession which is
practiced in the Church of R^ but although one would not deny that this Auricular
Confession may be of some use (...) the Popish Church being guilty of Idolatry,
and of several Errors inconsistent with ^tion, it does not follow that one
ought to turn to, or remain in her Communion, bec^ of this Confession; which,
after all, is not attended with the advantages and use ^hinted at in this
Prayer.

VII. Margaret Martel, or rather the Director of her Conscience, tell us, That
had she (...) under an obligation to confess herself, she would not have
committed this Crime, (the (...) she makes use of do import as much;) but she
did Confess her self at Paris before she ^branded with a Flower-de-luce. Her
Father did the like, before he committed the Mu^ for which he was banished. The
Ravaillacs, Gerards, and Garnets, made use also of the ^ricular Confession; How
then did they commit those abominable Crimes, if the Confe^ is so powerful to
restrain Men from Sin? Rome and Italy, where the Auricular Confe^ is so
frequently used, ought, according to this Doctrine, to be altogether free from
Murth^ and other great Crimes; whereas there are more Assassinations committed
in those Part in all the Protestant Countries of the World put together. Where
is then the great ^tage of the Auricular Confession?

VIII. The Protestants have always approved a sort of Confession, which may be
called, (...) Direction; and think that Sinners would find a great benefit to
apply themselves to their ^nisters for their Advice and Instruction; but they
believe, and may prove, that the Ro^ Church is in the wrong. 1. For having
added the Confession to the number of the S^ments instituted by Christ. 2. For
obliging all Christians, upon pain of Damnation, to ^fess all then mortal Sins.
3. For giving, or rather pretending to give, to her Priests a Po^ to absolve
Sinners. 4. To substitute in the room of the Duties required by true Repentance
the abstinence of certain Meat, the reciting of some Pater's and Ave Maria's,
the visiting (...) some Relics, and the like, which are of a dangerous
consequence; for men being natural perverse, are apt to follow their wicked
Inclinations, and give up themselves to all sins, if the can but persuade
themselves, that the Absolution and Pardon of all their Crimes are so ea^
purchased.
This is certainly the reason of the depravation of the manners of the Inhabit^
of Rome, the Center of the Romish Church, and the most debauched City in the
World.

IX. Those who framed the Prayer of Margaret Martel, wherein the Protestant
Religion (...) in general so unjustly aspersed, have doubtless contrived also a
scurrilous Ballad sung in the Streets to make odious to the common People the
French Protestants who live amongst us but the Artifice is too plain to take
effect; for even Children of fifteen years of age may remember, that there were
few French Protestants in England, before the Cruelties of L^ XIV. drove them
from their native Country; and that all did not come over with wood^ Shoes.
Our People may indeed ask the French Papists, why they live here, since they h^
the liberty to go home?

This pitiful Scoundrel seems very uneasy, because the protestants of England
have open^ their Arms to their distressed Brethren; but it is not doubted, but
the King and Parliament, who have taken the Refugees under their Protection,
will take care also to punish the Impedence of a Fellow who dares presume to
reflect on their Compassion and Generosity.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed; and sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1697.


