THE POLITICS OF THE French KING, LEWIS the XIV.

DISCOVERED: With Respect to Rome. Emperor, and Princes of the Empire. Spain.
England. United Provinces. Northern Princes. Suisse Cantons: And of Savoy.


With a short Account of His RELIGION.

Translated from the French.

Licensed according to Order.

THE Policy of France, And the MAXIMS of LEWIS the XIV. Discovered to all
EUROPE.
IT is not Birth which chiefly distinguishes Princes from other Men, but their
Parts and Abilities: How many of them find we in History; who having but an
indifferent share of them, make no other figure, but to fill up Genealogy; and
whose Birth-days, and the days of their Death, are the only two which make any
noise in the World. It Is according as this Spirit or Genius is disposed in a
Sovereign, that he acts for the good and welfare, or for the misfortune and
undoing of his People. Woe to thee O Land, says the Wise Man, when thy King is
a Child, and thy Princes eat in the Morning: Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy
King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season for Strength, and
not for Drunkenness.

The Jewish Nation were happy under David and Solomon, but Rehoboam spoke to
them in this manner, My little Finger shall be thicker than my Fathers Loins;
for whereas my Father put an heavy Yoke upon you, I will put more to your Yoke:
My Father chastised you with Whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions.

Augustus Caesar was called Pater Patriae, Father of the People of Rome; but
Nero their Hangman. Philip II. was born of a wise Father, who Reigned with
general applause; but yet he was a Blood-thirsty Man, who spared not his own
Blood, and squandred away what Charles V. had preserved with so much Glory and
Prudence. Francis the First was the Idol of the French, and Darling of the
Nobility; he acquired the Title of a mild, gentle Prince in peace, Victorious
in War, the Father and Restorer of Learning and liberal Arts; but Charles IX.
that of Murderer.

Henry IV. was surnamed the Great, by reason of his great Actions, he was the
Darling and Father of his People, and his beneficent sweet disposition seemed
to promise a happy Reign, if a cursed Hand had not put a stop to the course of
his Life. Lewis XIII. was surnamed the Just, grounded without doubt upon the
Gospel, which assures us, That blessed are the poor in Spirit, and that theirs
is the Kingdom of Heaven. It was rather Richlieu's Spirit that reigned than his.

Lewis XIV. did not discover his Inclinations whilst he was under the Tuition
of his Mother and Mazarines lash, but so soon as ever this latter was dead, he
showed what he was.

His Flatterers in imitation of his Grand father gave him the Name of Great,
although he had not as yet deserved it. It Is true indeed, He is Great, as to
his Ambition, a great Usurper of the Territories of his Neighbor, a great
Enemy to the Holy See, to the Pope, and a great Persecutor of the Hugonots, His
Reign is full of nothing but great Monopolyes, and his Louis d'ors are the only
pass par touts, or Keys that open the Gates to his Conquests. He was born
Armed, and his first nourishment was the Blood of his Nurses which he drew
himself, that ambitious Spirit he is possessed withal, would willingly sacrifice
a good part of his Subjects to his Passion and Greatness: Woe be to thee O Land
that groans under the burden of such a Prince! Woe to that People enslaved
under his Dominion! Under the Reign of Antiochus the Illustrious, the Jews
often cried to God, that he would deliver them out of the hand of their
Oppressor: Why may not the French put up the like Petition; nay, and all Europe
besides to be delivered out of the hands of that Usurper. Lewis the Great
thought he already held in his hand the Scepter of the Monarchy of all Europe,
when Vienna was besieged; yea, he thought it within two hairs breadth of its
destruction, which he supposed inevitable, grounded upon the Prophesies of
Drabitius; but perceiving this way stopped up, he betakes himself to his first
Errors and former Road, he waits with great impatience to see what the Snares
which he laid at the time of the Queen of Spains Marriage, will produce: Man
purposes, but God disposes.

Time impairs the Mind as well as the Body, and Princes are oftentimes fain to
let their Successors do what they were not able to do themselves, and so much
the more, because that same Divine Providence, on which Princes depend as well
as the rest of Mankind, does not mete here below by the measure of their
Ambition: Ambitious Men build Castles in the Air, and by their good will would
possess the whole Earth beside. This itch reigns at this day in France, and
this is it which quite takes up the mind of Lewis XIV. as we shall see by the
sequel, and the course he takes to accomplish his Designs.

The Policy of France, and its Maxims in respect of all Europe in general.
HEretofore Men accused Spain for aspiring to an Universal Monarchy: If it was
so, I suppose Philip II. begun to lose this hope, when he perceived the Sea and
Winds oppose his designs, and that the Armada, which he called Invincible, (on
Board of which he thought to have brought into Spain the British Isles, etc.)
came to nothing, and that his choicest Troops who were embarked therein,
served only to fight against the Waves, and feed the Fishes of the Sea;
moreover, when he saw, that during the whole War of the Netherlands, (a small
handful of People whom he called Gueux or Beggars, in derision) were always
able to hold up their Head against him, nay, and to beat him in several
Encounters, until such time as in the Year 1609, he was fain to cry Quarter,
make a Truce with the United Provinces, and acknowledge them for Free States.

This was a very bitter Pill, and would scarce go down with a Prince who was so
highly ambitious: But it behoved him to swallow it, and it wrought so strongly
upon him, that he lost Seven Provinces at a clap by it, and part of the Indies:
Insomuch, That this longing desire after the Universe began to abate by reason
of his Age which had already lost the first heat of Youth, and by reason of the
bad success of all his Enterprises. Philip III. was as little fortunate as he,
and Philip IV. had great disappointments toward France and the Low Countries
and was very glad by clapping up a Peace to acknowledge those who had been his
Subjects for a Free and Sovereign Commonwealth, holding of none but God
Almighty. Charles XI. Reigning at present is a good Prince, who loves his ease,
and would willingly quit all the Claims and Titles of his Ancestors to an
Universal Monarchy for a Son and Heir to the Crown of Spain to succeed him.
Malherbe told us long since, that if it were true, that Spain aspired to an
Universal Monarchy, he would advise his King to beg of God to prolong the World
as much as he can. This Malady ceasing in Spain, has passed into France; but
France being wiser does not grasp so much, and her King's Ambition is only
confined to Europe, a wish worthy of such a great Prince; and who, if we
consider him aright, could scarce demand less; his Neighbors ought narrowly to
watch his water; for certain it is, France cannot aggrandize her self without
encroaching upon her nearest Neighbors; as she does really every day already.
When the House of Austria made broad signs of her design upon the Universe; all
the Princes of Christendom rose up against her, and entered into an Association
to prevent her. Charles V. after the Battle of Pavia, where Francis was taken
Prisoner; thought himself above all, but he found business enough. The Pope,
King of England, the Venetians, the Grand Duke of Tuscany, the Swisse made a
League against him, to hinder this Emperor from bringing France, and
consequently the rest of Italy under his subjection. It was not for any
kindness the Pope and King of England bore King Francis, that they combined
together to relieve him, but because Charles V. became so great, that he would
by his good Will have made himself Master of the World. Now at present,
forasmuch as this Itch is past into France, All Princes of Europe for some time
have run counter to whatsoever their Ancestors did in the Reign of Charles V,
and Philip II. and instead of opposing they have abetted and concurred with the
designs of France, some out of base compliance, others out of fear. There are
none but the Princes of Nassau alone who have always been fatal to whosoever
had a mind to aspire to this sublime Monarchy of the Universe: Do not Men
admire with me the wretched Policy of several Princes and States in the World,
who look on with their Arms a cross, and behold the French King to advance so
fast, and take Luxemburg, a City of such grand Importance to Europe; only the
Prince of Orange presented himself upon the breach with the Low Countries but
who not being in a capacity to do any thing by himself, was forced to retreat:
The French King would never have taken it, had England and the States,
withstood it, he has no cause to brag of it; it is a truth all the World knows
but too well; he was so cunning to get the King of Great Britain on his side,
that he consented to take what was not his own, and to baffle the rest by
illusory promises of an Universal Peace, after the taking in of Luxemburg,
which they suffered him to do; and this gross valiant Captain (of a
Trencher-man) the Marquess of Grana, Governor of the Low Countries, who was
not promoted to this place, but upon his demonstrating the means of being able
to preserve this most Important place to the Court of Spain; a place, I say, so
necessary to Spain for the preservation of the Low Countries by the assistance
of Germany; and albeit, he should have minded nothing else, but the
preservation of that same City, his own Honor, as well as Duty to, and
interest of his King his Master, being all engaged therein: Instead of doing
which, this Fat-gut put into it only a pitiful Garrison of Twelve, or Fifteen
Hundred Men, instead of Four Thousand, and was wholly taken up in fortifying
the City of Namur with his Regiments, and some other places which were Cities
on the boundaries which France would not have dared so much as to touch: Would
you not swear such a Fellow conspired to aggrandize France, and concurred with
the Designs of Lewis XIV. When the King in 1667 would have undertaken the
Conquest of the Spanish Netherlands, England, Swedeland, and the United
Provinces, associated together by the Triple League, forced him soon to quit
his hold; they obliged him to re-procure, and make a Peace with Spain; and to
restore to it, some part of what he had usurped and taken away. It would have
been just so, if the Neighboring Princes had done the same at such time as he
attacked Luxemburg: Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you: But France
cunning and subtle had sufficiently tried how prejudicial this League was to
her; she could never be at rest till she had plucked this Thorn out of her Foot;
and so soon as ever the term was expired, she could not be satisfied till she
had found out a way to hoodwink England, and so got her disingaged from the
Tripple-knot. The Duchess of Portsmouth like another Dalilah came over out of
France into England, to lull asleep the Sampson of this Kingdom: France found
out the way to act, and speak so fair, that she hook't in Dunkirk by Promises
and Money, at the beginning of the Reign of Charles II, King of Great Britain:
A Town of so great Consequence to England, in as much as it affords a good
entrance into Picardy, and Flanders. It Is no new thing for France to be
troubled with this itching mind to sieze on the places of her Neighbors, and
to enlarge her Dominion from one end of Europe to the other. The Duke of Rohan
told us heretofore, that Princes commanded People; but that Self-Interest
commanded Princes. (Without question he would have added something else had he
lived in this Age,) and especially Lewis the XIV. We may see Examples of it,
day by day, and to secure his Ambition, all times and seasons are good for him;
in Peace, in War, in Cessation of Arms. Interest is the evil Angel has so long
reigned through France, we are taught out of History, how Godfrey of Bulloign
having a mind to take a Journey for the Conquest of the Holy Land; and coming
short of Money to put himself in a capacity to do it, sold many of his Cities
and Lands; amongst others, the City of Metz with the Country adjoining, which
its own Citizens and Inhabitants purchased of him for the Sum of an Hundred
Thousand Crowns. They enjoyed this their purchase till the Year of our Lord
1551, in which Charles V. did so evilly entreat the Protestants of Germany.
Henry II. King of France, under a pretense, seemed forward to send Relief to
the said Protestants of Germany: In effect, he dispatched the Constable of
Monmorency with Four Thousand Men, in all probability for this Expedition; but
it was quite and clean for another design, as the sequel will make appear: He
demanded passage of the City of Metz; who were for the most part of the same
Religion with those who were molested in Germany; between whom, and the
Emperor, there was no good understanding: They granted to the King with
abundance of joy, whatsoever he required of them in reference to his Troops
passage; and in testimony of their good will, they caused Tables to be set up
in the Streets, to make the Soldiers eat and drink on their passage, with huge
demonstration of Friendship and Rejoicing. But alas! Their Laughter was soon
changed into Weeping; so soon as ever the Constable (who was received by the
Magistrates with all Tokens of Honor and Benevolence) had entered the City, he
feigned himself to have a fit of the Gout, and to feel intolerable pains; he
declared his great desire to have his Will made, not knowing what might befall
him, in the War he was about to commence; and entreated the Magistrates of the
City, and all the Nobility that they would assist as Witnesses of it. In the
mean time he had given order to two Colonels to sieze, one of them upon the
Gate by which the Troops entered, and the other on that, by which they went
out. To the first, He gave order to cause part of the Army, which was still
without to advance; and to the other, to bid those who were already gone out to
enter in again: Now the Constable seeing the Magistrates and chief Nobility
round his Bed, expecting his Orders; up starts he like a Lion enraged, and
sheathed his Poniard in the Mayors Breast, and at the Signal given, his Guards
rusht in, and Assassinated all the Nobility they met with in his Chamber;
whereupon the Army that had entered the City at the same time, cried up and
down the City, The Town is won: It was plundered, and subdued to the Bloody
Dominion of the King, and of an Allie as it was, soon became a Subject. This
was the Bloody Conquest of Henry II. And there is your French Policy.

Lewis XIII. not knowing how to get possession of Lorain, by the Advice and
Counsel of that most Subtle and Crafty Politician Cardinal Richlieu, comes to
Lions with an Army under pretense of some design against Savoy. The Cardinal
gave notice beforehand to Duke Charles of Lorrain, that he should make his
personal appearance before the King, to pay him his respects, and assure him by
word of mouth of his good intentions toward his Person. This Duke thinking no
harm, suffered himself to be persuaded to it in earnest, departs from Nancy to
salute the King at the head of his Troops: After he had complemented him,
thinking he might return home again, he found it to be a Lions Den, arrested he
was upon pretense of some old claims. His Eminence at that time performing the
Office of Mediator, propounded that to make his peace with the King, and that
he might enjoy his Liberty, to put into the Kings hands Nancy his chief City,
and the Key of his Duchy: Thus far he must go to be freed from his Arrest:
Well Nancy was delivered up, the King entered into it like a Conqueror with
his Army at his heels: Observe the Policy of France in this particular.

The demolishing of the Castle at Orange is just such another trick, shows
their temper, for upon some little difference that arose between the two
Princesses, Royal, and Dowager, Lewis XIV. King of France, as usually he does,
would intermeddle with it, and that he might make them agree, and that the
young Prince (then under Age) avoid the Expenses of maintaining a Garrison
there; he caused the Bastions of the Castle to be pulled down, and left nothing
but the Dungeon, which together with the Town he could take at pleasure, as
since he has done. What the same King did at Strasburg is much the same: This
City looked upon its self secure after the Treaty at Nemegen, confirmed by the
powerful Letters the King writ to them time after time, after the assurances
his Resident then in the City gave them, that his Master desired nothing more
than to live in a fair correspondence with the Emperor, and with the Cities of
the Empire; last of all by the suits and importunities of the same Resident, a
Traitor was Elected Burgomaster, who did nothing but by the Council of France.
The Magistracy and Citizens thus lulled asleep by all these fair promises and
protestations, dismissed the Swisses their Guards; but they were no sooner
without doors, but Mr. Louvois with a puissant Army began to invest their City;
obliges them to surrender on what conditions soever he thought fit to prescribe
them; even at this present they make no Conscience to violate those sorry
Articles which were granted to them, and to misuse them like Slaves, as he does
all the rest of his Subjects. Take notice of your Humor of France, which is
always restless.

After the peace at Nemeghen, how many Cities and Towns has he taken in
Flanders? How many of them has he burnt and pulled down to the Ground, to
occasion the peoples revolt, to cause them to rely wholly upon him to defend
them from utter ruin, and to get free from all those great Contributions
wherewith he loads and oppresses them. Take notice of the French Policy.

After the Pyrennean Treaty, which was but just signed, whereof this present
King's Marriage was, as it were the Seal and Condition, notwithstanding all
those Oaths and Promises this King took and made to his Father in Law, Philip
IV. not to assist Portugal; no sooner did he return to Paris, but he sent
Mounsieur Schomberg with some Regiments and Money, and all this to weaken
Spain; which made a balance with him of the Empire of Europe, so that neither
Peace, Truce, nor Promise, nor Protestation are able to sway him, when his
Interest is at stake; no, nor Religion it self: How zealous a Catholic soever
he would fain seem to be, is not a Fence strong enough to restrain him, as we
shall make appear in the following Discourse

When Lewis XIV. sent an Ambassador to the King of Siam, under the pretense of
converting him, do you really believe this King endeavored to extend his
Mission so far? No no, he works no Conversion, but where he may send his
Dragoons, who are his booted Apostles: It is to spy the Country by his
Jesuits, to endeavor by means of the Sieur Constance, a Venetian by Nation,
and Chief Manager of that King's Affairs, to drive out other Nations, to settle
some sort of Commerce in that same Country; that he may there have certain
Emissaries, who may ever and anon put Jealousies into the King of Siam's Head,
by reason of the Hollanders growing Greatness in the Indies, to make the
business of Bantam serve as a pretense, making another construction of it.
Observe the Policy of France: She has her politic tricks which succeed
wondrous well: This is the reason why she sends none but notable Men into all
the Courts of Europe, and such who are wonderful quick sighted and versed in
Affairs; whom it is all one to her whether she fetch from the Camp, the Bar, or
from the Church it self, as occasion serves; according to the places wherein
she would have them employed: But more especially, it is requisite they should
be dextrous and cunning, brazen-faced, that they have the knack of promising
fair; that they don't insist too much upon certain petty scruples, which honest
men ought to have: In a word, to express it more intelligibly, they must be
Cheats and Knaves; as for Spain, they most an end send thither one of the
Clergy, by reason that every one knows, that persons of their Character have
great credit there, and in considerable esteem.

In England at such time as the Parliament were more powerful than they be at
present: Thither they sent the Marquess De Rou'vigni, who was of the Reformed
Religion, and their Delegate General at Court, and was of the very same temper
that all the other Ministers are, and swaid by the same politic designs.

Into Holland they usually send some well-spoken Man, who one would think would
ruin his Master, by promising, from which the King never gets off, but by
standing to nothing; who does what in him lies to insinuate himself into the
favor of your Dutch Ladies, either by play, or a liberal entertainment, and as
they have a mighty influence upon their Husbands temper and mind, they cast
about to learn of them what they were not able to know from the Husband
himself: Now seeing they began to give no credit to him who resides there at
present; the King, as himself confesses in his destiny of Princes, was foret
to send him his Holy Spirit of France in all haste; so that by this means he
might be looked upon as sincere and infallible in whatsoever he should say.

To the Courts of Germany they dispatch your Brawny Fellows, who are able to
bare Wine well; thereby, that they may be made fit Table Companions for the
Prince, whither their Commission sends them; for at the time when the third
Course comes up, when the Wine begins to operate, they speak diverse things
which they would not have divulged at another time: As says the Proverb, In
vino veritas. Don't believe that France sends a Churchman to Rome, and why?
Because they are all inferior to the Pope, and there is not the pittifullest
Priest, but is confident, he shall be one day Cardinal; as Soldiers are, that
they shall one day be Captains. Thither is sent a Nogaret, who bauls aloud; and
to the Popes Infallibility, opposes the Power and Strength of his Master, the
King.

Into other Courts, where greediness of Money prevails over their own Interest,
there is not wanting presents, and such a Prince there is, who is betrayed even
to his Pillow.

In fine, All Weapons are convenient to this Policy of France, provided they
can but bring about their Design: You see in all Courts Roman Catholic
Officers, and all for sooth, for having fought Duels; but retiring out of their
Country is not their chief business, that indeed is their pretense; but they
have other aims and good instructions, and you see them after some time
expired, return into France, to receive the reward of their employ; who bring
along with them information concerning the strength or weakness of the places
from whence they come, which in due season may be advantageous and useful to
France; yet what is most deplorable, is the blindness of several Princes to
entrust such like Men with Employment, even among Protestants. Mounsieur Vauban
the present chief Enginier of France followed this Trade particularly in
Holland; it is confessed, we must say, he serves his Master; but it behooves other
Princes to have a special care of him. You are in the right, you say true, and
it were to be wished all other Potentates would do the same for the quiet of
Europe.

Another Maxim of the Policy of France is, that when any Prince or Princess is
to be Married, that may be for their turn, he causes Marriages to be proposed,
and does his utmost to place French Princesses in the Houses of Foreign
Princes, whom they never fail to teach their Lesson, and tell them it is their
Duty, when time serves; and before their departure, to make them acknowledge
how much they are obliged to the King; and the means whereby they may render
him their acknowledgments: But yet it is of fresh date, how the King of
Portugal escaped him; not but that the French King by his Ministers and
Emissaries did what lay in her power; and to his comfort, he neglected nothing.
Spain has been too hard for him at this time: At present the Policy of France
is set a work to match the Royal Prince of Poland no question with some Natural
Daughter of the Kings, since they have had the boldness to dare to present such
an one to the Duke of Bavaria, who values himself as much, not to mention his
Right to value himself more than the Prince of Poland: Nay, I believe it had
been a thing already done, had they but been sure he would have succeeded to
the Crown; for failing in that, he would have brought no great Advantage to
France. It Is very improbable the King of Poland would have refused her with a
considerable Dowry; for he is already much obliged to the King of France, Two
Hundred Thousand Livers a year bestowed on one of his Sons, by giving him the
Abbeys of St. Germain, and St. Dennis, deserved well to be hearkened to:
Besides, the Queen ought to be well satisfied therewith; her Father is made
Duke and Peer of France, and they have promised to receive her as Queen, in
case she comes into France, although she be born Subject to the King of France:
So that it is not at all to be questioned, but that if the Crown were secured
to the young Prince, the business would have been done e're now: There are
Princesses enough in France to be chosen ready for this Match. Is it not to
exalt himself, like the Chief Monarch of Europe to erect at Metz a Souveraign
Court, before which the King makes all Kings and Princes be cited, who possess
any Lands, whom he styles his Dependants for the Territories that no ways
belong to him; they upon default of appearing, not owning this False,
Tyrannical, Universal Tribunal, he gets the Lands adjudged to him, takes
possession of them without any form of Process, but by his Cannon Law. If any
one contradict this, the King of Sweden, the Princes of Monthelliard, Pettite
Pierre the Duke of Lorrain, and a great many other Princes will tell you, what
a Monster this Chamber is, that it devours whatsoever comes in its way; and
what is yet more unwarrantable, is, that he dares ground his Right at this day
to some Lands in Germany, upon the final determination this Chamber of Metz
made in his behalf, as we shall shortly see in a Memorial he has lately sent
to the Diet at Ratisbone. France has besides a notable Advantage to frame her
Pretensions and Titles: I mean, there are so many cunning Fellows in Paris,
knowing so exactly to imitate the Ancient Gothic Character of Five or Six
Hundred Years date, that one would swear they were in reality Authentic: Now
by this means they hammer out a Dependence far fetched, which the Devil himself,
as cunning as he is, could not contradict: And then who knows what is still
behind the Curtain, and not come to light; which will not appear but in due
time and place; when a favorable opportunity shall require it. Can a Man
forbear laughing when he hears the praises which these flatterers bestow on
Lewis XIV. persuading him he has procured peace both to his Enemies and to all
Europe. These Tales are very fit to be told to the Kingdom of Siam, as
Mounsieur de Chaumont, the French Ambassador was not backward to do in his
Speech to that King, which is to be found at large in a Book Entitled, A
Voyage into Siam; and they have not been wanting in like manner to put off such
sort of Trifles to the King of China; such like stories, are good for nothing
else but to be obtruded on those Countries, though not here in Europe, where
our Eyes have seen, and Ears heard the contrary: Is it not strange to meet with
such Writers who commit such impertinent Trifles as these to paper? Don't we
know what the proceedings of the King of France have been to procure a Peace
with the States of the United Provinces? For seeing Fortune began to change, he
Agreed as touching the City of Nemeghen, which belonged to the Hollanders; so
that no body went to Versailles, to demand it of him: He offers them Mastricht,
which was still in his hands: Yea, If the States had not been so very hasty to
grant him what he demanded, with so much importunity, and for which he made so
many fair promises, he would have been glad to have defrayed all the Expense of
the War: Pray who can tell what it has cost him under hand to obtain this
Peace, which he sued for with so much instant Entreaties, sparing nothing that
he might endeavor to get the States to slip their Necks out of the Collar, and
forsake their Allies; he went so far as to surrender diverse places to Spain to
serve for boundaries between his Kingdom, and the United Provinces. In saying,
that if the States had not been too forward to hasten on the signing the Peace,
France would have paid the Expenses of the War. I hope I do not speak without
good grounds for what I say; several Reasons obliged them to clap up this peace
in all haste separately, because they saw their strength decreased daily: It is
certain that after the Battle at St. Dennis, which was not fought out, by
reason of a Peace, the Prince of Orange would have marched on into France with
his Troops: Moreover the King knew full well, that being forced to agitate a
General Peace, it would never be effected till he should surrender to the Duke
of Lorrain all his Lands; and that he could not possibly induce the Elector of
Brandenburg to restore to the Sweed, what he had taken from him according to
his obligation thereto, when the Peace in particular with him was in agitation:
France had a great mind to make him restore to the King of Sweden his Allie,
what he had lost in taking up Arms for the service of France; so that here are
your sufficient reasons for demanding particular Peace with the States; and
that it was not he that procured it for Europe, as he boasts and publishes up
and down: If any one was the cause of Peace to the Empire, 'twas the States of
the United Provinces; for when they had made peace at the instant supplication
of the King, the General Peace followed immediately, ushered in by the
mediation of the States General: It Is most certain, the King made this Peace by
compulsion; he began to do things, but by halves; the States and his Allies
reinforced themselves daily. The Hollanders were recovered out of their
Lethargy; the Prince of Orange day by day became more experienced; the Duke of
Luxemburg's familiar Spirit grew feeble, and began to forsake him; part of the
French Troops perished, the remainder were much harassed and worn out,
Swedeland had done her worst, and was at her last shifts; so that it was
absolutely necessary to afford some respite and relief to the French Troops by
a Peace, being that this Peace was partly but a forced one, the King was
obliged to give up whatsoever he had taken; so also it continued but a short
while, and just then, when the Emperor had his hands full of the Turk; and
when the Spaniard and his Allies had laid down their Arms, and did acquiesce
upon the strict performance of the Treaty of Nemeghen, the most Christian King
like a Lion, falls foul upon the Low Countries. Now it was convenient to stop
this Torrent, to deliver up a good many places, and to give ground, and to
patch up a Truce in the midst of Peace, which will continue no longer than his
Interest will permit; a body may say, and that truly, that France makes but
small difference between her Subjects and her Neighbors. Genoua may bear me
witness of the truth of this; he treads them under foot, and fleeces them all
alike, when occasion serves; and when his Will and Pleasure is, who is he that
dares assure us, that the Truce will be a stronger Bank to put a stop to his
Ambition, and his own private Ends, than the two Treaties of Peace of the
Pyrenneans and Nemegen: That Numerous Army, that amounts to near One Hundred
and Fifty Thousand Men, which he maintains as well in Peace, and in time of
Cessation of Arms, as in time of War; sufficiently declares the French Policy
that has always one foot up ready, a going to march; and sits on thorns,
having ever more Armies in a readiness to execute her designs: They make them
Camp, and de-Camp, continually to be in motion, that they may use and accustom
their Neighbors to it, for fear they should give them occasion of suspicion,
when they march in good earnest to fall upon any place, or surprise it.

One of the King of France his Maxims, is to hinder these Neighbors, lest they
should augment their Forces, but remain always in a condition, not to be able
to do them harm on the sudden, except they have a mind to have them about their
Ears; as we have observed at such time as the United Provinces were partly
resolved to levy Sixteen Thousand Men; what Solicitations, what delusory
Promises, nay, how many Journeys did the Comte D' Avaux take to hinder it: He
did nothing but talk up and down of the sincerity and reality of the Covenants
on his part, just as if no body beside his Master had any Honesty; and as if he
were the only Man for keeping his word in Treaties: All that was, because he
saw plainly that this new Commission given out, would obstruct the taking the
City of Luxemburg, promising that there his Master would stop, and put an end
to all his Claims and Demands: But he is still as ready to take another, as he
was before the taking of this City, as we saw lately at Mons; it would be all
one whether the States should oppose this proceeding, or no; it would be so
long as the Princes of Europe should suffer themselves to be hood-winkt by base
fear, or complaisance, wonderful advantageous indeed to promote the designs of
France in Europe; no body taking notice that France is as sordid as her Master;
and that both of them are afraid of cold Iron.

All these new Conversions of some, and Persecutions of others which we see in
France, is nothing but to blind the Catholic Princes, and to amuse them so
long, till he fall upon some City or State, professing the Protestant Religion:
The House of Austria knows too well this Stratagem; she practiced it her self
heretofore, when she had higher designs on foot than now she has; when she
attacked a Protestant Prince, her pretense then was that she would Extirpate
Heresy: This is the French King's trade at this day; it was expedient for him
out of mere necessity to begin at home with his own Subjects; and as that could
not choose but have weakened him, he solicites others to do as much as he: What
pains has he taken to set the Swisse at variance, and induce the Catholic
Cantons to fall out with the Protestants, and then afterward, when they are at
odds, to fall upon them? But the Pope has redressed that, and accommodated the
matter betwixt them. France has brought it so to pass, that she has forced
the Duke of Savoy to rid himself of his best Subjects, the Inhabitants of the
Valleys being under a premunier as he is, he could not go back with his word;
nay, I am fully persuaded, France would be extremely glad that England would do
the like; by that means to weaken her to such a degree, that she shall not be
able to do any thing, when Lewis XIV. has a mind to fall upon the Low
Countries, and remove from the States of the United Provinces, all possible
means to prevent it; and so by little and little, make himself Master of
Europe; as we shall see by the following story of the French Policy, and its
Maxims, in respect of Sovereigns in particular.

The Policy of France, in respect of Rome, and His Holiness.
ALL the World knows the Veneration and Respect all Catholic People have for
the Holy See, and the Holy Father that they look upon him as Christ's Vicar
upon Earth, St. Peter's Successor, Universal Bishop, and as we are taught by
the Council of Trent, the most Holy Lord, to whom all Kings, Princes, and
People owe an entire Obedience; fail but in this Duty, and you smell rank of
Heresy; according to the Council of Constance, it deserves Fire and Faggot.
Would you not swear to see Lewis XIV. persecute the Protestants at that rate he
does; that he is the most Devout Son his Holiness has, whereas others do but
kiss his Toe; he would out of Devotion kiss something else: But it is quite
contrary: He is a very Rebellious Son, who cares not a fig for all the Holy
Father's Remonstrances and Declarations, who dispoyles him of his Goods,
ravishes from him his State, and makes an entry into Rome by his Ambassador, as
loftily and haughtily as Artaban. And here is the French Spirit to invade the
Holy Father in his Patrimony, Authority, and Conduct: First, In his Patrimony
of the Church, by depriving him of his Regalities in France; which is a Right
the Popes have enjoyed this many Ages; which the Kings, Lewis the XIV. his
Predecessors have granted to St. Peter's Successors: What Submission, what
Remonstrance has not the present Pope made to oblige the King not to incroach
and seize upon the Rights of the Church; withal telling him, that such like
Usurpations as these, have proved always satal to Kings and Princes Families?
Yet all this has had none effect upon him; only the King said sometimes, the
Pope is a mighty good man, I would not vex him: But in the mean time, never
restores what he had deprived him of. Just such another trick as he played with
Spain, when in time of Peace he took from it part of the Low Countries; he
protested every where that he had no Intent to break the Peace, but only took
his Dependances, and what of Right was his own. You may turn the French Policy
loose which way you will; it presently finds out a way to oblige his Holiness
to permit an Assembly of the Clergy of his Kingdom in the year 1682, wherein it
was declared, as we all know, that he was not Infallible; that he had no Power
over the Temporalities of Kings, that he was subject to Counsels, and by
himself he had not any power to make any one Article of Faith. Could he have
thwarted the Pope more sensibly in his Authority than he did at that time;
besides, he obliged all the Preachers, Monks and Jesuits themselves, to teach
the same in the Pulpit, and in their Colleges to their Auditors. The
Archbishop of Paris, who was President of this Assembly, who as you may well
think, was not too well beloved at Rome? thought at least it was fit to make
himself feared, that they might come and offer him a Cardinals Cap. To this
effect he writ into England, to be informed what course Henry VIII. took when
he altered the Religion in that Kingdom; yet all this had not the least effect
upon the Popes mind, who knows his own Tribe better than so; and Mounsieur
Archbishop was in great danger to stand bare a long time without a Cardinals
Cap, although he might catch cold: When this Prelate perceived that by this
means his Affairs went rather backbard than forward, he bethought himself of
another course, prefers himself, and takes upon him, not like a Converter, but
Persecutor; in causing the Hugonots of his Diocese to be tormented, and those
of all France by his wicked Counsel, hoping thereby to curry favor with the
Pope, and regain his credit by his zeal and forwardness for the propagation of
Religion. But his Holiness, who has abundance of reason, and whose disposition
is not violent, whose intent and meaning is, that Conversions should be
effected by Reason, by good Examples; not by Dragoons and Rackings, and by an
Holy Life, which is not consistant with the Archbishop of Paris, who is taken
with the Female Sex, and love their Company: This change of shapes procured him
but ill will and disdain; he had no share in the last promotion, nor never will
so long as Innocent XI. lives, nor perhaps after him; when of necessity there
will happen great changes at Rome: In the mean time Mounsieur Camus, Bishop of
Grenoble (whose unblameable Life and Conversation might serve for a Mirror to
a many of your Court Bishops) has been honored with the Purple without ever
seeking for it, without persecuting any body, nor so much as suffering it
within his Diocese; this Prelate being not a-la-mode de la Court, this new
Dignity he so lately received, cannot choose but be a great heart-burning to
the King, and greater to the Archbishop, to see himself shut out of doors?
Last of all, Can a Man more visibly cross the Popes behavior, than the King
does at present in respect of the Franchises of his Embassador's Quarters,
which served only for a Sanctuary for Robbers, Bankrupts, and several
Assassinates; nay, more to fill the Embassador's, or his menial Servants
Purses? Although the Pope be Master in his own House, yet he has had the
prudence to expect the death of the Count Destrees, Ambassador; and the
departure of the Ambassador of Spain; yet what a clutter make they at the
French Court about the regulation the Pope makes for security of his Subjects,
and the quiet of his Capital City? I would fain know if the Pope intermeddles
with what the King does at Paris, or whether he did think it convenient, to
speak against the Effigies of the King; which they have placed now in his
Lifetime, in the middle of Four Lanterns, in the place de Victor, with lewd
Inscriptions, to which the Magistracy and Regiments of Guards did Obeisance,
and Honored as the King himself, even so far as to make Speeches to it. I
would have any body satisfy me how the King would have taken their bare
remonstrances of the Pope; without doubt he would have answered him, that he
might meddle with his own business, and that every one is Master of his own.
When his Holiness not approving the King's too familiar acquaintance with Madam
de Montespan, and correspondence with Madam de Maintenon, when he signified to
the General of the Jesuits, that he was much surprised, that Father La Chaize
made no more of giving him absolution, the King appeared to be very much
dissatisfied therewith; and said, he was bound to give an account to no body of
his Actions. Why did he cause his Ambassador to make his Entrance as it were,
with Sword in hand: All this does make the temper of France to appear, which
would domineer every where over all, even over the Altar it self.

But let the King make what noise he will, as these Franchises bring him no
profit, so there would be some way found out to pacify all things, if his
Holiness would grant a Dispensation for a Marriage of the Eldest Son of the
Church to a Daughter of Rome, (I mean the City of Liege) I would say, by means
of a Bull for the Cardinal of Furstenburg, in case he could get himself elected
Coadjutor to the Archbishop of Cologne, not being in a capacity to be
Archbishop of Cologne himself; to avoid falling under the same Circumstances
that the aforesaid Archbishop did upon the account of the Bishopric of
Munster, for which he never could obtain a Bull, how instant soever the
solicitations have been by the late Ambassador of France for obtaining the
same; but it is enough for the French King, since no body at present can be
admitted to it; who is averse to his Interests. Now if Fustenburg that Mercury
of France should chance to be so dignified, it is odds, but that the zeal for
his Master and Benefactor would be augmented, and that nothing but this Temper
and Policy of France would Reign, by reason of him throughout the Electoral
Dominions; nay, an hundred to one, but the King who would have a Garrison in
the Fortress, would become Absolute Master. But it is to be hoped, that for the
benefit of Europe, and the Church, that his Holiness will never make such a
false step, so contrary to his own Interests, and to all Christian People, as
to grant these Bulls to Cardinal Furstenburg: We all know very well, if once
the King could be without the Pope, he could save himself the trouble of going
to Rome, and could constitute and establish a Patriarch in France, after the
manner of the Greeks; no question he would do it, considering what was resolved
on these few years last past by the French Clergy: There would be a twofold
advantage by it; the Money that is carried to Rome, would not go out of France;
the Patriarch would grant him whatsoever he should require (as Parliaments do
at present) were it even a Dispensation to marry the Princess of Conty. But he
cannot shake off the Court of Rome; besides, the Jesuits would be upon his
back, if he should not appoint Father La Chaize, or some one of their Society,
Patriarch. On the other hand, those Bishops that aspire to be Cardinals, would
not be well pleased with this new invention, except the Archbishop of Paris,
who could have some pretense to this Dignity; who in plain terms does already
say, That the Kings of England, since Henry VIII, till Charles II. have done
well enough without Rome; besides, what the Northern Kings do at this time.
That which makes the French King temporize so much, is, by reason he knows
Popes are not as the King is said to be in the Inscription, viro immortali;
that next after this Pope there may come another, who perhaps may not prove so
honest a Man, yet may comply more with the Eldest Son of the Church; but new
Lords, new Laws: Death may as well crush, and bring down diseased Kings, as
crazy Popes. Be sure you may expect to see this politic Humor of France
within a little while cock up in Avignon, and the Country of Venessin, as much
as we see it at this day in Metz, Sedam, Franch Conte, Burgundy, Dombes, and
last of all in the Principality of Orange. The King has the same right of
Reunion, convenience of Situation over Avignon, and the County Venessin, as
he has over all the other Territories, I have but just named; for Q. Jane
could not alienate the Crown Lands to Pope Clement V. so that the Popes to
disburse Thirty Thousand Florens to keep it, signifies nothing. The Country of
Venessin was taken from the Count de St. Gille, so that albeit the Holy Sea had
had the possession of these two places for some years; yet be sure the King
will one of these days find an opportunity, whether by breeding a Quarrel, or
otherwise to get it into his Clutches: That once done, the Pope may cry out
long enough, he will be in a fair way, if he hold not his Tongue to make his
Son send some Troops against St. Peter, as has been done not long ago; and if
ever the French King make himself Master of Spain, as he pretends by right so
to be, after the decease of Charles now Reigning; the Pope must not think that
his Rights will be better preserved at that time in Spain, than they be now in
France, and the Dignity of Exarchat of Ravenna, which Pepin granted to the Holy
See, would soon change its Master, and who can tell whether Rome it self would
be exempted, so soon as ever the Pope should begin to speak of Excommunication,
the King would speak of a Patriarch, insomuch that the Pope ought not to
flatter himself that the politic disposition of France will truckle to the
Holy See, nor to make an estimate of the King, how much a Catholic he is by
the Persecution he raises against the Hugonots within his own Realms and
Dominions, and elsewhere; he knows well enough what he does: If he persecutes
them with one hand, he helps them with the other, he knows how to bring the
Turk into Hungary, when he supposes them fit for his Designs and Interests
against the Empire; when he thinks they may be serviceable to him as assistants
in advancing him to the Throne of Europe, to which our Great King has confined
his Ambition: But it often happens that Man purposes, but God disposes. France
would have you believe her true-hearted and real, that the Holy See, and every
body besides should of her Ambition make an Article of their Creed: Let her do
and say what she pleases; I do not for all that believe, that if so be Faith
and Truth were lost, that any one would go look to find it in France: All her
bypast Actions do but too much bespeak her, not to be any longer honest, and
that Faith cannot agree with the King's Humor; so that a Prince failing in
that, the Holy Father ought to beware of him; he is a close Enemy,
counterfeiting the Devoto; a whited Sepulcher that dazles the Eyes of those who
approach him: He is an Orpheus, who charms Christendom by his kind promises and
noise of his Louises dor, but within he is a very sink of Falsehood, insatiable
Ambition, of unparalled Covetousness, and of barbarous Cruelty; from whose
Cruelty, and out of whose Hands the Church should put it into their Litany,
Good Lord, deliver us, for fear they Christians fall into the same miseries
that the Jews did in the time of Antiochus the Illustrious.

The Policy of France, in relation to the Emperor and Princes Electors of the
Empire.
CHarles V. did manifestly weaken the House of Austria, by dividing it into two
branches; bestowing the Empire on Ferdinand his Brother, and Spain to Philip
his Son: I must needs confess that these are two Twins, so nearly related to
each other by Blood, by Alliances, and common Interests, that one will have
much ado to touch the one, without offending the other; or destroy the one,
without debilitating and reducing the other to the utmost extremity: This House
has evermore held up her Head against France; she always counterpoized with
France the Empire of the World: Spain took from Antony of Bourbon King of
Navar, the Kingdom he had acquired by his Marriage with Jane De Albret, Heiress
of Navar; so that it is easy to suppose, that at present the House of Bourbon
being exalted to the Throne of France since Henry IV. time, may be from its
Cradle Enemy to the House of Austria; and if she could de-Throne both of them,
no question she would with all her heart get into their place if she could, and
thereby join the Empire to France, France to Spain, and the Low Countries; and
then by and by very easily ascend to the Universal Monarchy of all Europe: If
this project don't succeed, it is at leastwise the intent and purpose of the
French Politic Spirit, and what Lewis XIV. drives at; who was not far from
effecting it, when Vienna looked upon her self near destruction, and an hundred
to one but had fallen into the Ottoman Chains: Scarce any one is ignorant of
the Correspondence the King of France holds with the Ottoman Port, that it was
upon his entreaty that the Grand Seigniour first violated the Truce concluded
with the Emperor, that he might second and abet Count Tekely's Designs, whom
France assisted with Money and Counsel. The Emperor and his Council knows
better than any body the occasion that moved the Port to send back Count
Caprara, together with the Propositions of Peace he brought along with him. The
Marquess D'Seppeville, Ambassador of France, failed not with all expedition to
send one Courier after another to his Master to give him notice thereof; who
failed not forthwith to dispatch a Person to the Grand Vizier, to oblige him to
persist in his Siege of Vienna, he laying before him that his Honor was
engaged, that the City was at the last gasp, that it stood him upon to take it
at what rate soever for his own Reputations sake, and good of the Port; that
this Siege having made such a noise in the World, he could not quit it, but
with Eternal Infamy to the Ottaman Empire and Grand Vizier, and for the better
facilitating the taking of it, and to divide the Armies of the Empire, he was
about to enter into Flanders with a powerful Army, which would undoubtedly
force the Empire to recall his Forces to defend themselves; and the King did
effectually make good his promise; for he entered of late years as we see into
Flanders, burning, pillaging, and taking all before him after the Turkish
manner, imitating therein his Allie, whom he was so forward to serve and
second; and the King divesting himself of the Title of Most Christian, took
upon him that of his Friend, and Allie the Grand Sultan; for places that ought
to be most sacred to Christians, and the retirements of the Nuns fared no
better: Several Virgins suffered Martyrdom by a Violation never before heard of
in Christendom: But all this did much contribute to the King's Design, and the
French Policy obtained its wish; there was Forty Thousand Men just ready in
Alsatia to pour into Germany, to make himself be declared Emperor at the Head
of this Army: His Manifestoes were already in print, ready to be spread abroad;
that to prevent Christianity from falling into Slavery, he was forced to
withstand it by a powerful Army, and by declaring himself Emperor to hold the
Reins of the Empire, to defend it, as serving as a boundary to France, and to
Europe it self; considering the incapacity of the Emperor, etc. for the King
knew what he said when he tells us the Emperor was not fit to Reign: Without
all question, had Vienna been taken, the Princes and Electors would have had
recourse to him, and been of his side, for their own preservation; being the
only Prince who had Forces ready, and who at that juncture was capable to
retard the progress of the Infidels. But Vienna being relieved, we saw then the
truth of what I have alleged, that their Spirit came down, and they became
crest-fallen, they cared not to join in the common joy of all the Universe,
which could not sufficiently praise God for this Signal Victory, by their
Bone-fires, and Te Deums, wherewith the Air echoed again: None but France stood
mute, and who forbid diverse Churchmen to give thanks for the same, upon pain
of incurring the high displeasure of the most Christian King. Here you may
perceive what Spirit France is of, in relation to the Emperor; who, that it
might have an opportunity to keep him under, and throw him down from his
Throne, and so take his place; The King of France heartily wishes that Vienna
might sall into the hands of the Mahometans: But as our Thoughts are not as
Gods Thoughts, so this King of Kings has disposed of things otherwise; who by
vouchsafing such grand Victories to the Christian Forces, France must be fain
to change their Batteries and Assaults. We hope also that the Emperors Council
will stand better upon their Guard, and appear more vigilant than they have
been hitherto; and that they will remove from France all means to pry into
their undertakings; yea, even into their Closet-secrets: For it is well known
what courses they have taken to make the Resolutions be changed and falsified,
when they were not relished by the King, nor for his Interest; and that the
Emperor could neither speak, consult, write, nor so much as make least
proceeding, but it was presently penetrated, diverted another way, encumbered,
watched and observed; and by the Jesuits good leave they are accused of having
had a great stroke in all these Affairs; they always take the stronger side,
expecting a change. No body can be ignorant but that the misunderstanding that
arose between the Elector of Brandenburg, and Monticuculi, General of the
Imperial Forces, during the Holland War; was occasioned by the cunning
contrivance of the Jesuit changing the Emperors Order, to engage Turrene with
Brandenburg, in the counterfeit Order not to engage; which gave opportunity to
the French Army to retreat; which was in very great danger to have made their
Graves there, if it had been attacked by two so good Parties, being reduced to
its last legs through sicknesses, running away from their Colors, and a
Mortality amongst them.

Then again, At the Battle at Sennif, Souches excuses himself, that he could
not make the onset for want of Orders; this was hammered upon the same Anvil:
Yet we hope that Affairs changing their Face, the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits
will have better thoughts of the Empire. I have much ado to omit two Affairs
which happened during the Emperors last Rupture with the King; one is the
business of General Capelliers Steward of his Household; who carried on a
correspondence with the French Ambassadors, and gave them a full account of
whatsoever past at home in his Masters House, that came to his hearing, or
knowledge; the Letters of all the Matter were intercepted at the Posthouse in
Frankfort; this Traitor indeed was clapped up, but the Jesuits who at that bout
had taken too large a Dose of Spirit Gall, knew well enongh how to make him
come of, lest he should make a Discovery of some others. During the Siege of
Philipsburg by the Imperial Forces, did not these good Men prevail with two
Merchants to send in a supply of Powder, but that Mine was sprung, and vanished
in smoke; the business was found out, and the Jesuits brought it so about, that
the undertakers were not punished, for fear lest they should make farther
Discoveries; I tell you this for truth; for one of these Persons was one of my
Acquaintance, who told it me with his own mouth, that they came to fetch him as
far as from Paris, where he was settled, to get him to do this business: You
may see by this, that the Spirit of France animates a great many Bodies,
actuates them strangely; and that those in whom his Imperial Majesty puts most
confidence, are not always faithful to him. When France carried on a design
underhand to induce the Emperor to bestow his two Sisters upon two Princes
dispossessed of their Inheritance; it was not with an intent that businesses
should succeed in this manner as we see they do at this day; for we cannot deny
but that Lorrain is the Restorer of the Empire, an Hero of so many Great and
Glorious Victories, the Subduer of so many Provinces, who will make the Grand
Seigniour not only sue to him for Peace, as he does already, but to grant
whatsoever one demands of him to save his Head from the riot and fury of the
Rabble, who will be sure to do it, if he conclude not a Peace, or a Cessation
of Arms, and that speedily. But this Spirit of France had its aims; that is to
say, by getting some body to counsel the Emperor to bestow his two Sisters on
two Princes in the forementioned Circumstances, who despaired of recovering
their Estates but by a Peace; they would always incline the Emperor to listen
thereto, notwithstanding his Imperial Majesty might not have that advantage by
it that might be expected; in hopes there might be some Article in it
favorable to them, restoring them to their Estates by this Peace. The truth
is, that has been very successful to the one, as for the other, it is to be
hoped, that he will open himself a passage to his Fortune by his Victorious
Sword: It Is most certain that the misunderstanding which has reigned between
Prince Harman of Baden, President of the Imperial Council, and the Duke of
Lorrain, between the King of Poland, and the Emperor, are nothing but Eggs
which France sits and hatches. The Marquess De Bethune is too well verst in the
way to Poland; and his Sister has still a French Soul, though Queen of that
Kingdom. The kindnesses the King of France has done her Children, are faithful,
and living Witnesses, and the transmitments that have past through the hands of
the Bankers of Hamburg and Dantzik are like so many rays of that great Sun of
France, which disperseth his Light into a great many Courts. The Emperor
cannot ignore that Itch of theirs is an old Distemper the Kings of France have
so long been troubled with; they long to be mounting the Imperial Throne,
because it is one step to the Universal; or at least, to the Monarchy of
Europe. Henry II. made them draw him out the Model after what manner the Romans
cut out their way through Italy; but those Countries have ever been Caemiterium
Gallorum, and fatal to their Enterprises. In like manner Duplessis gave advice
to Charles IX. never to venture upon Italy, but upon the Netherlands. Lewis
XIV. is much of his mind, as shall appear by the sequel of the Story. After the
Death of Ferdinand III. did not the French King use his utmost endeavors to
re-ascend the Throne of Charlemain; he spared not to send into all the Courts
of the Electors to procure their Votes; and such who were great with these
Princes, did their business for them; for France is free-natur'd enough, when
any one is to be brought over to their Party: One of the visible demonstrations
of the Kings designs is, that he caused an Eagle to be put upon his Money just
above the Head of his Effigies; and that he speaks his mind freely, but much
more haughtily, that the Empire has been long enough in the House of Austria,
and that it is high time it should return to his again; and that was just upon
the Turks coming into Germany, in the year 1683. But Man purposes, God
disposes: All the wise projects and contrivances of Men are but folly before
God, who does not guide the Economy of the Universe according to the ambition
of Lewis the Great: Now because this King knows very well that the Electors may
prove a great obstacle to his design upon the Empire if they have a mind to be
cross; therefore he makes much of some, threatens others. The Dolphin of
Frances Marriage concluded with the Princess of Bavaria, was a bait to draw in
the Prince of that Family to the King's Interest, and so inspire his Body with
a French Spirit: That Pension the King allowed him for some time made him much
in the Kings Books, and devoted to his Interest; nay, over and above the
Marriage every one was in the mind that this Prince would be perpetually
devoted to his Benefactor; but the unbecoming unworthy Matches that France
offered this Prince, made his Ministers look about them; who knew so well how
to disabuse him, that he altered his mind, and tack't about to the better and
more glorious side, whether we consider it in respect of the Marriage he
contracted with the Emperors Daughter, or by the Laurels he won in Hungary.
This is a thing he durst not so much as have dreamt of, if he had remained in
the French Interest; because the Conquests of the Imperial Army did not at all
correspond with the Kings designs, as we told you before: No sooner had
Mounsieur Baviere forsaken the French Party, but the King to comfort himself up
for that loss, entering Madam la Dauphines Chamber, told her that he just came
from winning Eight Hundred Thousand Crowns of her Brother. We all know how the
Elector of Brandenburg is beset on all sides with the Emissaries of France, and
how the chief persons of his Court, which discretion makes me forbear
mentioning, have taken but too large a Dose of that same Spirit Gall; so that
there is nothing transacted in the Electors Court, but the French Envoy has
presently notice of it, and by Mounsieur de Rebenack's good leave, Men are
sufficiently informed of all his Intrigues, of all the Presents he bestows; if
it were less secret, one might not perchance know it; but he wanting the
retentive faculty to keep his own Counsel, he must give others leave to
disclose it, who are not so much concerned to keep a secret. If the late Prince
Lewis had been surer to the French Interest than he was, perhaps he might have
been alive to this day: Well, I know the French Envoy had not an hand in the
fact, but did suggest and promote it: I know that the Prince Elector is not
ignorant neither, whence the Distemper proceeds; he has reason to countermine
them, and stand upon his Guard; but I could wish, he may not be too slow, and
that he shut not the Stable door when the Horse is stolen. If so be the Elector
of Brandenburg had an insight into his real true Interest and Forces; could but
get rid once of these French Spirits that encompass her; he might safely say he
was one of the most puissant Princes of the North, make others dread and stand
in awe of him: Be sure which way soever he takes, he casts the scales, France
knows it very well too, and that is the reason why they court him so much: Let
him but stand Neuter, and espouse no Cause, she is satisfied. The Persecution
of the Protestants of France had in a manner opened the eyes of the Elector;
yet Mounsieur de Rebenack, backed by Mounsieur D'espense, managed things so
finely, that people gave more credit to what they said, than to so many
thousand Witnesses that arrived daily at Berlin. This i will say, that the
Elector has this benefit, that all those that fly to him for refuge, people
his Country: But France out of spite to thwart his designs to make the
Electorship fall after the Decease of Frederick William to some Prince or
other, who will be more favorable to him, than those who were born by the
Princess Lewis of Nassau and Orange; and there is all the probability
imaginable she will accomplish her designs in this matter; at leastwise they
are in a fair way toward it, if God Almighty do not prevent it, by preserving
the Prince Elector alive, to whom he may give Issue.

As for the Elector Palatine of the Rhine, when France mediated a match between
the Princess, and the Duke of Orleans; she had two things in her eye; the first
was thereby together with a Pension to allure the late Prince Elector into her
Interests; not being able to do that, he might evermore devise pretensions for
the Right of Madam of Orleans.

After that we know but too well how the Electors Palatines Father and Son were
treated by Lewis XIV. how the Palatinate has been trodden under foot by his
Troops and the people of that Country ruined and laid waste: But last of all
Death having deprived the World of these two Princes in a short time without
Male Issue; and seeing that at present the Palatinate is fallen to the House of
Newburg, (pursuant to a Treaty with the Emperor to that purpose) the King of
France is persuaded there is no other resolution to take with the Elector now
Reigning, that he is too near an Allie to the Emperor (to whom he is beholden
for what he has) ever to abandon his Interests, or quit his Party; so that it
is not thereabouts neither, that France attacks it, the pretenses of Madams
Rights are now in debate: The Popes meddling in the matter signifies nothing;
the business is not ripe; it is a Gate France keeps open, for to enter into
Germany by; and all the delays the Pope obtains do but keep off the Distemper
a little longer, and do not cure it; and you shall see the next Spring (if any
change happen in Europe, France will enter thereinto with Fire and Sword, as
she uses to do. All the Elector must wish for is, that Peace may be concluded
between the two Emperors this Winter, that the Death of a Prince happening, his
success may afford work enough to Lewis the Great somewhere else: Now these
seem to be the only means how this Elector may avoid falling into the clutches
of France; and this reason ought much to sway with the Emperor, and be a
principal motive to him to make a Peace with the Turk, as he may now do very
advantagiously: For he must know, that if ever the French King break the Ice,
and gets footing in Germany; he will never return back: The French are very
insolent and domineering, especially at the first heat, and in prosperity; and
provided Fortune smiles upon them at the beginning, and in their first fury;
wherewith they undertake all Exploits, that is a great incitement to them to
drive on farther and farther, and then peace with the Turk not being made, I
cannot tell whether the Emperor will be ever able to make it, if he would
never so fain, at lest upon the same Terms and Conditions they offer him at
this time.

The Elector of Saxony never made much account of all the proposals of France:
He is a Prince that does not study all those cunning niceties and tricks that a
great many other Courts are full of, but one who being well verst in what is
good for himself, pursues it, without disputing, or making more ado: Now that is
your best Policy which succeeds the best; wherefore France seeing he would not
swallow the hook, breeds abundance of trouble in his Family, and sets him at
variance with his Neighbors, against which the Emperors Council has made
seasonable provision, which makes the Spirit of France that it becomes not so
familiar in that Court, for their Ducatoons are better beloved than Lewisses:
But to know what it done there, thither is sent such Persons who have skill to
comply and conform to the humor of the Country, and more especially to quaff
stoutly, and by that means render themselves fit Companions at Table; they must
be of strong Constitution to bear Wine; there they may get acquaintance, make
themselves familiar, and make bold to skip their Glasses. So likewise at the
French Court, when an Envoy or Resident is to be sent to the Court of Saxony;
they inquire in the first place whether he can hold out well at drinking,
that is one Qualification, together with couzening, that is requisite.

As for the Electors of Triers and Metz, as France are not afraid of them, as
not being Princes that are capable of doing much mischief, so they let them
alone till time serves; for she knows that standing in need of them, she will
be able to attract them by the sweet charms of her golden rays; if not, she
will proceed to threatenings, and thereby make her do what she pleases. The King
needs no more but send his Forces to Triers, he has reduced it to such a
condition as not to be in a capacity to dispute his entrance, and so he can
make himself Master of it, when he thinks fit.

As for the Elector of Cologne, we all know what mettle he is made of; that
he is a Prince that loves a quiet Life, and desiring to end his days in peace;
gives himself wholly up to his Devotions, to work out his Salvation; this
design being always commendable in a Prelate, and a Person of his Character.
But a mild peaceable disposition does no ways agree with that of France, which
is turbulent, boisterous, and would always be in action: Now here is the
reason why they have given the Archbishop a chip of the old block, who has a
good stock of the French Spirit: I mean the Cardinal Bishop of Strasbourg, who
is as violent, and as great a cheat, as he that animates him; nevertheless this
Bishop has got the art so well, to influence the mind of the Archbishop, that
he rules him with an absolute sway, and by means of the Bishopric of Munster,
which France procured him with Two Millions of Crowns, cannot handsomely turn
tail at present. I know the Pope upon very just considerations has not been
willing to dispatch the Bull hitherto; yet it is enough for France, that by
this Election, during the Electors Life; the Chapter dare never let it enter
into their thoughts, much less supply the place; so that France is sure that no
one Prelate of a contrary party, shall ever be admitted to that dignity, and
that suffices. How many Bishops are there in France without Bulls, who
notwithstanding perform the Functions of their place, and enjoy the benefits of
their Bishoprics. The Pope cannot live for ever, and the King will be sure to
keep the Gate open, and Highways clear; that after the Archbishops decease,
some other Emissary of France may come in at the same Golden Gate: This
Bishopric being of great consequence as himself did acknowledge it to be in
the year 1672. I told you that the Bishop of Cologne would have much ado to
free himself from the French Interest, the King having taken care for that
beforehand, in case of a change; and all that was done at Liege, was but a
cunning stratagem, and that through the suggestion of that Prince, to foment
misunderstanding between them, and to set before the Citizens of Liege the
Idea of their discontent, by reason of the Citadel which they have again
raised, whereof France is too much a Master, that will occasion the Archbishop
of Cologns Repentance, at least that of his Successor after him, in case they
begin to waver: Men were in suspense at that time concerning who should succeed
him; for France saw at a distance, and she supposed by all that had past, that
she might be able to prevail with the Chapter of Liege, to confer the
Coadjutorship of the Principality and Bishopric of Liege upon Cardinal
Furstenburg; but those that composed the Chapter better advised than any one
durst have believed or hoped for, had no mind to swallow the bait, but laughed
at it, which made him have recourse to the Chapter of Cologne, where he has
had better success, and notwithstanding all the opposition the Pope and
Emperor made; they went farther, and the Cardinal has obtained what France
demanded: They have been long about this business, and immediately upon Men's
saying, That the Cannons knew what Gold was. France prognosticated nothing but
good to her self, and found the Road to Cologne easier than to Munster.

France and the Cardinal know very well that the Pope will not give his Bull
for it; but they may have the same comfort in that as they had for Munster,
they will do well enough without it, no body besides being capable of
pretending to it; and as I told you the Pope being aged, may chance to dye, and
another more easy Man may succeed him.

Now then by what we see come to pass by the proceedings of the Policy of
France: Have I not great reason to say that the whole Empire, Electors, and
other Kings, Princes, and States have great cause to withstand the designs of
Leuis XIV. to prevent his rising to an Empire for fear of becoming his Slaves,
whereas at present he takes special care of some, and caresses them; he will
then Lord it over them, he will put off the Foxes skin, and put on the Lions
again; they will talk of nothing then, but of tell est mon bon plaisir, such my
Will and Pleasure is. Nothing but a Peace with the Turk can hinder him from
growing Great; nothing but that can put the Emperor in a condition to oppose
it. The King will be very cautious how he makes his limits at Ratisbon, during
these Contests that give him an opportunity to build Fortresses, to defend what
he shall usurp; as we see he has done but too much already: It will be
requisite to have an Army to drive him out thence. Have not we seen in the time
of peace what the Spirit of France is capable of doing: It Is known, that
amongst other good qualities, he is endued with the admirable gift of Usurping
well, finds always reasons for the doing so; which he would have all Men
receive for Articles of their Creed, as well as the just pretentions of the
King upon the Empire, treated at large in a little Book, wherein the Wit of one
called Aubri (Advocate in the Parliament of Paris) has been exercised? But the
King of France his Manifesto published newly at Ratisbone and other States of
the Empire, to maintain the Usurping Fortification of Tarbrack, deserves to be
inserted in this Book, to let these who have not yet seen it, understand the
slender Reasons he alleges to palliate his infraction of the last Truce.
Behold here what his Minister hath-published to all the World.

The King having been informed of the complaints which the Ministers of the
House of Austria make upon the account of some outrages committed at Tarbrack
by his Majesty's Order, who throughout the Empire they charge with acting
contrary, and call him an infringer of the Treaty concluded in the Year of our
Lord, 1684. The which has obliged his said Majesty to issue out Orders to the
Count de Crecy, his Envoy Extraordinary, and Plenipotentiary at the Imperial
Diet at Ratisbone, to represent to the Ministers of the Electors, Princes, and
States of the Empire assembled in the said place, the small ground there is for
such a complaint in it self, and the just occasions they administer to all
those who have a desire to preserve the public peace; to believe that this is
a pretense that they are willing to make use of to disturb the same peace and
quiet.

First of all, If it may be said upon good grounds that that Treaty ratified at
(...) may not properly be called a Truce, its true definition being only a
forbearance or sufferance, by virtue of which (although the War be still in
being) we are to forbear all Acts of Hostility; there being at that time no
rupture between France and the Empire; this tolleration may be looked upon as a
mutual promise of a good understanding and Union for the space of Twenty years;
in consideration whereof the Emperor and Empire on the one part, are to lay
aside, during the said term, their Sovereignty, Rights, Superiority, and
Protection, or all other pretenses whatsoever they may have upon Lands, Places,
or Towns fallen to France before the first of August, 1681. His Majesty in like
manner binds himself not to make any farther suit or prosecution in the Empire
during the said time. These are the most material Covenants, by which they
interchangeably assure each other of a long continuation of Friendship and good
Intelligence; which afforded means to the Emperors Arm is to conquer all
Hungary, and to put themselves and Empire in a posture, and in a condition to
undertake a War, which otherwise would not have waged but at great cost and
charges; and peradventure at the hazard and ruin of the Electors, Princes, and
States of the Empire. But further to demonstrate this weak pretext, altogether
not to be tenible, nor can hold Water of it self, we need not run over the
Articles of this Treaty, and though we might even look upon it as a Treaty
barely concluded only for the security of the tranquillity of the Empire, and
to procure for it the means whereby to employ its Armies against the common
Enemy; yet one cannot for all that prove that it may deprive the King of his
Power to fortify those places where his Majesty has right so to do, as well
by the possession he has already had, as by the common consent of the Empire,
granted by virtue of the same Treaty, nor that he cannot act in those places as
he pleases; you need only peruse all the Treaties of Truce which have been
made hitherto, to see whether a prohibition of fortifying is not expressly
included therein at such time as both Parties cannot agree. By this toleration
of the Truce of Bonvise in the year of our Lord 1537, it is said, that whilst
the Cessation of Arms lasts in the Netherlands, King Francis I. could not send
any Forces into the County of St. Paul, nor there raise any Fortification: This
Exception gives us sufficiently to understand, that the King was empowered to
fortify his places thereabouts, and elsewhere, during the said Truce; so that
they were bound to insert a clause into this Treaty, to deprive France of this
Liberty in the County of St. Paul only.

The General Truce that was agreed upon at Nice, in the Year 1538, ratifies and
confirms this same Article concerning St. Paul, but it does no way hinder the
two Princes to cause Fortifications to be raised any where else.

The Cessation made in 1555, makes no mention of this point, but the Crown of
Spain, and States General of the United Netherlands upon their concluding a
Truce in 1609, having a mind indeed to deprive each other of having the liberty
of raising any new Fortress in the Low Countries, inserted this Clause; There
shall be on neither side any Fortress in the Low Countries during the Cessation.

When the Peace was in agitation at Munster between France and Spain, that they
demurred longest upon and proved the greatest obstacle to the conclusion, was,
that the Catholic King could not find in his heart to quit his claim to
Catalonia, which caused them to agree upon a Truce for Thirty years for that
Province alone; during which term both Kings should keep what he possessed at
that time; but another difficulty emerg'd that the Spaniards could not endure
that they should fortify during the Truce; those places in Catalonia, to which
the French would not agree, alleging it unjust, upon this account that thereby
this would put them in a posture of being Defendants only, and not Aggressors,
which was permitted in all Ages, they would not so much as admit of the
Expedient offered by the Ambassador of the States General. The same case stands
good now, as to the present Treaty. Every one knows that the prohibitions to
raise Fortifications propounded by the Ministers of the Empire, in the Ninth
and Tenth Articles of the same project of the Empire, and what was then and
there interchangeably delivered by public Writing, was interjected by France:
Besides, the Imperial Ministers would by no means give their consent that the
Emperor should yield up to the King such places whereof he was in present
possession, which his Majesty would not have meddled with, nor limited, nor
encroached upon. The Emperors Ministers not able to make good this demand,
gave it over. It Is hard to believe that the Imperial Ministers will draw any
Arguments to be a sufficient ground of complaint from the Eighth and Ninth
Article of the Truce; forasmuch as the former contains only the settling the
Lands upon the Proprietors again, who would take the Oath of Allegiance for
them: The Sovereignty whereof was delivered to his Majesty. The other is, that
his said Majesty shall permit the Inhabitants to have the free Exercise of
their Religion. Moreover the reunion of Tarbrack having been irrecoverably
adjudged by a decree of the Royal Chamber of Metz in the Month of April, 1681.
It is hard to conceive what Title the Imperial Ministers can pretend to in
accusing France of acting contrary to the Cessation of Arms, especially the
King giving visible and daily demonstrations of the inviolable Observation of
the least punctillio of them, helping and furthering what in him lies, the
progress of the Imperial Forces against those Barbarians the Turks through his
moderation and compliance, and what administers ground of suspicion concerning
the designs of the Court at Vienna, (which his Ministers do but too much lay
open upon all occasions) is their not being desirous of keeping the Truce any
longer than they may be strong enough to break it.

Notwithstanding all this, considering that this Truce has offered to
Christendom that happy Peace and Tranquillity it enjoys at this day; and has
supplied means to the States and Circles of the Empire by their assistance to
bring upon the Ottoman Empire all those mischiefs wherewith they threatened the
Hereditary Countries. We dare boldly and truly say, that the Emperor is
beholding to him for the preservation of his Country, and for all those
advantages he has had over the Turks: His Ministers are as much to blame to
complain that the King making use of his full power, has caused his frontier
places to be fortified, as standing in most need: Just as a Sovereign, for the
security, repose, and prosperity of his Subjects, causes the boundaries of his
Territories to be fortified; would, not by so doing, make us believe, that he
had the least thought of siezing upon his Neighbors Country, or any mind to
Commence a War, no more than any private Person busying himself in repairing
the utmost Fences of his Lands to make them good, would thereby give but small
proof of his desire to entrench upon his Neighbors. But yet his Majesty is not
without hope but that the Wisdom and Prudence of the States of the Empire
assembled at Ratisbone, will seriously reflect upon the just suspicions which
the ill-grounded complaints of the Imperial Ministers have occasioned to him,
and that they will bethink themselves of one way or other that the good
Intelligence which his Majesty purposes to maintain with the Empire, may not
be interrupted, nor impeded. Given at Fountainbleau, October. 22th 1687.

To hear this Manifesto, would not a Man judge that the Emperor is obliged to
the King for all his Victories over the Turk, and without him the Empire had
been quite lost, when all the World sees evidently by what we have said, that
it was none but he that induced the Grand Seigniour to break the Truce, and to
send relief to Tekely; but the Spirit of France is always deceitful.

The Policy of France, and the Maxims, in relation to Spain.
FRom the Empire I pass to Spain, which Kingdom and France have divided Europe
between them some years last past; all other Princes have listed themselves
under their Banner; thereafter as their Interest required, but the most part
agreed in that point to support the weaker, and endeavor a just balance
between them. The late Mounsieur Sully, in a Letter to Henry IV. concerning the
Quarrel with Spain, says that the least growth of Power in the one is looked
upon to be a weakening and lessening of the other. Until Philip IV. time, Spain
ever kept up its head, (though it began to decline in Philip the Seconds, by
reason of the War in the Low Countries) but ever since that, and particularly
after the last King Philip IV. Death, France got the upper hand, and Spain
humbly submitted.

Upon the Festival of one of the Kings of Spain who was Sainted, the Preacher
St. Ferdinand extolling the grandeur of his Mighty King in his Sermon, told
'em, that if his God was not God, the King Don Philip should be God; but I
suppose something less than so, would satisfy his Successor, the case being
altered since that. And yet Charles II. is King of Spain still, has the same
Indies, and his Ships go thither, and come home laden with Gold and Silver as
they us't to do heretofore; but still this Spain is not like that, which was
once the Terror of all Princes in Europe, who were but justly jealous of her
aspiring Greatness, and had reason to be Confederates against it for their
common defense: Now it is in the same condition that a Thief is, when he is
brought to his last shifts, and just ready to be taken.

If Spain were not supported by its Allies, Lewis XIV. King of France would
quickly be at Madrid: The Low Countries would bend under the French yoke, in
less than one Campaign, though 'twould be effected more easily, because their
own Prince has no Children, and is very sickly, and though they see utter ruin
coming upon them, yet they dare make no opposition, for they could only make
sport for the insolent French Troops if they should, having no prospect of
succors from any body that is able to rescue them. France knows all this well
enough, and it is very true, that France waits only for a fit opportunity to
take possession of the Queens Right in the Dauphin's Name, for the Crown of
Spain falls to the Female Sex, and it came to the House of Austria by a Woman,
that is to say, by Jane, Ferdinand King of Spains Daughter, who married a
Prince of that Family.

To let you see how much Spain suffers it self to be baffled by France, I need
only show you two Examples, which will convince you that I have said nothing
but what is true. The King of France sent a Memorial to the King of Spain, and
to the States of the United Provinces, to this effect: That if the King of
Spain should grant the Low Countries to the Duke of Bavaria, or but make him
Governor (as the report was when he married the Arch-dutchess) that she would
then without more ado break off the peace, since neither of those things could
be done without manifest injury to the Dauphin's Right. Mr. Feuquier was the
Man who gave the Memorial to the King of Spain, and Count D'avaux to the United
Provinces; but were Paris over this, perhaps you will say, that Spain did not
consider it well, and they are so justly afraid of France, that it is no wonder
if that puts 'em a little out of their Wits: But I am going to tell you a
thing, which you will own does sufficiently discover the weakness and poor Spirit
of Spain; it happened at the Ceremony of making an Entry into London, that the
Spanish and French Ambassadors met: The Baron Watville went before Mounsieur d'
Estrade, France presently complains of this indignity; and Spain was so
pitifully mean, as to disown that brave Action of their Ambassador: Thus by
that scandalous procedure Spain suffered in its Honor, and gave place to
France, though there was nothing like necessity for their doing it: I can see
no other reason for it, but fear of Canon Law, and dread of the Troops which
France keeps up to enforce its Commands, which are just ready too, in case the
King of Spain should dye suddenly. Let Charles II. take what care he can in
settling the Succession, if he has respect for his own Family, and the last
Will and intent of Philip IV. his Successor will have enough to do, and a
scurvy War to maintain. The Queen, who is altogether French both by her Birth
and Inclinations, has her Faction in the Kingdom, and when the King is dead,
will much rather trust her Couzen-Germain, than a Prince who is a Stranger, at
least would be so, were it not for the Marriage, which will be a great
strengthening to his Party. The Marriages of the Infanta's of Spain, with Kings
of France, have ever been the cause of great differences between the two
Crowns, and very fatal to Spain; but the Marriage of Maria Theresia with Lewis
XIV. compleats the misery which is inevitably falling upon Spain, and how
stiffly soever the King of France may have denied his designs, yet he never
intended to keep either his Word or Oath as to that matter. We are sufficiently
satisfied by the obstacles he puts, that the Pyrenaean Treaty may not be
registered in Parliament; as also by his Manifesto's (which have run all the
World over) of the Queen of France's Just Pretentions. What good can Spain get
by Marriages and Alliances with France? On the contrary very great Mischief,
for it is by reason of the last Marriage that France lays claim to all this,
the wiser Philip II. preferred the Archduke Ernest, and afterward Albert. The
Truce which France has now made, is designed only to amuze and lull Spain and
its Allies asleep: Thus to make them lay down their Arms, and in the mean time
the French King has at least a Hundred and Fifty Thousand Men a foot, who dance
up and down, sometimes toward Alsace, sometime toward Cologne, and pretty
often toward the Low Countries: All this is only to make them used to him, that
so they may think he has no design upon them, and lay by all jealousy and
suspicion. But when he finds a good opportunity, you shall see him fall upon
them, as a Hawk upon her quarry, and carry them off too if he pleases; for what
should hinder him, when there is not a Man in Arms, and by that time the Allies
can be prepared, the King of France has done his business. Thus this Truce is
only to bear in hand, and amuze the Princes of Europe, that they may not make
War upon him, and that he may be constantly in a condition to take possession
of the Dauphins Right so soon as ever the King of Spain is dead, without any
other legal Process, but that of Dragoon Law: The Spaniards will find
themselves miserably deluded in relying upon this Truce. It Is a broken reed
which will pierce through their hands, and if unhappily, the Emperor should be
still engaged in a War with the Turks, what should hinder the two French
Armies, the one in Catalonia, the other in the Low Countries, from being
Masters of all where they go. I know very well that the Interest of England and
Holland are both concerned to defend the Spanish Netherlands, as the sequel
will show us: But in the one the French have so true a Friend, (who has so much
business beside upon his hands at home) that he will concern himself no more
for the Low Countries, than his Predecessor did for Luxemburg. As for the
States they have but Men enough to defend their own Country, and are naturally
very good Husbands: As for Cologne and Munster, his Majesty will probably put
some Men into their Towns for them, as he has done heretofore.

I think it a vast mistake in the Spaniard, to send Men into the Low Countries
for Governors (who for the most part) go thither only to fill their Purse, as
the saying is, and so return; and to do this effectually, they don't scruple to
rob both King and Country, pay neither Landlords nor Men, which makes them
desert, so that instead of One Thousand Men in a Regiment, perhaps there is
Fifty; and once I saw a whole Regiment which was going to change Garrison,
carried in a Wagon. In short, a Man need only to have been once in Flanders,
to see this that I tell you, the Soldiers upon the Guard hold out their Hats to
you for an Alms, and the very Officers are fain to live with the Capuchins upon
the Alms which the good Men beg.

The three last Irish Regiments which the King of England granted the King of
Spain for the service of the Low Countries which were effectually raised, are
wasted like Snow before the Sun, and now I don't believe there is Fifty Men
left. Spain in my poor judgment is very much in the wrong for another thing,
that is, to rely upon its Allies for the keeping of the Low Countries, and upon
that score to neglect having what Men are requisite for the Countries security:
Besides, they may be sure that France, knowing the temper of the Governors so
very well, do often feel their Pulse, and takes advantage of their weakness:
Understanding Men will never be beat out on it, but that the Marquis of Grana
was made a Tool, and put a helping hand to the taking of Luxemburg, the thing
is as clear as the Sun at Noonday; Four or Five Millions which he has left
behind him are a shrewd sign of it: I tell you no improbable matter, and
nothing but what happens every day; there are very few Men in our Age, who are
proof against a Million of Money; I confess there are some, but you must grant
me they are very rare: The Low Countries are no Inheritance to the Governors,
so that they get all they can out of it, as if they hired it. I wont say that
all who come there are of the same stamp (God forbid) 'twould be sad indeed if
Spain had no Subjects that were honest; but it is very certain that for these
last Ages, France has gallanted the Low Countries, and thinks them highly
obliged, if not depending upon her. There Is no trick which the French craft
does not use to bring about their designs, for they have ever found that little
Country, a hard bone to pick, but their present King has given it devilish
bites these years last past; France knows very well, too, that if they were
once Masters of it, they might then bend all their strength toward Catalonia
and Rousillon, and having nothing left to fear or quarrel about in that
Country, march on quickly to Madrid, which is no difficult matter when they
have once made themselves Masters of some of the Frontiers to go in and out at.
It Is for this reason that the Councils of Spain considering the strength of
France, should take other measures than they do for the defense of the Low
Countries, and I see but one only expedient in the posture that the Spanish
Affairs are in at present, which can give them present ease, except they had
rather have that Country fall into the French hands, as without doubt it must,
if they don't prevent it speedily. It is certain, that nothing but an Army with
a good General can prevent the ruin which is falling upon their heads. We see
after what fashion the Men, who are there now are paid; and the inconsiderable
number of them, and to say the truth, there ought to be Twenty Thousand
effective Men (beside what is there already, in Garrison to secure the
Country, and Ten Thousand more, in case of a Rupture; and since Spain cannot
furnish them with so many Men: You must let the Towns there levy Men, and pay
them who will be willing to do it, to secure themselves, and avoi'd falling
under the barbarous Dominion of the French, or be quite ruined perhaps, before
it comes to that, as many Towns and Cities have been before them, and that flat
Country now of late, in which the most Religious places were not spared. I know
very well that that proposal has been debated in Council long since, and that
the Council of Spain has ever rejected it for slight reasons. A good careful
Governor, especially the Duke of Lorrain, who is so brave a Commander, and
adorned with Conquests at the head of Forty Thousand Men supported by the
Prince of Orange, would make France shake. France has its Emissaries in the
Council at Madrid, as well as at other places, to oppose every thing which may
possibly thwart her designs; and I am of opinion that it will turn to better
account for the King of Spain to secure his Low Countries with the help of a
Militi a paid by the Cities (who wont abuse him) than to lose that Country for
want of Men to defend it: The latter of these is almost irretrievable, but that
former would be effectual, were it not for an illgrounded Jealousy, which
possibly heretofore might have deserved consideration, but is now quite out of
doors, for in my judgment we ought ever to take in hand the thing which is most
urgent, when the one is inevitable, and the other may probably never come to
pass. I say once more, that France can never compass her great design, but by
being first of all Master of the Low Countries: 'Twas for this reason that Du
Plessis advised his Master to set upon it that way; and it is that pass alone
which Spain and its Allies ought necessarily to stop with the same care and
diligence, as they would the breach in a Bank, through which the raging Sea is
ready to come in upon them, and this we shall see hereafter.

The French Kings Ambition and Interest is a Torrent, whose Impetuosity neither
Affinity of Blood, nor Alliance, Peace, Treaties, Truce, Swearing, nor even
Mutual Oaths are able to withstand: I Will go farther, no not the very bounds
which God by his wise Providence has set to the limits of every Monarchy, which
seems to speak to each Monarch, Hither shall thou go, and no farther. But Lewis
XIV. has sworn not to rest satisfied with the Lot which the Supreme Monarch of
the Universe has given him. Who can tell, had he once Conquered the World, but
he would begin again another Tower of Babel, to scale the very Heavens?
Ambition knows no bounds, but Pride goes before a fall.

Oh that Spain would not suffer her self to be lulled asleep by this deceitful
Truce! It Is a Dalilah, which all on a sudden cry out to the Spaniards, the
Philistians are upon thee: But I am afraid it will be so as 'twas with Sampson,
who when he awoke, finding himself fast bound, could no longer avoid becoming a
Prey and Conquest to his Enemy. The Grandees of Spain are a great help to
France, and contribute (without dreaming on it) very much to the advancing of
her Interest, and support of her Ambition, whilst they enrich themselves at
their Masters Expense, and in the mean time disable him to keep up Men for
their common defense; but if they were well advised, they should reflect
seriously upon the Condition they are in at present, and upon that they are
like to be in when they fall under the Tyranny of France: How happily would
such a comparison obviate the misery which is coming upon them? For they must
think when a French Man comes to the Crown, that the Spaniards will be but
little considered, and at best be only pitied or despised: The natural
antipathy between those two Nations wont suffer the new King to trust himself
with them, and all their stateliness will serve only for the French Court to
laugh and jeer at.

The Spaniards must not flatter themselves if that comes to pass, that the
Dauphin after his Fathers Death, will leave France to go and live in Spain: The
King's of France will always value Versailles beyond the finest City in Spain:
They will send Viceroys thither who shall be Frenchmen both by nature and
disposition, Mortal Enemies to the Spaniards, that thus they may be secure that
they wont join in any thing with the Spaniards against the French Interest.
These Governors and Viceroys will bring along with them, for their necessary
use their French Tax, the Mal tote, which will in a little time bring forth a
whole swarm of Impositions, as the Taille Taillon Aid, Grant, or Octroit,
Preciput, Equivalent, Free Gift, Gratification, Aid upon Wines, Gabels upon
Salt, Corn and Flower, Tobacco and Perriwigs, on all sorts of Stuffs,
Linen Cloth, Le pied fourchu, Impost upon Flesh, the Mark of Paper, upon
Silver and Tin, upon Milled and Silk Stockings, Impost upon Ice, Controlle des
Exploits, Tax upon Fee-Farms, Tax upon the New Conquests, Quint and Requint,
Mortmains, the price of Valuations, the Mark of Gold, the two Sols a pound, the
right of Sealage, right of Controlle, of Register and Oath, La Paulette,
abatement of Wages, Custom, appointment of a Governor, the Eighth Penny, Impost
and the reunion to the Crown of whatsoever has been given or sold, with some
others not worth naming. Again, after that the Spaniards would have for their
hosts some of those Devilish Farmers of the Kings Revenue who would fasten upon
them, as if they were a Conquered Country, and at first dash would lay a Tax
upon the Sun, knowing they make use of that instead of a Faggot.

Therefore I maintain that Spain should endeavor above all things, to dispose
the Emperor to accept of a Peace, or at least a Truce with the Grand Seignior:
To look out while this present King is living, for a Prince to succeed him, and
that this Prince may betake himself in time to Madrid to be well known to the
people, and be in the Heart of the Kingdom; To Defend it, and get Crowned
immediately upon the Kings Death: To possess himself of the great Seal, and all
Instruments relating to the Crown: And to make the Grandees of Spain side with
him as their Lord and Master.

Moreover by this means Spain may make an early provision for the security of
the Low Countries, and be justly undeceived in that pernicious Opinion which
the Council of Spain has, that England and the United Provinces must
necessarily defend them for their own Interest. I own it is true, they ought to
do it; but if France looses England from her true Interest, and diverts her
from thinking so (as without doubt we shall find) if this comes to pass in any
reasonable time, the United Provinces, whatever good intentions, and whatever
interest they may have in the preservations of the Low Countries, 'twont be in
their power to stop the fury of the French, which like an impetuous Torrent
will in a moment sweep away the best part of Flanders. So that Spain ought to
think of this in good earnest; and not lie asleep whilst the French policy is
so active, and is preparing long beforehand for so important an Affair which
will never be offered them again, if they let slip the opportunity of being
Masters of it. France takes all ways imaginable to get one, and makes it her
whole business; it behooves Spain to do so too, if she would avoid Ruin and
not fall under the Yoke of France, which is the greatest plague that can be
sent upon her, no less than the Destruction and Desolation of her people, the
exposing and humbling all the Grandees of Spain, who will be forced to give
place to the meanest French Gentleman. Therefore if the Spaniards are well
advised, after the Death of their King, they ought not to suffer the Monarchy
to go to Lewis XIV. but with the last drop of their Blood; and Banish for ever
this Violent, Insolent Spirit of France.

The Policy of France and her Maxims in Reference to England.
HEnry VIII. King of England in his time made a Golden Medal, on which was
Engraven a Hand coming out of the Clouds, holding a pair of Scales equally
poised, the one Scale denoting Spain, and the other France, with a motto in
Latin, to this purpose in English, I throw the Scales on that side I give my
Friendship. Without doubt that Prince knew his power, but now I can compare
England to nothing but an Ox, which knows not his own strength and suffers
himself tamely to be yoked. That Kingdom has this great advantage, that it
Guards it self, and an Enemy cannot invade it but with vast difficulty. It Is not
to be invaded without going often to and fro upon the Sea, they will have Wind and
Water to fight against, and a powerful Fleet to engage with before they set
foot ashore: Insomuch that if the King of England be at peace with Holland,
it is undeniable in his power to make the Victory lean to that side he is of:
France has found this so true, (although there is a perfect Hatred and
Antipathy between those two Nations) that she has spared no Cost, and compasses
Sea and Land to withdraw England from its true lasting interest, and bring her
over to their side, or at least make her stand Neuter, and look on with
arms-across, while the King of France Acts his Tragedy upon the Theater of
Europe. In the mean time it is most certain that England can rescue this same
Europe from being enslaved to France, better than any other Nation, if she
pleases.

If the King of Great Britain did but know his own Strength and Real Interest,
he might be not only the Mediator and Umpire of the World, But might make
Peace, when he pleases, between all the Christian Princes.

There are but two things requisite to effect this, both which are very easy,
nay are in the Kings power whenever he has a mind to it.

The First is, That the King of Great Britain take Care to be always beloved
by his People, and that there be a good understanding between him and his
Parliament.

The Second is, To have a strict Alliance with the United Provinces, and live
in perfect Amity with them, and maintain inviolably this Union and
Correspondence in all that Concerns each other. The former of these is mighty
easily done, and the King will obtain it effectually, when he once resolves to
Require nothing of his Parliament but what is agreeable to the Laws of the
Realm, as he already promised in his Coronation Oath. The latter will be done
so soon as His Majesty of Great Britain leaves listening to the French
Emissaries, and puts out of his head all Jealousies and Surmises which those
Creatures continually try to possess him with, having nothing that he need be
afraid of from the States, who don't wish to Aggrandize themselves, and Usurp
their Neighbors Territories as France does; but only keep what God has given
them, and be able to protect their Country in the enjoyment of that Liberty
they have at present. France, who is satisfied of the Truth of what I have
said, takes all occasions to obstruct it; She is never without some of those
Hellish Restless Spirits in the Kingdom, to sow the Tares of mis-understandings
between the King and his Parliament. Ever since the Kings of England have
appeared to be Protestants, this Catholicon has wrought well, and the Spirit of
France has been at work to set the Episcopal Party against the Presbyterian,
and to insinuate into the Minds of the latter, that the Bishops were inclined
to Popery, and that most of them were Jesuits in Bishops Clothes, Who would
certainly seduce the people little by little, and be Turn Coats so soon as
they have a good Opportunity, and dare discover their Opinion: That the King
himself was Popishly-affected, and a thousand things of this nature, which
exasperated the people, and made his Parliament jealous of him, for which
reason they Granted nothing at all, or but very little of what the King ask't,
and by this means his own private Occasions grew so very urgent that he
neglected the Public.

In the Reign of Charles the First, it was France which kindled the first Sparks
of the Civil War, which caused so much Bloodshed both to King and People;
insomuch that when the French Ambassador returned home from England, he boasted
how he had kindled a fire which would not be put out a good while, and that for
one twenty years England should not be in a Condition to do France any harm.
One Father Joseph a Capuchin was instrumental in fomenting the Division among
the Catholics underhand, and I can assure you there were some of those
Catholics in the Parliament Army: King Charles himself affirms it, and tells
you that the Rebellion among them proceeded from his having denied them places,
and as soon as War was declared between the King and Parliament, the King of
France sent Cromwell Six Hundred Thousand Livres to pay his Army at the
beginning. This is publicly known, and all who lived in that Age know it to be
true. But at present the King of Great Britain having changed his Religion,
France has changed her Battery too, and the Church of England is now her main
Piece of Ordinance: The people are so exasperated against each other, that his
Majesty of Great Britain must think of little else this good while, and will
find work enough in his Kingdom to compass his Ends (even though he had got a
Parliament at his Devotion) and if he should live Twenty years longer he would
scarce see a Conclusion, but must be fain to leave that business for his
Successor. So that the King had need stand upon his Guard, while the people
are thus disaffected; He not being in a Condition to send his Army abroad, nor
having Money to maintain them, France in the mean time may do what she pleases,
may take the Low Countries, and all Spain too if the King of Spain happens to
dye, which is the thing France waits for so impatiently.

For the Second thing, which is an Alliance with the United Provinces, and a
perfect Harmony and Agreement between those two Potentates, to oppose all Kings
or Princes whatever, who shall offer to violate the peace of Christendom. It Is
an undoubted Truth that the States desire it of all things, provided it be done
so securely as they may venture to rely upon it, and be backed upon occasion.
Of which there is small likelihood so long as things are as they are in
England. This is what France would not willingly see, since the joining of
these two powers would probably divert her from many Enterprises, and make her
lose her longing to undertake any thing contrary to the late Treaties of peace
at Nimeghen and the Truce: But France takes Care to hinder this, and the
mistrust and jealousy which she keeps afoot in England like magnifying
Glasses, makes the triviallest Objects look greater than they are, both in
public and private Affairs: We need go no farther than the business of Bantam,
which might long ago have been accommodated, but France thinks it more useful
to her, that things be let alone as they are, and neither go forward nor
backward, for fear of a happy Result. An Union of England with the United
Provinces would give no great encouragement to the French designs upon the
Spanish Netherlands, for if England were so minded, the King of France could
never do any good, if the late King would but have seemed to have stirred, the
French had never taken Luxemburg, but they knew his weakness, and were so
cunning to blind him, that he good Prince, never saw the mischief on it till
after the City was taken.

England acted very much against her own Interest, when she parted with
Dunkirk, that City opened the Gate to go into France and the Low Countries: But
now 'twill be otherwise if those Countries fall under the yoke of Lewis le
Grand, and if he by his Conquests joins Neuport and Ostend to Dunkirk: Flussing
in a little time will be thought convenient for him, and then he may very well
begin to dispute the Dominion of the Seas with England, and obstruct her
Commerce; and if at last the King of France Masters Holland, which misfortune
may happen, (the Low Countries being lost) England may very well think it is her
turn next. As 'twas for this Reason that Queen Elizabeth told heretofore
Mounsieur Sully the Most Christian Kings Ambassador, that neither France, nor
England, nor any other Prince had any right to pretend to the Low Countries,
and further, that she would never suffer, that his King should so much as think
on it.

This very Sully in a Letter to Henry IV. sent him word, That with a great Army
(for all what the Queen had said) he might take a course to keep them in order,
and take possession of such Lands and Cities in the Low Countries, as he should
think fit for his turn, and join France entirely with the United Provinces
which is the only means (says he) to restore France to its Ancient splendor,
and make her Superior to all the rest of Christendom: For if once by hook or
by crook the Provinces of Luxemburg, Juliers, la Marck, Mons, Limburg, Aix, and
Cleves were united to France, without doubt all the rest of the Country would
be forced to follow their example, being separated from any communication with
the rest of the World. France has been fixed that way ever since she saw there
was no good to be done toward Italy, but all the Princes of Europe are highly
concerned to put a stop to that Conquest: And there are only those two
Neighboring Powers which are able, and whose Interest it is most, to hinder
the progress that France makes in the Low Countries, which will draw after it,
as I have said before, dire effects: As for Spain of it self, it is only a Body
standing aloof off from its Members, which has nothing left but her Tongue: She
is reduced so low, as even to say her Prayers to Notre Dame Charity, and to beg
her good Masters and Friends to take care of her, and not forsake her: England
can do much toward the preserving the Low Countries, and if her King had not
promis't, to sit still, Luxemburg would have been at this time as 'twas before,
a bone for France to pick. His Most Christian Majesty knows this very well, and
it is for this reason that he takes so much pains to keep his Britanique Majesty
firm to his Interests, and if he wont declare for him, at least that he will
look on, and accept a neutrality. To bring this about, he spares nothing,
neither Presents, nor Pension, nor Tricks; and I may safely say, that the Money
which France gives, is a venomous Serpent, lurking under the Rose-leaves, it
smiles for the present, but will frown severely afterward; it is an Iron Chain
plaited over with Gold, beautiful in appearance, to attract and deceive the
English, but they will one day feel its weight and hardness, if they don't make
an early discovery of the base ends he has who offers it, who will be their
ruin at last, since they cannot subsist, but by a due balance between France
and Spain. I conclude then, that it is the King of Englands apparent Interest,
for self-preservation, and advancing of Trade, to oppose the King of France his
Conquests in the Law Countries; for if he does not, and supposing that after
the loss of that Country, Fortune favors him, and lets him be Master of all
the Seventeen Provinces (which may very well come to pass, if the States are
not seconded, and stand only upon their own Legs) in what a condition will
England be? France will be stronger at Sea, and more Potent in the Indies than
she; France will interfere with her in Traffic every day, she will constantly
have a brave Navy at Sea, and especially in the Spring, which will not let a
mouse stir out of the English Ports without leave, and upon the least
resentment, farewell England to all intents and purposes, since there is no body
left who will or dare lift up a finger in her defense.

Moreover Englands best Policy is to keep France under, not only to maintain
her Dominion of the Seas, but also to find a convenient opportunity for the
recovery of her Ancient Demesnes which France keeps from her for Example,
Britain, Normandy, Poitou, Languedock, and all France too, which belongs to it
by the Marriage of the King of England with Margaret, Daughter of Philip the
Fair, from this Match came Henry V. of England, who had as much Right to France
as the Dauphin has to Spain: For the three Sons of Philip the Fair, Lovis
Hutin, Philip the Long, and Charles the Fair dyed all without Issue-male, and
it was after this, when the King of England sued for his Right to the Kingdom
of France, that the Salique Law was first introduc't, ushered in by a Sermon
which the Bishop of Beauvais preached before the Convention of the States,
proving by the Gospel, which says, The Lillies spin not, that by consequence
the Flower de lis which represents France, ought never to fall to the Distaff:
But that Law could only affect what was to come, and not what was past.
Afterward Henry V. King of England came over into France with a Potent Army,
won several Victories, and at last Married Catherine, Daughter of Charles VI.
and in the year 1421 it was sinally decreed and concluded, that Henry should be
King of France: Now Isabel Queen of France, Mother to Catherine Queen of
England, made her last Will in favor of her Son in Law, and declared him Heir
to all her Estate, and to the Crown, which in my judgment is a great addition
to the Right which the Kings of England have to the Realm of France.

If the King of France had but had that Right to England which the King of
England has to France, what a Company of Manifestoes and Writings should we
have fly about? to demonstrate his just pretentions, as he calls every thing
he is pleased to lay a claim to.

So that let the King of England take a view of France which way soever he
will, he ought always to suspect her, and stand upon his guard, as against one
whom he certainly knows to be his Enemy. He may justly be assured that he does
not coaks him so without a design to get something out of him, and because he
knows him the only one who is able to counterpoize his Affairs: Therefore it is
no wonder that Lewis XIV. took so much pains to supply the late King Charles
II. Necessities, and satisfy his Pleasure, Mounsieur Barillen, and Madam
Portsmouth can justify what I say, but I can assure you that the King of
France regards neither Princes nor private Persons one jot farther than as they
are for his turn: Nay farther, Even Virtue it self is only esteemed by him, so
long as she squares with his Interest: What value pray did he put upon either
Princes or Princesses during Cromwell's Government? Were they not obliged to
retire (not to say driven) out of France? What subsistnance or help had their
Princes in their Exile from France? No, it is to the Family of Orange, that they
are obliged, which furnished them with considerable Sums of Money; but on the
contrary France was the promoter of the late Troubles of England, she gave the
Princes no protection, and never contributed the least toward the
re-establishing of the late King in his Throne.

All this considered, neither just resentment from the Royal Family, nor the
English Interest can decently allow of such close Alliances with France, as
shall be able to make England shut her Eyes, or be a by-stander, whilst Lewis
XIV. takes the Low Countries: But on the other side, she ought to be
continually in a posture to hinder her in every the least attempt she makes
toward it, and to make use of the Six Regiments in Holland, which the States
will not refuse upon such an occasion, to prevent the King of France his bringing
more Men down upon Flanders: I am persuaded that those Six Regiments would be
able to cope with double the number of the French; and thus by Englands only
showing of her Teeth, Europe will be safe: Resist the Devil, and he will fly
from you: But if you are afraid of him, he will soon master you. France has cut
out work for King James now Reigning: The Enterprise which he has taken in hand
is so great, that many Men fear, and others hope, that he will never get quit
of it with his Life. It Is no time to change Laws when the Enemy is at the Gate:
It Is not convenient at all times, to think of working great Conversions, some
Battles must be fought, to let the World see a Character both of a Soldier and
a Politician. All the World expected this and more from the King. His Mighty
Courage put all Europe in hopes, that he would be an Universal Comforter to
them, and would afford some respite to Spain. But alas! What can his Allies and
Spain hope for, whilst his sole business is to please the Jesuits, kindles a
fire in his own Kingdom, which it may be he will not be able to quench when he
pleases; and so long as he does so, he dares not call a Legal Free Parliament.

Spain lost her self by banishing the Moors out of the Kingdom. France is
weakened by the Conversions she has wrought, and by driving out the Hugonots,
and she has a great mind that the King of England would follow her Example. We
must not rob God of his Right, Conversions only belong to him, and he is able
to convert the whole World with one Word: Therefore leaving the care of this to
God, the King of England ought to mind the safety of his States, avoid being
made the King of France his Cully, and make him keep at home, and not fall upon
his Neighbors Lands, which ought to be the Barrier between them: Thus the King
will do his Honor and Conduct but Justice, and satisfy the expectation of all
Europe.

The Politic Spirit of France, and its Maxims, in reference to the United
Provinces.
THE States of the United Provinces, after they had constrained Spain by force
of Arms to acknowledge them for Free, High and Mighty States, depending on none
but God alone; were for some time the admiration of their Neighbors, and every
one labored to procure their Friendship and Alliance, and it may be said that
they were looked upon as the Umpires of Europe; but since the War in 1672, this
High Reputation has been lessened, and France has been so cunning to play her
Cards so well, that she had well nigh reduced them to nothing; if by an unlookt
for change, the People had not put the whole management and command into the
Prince of Orange's hands, and if some persons of ill designs had not been
brought to condign punishment. But God whom it pleased by his Providence to
protect and preserve this little Country, did after the siege of Norden send
such a panick fear amongst its Enemies, that they broke up their Camp with more
speed than they came, yet the thing which did most contribute to these
misfortunes, besides the Treachery of France was their being unprovided of good
Forces, and a good Head for the Army. These Provinces relied wholly upon the
Peace, and treacherous deceitful promises of France, which all a long in time
of Peace carried on a design against the said Provinces. We see that amidst
Peace, the Militia Forces grew slothful: Ease smiles for a little while, Men
quite forsake the care of Arms, and give themselves only to something
profitable and gainful: When the Enemy approaches, Men fly oftentimes to
their shame (far from that Glory which was heretofore the prevailing Passion)
as we might have observed in the late Wars. France was sure so long as the
United Provinces had no Captain General, the Militia would be but ill provided,
and no ways upon their Guard, and this is the reason why she was so very
careful to hinder the Prince of Orange from being advanced to those Dignities
and Commands which he at present enjoys, by strengthening and poisoning the
contrary Party: By this means the States grew weaker and weaker every day:
Their Forces were dispersed, their Fortifications neglected, and their strongest
places fell to decay; their Magazines but ill provided with Ammunition, whilst
France levied Men unawares, entered into secret Alliances with England,
Archbishop of Cologne, and Bishop of Munster.

Du Plessis says very well, that every State is not thought strong or weak,
but in comparison to the strength and weakness of their Neighbors; that it is
for that end that wise Princes always keep a counterpoize as much as possible,
that they may remain in peace and amity together, and so soon as ever that
fails, peace and amity is dissolved, not being grounded upon any thing but
mutual fear, or respect for one another: Now this is so true, that every Prince
is jealous of the least Levy or Motion of his Neighbor, even amidst Peace, or
Cessation of Arms; and do perpetually observe it, and labor to get a true
Information of the designs of his Enemy or Neighbor even before they be
hatched; for thereby his resolutions are spoiled; now this is the thing wherein
abundance of Princes and States (who stand upon cost and charges) are to seek:
This is a piece of Covetousness that sometimes costs its Master and his People
dear, and at last occasioneth a War, which perhaps might have been prevented
with a small matter. France is so well assured of the Truth of it, that she
lets nothing slip upon such occasions: Her Ambassadors in all the Courts of
Europe have Money for that purpose; and they can do their Master no better
service, nor sooner win his favor, than by corrupting one or more of that
Princes Council at whose Court they reside: It is their chief study Night and
Day, and spare nothing to accomplish it: When they come short of the good Man,
they are sure to win the Wife, that she may now and then ask her Husband; (nay,
rather than fail, one of the Children may serve the turn) whether or no he was
successful in such and such a business: They apply themselves in like manner to
the Servants, whom they reward according to their services. These Maxims prove
very lucky to them in States where there are many Heads, as in the United
Provinces, who are a great rub in the King of France his way in his Conquest of
the Spanish Netherlands, for he knows that having some of them, he may make
sure of the rest, so that his main business is to lull the United Provinces
asleep by a Truce which he breaks at pleasure, supposing at that time they may
neglect their Militia, as heretofore they did, and busy themselves only with
Trading, for the King knows that the States having their Wits about them, and
upon their Guard, they will never consent to the taking of the Spanish
Netherlands, at least that they ought not to do it, since that there lies the
bounds between France and them, which they ought to have a care of, as of their
Neighbors House least it be set on Fire. So that to bring about his Design
what has not the Count d'Avaux done to divide one Province against another,
nay even the Cities of Holland, and especially Amsterdam.

What did he not promise, what did he not engage, to accomplish his Designs?
However they were not managed with such secrecy, but that the very Boys in the
streets smoak't them out, through the frequent Journeys this Ambassador so
often made to this great City, neither is Mombas to be thought the only Actor
in this Affair, for when he retired to France, he left many Agents behind him,
to further the design in the Night, not daring to appear in the Day: but the
best was, Count d'Avaux became at length to be better understood, the People
began to suspect his Doctrine, for his abusing the easiness and good nature of
many of them, made them sensible of his practice, and illude his Designs: but
the Policies of France are more perspicuous, in fomenting the differences
between England, and the United Provinces, well knowing the uniting of both
their Forces together might give France it is Mortal Wound. How sweet therefore
must their Divisions be to France, and especially when they spring from among
themselves? The last War between these two, arose from some differences in
point of Traffic, and whilst the King of England was preparing for the War,
the King of France offered his Assistance toward an accommodation with the
States, on purpose only to delude them, as they well perceived afterward
being amazed that when they drew near to a Conclusion, France on the sudden
sided with England, and at the same time the one gave the Assault by Sea, the
other by Land: and so assuring to themselves an entire Conquest of the United
Provinces, they divided their Spoils, the one taking the Maritime places, and
France the other, but they mis-understood one another about Amsterdam, each
imagining to possess that himself; but there was no occasion for their casting
Lots for it, for God suffered it not to fall into their hands: afterward each
drew home their Forces, according to the Peace which the English were the first
movers of. Then did France labor what it could to strip the States of their
Allies, it is King foreseeing the Dice would turn, and that the Dutch might
rally, their Soldiers being in great Discipline under an experienced General,
then did the King give up Mastricht, and did whatever else lay in his power to
promote the peace at Nimeghen: Since which time he has always barked at a
distance, and did so much dread the States levying the last 16000 men, that
Count d'Avaux used all Stratagems to prevent it, as he will do at all times
whenever the States discover an inclination to arm; because that would prove
some hinderance to his encroaching designs, and here I must repeat again, how
much it is the Interest of the States, to prevent their Frontiers from being
swallowed up, which certainly in a short time will become a prey to the
Usurper, upon a more specious pretense then that King has usually made use of:
He may publicly declare upon what right his pretensions are grounded, how
that, without the least dispute these Provinces did formerly belong to Mary of
Burgundy, to Philip the First, to Charles the Fifth, and after that to Philip
the Second, and that these were in rightful possession of them till they
afterward Rebelled, and by force extorted their Liberty: He will offer them,
in case they will freely submit themselves to his Dominion, to maintain their
Ancient Privileges, and reserve to them the free Exercise of their Religion,
and also exempt them from all impositions as he does his French Subjects; which
if they shall refuse to do, then will he attack them with his Army, as he did
in the year 1672. fearing no opposition from any of the Catholic Princes,
before whose eyes he has all along cast a mist with the specious pretenses of
Religion; but if the House of Austria continue still to be lulled asleep, she
with all her Catholicism will be irrecoverably undone.

But I perceive the Estates of the United Provinces, next to God, must depend
wholly upon their own strength, and need only be afraid of France, and to
level their whole Forces against her, whose design for these many years has
been to suppress them, and if not wholly to destroy them, yet at least to
reduce them so low, as they should wholly depend upon her.

The King would willingly agree with them after the same manner as we read in
the Fable the Wolf would have done with the Sheep, dismiss your Shepherd and
your Dog, cries the Wolf to these poor simple Creatures, and then will we enter
into a strict Friendship and Alliance together, and live peaceably one with
another; thus says Mr. King, Cashier your General, disband your Veterane
Soldiers, 'twill be good Husbandry now in this time of peace, and you may
assure your selves of my Friendship, and take your ease during this Cessation,
and so we will live Friendly and quietly together; but the Italian tells us,
Trust not, and you will never be deceived: Thus as I laid down before, it is
best for them to rely wholly upon their own proper strength, and be ever
provided with a substantial Navy, both for Cruising up and down and for
Convoy's, and also to have another ready to put to Sea, their strength at Sea
is the right hand of the States, and which will easily disperse the storms
which France do often threaten her neighbors with: and if the States would
ever be persuaded to train up a sufficient number of Seamen, to be in constant
readiness to Man their Frigates whenever necessity required, it would produce
this double advantage; 1. The State would be ever furnished with men ready for
her Defense, without the Trouble of seeking where to levy them, and these will
be skilful enough by the continual service. 2. She would draw from neighboring
Havens many Mariners that would proffer their services, but especially such of
the States subjects as were in Foreign service would choose rather to return
home when they should be sure to be in service upon the Land or the Water, the
whole year round; those who are abroad, need not be frighted to return home by
sharp Proclamations: It Is certain France cannot brag much upon this account, for
I am sure most of the ships she sends out but especially the Pilots are all
Dutch, she confiding more in the skill and experience of them than of her own
men, who never dare venture upon long Voyages; and if ever the States, should
resolve upon so beneficial a method, the Policies of France would immediately
be perceived to rouse, and Count d'Avaux, hound-like would hunt from Town to
Town to oppose it: but he begins now to grow very angry, because of the small
effect which his large promises have hitherto produced, and merely for want of
their being duly tempered with Truth and Honesty, the main supporters of the
Credit and Reputation of a Minister of State in a Foreign Country, but the King
is obliged to this great Man for putting several stories of their High and
Mightinesses into his Head, that they have no cause to thank him for.

France notwithstanding is mightily assisted in the United Provinces, by the
Jesuits and other Foreign Priests, who are hired to sift out, and divert the
good intentions of the People, they are crept into the Prince of Orange's
Court, where they find private Friends to serve them on all occasions; they
have the impudence to brag of their Intelligence of things done in his private
Chamber, and they omit nothing that tends to the well acting of their parts;
they swarm in his Troops and Garrisons, whence they transmit their intelligence
to the Hague the common Office of adress, and as it were the Receptacle of the
other Cities and Provinces; the greater caution therefore ought to be used, for
all these Vermin are warmed by France, who is ever in action, and will deny
nothing to any one whom she thinks can be serviceable to her: I my self
remember, that not long ago, a Footman of one of the States Deputies was
offered Four Ducatoons a week, to betray whatever his Master should speak of,
either at his own Table, or in Discourse with the other Deputies, but the Valet
with reason and height of indignation refused the baseness.

Thus we may observe the French Policy, make use of all ways, how much
therefore ought they to be upon their Guard, to keep off her blows: I my self
observe the chief Cities about the Hague infested with Spies, who hunt every
Table, and daily change their Dining-places, except they find some good bit or
other to divert them, how cautious then ought they to be, who are obliged to
frequent Ordinaries: Others of these little Fellows screw themselves into all
Companies, others of them into the Court, at such times when the Prince and
Princess Dine and Sup publicly, and all this only to observe what is said, and
to make report of every small accident, even of the very Fire and Fuel:
Whenever these little News-Carriers happen upon any thing of moment, away they
scour like the Basques to the French Ambassadors, where they are sure of a
Dinner, his Table being generally filled up with these kind of Cattle: I could
name a dozen of these Animals, who to my knowledge are thus maintained, besides
others who manage these concerns with more privacy, acting only in the dark:
The Count de Caravas, was one of the chief of them; a Man very much esteemed
of, though in my mind only like a chip in pottage, not being so cautious as he
should have been, for he went about at Noonday, and through the great Gates to
carry his news: Two others whom I know to be Jesuits, are daily disguised in
Officers Habits at the Princes Levy, his times of Dining and Supping, haunting
the Court all the day long, where they are engaged in so many Intrigues, and
have such numbers of Acquaintance, that they well understand what advice to
give to their Friends the Catholics, for after all they are French Emissaries,
and wholly devoted to that Service; others of this sort get to be employed in
the Kitchen, where these Cattle are too too dangerous: The conclusion therefore
is Natural, to keep a watch on all sides, in all times, in Peace, in War, upon
the Motions of France, whose Maxims are destructive and Antichristian, whose
King is both perjured and a Liar, who, under the color of establishing
universally the Catholic Religion (which he himself in his Life and Faith
renounces) has no other end than the Extent of his own Dominion over all
Europe; first over the Protestant Princes if he can, and then over the
Catholic; and thus not only to be declared Roman Emperor, but also Universal
Emperor of Europe, and it is lamentable to behold with what a Covetous Eye from
Versailes he looks upon the United Provinces: It Is therefore advisable for the
States and People of these Provinces, to put in practice what our Savior once
advised the Jews, Watch, for ye know not the hour in which the Thief will come:
So, say I, be ever in a readiness to oppose him, whenever he shall endeavor to
possess himself of their Houses, and usurp upon the Territories of his
Neighbors, and by degrees upon that which God Almighty has disposed of to the
wise Government of the States, for France must be looked upon in these days as
the common Enemy to all Republics, as the Scourge of all that deny his Power:
True it is, that his fear of the United Provinces, by much exceeds his love for
them, it is very convenient to keep him in this fear, by repelling him whenever
he advances beyond his own Territories, and not so much to trust to Count D'
Avaux's deceitful Remonstrances, and his being against their putting themselves
into a posture of defense, ought assuredly to persuade them that it is also
contrary to his Masters desire, otherwise why should he trouble himself to
oppose it. The States are more particularly engaged to be upon their Guard, and
to neglect nothing which may tend to their defense, because of their too near
Neighbor the Cardinal of Furstemburg, who is lately Elected Co-adjutor of
Cologne, a dangerous and active Man, and already possessed with the Demon of
France, whom the King can raise with his Money when he pleases, to the more
easy reducing the Frontiers of the Provinces, and upon all occasions will buoy
up France in quarrelling with Holland upon the first notice given. The Spirit
of France appears in all his Actions, so that he is equally as dangerous a
Neighbor as the King himself, for his high Obligations to his Master will
oblige him also to concur in his designs of becoming the Universal Monarch, by
swallowing up his Neighbors round about him, as will be seen in time, if some
Course be'nt taken.

The Policies and Maxims of France, in respect of the Northern Princes.
I Place the Kings of Swedeland and Denmark among the chief of the Northern
Princes: These are two Powerful Kingdoms, and although they are Neighbors, and
nearly allied by Marriages, yet notwithstanding are so far from loving, that
like France and Spain, they mortally hate one another; and although their
Interest, Trade, and narrowness of Revenue ought to persuade them to live
amicably together, yet notwithstanding all, their antipathy will prevail; it is
of high importance to France to have ever one of these Kings at his beck, that
so she may give a diversion to the other, whenever the one should have a mind
to assist the Low Countries, or the United Provinces against her Encroachments.
The Swede being the stronger, suits best with this design of France, between
whom therefore there has been a strict Alliance, but the Swede being
disappointed of his Pension, and treacherously dealt with in respect of the
Duchy of Deux-Ponts, which descended to him after the Death of that Duke, but
was miserably impoverisht by France in the Life of the Duke: These things the
Swede cannot put up, but for the present it is not so convenient to discover his
resentments, but reserve them for a fairer opportunity, neither will France do
any good now if she should present her Louis' d'or's put up like a barrel of
Olives, as she did formerly to his Ambassador to soften him at the Treaty of
Nimeghen, which she her self has since bragged of: All this will be to small
purpose, for the Swede has already tasted sufficiently of the bitter Spirit of
France, and has resolved to have nothing more to do with her. Therefore France
goes now to the K. of Denmark, who had a mind next to see what kind of things
these Louis' d'or's be, and therefore never stuck to side with her; when
immediately Count de Roy was dispatched in quality of Generalissimo, with
several other French Officers, at whose arrival the French Tricks forthwith
discovered themselves, for Count de Roy immediately demanded on behalf of the
King his Master, part of the supplies sent from France, pretending that they
were squandered away to no purpose. The like Complement was formerly done to
the Elector of Brandenburgh, but Kings and Princes must consult the Honor of
their Posterity and the Ages to come, as well as the present. What a Cipher in
History will a Mercenary Prince and an Hireling of France appear in future
Ages, who is led like a Bear by the Nose, and thus gives a Tarnish to all his
other Actions, which otherwise might be worthy commemoration; he must not
imagine such baseness will dye with his Person, there are ever found some that
will be Friends to truth, all Pens are not so Mercenary as Varilla's and
Pellisson's.

As soon as France has made as much use of the Dane as she can, and finds any
other to be of more advantage to her, she will forsake him as one too much for
his own ends, pretending some sham-quarrel or other, (as the Turks do) to fall
out with him about his Pension, as she formerly served the Swede: and if the
House of Lunenburgh would have swallowed the Bait, the Dane should not have
warmed himself by France so long as he has already done.

But besides the Ignominy which will follow a Sovereign, who instead of
depending solely upon the King of Kings, Blushes not in becoming a Vassal to
his Equal, and giving occasion to France to boast like the Centurion in the
Gospel, I bid my servant do this, and he does it, and to another, go, and he
goes, and to another, come, and he comes. I say, besides this Baseness, its
most pernicious Policy, (though I doubt the Dane's too heavy to discern it) for
a small dirty sum of Money, and which serves only to maintain his
extraordinary Troops, to render himself an Enemy to all Europe, and in
particular to his potent Neighbors, without the assistance of whom both
Denmark and Norway must fall to the ground. For I do maintain, that it lies in
the power of the United Provinces, by a Remonstrance to do more Mischief to
those two Kingdoms in one year, than they can ever recover in ten by all their
Subsidies and Pensions from France: I confess, by the shelter from France, he
easily became Master of Holstein; but alas, good man, can he imagine to keep
it, for surely that Country will take ca^e to oblige him to quit it, as soon as
ever his Master the K. of France shall be routed out of the United Provinces.

Were there but once a Peace concluded between the two Emperors, the victorious
Christian Army would certainly make the Usurper disgorge, and reduce his
Stomach to temper: Soft and fair goes far. Had it not been for the Alliance
with France, the Dane had never made that Assault upon Hamburgh, which became
the Grave to so many brave Danes and French that served in that Attempt; the
unlucky Fort of the Starr stopped them in their Career, from whence with the loss
of Two Thousand men, they were obliged to retreat with shame and confusion
thereby becoming the laughing stock to all Europe besides.

The King of Denmark as well as many others, is not really sensible of his own
Interest, but suffers himself to be dazzled by this Golden Sun, which France
immediately displayes to such as she has a mind to corrupt; she ever has in
reserve her Nimigen Olives to gratify such, whose assistance she shall stand
in need of: But it is a thing much to be hoped for, that his Majesty of
Denmarks Eyes may be opened, as well as the Swedes; and that he would retrieve
himself from these Shackles, and have recourse to his other Allies, in whose
power it is to make the Trade of his Kingdoms to flourish, and his Revenues to
increase, without being obliged to keep up such a number of useless Troops as
he does at present: But France well knows the necessity of having at her beck
one of those Northern Princes, for fear they should unite in a strict Alliance,
and so league with her Enemies: This Policy of France is the Apple of discord,
and she not being able to be without a Northern Allie, if Denmark had stood off
a while, France must have purchased her Friendship at a double rate: The
Marriage which France proposed for P -- G -- with the P -- s A -- was only to
strengthen her Party, and to make her Alliance the surer, this made her willing
to defray the Charges thereof; P -- G -- himself, nor the King his Brother
having not much Money to spare for that purpose, this cost France a Hundred
Thousand Crowns to secure to her side, as she thought, a Creature in England,
who should on all occasions further her designs; and to knit this the stronger,
he would have had him believe, he should succeed to the Crown after the Death
of King James II. to the apparent prejudice of the next undoubted Heiress, To
make which the more feasible, he would have fomented Jealousies between the two
Sisters and their Husbands, well foreseeing a terrible blow if Affairs should
change, and the Succession be kept in the right Line. It Is true, the King of
France might think to engage P -- G -- into a Scurvy business, by contriving a
Civil War in England, after the Decease of the King now Reigning; but I cannot
devise after he should have involved him in this Labyrinth, how he will
extricate him: The Duke of Monmouth (for all he was the Son of a King) is a
caution to every Subject.

It Is well known the French King is very earnest with the King of England by
his Jesuits, to demand of the First Parliament he can get at his beck and
Devotion, the Power to chose a Successor after the Example of Henry VIII. and
once gaining that, to advance the P -- s A -- to the Crown before any other;
but many weary step, and a far Compass must be taken before he get so far:
First of all, The King of England must have a Parliament at his Devotion:
Secondly, This Parliament must grant his Request: Thirdly, The King must choose
(nay who can tell but Death may prevent all these:) In the Fourth place, It Is
meet the People consent to this Choice: Nay last of all, It Is absolutely
convenient that the P -- s of O -- as Lawful Heiress acquiesce in such
determinations.

The French King who is no admirer of Virtue, but as it keeps pace with his
Interests, understanding those Noble Qualities, and Great Virtues the Princess
of Orange is endued withal, that she will no sooner shine upon the Throne of
her Ancestors, but she will attract and win the Hearts of all her Subjects,
both by her Wisdom, and also strict Alliance with her Neighbors: He sees that
these Ties and Bonds may in time make him disgorge what he has swallowed, and
repent of all the sorrows he has caused, and still does cause Christendom to
suffer: Who knows but God may have marked out this Great and Virtuous Princess
as a second Judith to put this Blasphemous Holofernes to Death: Yea, this is
what this Usurper and Disturber of Christendom is so sensibly apprehensive of,
and endeavors to hinder, by feeing and corrupting the Great Men of England, by
making sure of all the Catholics, and of Ireland it self, thereby to give them
relief in case of necessity.

But P -- G -- and his Consort P -- s A -- will look better about them, and
will not suffer themselves to be deluded by this deceitful Spirit of France:
They see all its pernicious and deceitful Maxims, and will wait for the time
Providence has determined for their Succession to the Crown; they have already
gained the Peoples Hearts, the Esteem and Reputation of Europe; and of their
Allies; and by this means may be assured to back and justify their rightful
Titles at that time, in case any one should dare to oppose it.

As for the Princes of the House of Lunenburg, they are taken notice of and
watched, they are encompast with French Emissaries on all sides, who do nothing
but continually set before them the Advantages that may accrue to them by
accepting of the French Kings Pensions; or to speak the truth, make themselves
Slaves to Lewis le Grand, just following the King of Denmarks Example, to dance
after his pipe. The French pence often stick too close to the fingers of the
Ministers of those Courts, Bois-David and his Kinsman St. Pouage could tell us
fine stories of their tricks, and certain too, they could deliver brave
Memorials concerning that Court, had not Bois-David been for the Kings turn, he
durst never have had the face to have come home into France as he did, being
found guilty upon the score of a Duel with Aubjou; for there is no fault how
heinous soever, but the King pardons, if the Malefactor be judged needful for
his Interest and Ambition: We are confident the King proffers vast Sums to
withdraw the Princes of the House of Lunenburg from their true Interest, and so
bring them under the French Yoke; but I would have them disabus'd: It Is no
ways Honorable nor creditable for Free and Sovereign Princes to stoop so low
as to be Mercenary to France, and it is certain all these offers are for nothing
else but to loosen themselves from their honest true Allies, viz. the Swedes,
the Elector of Brandenburg, and the States of the United Provinces, whose
pecial Interest it is to hold fast, and be firmly united, as well by reason of
the nearness of their States, as upon the account of Trading; and that fair
correspondence which has always reigned amongst them: So that a Man may
safely avouch they serve to maintain, and mutually preserve one another. Now
France has a design in it, in meaning to oblige the Princes of Lunenbourg to
come over to her Interest; for should the King of England, or Spain chance to
dye suddenly, she would have occasion for those three forementioned Powers to
be able to oppose them with the French Troops joined to theirs, in case any one
of them should be in action.

It Is most evident, that Lewis XIV. ought to labor as he does to procure
himself Allies to second his Designs upon the same score as he does for
Denmark, whether it be to hinder the Prince of Oranges passage into England, or
when he means to fall upon Holland in good earnest; these two concerns go to
his heart, and is his sole grief considering the Grand Conquest of the
Emperor, who will be like to grieve him to the heart with his Victorious Army
after peace made; nay, and perhaps make him lose his longing, to put some of
his great designs in Execution, for which he labors tooth and nail, and now
begins to cool upon it, to the end he may so well order his business, that he
may neither meet with any impediment, or at least that he may divert and busy
those who mean to withstand it.

I dare safely affirm, that the Prince of Orange is the only Man the French
King dreads, and that the very thoughts of the Succession of a Royal Princess
to the English Crown puts him in a deadly fright, which gives him a Stool
without a Pill, knowing withal that this as great a Politician as Captain (not
knowing what Corruption means) perfectly verst in the true interest of Europe,
will say as Q. Elizabeth did, that none had any thing to do to pretend to the
Low Countries, and will not endure that either the King of France nor any other
should make himself Master of it, which will be very feasible when he shall be
advanced to this Dignity, and this is the reason why the Spirit of Lewis the
Great encompasseth the Earth, and would fain associate himself with as many
Princes as possibly he can to shelter himself from the impending Storm and
Tempest, and secure him from that Thunder that is ready to break out against
him.

Poland is at a great distance from France, can neither hurt it by Sea or Land,
but can do him great service indirectly, as crossing the Designs of the
Emperor, or by falling upon Swedeland, especially Swedeland when France thinks
good; for there wants not a plausible excuse when a Prince means to make an
attempt. Casimir Son of Sigismond had a lawful one indeed; for this Sigismond
being as yet King of Sweeden, was elected King of Poland: He kept nevertheless
his first Kingdom, until Prince Charles his Uncle was proclaimed King in the
absence of his Nephew King Sigismund, who sent a Senate consisting of Forty
Jesuits to have full power of deciding all State-Matters, and were to reside at
Stockholm, being dispatched with full instructions by Patent, impowering them
with Royal Authority: But when the Senate was arrived in Stockholm Road, Prince
Charles with all the Nobility went out to meet them with Twenty or Thirty Ships
to do the more Honor to these new Senate. This Squadron coming round about the
Vessel of their Reverend Senators, gave them a broadside, seeming to welcome
them: Their Ships immediately sprung diverse leaks, and the Jesuits went down to
hold their first Session in Quality of Senators at the bottom of the Salt Sea,
none using any means to save one of them. In the upshot, Prince Charles was
Elected King, the Archbishop dispensed with the Subjects Oath of Allegiance,
which they took to Sigismond and his Uncle was proclaimed King.

The French King thinks himself concerned in the Election of a King of Poland;
thither he usually sends an Ambassador with some Lewisses to carry on the
Election in favor of some Prince of his Faction, but especially that he may
not be true and steadfast to the Faction of the House of Austria. King John now
Reigning, his Queen being a French Lady, has contributed very much to the
Bishop of Beauvais the French Ambassador, to solicit in her behalf, because
the Most Christian King always thought that by the Queens Intercession he
should prevail with the King to come over to his Interests, and he was not
altogether mistaken. True indeed the repulse she suffered from the King of
bestowing the Titles of Duke and Peer upon the Marquess D' Arquier her Father,
and acknowledging her to be his Daughter, and of giving her the honor of Queen
in case she should come into France, had a little cooled her; but when it will
cost the King but a little sheet of Parchment to please a Prince, the King is
extraordinary liberal of it at Court, especially if he have need of him. So
likewise out of acknowledgment of these favors you see the King of Poland does
whatsoever his Benefactour will have him; and St. Lewis is in great power in
that Realm. Yet I don't look upon it as the true interest of Poland to make
such a stop, the ways being so good since the deliverance and relief of
Vienna, the issue and result of his great exploits would have Eternized his
memory by giving a peace to the Grand Seignior upon advantageous terms for
Poland; but the best of all was, he might have secured the Crown upon his Sons
head, for questionless they could not in Justice have denied it him, as an
acknowledgment of all his Victories. We are not ignorant that the Spirit of
France, very prodigal of promises, and fertile in cunningness, do ascertain the
King and Queen, that Prince Alexander their Son shall not fail of a Crown, and
your Golden Lewisses work wonders: But who pray will give Lewis a lease of his
Life till then? I must needs say he caused to be put under his Statue, Viro
immortali, but I have found also in the same place, Cum fistula in ano. So that
he may dye before the King of Poland; and if he do dye, it may so come to pass
that his Successor may have so many Irons in the fire at home, that he will
never think of seeking any more abroad.

But now France offers the young Prince Royal of Poland for pledge of their
Truth and Friendship the Princess de Conti la Valliere, whom they also offered
to the Prince of Bavaria, as if there were no more Legitimate Princesses in
Europe: I am persuaded the King of France thinks he does the Polonians a great
deal of Honor, by offering them one of his Natural Daughters for to be their
Queen. This would be fine to employ the Pens of those Droll-Wits, Pasquin and
Murforio: It Is certain, if the King of Poland should give way to this awkward
Contract of Alliance, it would be as much as to declare plainly, that he no
longer pretended to have the Crown of Poland for his Son, and that this
Marriage was an act wholly disclaiming it: I would have him rather follow the
King of Portugals example; he was cunning enough to get himself disentangled
from the importunities of France, to strengthen himself by his alliance with
the House of Austria and the Emperor, by his Marriage with the Princess
Palatine of Newbourgh; he knew too well, that if ever Lewis XIV. got footing in
Spain, that his Kingdom would depend on his disposal. One of the two Teeth this
same Lewis was born with, is called Usurping, the other Cruel; from the one
proceeds dependence, decorum, or convenience of Situation, from the other,
Treachery and Persecution; you need not question, if the King of France should
become King of Spain, but Portugal would be first of all invested, because the
Spaniard possessed that Kingdom from Philip II. until Philip IV. time, which was
about the year 1640, when the Portugueze shook off the Spanish yoke; Threescore
years of possession may plead prescription, whereon to ground his right of
dependence (there needs only thirty for a private man), besides the right of
decorum, or commodious Situation; for Portugal joins upon the Kingdom of
Castile, Aragon and Granada; he had not so good a Title to the Kingdom of
Austrasie; nay he has quite turned out the Princes who possessed one part of
the Lands of that Kingdom for near 600 years. Fear keeps the Vineyard, as the
French say, and distrust is the mother of safety. If I had to do with Salvages,
or with the King of Bantam or China, not knowing occurrences in our parts, it
would be requisite to enter upon an Historical Relation of all the slippery
tricks France has played this last Age, of all the Deceits, Cheats,
Usurpations, Injustices and Cruelties this present King has put in practice to
be Master of the Estates and the Possessions of his Neighbors: But I speak to
Europeans, and they Christians too, who have seen with their Eyes, heard with
their Ears, and have daily before them, Princes dispoyled and stripped of their
Possessions, so many People ruined, so many Cities taken, so many Houses, now
nothing but ruins and rubbish, Thousands of Christians reduced to Beggary; nay,
and the Blood of his own Subjects still a gushing out in mighty streams all
over the Country; These I say are speaking Books, where all up and down you may
find in huge Characters, Lewis the Great, Sacrifices all to his Ambition and
Interest. Now although all the World knows it, and though scarce a Prince but
has been cozened by him, yet he is so skilful to hush them asleep by the mild
gentle rain of Lewisses, that some part of them cry, Lord what would thou
have us do, and run headlong insensibly, and with a kind of delight, to the
ruin and destruction of their Issue. O how much need has Europe of a good
Oculist, to remove the Scales from the Eyes of a great many Princes, and once
in their lives to open them for them, to the end, that every one knowing what is
good for himself, may lay aside, and forsake the interest of France; they ought
all unanimously to endeavor with might and main to procure him a Competitour
to balance him, and retain and bind him up within his just bounds, and so
disable him, that he may no more trouble the earth by his ambition. One blow is
sufficient to do it; what need I tell you, all Europe sees it: This will come
to pass when it shall please the Divine Wisdom of the true Universal Monarch,
King of Kings, to make it evident. We cannot but wish Lewis XIV. long life,
that he may be witness of all these things, and may have another Joshua to stop
the course of his Sun, for which the people of the earth so much long and put
up their continual Prayers for.

The Spirit or Policy of France, and its Maxims, in regard of the Suisse
Cantons his Allies, and of Savoy.
THE Cantons of Switzerland being free and absolute are governed by themselves,
hold of none but of God and their own valor; they are partly reformed, and
partly Roman Catholic; it is by reason of this difference of Religion, that
they have often variance amongst themselves, and give the King of France
occasion to lay hold on the opportunity, who makes good use of the easiness of
the latter to sow the seed of dissension among them. In time past they did no
way border upon France, which was a great happyness for the Cantons, but since
the peace Hen. IV. made with the Duke of Savoy, the Country of Gex belonged to
that Prince; then after that France which always gets ground, did make
encroachments in Alsatia, Franche Conte, and toward Burgundy, is at this time
Neighbor to the Swisse on three several sides: But Lewis XIV. not content with
that, had a mind to be a nearer Neighbor to his fellows, by the Fort of
Huninghen within Canon shot; as we all know, from Basil, the Governor has
lately attempted it, the Suisse were too much overseen in being a little to
well acquainted witsi the King of France, who thereby has found out where
their strength and weakness lies, and which way soever their affairs turn,
whenever they are forced to quarrel with these Princes, it will always fare
with them as the Fable tells us, it did with the Earthen pot and Iron pot.
Secondly, To lend so many Regiments to France, are as so many men lost out of
the Cantons, who, it may be, one day, may like young Vipers, destroy their
common Mother, their Country; there are few Swisse Officers in the French
Kings Service, but let themselves be corrupted by Marriages, then suffer their
Eyes to be dazzled by good places, and your Louis do'r, and so at once renounce
both their Religion and Party, sacrifice as Stoupa the Lieutenant General would
have done twice sixteen Cantons to the Interest of France: He is not alone in
his own gang, he has, God knows, too many Disciples; you will find but very few
who imitate the Sieur Dasselouer of Berne heretofore Captain in the King's
Service, who chosed rather to give over his employ, and break his Pike then do
any thing contrary to the Treaty which his Superiors had entered to, about the
passage of the Rhine against the Hollanders; they have also committed a notable
fault in tying up their own hands, that they cannot send to Spain the like
number of Soldiers, as they do to France: This restriction has more of the
Frenchman in it than the Cantons are aware of: They cannot but grant that they
have suffered themselves to be curbed by the Fort at Huninghen, which but too
much discovers the Kings design; every chink in it are like so many open
Mouths, crying out upon them, Awake, awake ye sluggish People, and behold me,
as the Emblem of the Usurper, as a Monument reared in remembrance of your
Liberty lost.

Now if this be not sufficient to make the Cantons seriously reflect upon Lewis
XIV. his proceedings in respect of them, at least that Cannon which the Fort of
Huningen discharged upon the City of Basil might open their Eyes, for the
Usurper gets ground every day, and I Will warrant you no sooner shall he find a
favorable opportunity, but he will improve his quarrel with Germany against
them. Princes never want pretenses: He will begin in good earnest, to Will and
Command, that the Bishop and others of Basil be restored, and that their
Arrears be paid them from the time that they have been forced to forsake the
Town; and if he be to enter by Force of Arms, and if he have obtained the least
Advantage, as the Cantons are tame enough to obtain Peace he would demand every
year a Medal as a mark of Homage for Tribute (as he did of the Hollanders)
together with a great many Forces which the Swisse would be glad to supply him
with upon his first Demand, and would place Bishops as so many Emissaries in
every City.

I told you the French King takes advantage by the difference of Religion in
the Cantons to foment discord amongst them, as we have lately observed in the
business of Glaris, which setting aside the Popes Nuncio's stirring in it,
would have proved the first spark of Fire and Dissension amongst them, then
which he desires nothing more the better to further his Affairs, and his
pretended Reign over Europe. The Roman Catholics in those parts are commonly
ignorant in their Religion, and being very stupid at the bark, and with the
outside, without ever searching into Fundamentals; the only name of Catholic
actuates, moves, and incites them, without inquiring any farther; but I would
have them once for all be undeceived; not suffer themselves to be imposed upon
under the false Notion of Catholic: It Is a false mask under which he lurks the
better to deceive them, and bring them to his Leure; thereby to set them at
odds amongst themselves, and having once done that, he will come pouring down
upon Basil or Geneva, yea, perhaps upon both together. These are bars and
boundaries which ought to be in a manner Sacred; the Cantons should take care
that they be never suffered to be meddled with nor touched; they are to defend
them with their Sword in their Hand to the last drop of Blood; for this passage
being cleared, and the discord breaking out amongst them, farewell they, they
are undone to all intents and purposes, of free Swisse they will become French
Slaves: But now if the generality of the Swisse be but true to one another, and
united, and but show the Usurper their Teeth, intimating their resolution of
defending what is their own, they may be sure the French King will only bark at
a distance, on the other hand, if they show no more eagerness for these two
Cities than they did for Franche Compte: If they make no stouter a resistance
than they did there, they will unavoidably post on to their total ruin and
destruction. I know France will not bring them under their yoke, but make them
tributary. They are now free and absolute, but let them take heed they suffer
not their Necks to be brought under their yoke; let them call to mind their
Ancient Valor, that their Country has proved a Sepulcher to the French, and
that they have forced them to a dishonorable retreat: Geneva is a delicate bit
the French have a Months mind to, since she has appropriated to her self the
County of Gex, methinks that Republic too lies very commodiously for her
purpose: They have a long time muttered at the French Court, that they meant to
resettle the Bishop a Savoyard who is nominated by the Duke of Savoy, whom he
makes to reside at his Court to make his Right appear: If it were as easy for
the French King to settle a Bishop there as it has been for him to settle a
Resident, he would have accomplished it long ago: Now since this Resident comes
in our way, let us speak a word or two by the by concerning his Residence. You
must know he is as necessary a Man there, as the Fifth wheel in a Chariot, for
he is good for nothing but to receive the Swisse Packet of Letters for the
Court, which a Merchant formerly received, so that the Sallary, and the Abode
of such a Minister would be useless, if there were not something else in it. I
dare say he would have but a poor pittance, had he no other comings in but what
France allows him, and if he had not the best part of it from the Clergy: I do
remember that the first Man that filled this worthy place, was one Charigni, a
poor pitiful Fellow, whom Mounsieur De Pompone had often released out of Fort
L'evesque whither he was committed for Debt, and sent him thither to get him
disintangled: There he made a Trade of the Catholic Religion, for every Sunday
and Holy Day was his days of Receipts; every Savoyard that came to Mass, giving
to the Offering Five or Six Souse, under pretense of maintaining the Church and
Priest, but rather Mounsieur the Resident, who besides kept a kind of an
Ordinary where they might dine, the poor Wretch was fain to catch at any thing,
for he was no better than a Beads-man living upon Alms at Paris, being forced
to quit Province upon the account of some false pieces of Five sous he would
have put off, where he was reduced to Extremity, and all the stir he kept at
Geneva was only to make the Magistrate to greese his fist, and present him with
something by the by, as no body knew. But since the time his Secretary has
changed his Religion, and since he gave his Almoner a box on the Ear, because
he spoke in behalf of the Protestants, upon a Sermon that he and the Resident
came from hearing: I say, from that time he has laid open his folly, he is
countermanded, and another of better sense and more discretion supplies his
place. Considering the design the King has in hand of dividing this City, it
seems to be in a manner necessary at present to have a Resident to acquaint him
with all concerns, to find out wherein their strength and weakness consists;
yea, to corrupt some Magistrate or other, as at Strasbourg; the enterprise of
the Duke of Savoy in the year (...) ought continually to be before their Eyes
as a warning; for it is certain, that the French King with what amusement
soever he may seem to divert them; does but wait a fair opportunity to spring
his Mine, give fire to his Train, and play his old game as he did at
Strasbourg; so that it mightily behooves the Citizens of Geneva to stand upon
their guard, and endeavor to dispose their Allies to afford them succor so
soon as ever they find that grand Usurper to advance; for he is now taking his
aim, and so well played his Cards, that he has made the Duke of Savoy to sneak
and truckle, not daring so much as to put his Nose toward France: In times
past, the Dukes Ancestors did defend the City of Geneva as well as the
Inhabitants; they had a great deal more reason for it then France now a days,
upon the account of the pretensions to it, and the rights the Counts of Geneva
have yielded up to the Duke of Savoy. Charles IV. Proclaimed that Duke Prince
of Geneva, and of all the Territories thereunto belonging, and they have
inherited it till the Year, 1532. But the present Duke is so far from making
any opposition against France, that he would rather deliver up all his Rights
and Claims to it, and let himself be cullyed out of it under pretense of
reinvesting the Bishop; now although that Prelate should be settled, and France
master of it, what course would the Duke of Savoy take, if the King would not
remit to him? Would he have recourse to Menaces or Reprisals? If he should do
so, the King of France would jerk him soundly, like a Boy, and would make him
kiss the Rod to boot. So that I would not have Geneva to flatter her self with
the treacherous promises of the French King, nor yet with the Assistance; which
Policy and Reason might oblige the Duke of Savoy to send them. Let her e'ne
rely on her Allies the Swisse Cantons, upon her own, though slender Forces, and
upon so many French Officers who have fled for refuge thither, who will be sure
upon the first news of it, to run to her assistance, or otherwise they must
have lost common Sense, and all sentiments of Honor and Thankfulness. Again,
if so be the Emperor make his Peace with the Turk, he must send for the Duke
of Lorain to help him, who is a great Captain, and even laden with Victorious
Laurels, whose very name will make France quake. I, and he may serve him for a
inlet whereat to enter into his Duchy of Lorrain; where his Subjects quite
spent with the Tyrannical Dominion of France, expect him as their Moses and
deliverer.

The King is a Lion in a Foxes Skin, he is not so formidable as men believe
him; his only end is to make himself be feared, and he obtains his desire by
threatenings; but shake off this panick fear, look upon France nearer, mind her
soberly and seriously, consider the continual running away of her Inhabitants,
the punishment and imprisonment of another part of them, is as so much Blood
flowing from her Veins, which by little and little weaken her. Add hereto the
just complaints of the Catholics, the decrease of her Revenues, and what is
worst of all for her, the death and the going away of so many Generals within
these few years, and so suddenly one after another, does she not seem to behold
that Scene Heaven has contrived on purpose to humble her, for indeed she is at
a lower ebb then one would imagine: I Will engage she is as sick as her King, and
that they be both smitten to the heart.

The first Enemy that sets upon her will not be long alone, he will be soon
seconded; but it will be just as in the Fable of the Counsel of Rats, who
consulted together to go hang a Bell at the Cats neck their sworn Enemy, but
not one of them durst venture to do it first. Who would ever have said the Pope
would have contributed his assistance to the Union of the Switzers? Yet it is
true he did so, as we may have observed in the business of Glaris, which I have
above recited: Nay his Nuncio is very intent, at his leisure hours, to open the
eyes of the Catholic Cantons; for those silly people, provided the King tell
them of intending to re-establish a Bishop, it is enough for them, that is all
they care for, but they are not sensible of what is behind the Hill, that the
grand Usurper lies hid under the Bishops Mitre.

I have but one Admonition more to give the Right Honorable Cantons of
Switzerland, that is to say, the King has no respect nor good will toward
them. He takes them for Scaffolds to be made use of when need requires, and
when that is over, he looks upon them as no body. I desire no other proof of
what I say, then what of a fresh date happened to the Ambassador, which the
Cantons not long since sent to the French King: After he had wrangled with them
about their Commission not being in general Terms, on purpose to refuse them
Audience; well, this difficulty once removed by a second Commission dispatched
to them, they were e'ne fain to go away as they came, without so much as seeing
the King, or obtaining one only Audience. This is the greatest undervaluing,
and most sensible affront that ever Freeborn men had given; and if the Cantons
pass by this, and don't show their just Resentments of it, they will be despised
by all the Princes of Europe; and it will not be the last ill turn of this
nature that will befall. But that I may fully certify you of the truth of what
I here deliver, see here word for word the Harangue, or rather Complement,
these Gentlemen past upon Mounsieur Colbert Croissi Minister of the Foreign
Affairs at their departure.

Sir, Our Lords and Superiors sending us hither to do what in us lies, and
make use of all importunities to endeavor to win the Kings affection, to the
end he might be inclined to uphold the City of Geneva their Allie, in the
possession of what they have hitherto been above One Hundred and Eighty Years
grounded upon Authentic Treaties.

But his Majesty being resolved to commit to his Parliament of Dijon, a
business which is plainly acknowledged for an affair of State, which depends
upon Treaties of Peace, Covenants and Alliances; the which said Parliament our
Superiors will never acknowledge as just, no, nor give their Allies, the Citts
of Geneva, counsel to yield to their Treaty, which is theirs also. Moreover his
Majesty giving us to understand by your Excellency, that he would no more then
you confer with us touching this matter; and because we are afraid that a
longer stay here might be as unwelcome as our coming; we could not do better
then withdraw home again to make a faithful report of what has past to our
Lords and Superiors.

We are come to take our leaves of your Excellency, and to give you many thanks
for the patience you have had in several Conferences, beseeching you that in
pursuance of the reiterated Orders we have had given us in behalf of our Lords
and Superiors, who notwithstanding they be much troubled at the bad success of
this Embassy (seeing they take more into consideration the prosecution of 25
Canons, then the fidelity of many thousands of the best and most steadfast
Allies of that Crown, who have shed their Blood, and sacrificed so many brave
men, for the service, grandeur, and maintaining of that State) yet that
nevertheless they will stand to their Treaty of Peace and Alliance, in the
hopes they have always entertained, and do still entertain, that his Majesty,
(to whom with the Royal Family they wish all happiness) will on his part be
responsable. As for our part in particular, though we have not had the
happiness to see his Majesty, yet we cannot chose but wish him all Personal
Health, and do assure your Excellency, of the esteem and high value we put, and
all ways shall, upon your deserts and incomparable virtue, protesting to you,
that we are more particularly your most humble Servant.

After such a base affront, who would not undervallue such Ambassadors the
Representatives, and their Superiors also, who durst present them with a
Golden Chain of 500 Crowns value? One would think they had an hand in it, and
that they were covetous of Money and Presents: If an Ambassador after taking
such an affront should have accepted it, he would have deserved to be hanged
with that Golden Collar. By the refusal of Audience you may well understand
what France is made of, and its designs: Whoever heard or saw a free and
absolute Republique referred to a Parliament under his Authority, as the King
refers Geneva to the Parliament at Dijon; it would have been more legal and
just to have referred them to the Parliament at Turin. Now behold the equity of
this great King, who would always be both Judge and Party in his own Cause, who
would make all Europe depend on his Judges; some upon those of Metz, others on
those of Dijon and Aix in Provence, as he forces the people of Orange to do;
but we hope those of Geneva will not submit to those unjust Judges; and
supposing they do, they will not miss losing their Cause, and after that, they
will make a new pretension upon them, till they have fettered them, and losing
their City and Liberty, they become the slaves of France; a Victim offered up
to the Jesuit, and the Conquest of Lewis the great, and it is odds, but that
will be so indeed if they don't look about them betime, and prepare themselves
for its coming upon them; for he will come and give them a visit, as he did the
Genoueses. Let them not flatter themselves with the contrary, when he shall
make them resolve to sacrifice themselves for their Liberty, rather then to a
Prince who would be their Antiochus, their bloody Master, and would snatch the
Children from their Mothers embraces to deliver them into the hands of the
Jesuits; make them forsake Relations, Religion, and all duty of Christians, and
refusing to obey this ambition, would hale them to the Scaffold, and throw
their Carcasses to dogs; nay, if so be they should deal more gently with them,
it would be only to make them bear company with his own Subjects in Dungeons,
in the Galleys, and in the West Indies. Now take notice of this Spirit of
France, and beware of it.

That Lewis XIV. is no good Christian.
I Shall finish this Treatise in demonstrating that this King is no good
Christian, that it is but a cloak for his Knavery, the better to play fast and
loose, the better to bring about his ambitious designs, that albeit he makes a
great clutter with the title of most Christian King at Rome, yet we find him to
be nothing less: All who are baptized are not Christians, for then we might
reckon Julian the Apostate and Arrius to be such, whom men look upon as
Apostates and Antichrists. I am persuaded the Marquess de Montespan will
justify what I say. I cannot think that Prince worthy the name of a Christian
who covets his Neighbors Wife; nay before all the World takes her from her
Husband, makes use of her, and begets Children of her, whom he would fain get
declared natural, never before Lewis his time practiced in France: He cannot
assume the name of Christian who makes little Conscience to break the most
solemn Oaths and Engagements made at the Communion, as he did at the Peace
concluded at the Perinees, upon his Marriage with the Infanta of Spain. And
then the Oath taken at his Coronation, to observe the Edicts of pacification,
are they not daily violated and retracted upon every frivolous pretense? Good
Christians are such who live up to those Vows they have made, even to very
Infidels.

The Marquess de Laverdin making his public entrance into Rome, did choose
rather to do it like a Fox than a Lion, (as since it appears) without ever
determining any thing positively concerning it, when they demanded him to
explain himself before he made his entrance; so that engaging himself neither
pro nor con, it will always be time enough, and seasonable to make his Masters
will to stand him in stead, as we shall see hereafter, when the Provencal Fleet
shall be before Civita Vechia, and other Ports of the Popes Dominion; besides
that, it was convenient to carry it fair to obtain the Bull for the Cardinal of
Furstenburg, whom France was assured would be nominated to the Coadjutorship of
Cologn; the Dean and Chapter, as it is credibly given out, fingered the Kings
Money; to that in effect it was registered and their Votes sold, so that it was
not possible to go back with their word. When the Marquess de Lavardin entered
Rome, the business was as good as done, and the King made sure of it, but he
found himself mistaken, as to the Bull, for he believed the Pope, who is wise
and good natured enough of himself, not loving noise, would yield at the
Ambassadors arrival, that the Spiritual would give place to the Temporal; but
he was deceived in his account, meeting with such stiffness and vigor in an
old man, which it may be one durst not have hoped for in a young man. In the
mean time behold the Marquess de Lavardin keeping watch and ward night and day,
and that round about the Palace of Fernese, just as if it were a Fort
surrounded with enemies, before the Pope and the Conclave of Cardinals Noses:
By all these riots and indignities done to the most eminent person of the
Church, Vicar of Christ, and St. Peter's Successor, is nothing in comparison to
that which Talon the Kings Advocate has belched forth against his Holiness,
and the Cardinals his Counselors, accusing the former to be a favourer of
Heresy, Jansenisme, and of Quietists, and a thousand other impertinences,
which is to be seen more at large in the demand of the abovesaid Talon to the
Parliament of Paris, and by the Ambassadors protestation publicly affixed at
Rome, the expressions therein are scandalous, that they might deservedly
procure the fire for a private person; but when one has the power in his own
hand, he thinks he may Lawfully say and do whatsoever likes him: But the Pope
who is grave and wise will let him go on, yea peradventure his great modesty
and prudent behavior may make the King come to himself again, and acknowledge
the wrong, and that the Pope is Master at home in his own House, and may be
able to disannul and take away the Franchises of the Ambassadors quarters, when
he shall see it convenient for the repose of his People, and his own Conscience.

It is not his frequenting Mass which is a Characteristical mark of being a
Christian, or for being kind to the Jesuits; for fear awes Princes sometimes to
make much of Jesuits, and show much respect to them. Hen. IV. was not free from
this fear, when he would have restored them in France; for when the Duke of
Sully advised him to the contrary, he started up and replied, secure me my Life
then; for 'twas more then probable, that those who sued for their return had
assured the King, that if he did not do it he would be in imminent danger of
being Murdered: When Life is at stake what will not a man do to save it? Who
can tell but these good Fathers have told the King now Reigning, if in case he
did not root out all the Huguenots out of his Dominions, this must come in
always, ad majorem Dei Gloriam, that he would endanger his Life.

What sign of a Christian was there in the King when he made a League with
Cromwell to fall upon the Low Countries, and to banish Charles II. from his
Kingdom, who was rightful Successor to the Crown of England, and a good
Catholic in his heart, although afterward out of Policy he was fain to appear
otherwise.

Again, what sign of Christianity does there appear in a Prince who assists
Count Tekely in league with the Turks against the Emperor? A King who forbids
all Bishops and Curats throughout his Dominion to cause Te Deum to be sung for
the Victories of the Christians obtained over the Turks, who impedes by force
of Lewisses the progress of the King of Polands Forces against the same Turks,
that they may have the opportunity to employ all the Ottoman Forces against the
Emperor, thereby to make him abandon what he has got at the dear rate of so
much Christian blood.

What Christianity do you observe in the Kings proceeding at the Cities of
Genoua and Orange, where he has no right at all: So that by all that I have
alleged, all these Titles of most Christian and Catholic Zeal the King is so
much taken with, and affects, is only a deceitful mask of hypocrisy to lull
the Catholic Princes asleep, the better to play his game, and make himself
Master of them one after another. Although the King of England would hinder
him, as being the only man that could best do it, he would endeavor to cause
an insurrection of the Church of England men against him, he would send them
Money and Officers as he did to Cromwell; so that one may say of the French King
that he becomes all things to all men, when his interest is at stake: He enters
into Covenant with Turk or Huguenot, Pagans or Infidels, against Catholics
themselves, if it be necessary for promoting his greatness, and to attain to
the Monarchy of all Europe. And for a conclusion this is the Kings Religion,
and your Wit and Policy of France.

FINIS.

