Popish Treachery: OR, A Short and New Account OF THE Horrid Cruelties
Exercised on the PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE. Being a true Prospect of what is to be
expected from the most solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes. In a Letter
from a Gentleman of that Nation, to one in England, and by him made English.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year 1689.

The Preface.
IT is not long since this Letter was writ to me by a French Gent^^man, at my
Request, and for my particular Satisfaction; who he is a Person of much Worth
and Integrity, and has been an Eye-w^^ness of most of the things whereof he
speaks, so the readier Faith a^^ greater Credit ought to be given to them. But
his Testimony alo^^ need not to be relied on for the Matters of Fact he here
relates, the^ are thousands of other French Protestants, now in England, that
co^firm the truth of all; and who having felt the smart of a severe Pers^cution
in France, are fled from thence to avoid the extreme Fury a^ insupportable
Violence thereof. Now the unquestionable Evidence have for the certainty of
what is advanced in the following Accoun^ and the desire of many to see it
Published in English, has made me consent to expose it, hoping it may give some
seasonable Information, an^ Satisfaction, to our People.

For though most of them may have heard much talk of a Persecution i^ France,
and have Generously and Bountifully contributed their Charity toward the
Relief of those Miserable Persecuted French Protestants who are come hither for
Refuge and Succor, yet I have reason to believ^ that very few of them know any
thing of the Cruel manner, wherewit^ the Barbarous and Inhuman Papists have
pursued that Persecution this is what they will find set down in short, in the
little Relation her^ presented to them; and they may there see a Notorious
Example of the base Treachery of Popery, and of the Cruelties which it holds,
as (...) Point of Religion, to make Protestants suffer; over whom it pretend to
have a Sovereign and Absolute Dominion. So this little Histor^ not being
perplexed and embarressed with numerous and tedious Circumstances, all sorts of
people may thereby easily inform themselves o^ this Persecution, as much as we
ordinarily desire to know of such Events And besides that Charity of our poor
Persecuted Brethren and Fellow Protestants makes us concerned therein, as being
equally Objects of the Hatred and Oppression of Popery, so it may serve to
prompt us to some Reflections for our own Interest: Nam tua res agitur paries
cum proximus ardet. When our Neighbors House is on Fire, it behooves us to
take Care of our own, and to use all Lawful and Convenient means to ^^eserve
it from the Rage and Fury of a Merciless Enemy. Such has Popery ever been to
Protestants, and from it, Good Lord, still Deliver England.

Popish Treachery: Or, a Short and New Account of the Horrid Cruelties
Exercised on the Protestants in FRANCE, etc.
SIR,
Cannot but wonder, as well as you, that no History of the Persecution of the
French Protestants, has yet appeared in your Lan^^age: It Is to be wished it
were well known to all people of the Re^^rmed Religion, that they might there
see Popery in its true Co^^urs, and be taught by that great Example, to
understand, that the ^^omises it makes, are but Lies and snares, to deceive the
Honest ^^ith and good Nature of other Men. They would there see like^^se, how
by little and little it advances its Affairs, still swearing ^^at it has no
design to proceed any further; and how it, at length, ^^ds Inhumanity to
Perfidiousness, when it has once got to be up^^rmost: But we had enough to
convince us of the Treacherons and ^^oody Spirit of Popery, without the History
of this late Persecu^^on. The Massacre of the Waldenses so often reiterated:
The gene^^^ Massacre of the Protestants all over Europe, in the beginning of
^^e Reformation: The Persecution and Massacre of the Low-Coun^^ies, under
Philip the Second: The Massacre of St. Bartholomew in ^^ance: The Gunpowder
Treason in England: The Massacre of Ire^^nd: The last Persecution of Hungary;
and the late one of the Val^^ys of Piedmont, show sufficiently, how that
Communion thirsts af^^r the Blood of men, and is Ingenious in satiating it self
therewith, ^^om time to time. However, Sir, since you desire it, I will here
^^aw you a short Scheme of that great Persecution, which ought to (...) an
Eternal Advertisement to all Protestants in the World, that Popery spares
neither Oaths nor Promises to delude them, and stic^^ at no Frauds nor
Violences to obliterate them totally, if it we^ possible, from off the face of
the Earth. And this Relation I a^ now going to make you, will be so much the
more faithful, as tha^ shall say nothing therein, but what my own eyes have
seen, or wh^^ I other ways know for certain Truth.

The Protestants of France, lived under the Faith of many Edict^ which promised
them liberty of Conscience, and equal Priviledg^ with the rest of the French;
the most considerable of their Edicts w^ that of Nantes. Henry the Fourth,
Grandfather of His present Majesty, having by their Assistance and Fidelity,
put an end to the League which the Papists had made, to hinder him from gettin^
into the Throne, was desirous to recompense the Blood and Live^ which the
Hugonots had expended for his service; and he did it b^ that famous Edict,
which gave them the same Privileges as his oth^^ Subjects enjoyed, and he
granted it to them, and to their Posterit^ for ever, under the Title of
PERPETUAL and IRREVOCABLE so it was, as a Law of the State, which was confirmed
by the King at their coming to the Crown, and has been expressly so, by man
Edicts of Lewis the 13th, and of Lewis the 14th, now reigning.

When this King came to the Crown, he was very Young; the Prince of Conde
stirred up Civil Wars to ravish it from him, and the greatest part of the
Papists sided with him, but the Protestants we^ all of a constant and
uncorrupted Fidelity to their Sovereign, so tha^ they made all the Prince's
Designs prove Abortive; and preserv^ the Scepter to him that yet bears it.
After which, he gave them public Declaration of his acknowledgement, and
assured them of h^ favor and protection, during his whole Reign; but at this
same tim^ that he gave this public Declaration, and a thousand other
privat^ones to particular persons, he even then began to form a design (...)
ruining those who had saved him: He made reflection, that since, b^ their
means, he had been settled in his Throne, they might, in a^ other occasion,
shake him out of it; and upon this reflection it w^^ that he refolved to ruin
them, as he has in effect done.

At first, he began with Retrenching, by degrees, all the Hugono^ ^^om his
House, who had any Employment therein, and the which (...) had given them as a
recompense of their faithful service to him; (...) so much, that in a short
time, there was not a Soldier in his whole ^uards, but what was of his own
Religion; Merit was no longer con^^der'd in their persons, he no more advanced
any of them to the ^^aces of Trust in the Kingdom; he put out those he had
formerly ^^^eferred thereto; and he set forth diverse Declarations, prohibiting
^^em all kind of Offices, Arts and Trades, so that none but Papists ^ould
exercise, or profess any; by which means, vast numbers of Pro^estants were
reduced to inevitable misery.

He took their Colleges and Schools away from them, so that they ^ad no Master
of their Religion, to teach their Children either to Read or Write. When he had
done that, he then sent Troops of Missionaries into all the Towns, to gain, as
many as they could, by cunning Tricks, or price of Money; and 'twas a strange
thing to see the shameful Commerce this people made, of buying those whom
extreme poverty obliged to sell themselves. The misery was so great in some
places, that they were forced to turn Papists; sometimes for ten Crowns,
sometimes for five, sometimes for two, sometimes for a great deal less. These
Missionaries walked about, every where, with Baggs of Money in their Hands, and
for the space of two years together, one saw hardly any other Traders stirring
up and down the Kingdom, but these Dealers for the Souls of men, who bought
them according to their Profession, and the number of their Families.

At the same time, Pensions, or Employments were given to those, of any
consideration, who would turn Papists. The King, by a Declaration, gave liberty
to Children, at seven years of Age, to choose a Religion; and the Fathers of
such Children as became Papists, were forced to give them yearly Pensions, and
always more than what they were well able; by which means they seduced
abundance of the youger sort, bringing mourning and desolation into many
Families, which for the most part of the time they utterly ruined.

After this, they forbad their Minister to speak any thing of Controversy, or
of what passed against them; upon which prohibition, and diverse others of the
like nature, they daily made them say things that had never entered into their
thoughts: They hired false Wi^nesses to depose against them, who were often
reduced to avow the^ lying Testimonies; and 'twas frequently proved too, the
Priest^^ and others, and suborned them. But as their ruin was absolutel^
sworn, so nothing satisfied them; their Estates were confiscate^ their persons
cast into prison, banished, or condemned to some other shameful disgrace. There
was no safety for any, they found way to bring the most moderate into trouble,
and especially, to destroy those who were capable of giving some good Example
to others.

These are the degrees of the Desolations of this People, and of the tears they
have been made to shed for about twenty five years la^^ past; during which
time, no body possessed in peace what they had and every one were in perpetual
unquietudes for themselves, and for their Children. But these were only the
beginnings of their Misery and the Essays of Popish fury and perfidiousness:
Whilst on one hand they persecuted some, they assured others that the King had
no design against their Liberty. In almost all the Edicts which His Majesty set
forth, he inserted some Article to lull them asleep: He said that not one Title
of the Edict of Nantes should be violated: And he insinuated, that his
intention was only to interdict the Religion and to stop there.

The Elector of Brandenburgh having had the bounty to intercede for them, the
King of France gave him an Answer, that is to be seen in many of the
Protestants writings; by which he assured His Highness, That so long as he
lived, no wrong should be done to his Subjects of the Reformed Religion; that
he acknowledged them for good ones, and would maintain them in all their
Privileges. In the mean time, he had taken from them many of these
Privileges; and what is remarkable at the same time that he wrote this Letter
to his Highness of Brandenburgh, he in the very self same instant caused many
of their Temples to be Demolished, and others to be shut up; put the Ministers
into Prison; oppressed private persons with heavy Injustices; and made those to
mourn bitterly whom he said he would protect. He began a thing too, which had
never been heard of in any Age, not even in the Savagest Nations, or the most
mote from Christianity; that is, He made Children to be taken from ^eir Fathers
and Mothers, and to be put into Convents, with a strict ^arge not to let their
Parents see them, not excepting even persons (...) the highest Birth, and of
Families to which he had obligations that ^^ght never to have been forgotten by
him. He took away seven ^om the Duke de la Force, an Ancient Duke and Peer of
the King^om, the eldest not being then Twelve Years old. He did the like (...)
all those of the Count de Roy, whom he had some time before per^tted to go and
serve the King of Denmark, in Quality of General (...) his Armies. In a word,
at the same time that he promised to ^otect the Hugonots, he even then did all
he could to ruin them, ^^d there was nothing but Sighs and Tears amongst them;
One saw ^ery where Souls afflicted to the very Grave; some bewailing the ^^s of
their Pastors and Temples; others the dispersion and ruin (...) their
Families; others the carrying away of their Children; and ^^ers trembled for
fear of the same, or of greater Misfortunes. In ^e, do but mark now how far
their Fraud and Cruelty went; that ^ict of Nantes was Revocked, which they had
so often promi^d, ^^d so often sworn should be inviolably observed; and this
Fence ^ing quite broke down, all that great people was abandoned to the ^ge and
Fury of the Soldiers. But, what is yet more notorious, (...) push on the Cheat
as far as the fraudulent Wit of Man could car^ it, in the very Act for
Cessation of the forementioned Edict, this ^^ng declared, that he was desirous
that all people should live qui^y in their Families; and that the Exercise of
the Protestant Reli^^on being interdicted, every one might live in his own
House, as he ^eas'd. But at the same time that His Majesty solemnly Swore this
^omise, he sent his Armies to surprise the Protestants in their Towns ^^d
Houses, with orders to Plunder, Burn, Demolish, Beat, and in ^ort, to make them
suffer all manner of Evils could be devised, ^ath only excepted; which in this
circumstance would have been ^ok'd on as a great Happiness. The King Usurped
the Throne of ^^d, and took upon him the Empire over the Conscience; and in
(...) Name whole Towns were Summoned, by puissant Armies, to turn ^ists, and
upon refusal, they were abandoned to pillage and ruin, and to the same Fury as
Enemy Towns are wont to be when tak^^ by Storm. They seized on all the Avenues,
and brought back th^^ to the persecutors, who had escaped out of their hands:
They be^^ ransacked, violated, and made this people suffer a thousand Evi^^
without distinction either of Age, Sex, or Quality, from the old (...) to the
youngest, Male and Female, Noble, or Ignoble, all we^^ equally at the
discretion of the Soldiers: Blasphemies, Impiet^ and Blows were the Arguments
of this Infernal Mission; and o^^ may say, without exaggeration, that Hell
seemed to be let loose, a^^ that the Devils were come to Preach up Popery on
the Earth. Al^ Who can reckon the Tears were shed in this sad occasion? G^^
alone knows their number, who doubtless has counted and gathe^ them all into
his Bosom. The Air ecchoed every where with grie^^ ous Lamentations; and I
think, nothing more pitiful could be hea^ than the Cries and Groans of this
people, whilst they were in (...) hands of their tormentors.

They dragged many of these poor Creatures into the Po^^ Churches by the Feet,
by the Hair of the Head, or by Ropes ti^^ about their Necks, they hanged them
up at the tops of Rooms, (...) out of the Windows, by their Heels, or by their
Hands; the plunged them into deep Wells, and stinking Mires, with Toads a^^ and
Serpents, where they left them according to the time of th^^ Constancy; they
lighted great Fires, and Roasted some till th^^ had changed their Religion; if
their patience was longer than (...) Cruelty of their Persecutors, then they
basted their Naked Legs w^^ scalding Grease, or boiling Oil. Others they made
to hold (...) hot Coals in their Hands; burnt the soals of their Feet; tore
(...) Hair from their Beards, and the Nails from their Fingers, and T^ by the
very Roots; larded their flesh all over with Pins, and thrash them with Sticks
till they left them for Dead. If they were Si^^ they beat Drums, and sounded
Trumpets, Night and Day, in the Ears, for 'twas a general Rule to hinder them
from sleeping, and set them in different Postures; sometimes standing upon one
L^^ holding up a Hand in the Air; sometimes down on their Knees, ^ing the like,
etc. If they changed Postures, through wearin^ ^^en they pinched and cudgelled
them till they were Black and Blue. ^^metimes they tied all the people of a
Family in a Room together, ^^d in sight of one another, they beat and bruised
the Men, and ^^de the Women suffer a thousand indignities. They would often
^^rry them separately into Chambers, to torment them, but so as ^^ey might hear
each others cries; and every one in suffering, suffe^^d for themselves, and for
the rest of their Family, which they ei^er saw in torments, or heard the cries
thereof. In short, let any ^an but fancy to himself, what vast numbers of
Soldiers, brutal, ^^d let loose, are capable to invent and act in all manner
of mischief ^^d cruelty, and he will have an Idea of the method whereby the
^^otestants of France have been taught to become Papists. O Tem^^a! O Mores!

This great Fury made those that could save themselves, fly into ^^e Woods,
Mountains and Caves; they wandered in the Fields, ex^^sed to all the injuries of
the Air, not having wherewith to live, (...) to cover themselves, and not
daring to stir but in the Night, for ^ar of falling into the hands of their
Enemies, Old and Young, Men ^^d Women, all wandered in the Deserts; and all
these were but ^^me Members of sad Families, Fathers without Children, and
Chil^^en without Fathers; Wives without their Husbands, and Hus^nds without
their Wives; a doleful spectacle, no doubt, to the ^^es of Men. But this is not
all, the fury was so excessive that the ^^a-Ports were every where shut for to
hinder their flight, and a^^ve 100000 Soldiers employed to stop their passage
on the Fron^^rs, besides all the Peasants whom they had made, and the Priests
(...) joined, to take up Arms against them; so that it was by great ^^ovidence,
if any could save themselves amidst so many Obstacles. ^^nd I don't believe
there was one in forty but what was taken, after ^ving gone, sometimes two or
three hundred Leagues, with all sort (...) misery and difficulty. The Prisons
were all full of those poor ^^gitives, and if any of them had ever changed
their Religion be^^re, they were sent to the Galleys; a punishment in France,
more ^gnominious and Cruel than any Death. One law every where in ^^e
Provinces, the Chains of these Confessors, which they dragged along from one
end of the Kingdom to the other: Tantaene Anim^ caelestibus irae. The Women
were Shaved, and carried away t^^ Convents; nor were they put in there many
times, till they had fir^^ been at the mercy of certain people, worse than the
very Dragoons, and who made them suffer things that modesty and civility permit
m^^ not to name: I shall only say that they shut several of them up for many
months together, with Murderers and Highway Men, an^ such like Cattle. Some
were cast into deep Dungeons where the^ never saw daylight, and they clothed
them with filthy Ragg^ taken from the noisome Carkases of dead persons, which
they stripp'^ before their Faces. But the height of all Evils, and that which
ha^ never entered into the heart of the wickedest of all the men Histor^ tells
us of, was the sending whole Vessels full of them to the New^ world, to be sold
to the Savages there; Men and Women, Youn^ and Old, Noble or others, all were
treated equally alike.

In some places they made Assemblies to pray to God, and the^ the Dragoons
Massacred all they could light on, burnt the House to which the Fugitives
retired, and those poor creatures with the^^ Some they hanged up on Trees, and
others they precipitated from the tops of high Rocks, and they broke those on
the wheel, lim^ after limb, whom they called the heads of these Assemblies. But
(...) would be endless to particularize all the various Tortures, and u^^ heard
of Cruelties, which the Papists practiced upon the Protestan^ in France, for to
force them to abjure their Religion: I will on^ say, that they carried them to
all the excess of Fury and Inhumani^ that the Devils themselves were capable to
inspire. So that conside^ing this Persecution in all its circumstances, it may
well be recko^ed the greatest and blackest that ever was amongst Christians
(...) any Age.

After they had in this manner dispersed so many Families, ruin^ so many
Houses, made so many Tears to be shed, and caused a g^neral Desolation, they at
length made a public Spectacle and D^vertisement thereof. The Kings Players
Acted for many mont^ together in Paris, a Comedy, called, Merlin Dragoon; in
whi^^ the Persecutors and the Persecuted were the Persons Represente^ and
in^^^^rt and People went in Crowds to laugh and divert themselves, at the
Oppressions and Torments which the Protestants had ^uffer'd; and by this, as
well as the rest, you may judge what share Piety had in that Work.

Now though all these Frauds, Violencies and Cruelties, and infinite numbers
more have been acted toward the Protestants of France, ^n the face of the Sun,
before Millions of Eyewitnesses, and are known to be the greatest part of
Europe; yet some are so unreason^bly incredulous, that they will not be
persuaded there has been any Persecution in that Kingdom; and others have been
so disingeniously confident, as to maintain in their Oral and printed
Discourses, that there has been none. Amongst these latter, is the Bishop. of
Meaux, Monsieur Varillas, Father Thomasin, Monsieur Brueis, etc. persons of
great Parts and Learning, though of very ^ittle Candor and Integrity. Nor
indeed, is it any wonder to find such Sons and Champions of Popery, deficient
in those laudable and Christian Virtues, since it is very difficult, nay, almost
impossible, for a man to be of the Roman Church, and not have his Principles
Vitiated, and his Morals-Depraved by her; so different are the Maxims and
Doctrines she imposes, from those which our Savior teaches us in his Holy
Gospel. But that which the Ingenious Author of the Apolog. Hist. urges, to
prove the truth of the late Persecution against the assertions of Monsieur
Brueis, and the rest, seems sufficient to convince the unprejudiced World of
the reality thereof, and to invalidate those Gentlemen's Arguments, and all
other whatsoever to the contrary.

Above two hundred thousand persons, says he, of both Sexes, of all Ages, and
of all conditions, the greatest part of which lived very well, at their ease,
in their own Houses, and many of them possessed rich Inheritances, considerable
Imploys, fair Revenues, some to the value of three and four thousand pounds per
Annum. These, says ^e, have left all, and are most of them gone out of France,
in a manner, quite Naked. They have not only quitted their Houses and Estates,
abandoned their Country, their Friends, their Parents, Relations of all kinds,
those that were nearest and dearest to them; they have broke all the ties of
Nature and Consanguinity; and (...) the most tender Affection; they have
separated, if I may so say (...) from a part of themselves, from their own
Bowels. In this crue^ separation, they have gone away from all they had most
near and dear to them in the World, at the price of their Liberties and their
Lives. They have done it to go and wander in unknown Countries, in Climates
extremely different from those where they had received their Births, without
having any thing certain, without hoping for any other subsistence there, than
what they could gathe^ from the charity of strangers. If this be not the effect
of a violen^ Persecution, what is then that madness which has got into the
minds of all, and made them take so unparellell'd a Resolution (...) How has
this Fury communicated it self to so many people of all sorts, who lived very
far asunder, and who had never known, o^ seen one another? How has it gained,
in so short a time, all the Provinces of so great a Kingdom as France is, and
in those Provinces, almost all who were, or had been of the Reformed Religion
Men and Women, Young and Old, Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble? Let Monsieur
Brueis now explain to us a little this unheard of Prodigy, if he will persuade
us that there has been no Persecution in France.

But whatsoever men are pleased to say, and think of it, I may with truth
affirm, that above two hundred thousand of the Kings most faithful Subjects,
have voluntarily Banished themselves from his Kingdom to fly the Persecution;
not to speak of many thousand others, persons, some of which have been
condemned to the last punishments by the Judges; others have been Massacred by
the Soldiers; others have died in the Galleys, others have been shut^ up in
Convents; and others been embarked and sent for America^ New Declarations more
severe than the former are daily published (...) fresh Oders are given for the
Guard of the Frontiers; the new Converts are forced, with greater rigor than
ever, to go to Mass to Confess, and receive the Communion. They continue to
fil^ the Convents, Prisons and Galleys with Confessors; and they empty them
from time to time by new Embarkments for America^ There where the Assemblies
continue, there they continue to Massacre them. The Dragoons perform their
Mission with the same Zeal still; and the Judges cease not giving the same
sights to the people of Bodies drawn about on Sledges, and cast Dead upon the
common Highways; and of Martyrs conducted to punishment, and ending their Lives
by the hands of Executioners.

Such is now the face of France: Such is the Concord and the Union that reigns
at present in this Kingdom: Such is the calm which the Church enjoys, and that
happy Peace which the King has given it; according to the style of Monsieur
Brueis: What Concord, O God! What Union! What Calm! What Peace! Truly no
Patience is Proof against the base dishonesty of this Declaimer. Who can suffer
such like impudence? But above all, who can without indignation read what he
says in another place in the same Spirit? We see now, says he, that the Wise
Conduct of this Great Prince has brought again into the Church, the fairest
days of Christiani^y, etc. Yes, these are, we know it but too well; these are
the ^airest days, not of Christianity, God forbid! But of Popery, of ^he Roman
Church; that cruel Babylon, which is never so satisfied, ^s when she can make
her self Drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; looks on such
Days, as her Days of Festi^al, as her Days of Triumph. So it was that she
heretofore looked ^n that sad and dreadful Night of St. Bartholomew, wherein
many ^housand Protestants were Massacred by the Papists in times of Peace, and
in cold Blood: One of her Orators made the Encomium thereof, with a thousand
Transports of Admiration and Joy, in a Speech which he pronounced before Pope
Gregory the XIII, O Memorable Night, said he, and worthy to be Ingrav'd in
large Characters in History, etc. That same Night, I think the Stars appeared
more Bright and Glorious than ordinary; and the River Seen had swelled its
Waters, that it might hurry away with a greater rapidness, the dead Bodies of
those Impure Persons, viz. of the Reformed, and discharge it ^elf the sooner of
them into the Sea. O! Thrice happy Woman, Katharine, Mother of the King! etc.
O! Happy Brothers of the King! etc. O! Day, in fine, full of Joy and
Pleasantness, wherein you, Holy Father, having received this News, you assisted
on foot at the Processions you ha^ ordered, for the rendering thanks for it to
God, and to S. Lewis, and What more agreeable News could have been told you?
And we, wh^ Happier beginning could we have wished for of your Popedom?

Let any one judge by these Words of the Spirit of Popery, an^ of that of her
Sovereign High Priest; and whether it be not the Spirit of the Impure and cruel
Babylon, rather than that of the Church of Jesus Christ.

I will now conclude, because I proposed to my self to give you bu^ a little
Abridgment, and an Idea, only of this great Persecution; doubt not but he, to
whom Vengeance belongs, will sooner or late Revenge so many Evils. Lento quidem
gradu Divina procedi^ ira, setarditatem Supplicii gravitate compensat.

Vengeance does surely, though but slowly tread,
And strikes with Iron, though it walks with Lead.
You see, in this Relation, the Impostures and Treacheries (...) Popery, as to
its Oaths and Promises; to which no credit ought eve^^ to be given, because it
certainly never Swears and Promises, but t^^ be Perjured, and to break its Word
upon the first occasion. Yo^ likewise see here the degrees of its Cruelties,
and how by little an^ little it advances them, till it at length comes to the
Effusion o^ Blood, and to open Violence. Farewell. I am

SIR, Your very Humble and Obedient Servant.

FINIS.

