A SERMON Preached in the College Church OF St KATHARINS, FEBRVAEY the 13th
School.

By JOSIA POVEY, Brother and Minister there.

LONDON: Printed by J. Mayos, in the Year School.

To the READER.
I Used many Arguments to persuade my Auditors to desist in their desires of
rashly passing this Discourse from the Pulpit to the Press, but not prevailing,
I fear the uncharitable will Carp at the Inchoherence, etc.

A SERMON Preached in the College Church of St Katharins. February the 13th
School.
PSALM 119. Part of the 1st Verse. Blessed are the Undefiled in the way.


THAT all things do naturally act and are designed to some extreme and ultimate
end of their being, is a Truth so secure, either from being denied by
Philosophers, or disputed by Divines, that none who enjoy a moderate use of
their Reason, but will equally pretend to an Evidence and Demostration of it.
Thus to be existent and to have a Natural propension to some chief and final
End, are terms both Inseparable and Convertible; and that innate Principle
whereby every thing is inclined to prosecute its own well being and perfection,
is no less Necessary then Universal: Neither are they lest destitute of means
for the attainment of a proper and peculiar End; Nay, all things are naturally
invested with particular Instincts and Imbred Faculties, whereby they are
enabled for the prosecution of Hapiness. All Vegitables are qualified with
faculties, whereby they are impoured to spring out of the Earth and to grow up
to Maturity, and naturally produce Seeds and Fruits, by which their Species is
Multiplied and Perpetuated; The sensitive Creatures being Endued with quick and
acurate Senses, have a lively perception of Pleasure and Pain, and carried on
with a vigorous and active Propension toward those pleasures of Sens. Being
enabled to resist things unpleasant, and Elect those that are grateful, as if
they apprehended the means and the end in which does consist their highest
happiness; nor is Mankind a jaring Noat in this great and Universal Harmony,
but all of them, how different soever in their Degrees, Fortunes, or Humors,
yet by a general consent do agree in this one desire of being Blessed. This is
the great end that all their projects and contrivances do propose, this is the
Goal to which the whole course of their lives is only directed, this is the
reward which all contend for, and every one expects to obtain; in this agree
the Godly and the Wicked, the Pure and Debaucht, Remember me O Lord with the
favor that thou bear unto thy People; O visit me with thy Salvation or
Blessedness, Sings the Divine Psalmist. Let me die the death of the Righteous,
says Balaam, and let my last end be like his, that is, be Blessed. Thus this
eager appetite of being happy, is so incorporated with our Natures, that
nothing can divorce that desire, but dissolution; we may with as great
facility, new Model our frames, as Extinguish this lively Principle, it bearing
the same date with our existence, and cannot be put out, while we are yet not
dissolved into our Primitive Nothing; so that its Demonstrable, all court
Hapines but most mistake werein it consists, one thinks its seated on the top
Pinnacle of Honor, so with proud Sejanus, climbs so high till he tumbles
headlong; another with Mydas, thinks it a Mineral that must be dig'd out of
the Earth, so toils to load himself with this thick Clay, till he finds a Grave
where he sought his Treasure; and indeed most think Hapiness to consist in
worldly fruitions which satisfy sens, and not in being undefiled, which only
can give delectation to the Soul: and since it is so, shall take this Method.

First, I shall show you Particularly and Negatively wherein Hapiness does not
consist.

Secondly, Shall show you in General and Affirmatively, werein it does consist,
and how to compass that Blessed State.

Thirdly, What it is to be Undefiled, and when we may be esteemed so.

And Lastly, Shall give you the Blessed Consequents of so being.

First, I shall show you (Particularly and Negatively) wherein Blessedness does
not consist.

First, It (does not or) cannot consist in Riches.

Secondly, In Honors.

Thirdly, In Beauty.

Fourthly, In Humane knowledge.

Fifthly, In long Life.

Lastly, That a Concurrence and Combination of all these cannot make one Man
happy.

First, Riches cannot render us truly Blessed and Happy, for that cannot do it
that is not desirable for its own Excellency, but for its use and subserviency
to the more Ignoble part of Man, and never satisfies, for the more a carnal Man
has of them, the more he covets, so that you may as readily extinguish Fire by
putting on of Fuel, or fill a Chest with Knowledge, as satisfy a Man's desires
with Riches. The Macedonian Monarch, when he had Conquered the World was so far
from being contented, that he Wept because he could not find out another.

Secondly, That which is got with much care, and cannot be secured, can never
make happy, and that Riches are so, St. Matthew assures us in the 13. and 22.
there he compares them to Thorns, to show their vexation: Hosea the 12. and 1.
to Wind, to show their incertainty; And Experience tells us, That he who Enjoys
the greatest hapiness in them, wants one more a security for the future of what
he possesses at present; Do not think, says Polycarp, that thick Clay which has
past through so many Hands will ever stick to thy Fingers; Will thou set thy
Heart on that which is not, says Solomom, for Riches take themselves Wings and
fly away, they have not only Feet to walk off from us, but Wings and fly away
from us; And he that assures himself of their continuance with him, is as much
infatuated as the Rustic that thought himself for ever happy, when a flight of
Birds Lodged on his Farm, purposed to feed Deliciously every day, and at night
to sleep in Down, but alas! he was soon disapointed, for they suddenly took
Wing, and went to his Neighbor; at best the most secure Miser can never have
better Fortune, then the Fool in the Gospel, For if Riches go not from a man,
he must go from them, for Riches cannot deliver from Death, nor be of any value
to a Man in the Grave: He that dies worth ten Pounds is as happy then as he
that dies worth ten hundred thousand; Grudg not, says the Psalmist, though a man
be made Rich, and the Glory of his House increased, for he shall carry nothing
with him when he Dies, neither shall his Pomp follow him. Yet how many with
Judas sell their Salvation for Silver, and loose Heaven to engross Earth. I
cannot see when we have those things that are necessary in that State werein
God has placed us, what satisfaction there is to view a mass of Treasure,
which we brought not into this world with us, only heapt together, and so leave
not the world Richer or Poorer then we found it: only fetch a few turns on the
Theater and entertain the beholders with a short Scene of Impertinences, then
descend and are never heard of more, and only enrich the Clods with our
Avaritious Carcases, amongst which we must shortly lie down: If abundance had
been the only Blessing, our Savior would have left it to his Disciples, and
Servants, but in his last Will and Testament, he did not say, My Riches or
Honors I give unto you, but my Peace; for that sollid and lasting joys are in
the peace of the mind; Yet what a scramble and hurry deluded Mortals make about
them, as if the chief and only happiness consisted in them, when the way to be
Blessed is not to make their Estates greater, but their Spirits and Desires
lower.

Thirdly, Honor cannot make us blessed and happy. That which is attended with
Cares, Fears, and Incertainties, cannot do it.

And First, That Honor is attended with Cares, Princes, and others in Power,
experience, who rise early, and lie down late, to receive Addresses, and read
Petitions, so that Honor must be full of Cares, and uneasy to them that have
it.

But Secondly, It must be attended with Fears, because mostly Envied by those
that have it not; so consequently none can be safe, since Honors Principal
dependence rests on the vain and false opinion, and dissembled Favor of Men,
who often Hosannah him one day, that is called Belial on the morrow; Alas, the
most Honorable is not altogether unlike a King in a Play, no longer Acting a
Majestic Part then the Spectators please; nay, the Favorit's of Crowns are
like Court Dials, whereon all look whilst the King shines on him, and none when
night with him. But if Honor chance to last for Life, yet Death equals the
Scepter and Spade; he that is the tallest Caedar of Libanon to day, may to
morrow be like a rotten stick, trodden under foot, and meat for worms, and the
poorest wretch would not be like unto him, for when such lay down their
Scepter, and pay their tribute to the Tomb, then he that dwelt in his Palace,
is Dirt in his Grave, as the Poor that creeps in his Cottage; nor can you then
distinguish between the dust of Dives or Lazarus, the dust of him that Grinds
in the Mill, or sits on the Throne. Nay a little time and ingratitude renders
the Monument and name of the greatest Monarch, as silent as his Ashes; thus it
was with the gallant Archimedes.

But Thirdly, The uncertainty of Power bespeaks its Vanity, its often, like
Lightning, Flashes in the face and is gone, and its well if it does not hurt
the man; the smallest Cloud obscures its Brightness, the least stain blemishes
its Beauty; nay the most trivial accident compleats often its Destruction.

Former Ages have given us larger Testimonies of it, and our Age no Strangers
to it: Valerianus Crowned with the Imperial Diadem, was like a Crane kept in a
Cage. Marius the Great General, and Mighty Warrior, begged his Bread at the
Ruins of Carthage, where he had formerly Enricht his Soul with Victory; and
Zerxes that Darkened the Air with his Arrows, was forced to escape in a Fishing
Boat: Nay he that was Adorned with Royal Robes, and Swayed the Scepter one day,
was Vested as a private Man, and Rifl'd by a Peasant on the Morrow; which may
teach us that its Grace, not Honor can make us truly Blessed and Happy, and that
its often better to live in the Vallie, where the Storms blow over, than to
Inhabit on the highest Hills, where continual Hurricanes disturb, and not to
keep that chief in our Affections which we cannot secure in our Possessions
(but to be practisers of Piety, which will make us Honorable to all Eternity.)

Thirdly, Beauty without Grace cannot make Blessed and Happy: That which may by
every little accident be lost, cannot make happy, and that Beauty is so, is
evident, the least Distemper decays it, a Fit of an Ague, Small Pox, or Fever
fades it, a few years out of the Grave, or a few moments in it, wholly spoils
it; Nor is Beauty the peculiar Prerogative of the rational being, for that the
most Powerful and Charming is outdone by Birds and Flowers: Its only a
colored piece of Clay, or like a fair Picture, take away the Varnish, and
there is nothing: It Is a Traitor in Retirement, and often carries Poison and
Disapointments in its most Endearing Enjoyments. Its a Hellena that hurries to
the Destruction of Troy: Its a Dalilah to entrap Sampson: a Jezabel to
infatuate Ahab: And a Bathsheba to allure David: And its Excellency without
Piety is perceptible by none but the Purblind, and its Charms, nay Existence,
is only derived from Delusion and Empty Opinion. Isaiah 3.19, 20. Esteem not
then the Daughters of Jerusalem, but those of Zion, whose Beauty is within: Who
are Undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of the Lord.

Fourthly, Humane knowledge Abstracted from Supernatural Grace, cannot make
Blessed and Happy, that which is attended with Vexation, Labor and Error cannot
make happy, the wisest of Mortals assures of the First, our own Experience of
the Latter; for Wisdom, none Transcended Solomon, he understood Nature and Art,
Words and Things, Interest of States, Intreagues of Court, for Policy and
Government, none was like him, nor shall any arise hereafter comparable to him;
yet he pronounces Humane Knowledge, vain and Vexatious. In much Wisdom, says
he, there is much Grief, and he that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow.

Secondly our own Experience assures us, that the little knowledge we have, is
got with much trouble, and our grief is Augmented that we understand no better;
What we know is the least part of what we know not, and the more we do know,
the nearer we approach the Sun that blinds us; for since the Infernal Raven
has picked out the Eyes of our Understanding, with a Splinter of the Tree of
Knowledge, we only groap for Truth, and stumble at Error. Every Age brings
forth new projects, as it does a new Generation of Men; every Age confutes old
Errors, and begets new; so that Humane Knowledge makes no Man happy, nor does
Blessedness consist in Intellectuals, but to be Undefiled in the way, that is
Wisdom, and to walk in the way of the Lord, that is Understanding, to know the
Statutes of Heaven, and Laws of Eternity, makes happy; Abstracted from these
all our policy, only lights us into the Territories of Darkness, serves only as
Pisgahs top did Moses, shows us Canaan, never brings us thither. But the Study
of Divine Wisdom, exalts our Nature, presents new pleasures, fills the mind with
Beautiful Ideas; is like a Travellor that ascends, every new step, enlarges his
Horizon, and lights him to Everlasting rest.

Fifthly, Long Life cannot make blessed and happy, that which Increases trouble,
cannot, and that long life does so; Experience Evidences, those that see most
days, see most miseries, Coughs, Cares and Consumptions, attend them, such only
Live to see their nearest and dearest Relations go to the Grave before them.
This made old Peleus Gray Head, go down with sorrow to the Grave; this made
Hecuba and others Bark with the Inhabitants of the Kennel, Howl amongst the
Tombs, and sail to their Sepulchers in a Sea of tears. I might instance a
thousand more calamities incident to the life of man, so that were it not for
the Expectations of another life, man would be the most miserable of Animals in
this; It was an apt Expression of the Philosopher upbraiding one that desired
long life, (...).

Alas, there is no object so deplorable as a Gray Head, and an Unsanctified
Heart, but the Hoary Scalp is a Crown of Glory, and only to be desired by such
as excel in Piety. Such aspiring Spirits were not given us, to be tied ever to
a Perishing Body; Nor can we think it worth the while, that the maker of the
Universe should Create a Soul, and send it down into the Body (or World) on
purpose to superintend these trivial affairs, to keep alive a silly piece of
Earth, whilst it Eats and Drinks, to move it too and fro in chase of Shadows,
and to hold it up while others bow the Knee and do it Homage, No, our Creator
has put us into this world in order to our Translation to a better, we are not
always to live among Mire, and be tied to a Perishrng body; we come into this
World not to take up our abode and rest, this life is only to Exercise our
virtues, and qualify us for the world to come, we live not so much to Enjoy it,
as to Conquer it is Temptations, and despise it is flatteries, and if we live
long enough to do this we may thank God; for what Laboring man would not
willingly be at rest, what Mariner is not glad that he has weathered all
Storms, and steered to his desired Haven, where his soul shall Enjoy Divine
pleasure, to big to be described. When Craesus asked Solon, who he thought
happy? he told him one Tellus, a man that was dead, for tho death breaks the
Union between the Body and Soul, yet it cannot break that Union between the
Soul and Christ, if undefiled; then why should we think a Temporary Life such a
Felicity? then why should it trouble us to leave men to live with Christ and
Angels? why should we be so unwilling to leave this body of dust? where we
shall sin no more, be sick no more, and troubled no more, but pass from death
to life, from a valley of tears to Eternal joys; then why should we not with
Scipio desire to be dissolved, when we hear of Immortality and Glory,
undoubtedly death to him that is undefiled in the way, is only as a passage
through a dark entry into a Glorious Palace, a putting of these Rags of the
flesh, and a putting on the Robes of Righteousness, a laying down a Sheep-hook,
and a taking up a Scepter, a laying down a Crown of Thorns, which Prick,
Torture, and Torment us, and a putting on a Crown of Glory which will for ever
Comfort and Delight us.

Lastly, A concurrence and combination of all these cannot make so much as one
man Happy, the Heathen Philosopher in search found a convenience, but no (...)
self-sufficiency; for if one man had all the Excellency and Power, all the
Highest and Greatest Treasures and Glory under the Sun, had he all the Bodily
perfections, which are distributed amongst the numerous Train of mankind, and
all conspired together to make this one man happy, he would infinitely come
short of his Design: And this miserable one Person at last would woefully
Experiment, that all these Glittering and Gilded Representations, with which
this flattering World had dazzled and deceived his Eyes, were but like Painted
Sepulchers, glorious and gay without, but within filled with Rottenness,
Darkness, Horror and Death; or like Egyptian Temples, with a Specious outside,
but Inhabited with Crocodiles and Dragons instead of Gods; I say, had one man
all the Ethics of Aristotle, all the Morality of Seneca. all the Learning at
Athens, had he all the cuning and tricks of Achitophel, the strength of
Goliath, the Treasures of Nebuchadnezar, the Honor of Haman, the Beauty of
Absolon: Nay, had he the knowledge of the Scribes, and the Devotion of the
Pharisees, he would at last discover himself to be a stranger to true Felicity,
and utterly unacquainted with the blessed condition, and that on these following
accounts.

At the Fall of our First Parents the Earth was Cursed, so cannot yield to Man
any true Comfort; It must now bring forth Thorns and Briars, that is Cares and
Troubles, and so its a Delusion to expect a second Paradise here, or to hope
for true Happiness any where but in Heaven, because all here is mutable, and we
Mortal. Wordly comforts are transient and vanishing, they cannot extend
themselves to Eternity, and thus they want the very life and accomplishment of
true Tranquillity; here we cannot write for ever on our Riches, here we cannot
write for ever on our Honors or Pleasures, there will be a period put to all
Humane Glory; all our Riches, Pomp, and Grandeur, must abandon us at the
Frontiers of the Grave; six Foot and a Shroud, then will serve

Indeed were it in our power to Procrastinate our days, could we strike off the
nimble Chariot Wheels of time, and with Joshua, Bid the Sun stand still; could
we Lengthen out our days to some thousands of years, and those to be employed
in the most Entire and Choicest of Worldly Fruitions, without interruption or
decay, it would seem a little more plausable to place our Hapiness here, But
alafs, who is there Ignorant of this said Truth, that the Life of Man is but a
Span Long; Are not my days few, says Job, I go where I shall not return, even
into the Land of Darkness and shadow of Death; and none knows but the next
breath he draws to cool, and fresh his Lungs, may be that Gale of wind to waft
him on the Coasts of Eternity: For when God is but Angry, all our days are gone;
Man is sick and dies, Man perishes, and where is he, to day he is set up, and to
morrow he shall not be found, for he is turned into dust, and his purpose
Perishes, and his pomp terminateth in a neglected Grave; and in a few Months,
after the Mourners have gone about the Streets, and the Solemnity of his
Funeral is over, is forgotten, as if he had never been; and if so, why should a
thinking Man place his Happiness here? Why should an Eternal Spirit Address a
Vapor? Why should an Immortal Soul court a Phantom, since the Spirit of Man
cannot delight in any thing that is Terrestial? here indeed are Diversions that
please and tickle the Senses, but cannot give the least Delectation to the
Soul, nor any wise satisfy the Capacity of a Man's heart; for if a Man could
give Silver as Stones, and Caedars as the Wild Figtrees, that grow abundantly
on the Plains; could he provide Men Singers and Women Singers, and be croun'd
with the Possessions and Delights of the Sons of Men, could carrouse it
continually with Belshazar in full Bouls; yet all these, or the highest degrees
of Luxury, could not desend the most daring Belshazar from the Sting of a
Tormented Conscience; for in the midst of Laughter, the Soul and the Heart too
if Wicked, will be sad, then all the Jewels in Saul's Crown cannot Comfort, or
create a chalm within.

For if a Man have a defiled Conscience, tho he were decked with Majesty, and
arrayed with Beauty and Honor, tho he wash his Paths with Butter, and the
Rocks power him out Rivers of Oil, tho he purchase a confluence of all created
beings, and could leave tokens of his pleasure in every place: Were he the
Universal Governor of the Ocean, and could not only Trace, but Control and
Command the Motions of the Sun and Stars; yet the Restless and Ambitious
Curiosity of his Soul, would aspire beyond the highest Heavens, prye after some
unreveal'd Excellency, some absconded Felicity, which the whole extent of this
finite Material World with all her perfections, could in no ways afford, there
being an inherent Insufficiency riveted in the very Essence of Sublunary
beings; that we can never allay our thirst at these Puddles of Egypt, but if
we would be satisfied we must be undefiled, and so soar aloft to the Cysterns of
the Celestial Canaan: For that nothing can Extinguish the thirst of a man's
Soul, but the Waters of the Well of Life, and the unfathomable Sea of the
comforts of another World.

And those that hope for happiness in any Worldly fruitions, without walking in
the way of the Lord, O! how is their Ignorance to be pitied; O! with what
compassionate Tears should that Carnal state of man be lamented, by all that
understand the worth of a Soul: What heart does not bleed for miserable man that
is perpetually mocked with Shadows, cheated with false delusive appearances,
infatuated and betrayed by their own Senses, whilst they rise up early, and lie
down late, to seek rest in trouble, and life in death, that run away from true
Blessedness, whilst they pretend to pursue it; Descend patiently to the
Chambers of Death, and Dream of nothing but an Earthly Paradise, till they are
amidst the infernal Regions.

Now if their Circumstances are thus, to be Lamented that hope for happiness in
Riches, Honors, etc. or a Concurrence of all these, then sure it concerns all
to enquire what will make them blessed and happy. My second General proposed.

True happiness consists in being invested with as good a state and condition,
as our Natures are capable of receiving; but since the united sufficiencies of
all created beings are not enough to satisfy our boundless desires, and to
make us truly and for ever perfect and happy. The Soul of man being unsatiable
in its appetite, as its immortal by nature; It only remains then that our
aspirings must terninate in an infinite and eternal being, in acquaintance and
Fellowship with God the fountain of all Blessedness, who alone being infinite,
is able to fill the Soul of man which is Immortal; and therefore we may be
assured, that true happiness can consist in nothing else but a Regenerate
state, in a devout contemplation of God, in being a Child of his, an heir of
Salvation, in supernatural Grace, and the blessed consequents thereof.

These are the Sources and Fountains of all happiness, these the parents of Joy
and Peace; those Rich and mighty Cordials that raise Nature, make all Purity,
all Glory, lay all Storms, compose all Mutinies in our Bosoms, extinguish
Troubles, prevent Fears; such a one can commune with his own Heart without
uneasiness; reflect on's Actions without regret, is ever raised above
Malencholy, being continually cherisht by Celestial influences, and ever
incircled in Gods Love. These are the never failing Fountains that perpetually
feed and supply those Rivers of endless and unspeakable Blessings; these are
the Springs which for ever maintain that Ocean of Infinite and Eternal joys;
these are those inestimable Jewels, which whosoever is securely possessed of, his
heart is so filled with love and admiration, that for ever he imploys his
dearest and most noble thoughts on them, ever sixing his Eyes, and uniteing his
heart to God the supreme Good.

And now Secondly, The way to compass this Blessed state, our dearest Redeemer
tells us in his Sermon on the Mount Mat. 5th. also, the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and wisest of Mortals from their own experience assure us, that there
is no Happiness without Holiness. Therefore they passionately excite us, to
elevate our affections above these contemptible vanities and Fallacious Ideas,
and to esteem them as Dross in comparison of those sublimated Excellencies
which are at Gods Right Hand, and if any ever hope to be happy here or
hereafter; he must be Innocent, Charitable, Humble, Harmless, and Honest, he
must love Righteousness and hate any thing that is foul or ill, he must have a
heart first fixed on Heavenly things, and subservient to these; the necessary
affairs of his honest and lawful occupation. And thus let the way of the Lord
be your path then doubt not of being Blessed for his Graces will enliven you,
his Blessed Spirit will be your guide, his Holy Angels your guard, his Word
your Light, and Blessedness your end, for Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
that walk in the Law of the Lord. Which leads me to my third proposed, to tell
you what it is to be undefiled: and when we may be esteemed so.

First, To be Undefiled is to practice the precepts in the 15th. Psalm. and to
continue in a general and sincere course of Piety and Charity, St. James in his
first Chap. and last Verse tells you, That pure Religion and undefiled before
God is to visit the Fatherless and Widow in their affliction. and to keep your
selves unspoted from the World. You Will answer we may visit the Fatherless and
Widow, but we cannot be unspoted; Its owned that we cannot wholly put of the
Rags of Corruption till we wholly put on the Roabes of Righteousness, for that
this Heredetary Corruption Sin will stick to our Flesh, tho we wash this
Ethiope with all our Hysop it will be black, tho we rub this Leopard with all
our Nitre, it will have some spots. The flesh will be a Solicitous Dalilah
about us, and within us, will Sojourn in our Mesec, and dwell in our Tents of
Kedar, for while we are in this Village, where our Martha dwells, our
affections will have a taste of Earth, we may correct our Corruptions, but
cannot wholly destroy them, we may and must be without blame, as to gross
Inniquities, but cannot be without blemish, as to sinful Infirmities, till we
pass this Egypt, and arrive at the Celestial Canaan, for there, and there only
are the Spirits of Just men made perfect and undefiled.

God never had but one Son here without Sin, Except him the best of Saints have
been subject to it, and are Enjoined to confess their daily Trespasses; for to
tred always firm in the paths of Righteousness without ever sliping, to walk so
uprightly as never to fall, by security, weakness, or inadvertency; is a task
not for a man but an Angel: if there be any Souls so happy as to triumph over
all Infirmities, and so watchful as never to be surprised, they are peculiar
Jewels kept in undiscerned Cabinets. Tho some of the Patriarchs, Apostles, and
blessed Martyrs ariv'd to such Sanctity, that they seemed incapable of
Accessions; St. Paul said, He was Crucified to the World, etc.

Yet in this Age of ours, not to be subject to disorderly desires, not liable
to Irregular Motions, wandering thoughts, dullness in Duty, is only the
Privilege of Souls clothed with Immortallity; for our understandings are not
so clear and bright, but they may be deceived, nor the bent of our affections
so strongly set, but they may be perverted. Where is the Love that has no
drfect? where is the hope that has no fear? we have secret Dispositions in
Nature, to folly and error, we have ebs and flows of Blood, and Spirits;
Distempers within, roughness of Conversation without, Irksome Adversity and
Flattering prosperity, Nay, we have Souls engaged with our Senses, and these
with the World, we are so surrounded with variety of objects, which through the
Intervention of our senses, leave their Ideas in the head, that the Eye of the
mind can no more help looking on them, then not to wink when a blow is given;
so that we must almost forget our Nature to be undefiled wholly, amongst so
many Snares.

Such sagacity of Judgment, such strength of resolution, such felicity of
circumstance, we can never soar to, but that some venial defect may lurk in the
most sanctified Soul, but we must have a care of mistaking contracted habits
for frailties of nature, of cherishing any ill motions, or throing our selves
into the way of Temptations, when we have warnings without or misgivings
within, for then they cease to be Sins of surprise, or infirmity become Mortal,
bring dishonor to God, injury to our Neighbor, and defile our Nature.
Therefore,

Secondly, Here Is the Characteristic of the good man that shall be esteemed
Undefiled, he is one tho he stumble accidentally on a Temptation, yet he lies
not in the Mire, but rises again presently, and keeps on his Journey, gets
ground of his Passions, and is ever accompanied with earnest desires, and
serious endeavors, he presses after the Mark of the high calling, and when any
Temptations ofered, yields not to it; for its not his Sin to be Tempted, or to
feel that he is so, but the Evil is in yiedling and doing, since his actions
are at his command, tho not always his mind: Its Corruption allures, but
consent defiles, therefore the good man, so soon as any unlawful object is
represented to him, he resists the Lure, and the Fight of Rephidim begins,
sometimes Israel prevails, and sometimes Amalec, but he still holds up his
hand, that is, lets his thoughts be Elevated, and his mind Soaring, till he
hears the shout that Israel has the day: And when he has once got the
Victory, sets a strict watch at the Cinque port of his Senses, and so soon as
the Devil shows him the World, dispises it, and the Devil too, with a, Get thee
behind me Satan; And when ever he is Assaulted, by any darling Sin, he never
parleys, but if in danger of being overcom'n, immediately throws himself into
the Arms of his Blessed Savior, in full assurance that he has given his good
Angels, more power to preserve him, then the Evil to hurt him, and rests his
hand on the Pillar of Faith and Prayer, till Amelec fly before him.

Now such a man that thus struggles for the Consolation of the Spirit, more
then for sensible things, that soars alost on the Wings of Faith and Love, that
Prunes the Luxuriancy of untaught Nature, and Animal inclinations, that adornes
himself with those three Heroic Virtues, Faith, Love, Humility; that is
fervent and frequent at Public and Private Devotions, is a constant
Communicant, is just in all his dealings, is Generous in Charity, like the Sun
reaches his rays to all, is active in the work of Angels, thankful to God,
Meek and Courteous in Behavior to men, is modest in Prosperity, chalm and
resigned in Adversity, that acts as uprightly as if he were to dye to day, and
give an account at night.

Now such a man that thus fears the Lord his God, and does all the good he can
to men, may be as well assured, he is in the state of Salvation, as that Jesus
is Risen; such a Man may be satisfied he is undefiled according to Gods Will,
tho not according to the purity of his August Essence; and may be confident
that his defects for Christ's sake shall be Pardoned, and the spots that he has
contracted, shall be by the Roab of his Righteousness covered, and shall
compass the Blessed Consequents of being Undefiled: My last proposed,

First, If God sees it good, you need not doubt of being Externally blessed,
since the service of God has a Friendly regard to worldly Prosperity;
Godliness says the Apostle, is profitable to all things having the promises of
this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. for that piety inclines Men to be serious in their
thoughts, temporate in their lives, and diligent in their callings, which
Enriches; Read Deuteronomy. 28. Wicked men indeed may prosper by industry, but its not
by the blessing, but sufferance of God, and such cannot be secure in what they
posess, since none are safe from Ruin, but in the favor and protection of God
the giver, Psalm. 73, 12.18, 19 verse. For the Elect's sake, God made the World,
Enrich't and Redeemed it.

Therefore if thou would be blessed with Riches, then be undefiled, and thou
have the God of wealth, and the Minerals of the world, to supply thy wants; if
Honors thou have him that makes the Heavens Bow, and Scepters and Diadems
obey: if Wisdom, the treasures of Eloquence and Riches of Eternal Knowledge are
in his bosom; all which God will certainly give thee, if for his Glory and thy
good.

Indeed God does not in the Gospel promise Wealth, Honor etc. to every man; on
this Theater all are not to act the part of Princes, and Prelates, because the
perfection of human Affairs, requires a Diversity amongst men (Kings and
Subjects, Masters and Servants) Bishops and Deacons, el's a general Aequality
would usher in a general confusion.

But Secondly, If thou have not an affluence of Temporals, yet if undefiled,
thou art secure at least of Christ's Legacy, internal Peace, which is the
greatest Blessing, since a man is nothing but his mind, and if that is out of
order, the greatest Treasures, the highest Honors, and the softest Pleasures,
cannot make happy, but posessing peace of mind, tho never so poor, thou
Enjoyest infinitely more comfort in it, then in the affluence of all created
beings, without it, and all that walk in the paths of virtue, need not doubt of
compassing this Peace; since such act according to their Primitive Institution,
and are in the state they were intended, and in that condition for which God
designed them; But in the revers, those take much pains to loose their Labor,
that hope to find Peace in the paths of Impiety.

No, its only a Religious life can make us happy, for that ever yields comfort,
when we stand most in need of it, in times of Affliction or Death, Holiness
being of that Blessed Nature, that it makes all Light within, tho there be
nothing but Darkness without.

Riches, Honors, Pleasures and Preferments, (says a Pious Author) are coy,
and keep distance, and when we loose them, leave us with a weeping Eye, and
heavy Heart; but Virtue never leaves us till we force and chase it from us: Its
the Sovereign Cordial in all conditions, its not lost in the many Misfortunes
that surround us, it continues sweet and comfortable in Misery, gives Courage
in Adversity, makes us rich in Poverty, is such a Physician that puts us to
little Expense, yet gives such Cordials, as cheer the Body, Spiritualize the
Soul: Nay, is the precious Pearl that purchases our Peace to all Eternity, and
shines on our Souls even here with Beams of Everlasting Glory.

For such thoughts of Spiritual Ravishment and Unutterable rapture, are many
times inspired by the Spirit of Comfort, into the hearts of Gods Children, who
have often in a sweet shower from Heaven, a whole Sea of Comfort powered on their
Souls; and by the Glorious fruition of inward Peace and Joy, have such a lively
perception and foretast of Everlasting pleasures, as is beyond the power of the
Heart of Man to conceive, or the Tongue of Angels to express, as if with one
hand they had already laid hold on the Crown of Life, and had got one step
within the Gates of Heaven; for the Angels whom they fill with joy, with a
careful tenderness and alacrity, become their Guardians, and servisable to them.

All the Creatures are in League with, and reconciled unto them, and with a
secret reverence do adore that Sacred Character of Divinity that is imprinted
on them, for by being Undesiled. These regain all, that Adam by his fall lost,
and are happier in this state of Integrity, then Adam in that of Innocence; for
the Undefiled are now Sons of God, and Heirs to his Kingdom: Nay, for ought we
know, such may hereafter Equalize, if not, Transcend the splendor of Angles,
for tho the Undefiled are lower then Angels by Creation, yet they are superior
by Adoption: Angels have only Glorified Spirits, but the Undefiled shall have
Glorified Souls, and Spiritualized Bodies too, even like our Savior; for the
Felicity and the Eternity of such shall be like his, as in the 1 Epistle St.
John, 3 Chap. 2, 3 Verses.

And if the Pious enjoy such Transcendant Peace and Glory, who in his wits then
would not deny himself the pleasure of a moment, to be pleased for ever? Who
then would not be a Christian for a few years, to Reign with Christ for ever?

Did you see as I often do (in my Visits of the Sick) I say did you see Sinners
in that stormy night, when Vengence reaches them, or Death pangs seizes them,
you could no more describe their Fears and their Cares, then fathom the
Firmament: But on the contrary, if you were sensible of the Transports of Peace
and Comfort that Pious Souls enjoy in the time of Afflictions or Death, it
would make the greatest Debauch turn Puritan, and the most refined Epicure a
Mortified Saint; it would charm the Cup out of the hand of the Drunckard, and
lure the Sinner from the softest Embrace.

For when the Undefiled resign their already Mortified Bodies into the cold
hands of Death, their Souls being conscious of an upright and unspoted Life,
have created Eyes so Fortified, that many enjoy Transcendent Rays of the
Beatific Vision before Departure. Nay, being supported by the Spirit of
Comfort, feel no sting in Death, discover no darkness in the Grave; no amazment
at that Great and Terrible day of the Lord, when the Sun shall be turned into
Darkness, and the Moon into Blood, when the Heavens shrivel together like a
Scrole of Parchment, and the high and mighty Mountains skip out of their
places, like roused Hindes.

Then Lastly, The Undefiled shall be Eternally Blessed, they shall not only look
down with Cheerfulness into the Grave, but in to the other World without
terror, where they shall not see a Court of Justice, but a Throne of Grace,
where they shall not see a severe Judge, but a kind Father, and a Savior, who
died for them, ready to pronounce them Blessed, and set the Crown of Glory on
their Heads; where they shall ever be in the conversation of Excellent Persons,
brave minds, Charitable Souls, and dear Friends; be eased of all their Pains,
resolved of all their Doubts, freed from all their Fears, and happy beyond
their Hopes; having Scepters made to fill their Hands, and mighty Glories to
Crown their Heads, and forever enjoy Gods dearest delights, and highest
Glories; for, Blessed are the Undefiled in the way that walk in the Law of the
Lord.

FINIS.

