THE PAPER Called the AGREEMENT of the PEOPLE taken into CONSIDERATION, AND The
Lawfulness of Subscription to it Examined, and Resolved in the Negative, by the
Ministers of Christ in the PROVINCE of LANCASTER.

Published by them especially for the satisfaction of the Conscience, and
guiding of the practice of our entirely honored and beloved, the People of our
several Churches, committed to our Charge; and for the general good of this
Church and Nation.

LONDON, Printed for LUKE FAWN, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1649.

The paper called the Agreement of the People taken into Consideration, and the
lawfulness of Subscription to it examined, and resolved in the negative, by the
Ministers of Christ in the Province of LANCASTER.
THis Agreement being drawn up in the name of the People of England, and by the
Title of the Book being tendered to the Consideration of the People, as also by
a Declaration, bearing the name of his Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, and his
general Council of Officers, annexed to it, it is said to be tendered to the
People of England; and the said Declaration desiring that all good people of
England Will cordially embrace it, and by Subscription declare their
Concurrence, and accord thereto, when it shall be tendered to them, as is
directed therein: And it being of universal Concernment, taking in, and
desposing of all public Affairs, not only of the Civil State, but of
Religion: We the Ministers of Christ in the Province of Lancaster, who have
constantly and cordially adhered to the Cause of King and Parliament, both in
the first and second War, and have opposed, according to our places and
Callings, the late Scottish Engagement, (by which many of us have been
Sufferers,) and (having been called thereunto by the Authority of Parliament)
have not only taken, but pressed upon our people both the Vow and Protestation
to 5 May, 1641. and the Solemn League and Covenant, in the latter of which we
have bound our selves, Art. 6. in the Cause therein Covenanted, all the days of
our lives zealously and constantly to continue against all Opposition, and to
promote the same, according to our power, against all Lets and Impediments
whatsoever; and what we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, to
reveal, and make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed. And Art. 4.
That we shall also, with all faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the
People, contrary to this League and Covenant; do hold our selves bound (our
common interest, and relations, our special vocations, and our aforesaid
Engagements being considered) not only deliberately to weigh, and resolve, with
our selves and one another, what to do in reference to this Agreement, but
publicly to make known our apprehensions concerning it, for the resolution of
those that may be in doubt about it, and t^^t those that are for it may have
our Reasons why we dissent from it; and we humbly and dearly entreat our highly
honored and beloved Countrymen and Brethren of this Kingdom, into whose hand
this our paper may come; as well the Composers and Publishers of the Agreement,
as those to whom it is directed and intended, to be offered for their
Subscription, more especially the Inhabitants of this County, unto whom we
stand in a more intimate relation, both as living among, and having the
spiritual Charge respectively of them, heartily to take and interpret, and
conscientiously to perpend this our maturely conceived, and settled Judgment.

This Draught, called the Agreement of the People, being a Platform of
State-Government, calculated for this Nation, and so, more immediately of a
Political or Civil Consideration; Our undertaking is not to survey, or give our
Verdict on every thing it holds forth divisively, or by distinct Sections, no^
ye shall we examine any thing in it Politically, or by the rule of
State-M^^i^s, or the Laws of the Realm, we remit that work to the learned
State-men and Lawyers of the Land Ashursts Reasons, etc. and Mr Prynnes Speech.
: But we shall (...) it as Christians and Ministers, enquiring and determining
according to our Talent how it may stand or disagree with the dictates of
Conscience regulated by the Word of God: And in doing this, our method will be.
1. To give an account of our Conceptions upon the whole plot or frame taken
together. 2. To speak distinctly and particularly to the Ninth Section, which
concerns Religion; whereupon we shall be the rather particular, because it is
both more proper to our profession, and more pressing to our souls.

For the first; The project of this Agreement is to place a power in the
People, to alter when they will the Government of the Kingdom, to abrogate the
present, and to erect a new form of Policy, and to be Lords paramount, or
transcendental Moderators over those to whom the Government is committed,
assuming to deliver them their Authority, to give them Laws, to disanul the
Laws they make, to consine their Legislative power, and to oppose them by force
of Arms when they see good; and to move them now to exert the said power. This
may appear by the whole tenor of the Agreement, and namely in that it
represents the People ordering the present Parliament to dissolve Page 8
partic. 1.
, appointing new Representatives of a new proportion and Constitution, (both in
regard of places and persons electing,) and of the manner, times, and other
circumstances of Election Page 8 partic. 2. etc.
, which are to have the supreme trust in order to the preservation and
government of the whole, and their power is to extend without the consent or
concurrence of any other person or persons, to the erecting and abolishing of
Courts of Justice, and public Offices, and to the enacting, altering,
repealing, and declaring of Laws, and the highest and final Judgment,
concerning all natural or civil things Pa. 24. part. 8
, limiting the said Representatives from having power in many things Pa. 24.
partic. 8. etc.
, directing and restraining them in matter of Religion Pa. 26. par. 9
, and repealing all Laws. Ordinances, and Statutes, contrary to the Liberty in
Religion which they provide Pa. 27 part 4
, reserving in themselves, or any of them, power to resist them by force of
Arms in some cases P. 27. part. 10
; And that such a fundamental change was in the Intentions of the Compilers, is
evident by the Declaration following it, which says, it contains the best and
most hopeful Foundations for the Peace and future well-Government Government of
this Nation Page 30.
, and in it they disclaim to middle in any thing, save the Fundamental settling
of that power (to wit, the Law-giving, or Judicial power over the Kingdom) in
the most equal and hopeful way for common Right, Freedom, and Safety, as in
this Agreement Page 32.
.

This Agreement then persuades the people to cast off, or depose the present
Government, to turn themselves into an Anarchy, or jumbled multitude, to become
a people without distinction or order, to run themselves into that confusion
which the Jews were brought unto by the Babylonian Captivity, to be as the
fishes of the sea, as the creeping things that have no ruler over them Habak.
1.14.
, and so fit for nothing but to be angled by them that desire to fish in
troubled waters, for so it follows in the Text, they take up all of them with
the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drags, Verse
15.
as though we were a colony, or company of men, swarmed or broken out from some
other Nation, and newly landed in this Island, free and ready to elect and set
up a frame of a Commonwealth, such as we should like best. Unto all this we
say;

1. We are constituted Kingdom, a settled State, and under a lawful Government,
which is very ancient, fully understood both by Magistrates and People, and
deeply rooted in men's affections, both by long habituated exercise, and the
well-approved benefices of it.

2. The Government we are under is good, wholesome, equitable for the
Constitution of it, fitly balanced and proportioned, being reduced to the
golden-mean, lying between Monarchical Tyranny, and Popular Anarchy, it has
had the general sufferage to be one of the moderatest and best tempered
Governments in Europe.

3. The form of Government which we have are bound to own and continue under,
not only by the single tie of the duty of Subjects, but by sacred obligation of
Oaths, Vows and Covenants, into which we have been called be called by lawful
authority, prescribing or propounding them to us; as namely, 1. The Oath of
Allegiance, in which the Subject solemnly swears in these words, I shall bear
faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him,
and them, will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies
and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their persons, their
Crown or Dignity, 2. The Oath of the Kings Supremacy, wherein are these words,
I do promise, that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true, allegiance to
the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, and to my power shall
assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminencies and Authorities
granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, or
united to the imperial Crown of this Realm. 3. The Vow and and Protestation of
5 May, 1641. in which who so enters into it, binds himself thus, I do in the
presence of Almighty God, promise, vow and protest to maintain and defend, as
far as lawfully I may, with my life, power and estate, according to the duty of
my Allegiance, his Majesty's, Royal Person, Honor and Estate, as also the Power
and Privileges, of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject,
etc. 4. And lastly, The Solemn League and Covenant, wherein we with hands
lifted up to the most high God to swear thus, We shall with the same sincerity,
reallity and constancy, in our several Vocations, endeavor with our estates and
lives, mutually, to preserve the Rights, and Privileges of the Parliament, and
the Liberties of the Kingdom, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
Person and Authority, in the Preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with our Consciences
of our Loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his
Majesty's just power or greatness. And it deserves to be remembered, that the
Parliament, at their entering into the Vow and Protestation, did it upon and
apprehension, that our Government was in danger of undermining, and laid down
their sense thereof as one special ground of making the same, In the Preamble,
and finding also that there have been, and having just cause to suspect that
there still are, even during the sitting in Parliament, endeavors to subvert
the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the exercise of
an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government by most pernicious and wicked councels,
practices, plots and conspiracies etc.
and both entered and led the people into it expressly for the prevention of
such a design, adding to the tie of civil duty, the religious bond of this Vow
and Protestation, for the firmer obliging of our allegiance to the Government:
And in the instructions for the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant
throughout the Kingdom, Art. 10. there is an Exhortation ordered to be made to
all sorts of persons to take it, as that which they judge not only lawful, but
(all things considered) exceeding expedient, and necessary for all that wish
well to Religion, the King and Kingdom to join in.

From these three Considerations, as Premises, we infer: First, There Is no
place, need or occasion for such an attempt (...) is the abolishing of the old,
and rearing a new model of Government.

1. Say, that some invested with the Government have been faulty, that is no
ground for changing the Government, if it be, we may run through all forms of
policy, and stay in none, but still be changing, for men will still be found
failing; our Government being lawful and good, our course is (as to this case)
to pray that our Magistrates may be good, as we are required by the Apostle 1 Timothy 2 1.2
, for unless it please God to give us just and godly Magistrates, the best
Constitution will nothing avail us, and if that were obtained, that which we
have would serve our turn.

2. Say, that such deep wounds have been given lately to our Government in the
persons of those in which it was inherent, as that the influence of it into the
body politic may be for a time suspended, yet we cannot think that the
Kingdom it self is thereby beheaded of its Government, if that Maxim we have
often heard of [The King never dyes] be true, and that Act for the continuance
of the Parliament, till it dissolve it self, be still a Law, we cannot but
conceive we have a Government actually invested, and however it is, who can
deny but still there is an obligation and right in us to the Government? And as
it is a far easier way to restore the former Government to its natural course,
then to remove it, and settle another; so we believe, if we of this Nation
shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will raise it up again. We
observe (if we understand the Remonstrance of his Excellency etc. of November.
20. and the Declaration of November. 30. and the humble Answer of January 3. and
the Petition before this Agreement,) that the late proceedings against those in
the seat of Authority were asserted, and put on as necessary, in order to the
matter of this Agreement, and if so, the said matter cannot be necessary by
virtue of those proceedings; desperate and successive things cannot really and
innocently make each other necessary. And indeed until the composers of this
Agreement prove the fundamental change of Government in it simply necessary,
(which hitherto they have not (that we know of) assayed to do) the pretense of
necessity for the aforesaid proceedings, so far as it was built upon their
tendency to this end, stands unsupported, which we the rather point at, for
that in the humble Answer aforesaid we find acknowledged; That the late
proceedings against the Parliament Members was a course in it self-irregular,
and not justifiable, but both by honest intentions for public good, and an
extraordinary necessity for the same end leading thereunto. Now if the changes
in this Agreement be that end, and public good, and they prove not at all
necessary, (no not lawful, as we hope to manifest) the extraordinary necessity
pretended thence for these proceedings vanishes into nothing. All that is
particularly said for the needfulness of any thing in this Agreement, that we
have met with, is laid down, page 8. Since therefore our former oppressions,
and not yet ended troubles, have been occasioned, either by want of frequent
National Meetings in Council, or by the undue on unequal Constitution thereof,
or by rendering those Meetings ineffectual, We are fully agreed, etc. But the
superstructure that follows upon this reason (to wit the change of Government)
is too large fot this Foundation, the provisions do far out-reach the
grievances, which might easily (yea and we think only) be remedied, the
Government standing as it does, especially the two of those three evils which
are (to our thoughts) important, the dis-continuance and ineffectualness of
Parliaments, and for the former already provision has been, made since this
Parliament, and no doubt what remains necessary to be done against any of those
evils, the Parliament would carefully provide for, as appertaining to self
preservation.

Secondly, Such an attempt would be very unsafe and full of danger, were there
any occasion or appearance of need for such an undertaking, yea, it would be a
very rash and impolitick course, and prudence would forbid it; the experience
of all ages may instruct us how perilous a thing it is to go about to innovate
or make an alteration in Government: and how much better it is for a people to
bear with many inconveniences in a settled State, then to run upon the mischiefs
that usually and almost inevitably attend such a change. When the ten Tribes
revolted from under Rehoboams. Government, for the burthensomness of his
fathers reign, and because his was threatened to be more heavy; they got no
case nor other advantage by that revolt, but (together with the loss of their
Religion and their God) they involved themselves in sea of miseries, never
enjoyed any good Government, but through many changes, and at last by
revolting, from under Shalmaneser King of Assyria they brought themselves to
utter ruin.

3dly, What ever power of taking away and new forming Government is conceived
to rest in the People, yet it is all one as to us our Oaths, Vows,
Protestation, and Covenant considered, by which we have fast bound our hands
from the use of such a Freedom (were there any such orginally residing in us,)
these Oaths and Covenants which we have taken are to us far more restringent
and strongly engaging to keep to our present Government, then any secular
respects can be to put on a change, in as much as the satisfying of those
conduces to the good or peace of the Soul and Conscience; the prosecution of
these reflecteth only upon a temporary Commodity. If the People of this Land,
that are within any of these religious bonds, shall attempt either wholly to
take away the King, the House of Lords, and the ancient Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the House of Commons, or any of them, or diminish any thing that
is matter of power, honor, or privilege from any of them, then when they swore
or protested, inherent in them, or put any power in themselves, which they
cannot have but by some substraction from the Rights either of King or
Parliament, how can they be clear from the great wickedness of perjury, or
Vow-violation? So that these Vows, Oaths, and Covenants being upon us (as we
believe all are upon many, and some at lest upon most of the people of this
Kingdom) if this Agreement shall indeed be carried on, and rendered to us, each
of us (that are within any of them) may answer to the offer of it in the words
of Jephthah, Judge. 11.35. I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go
back. Let but the nature of an Oath be weighed, In swearing we call God for a
record upon our souls, and appeal to him to be a witness and judge of our truth
and reallity in the Oath, by manifesting himself either in mercy, or judgment,
according as we either with sincere or treacherous intentions undertake, and
according as we either firmly keep or perfidiously break the Oath: and dare any
of us be such God-contemners, and self-destroyers, as wittingly, or purposely,
to violate our Oaths? If any unrighteousness or sin had born the subject of
these Vows, Oaths, and Covenants, we might be allowed, yea bound to repentance,
and revocation of them that were such, but no such thing has been or can be
once alleged against any of them: We wonder that the Framers of this Agreement
are in it so liberal in providing for the liberty of Conscience (as they term
it) in matter of Religion, and yet are so silent in the resolution of
Conscience in this point of Religion, which is public enough for them to take
notice of, and may (we believe) concern their, as well as our consciences. Say
there were some inconveniences (though we find none in the substantials of our
Government) yet we, having devoted our selves thus unto it, cannot alter any
thing expressed in these Engagements, without impiety, to be abhorred. A
righteous man swears to his own hurt, and changes not, Psa. 15.4. The League
which Joshua made with the Gibeonites, and the Princes of the Congregation
swear to, though it proved to be to the public loss and prejudice, they might
not break, and they answered the Congregation that murmured against them for
it, thus, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we
may not touch them: We will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because
of the Oath which we swear unto them, Josh. 9, 15, etc. And when Saul, four
hundred years after this, in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, had
slain the Gibeonites, there was a famine in the days of David three years (Saul
being dead) for that his bloody fact; and seven of Saul's sons were hanged up
before the Lord, ere God was entreated for the Land, 2 Samuel 21. God has heard
our Vows Psa. 61.5.
, and though men do not insist on, or would discharge us of them, yet the Lord
our God will surely require them of us Deuteronomy. 23.21.
: A false Oath is one of the special things that he hates Zech. 8.17.
. He has said, he will come near to men in judgment, and will be a swift
witness against false swearers Mal. 3.5.
Zedekiah the King of Judah, being made by Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon
to swear fealty to him, though he was a foreign and heathenish Prince, and
though the subjection was disadvantageous to him, and tended to make the
Kingdom base, that it might not lift up it self; yet Zedekiah breaking this
Oath, and rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar, the Lord sent his Prophet with
these tidings; Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that does such things? Or
shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? Nay, upon this his breach of
Oath, the Lord himself swears thus, As I live, says the Lord God, surely in
the place where the King dwells that made him King, whose Oath he despised,
and whose Covenant he brake* even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall
die; neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty Army, and great company, make for
him: Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant, when lo he had given
his hand, and has done all these things, he shall not escape: Therefore thus
says the Lord God, As I live, sunely mine Oath that he has despised, and my
Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompouce upon his own head Ezekiel.
17.12.
. And again, when Zedekiah, the Princes, and people of Jerusalem, had made a
Covenant before the Lord in his house, to proclaim Liberty, and let their
Hebrew servants go out free, after their seven years service, according to the
Law and Covenant of the Lord, and had done accordingly; but afterward, upon
the retreat of the King of Babylons Army from them, they had caused their
servants, whom they had set at liberty, to return, and brought them again into
subjection, the Prophet thus denounces against them from the Lord, Therefore,
thus says the Lord, ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty
every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbor; behold I proclaim a
liberty for you, says the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the
famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth:
and I will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, which have not
performed the words of the Covenant which they had made before me; I will even
give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek
their life, and their dead bodies shall be for meat to the fowls of the
heavens, and to the beasts of the earth Jerem. 34.17 etc.
. Now in this our case (which with the inversion of the terms may be paralel'd
to theirs) if we, having covenanted subjection to the Authority set over us,
when we were in fears and dangers, shall, when our fears are over, cast off
that subjection, and proclaim to our selves liberty from it, and presume to
abrogate the Government we have covenanted to preserve, we provoke the Lord to
pass the same sentence upon us.

They that hold forth this Agreement to us, say, in Title, it is an Agreement
for a secure and present Peace, upon Grounds of common Right, Freedom and
Safety. But by this Scripture, we know not how otherwise to style it, then an
Agreement for sure and (it may probably be) present trouble and misery: and if
it go on to be a National Compact indeed, we doing the same things with
Zedekiah and his people, if we have ears to hear, we may hear the Lord
pronouncing the same things upon us which he did upon them; Behold I proclaim a
liberty for you, says the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the
famine. This is the Freedom, and not that which the Agreement speaks of, which
we shall purchase by it: And we earnestly with that we may not put the Lord to
it, as those rebellious Jews did, when he said of them, Jerem. 44.28
Jer. 44.28. And all the remnant of Judah shall know, whose word shall stand,
mine or theirs. And as for common Right, which is another thing the Title of
the Book holds forth, we may gather what Right we may expect by it, should it
be established, by our Covenant Breaking; if we look into another Prophet, to
wit, Hosea, cap. 10.4. They have spoken words, Hosea 10.4.
swearing falsely in making a Covenant; thus judgment springs up as hemlock in
the furrows of the field. When we look into the tendency of this Agreement, and
withal observe the posture in which it is published, before it a Petition to
the honorable the Commons of England, and behind it a Declaration to the
People of England, in both which it is with plausible terms and Rhetorical
insinuations flourished over and set forth; we remember and make bold to put in
mind all persons, named or concerned in it, of that flying roll in Zechariahs
Vision, the length whereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits,
and the meaning of it is thus given by the Angel, This is the curse that goes
forth over the face of the whole earth; for every one that steals shall be
cut off as on this side, according to it, and every one that swears shall be
cut off as on that side, according to it. I will bring it forth, says the Lord
of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house
of him that swears falsely by my name; and it shall remain in the midst of his
house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof
Zech. 5.2, 3, 4
. And let the spreading of this roll, and the pronouncing of this curse, warn
and deter us all, that those very hands which were lift up to the most high
God, in our swearing to preserve the Government we are under, be not lift up
against, or made instruments to pull it down, lest we involve our selves
thereby in the large, lasting, and consuming curse of the roll which the Lord
of hosts undertakes to bring forth, and execute upon every one where ever,
upon the face of the whole earth, that does such a thing; so that if we fall
under this guilt, though we should make a Covenant with Death, and an Agreement
with Hell, it shall not stand; but when the overflowing scourge passes
through, we shall be trodden down by it Isa. 28.15, 18
.

And here, having so much insisted on the strongly obliging force of our Oaths
and Covenants taken, we cannot refrain our selves from expressing a little,
what great heaviness and continual sorrow we have in our hearts for the little
care that is taken by the people generally of these their Oaths and Covenants,
the common prevaricating and departing of many from the several endeavors
engaged to, in them, upon any temptation, either of advantage offered, or
danger and trouble threatened, and the remissness, backwardness, and
indifferency of spirit in all (we excuse not our selves in this) in relation to
the duties of them. But especially we know not how to hide or hold in the
sorrow and shame that, even unto horror, has filled our hearts and faces, upon
occasion of the late proceedings, both those against the secluded and
imprisoned Members of Parliament, and those against the person of the King
deceased; we not knowing how to clear them from manifest disloyalty and breach
of Covenant, and when we would comfort our selves with this, that our souls
have not come into the secrets of, or been united in any society with those
actions, but ever abhorred them; our hearts are yet faint within us, when we
consider, how, upon these proceedings, our Christian and Protestant profession,
the Way, and common Cause we have stood for, the endeavored Reformation, and
the National Covenant, we with others have entered into, are reproached: Oh
tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, ^ Sam. 1.20.
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

But having delivered our sense in this first part of the whole frame, and
general drift of the book, we proceed to that which we proposed for our second
part; the examination of the nineth Section of this Agreement, which concerns
Religion; we have seen its contrivements in humane or civil matters, let us now
see how it would despose in the matters of God; and truly in this respect we
may say to the promoters of it, as the Prophet Isaiah spoke to Ahaz. the King,
Hear ye now, is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary any
God also Isai. 7.13.
? In speaking to this Section we shall 1. dissect it, sentence by sentence,
denoting, as we go, the flaws or faults we observe in it; 2. Lay down some of
our Reasons against what we take to be the main import or project of it, to
wit, the dissettlement and free intermixture of Religion. This Section of
Religion is divided into four heads, whereof we shall examine particularly the
three first.

It is intended, Agreem. 1.
that Christian Religion be held forth and recommended as the public
Profession in this Nation. 1. How reservedly, sparingly, fearfully does this
Agreement own Religion? as if it were jealous of engaging men to it, it dare
not enjoin, no nor resolve firmly on it, only it adventures to intend it; a
word that enacts, or puts not anything in being, imports nothing but a wavering
irresolvedness and mutability. 2. How doubtfully does it hold forth Religion?
Here Is no restriction to true Christian Religion, although there are so many,
and so extremely differing ways of Religion which assume the title of
Christian; yea instead of such a necessary restriction here is a plain
implication, (in that only Popery and Prelacy are excepted from being thus held
forth,) That any Religion (Popery and Prelacy excluded) may be the public
Profession. 3. How pretendedly and merely in show does it hold forth the
profession of Christian Religion? for in the three following Heads it leaves
practice free, and what gross hypocrisy is this? If a man should propound to
himself, and declare to others that he would profess Christian Religion, but he
would leave himself a freedom to practice any way, live as his list, were not
this in him the most deliberate, wilful and perfect hypocrisy that can be
imagined? And is it not so in a Nation? yet this is the Agreements Profession.
4. Is not this holding forth of Christian Religion as the public Profession
being compared with the rest of this Section, a self-contradiction? for if none
shall be compelled to the public profession, but may cast it off if they will,
as in the second Head; and if men may both profess and practice differently
from that which (it is said) shall be publicly held forth, as in the third
Head; if this liberty be generally made use of, what becomes of the public
profession? how is it held forth? and by whom? And suppose it not grown to
that, yet this Agreement neither tells us who it intends shall hold it forth,
nor by what acts or means it shall be held forth; but on the contrary, denies
the Representatives to have the highest and final Judgment concerning things
Spiritual or Evangetical; Page 14. part. 8
and consequently it cannot be done by them and for a Church Representative, or
National Synod, or any other way of holding forth a public Profession, here
is not the least syllable, but contrariwise provisions that make it morally
impossible to be done.

Agreem. Which we desire may by the grace of God he reformed to the greatest
purity, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, according to the Word of God. 1.
Here are none nominated, encouraged, or authorized to take this work in hand,
and we apprehend the Representatives, being not to have the judgment of things
Spiritual of Evangelical, are dis-enabled to do, or set others about it. 2. But
in the three following Heads there are full promises, that men may (if they
will) live unreformed, yea lay aside the very face and profession of Religion,
or deform the Church of God in Doctrine, Worship or Discipline, without
control. 3. We have Covenanted a Reformation in all these; but is this hollow
desire, with long actual grants of the contrary following it, all the keeping
and performing of our Covenant that is intended? It is no marvel those words
are left out [according to the example of the best reformed Churches,] for such
a Reformation is this, is without example or pattern in any Church or age. 4.
It is Reformation according to the Word of God, That the Magistrate suppress
the preaching of false doctrines, and exercise of false Religion, and that he
command men to serve the Lord, according to his own institution, and bring men
to the means of their Salvation, which the following particulars deny him power
to do.

Agreem. The instructing of the people whereunto in a public way, (so it be
not cumpulsive,) as also the maintaining of able Teachers for that end, and for
the confutation or discovery of Heresy, Error, and whatsoever is contrary to
sound doctrine, is allowed to be provided for by our Representatives. 1. Here
is mention of able Teachers for the instructing of the people in Christian
Religion, but not a word of a Church or Ministry for this, or for the building
up of those that are instructed, or for the offering up of the public
Worship, the administration of the Sacraments and Discipline: Must we have none
of these things provided for? Must they be laid aside, until that faint desire,
without hands or endeavors, work out a Reformation? Or must these be dispensed
by any body? Here then is a Christian Religion without Church, Ministry,
Sacraments or Discipline. 2. Here is confutation and discovery of Heresy, etc
spoken of, but no Church Censures, or Authority placed in any to purge them out
of the Church. 3. Here is compulsive instruction prohibited; the meaning of
which we take to be, that none shall be compelled to repair to the public
meetings for instruction, or to behave themselves orderly therein; so that
neither Magistrate, parent or master shall bring those under them to the means
of their salvation, but give them the reins to run on in ignorance, and all
damnable ways. This one clause, if followed, is a lesson that may more instruct
men to irreligion and informedness, and more unteach men the Christian
Religion, then all the able Teachers, here allowed to be provided for by the
Representatives, can prevail to instruct them to it. 4. Here is not so much
care taken to promote the Religion, which is intended publicly to be held
forth, as there is of giving advantage to other ways differing from it in the
following Heads; for here the instruction of people unto the public Religion,
and providing Teachers for that end, is put off, and referred to the
Representatives; but the liberty of diserting it, and both professing, and
practicing contrary to it, is presently granted and enacted; and the Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, contrary to that liberty, are repealed.

The maintenance of which Teachers may be out of a public Treasury, and we
desire not by Tithes. For this, we being in hand with matter of Religion, and
this being but of a temporal concernment, and that our own, we shall not insist
on it: We expect to suffer in such things, and think it but suitable when our
Religion it self is thus dealt with, as in this Agreement; only seeing that in
this very page it says, No Representative shall in any mise level men's
estates, destroy property, etc. We mind it, to see that it agree with it self.

Provided, That Popery and Prelacy he not hold forth as the public way on
profession in this Nation. 1. They are so much the more beholding to this
Agreement, the ways that are not thus held forth being better provided for, as
we shall see presently. 2. Then, any or all other ways of Religion, called
Christian, are, or may, be held forth as the public way or profession,
besides Popery and Prelacy, here then is a profession of Religion of a wide
latitude, and of strange party-colored, and jarring composure, more like to
the mixture of the cup in the hand of the great Whore of Babylon, or to the
many headed and homed beast she sits on, Revel. 17. then to pure and uniform
Religion of the chaste Spouse of Christ. 3. Why are these two only excepted, is
it because these are the worst of all? doubtless there are other doctrines and
ways that are held forth among us, or may be introduced as bad as the worst
points of Popery, and ten thousand times worse then Prelacy, such as these of
the Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Arrians, Pelagians, etc. 4. Why are
they only excluded from being the public profession? If they may be allowed
to be professed and practiced, why may they not be comprehended under the
notion of the public profession, as well, at least, as some other differing
ways? It they be too dangerous or noxious for that notion, why are they not
wholly exterminated? they may hurt as well, if they be permitted, as private
profession.

That to the public Profession so held forth none be compelled by penalties,
2 Head.
or otherwise, but only may be endeavored to be won by sound doctrine, and the
example of a good Conversation. 1. To the profession of Christian Religion none
among us have been or are desired to be compelled, but it has been, and still
is judged, a necessary course to cause men that profess the Christian Religion
to carry toward it answerably, to bring men to the means of the knowledge of
it, and to restrain men from public scandalizing of it. 2. Compulsion by
Penalties, or otherwise here forbidden, may include the Ecclesiastical Censures
of the Church, the exercise of the power of parents over their children, and of
masters over their servants, in reference to duties of Religion, and the
rather, because it is said, they only may be endeavored to be won by sound
doctrine, etc. which words are exclusive of all other ways. 3. Here then (if
this should stand) men might become Atheists, Recusants, Sabbath Breakers,
Blasphemers, or what they will, and no man say to them, what do thou? The
former Court connivance of Popery, the prelatical indulgence of profaneness,
the Kings book for sports on the Lords Day so much cried out upon since this
Parliament, were but small Gnats to the swallowing down of this; a horrible
thing to be enacted in a Kingdom so generally christianized as this is. 4. Them
may no Court or Magistrate constrain men to take an oath (such as is used among
us) because in so doing he professes Christian Religion. 5. How should men be
won to Christian Religion by sound doctrine, and good Conversation, when no
provision is made to bring, or keep doctrine to be sound, and conversation to
be religious.

That such as profess faith in God by Jesus Christ (however differing in
judgment from she Doctrine, 3 Head.
Worship, or Discipline, publicly held forth as aforesaid,) shall not be
restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of their faith, and
exercise of Religion, according to their conscience. 1. Thus all the damnable
Heresies, Doctrines of Devils, Idolatrous, Superstitious, and abominable
Religions that ever have been broached, or praclised, or can be devised (if the
persons owning them will but profess faith in God by Jesus Christ) are set a
liberty in this Kingdom; nay not only granted a Toleration, but
enfranchisement, yea protection and patronage, and that in gross, without
considering or knowing what is so allowed, and taken into Tutelage. 2. Although
here is a distinction used betwixt the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline
publicly held forth, and other ways differing from them, yet the deserters
of, and contrary professors and practisers to the public profession have as
much favor granted them (as to secure practice) as they have that embrace it,
nay more. 1. None are forbidden to compel by penalties, or otherwise, to any
profession of Faith, or exercise of Religion, that is differing from the
public, how gross soever it be in it self, or opposite to it, only men may
not be compelled to the public. 2. None are prohibited to restrain any from
the public Religion, only men may not restrain from the Heterodox, or
differing ways, though never so corrupt. 3. No protection is granted to those
of the public profession; men may thrust themselves into the public
Assemblies, violate the Ordinances of them, and no remedy for it; men may
profess the public Religion at their perils, but the differing ways must be
protected. 3. It were much more to the honor of the Name and Faith or God, if
this liberty must be afforded, that men might have it without professing Faith
in God by Jesus Christ, for the worst the world will verbally profess thus much
to obtain such a liberty if they have need of it, and by their professing thus,
when as both their real prefession, and their practice denies, opposes and
reproacheth the Faith in God by Jesus Christ, the Name of God and of Christ and
the true Faith are but the more blasphemed and vilified.

Agreem. In any place (exept such as shall be set and apart for the public
worship, where we provide not for them unless they have leave.)

1. As you provide not for them, so you prohibit them not the place of the
public Worship, but rather by adding that reservation, unless they have
leave, you make them capable of it, only they must carry favor with them that
can give leave, and then ask and have.

2. If they (to wit, the dissenters from the public, and advancers of another
different profession of Religion) may have leave, and upon it enjoy the places
of public Worship, then may they by increasing their number come to justle
out the public profession, and then that which in the first head was
propounded to be held forth and recommended, cease to be the public
profession, and instead of being held forth, is put forth adoors.

3. Were this a real exeption, and might not be remitted by leave, yet it is
little or no abatement of the liberty, or prevention of the growth of a way to
e denied the public, if it may have free passage in any other place, yea if
it find followers enough (as, if it be bad enough, it is likely to do) it may
become as public as that which has that name, it being the concourse of
people, and not the place which makes any action of society public.

Agreem. So as they abuse not this liberty to the civil injury of others, or to
actual disturbance of the public peace on their parts. Civil injury then of
men, and breach of outward wordly peace, must by all means be prevented, and
rather Religion confined then it incurred, such miscarriages may nullify this
liberty, but spiritual, yea divine injury, the disturbance of the Churches, and
consciences peace and wealth must be let pass, yea protected.

Agreem. Nevertheless it is not intended to be hereby provided, that this
liberty shall necessarily extend to Popery or Prelacy. This clause (as the
former) would make a countenance of being an exception, but indeed is none; for
as it does not say, that these two shall be excluded from this liberty, so it
leaves it Arbitrary, that it may extend to them, and consequently leaves no
authority in any to restrain them from it; if any in the place of Magistracy
should go about to abridg them of this liberty, they might soon plead, where is
your authority? The Agreement prohibits to us, but never any Law forbade a
thing in these terms, it shall not necessarily be. The same, though it be not
expressed, must needs be granted of all other ways, to which this liberty is
intended; it is not necessary it should extend to this or that, because it is
not necessary that this or that should be.

And because the exceptions that we have noted by the way, upon looking into
them, appear to us to be of no reallity at all, but may be inserted as colors
and shadows to blind the eyes of men easy of belief, and to make them think
those more generally distasted and exploded ways Popery and Prelacy are quite
cashiered from having freedom, and that others are much confined by exclusion
from the places set apart for the public profession. We shall yet further
give notice to the Reader, that these pretended exceptions (as to that purpose)
are but void and frivolous terms, mere nothing, and that notwithstanding them,
Popery and Prelacy stand as free to be practiced as any other different ways,
and those other different ways are as capable (if they can but get head or
favor) of the public places, yea of the style of being held forth as the
public profession in the Nation, as any one that may seem at this day to have
the property thereof. For I. The second and third particulars of this Section
are page 27. and 28. declared to be fundamental to our Common Right, Liberty
and Safety, and there being nothing positive in them to exclude either Popery
or Prelacy from liberty and protection therein provided, or any different ways
from the public places, (as has been noted) they stand inviolably by this
Agreement entitled thereunto, and in case any Representative should take in
hand to restrain them, they may lawfully by force of arms make resistance
against the Representative, page 27. part. 10 of this Agreement; yea this being
a fundamental, all they that join in and subscribe the Agreement, bind
themselves to maintain them in it, page 28. 2. Suppose there were something in
these seeming exceptions, yet it vanishes into nothing; for if the Papists,
Prelatists, or any other, do exceed them, none can take cognizance of it, or
offer to reduce them into the limits of these exceptions, for all
Representatives are forbidden the highest and final judgment in Spiritual or
Evangelical things, and of so, then all other Judicatories and Magistrates must
needs be denied subortinate judgment or cognizance of such things, under which
all the aberrations in this matter are comprehended, yea, and by this means any
other Religion that cannot be shrouded under a Profession of Faith in God by
Jesus Christ, as Judaism, Turcism, Paganism, may yet settle it self, and enjoy
freedom amongst us by this Agreement, if it err only in Spiritual and
Evangelical things, in as much as there is none that has power of judgment
over it to suppress it. We have but a word or two more way of observation on
this Section of Religion.

We cannot but take notice, that the holding forth and recommending of
Christian Religion, as the public profession in this Nation, is laid down,
not as fundamental to our Common Right, Liberty and Safety, but only as useful
and good for the public, page 28. whereas the second and third particulars
(wherein Liberty from the profession of that Christian Religion, and for a
different profession and practice from it is provided for) are laid down as
fundamental to our Common Right, Freedom and Safety, so that by this Agreement,
Chrisrtian Religion, as to the Foundation of a Kingdom, is a stone set at
naught by these builders, though it deserve to be the head of the corner; Acts
4.11.
whilst Liberty to desert that Religion, and positively to profess and practice
in opposition to it, Liberty of Irreligion, Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy,
Sabbathbreaking, Seduction, Schism, is of the Foundation, sure the edifice must
needs be a Babel, or confusion, a principal part of the Foundation whereof is
such a Liberty as this; it must needs be a rotten building, where Liberty to
fundamental Erroe is of the Foundation.

Once more, it is said, as you see noted, that this Liberty is fundamental to
our Common Right, Freedom and Safery; but let us ask what equity there is in a
liberty to iniquity? In a liberty to dishonor and injure, the Name, Truth and
Ordinances of God, to infect and destroy the Church of Christ, and the souls of
men? What freedom is it wander and run a whoring from God, to be led captive by
ignorance, error and unrighteousness? And what safety is there to open the fold
for grievous wolves to enter in, and devour the flock, to give way to the
poisonous and eating gangrene of damnable heresy, to spread without any
corrasive? And was it noted of Israel. Judge. 5.8. They chose new gods, then was
War in the gates?

In the last we come to lay down Arguments or Reasons, some of many (that might
be insisted on) against the relaxation, or setting free of men to Atheism, and
the full liberty and protection granted to false Doctrines and Religions by
this Agreement, in this Section.

1. If the Scriptures may be our rule and judge in this matter (and to those
that admit of their binding authority and decision we only address our selves)
the sinfulness of such a Toleration, and maintenance of erroneous and
irreligious ways, will clearly appear; 1. By testimonies our of the Old
Testament, wherein there is more found for our direction, because (as we
apprehend it) the Governors of Israel, to whom the Oracles of God were then
committed, had in this case received the knowledge and worship of the true God.

1. By the Commandments which the Lord gave for the suppression of Idolatry,
and the punishing of Idolaters, Blaspemers, and Sabbath Breakers, Deuteronomy.
7.5.12.2, 3.13.1, 2. to the end. 17.2, 3, 4, 5. Jud. 2.2. Exodus 22.20.31.14.
Lev. 24.13, 14, 15, 16. Exodus 32. 26, 27. Number. 15.35.

2. By the approved and binding examples of the people of God, and of godly
Magistrates abolishing and destroying the monuments and means of Idolatry, and
executing punishments upon Idol-Priests and Worshippers, blasphemers of the
living God and profaners of the Sabbath, and commanding and causing those under
their authority to abandon superstition, and to embrace the true service of
God. Genesis 18.19.35.2, 3, 4. Exodus 32.28.1 King. 18.40. 2 King. 10, 11, 24.2
Chron. 14.2, 3, 4, 5.15.8, 12, 13, 16.19.4. 23.17.29.5, to the end. 30.5, 6,
12.31.1, 2, etc. 34.3, to 9. and verse. 32, 33.35.2, 3, etc. Ezra 10.5, 7, 8.
Neh. 13.9, 11, 17, 19. Yea Gentile Princes, being convinced of their duty to
the true God, have straily enjoined his honor and service, and mulcted the
contrary, Ezra 6.3, to 13.7.13, to 27. Dan. 3.29.

3. By condemning and reproving the Toleration of corrupt ways of Religion, 1
King. 18.21.2 Chron. 20.33. Hos. 7.8.

4. By predictions and precepts (apperataining to the times of the Gospel)
holding forth the duty of those that are in civil power to promote Religion,
and to punish the corrupters thereof by that their power, Isa. 49.29. Zech.
13.3.

And whereas some except against the validity of those precepts, presidents,
etc. as proper to the Paedagogy of the Law and the Nation of Israel, and not
binding to us now under the Gospel, we say to that, 1. Some of those commands
and practices were antecedent to the Law given by Moses, as that of Abraham,
commanding his children, Genesis 18.19.
and his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord: Genesis 35.2.
and that of Jacob, requiring not only his household, but all that were with him
(amongst whom it is supposed were the captive Shechemites taken, in the Chapter
preceding, Divines Annot. in loc.
by the sons of Jacob, who indeed were likeliest to harbor Idols) to put away
the strange gods that were among them: And it is very remarkable, that before
any Law was given by Moses for the punishing of Blasphemers and
Sabbath Breakers, yet the people of Israel apprehended, and put in ward, both
the Blasphemer, Levit. 24.12. and the Sabbath-breaker, Numb. 15.34. until the
mind of the Lord might be showed them, having so much in them by the light of
nature, and the rules of the moral Law they were acquainted with, that such
were to be punished. 2. We have no other Institution of Magistracy under the
Gospel then that which was before, nor find we in the new Testament any
abrogation or alteration of what was before time committed to the Magistrate,
but civil authority continues Gods Ordinance by virtue of that appointment from
the beginning; neither is any thing detracted from his commission that was at
first in it. 3. No Reason can be assigned, why those evils in Religon should be
then punished, and not now; they are no less sins now, then they were then;
they are as dishonorable, and hateful to God, and as baneful to the souls of
men, now, as they were then. The Reasons given for their punishment then (as
that they are very ensnaring if allowed to be among the servants of God, Iud.
2.3. Exodus 34.12, 13. that they tended to turn men away from the Lord their
God, and to thrust them out of his way, and that to punish them is to put the
evil away from the people, and to procure that all Israel may hear and fear,
and do no more such wickedness, Deuteronomy. 13.5, 11.) they are moral, and still
obtain strength: Error and false Religion have not lost their ensnaring nature,
nor are men now more wise and steadfast in the truth then they have been. 4.
What is now fundamental to common right, liberty, and safety, was so in those
former days, and we may not think that the Lord would have given such strict
and standing Laws to his people, in matters of Religion, if liberty therein had
been indeed fundamental to common right, freedom and safety, as this Agreement
pretends.

2. By authorities out of the New Testament.

1. The description of the Magistrates power and duty extends to the
procurement of good, and avengement of evil indefinitely without any
restriction; and there being no limitation of this good, and evil, in this or
any other text, we must needs hold to that approved rule of interpreting
Scripture, which is not to distinguish, or limit the sense, when the holy Ghost
does not.

2. The duty of Christians, in relation to their Rulers, is, to pray for them,
(to wit, for their Coversion, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2
as appears by v. 3, 4) that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: A Christian Magistrate then as such (and consequently by
the power of his Magistracy) is to assist, and promote, not only honesty and
justice toward man, but godliness and piety toward God.

3. Parents and Masters of Families, whose power is of the same nature (that
is, civil and external) with that of the Magistrate, 2 John v. 10.
they are enjoined to exclude and expel out of their houses false Teachers, and
then by Analogy, or proportion, the Magistrates are to prosecute such, and
exterminate them out of their state. No Reason can be yielded why the less
extensive and inferior power should be thus tied, and empowered, to oppose
Heretics, and not the larger and superior of the Magistrate: only the Apostle
might forbear to mention it of the Magistrates, they being at that time
generally unchristian.

4. The Holy Ghost foretells, that those ten Kings which do first give their
power and strength unto the beast, and do make war with the Lamb, being
overcome by him, Rev. 17.12, 13, 14, 16
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and shall burn her with fire; that is, shall destroy the Roman
Antichrist, or Rome Antichristian; and that not only as the beast, having civil
dominion, but as the great Whore, (that is) as a corrupter of Religion, by lies
and idolatry; Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
and a seducer of the Kings and inhabiters of the earth to her false Religion:
But how shall they lawfully do this, if Kings and States have no sword, power,
or duty to command, enforce, and punish, in the cause of Religion.

3. Having thus (we hope) sufficiently confirmed the unwarrantableness of such
a manumission, and protection of irreligion, false doctrine, and perverse ways,
by Scripture authority, we shall for a close tender to consideration:

1. How can those Caveats, given us by our blessed Savior, and his Apostles,
Matthew. 7.15.
To beware of false Prophets; To take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, Cap. 16 6
and of the Sadduces; To mark them which cause divisions, Romans 16.17.
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine received, Gal. 1.9.
and to avoid them: If any man preach any other Gospel, Phil. 2.2.
then that we have received, to Anathematize him: To beware of dogs, 1 John.
5.21.
evil workers, and of the concision: To keep our selves from Idols: and many
others How can the observation, and the practice of these, and a subscription,
and grant of such a liberty, consist together?

2. How can we do this, and yet be true to our Covenant, wherein we stand
bounden sincerely, really and constantly to endeavor, in our several places and
callings, Artic. 1, and 2.
the Reformation of Religion, in the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, in
doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government: To bring the Churches of God, in
the three Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, and Catechizing; That we shall
in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaness, and whatsoeven shall be
found to be contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness?

3. In doing this thing shall we not fail, desert, and give up that Cause for
which defensive Arms were taken up by the Parliament and Kingdom; for the
maintenance of which so many lives have been adventured, so much blood has
been spilt, such miseries have been waded through in the late Wars, yea, so
many prayers put up, and Fasts public and private observed, one main (if not
the first and principal) part of which Cause was the Vindication and Defense of
Religion? See Declarat. of both Kingdoms, 1643.
And shall we thus improve and requite all the wonderful successes and
deliverances wherewith the Lord of hosts has owned, and pleaded this Cause
for us, and answered our desires therein?

4. What advantage would this liberty give to our, and religions enemies, to
open their mouths in reproaches, and blasphemy against our way; who have
formerly objected against us, That our design was to promote private fancies,
to introduce a multiformity of Religion, and to subvert Magistracy; and whom we
have charged with a cup filled up to the brim of Apostasy, Atheism, Decla. of
both Kingdoms. p. 4.
Idolatry, Blasphemies; and Profaness?

5. Shall we not asperse all the petal Laws of the Land, and all the judicial
proceedings that have been upon them since the Reformation against Seminary
Priests, Jesuits, and Papists, or any other, justly suffering in matter of
Religion, as acts of highest injustice, being against the Fundamentals of
common Right, Freedom, and Safety?

Lastly, Will not this Liberty, reduced into practice, be in danger, not only
to deface, defile, rend, and crumble to nothing our Churches, but to fill the
Kingdom full of Factions and Tumults, and tend to the overthrow of the
Magistrates power in civil things, and that men having once got head, and
immunity in the things of God, will proceed to introduce a lawlesness and
impunity in humane Interests; the Commandments of both Tables being so united
and enwreathed in one, that they stand and full together, James 2.10.
and the violation of one has an influence upon all; and it being so easy for
men willing to err, to entitle any civil extravagancy, not only to Conscience,
but to Faith and Religion?

We have thus, in the uprightness of our hearts, delivered our Judgment
concerning this Agreement, and Subscription to it, not affecting Division, or
Faction, but vehemently desiring and seeking a religious Peace, and right
agreement of the people; not intending any disrespective reflection upon the
persons of any, but heartily desiring the true honor and happiness of all; and
endeavoring, according to our places, to prevent the great evils that we
pre-apprehend will ensue, if this Agreement should be carried on. As for us, we
shall not (we trust) sin against the Lord, 1 Samuel 12 23.
in ceasing to pray for you our dear Flocks, and the rest of the Churches of
Christ in these Kingdoms of England and Ireland, that he would direct your
course in this case of so weighty and fundamental an importance: and we have
herein endeavored to show you the good and the right way: And having laid
before you those Grounds upon which we profess our disagreement and dissent to
the Book called the Agreement of the People: We testify the same by
underwriting our names.

Richard Heyrick Warden of Christ's College in Manchester. Richard Hollinworth
Fellow of the said College. William Walker Minister there. Alexander Horrocks
Minister in the Dean parish. John Tilsley Pastor at Dean. William Alt Ministers
of the Gospel at Bury. Toby Forness. Ministers of the Gospel at Bury. Robert
Bathe Pastor of the Church at Rachdale. James Hyet Pastor at Croston. William
Ward Min. of the Gospel at Walton. Thomas Johnson Pastor of Halsal. Edward
Woolmer Min. of Flixton. Thomas Cranage Pastor of Brindle. James Wood Pastor at
Asshton in Makerfield. Edward Fleetwood Pastor at Kirkam. John Angier Pastor of
Denton. Thomas Pyke Pastor of Radcliff. John Harrison Pastor of the Church at
Asshton-underline. Jonathan Scholefield Min. at Heywood Thomas Holland Pastor
of Ringley. Robert Constantine Pastor of Oldham. William Meek Pastor of
Salford. James Walton Min. of Blakely. David Durie Preacher at Gorton. John
Walker Preacher of the Word. Samuel Joanes Min. at Hool. Henry Welsh Min. of
Gods Word at Chorley. Thomas Crompton Min. at Astley. Peter Bradshaw Min. at
Cockey. Isaac Ambrose pastor of Preston. James Bradshaw pastor of the Church at
Wigan. John Fogge pastor of Liverpool. Richard Maudsley pastor at Ellens.
Robert Yates pastor at Warrington. William Dun Min. of Ormeskirk. Thomas
Norman pastor at Newton. Paul Latham pastor of Standish. William Leigh pastor
at Newchurch Will: Garner preacher of the Gospel Thomas Whitehead pastor at
Halton Robert Shaw Min. at Cockeram. Edward Gee pastor at Eccleston. Will:
Brownsword pastor at Douglas. Christopher Edmundson pastor at Garstang. Peter
Atkinson Min. at Ellel. Richard Walker Min. at VVarton. William Smith Min. at
Overkolles. Robert Seddon min. of the Gospel at Alker. Robert Cunningham
preacher at Hamilton. John Fisher pastor at Bispham. John Jaques pastor of
Bolton. John Syll pastor of Gressingham. John Harper Rich. Goodwin
Ministers of the Gospel at Bolton in the Moors.


March 6. 1648.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.

FINIS.
(...) additions of grace and glory into Gods Children, Rev. 2.10.
and therefore the chief marks of Gods favor: As in our gracious King Charles,
Dan. 12.10.
who was also taken away from the evil to come, in Gods mercy unto him; which
thou even thou, unto the shame and confusion of thy face (although thou have
harned it) shall see in the approaching day of Englands calamity, which in a
great part is procured and hastened by thy infernal counsels; thou needst not
to have given that Scripture such a violent stretch so to streine it as to make
it reach from Assyria unto England, or to travail so far for a reason why
His Majesty should not have a royal interment with His Mauncesters; the causes
were nearer thee, Let me assign them:

First, it had been a Condemnation of your selves to have allowed him solemn
and Kingly Funerals, unto whom you gave so unjust and cruel a death, that
were to build up what you were resolved to destroy.

Next, you could not but know, that the neighborhood of his sacred earthly
remains must needs refricate the scarce skinn'd sorrows of London; when they
should have such a standing and still present Monument of their former
happinesses, in His Majesty's peaceable Government; and of their new misery in
your Tyranny, which would serve also (this being the place of the greatest
confluence) to recrude the grief of the whole Kingdom, and probably beget
such compunction and reluctance in both city and Kingdom, as would testify it
self, by their attempt to cast you down headlong from your new and wickedly
acquired Dominion.

Another reason was, lest the nearness of his Body whom you murdered, might
too frequently offer unto you the horror of your Guilt, and redouble unto you
those inward cheques and lashings of your Consciences (which you cannot be
without) and so impede and trouble your Counsels.

The Devil at the Oracle of Apollo of Daphne could not give his Answers unto
Julian the Apostate, Theod. l. 3. c. 9.
who sent to consult him about his undertakings against the Persians, so long
as the body of the Martyr Babylas lay by him, so it is to be presumed that the
same Spirit (which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.2.
powerfully works in the Children of Disobedience) might be hindered in his
cooperation and influence upon those unto whom he has consigned the chief
exercise of his power in our English world, if King Charles his sacred relics
were lodged so nigh unto them as Westminster, and therefore Windsor was near
enough.

But from the view of His Majesty's undeniable matchless Virtues, let us pass
unto that of His Sufferings:

Sinful envy never fails to give a malicious attendance upon virtue, which
by how much the more it is illustrious, with so much the greater rancour does
she dog and persecute it, and therefore many are the troubles of the righteous;
and no (mere) man had ever more, then righteous King Charles: behold and see if
any sorrows and sufferings were like unto His. See one of the most potent
Monarchs of Europe, loved at home, and feated abroad, most injuriously and
strictly Imprisoned, debarred from the most dear society of the most virtuous
and best Wife, from the converse and sight of his most sweet and hopeful
Children, from the attendance of his most faithful Servants, from Gods house,
from Gods public worship and all Gods Servants, fore'd to cohabite with
Beasts, brutish, savage, and wicked Men, and these to be made the Instruments
of their cruelty unto him, who were his sworn Subjects and Servants, upon whom
all civil and divine obligations of duty and affection unto His Majesty
rested, and that upon pretensions of Religion and Liberty, of which He was the
truest and most undoubted Defender; to lie under the weight and wounds of so
many scandals, reproaches, wants, and miseries; besides the most grievous sense
of the sufferings of his Kingdoms and best Subjects, to be daily tortured with
so many iterated, unreasonable Propositions, and insolent Demands, to be racked
out of his undoubted Royal Rights, to make so many Concessions and such great
Condescentions in his propensness unto peace, which notwithstanding his Enemies
never meant; to be tormented (if it wre possible) unto perjury, sacrilege, and
Acheisme; and to have no other Conditions propounded for the Enjoyment of his
Crowns and Kingdoms, then that which the Devil made unto our Savior, All
these will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me; to offer his
own (that which never was theirs) to deny God, which God gave him to
acknowledge and worship him: These must needs be sorrows and sufferings as
beyond expression, so above our conception; most terrible tests, and trials of
all his virtues; certainly no man had ever more, and more strict examinations
of Gods graces in him, all which he fully answered with a learned and
invincible piecy; for in all these who ever heard him murmr, repine, or
charge God foolishly? who ever heard him accuse, rail at, or threaten his most
confirmed Foes? with Job, Job 16.20.
his eyes still powered out tears unto God, whose justice in their greatest
injustice he acknowledged, and although he vindicated his own Innocence,
(having wherewith to justify himself before man) from theirs; yet not before
God, he cleared the equity of his judgment upon him, for acting against his
Conscience in the Earl of Straffords death.

But it was the great and crying guilt of these Nations sins ( Englands
principally) which made this righteous man fall into the pits of his
Adversaries, to ripen Gods judgment upon this Nation, by that great addition
of guilt [the shedding of his innocent bloud] who had so many characters of
Gods supreme power and spiritual graces upon him, as must needs make this
Crime committed against God, and draw his speedy and unavoidable vengeance upon
them for it.

God usually punishes one sin by suffering Sinners to fall into others, and
those customary sins accompanied with senslessnesse and impenitency, which
fills up the measure of sin brimfull for judgment to take it off: so that this
pious Prince fell in the very conruption of Christianity, which is of far
more malign aspect, and has a more malicious influence of impiety upon the
actions of men then Atheism it self, for then men profess that they know
God, jet in their works they deny him; using the name of God and Religion, as
Conjurers int heir Incantations to perpetrate those things are most contrary
unto God, and destructive unto Religion; for as the Devil never does more hurt
then when he appears in the likeness of an Angel of light; so are men never
so mischievous, as when they drive on wicked designs under the show of
Godliness.

Englands former sins which caused this Gods just dereliction, and the
abandoning them up unto greater, were their exceeding luxury, in turning the
grace of God (temporal favors) into wantonness, the long continuance of their
peace, the increase of their Trade, riches, and plenty, begot in them a
general insolency and pride, so that when they Waxed fat, like Jesurun, they
kicked against God, in the Authority and regard due unto his principal
Officers, the Prince, and the Priest: Hence the people of England (in their
generality) became self-willed, heady, high-minded, and incorrigible, they
slandered the footsteps of Gods Anointed, smote him-with the tongue, contended
with Gods Priests; and usurped that sacred Jurisdiction which God had delegated
unto them, as those Conspirators did ( Ye take too much upon you ye Sons of
Levi, since all the people of the Lord are holy) under pretense of then
Ambition of the Clergy; and being like Elihu's now bottels, ready to burst,
with that liquor or flatuous and superficial knowledge instilled into them by
the giddy preachments, and undigested, swelling, and tedious prayers of their
Lecturers, (who reduced all Religion unto lip-worship, and canting Scriptures.)
Hence came it to pass that contemning the old paths, the truth of the
reformation in the Protestant Religion they contended unto blood to corrupt by
their phanatick Alterations, the pure Doctrine and Evangelical discipline
established in the Church of England, to effect which with the more ease, they
adventure upon sacrilege, to carry on that, they must pull down Episcopacy,
(the fence of the Church) and here the King, as a nursing Father interposing,
they tender Him unable by encroaching upon his Prerogatives, quarrelling him,
seize upon his Strengths, Arm, fight against him, Imprison, and then Murder
Him; which last Act of Rebellion, though the greatest part of the first
Engagers may be thought never to have intended, yet they may see the first
violation of their Obedience due unto His Majesty punished, by a guilt (thus
far) of his Innocent, blood, that that power which they raised, spilt it; So
dangerous it is to vary from a Christian Principle, or to do evil that good
may come of it, God only having power to direct, limit, and determine any
evil action: so that look over the pedigree of Englands sins through the
several descents thereof, and you will find it thus, peace begot wealth, that
plenty, that pride, that vanity, that curiosity, that contention, that hate of
the Clergy, that sacrilege, that the downfall of Bishops, that the contempt of
the KING, that War, that Imprisonment, and that the murder of the King, a
murder, the most horrid murder that ever the Sun saw, for Subjects to take
away their KING's life; without the prescription of a single example, or a law;
nay, even against all laws divine and humance, to Try him after the form of
a Judiciary proceeding, this is to entitle God unto the greatest sin; to
establish iniquity by a Law, and to make God such as themselves: Thus the Jews
dealt with our Savior, Ioh. 19.7.
We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die, because he made himself the
Son of God, although there was no such Law; but a new-made Law, a Junto-law,
Straffords law, Canterburies law, the KING's law (consequent Laws, Laws
without names or cognizance) made because He was KING. Neither does their Power
any more prove the equity of this fact (the great scandal of the Christian
name, and height of Anabaptistical fury) then the Devils power (which is from
God) does justify his malice (which is from himself.)

They have now indeed made King Charles a Glorious King, proved him glorious in
his Personal virtues, glorious in his divine Grace, but most Glorious in the
Christian Constancy of his Glorious sufferings for Gods Cause, the true
Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the three Kingdoms, thus
has God extorted a truth from them; for this spoke they not of themselves, but
(God forceing their testimony) they prophesied.

As we have seen His Majesty's sufferings, and their causes our sins, so let us
reflect upon their punishment; as the Springs from which our sorrows should
arise. l'it. Constable. l. 4. c. 29.
The exceeding avarice and hypocrisy (two noted Court sins with which the
greatest Christian Prince Constantine was abused) of the State-Grandees, the
deep pits wherein they laid the fatal snares into which pious King CHARLES
fell, will be visibly punished, for God will not be mocked. The pride, vanity,
sacrilege, rebellion, and the cruel murder of His Majesty will have
particular judgments levelled against these sins; every man's sin even of
those who have fought for His Majesty who have yet fought against him by their
sins has given force unto this great stroked and wound given unto these
Kingdoms in His Majesty's death; and therefore ought every man to proportion
his sorrow unto his sins. As King Josiah from Judah, so the strong Barricadoe
King Charles is taken away betwixt Gods judgments, and this Kingdom, the
great and wide Inlet of all misery is made by his death, could our sorrows
answer them, like a Torrent, it would over flow all the banks of reason, and
grow too big to be carried away by the channels of our senses: behold every
spring of Jeremiah and Judahs sorrow open, to send forth these flowing streams
of affliction upon us, and also arise from the same head; The breath of our
Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their pice, of whom we said,
Under his shadow we shall live among the Heathen.

Those heavy judgments which the Prophet Jeremiah foresaw impending, and
after came to pass by King Josiahs death, are in agreat part by King Charles
his death, Lam. 1.10. and 2.7.
already come upon us. Gods house his beautiful house is laid maste, the
Heathen have entered into the Sanctuary, they have made a noise in the house of
the Lord as in the day of a solemus Feast: So that they who in the beginning
pretended God, Religion, the Church, [their Cause] have dealt with us as that
Faction among the Jews who called themselves The Zealous in the War with
Titus did under pretense of defending Religion, Joseph. Bell. Jud.l. 2. c. 12.
and the Law, they possessed themselves of the Temple, yet were themselves the
first who put fire with their own hands into the holy places.

How has the avarice and carnal interests of the Teachers of these times
corrupted the purity of our Religion, Lam. 2.14.
as Judahs, so Englands only Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for
her, and they have not discovered her iniquity, 4.13.
to turn away her captivity, but have ^^ene for her false burdens and causes
of banishment; they have shed the blood of the just (K. Charles) in the midst
of her. 1.5.
Englands greatest Adversaries are chief, 5.8.
and her Enemies prosper; Servants do bear rule over us, and there is none to
deliver us out of their hand. 4.5.


They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, 5.12.
they that were brought up in ^ear let embrace dunghils. Princes are hanged by
their hands, and the faces of the Elders are not honored. War, desolation,
and famine, with their sad effects, foretold in these Lamentations, appear in
our Horrison already like Elijahs little Cloud, which will shortly overspread
our whole English firmament; and all these calamities have and will fall upon
us, 5.16.
because the Crown is fulne from our Head; 1.9.
the British Josiah K. Charles is taken from us, and we have no Comforter; and
how great and just Causes of our sorrows are all these Calamities: But let
this sorrow have the full advantage in its fall, (to add motion unto all the
turning wheels of our afflicting griefs) the fall from our great happiness in
His Majesty's Government: Let London, let England, let Scotland, let Ireland,
let every of them Remember (as Jerusalem did) in the days of her afflictions
and her miseries, 1.7.
all the pleasant things that she had in the days of old. All the pleasant
things they had in the blessed days of King Charles his blessed Reign, the
glory and truth of her Religion, the just execution of her Laws, her peace,
her riches, her plenty, her liberty at home, and her protection and honor
abroad, 2.15.
England was the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the while earth. The
Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have
believed that the Adversary and Enemy should have entered into the Gates of
(our) Jerusalem, London, that Churches should be turned into stables, Gods
Houses made Coures of Guands, the Royal Palaces made Garrisons, the Tithes
(the portion of Gods Ministers) made the Soldiers salary, that the Law should
be turned into wormwood, our Religion and, Liberty measured out unto us by the
Pikus length, the Decisions of the Sword become the Principles of Faith, and
that (:which is the Cause of all this) mechanique Persons, Trades men (who will
certainly mar, never can mend so great concernments, they never before
handled, or were acquain-with) the sole Moderators of Public affairs, and
the chief Princes and Potentates of our Kingdom.

But now the glory is departed from (our) Israel, 1.1.
the Ark of God is taken, and how is England become a Widow? made a prey unto
cruel people, and skillful to destroy, who daily force and prostitute her unto
their wicked purposes: for these things let England (and every true-hearted
Englishman) say, I I weep, 1.16.
mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the Comforter (King
CHARLES) that should relieve my soul, is far from me. The breath of our
Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, etc. The life of our Religion, of our
Laws, of our Liberties, is taken from us; the Image of Gods power in supreme
Authority, Indemnity, and Inviolability, is taken from us, our Physician, our
nursing Father, our Comforter, our Protector, is taken from us, and for our
sins was taken in their pits, so that now we want the Wings of his protection
among these Heathen among whom we live; we are now made very Slaves unto the
worst of Heathen, a People without God, without Faith, without Law, without
Rule, without Reason, without Humanity, without all these, and whose unrully
will only, is unto them all these. These calamities are all fallen upon us,
because The breath of our Nostrils, etc. pious King Charles is taken from us
like Elias in a fiery Chariot, Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 73.
(or as Conctantine the Great after his death was impressed on a Coin plucked
up by a divine hand) into Heaven, that his eyes might not see, nor his
righteous soul be afflicted with all that evil which is to come upon us, to
consume us; woe unto us for we have sinned. These are but the contracted heads
of those miseries which we shall all read over, in the vast volumes of our
approaching woes; and justly bespeaks such sorrows as might transform us into
Niobes, make our heads rivers of sorrows, and our eyes fountains for
continual tears.

The Land in mercy look upon us, and wipe away these tears from our eyes, and
their Causes, our sins from our souls; and since the blood of the Martyrs is
the seed of the Church, in mercy unto his Church restore the seed of his Martyr
King Charles the first unto the Government of these Kingdoms, that Religion,
Peace, and Liberty, may be restored unto us: I conclude these ours, Lam. 5.21,
22.
at the Prophet does his Lamentation, Turn thou unto us, o Lord, and we shall
be turned; renew our days as of old, if thou have not utterly rejected us:
hear our prayers O Lord for thy Sons sake, unto whom with the Holy Ghost be
ascribed, etc.

FINIS.

