For the King and both Houses of Parliament. BEING The Case of John Pollard of
Steeple in ESEX truly stated, and the cruelty and injustice of his Oppressors
fully declared and laid before you, to do justice therein, and execute true
judgment, and relieve the oppressed.
IN the year 1657. I John Pollard was summoned to appear before the Barons of
the Exchequer by Henry Robinson Priest of Mayland, in the County of Essex,
whereunto I procured my appearance to be entered, and because my Answer to the
said Priests Bill could not be accepted without an Oath, I was afterward
arrested upon an Attachment of Contempt for not answering, and thereupon was
committed to the County Goal, and there continued a Prisoner fourteen Months
and upwards, that is to say till Michaelmas Term, in which Term I was removed
from thence by a Habeas Corpus issuing out of the Upper Bench Court, and was
thereupon committed to the prison of the Marshalsea by the procurement of one
Benjamin Maddox an Impropriator of Tithes of part of the Parish called Steeple,
where my outward being is; and on the first of February following, a
Declaration was left with the Doorkeeper of the said prison, for me to give my
answer to, wherein the said Maddox demanded threescore pounds of debt for the
creble value of Tithes for one year, the Rent being but about fifty pounds a
year, at two shillings in the pound, which is five pounds in all; Whereupon
before the end of the said Term I repaired to Thomas Jekills chamber, Attorney
for the said Maddox, and he being not there, I left my answer in writing with
his Clerk, which he received, and told me it would be as well, as if I had
given it his Master; Yet notwithstanding the said Attorney soon after sued out
an Execution to the Sheriff at the suit of the said Maddox, whereby the Sheriff
has taken from me twenty two dairy Cowes, worth one hundred and four pounds,
for five pound Tithes; And the Chief Justice Glin being informed of the said
Jekills proceedings toward me, He said, Strange, this cannot be: Then the said
Glin asked Thomas Iekill who had confessed what he had done, then Glin asked
Jekill whether I had given him a Plea in my own person; Jekill answered, that I
did; Then said Glin, You should not have taken his Cows; for if he would not
have an Attorney, you should have taken his own plea: and then Glin ordered
that my own plea should be taken, and that the Judgment should bevacated, and
that the suit should go to Trial the next Assizes, and that I should have my
Cows again all that were unsold, and those that were sold the money should
remain in the Sheriffs hands till further Order: in stead of which Order the
Clerk drew up one which was opposite to it; so I went to Westminster Hall the
next morning again, and there was Jekill and one of the Judges whispering
together; a little after came in another Judge, and then that other Judge with
Jekill and the other Judge whispering together till Glin came, then Glin and
the other two Judges whispered together a season, and when they had done I
spoke to Glin to this effect, Thou made a very good Order yesterday, but they
have abused thy Order, and have drawn up a contrary thing in stead of it: Then
said Glin to me, Your plea cannot be taken in person, nor the Judgment cannot
be vacated, nor it cannot go to Trial at the Assizes; Thus John Glin made one
Order one morning, and the next morning made it void again: and so because I
could not fee an Attorney (the use of whom was first appointed for them that
were sick, or beyond Seas and could not appear in their own persons according
to the summons) therefore have I lost the value of 104. pounds for five pounds
Tithes.

Not long after one Matthias Armiger a Farmer of part of the Tithes of Steeple
Grainge aforesaid, seeing the said Maddox have such success in making a prey
on my estate, was encouraged to get what he could of me also, and while I was a
Prisoner in the Upper Bench, where I remained five months and one week, the
said Armiger sent a Declaration against me for two hundred eighty and five
pounds, for two years Tithes of a Farm, being but a little above two hundred
pounds a year Rent in the whole, though formerly Tithes were paid but for three
parts of the said Farm in Steeple to him, the Tithes of 3 parts of which
amounts to about thirty pounds for two years Tithes, for which the said Armiger
caused to be taken from me thirty five Cows and bullocks worth one hundred
twenty three pounds and ten shillings, which is seventeen pounds and ten
shillings more then the Award made at the Assizes by the Jury: and the said
Armiger sued for the Tithes of the whole Farm. And one Charles Nuttall Attorney
to the said Armiger and two more men swore that the said Amiger had right to
the Tithes of the whole Farm, upon which I was cast for the whole Farm an
hundred pounds.

And the next morning, my cause being again called at the same Assizes before
another Judge, the same witnesses came against me, and I charged the witnesses
before the Judge of false swearing, and did desire that the under Sheriff might
be called, and did produce my Declaration which showed why my Cows were taken
away by Maddox, and the Judge took it and read it, and did confess that it was
clear, that it was for one part of the Tithes of the whole Farm that Maddox
sued for, and upon the same reason Armiger ought to sue but for three parts.
Then the witnesses and one man did whisper together, then the Judge asked them
whether they did sue for the whole or for three parts, and then they answered
but for three parts, and the Jury brought in their virdict for three parts, one
hundred and six pounds, although the other Judge and Jury gave him but one
hundred pounds for the whole. And thus it may be noted, that Armigers witnesses
that swore one day before one Judge that Armiger had right to the Tithes of the
whole Farm, the next day before another Judge, being on their oaths, denied
what they had sworn to, and said he had right but to three parts. And I
declaring against Armigers Attorney for his false swearing, the Judge said I
was upon the catch.

Also in the year 1660. the said Armiger brought another action against me
(being a Prisoner in the Fleet) and he demanded one hundred ninety and two
pounds for one years Tithes of the whole Farm, the Tithes of three parts of
which Farm for one year comes to about fifteen pounds, for which he caused to
be taken twenty five Cows and Bullocks worth about fourscore and five pounds.

So that for fifty pounds Tithes which was for less then three years, they
have taken Cows, Bullocks and one Bull, to the number of four score and two in
all, all which are valued to be worth three hurdred twenty two pounds, and
returned nothing again, and the said Armiger keeps me and my Brother prisoners
in the Fleet besides.

These things are laid before you who are empowered to do Justice and equity,
seriously to weigh and consider, that you may show mercy to the oppressed, and
remove this unreasonable oppression which cries in the Land, that these heavy
burdens and this sad bondage may not always lie upon the back of the Innocent.

John Pollard.
29. of the 4 th. Month, 1661.

