THE POOR MAN'S MITE, Unto the more large CONTRIBUTIONS of the LIBERAL, At this
day freely added, in Testimony of that respect which is born unto the faithful
and their interest, as it is laid up and hid in Jesus.

BRIEFLY DISCOVERING, 1. The vanity of that rejoicing, which seems to glory in
any thing save the Lord. 2. What is required of all that expect to have the
form of the Lords house revealed unto them. 3. That however the chief
Cornerstone may be rejected, none other foundation can no man lay. 4. That as
Christ shall appear, so with him shall the interest of the second or new
Creation, appear with him in glory. 5. A Postscript, or Additional word to the
Reader, occasioned by the a late revived noise of Uniformity, or national
Conformity to the principles of some men.


London, Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley. 1659.

THE POOR MAN'S MITE.
SINCE the late wonderful appearance of wisdom and power from on high,
bringing down the haughtyness of insulting arrogant flesh; presenting to view
the secret devouring Contrivances of the old enemy, which under a new name and
pretense of doing the good formerly left undone, the more covertly intended the
accomplishment of the things they would have done. So many have been the
valuable and worthy Testimonies of the faithful that are gone before me, That
at this time my self, of all others, had least encouragement to contribute my
mite. And were it not that a more then ordinary sense of the vanity that may be
written upon man, (as man) in his very best Estate, and of the unwearied
endeavors of the great adversary of Light and Truth, to obstruct its dawnings
and breakings forth upon the Children of men, is stirred up in my heart; I
should have been altogether silent: but for that from both these, to wit, the
vanity of man, and the continued dispight of the enemy, no less then occasions
of Godly jealousy, if not of fears and doubts, is administered to both the
youthy and the more aged Christian (though I confess the same, with exceeding
weariness of mind and meekness of spirit, ought to have its entertainment,
even in the very thoughts of a man) I am as one in some degree awakened, and
made willing, in tenderness and faithfulness of heart at this time, to offer a
few things to the serious consideration of the faithful, with whom though I
seek not for what may gratify a carnal interest, cannot but hope to find at
least a tincture of that heavenly Spirit of love, which rather helps to
improve, then reject the smallest appearance of true love and respect to them,
and their everlasting concerns, though it proceed from one of the meanest of
all their Fathers family.

The first thing offered is, That of God is Christ made unto his people
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, to the end that if any
would glory, they should glory in the Lord.

The infinite Father of Wisdom, Grace, whose name is the Lord, and will not
give his glory to another, foreseeing the evil that would be springing up in
the heart of man, to the causing of him to turn aside, and depart from the
living God, by an Essay to become Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption to its self, was therefore pleased in much wisdom, Prove. 8.
to place the Fountain of all durable Wisdom, Riches and Righteousness in his
Son, as a life occult or hid with him, to whom the name of a Redeemer belongs,
in whose presence every knee shall bow, or smite together, and every tongue
confess to God, that this is He in whom all fullness dwells.

From whence proceeds a loud voice of admonition and caution unto all the
Children of men, to be careful, lest at any time they should be tempted to
depart from the Fountain of living waters, and hew out to themselves Cisterns,
yea broken Cisterns, that can hold no water; which two are evils commonly
committed at once: for no sooner do men begin to hew out Cisterns to
themselves, but at the same time they are found departing from the living
Spring and Fountain of Life; but who are found in the practice thereof, seldom
escape the evil of their doings: know therefore and see, O all ye inhabitans of
this Isle, That it is an evil thing and a bitter to forsake the Lord.

For the evil of our own distrustful imaginations will corect us, and our
backslidings shall reprove us: for what has the Redeemed to do in the way of
Egypt or Assyria, or with the waters of Shihor, to drink in the shallow and
corrupted streams thereof? Is not the Fountain opened, whereunto all that
thirst may come, and he that has no money nor price, may come and receive
freely of that fullness, which is to make him fruitful in a dry Land?

But Poor man having lost his first image, wherein he was created, as in a
posture meet to receive a more lasting and durable comelyness from God, had he
with patience waited for the bringing forth thereof (though he be not Ignorant
of his present depravity, and from whence he is fallen) yet such is the pride
of his heart, that finding no price in himself, that will render him
acceptable, rather chooses to trust to and live upon the petty waterings of
some borrowed accomplishment, then give the least reception to the water of
Life, because it is freely offered: which ungrateful and pernicious principle
opens the largest door of entrance into the heart of man, for the grand opposer
of grace and truth, as it came by Jesus Christ, that is imaginable; and is to
be lamented, as one of the forest evils that can happen to a Nation or People,
that in the day of their visitation have not hearts to understand, nor wills to
receive or affect the things that concern their peace: and I could be glad that
even this were less the sin of this Nation, then the many broken Cisterns of
late hewed out and found in it seems to declare: wherefore it highly concerns
us, even now ere it be too late, whilst we are upon the wheel, to cease from
man whose breath is in his nostrils, and unfainedly to return from the evil of
our former ways, and to make our ways and our doings good, lest by our
further abuse of the grace and patience of God, we at last become as vessels
utterly moved, or as Jeremies Bottle, that having past the trial of both wheel
and furnace, being then broken, cannot be made whole again.

2. That, if Israel shall be ashamed of, and return from their iniquities, the
Lord will show them the form of his house, for his Arm is not shortened that it
cannot save, but our sins separate betwixt our God and us: And if after a
strict enquiry made for the sin of Israel: in the day when the Lord alone had
been their wisdom and strength, it be found that the thoughts we had of our
selves or others (who were but instruments, not the cause of our deliverances)
beyond what ought to have been thought, are none of the smallest of our
offenses, how ought all the Lords people, though of different judgments and
persuasions, to be one, even in a lamenting this, and all other our evils
committed against the Lord, that yet spares us, as a man spares his son that
serves him, and to be provoking one another to walk answerable to the
wonderful mercies conferred upon us, least the Lords returning to visit us with
favor amongst men be mis improved, and by agravating our former disobedience,
impatience, and ingratitude, a worse thing happen unto us?

And now ye honorable ones whom the Lord (we hope in mercy to your selves and
us) has restored to your former station or places of trust; Though it be
Judged that you have not wanted remembrances on the Lords behalf at this day,
yet its also hoped that it will not be an offense to you (especially the truly
meekned and humbled ones among you) to hear, though from a babe, that if with
full purpose of heart ye resolve to decline the evils of the Times past, when
men acted partly for God and partly for themselves, and become entire and true
to the interest of God and the faithful; that with him it is to show you the
form of his house, who will not only be found amongst you in so doing, but in
the day when he shall come to make up his Jewels, and to enquire for what
honor has been done to Mordecai for his fidelity to the King of Kings, he
will crown you as wise Master Builders; and even now whilst ye are a building,
if ye keep close to him in your undertakings, will enable you to carry on his
work against all the Tobias's, and Sanballats of this age, who doubtless by
as much as in them lies, will endeavor the hindering and impeding thereof: for
they love not the prosperity of Zion, and every appearance of the new Jerusalem
is an offense to them. And some of them have been made to own the Lord and his
people amongst men (yea wicked men) who saving their vizards were ravening
Wolves and greedy Lions, that gaped for the time, when the innocent should
become their prey. But for ever magnified be that name, whose mercy is above
all his works; Daniel is escaped, and ye are owned in the day of the Lords
appearing, thus far to visit and redeem his people: Wherefore be it ever
remembered as pertinent and besuiting us, That when the breaches began to be
stopped, and the walls of Jerusalem were built; the builders and people were
much cast down in their own eyes, for they perceived that the work was wrought
of God, at every of whose appearing to work, let the fearful and unbelieving
learn to become obedient, and comply with the pure interest of God and his
people, in all the degrees, arisings and gradations thereof: for you will find
its of force enough to work out it self through all the heaps of thick
darkness, which the Prince of the Air and Children of disobedience has this
many hundred of years been casting upon it, and will surely shelter, and all
the day long be a covering to those that love and cherish it.

And who so soars in this Region, are in Communion and correspondency with the
spiritual and hidden operations of this Interest; To such no greater folly is
there, nor more apparent, then the spousing or contracting thereunto the
interest of the flesh, or wordly power and wisdom, (as the needful expedient)
to hasten the work of God among men, by joining together what God would have
put asunder: which attempts henceforward as Light and Truth rises higher in
the Earth, may expect by the wise in heart, to be esteemed and accounted of,
for none other then the fruit of a carnal, selfish, degenerating principle,
that will at last evidently demonstrate the Attempters to be Children in whom
there is no faith, and after a large pretense to serve none other King but
Jesus, give the World an occasion to say, Lo, this is the man that made not God
his strength. Hos. 5.
When Ephraim saw his wound, and Judah his sickness, they sent to the Assyrian,
and to King Jareb, but they could not heal them.

And therefore ye worthy builders, whose experience has outlived the rise and
fall of much of this kind of doings in England, the hopes of the faithful
enlightened ones are, that your wisdoms will be such, as to make a righteous
advantage thereof to redeem the time past, for the days were, (and are) very
evil: and how little the last five or six years added to the setting up of any
thing that is able (or ought) to stand, notwithstanding the specious pretenses
made thereunto, I leave to all that are concerned to judge, who after a general
survey of things, I fear will hardly find any thing lifted up that is more
abiding (or deserve to be so) then an Image of wax, that is either capable of
receiving another Impression, or in a short time liable to be thrown to the
ground.

Honored Sirs, though our purpose is not to be tedious, yet forasmuch as the
concerns of a worldly political Interest leaves you not unpresented with
seeming plausible and substantial bottomes to work upon, (to the intent the
chief Cornerstone may be rejected or laid aside) it may not therefore be
omitted to reminde here, That none other foundation can no man lay, and
prosper, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ: and if any as wise
Master workmen shall build thereon, their works will be tried, and the durable
substance thereof revealed, and that by fire; and accordingly shall the reward
of every builder be: for by how much the work will not abide the trial, by so
much shall the loss of the workman be: wherefore in all your undertakings to
build, be sure to digg deep till you meet with the Rock of ages for your
foundations; Then you will not need to fear, though storms arise, the wind
blow, the rain descend, or though Ashdod, Ammon and Moab be offended or
enraged, for the prosperity of the Lords work: for the Lord himself has
respect unto it, and by his own everlasting arm shall every true Nehemia be
preserved and born up.

The last things offered to the faithful in general, are, that when Christ who
is our Life shall appear, we also shall appear with him in glory: now we are
sons; but it does not appear what we shall be: but we know that when he does
appear, we shall be like him, etc.

As hereby the purpose of the Lords Servants may be understood to work out from
amongst the Saints the evil of an unbelieving heart, if by all means possible
they might beget in them a lively hope, or an ability to hope to the end; so
they seem to promise the safety of a believers interest, as it is rooted and
laid upon a Rock that is higher then they: the which whosoever is made truly to
believe, and see as with the eye of faith, makes not have, but is ready to
wait for its further comings down upon him, or until the Lord shall say, Come
up hither; and having been as it were, in a mount, where a more ample and
certain view of their Life and interest is given them, they cease not to
improve the exercise of faith, as well when they are commanded to descend as
when to ascend; knowing he to whom they have committed themselves, is God of
the valleys as as well as of the hills.

And for our advantage herein, if the first man Adam a living soul, and the
second as the quickening Spirit or Lord from Heaven, be but considered as the
two principles or Rocks from whence proceeds, (to be discerned) the nature of
both Creations, the one as earthly in its best strength and beauty, the other
as heavenly, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; it gives a certain
kind of demonstration of things carnal or things Spiritual, in their several
seize.

The first Adam was the root of the first or fleshly Creation, and in him the
sun of its glory was found as Light gathered up into the body of the Sun; and
being created as is said, In the Image of God, typified or prefigured the Son
of God, that was to be revealed as head unto both; and whilst in its estate of
simplicity, Adam continued living in Communion with God, walking in the
enjoyment and participation of a Life, which had its sole dependence upon him:
he was in short a glorious piece, the map or abridgment of things created both
in Heaven and in Earth.

But all this glory and excellency, through the temptation of the Devil, (and
the help created) for Adam, and the weakness or mutability of that Estate in
its own nature, leaves God, and is drawn away to seek after a life in himself
in distinction from that everlasting Life, Wisdom, and Righteousness, which
God would have been unto it, in the day of his second or next appearance to
Adam.

The second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, is the Root of all the new Creation,
which is Created according to God, in righteousness; in respect of which
estate, as proceeding from the ancient of days, and being Rooted and
principled in him, the most glorious and highest attainment of the former is in
the spiritual man's account, or him that judges all things, but earthy and
fading.

A serious contemplation of both these, or of the day which Abraham saw afar
off and was glad, a prospect is opened into the second or new Creations
interest, as it is laid up and secured in its Root, and will according to every
season proper to its appearance, be breaking forth in the several degrees and
parts thereof, working mysteriously and effectually through all the devices of
Satan, and the wisdom of flesh, which as a grand competitor constant to it
self in all things, is very ready to challenge the name or birthright, of a
created help, that by no mean may be rejected or turned off the stage; and
notwithstanding the right it pleads to copartnership with the wisdom of God, or
the simplicity, that is in Jesus, shall at last be sentenced for ever to
depart, as the fruit of, and proceeding from an adulterous act committed
between the Sons of God and the Daughters of men, and not judged worthy to
share the in blessed fruit of the faith and patience of the true seed; who
being wrought to up to see where, and with whom their life and interest is as a
nail fastened in a sure place, become steadfast and unmovable in their hopes,
and of an ability to draw out or extract some good from every appearance of
evil; and whilst the adversary preys upon their Bodies, they rejoice in their
Head, the first, and the last, the root and the offspring of David, the bright
Morning Star, and to his people the dayspring from on high, whilst the
Enemies cruelty bring thick darkness upon themselves.

So that in the day the Enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, it
was turned to the contrary, Esth. 9.11.
and the Jews had rule over them that hated them.

Thus to see the Lord in times of the greatest unlikelyhood, so eminently to
make known his salvation to his people, when the Rulers of the Earth conspire,
and take Counsel together against them; how should it work us off from seeking
to hide our interest, our life in any thing below himself, who is able to make
all things to work together for good to those that love and fear him; but
notwithstanding the wonderful occasions that have been given to believe this, a
Spirit too much the contrary has appeared, even many that once seemed to have
clean escaped the influences of lo here, or lo there; So that with them, what
was Paul, Apollos, or Cephas? is not Christ the Head? or is there any other
King but Jesus? and yet after all this, as opportunity is presented, either in
private or public concerns, are joining issue with Ashdod, Ammon and Moah; so
that when the work of the Lord was to be promoted, the language of a true
Israelite would not be understood in our Land, and no man cared to hear any
other then the language of his own people, or that whereunto he had espoused
himself; and that amongst the rest is feared to be an evil of no mean dye, and
calls for more then an overly repentance from all that have been joining hands
therewith, lest the Lord be provoked suddenly to appear terribly against the
whole offspring and proceed of that adulterous conjunction.

And now ye remnant of the little flock, that are risen with Christ, mind the
things that are above; lay up treasure where neither moth not rust does
corrupt: for if your inclinations be earthly, so will your expectations be: as
the Lord has not been wanting to you, be you therefore ready to answer the
abundant favor bestowed upon you. The devices of Satan are many, to chill your
affection and to harden your hearts one against another; be wise therefore in
your day, be not ensnared, let brotherly love continue; and let not parts nor
gifts create dissentions amongst you, or cause you to justle in the broad way.
If ye have received, be thankful: remember that God is love; and he that
dwells in him, dwells in love, it is the fulfilling of the Law, the more
excellent way, wherein (notwithstanding the endeavors of the Enemy to the
contrary) my hopes are to see you walk readily and cheerfully without offenses,
or giving any occasion to judge you in meats or drinks, or in respect of an
holy day: And that there will be given a Spirit of wisdom, of sound Judgment,
and true discerning to the upright in heart, to make great use of the present
diversities of Spirits, that seem to be in swift motion at this day to
propagate the interest of God, and to cherish the power of true godliness,
wheresoever and in whomsoever it shall appear: for as Christ appears more and
more, so shall his Image of true Godliness appear in his people, more easy to
be discerned; and not only the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be
discovered, but also the hypocrisy of the hypocrite: for as the glory of
Israel shall break out, so will the nakedness of Edom or Esau be made bare.
Until the farther accomplishment whereof, Oh that we may all in a right Spirit,
rest in the Lord, and stay our selves upon our God, waiting patiently for him,
whose coming will be in Judgment to his enemies, and in favor to all that love
his appearing.

Postscript.
SInce the late wanted noise of Uniformity, or national uniformity to the
principles of some men, has been revived in our Ears, It remembered me, that
when the people were all of one language, it is said they traveled together,
until they came into the Land of Shinar, where (as may be judged) they found a
pleasant plain, and meeting with a place so goodly for habitation, said one
unto another, Come let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly, that we may build
us a City or a Tower, and leave us a name, etc. Now when by many of this
Nation, the several Hills that were risen in it, had been passed over, and in
their travel the great Episcopal Mountain trampled under and levelled with the
ground, they judged the place whereunto they were then come would prove a plain
of great fruitfulness, and that the tenths thereof would be of great value,
therefore coveted to make it the place of their continual abode, and cared not
to follow the Lord any farther; but speedily sought how to establish and settle
themselves in that state whereunto they had attained, so as never to advance
one jot toward the Price of a higher calling, though it were even said unto
them, Arise, depart, that is not your rest; but rather hastened to erect some
monstrous Tower or great Babel for their defense: and that contrivance being
blasted by a voice of noise and confusion from on high, causing the people to
scatter abroad, and run to and fro, through which knowledge is increased in the
Earth, the artificers rage, and are disquieted, for that their good old Cause
(as they call it) is not like to prosper: And know not how enough to vent
themselves, (but remembering, that from the Nobility to the ribaldry of England
Popery has been, and still is by most abominated, as hellish and Diabolical,
and the rather amongst all, for that they have been so full of bloody, cruel
and murtherous plots and designs, that would at any time have established it,
as our Nations Religion,) betake them to a public upbraiding and charging of
others, with what themselves are most guilty of, viz. the opening a door of
entrance for the Pope and his Religion in England. I wish the Hierarchy and
other the Arrogant usurpations of that Antichristian Bishop, were less
cherished and upheld in the practice of those men, who would have all men to be
of their minds, but not to be as they are, Teachers of the people, or Masters
in Israel: but the days hasten, when the Lord shall be known to be the Teacher
of his people, and many that call themselves Ministers now, do it because they
would be Masters, pretend to Christ, and set up the Custom of the Jews, and by
their tradition violate the simplicity of the Gospel, lay claim to the
maintenance of that Priesthood, whose order and being they are called (as they
say) to preach down; and yet are no Priests, but Ministers; I think so indeed,
and whose they are, and whom they serve, every day more then other seems to
manifest. Now to the ingenuous Reader I leave it to judge, which are more like
to gratify the interest of Rome, or become her false Bishops agent, these men
who with their national Uniformity would compass Sea and Land to gain
proselytes; or people desirous to be found according to the Word of God, in a
Gospel-separation from the corrupted and beastly generations of the Earth, that
will not learn Righteousness, though they faint in Judgment: and for a further
discovery of this principle (as it has been offered) I refer the Reader to Mr.
Deals discourse thereon, called Uniformity examined; and wish they may
henceforward better improve the gifts and parts, and learning they boast so
much of, to a better use, then to limit the Holy one of Israel, who knows how
to call a Fisherman, and reject a Rabbi; or so much to set themselves to throw
down all others, as if they were the only ones, and wisdom must dye with them:
but who are so blind as a people that will not see; or deaf, as those that
will not hear? What the effect of their despising the day of small things may
be, is rather feared then determined: and who knows but in the day when it most
concerns them, having eyes they shall not see, and having ears they shall not
hear? this Judgment is not wished unto them, but rather hearts to follow one of
their Eminent friends, in truth (not in hypocrisy) to confess, that now they
are made to know there is a God in Heaven: whose so doing, some of their
greatest Rabbis once said in my hearing, would prove worse then a thousand
worsters to them; So that it may be that the seeming private penitence of a
Champion of theirs, will be worth the having in public, whether it be done by
the Confessor in truth or no.

FINIS.

