A SERMON Preached before the RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES, IN St. MICHAEL's CHURCH
DUBLIN. September the 25th. School.

By Thomas Pollard, Minister of St. Peter's Dublin.

DUBLIN: Printed, by and for Joseph Ray, Bookseller in Skinner-row over against
the Tholsel, MDCXCVIII.

TO THE Religious Societies IN DUBLIN.
BRETHREN,
THo I was ready, at your Request, to Preach this Sermon, yet I (must confess I
was not so willing to make it Public; as conscious to my self how much so
great and useful a Subject must suffer through the Weakness of the Manager: But
when your desires came backed with his Grace's Commands, it was no longer fit
for me to dispute the matter.

I am very sensible that besides the Exceptions that may be justly taken
against the Imperfections of this Discourse, many Objections will be raised,
against the Argument it self, which is likely to find the same ill Usage for
Encouraging, that you have already met with for Endeavoring a Reformation:
But if the Publishing this Sermon may prove either useful to You or Beneficial
to others, I shall, very little Regard the Censures of ill Men; who as they are
Enemies to Virtue, so they will be sure to be to all that shall abett it.

To Direct and Encourage the Good Work you have so successfully begun, viz. The
beating down the Body of Sin, and putting some stop to that I orrent of open
Lewdness and Profaneness, which for some time past has been breaking in upon
us, was the great design of this Discourse; and if it may Influence and
Inspirit any of us in so Generous an Undertaking, I shall think my Time and my
Labor well laid out. And that GOD's Blessing may allways accompany your
Endeavors and mine in this Charitable Attempt is the hearty Prayer of

You Affectionate humble Servant Thomas Pollard.

A SERMON Preached before the Societies in St. Michael's Church, Dublin,
September the 25th. School.
The 19th. of Leviticus in the latter part of the 17th. verse.

Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.

The whole Verse runs thus, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart:
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.

THese words recommend a duty as difficult to the Performer, as unwelcom to the
Receiver; and that is Brotherly Admonition and Reproof: for whosoever shall
attempt it (though in the greatest kindness to Men's Souls) is in danger not only
of being accounted, but of being treated as their Enemy, because he tells them
the truth.

'Twas a work difficult enough for a Prophet, and we find God himself
intimating, as if there were but few qualified for so generous an undertaking:
Isaiah 6.8. And I heard the Voice of the Lord saying whom shall I send, and who
will go for Us? Implying that it was no easy matter to find a well qualified
and willing Person; and though the Prophet Isaiah was prepared and ready at that
time to undertake the Employment, yet we find the Prophet Jeremiah something
backward, bewailing himself and complaining of the hardship of the Duty.
Saying, Woe is me, my Mother that thou have born me a Man of strife, and a Man
of Contention to the whole Earth, Jer. 15.10.

And therefore to arm him against all dangers and difficulty of the
undertaking, God does not only cheer him up, but threaten him too, Thou
therefore gird up thy Loins, i. e. rouse up thy Spirits and thy Courage, and
arise, speak to them all that I commanded thee, be not dismayed at their Faces,
lest I Confound thee before them. Jer. 1st. 17. And whether they would hear, or
whether they would forbear, God obliged him to discharge this necessary, though
unwelcome office toward them.

And with the same caution God arms Ezekiel upon the like occasion, And thou
son of man be not afraid of their words, though Briers and Thorns be with thee,
i. e. though this people be as Briers and Thorns, which shall prick and wound thy
Soul, And though thou do dwell among Scorpions, be not afraid of their words,
nor be dismayed at their looks, Ezekiel. 2.6.

And if a Commissioned Prophet was to expect such Treatment, when he was sent
by God to rebuke a wicked Nation, how much rougher usage must a private Person
look for when he undertakes to Reprove a wicked and licentious People? and to
reform those Vices which by a long and general Practice and Indulgence, are not
only grown fashionable, but have gotten Credit and Power in the World? insomuch
that he that dares attempt a Reformation, must look for nothing less than to be
torn with Briers and Thorns, and to be the object of all the Venom, that the
Tongues of these wicked Scorpions can spit against him; but God that knew the
danger does not excuse from the duty, but lays his commands peremptorily thus,
Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor, etc.

And though this Precept was given under the Law, yet it is of that Moral
Obligation, that it is not superseded, but rather reinforced by the Gospel
Dispensation.

I shall not at present confine these words (as some understand them) in
Relation only to the former part of the Verse. Thou shall not hate thy Brother,
in thine heart, i. e. Thou shall not bear any private Malice or Grudge against
him, and smother it in thy breast, as Absalom did against his Brother Amnon,
for the Text says, He spoke unto him neither good nor bad, and gives this as
the reason, For Absalom hated Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.22. But thou shall make known
the cause of the Difference and Displeasure, and shall in any wise plainly
rebuke him for it. Though this be an excellent duty, and may prove the prevention
of many great and grievous Evils, yet I shall at this time treat of these words
in a greater Latitude, even as they respect Sin in general and not only some
trespass committed against our selves.

And in handling of them in this larger sense, I shall follow this method.

1. I will endeavor to make it appear that it is the Duty of a private
Christian, as much as in him lies, to Reprove and Reform Sin in his Neighbor.
2. I shall show you the manner how this duty is to be performed. 3. The Motives
and Reasons that may encourage him in so difficult a performance.
1. I shall endeavor to make it appear, that it is the duty of a private
Christian, as much as in him lies, to Reprove and Reform Sin in his Neighbor.

To prevent Sin, and destroy the works of the Devil, is so Noble and generous a
design, that for the accomplishment thereof our Blessed Savior thought it
worth while to leave all the Glorious Mansions of Heaven, to descend into a
wicked World, and to submit himself to the most barbarous Treatment it could
give him; and his great business here was to save his People from their Sins,
that they being delivered from their Spiritual Enemies, might become a peculiar
People zealous of good works, and might serve God without fear, in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of their life.

And if it be our Duty to learn of Him, and endeavor to be like him, we are
certainly obliged to promote the good of Souls, as much as in us lies, and to
be willing to run some hazard, to be at some cost and pains for the rescue of
a poor Soul, which was so precious in the eyes of Christ, that he thought it
worth dying for; he came into the world on purpose to do Kindnesses to the
Souls of Men, even to turn us from the Errors of our ways to the living God.

The very first act that a Christian does in behalf of himself, is solemnly to
engage in a war against the Devil and all his Works, against all the deceitful
and wicked Pomps and Vanities of the World, and all the sinful lusts of the
Flesh; and that sacred Vow does oblige us by all lawful ways and means to
prevent and destroy all these, as well in others as our selves: and if we
neglect it, we make our selves partakers of their sins.

Even under the Law they were enjoined to Rebuke Sin in their Neighbor, and
not to suffer sin upon him: Some translate it, Thou shall not bear Sin for him,
by which is sometimes understood the Sin it self, and sometimes the Punishment
thereof. And truly he that neglects this Duty among his Friends and Equals,
when it is fit to perform it, makes himself liable to both.

And this neglect in the former part of the verse, is called A hating our
Brother in our heart; for so some apply that part of the Verse, and not without
reason; for what hatred so deadly as that which tends to the utter ruin and
destruction of a Soul?

What was spoken by the Prophet Ezekiel of the Watchman, to whom the charge of
the People was committed, and was by virtue of his Office obliged to give the
People warning of their Danger, is in some measure applicable to every
Christian, who is so far a Prophet, as to be obliged to prevent Sin, as far as
lawfully he may, and in any wise to warn and rebuke his Neighbors, when an
opportunity and fit Circumstances do offer. And in this respect why should we
grudge any one the honor of rescuing a Soul from Death? ought we not all much
rather, to join in Moses's passionate Prayer; Would to God that all the Lords
People were Prophets, and that he would put his holy Spirit upon them.

The punishment that God threatened the Prophet with, in case of neglect is very
dreadful; His blood will I require at thine hand. Now tho this be more
particularly the duty of a Minister, who is entrusted with the cure of Souls,
and designed here by the name of a Prophet, yet private Christians are not
altogether free from the Obligation, but even a mere Laick may draw the blood
of his Brother upon his own head, and by a silent approbation of his Sin make
himself liable both to the guilt and punishment; and every Man is so far
engaged against the common Enemy, as to take his Brothers part, and rescue him
out of his hands, as well as he is bound to defend himself.

Our Blessed Savior enjoins this private Admonition in these words, If thy
brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone, if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. And tho these words
speak only of a trespass committed against our selves, yet if we love God as we
ought, we should sure be as much concerned for him as we are for our selves.
And it is a sign that we have little zeal for the Glory of his Name, when we can
patiently hear it blasphemed, and see his honor trampled upon by wicked and
profane wretches, and sit contentedly by, and neither say nor do any thing to
retrieve and vindicate it; sure we could not think him our Friend, that could
silently and contentedly stand by, and see any of our selves thus rudely
treated and abused.

It Is the same private reproof that St. Paul means by his first and second
Admonition; Titus, 3.10.

And the end of all this is in the expression of my Text. Not to suffer Sin
upon our Brother; or as St. James expresses it, The converting of a Sinner from
the error of his ways.

And were our love to our Brother, of the same kind with Christ's love to us,
we should not need many arguments to convince us of our obligation to this
Duty; that Love alone would soon put us upon the discharge of it; It Is a very
powerful Passion, where it is sincere; it will not stick at Niceties, or be
discouraged with every seeming Difficulty. And we know it is our duty to love
one another, as he loved us. And if his love was so great to the Souls of Men,
as to think the Redemption of them worth the infinite value of his own Blood,
sure, to render our love, in any degree like his, we are certainly obliged to
lay out our most vigorous endeavors toward the conversion of one another, and
be as solicitous for the prevention or removal of Sin, as of the Plague, for
indeed the former is as catching, and more fatally mortal than the latter.

Who could stand patiently by, and see his Friend about to take deadly Poison,
or throw himself off a dangerous Precipise, and not use his utmost endeavors
to prevent such a mischief? And is it not much more barbarous and inhumane to
stand uconcernedly by, and see my Brother Sin a Sin unto Death, and so ruin
Himself, Soul, and Body, to all Eternity? And yet never make one step toward
his rescue and deliverance. Sure did we know the worth of a Soul, or had any
Bowels and Compassion for our Brother, we should with the same earnestness
endeavor his preservation, that the Angel did Lots, even by calling upon him,
and leading him by the hand, and forcing him out of Sodom, warning him of his
danger, and with the same zealous concern bidding him escape, Neither stay thou
in all the plain, least thou be consumed: And indeed he that cannot find in his
Heart, to do something toward the conversion of a Sinner, nay to run some
hazard, and be thus importunate, when he sees his Brother ready to tumble in
Hell, has sure very little of this heavenly Angelical Temper in him, very
little value for a Soul, which Christ thought so precious, and less of
Christian Love and Resolution in him, he falls far below the Character of the
more generous Heathens, who looked upon the preventing of Sin and Error in
their Friend, as the most sacred Office of their Love and Friendship, and upon
this account looked upon their Friend as their Guardian Angel, or rather as
their own Conscience, whose business it was, not only to direct them in their
Duty, and forewarn them of their danger, but also to check and reprove them
when they did amits, and wandered out of the ways of Truth and right Reason.

And sure Christianity does not supersede, but improve and exalt this excellent
and necessary duty. And by how much we have more noble motives for the
performance of it, by so much are we the more strictly obliged to the
Conscientious discharge of it.

And thus having proved that it is the Duty of a private Christian, as much as
in him lies, to reprove and reform Sin in his Neighbor; I come in the second
place to show you how this Duty is to be performed.

And that is first of all by instructing the Ignorant, and that both as to the
Credenda and Agenda of their Religion: For as many Sin against light, so some
Sin for want of it; and it is noble charity, to give Eyes to the Blind, to give
Light to them that sit in Darkness and the Shadow of Death, and to guide their
Feet into the way of Peace. But tho this may tend very much to the Reformation
of our Brother, yet it is properly rather to Direct than Reprove.

2dly. There is a way of reproving Sin-by the contrary example of Holiness and
Virtue, and when Sin has not taken too deep a root, this may prove an excellent
method for the reclaiming of Sinners. For the exemplary Piety and Holiness of a
good Man, is such a Check and Reproach to the Ungodly, that like the Ark and
Dagon, one cannot stand before the other.

But if the Contagion of Sin be spread and grown so inveterate, that Example
alone cannot Shame and Master it, yet it will still have the Advantage of
giving the more Force and Efficacy to our Reproofs; it will convince them that
we are sincere and in earnest, when they see us so Zealous in the Practice of
that our selves, which we would so earnestly recommend unto them. But it will
be a hard matter to persuade any man to believe and practice that, which, by my
own Actions, that by most People are looked upon as the most sensible and
convincing Arguments, I do plainly demonstrate, I neither believe nor practice
my self. How apt will every one be to retort my Rebukes, with a Physician heal
thy self; or rather with a Thou Hypocrite, first cast the Beam out of thine own
Eye, and then shall thou see clearly to pull the Mote out of thy Brothers Eye.
He that is guilty himself is not fit to stone Sin in another.

3dly. Our Rebukes and Reproofs of our Brother, ought to be insinuated with all
Tenderness and Brotherly love, that they may plainly perceive our design is to
save their Souls, and not to Gratisie our own, or others Spleen, in exposing
their Persons and Reputations.

And that we may the better insinuate our kind concern for them, we must
observe, as near as we can, the Mollia Tempora fandi, the season and
circumstances that are most likely to render our endeavors successful; least
otherwise it should appear that we design rather to Upbraid, than Reform them.
And then it is likely they will rather grow worse than better under our
Admonitions, as it is thought the Physic that does not Master, does irritate
and ferment the evil Humor. And therefore we ought to use the greatest caution
and prudence, that our Reproofs, (according to the observation of a great
Divine) may come as the Fathers thought Grace did to the Elect, Tempore
congruo, in a fit season, not when they are in the heat and Career of their
Sins, but as God did to Adam, in the cool of the day, when the temper of the
Wax may make it more capable of an impression, lest striving to stop the Rapid
Stream in 'its force we make it swell and overwhelm all before it.

Reproofs ill placed look more like the Attacks of an Enemy, than the Rebukes
of a Friend, and they will sooner Exasperate than Reform the Delinquent. And
therefore, when there is any hopes of doing good this way, this gentle method
should be always used, before we proceed to rougher treatment; we should try if
the pouring in the precious Balm of Reproof will do the work, before we proceed
to break their Heads by the severity and Penalty of the Laws.

But 4. sometimes the wound is more dangerous, and will perhaps need Incisions
and rougher Applications; sometimes the Sin is deeply rooted by a long Custom,
and is become not only fashionable, but has gotten Credit as well as Ground in
the World, and then People Sin on with a stiff Neck, and a high Hand, and a
Crest lifted up; and when the Man becomes so exceeding Sinful, then Reproof
will be lost upon such obstinate Sinners, all this precious Balm will like Oil
to the Fire, make it flame the more. Those are the People the wise man speaks
of, Reprove not a Scorner lest he hate thee. Prove. 9.8. He means such as are
Incorrigible, have ascended the Chair of the Scornful, and are become
presumptuous, open and daring Sinners; such, as the Heretics of old, are to be
rejected, and the precious Pearl of Reproof are not to be cast before such
Swine, lest, like the evil Spirit, they turn upon thee and tear thee. But here
we are to call in the help of the Civil Magistrate, who should be as the
Apostle speaks, the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, Romans 13.4. And let him look to it, if he bears this Sword in vain,
he makes himself partaker of other men's Sins, draws a vast guilt upon his own
head, and his Doom will be so much sharper, as his Trust was greater than other
Men's.

But thanks be to God, who has not only given us good Laws, for the suppression
of Vice and Reformation of Manners; but has also inspired some of our
Magistrates with so much Courage and Zeal for God and Religion, as resolutely
to put these wholesome Laws in Execution, maugre all the Interest and Malice of
a wicked, Profane and Licentious Faction.

And since we have not only good Laws but good Magistrates, who do so Zealously
abett the cause of GOD and Practical Holiness, we ought not to be fainthearted,
in so good a cause, but where Brotherly Admonition will not, or is not likely
to take place, there to appeal to the Civil Magistrate, and to pray the
assistance of the Sword of Justice, for the cutting down those Sins, which were
too strong and powerful for any private Reproof.

I told you before, that by our Baptismal Vow, we are all engaged to resist and
prevent Sin, as far as lawfully we may; and when it is not probable that the
best Arts of Persuasion and Reproof will take place, but men are become so
obstinate, and desperately wicked, that they are not to be awakened by all the
terrors of the LORD, then it is high time to try if the Sword of Justice will
deter them, or have any better influence upon them; and to this end we may
justly and fairly complain to the Civil Magistrate, and desire the execution of
the Laws against such scandalous Offenders.

And the reproach of being called an Informer, ought not to discourage us, or
to quench our zeal for GOD's Glory and the good of Souls; and tho a sort of men
among us are reviled and hated for no other reason but discharging a good
Conscience in this matter, yet they do no more than what the Law it self as
well as Conscience does allow of and encourage. Or else how should Convictions
be made, or Offenders brought to condign Punishment? What would Laws signify,
when no man had care or zeal enough to see them executed and take effect? How
should the Magistrate take Cognizance of Delinquents when each connives at the
others wickedness?

What if some people reproach you as too busy and forward; if we will be
Christ's Disciples, we must exercise more self denial than that amounts to.

The word Insormer, may be taken in a good as well as in a bad Sense, according
as it is applied. The Odium that was first derived upon the name, was in the
early persecutions of the Church, when the Christians lost both their Lives and
Estates by the Heathenish Informers; but as it was an Enemy to Virtue then, so
it may be to Vice now; and if it be really so, if it tends to the Promotion of
Piety and Reformation, it can be no inglorious name, unless it be a crime to
suppress Sin, and to root out the Lewdness and Profaneness which will bring a
Curse and Destruction upon a Nation. Would he deserve to be Branded with an
Infamous Character, that should discover to the Magistrate such Treasonable
Practices as tended to the utter Subvertion of the State and Government? Ought
he not rather to be Encouraged and Rewarded? Or is it less meritorious to
Inform in the cause of GOD than of the King? And is there a greater Enemy to
any Nation than the Vices thereof? Does any thing tend more to the Ruin of a
People, than Debauchery and Profaneness, and the Contempt of GOD and Religion?
Did we ever see a Kingdom brought to Misery and Desolation, where the
wickedness and unrestrained Lusts of the People had not the chiefest hand in
it? And does he deserve ill of the Common Wealth, or any name of Distinction,
that is not kind and creditable, that does all that lies in his Power to
suppress those Vices, that would ruin a Nation, and have a natural as well as
moral tendency to draw down the severest Judgments of GOD upon a Land? The best
actions are likely to be misrepresented by ill men, especially if they create
any unquiet to them, and disturb them in the enjoyment of their Lusts and
Sensualities; he that attacks them here, touches the apple of their Eye, and
must expect all the ill usage that their Rage and Malice can suggest.

This is the Root of all, and the true reason why some men are so enraged at
Informers, and if they would lay their hands upon their Hearts, and impartially
examine them; I suppose their own Conscience would hardly give them leave to
deny it.

But tho those people rage and swell, and conspire together against the LORD,
and all that are Enemies to their Lewdness and Profaneness, yet all this ought
not to quench your zeal for the Advancement of Holiness and GOD's Glory. But go
on resolutely in this good work, comforting and encouraging your selves with
St. Peter's words, If ye suffer for Righteousness sake happy are ye: For as our
Savior says, great is your Reward in Heaven.

And the most effectual way to conquer their Malice, and disprove their
Calumnies is, as the same Apostle advises, Resolutely to maintain a good
Conscience, that where as they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed that falsely accuse your good Conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16.

The Informer that is so odious amongst Men is one that does Vexatiously
prosecute his Neighbors, merely out of Lucre or Malice, without any regard to
the Service of the State, or the Reformation of Offenders. But this is far
different from his case, who out of a due regard to Virtue and the Glory of
GOD, cannot patiently bear the trampling upon either, without interposing his
endeavors for the preservation of both, whether it be by friendly Reproof and
Admonition, or when that will not, or is it not likely to prevail, by applying to
the Magistrate, who bears the Sword of GOD, and is bound to wield it for the
support of Virtue and Religion, and for the Punishment and suppression of evil
doers. And when neither Malice nor Lucre comes in for a share, but the Glory of
GOD, the eternal wellfart of Souls, and the good of the Kingdom are the sole
motives of such Information, the name of Informer is so far from being a
Reproach, that it ought to be had in honor with every man that loves GOD or
his Country, or has any kind regards to Virtue and Religion.

And so I proceed to the last Particular, viz. To show the motives and reasons
that may encourage you in so difficult an undertaking.

I have already told you, that some by this Phrase of not suffering Sin upon
him, do mean thou shall not bear Sin for him, or make thy self partaker of his
Sin: And if so, then the neglect of rebuking a Sinner when my kind Reproof may
tend to the reclaiming of him, is to make me partaker of his Sins, and I am
obliged to discharge this Charitable office to my Brother, as I love my own
Soul, and would not bring my self under his Condemnation.

2dly. If men would be so kind to themselves or others, as to suffer themselves
to be persuaded into a Conscientious discharge of this Duty, what a happy
Change and Reformation might we soon expect in our little World! Especially did
the more Holy, Wise, and Pious, faithfully and zealously engage in it. How
would Sinners be ashamed and blush at their Villainies! We should have no more
barefaced wickedness, but Sin would sculk into the Corners of darkness, and
what a blessed Reformation would ensue! This precious Balm of Reproof is the
most likely medicine to heal up our breaches, and to cure the wounds and
putrified sores of GOD's People

David calls it an excellent Oil: Psalm. 141.5. an Oil that has two sovereign
qualities, those of Cleansing and Healing: this Reproof searches the ground of
the Heart, and when that is well prob'd and made clean, it soon heals the
breaches thereof. It Is an excellent means to awaken the conscience of the
Sinner, and to set it upon the discharge of her office; even to check us for
our miscarriages, and forewarn us of the dreadful expectation of the just
Judgments of GOD, and consequently puts us upon a diligent enquiry, which way
we shall escape, and secure our selves from the wrath to come?

Hence it is that the Wise Man tells us, that The Rod and Reproof give wisdom,
and that he that hates Reproof is brutish. And so highly did he esteem of this
method of reducing a Sinner, that if this repeated could not reform him, he
seems utterly to despair of his conversion, He that being often reproved
hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy. Prove.
29.1. Intimating that if this method failed, nothing would be effectual.

But thirdly whether Sinners will hear or whether they will forbear, whether
they will take warning and be converted or not, the faithful dischargers of
this Duty will have this remaining comfort, They will be sure to save their own
Souls, whilst the Obstinate and Incorrigible shall perish in their Iniquities:
Thus St. James assures us, that he that converteth a Sinner from the error of
his way, shall save a Soul a live, and shall cover a multitude of Sins. James,
5.20. i.e. of his own Sins; For as the former part of the Verse contains a
motive taken from the advantage that accrews to the Converted, so the latter is
an argument drawn from the benefit that redounds to the Convertor, viz. He
shall hide a multitude of his own Sins. i. e. GOD will the easier be persuaded
to be propitious to him, and upon his repentance. (which must always be
supposed) forgive him those Sins he had formerly been guilty of, and I the
rather take this to be the sense of the words, because it is exactly agreeable
to that of Daniel. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and
ever. Dan. 12. This is such an exceeding and an eternal weight of Glory, that I
can say nothing greater; and therefore shall leave off here; desiring you to
consider the weight and efficacy of this Motive; and shall only remind you,
that since the effects of this Duty are so blessed, and the Reward so Glorious
we ought not to be discourg'd in it, either through the fear of singularity,
censoriousness, or any dirt that a malicious people can bespatter us with:
Remembering that it is commonly the fate of Christ's Disciples, That if in him
they have peace, in the World they shall have Tribulation. And our Savior
himself does assure us, That narrow is the Way, and straight is the Gate that
leads to Life, and few there be that find it.

Now to GOD the Father, GOD the Son, and GOD the Holy Ghost be ascribed all
Honor, Power and Glory, for ever and ever.

FINIS.

