THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE FEMALE Warrier. A TRUE HISTORY: Very
delightful, and full of Pleasant Adventures in the Campagnes of 1676, and 1677.

Translated out of French.

London: Printed for James Mages and Richard Bentley, in Russelstreet in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza's, and Richard Tonson near Grays-In-Gate in
Grays-In-Lane. 1678.

To the Right Honorable the Count De Louvigny, Governor of Navar and Bearn.
My Lord,
IN making you a Present of the Heroine Musqueteer, I do but restore you what
already belongs to you: Bearn, where she was born, is a Province so sensible of
its Real Obligations to my Lord Marshal, your Father, and You, that the Honors
paid you as Fathers of your Country, exceed those they owe you as Governors of
it. The kindness you have for the Province in general, and particularly for
those of Bearn, is so well known, that many younger Brothers quit their Fathers
Houses with incredible Confidence, and run commonly into the Armies, without
any thing to trust to but your Protection, which generally proves more useful
to them than their Patrimony, by your bounty and liberality to such as are in
need of it, and the Favors and Employments you help them to who deserve it.
This, my Lord, gives me hopes you will vouchsafe your Protection to a Heroine
you have engaged in the service by the Fame of your Great Actions in Poland,
Flanders, Holland, and Germany, which sickness only and infirmities have been
able to put a stop to. My interest, (had I no other reasons, would have engaged
me to pay you this Homage, the best defense I could provide for my Book, being
the prefixing your Name to it. It belongs properly to the Jurisdiction of the
Fair Sex to pass sentence on Works of this Nature; and I have reason to believe
my little Story, appearing under the Protection of a Person of your Quality
(who are not only the greatest Gallant of the Court, but have the best Mien,
and are most in favor with the Ladies) will be kindly received, as having been
written only for your divertisement, and to give me the occasion of a public
acknowledgement with what Profound Respect I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, Prechac.

THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE FEMALE WARRIER.
BEARN, though one of the least Provinces subject to the Crown of France, may
be accounted among the most considerable, for the great number of Soldiers it
sends into the Armies. It has the honor of giving Birth to the Renowned
Prince, Henry the Great, and the Privileges he granted it are sufficient proof
of the esteem he had for the Inhabitants. And those who now serve the King in
his Wars, have made it appear they have not degenerated from the virtues of
their Ancestors. Besides, as if it were not enough for this Province to produce
Heroes in an Age, when all parts of France furnish such plenty of them, it has
signalized it self in giving Birth to a Heroine, who seems to have forgot the
infirmities of her Sex, to assume the vigor and generosity of the Masculine,
without losing the beauty and sweetness of her own, and to compose of both, the
most perfect Person in the Universe.

Her Name is Christina, Daughter to the Baron of Meyrac, one of the most
Eminent of the Province, though less known at Court than in his Country, where
he spent all his days. He had an only Son brought up at the College of Pau
whom he designed to send timely to Paris to learn his Exercises, the better to
fit him for the King's service, in the Armies where he intended to provide him
employment. Christina was bred at home with her Parents as their darling: she
naturally had that strong inclination for Arms, she knew sooner how to
discharge a Gun, than to handle a Distaff; and at nine years old could handle
and use all sorts of Firearms with incredible dexterity. She was extremely
averse from Learning to read, and to persuade her now and then to look on a
Book, they were obliged to permit her to go a-hunting twice a week; but to
purchase a pound of Powder she would do any thing, how difficult soever. This
for a time was a divertisement to her Parents; till Christina having one day
shot at Pigeons in a Barn full of Corn, it unfortunately took fire, which
consumed a great part of it, though a great many hands were presently at work
to quench it. At this, the Baron was so offended with his Daughter, that he
would not see her for many days, nor pardon her, but upon condition she would
never handle a Gun. Poor Christina was very glad to be readmitted upon any
terms into the favor of a Father, so severe as she knew hers to be: but that
way of living being quite against her temper, a week was scarce past, but there
appeared a visible alteration in her looks. This alarmed her Mother, who
tenderly loved her, and having often, but in vain, endeavored to prevail with
her Husband in favor of his Daughter, to remit a little of the rigor of his
orders; she ordered a Gun to be carried to a Neighbor's, where Christina, by
agreement with her Mother, sometimes resorted: And not daring to go a-Hunting,
lest the Father should know it, she shot at a mark for her exercise. This
restraint but heightened her passion for Hunting and Shooting, as she made
sufficiently appear by the advantages she took of her Father's absence, in a
Journey about that time.

The Baron in the Vacations sent for his Son home; and Hunting being the
principal Recreation of Countrey-Gentlemen, scarce a day past, but his Son made
a match with his Friends for that sport: He never went forth, but Christina was
cruelly vexed, she could not make one of the Game; and when he returned, she was
not less troubled for the pleasure she fancied he had enjoyed, and she was
unjustly debarred from, and seeing her Brother come every day home laden with
Game that he had taken, she could not forbear tormenting her self for fear he
would leave none for her.

One day, as the Baron and his Son were a-Hunting, a Farmer came to the Castle
to make his complaint of the great spoil done in his Corn by a wild Boar, and
to beg assistance for killing him. The Baroness being assured the Boar never
failed coming to the Corn in the Twilight, promised to take order in it, and
dismissed the Countreyman. Christina having overheard the discourse, said not a
word to her Mother, lest she might endeavor to divert her from her design; but
charged her Gun with two bullets, and as it began to be dark, went away to the
place the Countryman had spoken of; and to make the surer work, got up into a
Tree a little distant from the Corn, with a resolution to wait there the coming
of the Boar. The same Countryman having met the Baron's Son as he returned
from Hunting, told him the story, who loath to lose so fair an occasion
instantly turned back into the Field, and fearing he was come too late, stole
gently a cross the Corn, and attended the Boar's coming near half an hour: But
growing impatient of longer stay, he resolved to retire. His Sister in the
Tree, not well able to discern what she imagined she saw, the Corn being high
and night come on, made no doubt but it was the Boar stirring up and down; and
to lose no time discharged her Gun, and killed her Brother. As he fell he cried
out for help, which so troubled the unfortunate Christina, that she presently
fell down from the top of the Tree. The Countryman running in at the noise of
the Gun, immediately met Christina tearing her self like a Woman distracted,
and thought the Boar had wounded her: He asked her several questions, which she
answered not, but he took her up, and helped her to walk a few steps. When she
found her self in a condition to go alone, she ordered him to make all the
haste in his power to let the Baron know his Son lay a-dying, having been
dangerously wounded by the Boar; with that she made away as fast as she could
possibly, not knowing whither to betake her self. Having traveled above an
hour she found her self near a Castle belonging to the Abbot Dizeste, who was
extremely surprised to see her so bloated with crying, and at that time of the
night. But Christina, having given him as good an account of her misfortune as
she could in the case she was in, the Abbot who was her Fathers very near
Kinsman, instantly got on Horseback, and arrived at the Castle, the very
moment they brought in the body of the poor Gentleman, who having lost much
blood for want of help, died in the Arms of the Surgeon who first dressed him.
All things in the Castle were in such a confusion, the Abbot could not learn
the truth of the accident. The people would needs believe the Boar had killed
the Gentleman, though they found two bullets in his body: But the Baron and his
Lady, not finding Christina, made no doubt but it was her act; and though they
believed she had don't by misfortune, the Baron was so transported with
passion, for the loss of his Son, that he made search for his Daughter all over
the Town, with his Pistol in his hand, to sacrifice her to his Wrath. The Abbot
being told of it, ran after him, and having said to him all that might be
expected on such an occasion, he brought him back to the Castle, where he made
use of many tedious discourses to comfort him, but all to no purpose. Two
Capuchins came in at the noise of the disaster; and the Abbot having left them
the care of comforting of the Baron, returned home to bring Christina the news
of her Brother's Death, and the danger she was in, if her Father should
discover where she was; yet he assured her of his protection, and that he would
never forsake her.

Returning two days after to Meyrac, he was not a little surpised to find the
Capuchins exhortations had not abated in the least the grief of the Baron, nor
diminished his anger, but that he persisted in his resolution to be the death
of his Daughter, and would not admit of his Wife into his presence, because she
had been prevailed upon to speak to him a word or two, in favor of the
unfortunate Christina. This obliged the Abbot to hold a conference with two or
three Kinsmen more of the Barons, and to debate the business with them, and
find out some means to save her from her Father's resentment. After long
discourse, it was agreed she should be sent into Spain; and Arragon being not
above nine or ten Leagues from Bearn, and the Abbot having a Brother settled at
Saragosa many years, he was entreated to bear her company thither, and
recommend her to his Brother, which he readily promised. Christina, troubled as
she was, received with joy the result of this conference, and put her self in a
posture to be gone on the morrow, according to order: but the Abbot having
reflected in the night on the consequences of the intended Journey, found in it
so many difficulties, that he had almost altered his resolution by morning. He
foresaw the beauty of Christina would make a great noise in a strange Country,
being at twelve years old far taller and handsomer than Maids of that Age
ordinarily are, and especially in Spain, where the Women are generally very
low: besides, he apprehended the frank humor of his Kins-woman, and the
inclinations she had so different from the rest of her Sex, would hardly ever
agree with the Genius of a Nation, where Women are obliged to live with a great
deal of circumspection, and that it might prove very troublesome to his
Brother. But the business was urgent, and he must resolve: Christina perceiving
him waver, asked him the reason; he acquainted her with the difficulties he
apprehended, and added, it was not decent or fit a young Maid should run
rambling into a strange Country. Christina longing to get out of her Father's
reach, whom she feared, and having a passionate desire to see Spain, proposed
to the Abbot, that if he would give her leave, she would put on Boys Clothes:
And that she might have a plausible pretense for staying in Spain, he need no
more but tell his Brother he brought him a young Kinsman to learn Spanish, and
study some Months in the University of Saragosa. The Abbot at first boggled at
the proposal as ridiculous and childish. But finding her persist in it, and
promising she would so disguise her self, they should never discover her Sex,
he was persuaded by her. And having caused her to be privately put into a habit
suitable to her inclinations, he thought she became it so well, that he made no
more scruples, but parted the next day with her for Saragosa. Being arrived
there, they were received by his Brother with incredible joy and abundance of
thanks, that he would trust him with the Education of a Kinsman of so promising
a mien. The Abbot returned, and Don Lorenzo his Brother, took pleasure in
making provision of necessaries for his young Kinsman. Scholars in Spain wear
long, loose, black Vests like the Jesuits; a Habit that served very well to
make Christina look taller and handsomer, and her Hair being of a delicatbrown,
and cut after the Spanish-mode, had an admirable effect upon the beholders. She
no sooner appeared in the University, but she drew after her the Eyes and the
Hearts of the Students. It is incredible what an advantage this was to the
French Nation; for Spain being a Country inconvenient for Travelers, few
Persons of Quality go thither. And they seldom have amongst them any French,
unless it be some poor Laborers of the Mountains of Auvergne, Limosin, and
Bigorre, who for very small wages do all manner of Drudgery. And the Spaniards,
who are naturally lazy, are willing to employ Frenchmen who serve them for
money. This is the reason the People of those Countries, who seldom travel
abroad, slight the French as they do, judging of the whole Nation by those they
see amongst them. This general prejudice heightened their astonishment, who
admired the beauty of Christina, and called her The Handsome Frenchman. Every
one strove to be acquainted with the Stranger; and her Reputation was in a
short time so well settled at Saragosa, that those of the best Quality there
ordered their Children, to get acquaintance with the young Frenchman, and to
make him their Friend.

The Marquess d'Osseyra then a Student there, went every morning to take him
with him in his Coach to the University, and Don Philip de Palafox, Sonto th^e
Marquess d'Arizza, brought him back for the most part in his. He visited these
two young Lords oftener than any other, especially the Marquess d'Osseyra, who
took pleasure to teach him Spanish, and tell him when he spoke amiss. This
Gentleman had a Sister married to the Marquess d'Aytona; who having heard an
excellent Report of the handsome Frenchman, desired her Brother to bring him
with him to her House, proposing to her self the pleasure to be expected from
the Conversation of two young Lads of their Age. But she found it more
charming, and was so satisfied with the first Visit, that she prayed her
Brother to bring him often to her; being extremly delighted to see him and hear
him speak. To engage him to come again, she presented him with a Sword, and her
Brother with another; which they carried commonly under their Gowns, as the
Scholars in Spain usually do. This Present was fatal to them both: For as they
were going homewards one Evening very late, they met other Scholars who knew
the Handsom-Frenchman, and could not forbear (out of a Natural-antipathy
against the French) to give him ill-language and call him French-bougre. The
Marquess d'Osseyra, thinking himself concerned in their ill-usage and
incivility, and not daunted with the number of his Enemies, charged them
vigorously with his Sword in his hand. The Handsom-Frenchman seconded him so
well, that they two beat back five Men above thirty paces; till putting on too
far, they were at last forced to give Ground, oppressed with numbers of fresh
assailants. The Marquess had a slight wound on the Face; and the
Handsom-Frenchman received a went sometimes with him to the Comedies and
Opera's: About that time was presented the Opera of Cadmus, and took very much;
D'Angosse made use of the occasion to take Places for S. Aubin and himself, in
a Box, overnight. Having received his Ticket, he sent the Duchess word of it,
and advised her and the Marchioness to take Places in the Box right against
them, to have the better view of S. Aubin; which was done accordingly. D'
Angosse and S. Aubin having taken their Places, the two Ladies little minded
the Opera, being wholly taken up with viewing S. Aubin. Having taken exact
notice of him, they thought they were not deceived this time; yet the Duchess,
who could scarce believe a Maid capable to run through so many Adventures,
would be better satisfied. She sent for a Lacquey, who was a witty Fellow; and
having showed him S. Aubin, bid him put off his Livery, and having put on
another Coat, follow that Gentleman when he went out of the Playhouse; but be
sure to do it so closely that she might have a certain account where he lodged.
The Lacquey performed, and gave his Mistress an account. She and the
Marchioness resolved on a Frolic to try if S. Aubin were in truth the Heroine
Musqueteer, as they were made believe: After several Expedients, proposed and
rejected, they pitched upon sending him a Billet that Evening, which was to
this effect,

Whoever you are, you are a dangerous Gentleman. I never saw you but once at
the Opera, and you force me to a confession which the handsomest Gentlemen of
France have, by long service and great assiduity, in vain endeavored to draw
from me: I love you, Sir, and am ashamed to let you know it, yet pleased with
the thought of it. How great soever you are you must expect no more. I desire a
quarter of an hours discourse with you: my Quality debars me entertaining a
stranger in Public: follow this Lacquey, he will bring you to a sight of me.
If afterward you think me worthy the esteem and addresses of a Man of Honor,
I dare not pass my word, but Time and your good Mien may triumph over my
weakness.


They read the Billet several times over: The Duchess thought it too free, and
would have burnt it; but the Marchioness told her it mattered not, being
written to a Maid, and by an unknown hand. The Duchess, swayed with these
Reasons, called for the Lacquey; and having instructed him what to do, gave him
strict charge of the Billet. The Lacquey being come to the House where S. Aubin
was quartered, went to his Apartment and delivered him the Billet; which he
read, and was not a little surpised. Having read it, he was very much
perplexed, having a thousand thoughts in his head, not knowing what course to
take: He was fearful of engaging in an affair might be difficult to get rid of:
On the other side, he knew that a Lady of Quality, if slighted, is a dangerous
Enemy: This, and his natural Curiosity, made him desire the Ladies
acquaintance. He read the Billet over again, and feeing nothing desired but
what he thought might be granted, and judging others as reserved as himself, he
resolved to follow the Lacquey; and having wrapped up himself in a Cloak, bid the
Boy lead the way. Probably the Reader may think a Maid scarce capable of such a
Resolution; but he is to consider our Heroine was naturally courageous and
bold, yet as tender of her honor (in the Essentials) as the most reserved. I
have heard her say, she thought her self safer in Man's Habit, than that of her
Sex; as exposing her more to discourse commonly used to Women, if tolerably
handsome, which at length leaves an impression. About Eleven a Clock the
Footboy led him through a little Gate, of which he had the Key for the
purpose; S. Aubin staid in a Closet while the Lacquey gave notice of it to the
Duchess, who was then with the Marchioness. It surpised them to hear the
Gentleman was come, as appointed; they began to repent their hasty engagement,
fearing they should meet with a second Marquess de Mesples. The Duchess being a
Lady of eminent Virtue, and highly concerned to preserve her Reputation, was
upon sending him away without seeing him; and possibly had done it, but for
fear of her Letter, which S. Aubin, if a Man, (as for ought she knew he was)
might make very ill use of: The desire she had to have it again in her hands,
and her natural Curiosity, made her resolve to admit him entrance. The first
Civilities being over, S. Aubin being alone with the two Ladies, who eyed him
very narrowly, appeared so handsome that they believed him of their Sex. The
Duchess, willing to get her Billet into her hands, told him he might perhaps
have a very ill opinion of a Lady who appeared so forward, yet she thought she
could not do too much to make sure of so handsome a Gentleman: The Lady you see
with me is my Confident, and we two framed the Billet I sent you. I fear it may
appear too passionate, and being not so well acquainted with you as to leave in
your hands a Paper of that freedom, I desire you to restore it me: hereafter
possibly I may know you so well, as to put my Reputation into your hands. S.
Aubin presently took it out of his Pocket, and the Duchess receiving it threw
it in the Fire: and changing her tone, I must confess Sir, says she, my
Curiosity has exposed me to a great deal of folly. We have read a Book, called
The Heroine Musqueteer, and had a desire to be acquainted with so extraordinary
a Person. We were assured she was at Paris, and that you were intimate with
her: you will highly oblige us to bring us acquainted with her. S. Aubin was so
astonished at the discourse he had not a word to say. The Marchioness
perceiving it, made use of that Moment for the trial she had unhappily made
upon Mesples, and found whad she looked for: The Ladies embraced our Heroine,
and made her a thousand obliging offers of their services. Christina, ashamed
to see her self discovered, answered them with as much civility as the disorder
she was in would permit. The Duchess conjured her to tell her sincerely if all
that was written of her was true. Christina declared what was true, and what
was of the Authors invention. The Duchess was so well satisfied with our
Heroine's modesty and discourse, that she pressed her very much to take a
Chamber in her House, assuring her she should be used as a Person of Quality
and Merit. Christina refused, and gave so good reasons for it that the Duchess
was satisfied, but prayed her to visit her as often as possible: Christina
promised it, and after a long discourse, and mutual promises of secrecy,
retired. But for all their assurance of keeping her Counsel, she doubted their
performance; and could not rely on their discretion without scruple and
diffidence, which gave her no small disquiet.

About this time S. Aubin received news from Bearn, that upon a report of his
death some of his Kindred had possessed themselves of part of his Estate. The
Abbot Dizett who had the management of his Affairs advised him to make a
Journey to Bearn, to dissipate, by his presence, the false reports of his
death, and to take order for other matters. S. Aubin loath to go so far from the
Marquess D' Osseyra, and expecting, with impatience, the end of the Campaign in
order to Marriage, chose rather to hazard the loss of his Estate, than engage
in business that would rob him of those precious Moments he thought better
bestowed in thinking of his Love. Upon a second Letter to the same purpose, S.
Aubin desired D' Angosse to undertake the business; he readily took the Charge
of it, and set out for Bearn within two days.

S. Aubin reflecting on his Engagement to visit the Duchess, thought himself
indispensably obliged to be as good as his word. He went to her, and was kindly
received; there was commonly good Company there. S. Aubin was treated in so
obliging a manner, that every one took notice of it, and inquired who that
young Gentleman was, and very few knew him. A Principal Lord of the Court had
long been in Love with the Duchess and visited her frequently, but found his
addresses fruitless, and had no further advantage by them, than an opportunity
to gain an interest in the Servants by his Liberality. He was not discouraged
by the severe Virtue of the Duchess from seeing her often, in hopes to prevail
with her at Long-run. The Count d' Ex (for so was the Gentleman called) was so
far in Love that he easily became jealous, and could not with patience endure
to see how familiarly the Duchess conversed with this Stranger: He questioned
the Maids of his Party about it, but they could not give him a satisfactory
account; the Lacqueys were as much to seek as the Maids. He whom the Duchess
had employed to carry the Billet to S. Aubin being no more proof than others of
his Coat to the temptations of Gain, and finding no advantage from being his
Mistresses Confident, would not slip the opportunity of getting something from
the Count on this occasion. He told the Count of the Billet, and how he thought
the Duchess became first engaged with the Stranger, not forgetting the Passage
at the Opera. Here I cannot forbear blaming the injustice of most Men, to be so
easily persuaded of the ill Conduct of Women: How many are there who are very
virtuous, yet have not escaped being condemned for debauched, upon the Report
of a Maidservant dissatisfied, or a Foot boy mis-inform'd? This Report passes
to other Women, and seldom fails of coming to the Ears of one or other, who
will be glad of the occasion to speak as ill of another, as she knows her self
to be deservedly spoken of; and will be fure to divulge it very carefully, in
hopes to confound the Criminal with the Innocent: The Story loses nothing by
the Carriage, every one adds something to set it off the better; and there
needs no more to destroy a Woman's Reputation: Of which, I could give you
several Instances.

The Count was much surpised at the discourse of the Lacquey: He believed it
without examination, and his Jealousy made him believe much more: It failed
not to represent to him, that a Stranger of Quality, perhaps as obscure as his
Name, was in favor with a Lady of her Merit and Rank, when she slighted him
who was inferior to few in the Kingdom, for handsomness, Birth, or Employment.
This made him resolve to be revenged of his Mistress, by depriving her of her
Favorite. The Count, though otherwise very civil, was hasty of humor, and
fiery: His Jealousy required him to make his Rival a Victim, which the
goodness of his Nature would hardly consent to: It would have been no hard
matter to ruin his Rival, but his revenge would not have been complete, if
some part of it fell not on his Mistress. After much irresolution, he pitched
upon a fatisfaction no less cruel, than gallant: He had a Domestic, very witty
and intelligent, to whom he discovered his design, and told him he intended to
trust him with the execution; that his first care must be to find out a Wench
who had been debauched through want of Money and Experience, and liked it so
well that she continued the Trade; that he could not fail of choice in so great
a Town, and therefore must pick out the handsomest he could find, but she must
be such as could do him a kindness he should have cause to remember while he
lived: And to that purpose, he was not to spare cost or pains; but withal, to
put her into excellent Habit, lodge her in the best Apartment of the House, and
instruct her how to counterfeit, in her deportment, a Lady of Quality. The
Servant found a Person excellently qualified for the service his Master desired
from her, and so witty that she quickly learnt her Lesson. This was so well
performed, that the Count, who had resolved to have S. Aubin stolen away,
committed the care of it to the same Servant; and took him along with him to
the Duchess's to show him S. Aubin, to prevent a mistake. S. Aubin went
commonly in a Chair, and usually retired from the Duchess's at ten or eleven
Clock at Night. The Count's Servant having made the Chair-men drunk, got others
to wait in their room: S. Aubin, at coming off from the Duchess, not finding
his Chairmen, made use of the next at hand. Three Men, well-arm'd, had order to
guard the Chair: One of them, by the way, whispers S. Aubin in the Ear, that a
Lady of Quality, being passionately in Love with him, had ordered them to steal
him to her: adding, 'twas in vain to resist, for they were able to force him.
St. Aubin, though surpised at the Complement, was so used to extraordinary
Adventures, that he permitted himself to be quietly carried where the pretended
good Fortune waited him: As soon as he was arrived, two Men seized him, and led
him in the dark up a back stair; and having crossed two Apartments, thrust him
somewhat rudely into a Chamber full of Lights, and nobly furnished: One of them
who brought him thither took care to shut the Door fast enough. The Illustrious
Personage, who was there ready to receive him, would not give him time to know
her, but took him about the Neck with demonstrations of a passionate joy, as
true as what is affected can be; you would have thought the rich Habit she was
in had made her forget the meanness of her condition. S. Aubin, resolved what
to do, was not daunted at all, but answered her passion with all the civility
and respect imaginable: But these were not the Entertainment she looked for,
and after long discourse the fair Lady having in vain endeavored by an
affected modesty to raise the Gentleman's Spirits, was quite tired with his
reserv'dness, and attributing his want of boldness to the trouble he said he
was in at sight of her; I come not, says she, to give you trouble, but to
receive Love from you: At this, she hid her face with her Fan, as if she had
been ashamed she had let fall expressions so free. S. Aubin, who thought of
nothing more than how to get well out of the Briars, was in some hopes
observing her modesty, and assured her he had a great inclination to love her,
that he was unworthy so much favor, but would make it his business to merit it
by his services: I will dispense with you in that point, replies she, and,
since I must tell you all, I desire we may spend this night together: S. Aubin
who could not believe what he had heard say of the impudence of some women, and
expected not so very plain English, stood a while mute; And seeing no other
course to take fell at her feet (whom he thought a person of Quality) and
confessed ingenuously he was a Woman: The poor Wench who was made believe she
should be largely rewarded, was in a lamentable fear to lose what was promised
her, if it were once known she had not not done the service expected from her:
which troubled her the more, for that she had designed the money for several
necessary uses, particularly for getting rid of that which made her so fit for
the present purpose of her paymaster, she then fell at S. Aubins feet, and told
him word by word all the intrigue, advertising him the master of the house
(whom she knew not) was jealous of some person of quality. It was no hard
Matter for S. Aubin to guess it was the Duchess, and reflecting with horror on
the Regale provided for him, he made the Wench sensible it was their common
interest to keep mutual secrecy, which was accordingly promised, and having
agreed what to say; the Wench went to bed, which she took care to tumble so as
if two had lain there: S. Aubin lay upon the stools. And on the morrow a
little before day the Wench went according to order to give, a boy who was in
an antichamber hard by, notice of what past, assuring him he might when he
pleased send away the Gallant who was so soundly peppered she undertook he
should never forget that nights work. The boygave his Master this account, and
he was very well satisfied. He sent the Wench word she should blindfold her
lover, and persuade him to be led so into the place Royal, it being too early
to get a Chair: and it might concern her how she got ryd of him. S. Aubin well
pleased to see an end of an adventure had so terribly frightn'd him; forgot not
to give her who had so faithfully served him, some marks of his acknowledgment:
His virtue prompted him to exhort her to live honestly, which he seconded with
giving her some means to do it, he followed his guides, and as soon as he was at
liberty went to his lodging to bed.

When he had rested sufficiently he went to the Dutchess's as soon as he thought
her in a condition to to be seen, and praid her to send one for the
Marchioness, assuring her she had news to tell them would make them very merry:
As Soon as she was come they locked themselves up in a room where S. Aubin told
them the particulars of the adventure he had met with the night before: The
Duchess, who very well knew the kindness the Count had for her, and was
sufficiently acquainted with his jealous humor, presently suspected he had the
principal hand in it, which was confirmed by the circumstances, S. Aubin
related. To put it out of doubt, they agreed that S. Aubin should not for two
days appear at the Dutchess's, and that when first the Count came thither, the
Marchioness should insensibly fall into discourse of S. Aubin, and the Duchess
should express much sorrow for his sickness; which would certainly produce a
discovery of the Counts thoughts of the business. S. Aubin vanished, the Count
came, as he was wont, to the Duchess, and saved the Marchioness the trouble of
the discourse agreed on, by asking the Duchess why she looked so sad: The
Marchioness answered that S. Aubin, whom the Duchess had a value for, was
sick, and that she was troubled for want of his good company: the Count was so
glad at the news that he could not forbear asking very merrily what he aild;
the Marchioness, who knew the reason of the question, said she knew not, and
proceeded no further.

The Duchess, who lived very lovingly with her Husband, had told him the story
of Christina, and how she had got acquaintance with that maid in Man's Clothes:
And being glad of an occasion to make him merry, she scrupled not to tell him
the adventure of the Count, at which they laughed very heartily.

It was a fine time for going into the Country: The Duke having a house within
fifteen Leagues of Paris, was minded to spend some time there, and told his
Wife she would do him a pleasure to bring some good company thither. The
Marchioness being a very Jovial Lady promised to make one; they had a great
desire to have S. Aubin along with them, and the Duchess had invited him two or
three times but could not prevail: when he came to take his leave of these
Ladies the day before their departure, the Marchioness told him, if he would
not go along with them she would discover the secret of his sex. S. Aubin was
loath to go far from Paris for fear of exposing himself (as it is said) to new
adventures, though it was for another reason; yet he was so moved with the
Marchioness's threats that he resolved to go along: the Duke was very glad, and
they promised all to keep S. Aubins Council. When they were got into the
Country the Ladies thought of nothing but their pleasures; Hunting, Gameing,
walking and making good cheer took up their time: The Duchess having
considered that the Count continued his mistake, and still thought her
Criminal, was troubled she had not undeceived him, she spoke of it to her
Husband who thought she had reason, it being ever to a Ladies disadvantage to
give any cause of suspecting her Conduct. They resolved the Duke should write
him a Letter to invite him into the Country: The Count who thought very ill of
that Journey the Duchess had taken, though he did not know S. Aubin went with
her, was glad the Duke had given him the occasion of visiting them, and
imagined the Duke had written without acquainting his Duchess. He got thither
within two days, and was surpised to find so good company; there care was
taken at his first arrival to have S. Aubin out of the way. After Supper the
Marchioness said, she had lighted that day on the pleasantest story in the
World: they prayed her to acquaint the company with it; she excused her self
saying, she had a very ill memory: with that, she stepped a little from the
table, and taking a book out of her pocket where she had writ what she had to
say, she pretended to make use of it to help her memory, and said that a person
of quality had been jealous of a Maid in Man's Clothes, and so went ongiving an
exact and particular account of all that happend to S. Aubin at the Counts, and
how he had been deceived when he thought himself revenged: the Duke and his
Duchess the mean while observed the Count, who knowing himself by the
description to be the party intended, changed color and countenance at every
word: The Marchioness having made a stop at the feigned sickness of S. Aubin,
the Duchess was earnest to know if the Count had been disabus'd: The
Marchioness takes her Book in hand, and read that; the Lady principally
concerned, went shortly after into the Country, and having scrupled the
leaving the Count in a mistake so disadvantageous to her, had prayed her
Husband to invite the Count to come and visit them. But how did she justify her
self, says the Duchess, my Book says no more replies the Marchioness. This
Gentleman, the Count being newly arrived from Paris, may probably inform you.
Never was Man more out of Countenance then he: The Duke pitying the Disorder
he was in, told him S. Aubin was, The Heroine Musqueteer; the Count begged the
Duchess pardon, giving her many sorry reasons to justify himself, which she
little valued: They sent for S. Aubin having first engaged the Count not to
discover the secret: they had good laughing at the adventure; but the Count was
so confounded at it that he durst no more speak to the Duchess, and shortly
after returned to Paris.

S. Aubin in the mean time was not so merry as formerly, the same reason that
stopped his Journey to Bearn would not permit him to be long absent from Paris
with patience: He expected news from the Marquess D' Osseyra, but received not
any, though they had taken care to agree a way to maintain a Correspondence. As
he was walking one day with the Duchess, he spied three Spanish Soldiers
returning homewards from Flanders, he spoke to them in Spanish and asked them
a hundred questions about the Marquess D' Osseyra: One of the Soldiers hearing
him repeat so often the Marquess's name, asked him boldly if he knew him, and
had any concern with him. I have been his prisoner, says S. Aubin, and he used
me so well I shall acknowledge it while I live: The Duchess perceiving by S.
Aubins countenance how glad he was to discourse with the strangers, was willing
to give him time enough to do it at his leisure, and ordered one of her
Servants to entertain them that day, and take care of them: They were scarce
got into the House, but S. Aubin found them out, and addressing himself to the
Soldier, who seemed best acquainted with the Marquess, he asked a Thousand
particulars concerning him. The Soldier astonished to find a Gentleman so
acknowledging, and perceiving him the Marquess's very good friend, confessed he
was his domestic, and had by the way met with those two Soldiers going for
Spain: But as for him he went nofurther than Paris, on business from his
Master: S. Aubin Ravished at the news, and thinking himself concerned in the
Journey, asked if he had not Letters for Christina: The Spaniard astonished to
find him so wellacquainted with the Marquess's affairs, told him he had several
for her; give 'em me then says Christina, forgetting her self to be S. Aubin.
The Spaniard looked attentively on him, and with the cool gravity usual in
those of his Nation, answered he would rather part with his life: I am
Christinas Brother and a good friend of your Masters, says S. Aubin. And you
may trust me with them: but the Spaniard was not to be persuaded out of them.
Christina seeing it and being impatient to have a sight of Letters she so
dearly longed for, confessed she was Christina and had that day disguised her
self into Man's habit for hunting: Old birds are not caught with chaff, says the
Spaniard, I Will as soon part with my life as my Letters, which he bound with two
or three Spanish oaths, and quitting S. Aubin went strait to his Comrads and
set forward immediately for Paris: S. Aubin was upon the point of following
them to set upon them by the way, and force the Letters from them; but fearing
the Consequence of an action so rash in a Kingdom where such violence is not
allowed, he prayed the Duchess to give order for horses to carry him presently
to Paris, fearing if the Spaniard mist of him there, he would return presently
for Flanders. The Duchess not knowing the reason of this haste, endeavored
very civilly to engage him to longer stay. S. Anbin vexed at her unseasonable
civility acquainted her with what had past between him and the Spaniard: The
Duchess in compassion to a Lovers impatience sent horses the same day to wait
S. Aubins coming by the way, who on the morrow went off in her Coach, and in a
short time arrriv'd at Paris. He failed not to go to the place where he knew
the Marquess would address his Letters, and thought it requisite to put on
woman's habit, lest the incredulous Spaniard should scruple delivering him the
packet: soon after the Spaniard arrived, and having desired to speak with
Christina, he delivered the Letters, applauding himself much that he had not
trusted them with a young Gentleman who would have surpised him with untruths:
But he had mistaken his mark, for he could have rather parted with his life
than his Letters: Christina more intent about reading her Letters than hearing
his bravadoes, opened several which pleased her well: I would have inserted
them here for the Readers satisfaction, but there are a sort of Letters very
good for the writer and for the party they are written to, but flat and insipid
to others who have not the key to understand the meaning and apprehend the
delicacy of them: I shall only give you one I thought easiest to be understood.

Attribute my silence to the Excess of my Love: when my letters are written I
look upon them as yours, which makes them so dear to me That I cannot find in
my heart to expose them to the danger of falling into the hands of strangers.
By all those I send you by the express, you will find you wholly take up my
thoughts. It is an age since the beginning of this Campaign: why should the
imanary progress of our armies stop that of my Love. If possible draw near one
of the conquered Towns that I may have the pleasure at last to think I am not
far from you, and that if we lay a siege, as the discourse is, I may flatter my
self with the hopes of having you my prisoner: But for Heavens sake, be not in
the place, for I foresee the Cannon will be ill served when I think it may be
discharged against you. And I would choose rather to lose my office than do it
on such an occasion.


Christina in Reading the several Leters had all the joy a person in love is
capable of after long expectation of news from her Lover.

This was her Answer.

I am very well pleased with your Letters: they are all very passionate. But
you alarm me in telling me you are going to form a siege. I tremble for you
that the success will not answer your hopes: Let me entreat you to think of
nothing but loving me, there you are sure of Conquest, the other is uncertain.
I will draw toward the Frontiers, because you desire it; I know I shall be
better at ease, and I take pleasure beforehand to think I shall hear from you
oftener: Make an end of this Campain as soon as you can, Love will make you
amends for the damage your glory suffers by it.


Christina sent back the Marquess's Man with this answer, and resumed her Man's
Habit, and the Name of S. Aubin.

D' Angosse in the mean time was returned from Bearn, and had, with the help of
the Abbot d' Izette, happily ended what he had to do there on S. Aubin's
account, and much to his advantage; for which D' Angosse expected no small
acknowledgment. He could not imagine but Christina would at length be sensible
of his affection for her: And when S. Aubin would have made him a considerable
Present, proportionable to the service he had done him, D' Angosse took it for
an affront, and told Christina he thought himself not unworthy of her
affection. S. Aubin was so well acquainted with the boldness natural to those
of his Country, that it surpised him not at all: But to undeceive him, once
for all, told D' Angosse he had a very high esteem and value for him, and would
evidence it on all occasions; but entreated him for the future to order his
thoughts better, than to give him occasion to forbear his company, and forbid
him further Visits; which he would infallibly do, if he continued to discourse
him at that bold rate. D' Angosse was too much a Gascon to be discouraged at
this, so that S. Aubin, to be rid of troublesome importunities, was forced to
change his Lodging.

There was about this time, a report that the Confederate Army had invested
Charleroy, and begun already to form the Siege: Most of the young Gentlemen at
Court, and other Volunteers, left Paris upon the news, and went for the French
Army, not doubting but the Marshal Luxemburg, who Commanded it, would attack
the Enemy in their Lines. The Army increased extremely in two or three days,
Volunteers coming in Post from all Parts, and not finding Horses on the great
Roads, some were forced to take by-ways to furnish themselves, that they might
come in time. The Marquess de Fervaques, willing to be there with the first, to
signalize himself on this, and other occasions, had the misfortune to be taken
by the way, by a Party of the Enemies. The Officer who Commanded the Party,
having seized some Books among Monsieur Fervaques's Baggage, opened one, which
proved the Heroine Musqueteer: the Title made him eager to read it. This
Officer had been bred Page to the Marquess D' Osseyra, and not a little
surpised to find the Marquess's Name so often in the Book, he sent it the
Marquess, who was extremely astonished at it.

While every one wondered at the Confederates Resolution to lay Siege to
Charleroy, having formerly attempted it in vain. S. Aubin alarmed to hear the
expedition generally cried down as rash and unadvised, and all France confident
it would come to nothing, began to be afraid for the Marquess D' Osseyra. He
had not the patience to wait information, by the Public News, what was become
of the Marquess; but pushed on by a love, to which no difficulty was
insuperable, rid Post to Charleroy, pretending the cause of his Journey to be
only a desire of honor, natural to the French Gentry: Every Horseman he met
by the way he fancied might me a Courrier to carry news of the defeat of the
Confederates. But when he came to the Army, he found the Confedederates had
been so wise to save him the fright his Love might have put him to for danger
to the Marquess. They had, upon the approach of the King's Army, raised the
Siege, as the best of their Game. The Confederates having made a very good
Retreat, S. Aubin saw there was no cause of further fear on their account, the
Marquess D' Osseyra being safe; but he could not find in his heart to return
for Paris, without giving the Marquess notice: He was so pleased with being so
near the Man he loved best of any living, that he resolved to stay in Flanders:
And having engaged himself in the beginning of the Campain to spend some time
at Valenciennes, at Mariana's Fathers, he took that occasion to continue nearer
the Marquess: And considering it would be difficult hearing from him at
Valenciennes, where Count Magalotti the Governor was very strict to prevent
intelligence with the Enemy, he made sure beforehand of a Ligeois Lad, who
under pretense of carrying Victuals, went indifferently to both Armies; and was
admitted into the Spanish, as well as French Towns. The Ligeois having promised
to serve him faithfully, he went into Valenciennes, and sent the Boy into the
Spanish Army with this Letter.

Your Enterprise of Charleroy put me in such a fright, that I could not wait
the success in quiet: How could I be at rest, when I was to expect every hour
designs against you^ Wherever I went, judge what condition I was in, who
could not wish the glory of my Country, without giving an allarm to my Love;
nor pray for your prosperity, without breach of my allegiance: Make me a-mends
for the trouble you have caused me, by letting me hear often from you at
Valenciennes, where I resolve to stay and see what will become of you.


When the Ligeois came to the Confederate Army to deliver the Letter, he found
all in disorder there, by misunderstanding between the Generals; one blaming
the other for the miscarriage of the business of Charleroy. He was told the
Spaniards were withdrawn and that the Marquess D' Osseyra, Commanded a Body
apart about Ghent: The Ligeois found him there, and having delivered the
Letter, the Marquess rewarded him so, that he had cause to wish he might have
more such Letters to carry, and soon after sent him back with this Answer.

I am extremely obliged to you for the fright you were in, though it be the
greatest harm our Army has done. We are so used to ill success, we are not at
all moved at it: yet I should be he artily sorry for it, but that I am
persuaded you make a difference between me and others; and believe did I act a
part, I would allarm you oftener. But why should our Billets still speak of War,
which ought to be full of sweetness and tenderness? Do you know, our business
is grown Public, and that there is a Book Printed, Entitled The Heroine
Musqueteer? Since we are made the Subject of Romances, let us make an end as
soon as we can, and enjoy the fruits of our Love, without diverting the Public
any longer at our cost.


This Letter was delivered S. Aubin at Valenciennes, where he was received by
Mariana's Parents with Demonstrations of very great joy, and Evidences of a
sincere kindness. They flattered themselves still with the hopes of having him
their Son-in-Law; and being confirmed in this opinion, by his return, they made
him very welcome, and gave him the best entertainment they could. Only Mariana
appeared troubled at the sight of S. Aubin: An Italian Captain in Magalottes's
Regiment, had, by his subtle insinuations, got that advantage over the
simplicity of the honest Hemyn, that she told him all that had passed between
her and S. Aubin; and the design of her Parents to make her his Wife,
notwithstanding his great indifference for her. The Italian pretending himself
very much concerned for her, used all his endeavors to undeceive her thoughts
of that chimericall Marriage, assuring her, S. Aubin who apparently was a
person of quality, had no thoughts of marrying her, having not as much as writ
her a line since he left her: I know, adds he, the French well enough, they
engage themselves with women only for divertisement, Ambition and the thirst of
Glory are their predominant passion: But, it is no small prejudice to a fair
Lady so lovely as you are, to be exposed to the slights of a presumtuous
youngster, who perhaps makes sport in his Country with the obliging offers
your parents have made him.

Mariana having been frequently discouraged thus, found it no hard matter to
forget S. Aubin: And the Captain finding her so well disposed, failed not to
offer her his service; and to make her sensible of the great desire he had to
merit her good opinion. It Is no wonder a young maid who fancied all Men as shy
as S. Aubin, should be taken at last with the assiduity of a smooth tongued,
and cunning Italian. Love, that you may be loved is a maxim seldom fails, and
whether it were that the Captain was in love with Mariana, or pretend'd it
only, she was quickly comforted for the absence of S. Aubin by the care this
Italian took to entertain her with frequent discourses of the passion he had
for her, and the indifference of S. Aubin: when he returned to Valenciennes she
had disposed of her affection, and all her Parents cares to the Frenchman were
but so many pieces of mortification to Mariana, who complained of them to the
Captain. But when she reflected on her obligations to him, and the pleasure of
being beholding to so handsome a Gentleman, her sense of gratitude could not
but reproach her for loving another. She acquainted the Italian with her
reflections, who alarmed at the discourse, made use of all the interest his
suttleties had gained in the credulous Girl: And considering he might never
have so good an opportunity for making his fortune, he was so fearful S. Aubins
presence might revive Marianas former inclinations, and so loath to lose what he
thought himself almost master of, that he made use of such means to make sure
of Mariana, it was not in her parents power to dispose of her to another. He
forgot neither promise nor oath, and pressed her so hard that she thought it
but reasonable togrant him the highest favors his love could expect: her
mother reproached her for entertaining the Captain so constantly and slighting
S. Aubin. But her Mothers discourse and S. Aubins cold civilities were merely
thrown away upon her, who had received such effectual proof of the Captains
kindness: S. Aubin was so taken up with writing Letters to the Marquess D'
Osseyra, and so pleased with reading his answers, that it is no wonder he
concerned not himself much with other peoples business. Mariana having improved
her wit by conversing with the Italian, advised him to get acquaintance with S.
Aubin, as an infallible means to be welcome to her parents, by reason of the
esteem and kindness they had for that Frenchman. Another man would have
scrupled seeing a Rival so dangerous as S. Aubin, but an Italian has an
absolute command of his passion: The Captain dissembling the hatred he had for
S. Aubin on marianas account, did him all the civilities imaginable, of which
the Italians never are Niggards; S. Aubin as courteously returned them. The
ouning Italian easily had the advantage of the Frenchmen that in a short time
they were intimate Friends: and the Captain to discover S. Aubins designs upon
Mariana frequently made her the subject of their discourse. S. Aubin frankly
declared he had an esteem for her, The Captain willing to try him further, and
know whether he loved her, replied cunningly that few are satisfied with a bare
esteem of a young Lady of Mariana's qualities: I can go no further, says S.
Aubin, I have endeavored to disabuse her parents; and should be very sorry
they should for hopes which can never take effect, let slip the opportunities
of settling their daughter. The Italian well satisfied with an answer so
agreeable to his desires, concluded from S. Aubins discourse he was very well
born, and thought not of matching into an inferior family, which made him ever
after make his Court to S. Aubin with extraordinary deference.

Marianas Father was every day more and more charmed with S. Aubin's behavior
and carriage, and heartily sorry to see him so little concerned for his
daughter. The Italian frequented the house under pretense of seeing S. Aubin.
Mariana's Father taking him to be a discreet man and one that had an interest
in S. Aubin, whom he visited so often, took an occasion to tell him how much
his family was engaged to S. Aubin, and that he designed to have him his son in
law, though he seemed not very fond of the alliance. The Captain glad of this
confidence resolved to make good use of it, he presently fell to giving him
Counsel, and offered to speak of the business to the Frenchman, which the
Father accepted of with a great deal of pleasure. The Italian being now become
mediator in the affair consulted Mariana what answer he should return her
Father from S. Aubin, and amused the good man with delays and put-offs to gain
time for a favorable occasion, for Mariana to declare to her Parents the
necessity she was under of being married to the Captain. Lovers once Fortunate
flatter themselves with hopes they shall continue so still: But a Cruel
accident, which is so troublesome to Married Women, so terrible to maids, and
sometimes fatal to widows, was like to have broken all the measures these
Lovers had taken. Mariana found her self troubled with qualms, and with fitts
occasioned by the familiarities of the Italian, so that she thought it high
time to make her Parents acquainted with it: and believing her mother more
tender and compassionate (in such cases especially) she confessed ingenuously
the condition she was in, and was so far from complaining of him who had caused
it that she extold his merit in very passionate terms; praying her to keep the
business private, her Lover who had promised her marriage, having important
reasons to conceal it for some time. The Mother thinking she spoke of S. Aubin,
was so far from blaming her daughter that she excused the matter, and promised
to speak it to her Father, that order might be taken to have them privately
married. The honest Fleming was so glad of the news of a marriage he so
passionately wished for; that he presently sent for a notary to draw the
Marriage-setlement, wherein he gave his Daughter very great advantages in
favor of her pretended Husband that was to be: The two Lovers had signed, and
the Father had the pen in hand for the same purpose, but missing S. Aubins name
in the contract; he told the Notary he had observed on the like occasions that
the parties to be married first writ their names, and others afterward to make
good the contract as Parents or Relations, or to render it authentic as
witnesses: Having so said he gave the Notary the Pen, which put Mariana into a
terrible fright, and all the wit the Italian had taught her was little enough
to help her out: she told her Father S. Aubin was the name of a place, but that
the Name he found in the instrument was that of his Family. This convinced the
Father that he took the pen again and signed the deed. Being one of the most
considerable Burgesses of the town, and willing to pay a respect to the
Governor, he prayed the Captain who stood by, and past for S. Aubins good
friend to accompany the Notary to Count magalotts, and desire his leave for the
Marriage: The Governor having been possessed of the thing by the Captain, and
glad an officer of merit had found an occasion to make his fortune, readily
gave his consent, and agreed the Ceremony should be performed that evening in
his Chapel. Mariana had the wit to order her business so well, that her
Parents went not to the Chapel, but relied on an Aunt of hers she had gained:
This was done with such speed, that S. Aubin was marrie'd in the imaginations
of Mariana's Parents before ever he heard of it. The Mother gave so strict a
charge to all her family, to keep the matter private, that every one thought
himself sole confident of the intrigue: while the Ceremonies were a doing, S.
Aubin withdrew to his ordinary retirement. A maid who opened him the door,
desirous to insinuate her self into his favor, whom she looked upon as her new
Master, wished him joy: The Father seeing him enter, and thinking that out of
respect to him he was loath to appear to him, till he had repaired his Daughters
honor, embraced him with great transports of Joy. Mariana's mother having
spied her imaginary son-in-Law, would not give her Husband time to speak, but
took him about the neck, calling him her dear Son. S. Aubin who understood not
the meaning of their troublesome caresses, thought them mad. As he was going to
answer their impertinent discourse, a friend of the family who alone was made
privy to the business prevented him by giving him Joy: never was man more
perplexed than S. Aubin. He prayed them seriously to be undeceived one for all,
since for very substantial reasons it was not in his power to marry their
daughter. The Mother angry at so unexpected a declaration, replied that since
those reasons had not been strong enough to keep him from dishonouring her
Daughter, they were too weak to dispense with his marrying her; adding, if he
did it not, she would punish their infamy by strangling them both with her own
hands: The quarrel increased, and S. Aubin was in danger of being ill used had
not the Governor come in with the new-marryed couple. This looks so like the
last scene of a Comedy that the Reader will scarce believe it. But I pretend
not authority over men's opinions, I allow every one Liberty to think what he
pleases. My Memoires tell me Mariana fell at her parents feet and presented
them her Husband, whom they were obliged to receive, the marriage having been
celebrated with all the formality usual, and Mariana in a very hopeful
condition to make them Grandsires in a short time. At last they were all
satisfied, the Italian that he had got a good fortune, Mariana, that she was
Married to whom she loved; and S. Aubin, that he was delivered from her Parents
persecutions.

But the mind of Man is never content, and the Italian, (like others ingenious
in tormenting themselves) though he saw himself Master, by his Marriage, of a
considerable Fortune, and far beyond his hopes; comparing the plentifulness of
his present Fortune, with those former wants all his Industry was scarce able
to preserve him from, he had a Crotchet in his Pate; there was something more
than ordinary in the matter, that a Gentleman of Bergamo, no otherwise
considerable than for a Company of Foot which he had gained by the ordinary
means, should Marry a rich Heiress, unless there were some secret reasons for
it. In a word, his good Fortune had so refined his Fancy, that he passed the
same judgment of his Wife most Men do, whose Wives suffer them beforehand to
know what they should have been ignorant of till after the Wedding, and
imagined Mariana had been as kind to some other as to him. Of all he could
think of, S. Aubin appeared the most likely to be the Man: Having considered it
well, he applauded himself secretly for his penetration, and was confirmed in
his opinion that he had but S. Aubin's leavings, and was beholding for his
settlement to Mariana's being with Child; who, not daring to let her Parents
know it, resolved to be Married to him, when S. Aubin had refused her: He
doubted not but they had long held Correspondence, and continued it; and loath
to be any longer their Cully, resolved to observe their motions. S. Aubin who
had formerly avoided being alone with Mariana, that she might not have occasion
to think he loved her, was often in her company after she was Married; the
reason for absenting himself being now over, and her Conversation more witty
than formerly, so that having reasonable good Company at home, he thought he
might well save himself the trouble of seeking it abroad. S. Aubin's
Assiduities with Mariana, gave the Captain new umbrage: He durst not yet
complain of it to Mariana, or forbid her his company: his Jealousy the while
represented the most innocent Actions as criminal. He was the more troubled to
see most of the French Gentry in Flanders going for Paris, when S. Aubin, who
probably had no great business at Valenciennes, said not a word of returning
for France, for which he could not imagine any cause, but a Correspondence with
his Wife: He watched them so narrowly, that he quickly perceived S. Aubin often
employed the Ligeois into the Country, and at his return quitted all business
to speak with him. The Captain's suspicions made him fearful of every Shadow:
He was very desirous to know what business the Ligeois was sent about, and gave
order to an Italian Footboy, a very trusty Fellow, to hide himself in S.
Aubin's Chamber, and hearken diligently what the Ligeois said. The Footboy did
as he was Commanded, and reported to his Master that the Ligeois said not a
word, but gave S. Aubin a Letter which he read very attentively, and sighed
often in reading it. The Captain, well acquainted with Love-tricks, was so
possessed with Jealousy, that he presently fancied the Letters were his Wife's,
who perhaps had some Confident in the Town who conveyed them to the Ligeois.
This suspicion, how ill-grounded soever, gave our Italian no small disturbance.
He resolved to find out the bottom of the business; and, with the help of the
Footboy, found the means one day to draw the Ligeois into a Chamber of the
House, somewhat remote from S. Aubin's, or any other Lodging-room: Having
locked him up there, he threatened to run him presently through, if he would not
tell him truly whence the Letters came he carried S. Aubin so often: The
Ligeois not knowing what Relation S. Aubin had to the Marquess, but judging by
the good usage of the one, and liberality of the other, that the business was
of Moment, was very loath to answer him; understanding how dangerous a matter
it is to hold Correspondence with an Enemy, especially in a place of War. The
trouble the Ligeois appeared in heightened the Italian's Curiosity, that he
repeated his threats, and put himself in a posture to execute them. The Ligeois
affrighted at it, promised to tell him all if he would but save his life: The
Italian promised it, and the Wretch made him acquainted with the Correspondence
between S. Aubin and the Marquess D' Osseyra. The Captain surpised at the
news, made no doubt but they held intelligence against the State, and was glad
at heart for so favorable an occasion to be revenged of S. Aubin, under a
pretense of zeal for the King's service. The smallest things are of consequence
in matters of this nature, so that notwithstanding his promise to the contrary,
he made no scruple of securing the Ligeois, the Maxims of Italy having taught
him he was not obliged to be a slave to his word: He advertised the Governor;
who, having questioned the Ligeois, sent an Officer, with fifty Soldiers, to
arrest S. Aubin, who had received notice the Ligeois was a Prisoner; and though
he knew not the reason, yet he apprehended he might have let fall something in
discourse about the Letters he brought him: and that they might not be seen, he
burnt them; but it went so much against the grain, and he did it so slowly,
that he was busy about this cruel Sacrifice, when the Officer sent to take him
entered his Chamber, and after a sorry Complement or two led him into Prison.
The Officer failed not to give the Governor an account what he found in S.
Aubin's Chamber, and what a sight of Letters there was in the Fire. This last
Circumstance made every one think him Criminal, and that he had burnt the
Letters to prevent their being made use of as evidence against him. This
business made a great noise, and, as it is usual on such occasions for every one
to add something to the Report, this raised the news that passed then current,
of a great Plot discovered at Valenciennes. The Ligeois was examined very
strictly, and so frightened with the tortures they threatened to put him to, that
he confessed all he knew, and a great deal more: His frequent Journeys to the
Spanish Army, the Money received from a General of the Enemies, and the burning
of the Letters were evidences so clear, in the opinion of the Public, that no
doubt was made both the Wretches would shortly suffer. S. Aubin's good Mien,
and Curiosity, gained him Compassion from all that saw him: Every one pitied,
but none durst excuse him, for fear of being brought in as accessory to so
ticklish a Crime. He was the while under extreme perplexity in Prison, every
thing seemed to fall out cross: His stay at Valenciennes was looked upon as
mysterious, especially after he had declared he had no design to Marry Mariana.
It was hard to justify himself without confessing his Sex, which he could
scarce find in his heart to do. Being examined, he defended himself with saying
he had written to the Marquess D' Osseyra as his particular Friend; but that
his Letters had nothing in them that related to the King, or the State. The
Judges were not satisfied with his answer, and perhaps would have condemned
him, had not the Governor interposed his Authority, at the request of some
Ladies, to have the judgment suspended till he might receive orders from the
Court.

As they seized what was in S. Aubin's Chamber, an Officer belonging to the
Governor had the Curiosity to read some Books found there. Among the rest he
read the Heroine Musqueteer, where he saw the names of the Marquess D' Osseyra
and S. Aubin so often repeated, that he fancied S. Aubin the Prisoner might be
the same with S. Aubin Christina. He told the Governor, and showed him the
Book. The Governor read it with pleasure; and having, amongst S. Aubin's
things, found a very tender Letter of the Marquess D' Osseyra's, perhaps the
only one had escaped the Fire, he was fully persuaded S. Aubin was the Heroine
Musqueteer, but was willing to be further assured of it. He sent for the
Prisoner, showed him the Letter, and told him he doubted not but that which
appeared only a Letter of kindness, was a Cipher to cover some matter of State.
S. Aubin showed him so many reasons to the contrary, that the Governor
believed him incapable of holding intelligence against his allegiance; but
demanded of him a Letter to the Marquess D' Osseyra, to forbid further
Correspondence. This Proposal put S. Aubin to the groan; and not able to give a
good reason for refusing to write so, he appeared so disordered, that he
thought it might be justly taken for a clear conviction of his Crime, yet this
trouble justified him more than all his Eloquence: For the Governor imputing
it to his love, discovered him to be Christian, and no longer criminal. The
business was hushed up, and S. Aubin set at liberty. The whole Town was glad of
it, and especially Mariana's Parents, who still had kindness for him, and had
been afraid to lose him, the Italian had taken such care to inform them daily
of some new Circumstance of his Crime.

While S. Aubin was in Prison, the Captain, who made account to have his
revenge of S. Aubin in the punishment the State would inflict on him, could not
forbear telling his wife something of it, and at the same time reproaching her
with her falseness. A reproach a Woman truly virtuous is most sensible of: And
the Husband who uses such language to his Wife, does but raise in her a desire
to be revenged of an unjust suspicion by real disloyalty, when she sees him
make so slght account of the reservation she values her self upon: Mariana, who
no otherwise knew of any disloyalty but by her Husbands discourse, and could
reproach her self for nothing but having been too credulous, was so touched to
the quick with her Husbands ingratitude, that she resolved to punish him for
his Jealousy; it was long ere her resentment mastered her virtue, being
unresolved whom to make choice of to assist her in her revenge: But when S.
Aubin was set at liberty, she fixed her choice on him; and loooking on him as an
Instrument very fit for her turn, she used him more obligingly than usual:
Every day she resolved to make him acquainted with her design, but when they
were together she had not the power to do it, flattering her self perhaps he
would guess at it. After vain expectation he would save her the confusion a
complement of that nature would put her in, she acquainted him at length with
the injustice of her Husband, but had not the power to say all she intended,
shame stopped her mouth; and S. Aubin contented himself with blaming the Italian,
without making any offer of his service to flatter her hopes.

Mariana not discouraged at this, added, a man of his humor deserved to have a
wife that would be revenged of him. S. Aubin replied coldly, it was an honest
woman's part to think more of her duty to her self than her Husband. This would
be sufficient to keep her from any act of disloyalty, and for his part he
little valued a woman who was reserved on no other account but that of her
Husband. Mariana who expected S. Aubin would have offered to go halves in the
revenge she designed, was extremely surpised to hear him preach honesty to
her. And not able to endure longer the vexation it gave her, retired into her
Chamber, to weep it out there.

It Is natural to desire what appears difficult to obtain. S. Aubins resistance
heightened Marianas passion: to justify the discretion of her Lover; she fancied
he answered her thus, only to please her, who he knew was no Lover of very free
discourse: I should have explained my self better, says she, how else should a
man I have always used hardly perceive a sudden change so much to his
advantage. With that she resolved to speak more plainly, having observed her
time to make a new trial, she told him she had reflected on what he had said to
her of honest women's duty to themselves, but found those reasons too weak to
resist the motions of a predominant passion. I cannot endure my Husband, and
the desire I have to be revenged of a man who makes so ill acknowledgment of
what I have done for him, makes me forget all I would have regarded on another
occasion: And since I am extremely concerned to make choice of a discreet man,
I have pitched upon you: she stopped there, thinking she had said enough: S.
Aubin, who at first understood not what revenge she intended, thought she would
have made away her Husband, and abhorring so violent a design, blamed her
extremely, telling her, a Wife must bear much with her Husband, that the
happiest marriages are attended with trouble; and that if all Wives who are not
satisfied with their Husbands should take such violent resolutions, no man
would dare marry; adding, he would willingly adventure his life against any one
had offended her, but that he thought it not the part of a wise wan to meddle
between Husband and wife. And leaving Mariana (in the dissorder you may
imagine) he thought fit to acquaint her Parents with the passages, and to take
measures with them to prevent further inconvenience; but he had the discretion
to tell them no more than that they would do well to prevent dissorders
mightarise out of some small difference between the Italian and his wife, for
he perceived they were both too much disposed to quarrel: S. Aubin at their
request took it upon him to speak to the Captain, and advised them the mean
time to calm Mariana; he found out the Italian, and having told him he had
something of consequence to acquaint him with, he made him a long discourse of
the extravagant humors of most women, and the unhappiness of Husbands, who
have not the art of complying with their weaknesses, insinuating it was a wise
man's part to prevent noise, and cover handsomely the extravagances of an
humoursome woman; the Italian not knowing what the discourse tended to; took it
worse from S. Aubin than he would from any man, fancying he intended to insult
over him, by reproaching him with the easiness of his wife. Being a man of
courage he had not the patience to endure the affront, but laid his hand on his
Sword, without giving S. Aubin time to finish the discourse, S. Aubin stood
upon his guard, and defended himself, but they were parted without advantage on
either side.

Marianas Parents tired themselves with preaching to her to live in peace with
her Husband, when a Servant brings them news of a duel between S. Aubin and the
Italian, which surpised them all, though on different accounts: The
Father-in-law believed his Son had ill taken the good offices S. Aubin would
have done him, and so occasioned the quarrel: Mariana applying all to her love,
fancied S. Aubin had a generosity refined to that extremity that he pretended
himself unconcerned for her that he might be in in a condition the better to
vindicate her. But the revenge she expected was of another nature, such as she
intended to share in the pleasure of it with him who took it. The Captain
arriving, complained to Mariana's Father of the injury he pretended done him by
S. Aubin, and told him he would no longer endure the insolence of that
Frenchman, who abused the respect they had for him. The Father heard his
complaints with attention, and was surpised at the news of an intrigue between
his Daughter and S. Aubin, which might be likely enough: The Governor being
told of the quarrel, sent for the Captain, who confidently told him the reasons
he had to draw upon S. Aubin. The Governor not able to forbear Laughing at a
jealousy so ill grounded, brought the Captain to himself, by telling him S.
Aubin was a woman.

S. Aubin perceiving the secret he was so careful to conceal, was grown
puplick, left Valenciennes, and went to Mons, being about five Leagues off,
giving out he was an English Gentleman, related to the house of Crouy: The Duke
of Arschot who was Covernour received him very kindly: and as distrustful as he
was of strangers in a Garrison of that importance, he could not believe a young
Gentleman of so good a mien capable of any ill design. A Walloon Colonel, who
had served in England, was very civil to him; and the morrow after his arrival
invited him to supper. S. Aubin was no sooner come into the Colonels house,
but he saluted his wife, she was a Lady too well qualified to be capable of
ingratitude, and having been with her Husband at Cambray when it was taken, she
presently knew S. Aubin to be the Marshall Luxembourgs Aid de Camp, who had
complemented the Ladies there from his General; she was extremely glad to see
him, and to have that occasion to express her acknowledgment of his civilities:
She fancied her Husband, to please her with the surprise, had brought him in as
an Englishman; and she, to be even with her Husband, asked S. Aubin (as if she
had not known him) what News from England. S. Aubin, not perceiving himself
discovered, answered very naturally, and like a Man of that Country, affecting
to speak broken French, and giving so exact an account of Affairs, that the
Collonel's Wife thought her self mistaken, in taking him to be S. Aubin: She
excused her self for it, and her Husband made her mistake the Subject of his
Raillery all Supper-time. S. Aubin having dexterously escaped discovery here,
resolved not to appear before the Duchess of Arschot, knowing she had great
Relations at Brussels, and would not fail to let her Friends know of it. He
gave the Marquess D' Osseyra notice of his being at Man's by this Letter.

The difficulties I found in receiving news of you, and giving you an account
of my self, made me resolve to come hither. Your Campaign is at an end, and I
am in a Town you have no suspicion of: Consult your love, and tell me what I
shall do to keep within the Rules of Decency. I will wait your answer before I
appear at the Duchess of Arschots, that I may not expose my self to the noise
may be thereby occasioned; And you shall find, under the Name of S. Aubin,

Your Christina.


S. Aubin having sent this Letter to Brussels, by a trusty Messenger, resolved
to wait an answer in his Chamber, but was deceived: For the Collonel's Wife
having visited the Duchess of Arschot, for want of other discourse, told her of
the English Gentleman, who had supped the Night before at her House, and how
she mistook him for a French Gentleman she had seen at Cambray: Having added a
great deal about his Wit and good Mien, she raised in the Duchess a desire to
see him. The Colonel undertook to bring him to her, found him in his Chamber,
and having magnified the good service his Wife had done, in giving the Duchess
a Character of his good qualities, he offered to bring him to the Duchess. S.
Aubin, vexed at his officiousness, excused himself with saying his Head ak'd.
The Colonel, who expected not a refusal, and had engaged to bring him, pressed
him to go along, assuring him he should not stay a Moment. S. Aubin was
perplexed, being loath to see the Duchess before he had an answer to his Letter,
and not well able to get rid of the Collonel's importunity, he prayed him to
allow him a little time of rest, and he would go with him in the Evening. The
Colonel went away well satisfied with the promise, and S. Aubin continued
unresolved what to do. Having thought well of the matter, and knowing the
Duchess a generous Person, he chose rather to see her privately, and be known
to her; than expose himself publicly to the surprise his disguise might
occasion. He left his Chamber before the Colonel returned, and being got to
the Duchesses, sent her word there was a Stranger had business of consequence
with her, and desired private Audience: The Duchess went presently into another
Room, where S. Aubin was soon after admitted. As soon as S. Aubin appeared, the
Duchess at first sight knew who it was; and without allowing her time to speak,
kindly embraced her, expressing much joy to see her. S. Aubin gave her a brief
account of Affairs, and the design brought him thither; and thinking it better
to appear to the Marquess D' Osseyra in Maids Habit, prayed the Duchess
admittance once more into her Family; which the Duchess readily granted. All
things agreed on, the Gentleman made as if he withdrew; and presently after
returned by another Door the Duchess ordered to be opened on purpose. S. Aubin
had provided a Suit of Woman's Clothes at Paris, and having quickly shifted the
Habit and Name of S. Aubin, into that of Christina, the Duchess produced her as
a Gentlewoman of Lille, who was come to spend some time with her. It is the
Prerogative of Great ones to be believed without examination of Particulars by
Inferiors; and Christina was taken by all, for what the Duchess declared her
to be. The Duke of Arschot was the first deceived: The Colonel in the mean
time was returned to S. Aubin's Lodging, where he was told the Gentleman was
gone. Reflecting then on what had passed at Table, he made no doubt but the
pretended Englishman was the Frenchman his Wife had seen at Cambray. He was
sorry he had been so credulous, and resolved not to appear at the Governor's,
for fear of being asked news of the Stranger. The Duchess, willing to divert
her self with the Adventure, sent for the Colonel and told him, that being his
Friend, she took that occasion to let him know the Duke was much surpised to
hear he held Correspondence with the Enemy, and had entertained at his House,
at Supper the last Night, a French Spy, though his Wife knew him to be an Aid
de Camp of the Duke of Luxemburg's. The good Colonel, astonished at the
discourse, prayed the Duchess to continue his Protectoress; assuring her, by
all that is sacred, he was innocent, and had taken that young Gentleman to be an
English man. The Duchess, pretending her self satisfied, promised to clear him.

The Duchess of Arschot, fearing to draw trouble on her self, writ to one of
her Friends at Brussels, desiring advice how to govern her self, as to
Christina; and whether the Spaniards would not take it ill she entertained a
French-woman. The Duchess de Villa Hermosa saw the Letter, and she told her
Husband of it. The Marquess D' Osseyra was in the mean time gone to Mons, in
search of S. Aubin; but could have no account what was become of him. The
Colonel informed of the Marquess's arrival, waited on him to tender his
service; but finding him troubled S. Aubin was gone, he thought they had
discovered some Plot, and made haste away for fear of being apprehended as
having had a hand in it. The Marquess could not, with decency, be long at Mons
without visiting the Duke and Duchess of Arschot: He went to their House, and
was received with all the respect due to his Birth and Merit. The Duchess, who
guessed the cause of his coming, perceiving, by the distraction appearing in
his Countenance, the trouble he was in, told him they had that day surpised a
French Spy, drawing a Map of the Town; and that she had much ado to prevail
with her Husband not to cause him to be hanged up immediately. The Marquess
full of fear for S. Aubin, asked her, with much trouble, what was become of the
Criminal. You may question him if you please, says the Duchess, for he is yet
in my Chamber; and I am sure you will be for giving him his Life: Having passed
into another Apartment, There is the Criminal, says the Duchess, showing him
Christina. The Reader may well think they embraced one another e're she could
make an end of her Complement. Christina charming as she was, appeared much
more so to the Marquess. They were both so well satisfied at the sight of each
other, after so many cross Accidents, that they continued some time looking one
upon another, not able to speak a word to express their joy. They failed not
afterward to say all the kind things two Lovers are capable of on such an
occasion. The Marquess thanked the Duchess for the pleasant Cheat put upon him,
and confessed he was come with a design to Marry his dear Mistress, and prayed
her the Ceremony of it might be performed at her House. The Duchess, not
expecting so sudden a Resolution, could not handsomely refuse him; but desired
time to think on it, and to receive an Answer from Brussels; adding, he would do
well to send a Courrier to the Bishop for a License. Christina saying she
thought that very necessary, and desired it might be so; the Marquess sent away
a Gentleman express to the Bishop, and charged him to dispatch that Affair with
all expedition. The two Lovers, with a pleasing impatience, expected the return
of the Courrier, and rejoiced the while to see their Constancy so near being
Crowned with mutual Enjoyment. The Marquess was persuaded Christina's thoughts
were altogether Heroic, that she loved none beside him, and was above the
weaknesses commonly incident to those of her Sex. How odd soever it might
appear, that a Man of his Quality should Marry a Maid that had run through so
many different Adventures, his love, and the knowledge he had of the Virtues of
his Mistress, prevailed with him above all other considerations. Christina, who
had not on any other occasion been sensible of Love, but yielded her self to
the sole merit and perseverance of the Marquess, was extreme glad to see her
troubles so near an end, and her self upon the point of being united to the
only Man of the World, who had the secret to please her, and she thought worthy
of her affections: But this Joy was short-lived, and the satisfaction they had
to be together some hours, seemed granted them only to heighten the grief that
was quickly to succeed upon their absence from each other, with small hopes of
ever seeing one another again.

The Duchess of Benavidez, who, after the taking of Cambray, was returned into
Spain, and could not pardon the Marquess D' Osseyra his insensibility, had
informed his Mother of the Passion he had for Christina, and had given her so
ill-favored a Description of that poor Maids Disguises and Adventures, that
the Mother was persuaded her Son was bewitched: And attributing his Passion to
something supernatural, she prayed Don John of Austria (who had a respect for
her, having long known her at Arragon,) to obtain an Order from the King, to
the Governor of the Low Countries, to obstruct the Marriage of the Marquess
with Christina; and (if need were) to interpose the King's Authority to prevent
it. The Order was sent into Flanders, as strict as the Marchioness could wish
it, and the Duke de Villa Hermosa, very zealous for the service of his Prince,
and desirous to demonstrate an exact Conformity to the Orders of the Court, and
repair, by performing what was in his power, the misfortune he had to lose many
places it was not in his power to defend better than he had done; being
advertised, by the Duchess of Arschot's Letter, of Christina's arrival at Mons,
presently sent thither the Captain of his Guards, with the King's Order
addressed to the Duke of Arschot, declaring he must be answerable to the King
to have Christina forthcoming. And being told the Marquess D' Osseyra was gone
from Brussels, he presently thought him gone for Mons; which obliged him to
dispatch a Courrier thither, to tell the Marquess he must presently attend him.
The Courrier arrived as soon as the King's Order; and the Marquess (from whom
the Duke concealed the Order he received) believed the French intended to
attacque Brussels; and went away in all haste, having taken leave of Christina,
and recommended her earnestly to the Duchess. When the Marquess came to
Brussels, he was extremely surpised when the Governor showed him the Order
from Spain, and prayed him not to stir out of Town; for if he did, he must
interpose his Authority to hinder him. The Marquess was upon the point of
returning for Mons in spite of the Governor's orders, when a Letter was
brought him from the Duchess of Arschot, acquainting him she was much troubled
a Higher Power had put it out of hers to express her respects for him in the
Person of his Mistress, who was now in a Covent, where she should be used very
civilly; but was not to be spoke with by any but the Abbess of the place, the
Order from Spain being positive in that Particular. This was a deadly blow to a
Man in Love, as the Marquess; but it must be born with, and he must be content
to write into Spain to endeavor to obtain a Revocation of the Order. Several
Persons of the highest Quality writ in favor of Christina, giving her the
Character of an extraordinary Person; and that her Virtue, and excellent
Qualities, deserved to be used with particular respect. The good Offices
intended the Marquess by Letters so much to the advantage of his Mistress, had
an effect quite contrary to his Friends expectation. The King of Spain having
been told of her, and scarce believing what was reported of her, expressed a
great desire to see so rare a Person: And having asked if it were not possible
to have her brought into Spain, Don John of Austria promised she should. It
being Don John's Custom to make the King acquainted with the greatest Affairs
of Europe, by way of Divertisement; as in the beginning of his Ministry he made
him desirous to learn to write, by showing him a Letter from the Duke of Savoy,
all of the Handwriting of that young Prince; and assuring his Majesty he
might, if he pleased, do as much in three Months. The King thought well of it,
and learnt to write. Order was sent to the Governor of the Low Countries, to
Embarque Christina to be conveyed into Spain: the Duke de Villa Hermosa,
willing to save the Marquess D' Osseyra the trouble the removing his Mistress
to such a distance might occasion him, kept this Order very private. When
Christina was told she must go a Shipboard, she was at Death's-door;
especially when she heard she was to go into Spain and the Marquess to stay in
Elanders, with so little hopes of ever seeing her more. These Reflections made
her forgot she had ever been S. Aubin, and yield her self wholly to the
Sentiments of Christina; her love drawing Tears from her in abundance, which
the fear of Death was never able to force from her. She took Shipping at
Ostend, in a Vessel fitted, and armed, on purpose to convey her for Spain. She
was recommended with so much care to the Officers of the Ship, that they
thought her a Princess of some Sovereign Family, which the Spaniards had stolen
away for reasons of State. The Gentry of that Nation are great adorers of
Women, and those in the Ship used her with that respect that helped her to bear
her misfortunes more patiently, a Woman, what condition soever she is in, being
still sensible of the deference expressed for her. An Officer in the Ship
(whether Lieutenant, or Ensign, I know not) possessed with an opinion of
Christina's Highness, and having perhaps read in Don Quixot, that the first
duty of a Cavalier is to succor Ladies in distress, observing Christina one
day all bloated with crying, watched an opportunity to speak to her in private,
and told her if she was so averse against going to Spain, as her tears and her
sighs gave him cause to believe, she might signify her pleasure to him, who
would bring her where she desired, or set fire of the Ship. Christina, well
acquainted with the extravagance of the Spaniards, in what concerns Ladies,
doubted not but he spoke in good earnest; but looking on his Proposal as
impracticable, she thanked him, pretending she would not consent to it, for
fear of exposing a Gentleman of so much bravery to so certain danger. Who ever
knows the humor of the Spaniards will easily believe such an answer, from a
fair Lady, was more than sufficient to oblige this Officer to undertake
impossibilities for her sake: He conjured her to employ him in her service,
assuring her he would endeavor to answer the good opinion she had of his
worth. Christina, unwilling to act any thing rashly, advised him to consider a
little of the matter; and because they could not, without suspicion, discourse
long together, she prayed him to put in writing the means he thought proper to
bring about his design by: The Officer promised it, and withdrew to perform it.
As he was drawing up his Memorial two Vessels of Tripoly attacked the Spanish
Ship: I will not trouble the Reader with a tedious Relation of the Sea Fight,
but acquaint him only that Christina, choosing rather to go into Spain, where
she might hope to see the Marquess D'Osseyra once more, than to fall into the
Turks hands, did extraordinary Actions in the Fight; and having observed a
Soldier who scarce knew how to handle his Arms, took them out of his hands,
and made so good use of them, that she contributed very much to the shameful
Retreat the Turks were forced to make.

When all was quiet again in the Ship, the Captain and Officers, who all their
life had been under the vulgar error, that a Woman is incapable of Actions of
Valor, were astonished at Christina's dexterity and courage. They Complemented
her for it, but having not in their Language Terms suficiently expressive of
their admiration, they expressed it by looking on her without speaking a word.
The Spaniards are great Bouncers, much given to Hyperboles, one called her the
Queen of Amazones, another said she was an Angel descended from Heaven for
their aid. They were so well satisfied with the Miracles she had done (for so
they called them) that had she taken her advantage of the favorable
disposition they were then in, she might have easily persuaded them to land her
in France: But she had a very staid wit, not apt to be led with fancies, so
that she never thought of it. In the mean time the Officer who had offered her
his service, being confirmed in the fancy he had of her high Birth, by the
Actions he had lately seen, took a new resolution to set her at liberty; and
blindly, following his fancy, drew up an extravagant Project, suitable to the
Capacity of a Man bred very meanly. It was divided into Articles too ridiculous
to be inserted. The substance was,

That he would steal Christina, by killing the Sentinel at her Cabin Door; and
because this could not be done without noise, he pretended he had provided
against it by a hole he had made in the Magazin of Powder, at which he would
discharge a small Gun, set fire of the Powder-Room, and blow up the Vessel, as
soon as they were got away, to a convenient distance, in the Longboat. The
only Reward he desired for this brave Action, was to be sent to London with the
Character of Ambassador from the Princess, to desire his Majesty of England's
Protection. He was so pleased with the fancy of his Project, that one day he
told Christina she would without fail be at liberty in few days, all things
being near ready, and presented her the Paper; Read it, says he, and you will
find I have taken my Measures very right. Christina, who had already no great
opinion of his wit, received his Memorial, imagining he might write with more
judgment than he spoke. The extravagances of the Spaniard would at another time
have made her excellent sport: But now she pitty'd his folly; telling him,
coldly, her mind was altered, and that she was very desirous to see the Court
of Spain. Any Man, but a Spaniard, would have been offended at the slight; but
what ever happens a Spaniard finds Fuel in it to feed the Fire of his Vanity:
He replied she could not do better than go see the Grandeur of the Spanish
Court, which, in his opinion, was the most Majestic of the Universe.

The Ship this while drew near the Coast of Spain, and Christina, not
forgetting she was still further and further from the Marquess D' Osseyra,
afflicted her self every day so much the more. As soon as they landed, the
Master of the Vessel took Post to carry the Duke de Villa Hermosa's dispatches
to Court. When he arrived there, they asked him a hundred several Questions
about Christina. He spoke much in commendation of her beauty, but when he came
to the Particulars of the Engagement with the Vessels of Tripoli, he extolled
to the Skies, the valor and courage of our Heroine. This appeared so strange,
in a Country where Women spend their time in an excessive softness, and are
generally fearful, that all who heard the News, spoke of Christina with great
admiration. He who first gave the King an account of her, and occasioned his
desire to see her, failed not to acquaint him with what the Captain said of
her: The King was willing to hear the Captain himself, and sent for him. The
King's presence, and the desire to please him, inspired Eloquence into the
Captain, who gave his Majesty an account of the Fight, and particularly of what
Christina had done; which he displayed with such advantage, it heightened the
King's desire to see her. A Coach of the King's was immediately sent away, to
bring her with more convenience, and expedition to Court; where, by the
diligence of the Person employed to attend her, Christina arrived in very few
days.

The end of the Third Part.
THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE FEMALE WARRIER.
The fourth and last Part.
CHRISTINA being arrived at Madrid, was much troubled to find every one there
so earnestly desirous to see her: The Countess of Benavidez had given so
strange an account of her, and the Captain of the Vessel, in which she was
transported into Spain, was so careful in publishing her Action against the
Corsaires, (to which the People added so many fabulous Circumstances) that her
valor was generally attributed to a supernatural principle. Some confidently
affirmed she was a Witch; but this ridiculous report vanished as soon as she
appeared at Court, where she answered exactly all the Questions Don John of
Austria asked her in the Kings presence. She had the good Fortune to see
whatever she spoke was pleasing and well taken; to which her Modesty, good
Mien, and speaking Spanish so well, did very much contribute: The Court was
well satisfied with her discourse, and the Prince Don John of Austria assured
her she should be well used, and treated with respect: When she was retired,
the King, and the Prince his Brother, spoke much to her advantage: The
Courtiers, as well out of a natural inclination the Spaniards have to speak
always in favor of Ladies, as of custom to approve whatever the King likes,
highly applauded his Majesty's sentiments. They made particular Observations
and Remarks on all that appeared charming in Christina, and discovered such
excellency of wit in expressions dropped casually from her, that the King was
persuaded they had done her wrong who had censured her conduct; and of all
those Gentlemen who waited on his Majesty, there was not one but could have
wished himself the place of the Marquess d' Osseyra in her favor: Don John
gave order she should have Lodging and Diet at the Kings charge: These
distinguishing favors, and the obliging character given her by those who knew
her, made several Ladies, of the highest Quality, very desirous to see her.
It Is not to be expected they should have, for one of their Sex, the
complaisance of Gentlemen, who, taken at first sight with the splendor of a
beautiful Lady, observe not her defects, or at least pass over and excuse them:
Women, on the contrary, overlook, or (at best) take very slight notice of any
thing that appears pleasing and agreeable in another, and apply themselves with
diligence to magnify and blazon all her imperfections, and whatever they
believe displeasing or unhandsome. As soon as the Ladies had seen Christina,
they blamed their weak judgments who had cried up her beauty, and endeavored
to make them sensible of several defects in it, though all the World is not yet
of these Ladies Opinion in the case: The Countess de Benavidez perceiving the
presence of Christina, would deface the ill impressions she had given of her,
endeavored to prepossess the Courtiers to her disadvantage: But being
frustrated on that side, and looking on the Ladies as better disposed to serve
her design, who are usually pleased to hear any thing to the prejudice of one
of their Sex, who has gained the reputation of eminent; she spoke of Christina
with that scorn and contempt, that several of the Ladies were unwilling to
appear in the same Room with her. Notwithstanding the diligence of the
Countess, and the discourse of the Ladies of her Cabal, the young Gentlemen of
the Court liked Christina very well: But the Count Talara, first Gentleman of
his Catholic Majesty's Bedchamber, no longer able to stifle the Flame kindled
in his affections, frequented her company, and omitted nothing to make her
sensible he was in love with her. Christina, perceiving it, did all that could
be expected from a virtuous Lady to disabuse him, and used all the Discourses
and Arguments, a Woman, who would discourage a Lover and had no desire to be
loved, could invent on that occasion: The Count de Talara, not discouraged by
her severities, continued to love and wait upon her wherever she was to be
seen, being not of the opinion of that experienced Lover, who said it was in a
Woman's power to deterr any from loving her, by a cold entertainment, and at two
or three several times telling them dryly she was not pleased with the address.
Christina having followed this maxim, and several others for curing the Count,
thought it in vain to discourage him any more, but resolved (without giving her
self the trouble of undeceiving him further) so to order her actions, and shape
the conduct of her life, as not to give him cause of the least hope of success:
The Count attributing Christina's slights to some particular a version he
apprehended she might have against him, fancied she was otherwise inclined, and
being a Person inferior to none, in handsomness, quality, or wit, was troubled
extremely with this imagination: To satisfy himself in this particular, he
made some Persons, who now and then visited Christina, acquainted with his
passion, and prayed them not to see her any more. The Gentlemen of Spain have
that deference and respect one for another, that a request of this kind is not
extraordinary there: Christina very carefully avoided all occasions of being
alone with the Count, and went frequently to Court to entertain his Majesty
with an account of passages in Flanders. And having one day expressed a great
desire to see the Escurial, to know whether that famous House answered the
reputation it had in Europe; the King was glad there was any thing in Spain
could move the curiosity of a Person who had seen so many varieties, and prayed
two Ladies of the Court to bear her company thither, to show her the
magnificence of that Palace, and the rare devises in several Apartments there,
which Philip the second put so great a value upon: Order was given the Ladies
should be sumptuously treated there: Count Talara, having heard of it, would
fain have been one of the company, but was indispensably obliged by the duty of
his place to attend the Kings person, and as things then stood in the Court of
Spain, there was no absenting himself without manifest hazard of his Fortune.
As he was thinking of a Person he might confide in, to speak in his favor to
Christina on this occasion, news was brought him that the high Steward of the
Kings Household, who was his Kinsman and Friend, was newly returned from the
Army in Catalonia, where he had a command; the Count gave him a visit, and
having confessed he was desperately in love with an excellent strange Lady, who
was to be on the morrow at the Escurial, with several other Ladies; he conjured
him to make use of the Privilege of his place, in going to the entertainment,
where it would be in his power to do him good offices with his Mistress, under
pretense of taking care of the Ladies. A Gentleman never refuses an employment
of this nature, and this Friend of the Counts, readily accepting the charge he
gave him, promised to acquit himself well of it. He failed not to go the next
day to the Escurial; where, having given the necessary orders, he went into a
Gallery the Ladies were walking in; who, having notice of his arrival, advanced
to receive him, believing he had taken this Journey merely out of respect to
them: He had scarce begun to pass a Complement of civility upon them, but
having cast his Eyes on Christina, he stood still as a Statute: The Ladies were
astonished, especially Christina, who fixing her Eye earnestly on him, knew him
to be Don Philip de Palafox, of whom I spoke in my first Volume, as the Person
who passed the Pyrences to steal her away. Christina cried out, frightened to
see her self so near a Person who had been deeply in love with her, and one
whom she thought she had highly offended. Don Philip had not heard of Christina
since he went into the Army in Catalonia, whence he returned but once to Court,
to take his Oath of High-Steward of the Household, the place being void by the
death of the Marquess Darizza his Father; so that 'twas no wonder he was
surpised at so unexpected a sight of a Person who had been so dear to him, and
by her insensibility had made him resolve to go into the Army: Those who have
had any experience in Love, will easily agree, the sight, after long absence,
of a person we have tenderly loved, and never prevailed with, cannot but cause
extraordinary emotions in the heart of a Lover. All Men are apt to flatter
themselves in their passions, and Don Palafox, not able to imagine what strange
Fortune should bring Christina (a French-woman) into Spain, when the Two Crowns
were so deeply engaged in War, presently fancied she had repented her ill usage
of him, and probably was returned into Spain in search of him. And continuing
to interpret all things to his advantage, he thought the slights Count Talara
complained of, and the loud cry her late astonishment, at first sight of him,
had forced from her, effects of her passion for him. Being full of these
fancies, he said a thousand extravagances; and Christina was so surpised, she
answered not a word: The Ladies who stood by, taking notice of the astonishment
on either side, helped to bring them to themselves again; and finding Christina
much disordered by the presence of Don Philip, they prayed him to withdraw,
which he could not deny them; yet hoped the disorder he saw Christina in boded
him much good. He was no sooner gone, but Christina, observing that the Ladies
were in pain to know the cause of her trouble, yet so discreet as to forbear
asking her, acquainted them with what had past in her Country, and whatever
else had any relation to her concern with Don Philip: This lessened their
wonder at her astonishment, and was easily believed by them, who were well
acquainted with the headstrong humor of that Gentleman.

Don Philip the while considered the accident he had newly met with, and being
naturally vain, flattered himself with an opinion Christina was in love with
him. It was a pretty while ere he came to a resolution whether to return to the
Ladies, or retire to save Christina the confusion he feared his presence would
put her in before the Company: After much debate it was carried for the
retirement, in confidence his Mistress would thank him for his discretion, and
esteem him the better for it. Count Talara impatient to hear the success of his
Friends Journey, had given order he should have notice as soon as Palafox
arrived: And going to his House soon after his arrival, he asked him, with much
concern, what news of his Mistress: You have a Rival, answered Don Philip, who
has long been in love with the fair French woman, and he is a Gentleman I have
a great interest in, and my very good Friend. Know you not, replied the Count,
thinking he meant the Marquess d' Osseyra, that the King has explained himself
in that particular, and declared, he will not consent to their Marriage: You
surprise me, says Don Philip, (not comprehending the Counts meaning,) I did not
think the Court so well informed of the affair. A Kinsman of Don Philips coming
in, interrupted their discourse, and prevented farther explication: The Count
took his leave, and Don Pallafox remained very unquiet at the news he had newly
told: Going to the King on the morrow, he found Christina there, giving his
Majesty an account of every thing worthy observation at the Escurial: They
asked if she thought it a better House than Versailles; there is no proportion
between them, says Christina, Versailles being more considerable for the
Waters, and delicate Gardens about it, than the magnificence of the Buildings,
which are neat and convenient, but not stately; but the Escurial is a Palace
of very large extent.

Don Philip pretending he knew not this strange Lady, asked those who stood by
who she was, while she spoke to the King: They told him what they had heard of
the Marquess d' Osseyra's passion, the Fights she had been in, in Flanders,
and, in a word, all those Stories the Public had added to the truth of her
Adventures. The King being gone to Counsel, Christina retired, and Don Philip
gave her his Hand to bring her to her Appartment, which she would not refuse
him, for fear of notice being taken of it in so public a place: As soon as he
came where he might speak to her in private, he assured her he had always loved
her, and that if he had been guilty of disrespect in endeavoring to steal her,
she ought to pardon it, as an effect of the excess of his passion, his
intentions having been always very good. Christina willing to disabuse him,
told him his explications were to no purpose, since she had disposed of her
Heart to another, and waited only a favorable opportunity to complain to the
King of the injustice of her Enemies, and to entreat his Majesty's protection,
if she should marry the Marquess d' Osseyra; otherwise, that she might have
liberty to spend her life in a Covent. With that she burst out into Tears, at
the thought of the Marquess; which Don Philip seeing, (that he might not
afflict her more by discourse he perceived troublesome to her) went away, but
was so much concerned for her, that he made it his business to be better
instructed in the particulars of her affairs.

Having remembered himself that the Countess de Benavidez had resided long in
Flanders, he gave her a visit, and falling insensibly into discourse of
Christina: The Countess gave him a description of her, much like that she had
formerly given the Marchioness d' Osseyra, and many others; insinuating that
all her disguises were the effects of a criminal passion; which Don Philip was
so far persuaded of, that he repented he had ever loved her: Most Men are
disposed to believe what they hear reported of the ill conduct of Women, and
the gross Error of most strangers, especially Spaniards, in the hard censures
they pass of the liberty Women enjoy in France, did not a little contribute to
confirm Don Philip in the sentiments the Countess had inspired him with. He
thanked her for her information, and having that Evening met with Count Talara,
as the King was going to Bed, he told him he would cure him of the passion he
had for Christina, assuring him he knew by a very good hand, she was unworthy
the affection of a Person of Honor: The King having that Instant called the
Count upon business belonging to his Place, he had not the time to answer Don
Philip; and presently after, every body withdrew: The Count, by his privilege
of first Gentleman of the Bedchamber, was to lie there that Night: The passion
he had for Christina, made him muse all Night of Don Philips Discourse; at
last, reproaching himself for having endured Language so much to the
disadvantage of a Person he loved, he thought himself obliged, as a Gentleman,
to demand satisfaction, and got up with a resolution to fight Don Philip,
though Duels are forbidden in Spain: But the Prince dispensing very much with
the severity of the Edicts, they are not observed there as exactly as in
France, so that Gentlemen fight Duels there on very slight occasions. Count
Talara having written a Billet to Don Philip, he delivered it to one of his
Servants, a Navarrois in whom he placed great confidence, commanding him to
carry it to Don Philip: Challenges being out of fashion in France, I have
inserted the form of this, translated word for word, being as follows.

Whoever dares speak to the disadvantage of Christina, lies: She is of
unquestionable Virtue; and he cannot be a Man of Honor, who judges otherwise
of her: If you are of a contrary Opinion, let me find you at one a Clock after
Midnight, at the Toledo-Gate, where you shall receive the Punishment due for
the wrong judgment you have past of her.


The Count recommended this Billet so often, and with so strict a charge to the
Boy, that it gave him the curiosity to know what it contained. He was much
surpised at the reading it, and having been born near Christina, and heard so
many extraordinary things of her, he had a kind of inclination for her, and
thought he might do her some service in letting her see a Billet she was so
much concerned in; and slipped privately into her Lodging to show it her:
Christina having given him some Fruits of her acknowledgment, charged him to
carry it safe to Don Philip, and acquaint her with his answer, telling him,
(the better to engage him to it) it was of very great consequence to her.

Don Philip, having received the Billet, was extremely offended with the
outrageous Language the Count had made use of, and told the Boy it required no
answer, but he would give his Master an answer at the place appointed. The
Navarrois gave Christina an account, and then his Master: While the Count was
fitting himself to appear at the assignation, Christina was in Tears,
unresolved what to do. She considered, that as things were carried, this Duel
must needs produce very ill effects, since the Relations of both the Gentlemen,
would infallibly join with the Marchioness d' Osseyra, to ruin her, and
perhaps prevail with the Court to take some violent resolutions against her.
She was sensible likewise the Marquess d' Osseyra would be extremely
displeased, to hear she had been concerned in so public a manner, and in a
business of such noise in the Face of all Spain: A Woman, how small soever a
share she has in a Quarrel happened on her account, being sure to suffer by
it; the public (which judges of things by appearances, without examining the
truth) being always ready to blame her: Having made these reflections, she
resolved to prevent their fighting; she had scarce formed the design, but she
repented it, reproaching her self for being so little sensible of her
reputation, boldly and securely wronged by Don Philip. With that she gave her
self up wholly to what her Anger, her Courage, and desire of Revenge suggested
to her, and with the help of a French Merchant, got her a Suit of Man's Cloths,
a Sword, and a Perruke. About an hour before the time of the assignation, she
cunningly gave it out, the Count Talara was to fight a Duel; without mentioning
Don Philip: This was enough to alarm the Counts Friends, who arrested him in
his House. Christina in the mean time went to the place of Rendezvous, and
having spied Don Philip, though the Night began to grow very dark, she attacked
him so briskly, that she gave Don Philip a desperate Cut, which he had
certainly revenged, had he not been instantly hemmed in by five or six Men, who
seized both the Combatants. Count Talara's Boy, who loved his Master well, and
feared the success of the Duel, had given notice of it to a Gentleman who was
both their Friends, and having got together some other, ran with them to the
Gate of Toledo as they began to fight: They had put out their Flambeaus for
fear of discovery, and 'twas so dark, they could not discern one Person from
another, but hastily feiz'd on them; and having put them into several Coaches,
carried them to Don John's Apartment, that the Prince, who is extremely beloved
by the Nobility, might take up the matter. But the Wound Don Philip had
received, obliged them to take him to a Chirurgions, who (perhaps to heighten
the value of the Cure) presently said it was very dangerous, but that he would
warrant the Cure. One of those who had parted them was already got to Don John's
to advertise him of the business; and as he began to give him an account of the
Particulars, he spied Count Talara standing very quiet in Don John's Chamber:
He was so disordered, to see there a Man he thought he had left in his Friends
hands in another place, that it was not in his Power to continue his discourse.
The Prince, observing the astonishment of the Man, told him he had sent for the
Count, that he might be informed of the Affair, and that he would take care
there should be no Swords drawn. Don Philip is mortally wounded, says the
Gentleman, and we thought it had been by Count Talara. They were all surpsiz'd
at this, especially when told, that he that wounded Don Philip was in a Coach
at the Prince's Gate. As they were under the impatience to know who it was,
Christina and her Company entered the Chamber. Every one wondered to see a
young Man of so good a Mien. Christina addressing her self to Don John,
informed him what had obliged her to disguise her self; and the course she had
taken for staying the Count, that she might revenge, in Person, the injurious
discourse of Don Philip: Her resolution was commended by all, and her courage
admired. The Prince, to divert his Majesty with the sight of this disguise, led
her into his Majesty's Chamber; telling him, as he entered, he was come to beg
his Majesty's pardon to be granted that Criminal, who had wounded one of the
bravest Men in his Kingdom. The King fixing his Eyes on Christina, presently
knew her, and thought the discourse of the Prince, his Brother, had no relation
to Christina: But when he was informed of what had happened, he blamed Don
Philip extremely, for drawing that misfortune on himself, and assured Christina
of his Protection. Don Philip being soon after almost cured of his wound, Don
John made him and the Count embrace one another, and obliged Don Philip to ask
Christina pardon. He was so ashamed to have been wounded by a Woman, that he
left the Court, and accompanied his Brother into Cicily, where he was to take
Possession of the Archbishopric of Palermo.

While matters went thus in Spain, the Marquess D' Osseyra was in Flanders,
where the Duchess of Arschot, who had a design to have him married to a
beautiful young Lady her Relation, amused him continually, pretending to send
him every day some news of Christina, whom the Marquess thought still safe in
the Covent, so careful had they been to conceal from him her Voyage into Spain.
He fancied the long silence of his Mistress an effect of her modesty, as
knowing her Letters were to pass through the hands of the Duchess; and he
expected every hour to receive License to return into Spain, where he designed
to beg his Majesty's permission to marry whom he pleased. Christina was alarmed
with continual fears the Marquess had forgotten her, having heard nothing of
him since she left Flanders. The late Duel had occasioned a thousand new Tales
of her, in a Court where they are possessed with an opinion Women are good for
nothing but matters of Love, not a Person but was infinitely desirous to see
her; so that she could not stir a foot but she found her self compassed with a
Throng of People, which made her resolve to beg his Majesty's leave to go into
a Covent.

An illustrious Princess, who owes her Birth to Italy, had her Education in
France, and by I know not what Freaks of Fortune is now in Spain, having heard
various Reports of Christina's Conduct, had the Curiosity to inquire strictly
into it; and to be satisfied of the truth of her Adventures, writ for that
purpose into France, and the Low Countries. Soon after she received Letters
which confirmed the judgment she had formerly given in her favor, and assured
her, Christina's disguise was a pure effect of a Martial inclination she had a
little too eagerly pursued. This Princess, who by her own experience knew a
Woman may, without prejudice to her Virtue, love Traveling, Hunting, and
several other Exercises, commonly looked upon as proper only for Men, prayed
his Majesty he would be pleased she might take Christina into her House. The
King was content, and Christina accepted the offer with the greater
acknowledgment, as being upon the point of entering into a Covent, where she
expected vexation enough from the Reflections of the Nuns, who, though little
acquainted with the World, might have waggery and malice sufficient to torment
her. It Is hard to express whether the Princess was more satisfied with the good
humor and Complaisance of our Heroine, or she with the goodness and
obligingness of her Protectoress: They agreed so well in their tempers, they
quickly came to have an entire confidence in one another, and mutually imparted
their most important Secrets. Christina having one day declared she was
troubled there were Books published of her Adventures. You have no reason to be
troubled at that, says the Princess; it is my fortune too, with this difference,
that those which concern you are true Relations of what has happened to you;
whereas I have not had a hand in any thing they have written of me, though the
Writers have had the malice to interlard their Relations with Circumstances so
probable, many take them for true. Christina observing the Princess concerned,
advised her to publish an account of her Life, to disown all others, and
discover their falsities; and gave so many reasons for it, that the Princess
(who is a Lady of great wit) applied her self to the writing it on the Morrow.
Her first design was to write it in French, as a Language spoken in most Courts
of Europe; but having considered there are few understand it in Spain, where
she was concerned to clear her self, she published her Memoires in Spanish, and
some Copies of it have been transmitted into France.

The Princess lodged at Madrid, with a Lady of the highest Quality, and a
Relation of the Prince her Husband. This Lady was a Widow, and one who more
than any other, blamed the least liberties Women take; saying, there was little
difference between a Woman really faulty, and one that is but suspected; the
Reputation of a Woman being so delicate, that a mere suspicion, however
ill-grounded, may ruin it. The Princess had often, but in vain, endeavored to
convince her of her error, and persuade her that a Woman may be so virtuous as
to have nothing to reproach her self with; but it is not in a Woman's power to
stop the Mouths of her Enemies, from venting Stories, and Tales of her; which
is too common in the World. The Widows severity was proof to all reasons. The
Princess was discoursing one Evening to Christina, the foolish and obstinate
conceitedness of this Woman, and what difficulty there was in dealing with a
Person wedded to so inconvenient and unjust an opinion, and that she was
troubled she was obliged in decency to see her so often. Christina, who studied
to divert the Princess, promised her to Act a Part which should undeceive the
Widow by her own experience: She was fully informed of all that passed at the
Widows, and had observed she was very short-sighted: She was a Catalonian by
Birth, and would be thought to descend from the ancient Counts of Barcellona.
Whenever a Person of Quality of that Province came to Court, she would be very
angry, and think him ill-bred, if he came not to do her homage. Christina
knowing all this, put on a Gentleman's Habit; and having taken order that if any
came to the Gate, answer should be made, the Widow was not to be seen that day:
She gave her a visit under the name of Don Artal de Cardona, newly arrived from
Catalonia. The Widow, who was somewhat superannuated, being much pleased a
Gentleman so handsome and well born should give her a visit, and speak so much
in praise of her Family, (for Christina had attacqu'd her weak side) she gave
Christina the kindest reception imaginable: Their-discourse was long, and
before parting the Widow prayed Don Artal de Cardona to do her the honor to
see her again often: Don Artal promised it, and withdrew, and gave the Princess
an account of the success of the first visit. She admired the wit and address
of Christina, and prayed her not to omit any thing to make the Widow in Love.
The Princess having visited her the same day, she could not forbear falling
presently into discourse of the handsome Catalonian, and relate several
Particulars to his advantage, being liberal of her praises, and extolling his
wit and good Mien; adding, she knew him from a Child, and that then he promised
great matters.

Two days after, the pretended Don Artal went to see the Lady again, and
knowing very well what praises please a Woman best, especially one who is
precise, and stands much on her honesty, he fell a commending her Virtue and
Conduct, and by little and little slipped insensibly into the Subject of her
Beauty. Discourses of this kind never displease a Woman, especially a Widow,
whose condition, age and pretenses to Virtue oblige her to live retired. She
heard all with delight, and the concern she began to feel in her self for this
Gentleman, engaging her to eye him closer, and more attentively than before, he
appeared so handsome, she thought she had never seen any Man so lovely. A Woman
in years being more coming than others, at the third visit she was desperately
in love with him. Christina gave the Princess an exact account of all, who not
comprehending Christina's design to abuse the poor Widow thus, asked her one
day what she proposed to her self by it: I will convince her, says Christina,
how virtuous soever a Woman is, it may be accounted a piece of merit in her to
resist the Attacks of a Man of good Mien, and some indulgence is due to those
who are every day exposed to temptation.

Christina sometimes waited on the Princess to the Widows, because they lodged
in her House, and took great care to alter her voice in discoursing with them.
Being alone with her, she had the waggery to ask the Widow the name of that
handsome Gentleman she saw now and then enter her Apartment. The Widow, tickled
with the praises Christina gave a Man she had a kindness for, told her a long
Story of his Birth, Estate, and many other Circumstances; adding, he was her
Kinsman, which was the reason she allowed of his frequent visits. Christina
applauding all she said, found she had discovered the Secret to please her: And
not satisfied with playing upon her under the name and disguise of Don Artal,
would needs be her Confident; which she found no hard matter to attain, by
continuing her Commendations of Don Artal: As soon as she had shifted Don
Artal's Habit, she would presently run into the Widows Chamber, to tell her she
had seen him pass by, and that it was plain he was in Love. The Widow deceived
by a discourse that flattered her desires, and fearing Christina might think
Don Artal was in Love with another, and not with her, revealed to her at last
what she thought to have concealed from all the World, and imparted the Secret
of her love for Don Artal, desiring Christina's advice; who answered, that in
matters of that nature she had best consult her own heart, and consider the
bent of her affections; but that if any Passion were excusable in a Woman, it
must certainly be that she entertained for a handsome Man: Christina could not
say this without blushing, and her heart having reproached her for having been
so free in her discourse, she took her leave.

The desire we have to prevail for something we aim at, engages us often in
more discourse than is necessary; and it is sometimes very dangerous to be
eloquent. The Widow, reflecting on all Christina had said in praise of Don
Artal, (which yet fell far short of what she thought he deserved) concluded,
from Christina's discourse, she did not dislike the Catalonian: And being
through her age more inclined to Jealousy, she resolved to put a trick upon
Christina, by pretending all she said to her was only to discover what she
thought of Don Artal. The next visit she gave her, Christina began (as she had
used) to speak of Don Artal: The Widow interrupted her, telling her she might
do well to change the discourse; adding, very seriously, she loved not the
company of Persons so coming: She spoke this with such an Air of modesty, it
might have deceived the most judicious. Poor Christina found her self
disordered by so unexpected an answer, and her own Virtue causing her to
approve of the Widows discourse, she went away much troubled and perplexed, not
having the confidence to answer a discourse that reflected on her modesty. When
she came to the Princess, she complained of her misfortune in very lamentable
expressions, as if the most innocent actions still turned to her disadvantage.
The Princess, who was very discerning, and very much mistrusted those Women who
are over careful of outward appearances, told her, she had run too hastily into
the Snare, and that possibly the Widow did but pay her in her own Coin.
Christina, who had been frighted at this Adventure, took courage at the
judicious discourse of the Princess, and resolving to know the truth, put on
her Man's Habit. The Widow the while applauded her self for the good success of
her Plot, in ridding her of so dangerous a Rival: She expected, with
impatience, her Cardona; resolving, for the future, to take her advantage of
the eagerness of his addresses: As soon as he came in, she gave him the usual
reception; caressing him in the highest manner imaginable, with design to
inspire boldness into him. And as closely as she adhered to her Virtue, her
Love made her that day express a little forwardness, which Don Artal seemed not
to understand. The Widow, who had a great opinion of his wit, wondered to see
him so dull; and was confounded at his changing his discourse, and falling upon
the Subject of her high Birth, in terms which would have been pleasing enough
to the Vanity of the Lady, had she not been that day under a strong influence
of the Planet of Love, which for the time had the Ascendant of her heart; and
Don Artal very well knew it, though he had the malice not to take notice of it.
She did all she could to make him reassume the former discourse, and he as
carefully avoided it, magnifying the brave Actions of one of her Ancestors, who
had signalized himself in driving away the Moors out of Granada. But she was
then indisposed for War, and expected a Language less Martial, and more tender.
Don Artal soon after took his leave, and the Widow remained very ill satisfied
with his bashfulness. The Princess, sensible of the distraction she was under,
thought it would be a pleasure to her, to have the liberty of musing alone of
her imaginary Lover: and having learnt of Christina all the Particulars of the
last Scene, she observed how careful most Women, especially the precise, are to
salve up the appearances, not much regarding the essential part, if they may
but cheat the World, and be esteemed Persons of a severe life, and strictly
virtuous: while those who converse much with the World, making small account of
some little liberties they take without scruple, are not safe from obloquy and
censure, though really provided of a great stock of Virtue; while the others
enjoy their Amors privately, and triumph in public for the applause this
counterfeit reservedness procures them. In truth, said the Princess, those of
our Sex are very unhappy in being obliged, besides the satisfaction due to
their Conscience, to satisfy the World, which is always disposed to believe
the worst of us. It Is certain, replied Christina, we cannot always blame them,
there being Women of all Characters, who by their ill Conduct draw upon
themselves very hard Censures, and too often very deservedly; though it must be
agreed the Example of one guilty Woman, gives occasion for condemning an
hundred innocent.

The Spaniards, though they hate the memory of the Moors and Sarazens expelled
Granada, Murcia, and Leon by Ferdinand and Isabella, yet they retain to this
day several of their Customs; particularly, their Gallantries, their
Bull-sports, and darting the Cane on Horseback, Divertisements the Court of
Spain is very much taken with, where Opera's are not known, and their Comedies
(for the most part) ill. It was then a time of great rejoicing at Madrid; not
for the taking of a Town, but to celebrate the Birth of their Monarch. The
Princess was invited to see the Sports, and took Christina along with her. I
shall not give you here a Description of these Sports which prove mortal to
many who think their Valor consists in daring a Bull, letting fly at him with
their Darts, and then retiring with much skill and agility, though it
frequently happens the Bull is too quick for these Gallants, tosses them in the
Air, and gores them with his Horns; which sometimes dispatches them into
another World, and generally maims them in this. This piece of fool-hardiness
were excusable in ordinary People, who are drawn to it by Custom, and applause
of the Populace; but cannot be too much blamed in young Gentlemen of the best
Quality, who hazard their life to so little purpose, in fighting with Beasts as
they do in Spain: where you may see them bravely mounted with a Dart in their
Hand, expecting, in the middle of a Piazza, the coming of a Bull madded by the
People; and though he come at them with a fierceness capable to astonish the
highest courage, they bravely attacque him, and pierce him so dexterously with
their Lance, that sometimes they run him quite through the Body: But you may
also see the Bull sometimes unhorse them, to the extreme peril of the Rider,
and terrible fright of the Ladies. This Solemnity where this Princess and
Christina attended, was like others of the kind, where the fortunate rashness
of those who came off well was applauded, and the tragical miscarriage of
others lamented. The Morrow after these bloody Sports, the Cavaliers run
Courses on Horseback, and dart the Cane as they run; which is done in this
manner. They appear at the Barriere, with a Headpiece, and light Armor, made
(one would think) of Steel pollish'd white; and have commonly some Devise of
gallantry, or some Motto on their Shields, and a multitude of Ribbands of the
color best pleases their Mistresses. Christina had seen several of these
Courses, and having in the Armies performed the most violent Exercises, she
thought this not very difficult, where all she had to do was to spur her Horse,
and let fly a Cane with dexterity. She told the Princess she would gladly run a
Career, and ask the Widow for a Devise, the better to assure her of her
Passion. The Princess thought her in jest; but our Heroine telling her she
doubted not but to come off well, the Princess undertook to provide her fit
Equipage; and Christina, under the name of Don Artal of Cardona, went to the
Widow for a Devise, letting her know she would run a Course for love of her,
since other young People did it for their Mistresses, only he desired her she
would give him a fitting Devise. The Reader may expect one of those witty ones
so usual in Spain, but a Woman of her humor orders her life quite otherwise
than the rest of her Sex: One so precise being no less careful to conceal, than
an airy vain Coquet to make known she is Courted: The Widow refused to give Don
Artal a Devise, telling him she was not of those Women's humor, who judge of
their Servants love by the Color of their Ribbands. I rely not, adds she, on
such slight appearances, too often deceitful; I must have better proof of your
Passion, to persuade me it is real: (The truth is, she expected such proof as
Christina could not give:) If you loved me, as you pretend, you would rather
stay with me while they are darting the Canes, and would be more willing to
give me proof of your love in my Chamber, than in a public place: what is done
there generally serving only for matter of discourse to the Spectators. Don
Artal assured her he loved her passionately, and thought to have given her an
Evidence of his esteem of her, in carrying her Colors and Devise at the
Course, being ready to do any thing she could desire to convince her of his
love. Were your love as real and sincere as you would make me believe, would
you put me upon the necessity of appearing so forward, and not guess at part of
what is expected from you? Don Artal returning no answer, to a discourse so
easy to understand, the Widow was so ashamed she had spoken so freely, and,
withal, unsuccessfully, that she turned about presently and locked her self in
her Closet, for fear her tears should betray her. Being there alone, she gave
vent to a torrent of tears despair forced her to; considering with her self,
that having lived several years retired from Company, and free from those
Passions young Widows are usually troubled with, (for at six and forty years of
age she counted her self of their number) she had the misfortune to be taken
with the addresses of a hare-brain'd young Fellow, who perhaps designed only to
fool her: The next moment she consulted her Glass, which telling her she had
charms enough left still to procure love, she attributed Don Artal's
reservedness, to the tenderness of his years, and want of experience: She was
so pleased with this fancy, and thought it so reasonable, that she could no
longer doubt but the timerousness of her Lover, was a pure effect of his small
acquaintance with the World, being newly arrived from Barcellona, where he had
not used to see Persons of her Quality and Birth; besides, she knew young
Country Gentlemen have such Chymerical Idea's of Ladies of Quality, that they
think it enough to honor and admire them, without daring to push on their
Passion any further. While the Widow was thus deep in meditation, Christina,
sufficiently ashamed at what she had heard, went back to the Princess, whom she
found busy about her Equipage for the Course, not doubting in the least but
the Widow had given the Devise: But when Christina informed the Princess of her
answer, (though her modesty made her leave out several particulars) the
Princess could not forbear laughing, especially when told by Christina she
durst go no more to the Widows, for fear of being put out of Countenance, and
quite shamed by her forwardness.

On the Morrow the Princess and Christina were in a Balcony, near the King, to
see the Courses. As soon as the Gentlemen appeared, all Eyes were fixed to
observe their Devises: Count Talara, as he passed under the Ladies Balcony, put
off his Headpiece, making them a very low Reverence: His Motto was, Quiero
mucho, ye spero poco; that is, My love is great, and my hope small. That
concerns you, says the Princess to Christina: It put her to the blush, and the
King observing it, had the Curiosity to enquire the reason: The Princess, very
glad of an occasion to divert him gave him her sense of Count Talara's Motto;
and added, that Christina could, if she pleased, perform a Career as well as
the best of those who were to run. The King saying he did not think it, the
Princess conjured Christina to make use of the Equipage (she had provided) for
one Course at least. The young Monarch expressed so earnest a desire to see how
well Christina would come off, there was no denying him, and the Princess,
their Request. That less notice might be taken, she pretended her self not
well, and withdrew. Her next care was for a Motto somewhat answerable to Count
Talara's; which, being very witty, she was not long to seek: She caused these
words to be written on her Shield, No ay que amar, y me nos que esperar de
quien tienne duenno; It Is in vain to love, much more to expect good from him
who is already engaged. Christina, having set all things in as good order as
the shortness of the time would permit, appeared boldly at the Barriere, and
called for Canes, but was troubled with an Accident she had not foreseen: The
Order was, that the Cavaliers who presented themselves for the Course, should
tell their names, and make themselves known to the Officer appointed to
Register them, to prevent disorder usual on such occasions. Our Heroine, loath
to undergo that Law, was denied the Canes: The King, who had his Eye upon her,
perceiving her in disorder on that account, ordered his Brother Don John to let
them know it was his Majesty's pleasure that Gentleman should be dispensed with
from telling his name, or showing his face. The Kings pleasure was no sooner
known, but Canes were delivered her: And her refusing to submit to the Rules of
the Course, and the Kings dispensation, gave cause to believe 'twas an
extraordinary Person not willing to be known. This drew all Eyes upon her,
every one guessing who it should be. Great notice was taken of the Motto: Count
Talara, observing the opposition between it and his, desired, with impatience,
to run a Course against this unknown Person, who managed his Horse very well;
but it was not probable Christina should be as skillful at handling and darting
the Cane, as the Spaniards, who are used to that Exercise from their Youth: And
it is certain our Heroine had run a great Risque of being unhors'd, had not Don
John, foreseeing what might follow, given Count Talara a private hint the
Stranger (he was to encounter with) was Christina. You may easily guess the
effect this intimation had on the Amorous Count, who was confirmed in the truth
of it by the Motto he had observed on her Shield: He could not at first find in
his heart to run against Christina, but having thought better of it, he put
himself in a posture. The Count, who had already run several Courses, with
advantage, against the most expert in the Sport, meeting the Stranger,
pretended himself disordered and unready when he should have darted his Cane:
Christina, without losing a moments time, threw hers; which the Count appeared
sostunn'd with, that he fell off his Horse: Christina was so confounded founded
at the loud acclamations of the People (who judge of things by appearance,
without examining the truth,) she knew not whether she had got the better or
the worse, till she was presented with a Rose of Diamonds, the Prize appointed
the Conqueror. Our Heroine, pleased with her success, retired, loath to hazard
in another Course the Reputation she had gained by this.

Count Talara, having had a sore fall, was carried home to be blooded, which
was much to the advantage of Christina's Reputation. The Count being known to
be very expert at that Sport, the whole Court sent to see how he did. And the
Princess made Christina sensible of the Obligation put upon her by the Count,
who had fallen off his Horse of purpose, like a true Spanish Gallant, and
advised her to send one to inquire of his health: Christina, with some
difficulty, consented to it. The Count, ravished with joy at the Complement,
answered him who was sent, that his fall did not much trouble him, but he had a
wound would not be quickly cured. It vexed Christina she had given the occasion
for such an answer, fearing the Count would pretend to some advantages for the
Obligation he had put upon her. The Princess bid her set her heart at rest, and
oblige the Widow with the Rose of Diamonds she had gained at the Course.
Christina, though fearful to engage further with so forward a Woman, complied
however with the desires of the Princess: She shifted her self into her Habit
of Don Artal, and presently went into the Widows Apartment, where she found her
very much disordered.

She was so precise she would not appear at the Sports, but knowing Don Artal
would be there, and being much concerned what became of him, she had sent a
trusty Person of purpose to observe how things went, and bring her exact
information: He brought her the names of all those who were Registered for the
Course, but not his, for whose sake alone she had the curiosity to read all the
rest: She was much concerned at the missing him, a Woman ever passionately
wishing the glory of her Lover. Her Spy told her there was a Gentleman appeared
incognito, and had refused to tell his name; and that the King, to prevent
disorder, had dispensed with the formality; and that this unknown Person had
unhors'd the famous Count Talara, and retired with a Rose of Diamonds of very
great value. The VVidow wished with all her heart, this Unknown might be no
other but Don Artal; but then thought she, how should a Youth, and such a
Novice in Love, be too hard for a Gentleman of so much skill and experience:
with that Don Artal enters the Chamber; she presently asked him what news of
the Course, and why he had not been there. I was unwilling to appear, answers
he, without your Devise; and since you refused it me, I had no mind to show my
self where you would not be. I knew you had not appeared there, said the
VVidow, though the good opinion I had of you made me hope you might be that
illustrious Unknown, who so eminently signalized himself, and carried the
Prize; at least my heart gave me none better deserved it than you: but I see
our hearts often deceive us. You are not deceived in that, Madam, says Don
Artal; and see here (adds he, presenting her with the Rose of Diamonds) the
Mark you may know that unknown Person by, who has had the good fortune to
deserve your esteem. The Widow, surpised at a Present so glorious and
unexpected, received it very gladly, and embraced the occasion, so luckily
given her, to present her Servant with a String of Diamonds of very great
value, praying him to keep it as a Pledge of her Love. Don Artal, for fear of
angring her, durst not refuse it; but finding she began to fall again into very
passionate expressions, he pretended business of haste, and withdrew; having
promised to return on the Morrow, at an hour she appointed. Christina having
shown the Diamonds to the Princess, who understood Jewels very well, was amazed
to hear they were worth fifteen thousand Crowns. This excessive Liberality
fully convincing them of the violence of her Passion, Christina had compassion
on her, and told the Princess she would disabuse her: The Princess having
sufficiently diverted her self with the Intrigue, and thinking the VVidow had
punishment enough, said nothing against it. On the Morrow, at the hour the
VVidow had appointed, Christina sent her back her Diamonds, with this Letter.

It Is time to disabuse you, Madam; the Don Artal you love, is a Man in
appearance, but really one of your Sex: I am in good earnest, and unwilling to
take the advantage of your Liberality, being incapable to satisfy your Love.
You need not fear me; I am well acquainted with the nature of our Sex, and know
it a hard matter to resist temptations; but I pity those who have not the power
to do it: be you less Censorious for the future, and never fear my discretion.


The VVidow, who expected Don Artal, had not forgot any thing that might the
better set off the weak Charms of a Woman of her age: She thought the Present
he had made her, the day before, a good Omen, and that she had reason to expect
something better at the Assignation. She tasted beforehand a thousand
imaginary pleasures, and began to think long while her Lover arrived; when, lo,
a Letter is brought her. The String of Diamonds presently alarmed her: and
having read the two first Lines, she scarce held up from swounding; her
surprise was so great, she fancied her self not well awake. Having finished
reading her Letter, and reflecting on the beauty, and other Circumstances of
her pretended Lover, she believed all true that was written. She was not a
little taken with her Generosity, in sending back her Diamonds; and out of a
greatness of Soul, incident to Persons well born, which ordinary People are not
acquainted with, or the love she still retained for the Memory of Don Artal,
she had the Generosity to send back the Diamonds to Christina, with a Letter.

Though you have deserved Reproach for having deceived me, I cannot hate that
in a Maid which I loved in the counterfeit Don Artal. Rest satisfied with the
advantage you have had over me, and receive again the Present I made you: Yours
to me shall be ever dear, and in high esteem with me. I desire, if you think
fit, your acquaintance; and am not in the least indisposed to be your Friend.
And I must declare my weakness is such, I cannot mistrust a Person I have once
loved.


Christina having received this Letter, carried it to the Princess, telling her
she was much troubled with this String of Diamonds, and very scrupulous of
keeping a Present so considerable. The Princess having read the Letter, advised
her to keep the Present, and think no more of the matter; and would not permit
her to be further acquainted with the VVidow, (as Christina designed) knowing
she would owe Christina a spite, for the discovery she had made of her.

News was then received in Spain of the taking of S. Gislain, by the French;
which very much alarmed the Court of Spain, who thought the rigor of the
season (it being December) would have hindered, or delayed at least, the
Conquest of the place. The Spaniards vented their rage upon the poor French
living in Spain, without sparing those who had been thirty years Naturalized.
They seized their Goods, banished their Persons, and exercised upon them all
sorts of violence: Which is no new thing in that Country; for as often as the
French take a Town, burn a Ship, or obtain a Victory, the Spaniards seize all
the Goods of the French who Trade in their Towns. Judge you then how many
Pressures they are exposed to under the Reign of our Lewis the Great: This
commonly ends in a great Tax laid upon them, after payment of which they let
them alone for some time; but upon the next loss they have, the Persecution
begins afresh, which happens so often, that many have been forced to withdraw
and quit the Country. A Merchant of Bearn of Christina's acquaintance, and one
she was obliged to, found himself under this Storm raised against the French
upon the taking of St. Gislain. Christina protected him openly, having spoken
in his favor to Don John of Austria, and represented to him the injustice done
those poor People, who settle there, relying upon their Letters of
Naturalization, and with great labor and industry supply the Natural laziness
of the Spaniards, furnishing them with a thousand Conveniences they would never
know but for the French. The Prince, at her entreaty, caused restitution to be
made this Merchant of all had been taken from him, and promised to use the rest
favorably. This got our Heroine very great applause, but the hatred those of
Spain naturally bear all Strangers, made them attribute the favor she had
obtained to something supernatural: which occasioned the reviving the
ridiculous Report formerly gone about, of her being a Witch, and that with the
help of her Art she could effect what she pleased. After so many extraordinary
matters published of her, it is no wonder the dull and sottish People gave
credit to this Report, while the Court laughed at it, and the Princess made
sport of it with Christina. But her Enemies would not lose the advantage of so
favorable a Disposition of the people. The Marchioness d' Osseyra and the
Countess of Benavidez durst not open their Mouths against her, since the
Princess had taken her into her protection; but the favor Don John had granted
her, awaked the hatred of the one, and the jealousy of the other, lest the
Court should at last consent to her being Married to the Marquess d' Osseyra.
This made them resolve to use all their endeavors to foment the opinion of her
being a Witch. Having learnt that Christina was that unknown Person, who had
unhors'd Count Talara, almost without touching him; they took care to spread
abroad this Circumstance, and others, to confirm the people in their error.
Their Artifice was so great, and their Emissaries so diligent, that several
people of good sense, deceived by a number of probable Circumstances, gave
credit to this extravagant Report. That was not all; for, cloaking their malice
with a false zeal for Religion, they exhibited an information against Christina
in the Inquisition.

The Inquisition is so formidable a Court, that the name of an Inquisitor makes
them in Spain tremble, the severe punishments inflicted by that Tribunal on
Jews, Moors, and Heretics there, having gained it a high Reputation. The wiser
sort speak of it with respect, the loose hate the name on it, and the people
generally have it in veneration. As soon as any Man is informed against in that
Court, not a Courtier has the boldness to say a word in his favor, for fear
of being brought in as an accessory, as they commonly are who are of a
different Religion. The Kings Authority is of no force at all there; and there
is not one President can be shown, where the Catholic Kings have intermedled
with any Affair the Inquisition had taken Cognizance of.

The people are so afraid of them, that when I was in Spain I was assured, that
the Court being met one Afternoon, some of the Inquisitors stood at a Window
which looked into a rich Burghers Garden, where was a Pear Tree full of
excellent Fruit. One of them had a mind to some of those Pears, and sent his
Man to desire some of them; but the Gardener having refused to give him any,
the Inquisitor dispatched a Familiar (that is an Usher of the Inquisition) to
tell the owner of the Garden the Inquisitor would speak with him: The poor Man
was so frighted, he was scarce able to go to him; but recovered himself again,
being told they desired only a Plate of his Pears: The Burgher promised to send
it, and was glad he came off so. As soon as he got home he sent the Inquisitors
all the Pears on the Tree; and to prevent being so frighted again, cut down the
Pear Tree.

To return to Christina, the Inquisitors having received the Information,
caused her to be arrested; and, (which was worse) left her in Prison a
Fortnight before she was examined: 'Twas in favor to her Sex she was
interrogated then, it being ordinary with them to keep a Man a Prisoner six, or
twelve Months before he be examined. However the Princess, though advised to
the contrary, labored privately for her, but to no purpose, it being not in
her power to discover the particulars of her Charge. Our Heroine, who had no
reason to fear the Inquisition, upon the account of Religion, being Orthodox as
her Judges, was troubled at the noise she knew this business would make; not
doubting but it would come to the Marquess d' Osseyra's Ears, and that this,
and her former misfortunes, would create in him an aversion against her, the
disasters she had met with, though innocent, being enough to draw upon her the
slight of a Person of Quality: her business the while looked very ill. The
Widow I have spoken of, having heard the news, and considering her having
carried away the Prize, at the Course, from Count Talara, made no doubt but she
was a Witch; and reflecting on what had passed between them two, when she took
her for Don Artal, she was in horror at the danger she had exposed her self to,
by Conversing with a Person, who, by the assistance of the Devil, could appear
in what Form she pleased; and was ready to make her complaint to the Princess,
for bringing such a one into her House; and would have done it, but for shame
of discovering her weakness: Yet, being scrupulous of concealing so aggravating
a Circumstance against the Criminal, she went to the chief Inquisitor, and told
him, that to discharge her Conscience, she came to inform him what had happened
to her with that Woman in Prison, who had several times appeared to her in the
shape of a young Gentleman of Catalonia, called Don Artal de Cardona; but she
took care not to tell him the other particulars of the Intrigue, choosing rather
to lose her Diamonds, than to make it known she had presented Christina with
them, as a mark of her Love. The chief Inquisitor, out of respect to the Widows
quality, dispensed with her in several formalities, taking only her Hand to the
Depositions, which was one of the strongest Evidences in the Case. It is
incredible what a noise this business made in Spain, where they could hardly
believe a Maid could, without the help of Magic, do Actions so extraordinary,
and so much above her Sex. It was the general discourse, and they expected
every day a solemn Judgment and Sentence, suitable to the Learning and
Integrity of those worthy, and able Persons, who sit on that Bench. The people
had already set the day of her Execution, and, I believe, hired Windows to
stand in to see it. Some among them, to color the better their losses in the
Low Countries, said there was no reason to wonder at them, since this Woman had
bewitched all their Generals. The Princess was amazed at the ridiculous stories
she heard every day of the unfortunate Christina: The more she justified her,
the more they condemned her; and the least good Office done for her, was very
ill taken by the people. The very Court was troubled with it, the greater part
not knowing what to think on it, the rest suspending their judgments till the
Inquisitors should pass sentence: The first examination was wholly spent in
formalities. The Inquisitors were surpised at her confidence, and to see so
little appearance of fear in her looks. This made the Reverend Judges believe
she trusted much to her Art, or was innocent. Two days after she was examined
again; the first question was, what Charms she had made use of to take the
shape of Don Artal de Cardona? She answered, none other, but what people of wit
make use of to amuse Fools: She told them at large, that the great severity, or
hypocrisy, of the VVidow, made her desire to put a trick upon her, by visiting
her under the name of Don Artal: The knowledge she had that Lady could not see
very well having encouraged her resolution for that divertisement, in order to
the rendering her less Censorious for the future. Then she was asked, how she
could, with such a slight Cane, un-horse Count Talara? She answered, he had
notice beforehand, she was to run a Course, and that his fall was rather an
effect of the Spanish Gallantry, than any Charm of hers. She was then
questioned what made her disguise her self so often, and in Habits so
different? She answered, that, having from a Child had a strong inclination for
Arms, the death of her Parents had given her the opportunity of following that
noble Employment? In a word, her answers were so modest, and pertinent, that
the Inquisitors, being choice Men, and well seen in business, were persuaded of
her innocence. And, which is most to be admired, the Archbishop of Saragosa,
who was one of the Inquisitors, and the most prejudiced against her, knew her
to be the same he had formerly seen in the Covent of Ursulines at Saragosa; and
had occasioned the reprimands he gave the Nuns, upon his mistaking her to be a
Man: He told the other Inquisitors the story, and from a severe Judge, became
her Protector, and Friend.

As terrible as the Inquisition is in Spain, it cannot fright Love. Count
Talara, extremely concerned for the Imprisonment of our Heroine, being told by
the Princess, the strongest proof Christina's Enemies made use of to destroy
her, was the advantage she had of him in the Course, was so troubled to hear so
ill use made of his Gallantry, that he put himself voluntarily into the
Inquisition, and desired his Process should be made, declaring himself
accessory to the Crimes of Christina. The Inquisitors were astonished to see how
easily he rendered himself Prisoner, and the people failed not to say, the
Witch had by her Art forced him to it. The Count was examined, and his answer
found to agree with Christina's. The Inquisitors would have set him at liberty,
which he refused to accept till our Heroine had hers: which was granted her on
the Morrow, to the wonderful astonishment of all Fools. Count Talara was so
troubled he had, though innocently, accasion'd her persecution, he never durst
see her more.

Christina had the fate of most people in trouble, every one strove to make her
believe how much they were concerned for her, (now the danger was over.) The
whole Court Complemented her upon her delivery, and the King had the goodness
to tell her, he was glad to hear she had cleared her self with such credit. The
Widow (fearing Christina, to be revenged, would publish the passion she had
expressed for the pretended Don Artal) Courted her friendship, and assured her
she had never spoken against her, but to clear her Conscience. Christina had
the goodness to pardon her, and they lived thence forwards very good friends.

Christina in the mean time was very much troubled she had no news of the
Marquess d' Osseyra; sometimes she was afraid he had forgot her, the next
moment she rejected that thought as injurious to the fidelity of her Lover, and
in the end remained so perplexed she knew not what to think. The Princess, who
had great kindness for her, perceiving her more pensive, and melancholy, than
ordinary, did all in her power to divert her, and bring her into humor: She
told her all the silly stories the people made of her Black Art, and gave her a
hundred witty Jeasts on that account. Christina said she was not surpised at
it, having from her Chamber in the Prison heard the discourses of other
Prisoners, of the horrible Crimes she was accused of. Since you heard their
discourse, it is not possible, replied the Princess, but you must be well
acquainted with their affairs, it being commonly a comfort to one in misery to
relate and declare his misfortune; and the ordinary entertainment of Prisoners,
is to tell one another by what mischance they came thither. I confess, said
Christina, I have hearkened to them sometimes, with a great deal of attention;
but most of those who are Prisoners in the Inquisition, being charged with
impiety, or some other Crime relating to Religion, they are very mistrustful,
every one taking his Fellow for a Spy, or a Trepan: Yet I remember I often
heard the Complaints of a Soldier, who blamed extremely the Ingratitude of his
Country, in retaining him Prisoner in the Inquisition, for Actions which would
have been highly rewarded in a wellgovern'd State.

He boasted of great services he had done his Catholic Majesty in Flanders;
where, perceiving the Spanish Regiments grow thin, he married a Wife at Conde,
by whom he had two Boys: But the place being afterward taken by his most
Christian Majesty, he was made a Prisoner of War, and never knew more what
became of his Wife. Upon exchange of Prisoners he was not long after set at
liberty, and was in Garrison at Air, where he married another Wife; but that
place having also been taken afterward by the French, he was carried to
Cambray, where he thought himself secure: There he married a third Wife, which
began to rejoice his heart with her fruitfulness, when that place also was
taken by the most Christian King in person; that at length, being tired with
the War, and fearing his person fatal to the places he entered, he quitted
Flanders, leaving several brave Boys there, who would in time make good
Soldiers for the King, and was returned to Madrid: He added, that he passed
homeward through France, and observed that Kingdom to be so full of people, and
the Villages so near one another, that he thought he had traveled two hundred
Leagues all in one Town, which appeared to him very extraordinary, who had been
used to travel five and twenty, or thirty Leagues in Spain, without seeing a
House, unless it were some pitiful Venta, or sorry Inn: And having considered
with himself that the misfortune of Spain proceeded from its being so desert,
he was willing, what in him lay, to repair that defect, by marrying again: But
two of the Wives he had left in Flanders having followed him to Madrid, and
found him at home with his Wife, it angered them so grievously that they had
recourse to Justice, and charged him with several other misdemeanors and
impieties: that the Inquisition taking Cognizance of his Crimes had clapped him
up in Prison, and kept him there, though in all he had done, he had no other
end but the service of his King, and glory of his Country. The Princess could
not forbear laughing at Christina's Relation, which gave her so true a
Character of a Spaniard; it being certain there is nothing so conceitedly
haughty, as a Spanish Soldier at his return into Spain, from the Army in
Flanders: he thinks himself the only Man that has preserved the State, and
that now he may be allowed to follow his inclinations, and take his pleasure
without punishment, or control.

As soon as our Heroine was alone, she fell into her former fit of melancholy,
as if she had presaged what was a driving on against her in Flanders.

The Marquess d' Osseyra knew nothing of his Mistress being gone into Spain,
but thought her still in the Covent at Mons; the Duchess of Arschot having
taken care to keep him in that error, by writing often to him under pretense
of sending him news of Christina: She advised him still not to be too hasty,
and a little patience would certainly make him happy. But the Duchess had other
designs: the interest of her Family, and her particular dependences on Spain,
made her resolve to have her Niece married to a Gentleman of that Nation. This
Niece of hers had not yet appeared abroad, but was bred in a Covent; all the
knowledge they had of her, was that she was very handsome, and a very
considerable Fortune. The quality and merit of the Marquess d' Osseyra, made
the Duchess think him a fit Match for her Niece. In order to this, she was
willing to endeavor curing him of his passion for Christina, being fully
persuaded the Beauty, the Birth and Estate of her Niece, would be sufficient to
accomplish her design within a short time after her appearing at Court. But
having observed by the Marquesses Letters, the constancy of his affection for
Christina, the Duchess despaired of success, and respited the sending her Niece
to Brussels, for fear her Charms should have, upon some less interess'd person,
the effect she desired they should work on the Marquess alone. About that time
it was the French took S. Gistain; the Duchess fearing, from the situation of
the place, Mons in the Spring might have the like fortune, which would break
all her measures, and make it too late to execute her design; she resolved to
go to Brussels to communicate her intentions to the Duchess de Villa Hermosa,
who was very well pleased with the zeal she expressed for the Spaniards. Diverse
means were proposed to assure the success of the Marriage, but all appearing
uncertain, or dilatory, they parted without coming to any resolution. The
Marquess d' Osseyra went every day to see the Duchess d' Arschot, who, very
defirous to penetrate his sentiments, after a great deal of discourse, by the
by, advertised him, as his Friend, that Christina had in confidence acquainted
her with her design of making her self a Nun; but if it should be so, he might
be otherwise provided of a Mistress, to supply the loss of this. The Marquess
was much alarmed at Christina's resolution, and entreated the Duchess to give
it all the obstruction she could, which she promised very frankly. Having given
the Duchess de Villa Hermosa an account of this difcourse, she found her no
less than her self at a loss what course to take: But at last, feeing
themselves straightened in time, the report of his Christian Majesty leaving
Paris in sew days being spread all about, they agreed that the Duchess should
advise the Marquess to steal his Mistress out of the Covent, and marry her as
soon as he could get her out. They thought this a very probable way to effect
the design, because the Duchess might easily deceive him, in substituting her
Niece in the place of Christina. The Duchess of Arschot would not hear of it,
as a thing unworthy a person of her quality to use any Artifice to make a
Spaniard marry her Niece; but at length her ambition, and the flatteries of the
Duchess de Villa Hermosa, prevailed with her to reject all these
considerations; not doubting, with her dextrous address, she might trap the
Marquess; and that the beauty of her Niece, and respect due to her Birth, would
stop his complaining of a Cheat put upon him so much to his advantage. Soon
after this delicate Project, the Marquess came to the Duchess of Arschot's: The
ordinary expressions of civility were scarce over, but she told him, with some
concern, that word was sent her from Mons, Christina was ever day more and more
resolved to take the Nuns Habit, and that she durst no longer undertake but she
would suddenly do it. The Marquess answered her, it would break his heart; and
conjured her not to forsake him, but use all her interest with Christina to
divert her from this resolution. To what purpose, says the Duchess; for neither
the King, nor your Relations will ever give way to your marrying a Stranger
that has no Fortune, is but of mean Birth, and (as virtuous as I take her for)
has occasioned very different judgments of her: To disabuse you, it is my
opinion you should no longer oppose her design of turning Nun, it will be more
for your Reputation than you are aware of, and this Action alone will justify
all the rest of her Life. The Marquess confessed she had Reason of her side,
but that the violence of his Love would not let him yield to it; that he would
make himself happy to his own satisfaction, without troubling himself what
others thought of it, as being not of their judgment who think a Man's happiness
depends on the opinion others have of it. Since you are of that mind, says the
Duchess, I will let you see how true a Friend I am to you, in doing you a piece
of service more considerable than you could have hoped for, and such as shall
make you happy all the days of your life. The Marquess assured her he should
ever acknowledge her favors, and promised to do whatever she advised him to.
You must then, replys the Duchess, steal her out of the Covent, and I will
undertake she shall consent to it; for her desire of turning Nun proceeds only
from her fear that you have forgot her. And as all Women are very sensible of
being slighted, she is glad of amusing the World, by giving out she will spend
her Life in a Cloister, though it be in truth only to save her credit, in case
you should not love her: And that you may be no longer exposed to the freaks of
Fortune, or the violences of the Duke de Villa Hermosa, my Almoner shall marry
you in my Chapel, as soon as you have got her out of the Covent. The Marquess,
overjoyed at a Project that so pleasingly flattered his passion, threw himself
at her Feet, not having the power to answer her a word, but his dumb Eloquence
expressed his mind clearly enough: They agreed how all things should be carried,
and the Daches on the Morrow went for Mons, to dispose things for execution of
the design.

She told her Niece she had made choice of a Husband for her, with whom she
should have abundant cause to be satisfied; but that there were invincible
reasons to oblige her to permit her self to be stolen out of the Covent, and
be married without Ceremony; adding she was not to be surpised at it, as being
all for her advantage. The young Lady, who in the whole course of her breeding
had been taught to pay the Duchess very great respects, submitted her self
wholly to her pleasure. The Duchess having made sure of her Niece, and all
others she had use of, writ to the Marquess d'Osseyra, to let him know all was
in readiness; and that he had no more to do but come the next night to Mons,
with two of his trustiest Domestics, and that he might come to her House,
where she would tell him how the business should be managed. The Marquess, who
waited with impatience for news from the Duchess, faild not to set out the hour
she appointed. He arrived at Mons, and went to the Duchesses, as had been
agreed on. You see, says she, what I expose my self to for your sake: But that
you may not be blamed for this Action, I think it very fit you should write to
the Duke de Villa Hermosa, to let him know you are married; and entreat him,
that since it is a done thing, that he will write into Spain, in your favor,
that the Court may agree to it: I will take care your Letter shall be delivered
him, and send him word the same time, I have had no hand in your business. The
Marquess consented to all she desired, but had his Head so full of Love, he
would never have been able to finish his Letter without the Duchesses help, who
made him write what she pleased, without naming Christina, with design to take
her advantage by that Letter to justify her self to the World, as if the
Marquess had endeavored to steal away her Niece, and that he might be forced
to marry her, if the business in hand should unexpectedly miscarry.

All things thus ordered, she forgot not any thing that might heighten the
beauty of her Niece. It was no hard matter to set off a young Lady, whom Nature
had made very handsome and amiable: The Duchess having visited her a little
before night, gave her new instructions for her dress, and deportment, and
returned very well satisfied with her Charms. She appointed her to be at the
Covent Garden Gate, with a Maid who was of the Plot, and to follow the
Gentleman who came in search of them at the hour she had assigned them: She
charged her by any means not to speak, to cover her self with a great Vail, and
not show her Face, till the Priest had finished the Ceremony; telling her, it
was no more than in decency was requisite, to satisfy the Gentleman, and the
Company, of her modesty. The Duchess being returned home, told the Marquess all
things were ordered as he could wish. At last, the night so much desired by the
Marquess, and perhaps by the Lady as earnestly longed for, was come; the
amorous Spaniard, full of good intentions, and led by his passion, entered the
Garden, through a Door, of which they had given him a Key for the purpose. He
found there two persons veiled, one whereof was about the height of Christina:
Having approached, with a respect not free from fear, he took her by the hand,
and led her to the Duchesses with the haste you may imagine. They went straight
to the Chapel, where the Priest waited their coming: The Marquess fell
presently at the feet of her he thought his Mistress, to thank her for her
goodness, and began to say such things as Love inspires a Man in his condition
withal: But the Duchess hastened the Priest to do his Office, and said to the
Marquess, he was not to lose time in fruitless discourse, to keep his Mistress
from the pleasure she proposed to her self, in being at liberty to look upon
him, without wronging her modesty. The Marquess having his head full of the
thoughts of Christina, fancied he saw her, without showing her face: He was
satisfied with a kiss of her hand, fell on his knees and was married. The
Ceremony was scarce ended, but the Marquess cried out he was the happiest Man
alive, since it was not in the power of his Enemies to prevent his being united
to the most amiable Person in the World. Yes, and more happy than you are aware
of, replys the Duchess, throwing off the Brides Vail, since in marrying you to
my Niece, who might be the Darling of the best Man on Earth, I have married you
to a Lady of great Birth, and a considerable Fortune. The Marquess was so
troubled at the discourse of the Duchess, and the surprising beauty of her
Niece, that for some time he stood mute. Your Relations, and Friends, have
agreed to this Marriage, continues the Duchess; and nothing but a Merit equal
to yours could have prevailed with me to have a hand in a trick of this kind,
to make you happy against your will. The Marquess was so agitated with
different motions, he could not answer a word, needing all the respect those of
his Nation have for Persons of the best quality, to keep him from breaking out
into outrage against the Duchess. She was about to speak to him of the
advantages of this Affair. Madam, says the Marquess, interrupting her, I pray
insult not over my grief; for I know not whether I shall be able to take it at
your hands. This was but one of those expressions of sorrow and regret he let
fall, which forced tears from the new Marchioness, who had not any hand in her
Aunts Cheat, and expected Complements from her Husband of a very different
nature. The Marquess moved at her tears, and wounded to the heart with his own
sorrows, went into another Room, and would have left the House with a
resolution to go whithersoever despair would lead him: But the Duchess, who
fearing the noise this business might make, had the foresight, and care, to
make sure of an Order from the Duke de Villa Hermosa to arrest the Marquess;
had it put in execution, by persons who waited at the Gate for that purpose. He
was so disordered, he scarce knew he was arrested. An Officer, his Friend, whom
the Duchess sent for to speak with him, endeavored to persuade him to be
satisfied, but without effect. The Marquess passed all the night in very great
disquiet: the morrow the Duke de Villa Hermosa arrived at Mons, where he had
long discourse with the Marquess; I know not the particulars, but it is probable
he showed him the advantages of this Marriage, and the necessity lay upon him
to make no more stir about the business: which if he did, he would be laughed
at, and provoke the Court, his Friends, and the Duchesses Family all against
him. The Marquess convinced with these reasons, and seeing there was no remedy,
submitted to the advice of the Duke de Villa Hermosa; and thought it best to
return to his Wife, and beg her pardon for what was past. But she would not
hear him, being resolved to pay him in the Coin she had received from him, and
avoid his company who had so much slighted her. The Duchess found all her
Authority over her Niece, little enough to retain her: She would not afford an
Ear to any thing could be said for him, who had expressed himself sorry he had
married her.

A beautiful Lady has great advantages, her Complaints are moving, her
Reproaches wound to the quick, and her Tears find compassion in the stoniest
heart. The Marquess, who had approached his Lady with a great deal of
indifference, was so sensible of her Complaints, her Reproaches and Tears, that
he fell on his knees, protesting the Crime she thought him guilty of, a pure
effect of his astonishment; and that if she would vouchsafe him the hearing, he
could easily clear himself. She cast her Eyes upon him, without answering a
word; her looks, and the difficulty she made of being appeased, heightened in
the Marquess the desire of reconciliation: He made her so many protestations,
and assured her he would love her eternally, that at last she yielded to the
Instances of the Duchess, or rather the Oaths of the Marquess: But upon
condition he would give her a true account what had occasioned him to express
himself troubled for having married her, and to absent himself as he had done.
The Marquess promised it, but whether he kept his word I know not, having not
been able to learn the particulars of the account he gave her, which lasted all
night; but it is very likely she was well enough satisfied, having never
complained of it since: The Marquess about a Week after brought her to
Brussels, and to justify himself to those who were acquainted with his passion
for Christina, said, it was not in his power to resist the Decrees of Heaven,
where his Marriage had been appointed many Ages ago.

Though Christina had not heard of this Marriage, the news of it having not yet
reached Spain; it is certain her heart misgave her some ill was toward her,
which cast her frequently into melancholy the Princess had much ado to
persuade her from, by telling her she was not to afflict her self beforehand,
by fancying she foresaw the unfaithfulness of her Lover. Christina confessed
her self to blame for it, but could not help it.

Hearing the English Envoy was returning for London, she acquainted the
Princess with the great desire she had to lay hold on that occasion, to leave
Spain and go to the Marquess d' Osseyra. The Princess gave many good reasons to
divert her from this resolution, but in vain; Christina acknowledging the force
of her reasons, but that it was not in her power to yield to them, and that she
should certainly have the displeasure to see her die with despair, if she
opposed her design any longer. Loath as the Princess was to part with our
Heroine, she was however forced to let her go, to prevent the mortal effects of
her despair: She gave her a Letter of Recommendation to the Envoy, entreating
his care of that young Spanish Gentleman, being a Person of Quality and Merit,
and very desirous to go with him into England. The Princess gave her several
other Letters, in her favor, addressed to Persons in good credit in the Court
of his Majesty of Great Britain. Christina having resumed her Man's Habit, and
the day of her departure hired a Spanish Footboy, overtook the Envoy two days
journey from Madrid, not having ventured to go out of Town with him, for fear
of being staid, if discovered. The Envoy received her very courteously, easily
believing the good Character the Princess gave in her Letter to him of young
Montalban (as she called him) who confirmed by his Mien, and discourse, the
good opinion the Envoy had of him at first sight.

Montalban was so pleased with the thought he should shortly have a better
opportunity of informing himself truly of the state of his Love Coneerns, that
he appeared very cheerful and aerie, which the Envoy was much taken with, but
could not let him know it for want of skill in the Spanish Language, which he
could not speak, though he understood it very well. Montalban pretended he had
no other Language, but that, he had a small insight in the French, yet not so
much as to speak it. The Envoy, who had been bred in France, was glad of that,
and from thenceforth spoke to him always in French, which Montalban answered in
Spanish. He maintained this Character very well, till one day the Envoy
observing him in a deep study, asked him if he had left a Mistress behind him
at Madrid. Montalban having his Head full of Love, and surpised with the
question, answered him in French, he had not a Mistress in the World, and
continued speaking in that Language, till he perceived the Envoy astonished at
it; whereupon, making use of that readiness of wit which had done him so good
service on former occasions, and few Women want, he fell a laughing at the
Envoy's surprise, and prayed him, in Spanish, to tell him truly if he had
spoken good French. The Envoy assured him, a natural Frenchman could not have
spoke better. In troth, replys Montalban, I thought the Princess had but
jeasted, when, having taught me those three or four words, she told me I
pronounced them very well: I will apply my self to learn French, as soon as I
come to London. You will infallibly attain it, says the Envoy you are so
naturally fitted for it. Our' Heroine having, by her wit, retrieved the fault
her distraction made her fall into, avoided carefully all occasions of letting
him perceive she could speak French, the better to maintain the part she
designed to act in England. Being arrived at London, Montalban delivered a
Letter from the Princess, to the Marquess Borgamanero, Envoy extraordinary from
Spain. The Marquess being an Italian born, doubted not but the young Spaniard
was very well descended, as the Princess had signified by her Letter: He used
him with all the civility imaginable, praying him to accept of an Apartment in
his House; for, besides the respect due to the recommendation of the Princess,
an Italian, or Flemming, employed in the King of Spain's service, is glad of
any occasion to oblige a natural Spaniard, to take off the jealousy and
umbrage they have of Strangers employed in Affairs of that Crown. Montalban
would not lodge at the Marquesses, but Dined there every day, and went often to
Court with him, where he was kindly received by those who espoused the interest
of Spain: this was of incredible advantage to the Spaniard, the English who
were used to see those of that Nation haughty and huffish, admiring the
civility and good mien of Montalban. But he could not be satisfied with the
care the Marquess took to divert him, nor the civilities he received from
several English Courtiers, such was his impatience to know how things went in
Flanders: He asked every one, what news from thence, and was told of the
Preparations made for the Campaign, the provident care of the Spanish Governor
for the places most in danger to be attacked, and many other particulars
Montalban was not concerned in, nor cared for: But not a word of the Marquess
d' Osseyra, nor durst he enquire after him, in particular, lest his Countenance
should betray him, and discover the reason of his Curiosity that way. His heart
misgave him still, and continued the alarms and presages of ill success to his
Love, which so haunted his thoughts he could not relish any pleasure though
frequently invited to partake of it. Sometimes he resolved for Brussels, to
know how things stood; the next moment he discovered reasons to divert him from
that design. Tormented with this inquietude, and not able to resolve what
course to take, but inclining to continue in an uncertainty, which left him
some poor hopes of the constancy of the Marquess d' Osseyra, rather than hazard
the discovery of a truth which might plunge him in despair. As he was at Dinner
at the Spanish Envoys, a Gentleman of Flanders, newly arrived from Brussels,
came in to salute the Marquess Borgamanero, and deliver him Letters from the
Low Countries. The Marquess having known the Gentleman by name, received him
very civilly, and made him sit at Table with him. When the Flemming had drank
the Healths of all the Beauties of Brussels, his Tongue began to run, and he
gave them several pieces of choice news from Flanders, adding some Gallantries
of the Spanish Generals the Winter past; and, interrupting himself, now that I
am fallen upon the discourse of Gallantry, Have you not heard, says he, of the
officious Cheat put upon the Marquess d' Osseyra, to cure him of the violent
passion he had for a French-woman. Had any one then observed Montalban's
Countenance, he might have easily discovered the trouble he was in: But they
were all attentive to the Flemmish Gentleman's discourse, who told them, the
Duchess of Arschot, by agreement with the Duke de Villa Hermosa, on pretense of
favoring the Marquess d' Osseyra's Marriage with the French-woman, had married
her Niece to him. Oh Heavens, cried Christina, no more minding the Name, or
Nation she pretended to, and fell off of her Stooll. The Company thought it
some Disease, or Infirmity, and every one strove to help her, attributing the
Exclamation to the vioence of the Distemper, and not dreaming in the least of
the true Cause of the Accident. The Envoy of Spain was the most alarmed at it,
fearing, in a time where poysonings are so ordinary, it might be thought this
Spanish Gentleman had been poisoned at his House.

Could one have died of violent grief, I am persuaded our Heroine had taken her
leave of this World, upon hearing the Gentleman's news: but a death of that kind
happens not in our Age, and she, by the Marquesses care, recovered her strength
pretty well, and was carried into her Chamber, where, intending to give free
vent to those passions the ill news had occasioned, she had the dexterity to
get ridd of the importunate care of those who accompanied her, by telling them
she was often subject to Infirmities of that kind, and had learnt by experience
that rest was the only, and infallible Cure. As soon as she was alone, she
burst out into tears, and her fancy, to her further torment, represented to her
a thousand unpleasant things to increase her grief, which was swelled to that
height the most cruel death would have been welcome. After much debate with her
self, she thought it fit for her to return into her Country, and spend there
the rest of her days in a Cloister, her Virtue sugg^^^ (...) her she was
obliged to make the World this amends for all the innocent scandals she had
given it.

Upon the news of the Accident at the Spanish Envoys, the pretended Montalban
was visited by several Persons of the best Quality: The Gentleman, who had
brought the news of the Marquess d' Osseyra's being married, thought himself
obliged in civility to give him a visit. Christina (or, if you will, Montalban)
was a bed when this Gentleman came to his Lodging: Montalban gave order he
should come in, and the ordinary civilities being over, told him he was sorry
his Infirmity had deprived him of hearing the particulars of the Marquess d'
Osseyra's Marriage: The Gentleman offered to make him the Relation; Montalban
answering, he would much oblige him in it, the Gentleman acquainted him with
all the Circumstances of the Affair, without perceiving the change it produced
in our Heroine's Countenance, who had (to prevent his discovery) drawn her Bed
Curtain that she might not be seen. The Flemming being retired, Christina fell
again into tears, yet without any murmuring against the Marquess d' Osseyra,
whom she could not accuse of infidelity. As strongly as she labored to confirm
her resolution of going into a Monastery, she found within her no small
reluctance against the putting it in execution: so hard a Task was it to
disengage her self from the inclinations she had for a Person she had loved so
entirely, and esteemed so worthy of her affection: After much struggling and
striving with her self she resolved to send him a Letter, which was written as
follows.

I shall never believe any one can dye of grief, since I have survived the sad
news of your Marriage, attended with such Circumstances as make me despair,
without leaving me the liberty to complain of you: Was it not enough to lose
you, but I must, with the loss, have the cruel and doleful satisfaction to know
I lost you against your will? Had you been ungrateful for the affection I bore
you, the consideration of your unfaithfulness would have, in some measure,
allayed my sense of the loss of you: But while I adore you, and you love me,
another enjoys you. Pardon the trouble my grief forces me to give you, in
bidding you adieu for ever. When you know how easily I part with the World, you
will be sensible I continued in it thus long only for your sake; and since you
cannot be mine any longer, I shall quickly take leave of it with very little
concern.


Christina having heard that the Spanish Envoy sent a Gentleman with Letters
into Flanders, desired him to deliver this to the Marquess d' Osseyra, and tell
him, the Party who sent it expected not his answer. Our Heroine having written
this Letter, found her self somewhat better at ease; she weighed the design she
had of entering a Covent, and found it in truth a course of Life wholly
unsuitable to her humor: She considered how many made their Lives unhappy by
embracing a Profession out of despair, or to please their Friends, or for other
like reasons contrary to their inclinations: She chose rather to seek out an
opportunity to perish gloriously in the Wars, than to languish many years in an
unhappy condition, not doubting but the thoughts of her beloved Marquess would
haunt her in the most private retirements. This made her throw off the relics
of weakness her Sex had left her, and having heard that his Majesty of France
had opened the Campaign by the Conquest of Ghent, she continued her disguise,
and went into the Army with two or three English Volunteers, who went to learn
the Rudiments of War under that great Master. The Town of Ypres being besieged
about that time, our Heroine to avoid meeting with those who might probably
know her, during her long abode formerly there, consulted rather the motions of
despair, than endeavored to signalize her self by Actions of extraordinary
valor: She mingled her self one day with a Detachment of the Regiments of the
King's Household, who with Sword in hand took a Half Moon, where Christina
received a Musket Shot, and was carried to her Tent. The Chyrurgeons, less
Complaisant in the Army than elsewhere, judged her Wound mortal: The English,
who came with her from London, and still thought the pretended Gentleman a
Spaniard, fancied he had received the Wound by endeavoring to put himself into
the Spanish service, by getting into the Town: This made them acquaint the
Marquess de Conflans with what had past. He was Governor of the place, and
having Capitulated that very day to surrender it, the English let him know
there was in the Camp, a young Gentleman, a Spaniard, called Montalban, who was
wounded with a Musket Shot, by endeavoring to get into the Town. The
Marquess, well acquainted with the name, thought he might be one of the Noble
Family of Montalban, the head whereof is the now Duke of Uceda, and dispatched
a Colonel of the Garrison to enquire of his health, and see if he were in a
condition to be carried to Brussels. The English accompanied the Colonel, and
told our Heroine they had informed the Governor of Ypres of his quality, and
hurt; and that he had sent thither this Colonel, to know if he would be
carried to Brussels. Christina, amazed at the discourse, was pleased however at
so good an occasion of going to Brussels, in hopes to see the Marquess d'
Osseyra before she died: She confirmed them in their error, and having
answered the Collonel's civilities, as well as the condition she was in would
permit her, she prayed him to tell the Marquess of Conflans, he would do him a
singular favor to convey him to Brussels, which was accordingly done. Soon
after her arrival there, the Marquess of Conflans informed the Court, he had
brought thither a young Gentleman of Spain, who was lately come out of England
to throw himself into Ypres, but was unfortunately prevented by a Musket Shot,
received as he was endeavoring to get into the Town. The Persons of the
greatest Quality at Brussels, fearing to incommode Montalban with their visits,
sent to inquire of his health: But he fell into a Fever, and no hopes of cure.
All those about him wondered at the care he took to inquire who they were who
sent to know how he did, which proceeded from the desire the supposed Montalban
had to hear the Marquess d' Osseyra named for one. At last he was told, that
this Marquess, being newly returned from Bruges, had sent a Gentleman to
enquire of his health. Montalban was so glad of it, that those who attended him
observed a visible change in his looks: Having fetched two or three fighs, he
said, he should be very glad to see the Marquess, having something of
Consequence to Communicate to him. The Marquess being informed of it, ran to
him immediately, fancying him to be a Gentleman of the House of Montalban, who
had been of his acquaintance in Spain. As the Marquess entered the Room, they
told him the Gentleman was speechless. The Marquess went hastily up to the Bed,
and looking steadfastly on the Person that lay there, knew her to be his
Christina, a dying: She reached forth her Arm, and taking him by the Hand, made
him sensible of the satisfaction she had, to see him before she died. The
tragic Spectacle so affected the Marquess, he was ready to fall down dead for
sorrow: He continued many days retired in a religious House, and incapable of
comfort for being the cause of our Heroine's death, he resolved to quit that
Country where a hundred Objects would every day represent to his memory, the
death of Christina: He made use of his Friends to procure him Employment
elsewhere, and in a short time after received Orders from Spain to go and
Command in Biscay.

FINIS.

