TYRANTS AND PROTECTORS Set forth In their Colors. OR, THE Difference between
Good and Bad MAGISTRATES; In several Characters, Instances and Examples of both.

PROVE. 28. 15.As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over
the poor people. Chap. 16. 12.It is an abomination to Kings to commit
wickedness, for the Throne is established by Righteousness. By J. P.

London, Printed for H. Cripps and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop
in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

To the READER.
Reader,
A Tyrants Test, and a Protectors Pourtraiture, are worthy thy contemplation in
these froward times; in the one thou may read what thy condition had been
through Gods most righteous severity: had he not graciously interposed in the
other what thy condition is, and may expect to be through his mere mercy so
interposing. Tyranny makes Earth a hell, and a Tyrant is a Devil incarnate.
Just Government makes Heaven on earth, and good Princes, Gods in the likeness
of men. No Government is hell broke loose, where all would rule, and none be
ruled; every man's lust would be every man's law; his wants measured by his will,
and his deserts by his desires, which would render men Furies in flesh; and
daily tormentors to themselves and others, and therefore any Government is
better then none, Tyranny then Anarchy, but just Government banisheth the
wicked from a Nation, (as it did the evil Angels out of Heaven) making the
remaining Inhabitants to shout for joy; Here thou shall find a Tyrant tried,
and a Protector pourtraitur'd, by plain Characters, brief instances, and
examples of both, (which truly considered with our own concernments in both
respects) would muzzle the mouths of our muttering murmurours, and render us
more sensible of our present happiness, and thankful for it; thou shall not
here find a censorious Condemnation of the long and short Parliaments, nor a
flattering congratulation of all public transactions since their date; for
although these be ad nos in respect of their events, yet are they supra nos in
respect of our censures, this is my principle, this is my prayer, that wherein
men have been wise, and done worthily for their Countries Liberties, and the
Saints Interest, God would remember it, and never forget it; and that wherein
they have been weak, and failed in their duty, being but flesh and blood, and
men at best, though the best of men, God would forget it, and never remember
it; the Demonstration of Tyranny, the Commendation of Magistracy, the
characterizing of good and bad Magistrates, in their principles and practices,
with the effects thereof to themselves, and their people, was the design of my
heart, had the fact answered the fancy, and the product the project. Reader, If
thou be a Son of Sion, and a Citizen of Jerusalem, which is from above, the
peace that is within thy gates, and the prosperity that is within thy palaces,
must needs render thee sensible of thy felicity by thy freedom from tyranny,
and fruition of liberty by our present Government, thankful for it, and
fruitful under it, except like Jessurun thou art waxen fat, and kickest up the
heel, have turned thy grace into wantonness, and thy table be made a snare unto
thee; if thou be one of them that have thus converted their fullness into
folly, and their liberty into licentiousness, murmuring that Moses and Aaron (I
mean) thy quondam preservers are thy present Protectors, and have forgotten the
days of old, and the years of many generations, who has sown that crop in
tears, yea in blood, which thou now reapest in joy, if that liberty will not
satisfy, the like whereof is not in all the world, that liberty the like
whereof the generations that are past did never understand; that liberty, a
greater then which thou know not how to desire (except it be to have power
to tyrannize it over thy brethren dissenting from thee, as precious in the eyes
of the Lord as thy self, and it may be more in the truth then thy self) not a
Son of Belial suffered to molest thee, nor a dog to move his tongue against
thee, If thou can not in this fullness sit down with content, who will pity
thee if thou risest up, and fall? If thou will read and consider the difference
between good and bad Magistrates, thou may see the misery which thy
Forefathers felt, and our selves but lately feared under the one, and thy
present felicity, which our forefathers desired, and we now enjoy under the
other, the due and spiritual effects of which vision upon all our hearts,
through the Grace of our God in Jesus Christ, is the fervent Prayer of

Thy Friend, and Servant, J. P.

ERRATA.
Page 31. l. 32. for spoil you, read spoil him. p. 11. l. 34. for violendum, r.
violandum. p. 12. l. 13. r. profuseness. p. 15. l. 32. for Asses r. Lasses.

These, besides some others, which I pray thee correct with thy Pen.

A Tyrant, OR Homo Homini Demon.
1. TYranny is a Complication of Iniquity; whereby men (being Gods in Power)
become Devils in practice, to terrify and torture all that withstand them in
their devilish dealings. A Tyrant is a Devil in heart, a Man in shape, a Lion
in power, a Bear in practice, affrighting his People with his rage, and roaring
and tearing them limb-meal with his teeth and ^a^ons.

The tend^r merc^es of Tyrants are cruel: the Scripture calls them, roaring
Lyon^, evening Wol^es, that gnaw not the bones till the morning, Zeph. 3. 3.
not satisfied so long as any thing is left, dealing by the people as the cruel
Spaniards do by the Indians, of whom it is storied, that they show them favor
when they do not for their pleasure whip their nak^^ bodies with ^oards, and
daily drop them with the ^at of ^u^ning ^acon: They cause the just to perish,
and the wicked ^o fl^u^^sh qu^ffi^g the tears of the oppressed, making m^lody
with their mis^ry and music with their signs. The oppressed Romans complain^d
to Pompey, Nostra miseria tu es magnus, Thou ar^ become great by our miseries:
like those Miscreants in Micah 3. 3. they ^at the flesh, and fl^y the skin,
break the bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot: Like those American
Canibals, who when they take a prisoner, feed upon him alive and by degrees,
cutting off from his body now a meal and then a meal, which they roast before
his eyes, fearing up the wounds with a firebrand to stanch the blood, to the
unutterable aggravation of his horror and torment: Such a Lion ^ampant was
Nero, 2 Timothy 4 17. I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion; and the rest
of those Monsters of mankind, the bloody Tyrants, Rom^s^ Emperors, in the
primitive Persecutions; and their Romish Successors, the same in cruelty,
though not in profession, ext^r^ing complaints against them (...)m the people
of God in the voice of the Prophet Jeremiah personating Sion, Jer. 51. 34.
Nebuchadn^zzar King of Babylon has devoured me, he has crushed me, he has
made me an empty vessel, he has swallowed me up like a Dragon, he has filled
his belly with my delicates, he has cast me out. It is said, that the Roman
Tyrants in the first Persecutions did destroy twenty seven millions of people,
and that with such cruelties as were never heard of before. One mentions a
cruel Tyrant, who to get moneys of his miserable Subjects, used to send for
them first to the Court (as Charles ultimus Angliae did use to send for the
Citizens of London and others that refused to pay Ship moneys, etc.) and if
they did deny to pay according to his pleasure, he would first knock out one of
their t^eth, and then another, until they did yield to pay the same; as Charles
aforesaid by himself or Ag^nts did send persons that would not pay his illegal
and unjust demands to Newgate.

2. A Tyrants Regiment is without Righteousnes^; he lives by Robbery with
Authority, making his Will his Warrant, and his Lust his Law: He is not a
Magistrate, but a Malefactor; not a Preserver, but a Persecutor of Law and
Equity.

Righteousness is a ra^i^y in the Court of Tyrants (except unconcerned in their
own interest,) where golden Angels (especially if their name be Legion) are
their sacred Oracles, from whose mouth they receive, and so give sentence
accordingly, be it right or wrong, to the wresting of Judgment: the Bribe
prospers which way soever it turns; making even wise men mad by their
unrighteous sentence: Their right hand is full of bribes, Psalm. 26. 10. Solomon
says, such person^ trouble their own houses, Prove. 15. 27. fire their nests
while they think to feather them: Fire shall consume the tabernacles of
bribery, Job 15. 34. It was an Oath taken by the very Heathen Judges, Audiam
accusatorem and reum sine aff^ctibus and personarum respectione, I will hear
the Plaintiff and Difendant with an equal mind without affection or respect of
persons. It is ^^corded, that Olanes sat upon the fleyd skin of his father
S^lanes, na^led by Chambises on the Tribunal. There are more th^n whispers of
very sad stories of the bribery and baseness of our la^e English Court and the
greatest therein, taking money on both sides, and doing Just^ce on neither side;
but, as I said before, ^i^e consumes the tabernacles of bribery: wi^ness the
woeful desolations of that wretched Family; the Husband hunted out of the world
by the hand of Justice, and driven from light to darkness, the Wife banished
from the Land of her pleasures, the Children in their several dispersions in
several places unwelcome to all, being a burden to all. The Word of the Lord
is tried: The house of the wicked shall be overthrown, Prove. 14 11. Brimstone
shall be scattered upon his habitation, Job 18. 15.

3. He carries death at his tongues end, the peoples welfare is at his m^er
pleasure, where his word is there is power, and be his doings right or wrong
who dares say unto him, What do thou? Hi^ heart is hard, his hands are heavy,
and woe be to him tha^ ^eels their stroke.

He has long arms, and can strike at a distance; he wants not a heart to
conceive, a head to con^^ive, nor hands to execute his bloody Commands: It is
said, that Methridates with one Letter did slay fourscore thousand Citizens of
Rome; none must cross them in their devilish cruelty, except he will take a
Bear by the tooth, or a Lion by the beard. I dare not dispute, said a
Philosopher to Adrian the Emperor, with him that has thirty Legions at his
command, neque in eum scribere qui potest proscribere nor write against him
that can easily undo me: Against his word there must be no rising up, Prove 30.
31. They will ride without reins, until unhors'd with Haman, and their honor
of all becomes the hatred and scorn of all: His wrath is as a roaring Lion,
Prove. 19. 12. amazing all that are about them: as a late King of England, who
(though he had more of the nature of a Fox then a L^on, yet) would make h^
Courtiers tremble with his sparkling countenance, fierce, fiery, furious and
ph^enzylike cursing and swearing* Nebuchadn^zzars rage against those three
Worthies in Daniel, was hot^er then his Oven (for he had destroyed them in his
heart, when his Oven could not hurt them) for refusing to obey his idolatrous
Commands: and Herod by the word of his mou^h has bloody Executioners to
murder poor innocent child^en in a barbarous manner. Now cursed be the anger
of ^yrants, for it is fierce; and their wrath, for it is cruel; by means
whereof they live undesired, they dye unlamented, as Nerva, Valentinian; yea
their ruin is the rejoicing of the people, as was that of Nero.

Cum mors crudelem rapuiss^t saeva Neronem
Credibile est mul^os Romam agitasse jocos.
When the wicked perish, the City shouts for joy, Prove. 11. 11. Absolute Power
tick^es Tyrants; to destroy with a word, a nod, this is their glory. Caesar
told Met^llus, he could as easily destroy him as bid it to be done: And
Caligula, speaking to his Consuls, I laugh (said he) to think that I can kill
you with a nod of my head, and that this fair throat of my Wives shall be
presently cut if I but speak the word* To have power to crucify and power to
save was Pilates pleasure and delight.

4. He makes his people tremble before him; he kills and saves, puts down and
sets up in the haughtiness of his heart and pride of his power, persons and
principles at his mere discretion.

It is said of Nebuchadnezzar, that having a Kingdom, Majesty, glory and
honor, in so much that all people, Nations and Languages feared and trembled
before him, his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, that whom
he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up,
and whom he would he put down: You may judge of their disposition by his own,
and of his by his cruel decree against Daniel, who did him no wrong; like King
like Courtiers, like Prince like Priest; for whom will they advance but either
those that are their likes, or whom they hope to make their likes? When Princes
are roaring Lions, Zeph. 3. 3. they that are advanced Judges are evening
Wolves, verse. 3. The Prophets are light and treacherous, and the Priests do
violence to the Law, verse. 4. What a cursed crew is here? He does not scatter,
but gather the wicked about him, for they love their image; Regis ad exemplum,
etc. Hence it is that Kings Courts in Cities and Countries as they remove from
place to place, are little other ways then a moving Hell on Earth, where the
Elect of Satan, the most cursing, swearing, blaspheming, lascivious, proud,
wanton, effeminate, base and beastly persons, are gathered together, from all
the Nation, people and families of the whole Country, infecting all places
where ever they come, rendering them (as it were) the very suburbs of Hell:
Hence it was that where the Prince and the Prophet (Anglice) the Kings and
Bishops.
Civil and Ecclesiastical Tyrants had their Seats and their Seas, the Cities,
Towns, Countries were the most debauched parts of the whole Nation.

5. He will rule all, and be ruled by none; he throws away the bonds of Nature,
Reason and Religion, and acts by his pride, pleasure and passion.

No, not by God, Nature, Reason, Law: Exodus 5. 2. Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord
that I should obey his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go* Pride compasses them about like a chain, violence
covers them as a garment, Psalm. 73 6. Taking pleasure in their pride and
cruelty, until their pride bring them low, Prove. 29. 23. Their greatness and
gallantry makes them swell and look loftily: Is not this great Babel that I
have built for the house of my Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? said proud Nebuchadnezzar: but God plucked down his
plumes, and stained all his glory, and sent him to school amongst wild beasts,
that he might learn better manners then to vye it thus with the great God of
Heaven and Earth. Sea the R^ign and Ruin, the pride and punishment of Tyrus,
Eze. 28. 27. because his heart was lift^d up, he said, I am a God; but God
threatened to darken his br^gh^ness, to shame his glory, and to bring him to
the pit. I might instance likewise in Herod, who glittering in his shining garb
(as Josephus has it) assuming the honor of God, was ungodded, yea unmanned by
the basest of vermin. The time would fail to speak to B^n^adad Rabshecha,
Zenacherib. Antiochus, Nicanor, of Alexander the Great, of Nero, of Bajazet the
great Turkish Emperor, with many others, whose pride, insolency and haughtiness
brought the wheel o^ Gods wrath so exempla^lry upon them, that they are made
(some in sacred, and others in other Histories) perpetual monuments of Gods
most fearful indignation; amongst whom may we not bring the late King of
England of bleeding memory, whose stubbornness, resoluteness and unruleableness
by Parliaments, Councels, or the wisest of his people, brought him to ruin,
because they would not suffer him to command like a God without contradiction?
He acted so like a Devil, murth^ring and massacring his people with fire and
sword, until the wrath of the Lord broke out upon him, like a Lion from the
thicke^s, devouring him by the hands of his own people, to the h^rror and
amazement of all the Princes round about: his Will was his Reason, and his
Reason his Will, and both his downfall.

6. His Commonwealth is a common woe, where his p^or Subjects as in a great
Bridewell receive their work and their wages, their labor and their lashes,
their stripes and stipends, as his mere discretion, and the will of his Beadles.

Where a Tyrant rules, the Estates, Lives and Liberties of the People are not
theirs, but his; not at theirs, but at his commands. Cato calls them, Fures
publicos, p^bl^q^e T^ieves; another, Latrones cum privilegio, R^bb^s by
authority; the very Scabs of a Nation: Isai. 5. 7. He looked for Judgment, but
behold Oppression (or a Scab,) for Righteousness, but behold a Cry: Like that
of the poor Subjects of Phalaris, whose delight it was to see and hear their
tortures and screeches: as John Maria Duke of Millane, who took pleasure to
throw his people to be torn in pieces by fierce Mastives. With the Spaniard it
is sin to enquire into Religion, and punishable by a perpetual cruel
Inquisition: With the French it is crime enough in the poor Husbandman to wear
good clothes of his own getting, eat good meat of his own breeding; it is meat
for his Master and his Attendants, too good for him. The great Turk has his
Bow*strings to strangle his Subjects at their pleasure, whose commands must be
obeyed, though they be to require whom he pleases to throw themselves
headlong, and break them into pieces down steep Rocks and Clifts, lest a worse
thing (if worse may be) should befall them.

7. In stead of punishing offenses he arms Offenders, whereby he becomes the
greatest Traitor, Murderer and Thief, violating the greatest Trusts of the
Liberties, Lives and Livelyhoods of the People.

As God has his good Angels to do his Will, viz. secure and defend, protect
and preserve his people; and the Devil his evil Angels for contrary service:
even so Tyrants, which are Satan's firstborn, have their Angels or Messengers,
viz. whole Troops, Regiments, and Armies, to execute their cursed Commands: as
Herod had his armed men sent out to destroy poor Innocents; all Histories
recording the cruelty of Tyrants, mention their numerous and armed Agents,
their swift M^ssengers and Executioners of fury, who are commonly the scum,
filth and froth of the Nation: hence it was, that when the late King set up his
Standard against his Parliament and People, the vilest, basest, and worst of
the Nation did flow in unto him, whereof God made a great Sacrifice unto his
Justice and Indignation by their utter ruin and destruction.

8. He eats up the people like bread, and drinks their blood like sweet wine,
commanding all as if he made all, though he mars all, making his Creators his
creatures, his Makers his meat, his Lords his Loons.

All men naturally are born free, made at first to command, and not to obey;
and so lived, until from the Spring of Adams transgression they fell among
themselves to do violence and wrong; and foreseeing that such courses must
needs tend to common destruction, they agreed by common consent to bind each
other from mutual injury; and because a mutual faith was not sufficient unto
mutual peace, therefore they ordained Authority by mutual consent, and
betrusted some therewith to restrain by force and punishment the violation of
common right, which Trustees were not so made to b^ their Lords and Masters,
but D^pu^ies and Commissioners to execute that Justice, which else every man by
the b^nd of Nature and Covenant must have executed for himself and for another:
and why any man should have lordship or authority over others but for this
common end, is not imaginable: Rulers were made by the people, not the people
by them; they were made for the people, not the people for them; they are each
particular man's Lord by their own consent for each man's peace, but they are
servants to the whole for the good of all; no man^s bound to the Ruler in any
matter of common prejudice, but he i^ bound to them all in common preservation;
the whole owe not their lives to any though never ^o great on Earth, the
greatest owes his li^e to the whole, and is made great by God and man for
service, and not for Lordship sake: when such Trustees turn Tyrants, what are
they but the grea^est Traitors? Is not Treason the betraying of just Trust^?
the greater the T^ust, the greater the Treason, the worse the T^aytor: What
greater Trust then that of Governmen^? which being once vo^un^^r^ly and
plenarily betrayed, the people are ipso facto discha^g^d from their all^geance:
The affi^mation, that the whol^ people in one body is inferior to on^ single
man who ever he be* is high Trea^on against the Dignity of Mankind. It was the
saying of a Heath^n King, I rule not my people by Tyranny as if they were
Barbarians, but am my self liable if I do unjustly to suffer justly: And Trajan
the Emperor, giving a naked sword to one whom he made General of his Praetorian
Forces, said, Take this drawn sword, to use for me, if I reign well; if not, to
use it against me: But a Tyrant, what is he but carnivorum animal, a ravenous
creature, a devourer of the people?

9. He makes no more conscience of killing men, then Moles, of burning their
Houses, then Wasps nests, of destroying whole Families, then Litters of Rots.

As Methridates did slay fourscore thousand Citizens of Rome: what need we
instance the large volumes of cruel Tyrants? of their heading, hanging,
burning, frying, roasting, scalding, wracking, cuting, chopp^ng, flaying, their
poor innocent subjects at their pleasure, making pastime with their pains, and
sports with their spoils; witness also ^he rapes, robberies, murders, burning
and destroying of so many thousand persons, Cities, Towns, and Families by the
late Tyrant in England, Scotland, and Ireland, in his late bloody Wars, and
Massacres, raised for the utter ruin of all those that in the least withstood
his tyrannical principles, and usurpations.

10. He holds himself accountable to none, but God alone, though he believes no
more God in the Heavens, then man in the moon, pretending most to that which
his Soul most abhors, Religion and Righteousness, the Glory of God, and the
good of the people, are most in his mouth, when his heart loathes them, and his
conscience serves him to say, and unsay, to swear, and forswear, advance, and
abase principles and persons, to satisfy his lusts.

Tyrants know no God but themselves; Who is the Lord? said Pharaoh: W^o can
deliver out of my hands? said Nebuchadnezzar. Alexander the Great commanded
himself to be held a God, and Apelles pictured him with a thunderbolt, Lypsius
with this posie,

Jupiter asserui terram mihi; tu assere coelum,
Let Jove take Heaven, so the Earth be min^.
With which pictures Alexander was so delighted, that he commanded that none
should take his pictures, but Lypsius and Apelles; Caligula braved his god
Jupiter, and threatened him, though at every clap of thunder, or flash of
lightning, he would run hastily and hide himself under his bed like a wrigling
worm. Tullius Hostilius said, That Religion did but ^ffeminate men's minds, and
unfit them for noble employments, but one witneseth that even this Roman King
fained to himself two new gods, viz. Pavorem, and Pallorem, whom he carried
about with him in h^s own bosom, such wretches not fearing him that made all
things, are sometimes affrighted with nothing; As Ahaz that trembled at the
shaking of a leaf, and Manasseh who hid his head among thorns; and thence was
taken and bound in setters, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11.

A Tyrant wants not Parasites that say to him as one said to the Pope,

Tu merito in terris diceris esse Deus.
Thou well deservest here to be styled a god.
How did the peopl^s^-blow Herod with their flatteries? crying him up for a
god, and God makes those worms to devour him; the voice of a Tyrants heart is
like that of Ninive, I am and there is none besides me; or as Babylon, I will
ascend unto Heaven, and set my Nest above the Stars.

My r^of receives me not, it is air I tread,
At every step I feel my advanced head
Knock out a Star in Heaven, -- said Sejanus.
Attilas King of Hunnes arrogantly vaunted that the Stars fell before him, that
the Earth trembled at his presence: Caligula by certain Engines thundered and
lightened as another Jupiter, I will asc^n^ above the height of the clouds, I
will be like the Most High, said the King of Babel: Cyrus caused this to be
writ over his Sepulcher, I could do all things. But why then did he not
preserve himself from death?

Zerxes was angry with the Mountains, Winds, Rivers, the Elements, if any of
them crossed him, as if they were men under his pay: At Hellespont he caused two
millions of men to be w(...)d over into Greece, where a sudden Tempest
battering and b^ating his Boat^, he caused the Sea to be st^nck with three
hundred stripes, and c^st a pair of setters into it, to make it know to whom it
was subject. I have heard of a story of an English King, or rather a King of
England, of very late days, (a great Hunter, that was his worthy Character)
who being at Newmarket for his pleasure sake, and hindered in his sport by a
long rain for many days together, with very little or no fair weather, began at
last to be so really fretted thereat, that he was heard to say, That no King in
the world was so little beholding to God Almighty as he, in that he should wait
a whole month together for a day of fair weather for his recreation, and could
not procure it, or words to the like wicked purpose, that one day falling fair,
great joy was at Court, all his Troop of Courtiers mounting upon their hunting
Horses, and he with them, and being about their game, the clouds frowned upon
them, and at last a very great soaking shower of rain fell, at which the said
K^^g being in a mad fretting and frenzy fit, cried out with cursing and
sweating, that the world should be drowned, and therefore in a scorn rode up
upon the brow of a Knap upon New Market Heath (if my memory fail me not in my
information) where he said, Give me a Bible, I Will prove the world must be
drowned, crying out again and again, Why do you not give me a Bible? at last a
Bible was brought him, when he had it in his hands, he opened it, and turned
and tossed it, at last making a scornful mouth, he threw it over his left
shoulder in derision, and so rod^ away.

As for Promises, Vows, and Covenants, these are nothing with a Tyrant, he
oftentimes promises in the word of a King, and thinks his heart unsworn, his
solemn Oaths, Vows, and Covenants, Protestations, Imprecations, and
Execrations, he slips as easily as Monkies do their Collers, making election of
those only that serve his turn, and reprobates the rest; So a Tyrants Maxim is
out of Lucian,

Sceptrorum vis tota perit, si poedere just^ incipit.
Scepters are vain that do on justice stand*
That Principi nihil est injustum quod fructuosum, a Prince ought to account
nothing unjust which is profitable* that it is lawful Regni causa sceleratum
esse, to do any wicked thing to procure absolute Sovereignty. Again, that Regni
causa jus violendum esse, That all Laws may be violated to make way for
Domination; That Vbi honesta tantum dominanti lic^^^, praecario r^gnatur, where
it is warrantable for the Prince to do nothing but right and just things, he
rules but by courtesy. Who can forget those manifold imprecations of the late
King in several cases together with his Promises, Vows, and Oaths, and his
common breach of all, and the just Sentence of God from his own lips, so
frequently upon him, and his, and the execution thereof in the sight of the
world.

11. His Court is commonly the Center of wickedness, a Borough of Beasts, a
Den of Thieves, his H^ll a Hell, his Chamber of Presence the very Synagogue of
Satan, his Chair of State, the Throne of iniquity, where with his ranting
r^tinue, his cursing Courtiers, his cunning flatterers, his fine fools, his
gaudy Grandees, he satiates himself in his filthy desires, and where looseness
and licentiousness, glut^ony and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strive
and envyings, blasphemies and beastliness, profusness, profaneness, and all
kind of wickedness do ran^ and reign cum Privilegio Regio.

Tyrants Courts are commonly the very Sourse of sin, the welhead, the spring of
the wickedness of the Nation, from whence flows such bitter waters, as infect
the whole Country, like Prince, like Priest, like Prophet, like people, like
Court, like Country; the Chambers of Tyrants, what are they but the very
Chapels of Venus? where their Beds, Pallets, Couches, are the very Altars
whereon those abominable sacrifices of filthiness are so abundantly offered;
their Kitchins, Pantries, Cellars, Butteries, are stuffed and filled with the
sacrifices of Bacchus, where men break their brains, as swine do their bellies
with quaffing: It was said of Bonosus, the drunk^n Emperor, that he was born
non ut vivat, sed ut bibat, not to live, but to drink: and being overcome by
Pr^bus, he hanged himself, upon whom it was j^sted, that a ^anke^d hung there,
and not a man. Darius King of Persia commanded this inscription to be set over
his Sepulcher: I was able to hunt lustily, to drink wine soundly, to bear it
out bravely. Solomon says, Wine as raging, and Paul fi^ly joyneth drunkards
and railers together, 1 Cor. 6 9. being both commonly found in one person. And
are not the Courts of Tyrants commonly filled wi^h such roaring boys as these?
whose heads and hearts are overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, what
Governors are these like to make, who are so ungoverned? these jolly
companions are (like locusts) all belly, where they bury their wits, their
reason, their understanding; Nay, their throats are open Sepulchers, where
their whole families are buried alive, digging their grave with their teeth;
Hence it is, that so many Courtiers of the late King, having their hundreds and
thousands by their places, and preferments, whose glittering garbs in former
days rendered them like blazing Stars in the streets, drawing all eyes after
them, are now creeping up and down with thin cheeks, and ragged raiments, and
their poor families pining in penury, being buried before they were born, (I
mean) through their Parents pro^useness, neglecting to make due provision for
their posterity: much meat, much malady: a glutton shall not want woe, luxury is
attended with beggary: the Apostle joins gluttony and drunkenness, chambering
and wantonness, as birds of a feather in one nest, or person; And where do
these Ravens build so much, as in Kings Palaces, Est Venus in vinis, Whoredom
is commonly ushered in with drunkenness, hence it is that the Whore has a
Cup^n her hand, Revel. 17. 4. When Lot was drunk, he quickly staggered, reeled,
stumbled, and ^^ll into the Whores di^ch; where he so besoild himself, that his
name will never be clean again. What provision (or catering) for the flesh, (as
the word is Romans 13. 13.) to fulfill the lusts thereof, is to be found in the
Courts of Tyrants? I have heard of a great Duke ^^ the late Kings days, whose
mornings drink, de die in di^m, was so tempered, and conditioned, that a
Gentleman of London upon a certain morning v^siting the said Dukes Steward
(being of his acquaintaince) the said Steward passed by with a cup in his hand,
his friend asked him what ^e had there in the cup: the Steward replied I have
my Lords mornings draft: the Gentleman desi^ed he might taste it, which
accordingly he did, taking a little sup of it, the operation whereof was so,
that he professed he had much to do to ^orbear incivilities upon every woman that
he met, being so strangely and unexpectedly overcome therewith, that he locked
himself up within d^ors all that day, fearing least he should be overcome with
fol^y. A b^lly ^illed with wine, or int^xic^^ing drinks, soam^th ^ut
fil^hiness, said a Father: Wine is the milk of Venus, said another, by which a
man being once overcome he is become a child, one without strength, a fool and
no man, quia non ratione sed affectu rapitur, because he is not ruled by
reason, but affection, led about by the nose even of women: Thou shall be as
one of the fools in Israel, said Tamar fitly to her libidinous brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 13. What woeful waste has this sin made of the estates, persons,
families, bodies and souls of many of our late Courtiers?

Corpus, opes, animam, famam, vim, lumina scortum
Debilitat, perdit, necat; aufert, eripit orbat.
Take the meaning hereof from the mouth of Solomon, Prove. 6. 26. By means of a
whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread, and the adulteress will
hunt for the precious life. The Prod^gal soon wasted his estate when he fell
among harlots: The whorish woman, like the horseleech daughter, has no other
language but Give, give: What pledge shall I give, said Se^hem, Genesis 31. 12. Thy
signet, thy bracelets, Genesis 37. 18. Ask what thou will, thou shall have it,
said Herod to hit M^nion. This sin destroys Kings, said Solomon, Prove. 31. 3.
It laid waste the conscience even of David himself: The eyes of Courtiers (like
David's) how often were they gazing after Bathsheba's, looking to lust? Job would
not look, that he might not think upon a maid: When the eyes are full of
adultery they cannot cease to sin, says Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Sampsons eyes
first betrayed him to lust, and therefore they were first pulled out, and he led
away captive unto Gaza for gazing upon his Dalilah: By these loop-holes of lust
and windows of wickedness (I mean the eyes) the Devil gets into the very
heart. One wittily upbraided a certain wanton, that he had not pupils, but
punks in his eyes. A Philosopher observing one to have wanton eyes, said to
him, that the difference was not much whether he committed wickedness with his
upper or nether parts. Were not our late mincing Minions called Ladies of the
Court (I speak not of them all) ordinarily attired on purpose to catch the eyes
of their male companions, in so much as that it was hard to say, whether the
greatest part of their bodies were clothed or naked? as if they made shambles
of their shoulders, and merchandise of their flesh. I have heard of a Bishop
invited to one of their houses to dinner, and observing the Ladies naked back
and breasts, said to her to this purpose, Madam, it is time to shut up your
shop-windows; upon which she presently cast a vail upon her neck and shoulders,
and never was observed to appear so afterward: Lust not after her beauty,
neither let her take thee with her eyelids, Prove. 6. 25. some render it, neque
te capiat splendoribus suis, let not her glitterings gain thee, lest she ruins
thee; Flagitium and flagellum sicut acus and filum: Misery succeeds iniquity,
as the thread the needle; they are linked together with chains of Adamant. We
need not mention the licentiousness and lusts of the persons and Courts of
Augustus, Julius, Tiberius, H^l^ogabalus, Caligula, Commodus, Domician,
Proculus, and others of the Roman Emperors, who as they exceeded in pomp, state
and greatness, so this sin of wantonness and lasciviousness did reign amongst
them; for almost all Princes or Courts of Princes in Christendom have been
observed to indulge, if not even to court that wasting wickedness. I have heard
of a Kings Court not far off, where it was said to be held a kind of a piece of
gallantry, and a thing in fashion, for the Noble men (falsely so called) to know
no difference between their own and their fellow-Courtiers Ladies, and the
Ladies the like in respect of other men, and no great matter of offense to the
husband or wife that it should be known, because it was then the fashion; and
that it too much favored of Puritanism to be confind within the bounds of
Matrimony. May we not well remember the English Court Ladies paintings, their
pa^chings, their crispings, their curlings, their caps and feathers, the
cocking of their beavors, their stilletto's, their man-like apparel, their
slasht sleeves, their jetting, their strutting, their leg making, with the rest
of their antique apparel and postures? O how many families bodies and souls
have perished by them? how did they rejoice to do evil? it was their meat,
drink and sport, to be merry with the Devil: Those light Asses are said by
Solomon to flatter with their lips; their lips were nets, their hands bands,
their words were coards to draw men as calves to the slaughter; Her house
inclines to death, Prove. 2. 18. Terence calls harlots, Cruces; quia invenes
macerant and affligant. It was said of Pope Paul the fourth as a byword, Eum
per eandem partem animam profudisse, per quam acceperat. Pope John the twelfth
being taken with an Adulteress, was stabbed to death by her husband. Alexander
the Great, and Otho the third, lost their lives by their lusts: Her paths are
unto the dead, viz. where those hell^sh Sodomites are giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, shall suffer the vengeance of
eternal fire: The harlot is a deep ditch, a narrow pit, Prove. 23. 27. and
whoredom and wine and new wine takes away the heart, Hosea 4. 11. that is,
bereave a man of his noble principles of wisdom, knowledge, understanding: Hence
Adulterers are said to be void of understanding, Prove. 6. 32. a wound and
dishonor he gets; he s^abs his name, his family, his conscience, his body, his
soul; that sin renders men past feeling, Romans 1. 28. of a dead and dedolent
disposition, Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. yea impudent and impenitent: Hence it is, that
neither the strange woman, nor he that goes unto her, return again, Prove. 2.
19. that is very rarely, if ever. Are not these the very characters of many of
our late wanton Courtiers, men and women of d^baucht consciences and
conversations, impudent, impenitent, ^^aring, mocking and s^^ffing at all means
of recovery, wasting their precious times in Plays, Pastimes, Masks, and such
fool^^ies, spending their wits and parts in Complements and Courtships, rising
up in the morning wreaking from their beds of lusts, no sooner up but their
lustful drinks are tempered for them, then to their powdering, trimming and
tiring, then to their devotion to their bellies, I mean their gluttonous
dinners; then to Blackfriars, or other places, to see Plays, to offer up their
evening sacrifices to the Devil; then to their junkets and jollities, and then
again to their beds of lusts, and thus they wheeled about their time de die in
diem: These wretched female wantons, what were they but, as one wittily said of
the Italian women Magpies at their doors, Goats in their gardens, Devils in
their houses, Angels in the streets, and Sirens in their windows, where they
sit in their whorish attire, as Solomon has it, with their subtle heart, or as
some render it, trussed up about the breasts with their upper parts naked, Prove.
7. 10. Erat nudo collo, and pectore, cord tenus, etc. with their bare necks
and breasts; Nudato pudendo ut ad concubitum homines accenderat, which I forbear
to engglish; by means whereof how many men have been be witched? making them
become void of understanding, even as brutes; Nos animas etiam incarnavimus
(said one,) as if their very souls, reason and consciences were even turned
into a lump of flesh; though these seem pleasant a while, yet the end thereof
is death: Lust blears the understanding, making men believe there is sweet
sense in sinning but is it any other then as a man fast asleep, and in a sweet
and pleasant dream on the top of a steep Rock or Clift, who starting suddenly
for joy falls down and dasheth himself in pieces by his unexpected fall? These
men and women will come at last (as some of them doubtless have upon their
deathbeds) to see and say, that not only this is vanity, but vexation of
spirit: When this sin has brought home its reward, a diseased body, a
p^rplexed conscience, a distressed soul, then the guilty person cries out too
late, filling the air with doleful cries: as one said, Totum vitae meae tempus
perdidi quia perdite vixi, How have I lost the chief of my time, the flower of
mine age, the strength of my body, the marrow of my bones, the vigor of my
spirits, the whole of my estate, and eternal life for a few sinful pleasures
and sensual delights? It is said of the Mole, how true I know not, that he
begins to see when he is about to dye, and not before; Oculos incipit ap^rire
moriendo, quos clausos habuit vivendo: Those mole-ey'd Minions may see too late
their miserable condition; their pleasure will be gone, their pain lasts.

Principium dulce est; sed finis amoris amarus,
Laeta venire Venus, trist is abire solet.
The pleasures of sin are but for a moment, like the crackling of thorns under
a pot, much noise, l^ttle fire, much light, little heat, a blaze soon blasted,
before the pots can feel the thorns: They, and their p^easure are sna^cht away
together; their Sun goes down at noon day. Metals in the fire are most glaring
when nearest melting: The fishes swim merrily down the streams of Jordan, but
fall suddenly into the dead Sea, where presently they dye, and know Jordan no
more. What Is become of those gallant Grandees, roaring Roisters, with their
glittering Gi^ls and mad Mates, the wanton Wag^ails of our English Courts, who
fleared when they should have feared, and laughed when they should have
lamented? how soon are they put out as the fire of thorns? Psalm. 118. 12. Did
not our English Courts swarm with these lustful Locusts almost in all Ages, and
the chiefest therein commonly chief in these sins? Edward the Fourth had his
holy Whore (as he was used to call her) that came out of a Nunnery at his b^ck
to satisfy his lust. May not large volumes be filled with the historical
Narrations, and that according to truth, of the pride, gluttony, drunkenness,
wantonness, luxury, lasciviousness of the Kings and Courts of this Nation in
their constant succession one after another, until the hand of Vengeance did
put a full stop hereunto by that fatal Blow at White Hall Gate, 1648. They are
extinct, dead, and buried; and I wish such an immovable stone may be laid upon
the mouth of their Sepulchers by our present and successive Governors, that
they may never rise again, that as their names, so their sin may rot and
consume away; and the eyes of this English Nation may never behold such vanity
at Court any more, where lasciviousness and luxury were accounted mere
peccadilloes, not worthy repentance or remorse.

12. He commonly wades through blood to his bloody Throne, and having once
scared his conscience by spilling the blood of a Father or Brother to attain
the Crown, he can eat the flesh, and drink the blood of millions of his people
to satisfy his lusts without reluctance, and judges it his right to wrong
whom he will.

Tyrants are men of blood, fierce, fiery, furious spirits, cross, cursed and
cruel dispositions; the world is filled with volumes of their vi^lanies in this
kind; all Ages and Countries without exception have woefully felt the truth
hereof; in so much as if men had the use of their mental ears, as they have of
their corporal, the cries of the thousands and ten thousands, millions and tens
of millions of the slain and murdered by the hands of Tyrants would be so
great, that they would hardly hear the living for the d^^d. The Turkish,
Spanish, Roman, French, Scottish, English Histories, are they not stufft and
crammed with innumerable Instances of the cruelty of Tyrants, and their pleasure
therein? No sight pleased Hannibal better then a ditch running over with man's
blood. Ch^rls the nineth of France, Author of that bloody M^ss^cre in France,
looking upon the dead carcass of the Admiral that stank by long keeping
unburied, uttered this wretched saying, Quam suaviter olet cadaver inimici? How
sweet is the smell of an enemies carcass? And the Queen Mother of Scotland,
beholding the dead bodies of her Protestant Subjects whom she had slain in
Battle, said, that she never saw a finer piece of Tapistry in all her life. To
spend time on this were to waste a candle before the Sun: Englands Chronicles,
the Books of Martyrs, the late bloody Massacres and Wars in Ireland, England,
Scotland, are fresh and bleeding evidences of the bloodiness of Tyrants. I
shall not here speak of the death of Prince Henry, King James, the bloody
Massacres of the Protestants in Ireland, by whose Commissions and Commands how
cruelly and deceitfully they have been carried on: God has made inquisition
for blood, he has remembered and not forgotten the complaint of the poor; he
has cut off Saul and his bloody house according to his word, Psalm. 55. 23.
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days: They are cut off
before their time; their branches shall not be green, but shaken off as the
unripe Grape from the Vine, and cast off as the flower of the Olive, Job 15.
32, 33.

13. Prerogative Pleaders are his Orthodox Preachers, that make his mouth their
Oracle, his Dictates their Doctrines, all Scriptural Precepts of the Subjects
duties the only Canonical, but the duty of Princes Apocryphal writings.

Tyrants have their Chaplains according to their Religions, who rather preach
from their Masters mouths then to their ears, and principle the people
according to their humors to maintain their Prerogative: Hence we shall find in
Scripture, that wicked Kings had their Priests and Prophets of their own
tempers, who did always charm the people into base slavery by their base
preachings: Zeph. 3. 3. When the Princes in Jerusalem were rearing Lions, and
her Judges evening Wolves, her Prophets were treacherous, betraying the poor
people by their cheating charmings into a stupid, ^ordid and silly subjection.
Wicked Kings, Princes, Priests and Prophets are chained together, Jer. 2. 26.
they commonly keep one Court and one Council; and as they live together in sin,
so perish together commonly in punishment, Jer. 4 9. You may see how these
wicked Priests and Prophets did cling together against Jeremiah, who protested
against their flatteries and ^alsities, Jer. 26. 7, 8, 10, 11. See again their
cursed Con^ederacy in doing evil in the sight of the Lord, Jer. 32. 32. Ahab
had a mind to make War against Ramath Gilead, for the enlargement of his
Territories; he had no sooner signified his royal pleasure herein, but his
whole Kingdom of Priests and Prophets allarms the people to War, and promise
them success in the Name of the Lord; yea one of them, viz. Z^dekiah the son of
Chenaanah, like an Ape, did imitate the custom of the Prophets of the Lord, and
makes himself Iron horns, carries them unto the King, as if sent by a very
special Commission, and tells him, Thus says the Lord, With these horns shall
thou push the Syrians, until thou have consum^d them; but you know they all
told lies in the Name of the Lord: and one Michaiah, that spoke the truth, they
buffeted and imprisoned: And was it not thus in Englands Courts during the Rule
of Tyrants amongst us? No sooner had the late King a resolution to war with the
Scots, his native Countrymen, but all the Pulpits from White Hall round the
Nation did allarm the people to rise up with him, promising them success in the
Name of the Lord. Were not those wicked Kings, Priests and Prophets of the
English Nation linked together as with chains of Adamant, in so much that if
the one be destroyed, the other must fall: hence grew that ominous Proverb, No
Bishop no King, which fell out accordingly: How has God destroyed those dens
of Lions, those Magpyes nests, those black Ravens that deceived the people with
their rough garments? I am no adversary to the lawful Ministry; and let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my pen drop from my withered right
hand, rather then I should willingly speak or write against the Lords true
Messengers; but mere pretenders of the Lords message, when they utter only
visions of their own hearts, are the abomination of my Soul.

14. The greatness of his height causes giddiness in his head, and at last his
fall; Though his nests be among^^^e stars, the hand of Justice will reach him;
and though he dwells in the clifts of the Rocks, yet thence will it fetch him
out.

Pride is unsatisfied with preferment: ambitious Tyrants are still rising up
above the top of their places, where they lose their footing, and perish by
falling. Pride makes a man drunk with his own conceits, ushereth in his own
destruction, his Sails being greater then his Ship, his heart then his head,
his projects then his pate, he is frequently overset, and at last, himself his
house, his fam^ly are overwhelmed in misery: Pharaoh, Adonibezeck, Agag,
N^buchadnezzer, Haman, Herod, with several others, are experimental instances,
and woeful witnesses hereof. Zerxes having covered the Seas with his Ships, was
(by a just hand of God for his prodigious pride) forced to fly from Grecia in a
poor fisher-boat, where (had not the Persians that were with him cast
themselves into the Sea, to save the life of their King) he had been devoured
in the waves that regarded not his greatness. The same S^nators that
accompanied proud Sejanus to the Senate, conducted him the same day to prisor;
they that were ready to kneel down to him as their God, did ere long drag him
with contempt to the Goal. S^gismund King of Hungary, beholding the greatness
of his Army, hearing of the Turks advance, scornfully said to this purpose, We
need not fear the Turks, nor the falling of the Heavens upon us, for we are
able with our spears and halberts, to held them up, if they should fall; who
afterward was shamefully beaten, and glad to fly away in a small boat to save
his life. Bajaret the terror of the world, how powerful was his pride, how
dreadful his downf^ll, when coapt in a cage, carried up and down therein a^ a
Monster of men to be seen of men, dashed out his own brains against the grates
thereof. Pompe^ and Caesar strive for pre-eminence, and what ever was the
pretended, yet the real cause was, that the one could not endure a Superior,
nor the other an Equal. Catholic Monarchy is the white in the ^^^^t^, that
Tyrants aim at: Non sufficit Orbis, is the Tyrants Motto; See their language,
Genesis 11. 4. Let us build us a Tower, whose top may reach to the Heavens, and
let us make us a Name. See the pride and the plague, the Majesty and the
misery, the glory and grave of every Tyrant, elegantly set out by the Prophet
Isaiah, in his Chap. 14. 11. Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the
noise of thy viols, the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee;
how art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning? how art thou
cut down to the ground which did weaken the Nations? For thou have said in thy
heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of
God, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most
High, yet thou shall be brought down to hell, etc. Their Exaltation often
proves (like Hamans) the heightening of their Gallows, or Gibbet: as once a
Danish P^t^ntate in this Nation, K. Knute, caused the head of a false person to
be struck off, and set upon the highest part of the Tower of London, therein
performing his promise to a Traitor in advancing him above any Lord in the
Land. What got most of the Cesars by their tyranny? pride, glory, and hasty
preferment: Nisi ut citius interficerentur, to be killed the sooner. What do
they ordinarily but pursue their own destiny? As the Panther having a violent
desire after the poysonful Achonite, (which men hang up above his reach) who
leaps and skips and mounts to catch it, but cannot come at it, and at last he
wearies himself, breaks, and kills himself, and so is taken. Aliena appetendo
propria amisit, was the inscription written in a Cup made of the Duke of
Muscoviah's skul, taken by the Tartarian in battle, All covet, all lose: the
whole history of the late King is approbatum est, of this truth.

15. To bring him to punishment is Gods will, and man's work; With God is no
respect of persons, and in executing of justice the Prince and the Peasant must
fare alike.

A Tyrant betraying his trust, breaking his faith, destroying the end of his
Power, Government, and Greatness, regarding neither the Law, nor common good,
reigns only for himself, and his faction, and because his power is great, his
will boundless, and exorbitant, committing wrongs, oppressions, murder,
massacres, rap^s, adulteries, desolation and subversion of his good people, is
to be seized upon, secured, and executed, as a common Enemy of his Country or
People. It was the saying of an Heathen Poet,

-- Victima haud ulla amplior
potest magisque opima mactari Jovi,
quam Rex iniquus --
-- There is no Sacrifice
so rich, so fat, so pleasing unto God,
as Tyrant slain. --
To insist much upon this point, were but actum agere, so much having been
lately written from able and learned pens upon occasion of the execution of the
late King: Beuchanon has several histories and instances of the Scottish
Proceedings against their wicked Governors, in the year 1559. The Scotch
Protestants claiming promise of their Queen Regent for liberty of conscience,
she replied like a Tyrant, That promises were not to be claimed of Princes
beyond what was profitable; whereupon they told her to her face in Parliament,
that then they did renounce their Allegiance, and so betook themselves to Arm^.
The holy Scriptures are clear for it, Numb. 35. 32. No satisfaction shall be
taken for the life of the murderer, be he what he will be, high or low, rich
or poor, King or Beggar, the Scripture makes no distinction; if a murderer, he
must die for it: He which is guilty of death, shall surely be put to death. If
God makes no difference, who is that man that pretends himself a Minister of
God, an Ambassador of Jesus Christ that dares so much prevaricate from his
message, as to say, That Kings and Princes must be dispensed withal, and not
called to an account, though they should shed the blood of their innocent
people, so directly contrary to the very Letter of the Scripture. Nero was
condemned to death by the Roman Senate, Tarquinius superbus deposed by the
people of Rome, the Lacedaemonians did ordinarily put their Princes to death for
breaking their trusts, and offending the Laws of the Commonwealth: Eugenius the
eighth, being the 62 King of Scotland, was put to death for his misgovernment:
Cum nec amicorum, nec Sacerdotum admonitionibus quicquam moveretur, post
tertium r^gni sui annum in Coetu procerum omnibus in ejus exitium
consentientibus periit, socii scelerum and flagitiorum in crucem acti, and ipsi
gratum populo spectaculum prebuere. When no admonitions of friends, Ministers,
would serve turn for to reclaim him, they consulted and agreed together to cut
him off by the hand of justice in a public manner, and himself, and
accomplices, were rendered acceptable spectacles of justice unto the people.
When Rehoboam shall tread in the steps of his fathers unjust exactions, and
upon the complaint and petition of his people for their just rights and
privileges, he shall refuse to hear them, to ease them, but tells them, I will
add to my Fathers yoke, he chas^ised you with whips, but I will chastise you
with Scorpions: Ten parts of 12. of his people cast him off, made war against
him. What, said they, if this be the case, that we must be whipped and slasht by
this proud Tyrant, and at his will, and the will of his cursed Courtiers, and
his green-headed Grandees; Away with him, what portion have we in this Tyrant?
To your tents, O Israel, Arm, arm, let him now look to himself, 1 King. 12.
from the first to the twenty one ver. his grave Counselors told him plainly,
Verse. 7. If thou will be a Servant unto this people, and serve them, and speak
good words to them, treat them kindly; they will be thy servants for ever.
Where you may see ( i.) that the King was made so to be their Servant, and not
to Lord it over them. And secondly, That when Kings are Servants to the people,
the people are th^i^ ready and free, and willing servants, yea vassels unto
them; Love will compel them: But when they perceive that they have no portion
in him, he shall have as little in them: By how much the greater the person is
that off^nds, by so much the greater is his fault, by so much the greater his
punishment ought to be. And I believe that that late exemplary piece of justice
at Whitehall. Gate upon the late Tyrant, was one of the ^attest, richest, and
most acceptable Sacrifice that has been offered up unto the most righteous God
that loves righteousness in this Nation before that day: And that the zeal of
our Judges in executing petty thieves, robbers, and murderers at Tyburn, was
but as the tything of Mint and Cummin, in comparison of that great thing of the
Law then done.

16. His light shall be put out, his sparks shall not shine. Terrors shall make
him afraid on every side, and his own Counsel shall cast him down, his roots
shall be dried up beneatlh, and above shall his branches be cut off: His
remembrance shall perish from the Earth: and he shall have no name in the
Street.

His triumph is but short, and his joy but for a moment, though his Excellency
mount up unto the Heavens, and his Head reaches unto the Clouds, yet shall he
perish for ever like his own dung, he shall fly away as a dream, and be chased
as a vision of the night; the eye which saw him shall see him no more, neither
shall his place any more behold him. Solomon says, That a violent bloody*
Tyrant shall flee to the pit, let no man slay him: Prove. 28. 17. Let no man
mediate for him, lest he pay down as Ahab did, life for life, people for
people. 1 King. 20. 42. When Tyrants perish, the righteous increase, Prove. 28.
28. They swarm like B^es in a Sunshine day. When the wicked rise, good men
skulk and hide their heads; as Moses fled from Pharaoh, David from Saul, Eliah
from Ahab, Obadiah's Clients from Jezabel, Jeremiah from Jehoiakim, Joseph and
the Child Jesus from Herod, etc. But wherein they dealproudly, God is above
them, He sees their day is coming, He sits in Heaven and scorneth these
scorners. The Most High cuts off the Spirit of Princes, he is terrible unto
these tyrannical Kings of the Earth, those scourges of the World. God so
subdued Senacherib, as the Egyptians in memory of it did set up his Statue in
the Temple of Vulcan, with this inscription: Let all that behold me, learn to
fear God. Tyrants shall be sure sooner or later to meet with their match; The
blood-thirsty man shall not live out half his days. God will at last appear to
their fearful destruction, to be glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders of wrath and ruin upon bloody Pharaohs, he will tear out those
bowels that are filled and stuffed with the blood of the poor, and make
inquisition for their blood; then will he remember, and not forget the
complaint of the poor, h^e has fulfilled his threatenings against Tyrants in
our eyes, and ^^^ed our Nation from those men of blood, that they may fall and
fall in all the parts of the world and never rise up again, especially in our
English Nation. That God would melt all Crowns, and S^epters of the Potentates
of the Earth, into a Crown and S^epter for the Head, and hand of Jesus Christ,
putting all Pow^rs and Authorities under his feet, making our Government peace,
and Exactors Righteousness, that violence be no more heard of in our Land, nor
desolation, nor destruction within ou^ Borders: Let all the people

CRI IN HOPE,
AMEN.
A Protector, OR Homo Homini Deus.
JUst Government is Gods Ordinance for man's good; the form thereof, man's
appointment with Gods approbation; the end thereof, man's felicity and Gods
glory: and, a just Governor is a Protector of both.

The Institution of Government is of God, the Constitution of man, the
Governors themselves of both, viz. Gods permission and man's election: JUST
GOVERNMENT IS GODS ORDINANCE; The Powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.
1. Man's sin was the cause of his subjection to all mortals, but Gods mercy did
institute the same to preserve him from ruin by his own wickedness; had not
man sinned, there had been a prior^ty, but not a sovereignty: there had been a
reverence in the child to the father as the instrument of his production, but
no subjection, because no justiciating power had been stablished, there being
no need of it; the eternal Law written in every man's heart would have been
every man's guide, had it not been for sin; sin ushered in subjection as a curse
at the heels of it; Genesis 3. 16. Thy desire shall be to thy husband, he shall
rule over thee; her disobedience exposed her to subjection by Gods Ordinance.
Sovereignty and subjection are Gods appointment FOR MAN'S GOOD; He is the
minister of God to thee for good, Romans 134, Sociableness, or appetitus
convivendi, is the impress of Nature: and the reason thereof, mutual
preservation and accommodation, which cannot be without Government: Sin has
brought sorrow upon the world; Sin entered into the world in the van of a black
and bloody Regiment, sorrows, pains, aches, hunger, thir^t, shame, etc. with
death through sin in the rear; Conscience of guilt brings fear of death: hence
one end of society is preservation; and because men need security from misery
and ruin by one another, therefore has God appointed Government and Governors
among themselves for the good of all, the form of which Government is le^t by
God to their own discretion, who has only confined them within the limits of
this general rule, His GLORY and THEIR FELICITY: Forms of Government are no
more perpetual then persons themselves; Necessity requires Government,
convenience forms: Were it not for Government, the line and pale of every man's
property would quickly be trodden down; men's boundless appetites would be their
purveyors, and their wants would be measured by their wills: Confusion makes
men desire order, and convenience the forms thereof: No Government is the worst
Government; and where none rules, none will be ruled, but all quickly ruined:
Anarchy is the worst Tyranny; Better it is to be under the dominions of the
great Turk then the rabble rout: The forms of Government are man's ordinance, so
called by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 14. No form being divine or natural
in its rise or root, we find in Scripture several forms allowed by God, viz.
Governments by Patriarchs, Generals, Judges, High Priests, and Kings: in other
Histories we read of Governments by Popes, Monarchs absolute and conditionate,
by Dukes, Senators, Consuls, Dictators, etc. which argues no one form above
another to be jure divino, but that every or any form lawful, if conducing to
THE PEOPLES FELICITY AND GODS GLORY: The power of Government wheresoever settled
is fiduciary, and not inconditionate; and whilst their Trustees draw all their
lines into this Center, Gods glory in the peoples welfare, they may walk
securely upon the highest battlements of honor and dignity: but if their
projects and practice be sole sovereignty, puff^ up with a vain opinion of
puissance and grandeur, though for a time they proceed and prosper, and say
within themselves, they shall see no sorrow, yet they shall find at last their
buildings to totter, and the consequence tragical to themselves and Scepters:
for when the peoples Pilot proves a Pirate, not ruling, but ruining them, the
hands and hearts of God and men will be swift Avengers of such perfidiousness:
The Peoples protection is the end of Government; and therefore a just Governor
is the Peoples Protector; and what is he? what does he?

He really esteems the Public Safety the chief Sovereignty; that he is more
the peoples, then the people his; that he was made for them, not they for him;
that the State at large is the absolute chief, and the chief, so called, the
States servant, which he judges his Crown, and not his Cross; his glory, and
not his shame; carnal policy is not his study, but his peoples peace, his care
and prayer.

His head is full of public principles, and his heart full of conscience
thereof; he studies the peoples right, and his own duty; he projects their
protection, peace, and plenty, as the great ends of his Office; his design is
not to multiply gold and silver, he desires not the peoples coin with their
curses; he well considers that though moneys be the sinews of War, yet the
peoples affections are the joints of peace: he renders himself unto the people
matter of praise unto God for him, not of prayers unto God against him; he
strives to be the peoples pleasure, not their plague: All cannot choose but do
well when thou ^ulest well, said the Senate to Severus the Emperor. Carnal
policy, which some call King-craft, is not his study; that subtle trade, which
commonly Kings and great persons drive in the world: Jeroboams Calves were set
up by this artifice, 1 King. 12. When he had gotten the Crown (from Rehoboam)
over the ten Tribes, he consulted with himself how and which way he might
fasten it upon his head, and he had his Politicians very nimble about him
(...)dvise him herein; and forgetting how he got the C(...)ver consulting with
God for his establishment, (...) way to ease the people from their ^edious
trav(...) to their annual Sacrifices, and sets up two golden Calves, and so
keeps the people at home to serve God in their devised (called doubtless)
Divine Service. And the Text notes, that the thing that steard him in his
project, was not his defection in judgment touching the true Worship of God at
Jerusal^m: but verse 26, 27. His heart did misgive him, that if the people
should go up to Jerusalem, (within Rehoboam's Territories) to offer sacrifice,
they would turn again to their old King, the Power, the Polices, the Pulpits of
Jerusalem, would reduce them to the old House and Family of Rehoboam again, but
this policy of his was his ruin at last, as appears in the story. A good
Prince takes heed of his own heart, and Councellers, and any undue way^, to
establish his greatness. A Christian Prince well considers true piety has the
promise of Exaltation, so his declining it, will be his ejection, and therefore
takes heed of warping against his judgment and conscience, of offering
violence to his honest and p^ons principles, through the advice of Politicians
to ingratiate himself with the people; he knows that the heart of man is
deceitful above all things, and therefore it concerns him to look unto it: When
Saul was first called to be King, he did real^y withstand it, Veraciter se
excusavit de honor regni.
the burd^n of Government, the meanness of his birth, parentage, and breeding
came upon his heart, his personal unmeetness and unfitness for so great
dignities and honors refl^cted upon his mind: but after he had once king'd it,
and enjoyed the Honors, Man^ors, Glory, Retinne, and Revenues of the Crown, he
could not bear it, to think that the Crown should now be alienated from his own
Fam^ly; he forgot his parentage, his pedigree, nothing but greatness and
grandeur now in his eyes, and the Counsels God touching the translation of the
Kingdom unto another Family, he could not brook i^* He was little in his own
eyes at first, but big enough at last, 1 Samuel 9. 21. compared with Chap. 15.
ver. 17. As also 1 Samuel 18. 29. compared with 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31. Simplicity
will preserve, carnal policy pollutes, and destroys. Solomon gives excellent
counsel in this case, Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is Above to the wise, that
he may depart from Hell beneath. True wisdom is from above, and it leads to
life, A Crown in the next world is a Crown indeed: this is but a Cross to it.
Christian Policy makes a Christian Prince to esteem that low counsel only worth
regarding that will make a man wise in the latter end, Prove. 19. 20. He thinks
not here of an establishment, he minds his mortality, and it is his wisdom to be
frequently (in meditation) at his own suneral, making every tomb his Teacher,
every mounment, a Monitor, his bed, his grave, his sheets, his winding-sheets,

Vt Somnus mortis, sic lectus imago Sepulchri. He considers his time fl^es, his
glass runs. Joseph of Arimathea had his S^pulcher in his Garden to season his
delight: true wisdom provides for suturity: This will make the Evening of a
man's days, as the day-breaking to everlasting Glory. It provides for him
Malorum ademption^m bonorum adeption^m. Freedom from evil, fruition of good. I
have read of the custom of some Countries, that in the Coronation of their
Kings, amongst other ceremonies, two grave stones were brought him by a Mason,
who did use these words to him,

Elige ab his Saxis ex quo invictissime Caesar
ipse tibi tumulum me fabricare vel^.
Choose, mighty Sir, under which of these stones,
your purpose is ere long to lay your bones.
He remembers that this is not his rest, but a rest remains to the people of
God. He that is wise will be wise for himself, that is, for his Eternal
interest, and takes h^ed of carnal cras^in^ss in carnal designs; his zeal for
God, his w^ys, his people, his country, th^se will advance good Rulers, and
these will preserve him and therefore he knows no council, no cunning, no
craft, that is c^o^s to these. It was a most profane saying of a wretched
Cardinal, viz. That he would not part with his part in Paris, for Paradise: He
mak^s much of wise Councellers, but takes heed of cunning ones, he takes heed,
lest any about him spoil you by policy, as the Apostle cautioned the Colossians
against spoiling through philosophy, lest he being led away by their error,
^all from their sted^astness, simplicity, and integrity: carnal counc^l ^s are
not of Gods Counc^l, they cannot understand his mind: Try the spirits, they
will be soon found out.

He takes he^d upon whom he confers honors, relations, family, consanguinity,
mere policy, or outward respects, ^teer him not, in preferring men to honor
and trust; he honors those whom God honors: Gods command to Moses in this
case is to this purpose, Exodus 18. 21, 22. Thou shall provide out of all the
people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place
such over them to be Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of
fifties, Rulers of tens, etc. Men that are fit for places of Government should
be drained from the dregs, sifted from the bran of the ordinary sort of people:
This was David's and Solomon's practice; such Judges Jehosophat promoted, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7. It was observed of the late Lord Ireton, both in England and
in Ireland, (the very mention of whom melts the spirits of those that well knew
him,) that he took notice of good men, and of those especially that were least
solicitous after preferment, and ye^ most fit for it, and them he advanced and
preferred before they ever knew of it.

He dares not rule in the peoples ruin, nor advance himself in their downfall;
his pattern in the Mount is the King of Righteousness, who though Lord of all,
was servant unto all, and sacrificed himself for them, not them for him.

His heart is set upon the peoples health, his thoughts upon their thriving; he
rejoices, lamenteth, is pleased or pained, he lives and dies with them. When
Joseph was exalted, he was in the place of God unto the people. to preserve
life, Genesis 50. 19. compared with Chap. 45. 5. He does not burden the people,
but bears their burdens, as Moses and the seventy Elders, Numb. 11. 16. When
the Israelites sell before their enemies, Joshua their Prince, their Savior.
was as sensible as if his blood did run out of their veins, Josh. 7. 6, 7. he
took not away his peoples inheritance, but did cause them to inherit, Deuteronomy. 31.
7. He spoils not his people, but saves them out of the hands of them that
spoileth them, Judge. 2. 16. as those Judges did: He is their deliverer from
oppressors, as Othniel was, Judge. 3. 9. and Ehud, verse. 15. and Gideon, Judge.
6. 14. He is Gods Love-token to the people, as Moses, and Joshua, and Chaleb,
and Gideon, and David, and Solomon, etc. Whereas Tyrants are given in wrath,
Lev. 26. 17. He knows he is set upon a Hill, yea upon a Mountain, and cannot be
hid. Heavenly bodies enlighten not their own orb^ only, but send forth their
rays to them that are under them. Moses being in the Mount, conversed with God,
and his face did shine among the common people: His life i^ a^ one says,
Coelum quoddam lucidissimis virtutum st^ll^^ exornatum, a very Heaven,
sparkling with variety of virtues as with so many bright stars: The peoples
eyes are upon him, and his example will be their patte^n: Mobile mutatur semper
cum Principe vulgus; Like Prince like people: Common people are like a flock of
Cranes, as the first fly all follow* Princes are the peoples Lookingglass; the
Court and the City and the Country will dress themselves according to them: Men
are more apt to be led by their eyes then their ears by pattern then precept:
He considers Gods eyes are upon him, and so are the Devils; good men look upon
him with joy, wicked men look upon him with fear; If he be a pious Prince, his
tripping would be their tickling, his fall their feast: He considers his
burdens are great, his cares are many, his business much, his agitations
various, the solemn Oath of God is upon him; all these do argue that the
requisites for Government are not ordinary nor few. He waits upon God, and
looks up unto him for wisdom and strength. The Mariners eye is upon the star,
when his hand is on the stern; so is his: if he misteers, the whole is in
danger. Saul's slaughter of the Gibeoni^^^, 2 Samuel 21. 1. David's lust, 2 Samuel
12. 10. his pride, 2 Samuel 24. 1^. Solomon's idolatry, 1 King. 1^. 30, 31, 32.
Iorams wickedness, 2 Chronicles. 21. 12 13. Achaz sins, 2 Chronicles. 28. 19. A^^^^
rebellion, 1 King. 20. 42. brought misery to their people; these Pilots by
their ill st^erage did split their Vessels, and many of their people perished
thereby.

He judges his Honors relative, and therefore obligatory; having once accepted
the dignity of Government, he cheerfully submits to the burdens thereof.

He considers, That what he has, (as Ruler) he has it not from himself, and
therefore not for himself; his honors are the fruit of his painful
achievements: which do not lessen, but lengthen, not ease, but increase his
burdens,

Fructus honos on^ris, fructus honoris onus.
Labors bring honors, honors labors bring.
It was the saying of Luther, that Politici and Ecclesiastici labores maximi
sunt, Magistrates and Ministers have the greatest burdens. Had we not
businesses and cares, and ^ears above any private person, we should be equal to
the gods, said Augustus. Good rulers bear the peoples encumbrances, burdens,
and strifes, Crowns have their car^s with good Princes, their crosses, their
scratches; the sense whereof they feel more at their hearts, then their Crowns
on their heads.

He rules by rule, and not by roat; the Word of God, the Laws of men consonant
therewith, are his rules of ruling, and not his own lust, esteeming it his
greater glory so to be ruled, that he might serve the whole, then otherwise to
rule to serve Himself; Prerogative, Assertors, and base Flatterers, he hates in
his heart.

He esteems himself more obliged to God, then the people, because he has
received more from God then they; he knows himself to be under the strickest
Laws, not over the meanest rulers, Under the Law were commanded by God to write
the Copy of the Law of God in a Book, and the Jews say, that though the Kings
Father left him a Book of the Law, yet was he to write a Book thereof with his
own hands, which he was to carry with him whithersoever he went, from Deuteronomy. 17,
18, 19. And according to this is Gods saying to Joshuah, This Book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night, Josh. 1. 8. A good Ruler serves the Lord with reverence, Psalm. 2. 11. He
casts himself before him to do him reverence, Psalm. 29. 1. And as for the Laws
of men in their respective Territories, it was Platoes saying, That the Prince
is not above Law, but the Law is above the Prince; the Magistrate should be a
speaking Law, a living Law, as exemplary in obedience to the Law, as he is
eminent in rule over all the people under the Law. It is most true, that the
Chief Magistrate may do only that which is just, and most false, that all is
just that he does* Saul was as much bound not to hurt David, as David not to
touch the Lords Anointed. To rule over the people by mere coactive power is
beastly, not manly. A manly Prince would rule over the wills of men by their
consent: A Lion, a Bear, a Wolf, rules over the weaker by mere power. A good
ruler desires power directive, not coercive, voluntary, not violent, by
counsel, not command, by consent, not compulsion: he takes no pleasure to rule
in his Commonwealth, as the Lion in the Forest. A Protector truly so called,
cannot think himself wiser then all, nor above all, but to the making and
executing of Laws, to the Government of himself and people, he will have the
consultation and determination of the wise amongst them: it is Gods Charactar
of a Tyrant, 1 Samuel 8. 9, 10. To rule by mere power, to take the people under
him, and make them his Horses, his Asses, his Slaves, and Vassals, minding
altogether his own might, not the peoples right: but God's Charactar of a
Protector is of another nature, Deuteronomy. 17, 20. viz. he is such an one whose
heart is not lifted up above his brethren: he is a Fellow-Subject to the Laws,
though the chief Executioner thereof; he takes no advantage from the Letter of
the Law to gratify himself, and grieve his people, (as the late Tyrant) and
his Predecessors; he well considers that common Justice, Peace, and Safety are
the great Ends of Rule and Rulers, that Laws themselves are no longer binding,
but as relative to those great ends, that Religion, Reason, Nature* Grace, all
do promote the public Good: That the intent of Law is nothing less then the
Princes roially in the peoples ruin, that the soul of the Law is preferrable
above the shel, the life above the letter. Id^m facit ac is qui legem
transgreditur qui saeva verborum praerogativa fraudulenter conira juris
sententiam abutitur. He does as bad as transgress the Law who fraudulently
abuses the rigid prerogative of words, contrary to the true intentional
Sentence of the Law. He has a piercing eye over pretended friends and
flatterers, he knows his house will be haunted with these, do what he can. Many
will seek the Rulers favor, more then the favor of God, for there they hope
to find themselves, he takes heed whom he trusts, and bless himself from his
pretended friends, and prays with David to be delivered from lying lips, and a
deceitful tongue, who will speak fair, congratulate his victories and
happiness, it may be present him with offerings and gifts: But as one said,
Timeo Danaos and dona ferentes. And says another,

Munera magna quidem misit, sed misit in hamo;
Et piscatorem piscis amare potest?
When their words are as smooth as oil, there is war in their hearts: It is
something under his fifth rib which they aim at in their Courtships and
Complements; though they bring milk and honey in their Lordly d^sh, yet he
takes heed of security and sleep at such a time; for they watch their
opportunity to make use of their nail and hammer; they are like Cur-dogs that
would suck out blood by licking, and in the end destroy without biting. A
Squire being sent out of Spain to poison Queen Elizabeth, anointed the pummel
of her Saddel with poison in a secret manner, as if he had been doing somewhat
else, crying out with a loud voice, God save the Queen. When Gifford, Hodgson,
and others, had set Savage on work to kill the said Queen; They first set ou^ a
book to persuade the English Catholics to attempt nothing against her,
Caveatur osculum Iscarioticum: The kisses of Judas are dangerous, he takes heed
of poison in a golden Cup: Jesuits at this day kiss and kill together
familiarly officiose occidunt, as one said of false Physicians, Esocietate Jesus
fuit qui Iesum tradidit: His Familiar that a^e bread with him at his table:
When the kiss was nigh, the swords and staves were not far off: he knows that
men that are most glosing are frequently closing with him for mischief, Joab,
Judas, Absalom, Ahitophel, are most dangerous in their kisses: there are
kissing Cutthroats, who can be affable to their enemies, and disguise their
hatred in commendations, while they privily lay their snares, men Italienated
that can salute with mortal imbracements, and clapse in those arms which they
hope to embrew in their dearest blood, like unto Hacket hanged in Queen
Elizabeth's time, who embracing his honest Schoolmaster, bit off his nose, and
did eat it down before his face: Of all persons he makes not flatterers of his
Council. Augustus complained when Varus was dead, that now he had none left
that would deal faithfully and plainly with him: he bewares of confidence in
unfaithful men, who will prove like the Brooks of Temah, Job 6. 17. which
swelled in rain, and failed in droughts; they will be like Egypt to Israel,
broken reeds, whereon if he leans, they will not only fail him, but pierce and
destroy him: Julius Caesar was killed in the very Councel-Chamber by such
flattering Councellers, A pluribus amicis quam inimicis, by most of his
pretended friends: The French Proverb, When the Spaniard comes to parl of a
peace, then double bolt the door; and the Hollanders in former days would make
no conditions with them, because they well knew their Machiavilian Heresy:
Fides tamdiu servanda est quamdiu expediat. I shall say no more to this, but to
pray that God would preserve our faithful Rulers from unfaithful men.

A Christian Prince studies Princely principles, not Machivilian policies, and
well remembers that he is Gods Servant, though his Servants Lord, and that he
is bound to keep them free.

He well knows that goodness is the way to greatness, and grace to glory,
that righteousness and peace through Gods Ordinance are linked together with
chains of Adamant, that when his ways please the Lord, he need not fear his
friends or foes, that the Throne is established by righteousness, ruined by
wrongs, that though wickedness may build his house for a time, yet a woe from
God will destroy the foundation, Ier. 22. 13. That Heavens friendship is his
greatest security, that true piety is the best policy, to attain and maintain
his power and dignity: The Saints just liberty is his study, and men of
persecuting principles he cannot bear.

Men that judge themselves bound in conscience to punish others that are not of
their judgment and conscience; men that are not very ambitious that others
should know as much as themselves, and yet very zealous to have them punished,
because they know not as much as themselves: iron-hearted men; like that Tyrant
that would cast the men of his displeasure upon an Iron bed, and if any were
longer then the bed, he would have them cut off by so much the shorter, and if
any were shorter, he should be stretched out unto that length: These persons had
rather that people should dissemble their opinions, then own their own. The men
of my meaning are very discernable; they are such as pretend themselves
Ambassadors for Christ, and that with great majesty and authority imposing upon
all men in the name of the Lord, and yet in the face of all men neglecting, nay
despising his great Commandment of Loving the Brethren. It is known to God, and
my conscience, and all men that know me, know, that I am no adversary to the
public Ministry, but a cordial Assertor of their sacred Office according to
the utmost of my poor abilities against Opposers; well considering that though
they may differ amongst themselves in the explication of some of the terms of
their Embassy; as also, that though they work not Miracles as the Apostles did
to confirm their doctrine, which two particulars are the greatest pretended
Arguments impleading their Function, yet they agree in the grand import of
their Masters message, viz. the grace of God bringing Salvation by Jesus
Christ, and teaching men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
godly, righteously and soberly in this present evil world; which is the sum of
the Gospel; and that this having been already confirmed by Miracles from Heaven
in the first establishment thereof in the world, needs no more Miracles for its
confirmation* (those doctrines only wanting Miracles for their credit that are
extra-Scriptural, pretended revelations, strong persuasions and impressions
upon men's hearts, having no greater authority then their own fancies, visions
born in their own brain, carried on with fury, violence, pride and passion, and
most importunely pressed upon the consciences of men in the Name of the Lord
without any Scripture.) I say, these considered with the like, I am no enemy to
the publ^que Ministry, and do heartily congratulate good Magistrates favor
toward godly Ministers, and the present course and hopeful endeavors of our
present Rulers in seeking ou^ able and fit men to preach the Gospel in the
Commonwealth; I wish them prosperity in the name of the Lord: But the men of my
meaning in my humble Caution, are easily known by some or all of these
Characters.

First, Men that will be of the Kings Religion, be he of what Religion he will,
and are clamorous against all that cannot weathercock it like themselves; men
that are not Oaks, but O^^^rs, warping and winding this way or that way as the
hand of their bountiful Patrons and Benefactors will wreath them; as of old,
like Prince like Priest, Ezekiel. 22. 27. Men may easily discern their dawbing
with untempered mortar. The Court in former days never wanted these black
Parasites; they are known by their flattering titles they give, trying if they
can trade by exchanging flatteries for favors.

2. They mind earthly things; Watch them, you will see the center of their
circumference (be the circle never so great) will be themselves and families,
places, profits, preferments, gratuities, these are sweet Venison after
hunting; pluralities, nonresidence, neglecting Gods flock by other persons, are
little better then the unpardonable sins, but plusquam pluralities can down
with themselves without straining, and the silver bell that has the greatest
sound is the fairest call for their so doing, and the still voice of God
speaking to their consciences is not heard through the noise thereof: their
happiness is not so much to be envyed as their unhappiness to be pitied;
neither is the seasonable attendance of good men of this tribe about our
present Rulers and families in the least impleaded in these lines, nor their
bounty or favor toward them, provided their attendance be not with the great
neglect of those grand duties incumbent upon them by the Word of God, by
Covenant and Conscience, and that they improve their interest, opportunities
and advantages with them for the Common Peace of all their Brethren in the
faith, however differing in opinion from themselves.

Thirdly, The men (of my meaning) of persecuting of principles for conscience
sake, are always found defaming, vilifying and reproaching their dissenting
brethren unto the Rulers, by clothing their opinions with ugly names, as
dangerous, dismal, and dreadful things (taking advantage from their
impossibility through their much business to examine the truth, and to make
their own eyes their judges in the case, to save them a labor by telling them
in their own manner, what men hold, and how dangerous those things be, never
informing (either through their own ignorance or malice) in what sense, with
what cautions, limitations, and restrictions, they maintain, or deny, and upon
what grounds and arguments, they assert their judgments, it is no hard thought
to suppose; (for there is reason enough) that there are men of worth, learning,
excellency, and holiness, whose names and reputations suffer shipwreck by the
men of this Charact^r, when any knotty, painful, and laborious business,
(pertinent to their function) in times of straits, appear necessary to be done;
the men of their quarrel are then in esteem, but when the cloud is over, and
the work is done, and the Sun shines again, they have then done with them, they
are shut up again in darkness under their black reproaches and scandals, and if
they have but the liberty of their private Confines, Societies, and Companies,
it is reward sufficient, if not too much for all their labors; like the subtle
Ape that took the Spaniels foot to reach the chestnut out of the fi^e, and then
eats the kernel, and g^ts him gone, leaving the burnt Spaniel to seek out a
plaster: Well, the other world will make up all. A wise Prince cannot but
judge such disingenuity much unworthy their function, and h^s favor.

Fourthly, Men of persecuting principles for conscience sake, are frequently
known by this charactar, viz. They bring their opinions to the Scriptures, and
fetch them not thence, and prefer their id est, before the Scriptum est, their
interpretation before the Text. Men that Caedem Scripturarum faciuut, as one
says, that murder the Scriptures, yea that torture and torment them, like
Amboyna Tyrants, to make them confess, and own such things, as were never in
their meaning. The Scribes and Pharisees preferred their traditional
interpretations before the Text, and could not bear any exposition, though
never so sound against their false glosses, though never so rotten, and that
upon this ground, it is the general received opinion, and orthodox doctrine of
all the Rabbis, Doctors and Fathers: Non tam ovum ^vo simile, One egg is not
so like another as those then; and these in our days. Did they prefer their
false gl^sses before the true Text? so do these. Were they more zealous of
their traditional doctrines, then of the Letter of the Scriptures? so are
these. Were they fiery Adversaries to m^n differing from them, though more
learned, more holy, more serviceable to God and the world, then themselves? so
are these. Did they stir up the people against D^ssenters from them? so do
these. Did they bring forth their raylings instead of reasons? so do these. Did
they strive to ensnare, and catch at words and expressions without respect to
the sense and meaning of good men, to make them obnoxious to men in authority?
so do these. Did they falsely misrepresent them to men in place and rule? so do
these. A wise Prince will beware of these men that dig for evil against their
brethren, to defame them, that the ruler may disfavour them. It is Solomon's
character of an ungodly man, to dig up evil, and whose lip^ are as burning
fire, who sow strife, separate chief friends, men that will pick up, dig out
all that may be, and more then truth to injury the men of their controversy.
When the Manichees could not answer Austins arguments, they hit him in the
teeth with his youthful follies, whereunto his reply was only this, Quae vos
reprehenditis ego damnavi, What you discommend in me, I have long since
condemned: and the malicious Papists did the like to Beza, reprinting his
wit-wanton Poems on purpose to disp^^e him, and objecting his former
miscarriages whereof he had repented, he replied to one that did twit him in
the teeth with it, Hic homo invidet mihi gratiam Christi, This man en^ies me
the grace of Jesus Christ: And thus Miriam and Aaron, Number. 12. 1. being ^retted
that God should declare his Counsels to Moses only, and that he should have the
reputation of it, and not they, had nothing to object against him, but an old
matter of several years date, viz. his marrying with an Ethiopian: I shall say
no more about these men, but wish all good rulers may never be troubled with
such as these: White Hall formerly was very rarely without them; their
Aphorisms and Maxims, are dangerous. It was of old, No Bishop, no King: which
was more ominous then necessary, and the end of it was to engage the King to
assert the Bishops, and to assist them in their tyranny and executing their
cruel censures by his civil Sword. We have other saying^ of the same sense, and
for the same end, though in other expressions: viz. That the Sword of the
Magistracy and the Sword of the Ministry must go together: which is a truth in
a singular, but not vulgar sense; or (if you please) in an English, not
Scottish sense, that is, to protect, (not punish) the people of God for keeping
a good conscience. That Magistratus est custos, and conservator utriusque
tabulae, A true saying in a qualified sense, though many times very ill
applied: The Papists made Lutherans, and Calvenists, the Bishops; Brownists,
and Separatists, the Presbyterians; Sectaries, and Heretics; there are still
that succeed them in their ill trade, and are about an evil work, viz. making
wicked Anabaptists, Blasphemers, Arminians, Socinians, Pelagians, and I know
not what of those whom the Spirit of God through grace by the belief of the
Gospel has made the blessed servants of the most High God, Kings, and Princes,
and Parliaments have been dashed in pieces at this stone by too much compliance
with the men of this Character. And the Christian care of our late Rulers, and
present Protector, and caution of them hitherto has opened the mouths of many
Saints of different apprehensions, agreeing together as one man, with one heart
and lip, in prayers and praises to God for them and him: and I wish with all my
soul, and that for the peace and happiness of my Country, that that Spirit,
Judgment, and Conscience of theirs, and of him, in this respect may be
redoubled upon his Successors.

His loftiness in place provokes loveliness in practice, the more high the more
humble, and like the Sun above he comforts and cherishes those that are under
him.

His greatness does better him, and not betray him into pride, and vanity, his
HIGHNESS is his peoples happiness, he is like an Angel of God amongst them to
protect and defend them, not as a Lion among beasts to terrify and torment
them, he is their glory, and not their grie^, their songs and not their sighs;
When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice, Prove. 29. 2. because he
is a mercy, and not a mischief unto them.

His great project is rather to be beloved then feared of the people, and by
doing every man right, and no man wrong, he sets up his Throne in every man's
heart.

It is noted by the Indians in America, that the Christians God is a good God,
who does good, but their God (who is the Devil) they count good when he does
them no hurt, and therefore they serve him not in love, but in fear: The Lord
reigns making the earth to rejoice thereby; and so should Princes be the
triumph, and not the terror of their Territories.

His greatness provokes his goodness to commensure herewith in the midst of
his glory; he remembers his shame, and the deep sense of his own demerits keeps
him humble under popular Applause, knowing that his receipts are great, his
talents many, his accounts proportionable, he is always reckoning of his
reckoning day: Pride, passsion, and wilfulness, incident to greatness, are his
constant caution.

His height humbles him, and his humility exalts him, his sense of his
emptiness draws his heart after God for fullness. Pride brings a Tyrant low, but
honor upholds the humble in spirit, Sequitur superbos ultor, a tergo Deus,
Vengeance follows the proud man at the heels; the judgment of God upon Pharaoh,
Adonibez^ck, Agag, Haman, H^rod, etc. are much in his heart, his religion
teaches him to be pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, he (like
Christ) seeks not his own glory, and therefore God seeks it, and keeps it for
him, John 18. 30. He contends not for himself, and therefore is God for him;
under personal injuries he sits down with content, but public wrongs rouse him
up to contend; his heart is hunted out of his earthly holds, he sees the
uncertainty of earthly glory, the vanity, the nonentity of outward pomp, their
impotency to help in the evil day, their impossibility to stretch to Eternity:
That outward greatness is but a conceited wall, Prove. 18. 11. He well considers
that God humbles the haughty, lifts up the lowly, as the lower the Ebb, the
higher the Tide; so his humiliation shall not exceed his exaltation, he looks
not so much upon his fine feathers, as his foul feet, which is ballace to his
bottom, and prevents the danger of his Broad-Sails, in the swelling and Surging
Seas of outward pomp and greatness, he blusheth (not blesses himself) under
popular applauses; prayse^ do more press him, th^n please him, and g^ate upon
him then gratify him; the higher his head is before men, the lower his heart
before God, he does worthily in Euphrata, and therefore is he famous in
Bethleh^m: his same attends his virtue, as the shadow the body, he has no
tongue to praise himself: Haec ego f^ci proves men no better then Faeces,
(says Luther.) Self-brags shows men's dr^gs and dross, not their valor and
ve^tue. Laus proprio sordescit in ore, he that comm^nds himself, vomits out of
his own mouth his own shame, nauciating the st^^acks of standers by: Moses
glory was not known to himself, but to those that beheld him, his face did
shine, but he knew it not, his ears (are not tickled but) tingle, when he hears
men speak of his worth and worthiness. When an elegant Speech was made in the
commendation of Charles the fifth, by a great person, rehersing his noble and
famous acts: the Emperor modestly replies; That he accepted of the Oration,
because it did admonish him not so much what he had been, as what he ought to
be. He remembers what he was when he sees what he is. It is sto^ied of
Agath^cles, who of a Potters son, became King in Scicily; that he would ever be
served in earthen vessels; and of one Willigis, Bishop of Mentz, being a
Wheel-wrights* Son, that he caused wheels to be hanged up and down the walls
from his Palace with these words over them in Capital Letters, Willigis,
Willigis recole unde Venris, Mind thy beginning. It was good counsel given by
Placilla the Empress to her Husband Theodosius: Remember Sir, what you were
la^ely, and what you are now, this will make you mindful of your duty, and give
God the glory: A man as good, as great, considers what he must be, as well as
what he was, and is, he makes account of his accounts, and is frequently
reckoning his reckonings; his Masters Read ration^m is much in his mind, his
receipts are in his eyes, and his account current in his heart, and his quietus
est, is the firstborn of his desires, his even reckonings make long friendship
between God and him, he is often casting up his books, lest his books should
cast him up at last, which makes him diligen^, watchful, humble and low in his
own thoughts, the noise of the feet of them that buried his Predecessors, is
much in his ears, he h^a^s the sound of his own passing bell, and in his
thoughts goes to his own Funeral; he considers that as he has had a time to be
born, so he will have a time to die, and that he is every day drawing on,
toward his drawing on: that his last day stands, but all the rest runs, that
the mortal Sithe is Master of the royal Scepter, and that it mows down as well
the Lilies of the Crown, as the Crown of the Lilies; he remembers that though
his Palace be built of hewn stone, yet his life is immured within mud-walls in
a clay cottage, and earthly tabernacle, that his foundation is the dust ready
to be shattered and scattered with every blast, that he is but terra friabilis,
crumbling, loose earth: Pride, passion, and self-will, are his constant caution.

First, Pride, he that says he has no pride, cannot want it, this made a
devil of an Angel, and threw him down from his Throne with a vengeance. God
resists a proud person, (as in battail-array,) It is God's resolu^ion (not)
to ^ta^n (all glory but) the pride of all glory, and bring into contempt all
the proud, (though) honorable of the Earth, Isai. 23. 8. He has his day for
the proud and lofty; for every one that is lifted up, he shall be brought low,
his lo^ty looks shall be humbled, and the Lord alone shall be ex^l^ed, he
pulls down the proud, and lifts up the lowly: He does carefully
cautelously, yea very curiously look to himself, le^t his valor, his
victories, his greatness, his Highner, his Armies, his Navies, the crowchings
of his enemies, the applications of the great Princes of other Nations, his
great houses, his revenues, his a^tendance do steal in upon him, b^leagure his
heart, seize it and take it before he is aware, and carry him into captivi^y
under pride and vanity, and bring him to ruin without remedy; he well
remembers that by humility, and the fear of the Lord* are riches, and honor,
and life, Prove. 22. 4. When pride comes in, shame comes on, but while he is
humble, God is at his right hand, so that he shall not fall, if he grows proud,
he will know him at a distance, yea afar off. And therefore he studies God, who
pulls down and sets up whom he please^h, whose are all Kingdoms, Power,
and Glory; and he studies himself, his dust and ashes, his heart, his lip, his
life infirmities, he watches and prays against pride and vanity, which will
make him humble and happy.

Secondly, His own Passion is his own pain and sorrow: Commonly Princes think
they may be passionate by privilege and peevish by prerogative. Moses was an
excellent General, an eminent Governor, and his meekness did add much to his
merit: Anger is little better then a short Devil, and he that gives way to it,
gives place to him. He that is big with wrath, breeds contention, and brings
forth transgression in abundance: A furious man is a man mastered by furies,
and (as the Persian Kings to their Concubines) is a slave to a slave. Anger may
rush into the heart of wise men, but it rests and roosteth only in the bosom
of fools: The hasty man never wants woe. One counseled Augustus to determine
nothing rashly when he was angry, but that he should first repeat the Greek
Alphabet: Ambrose taught Theodosius in that case to repeat the Lords Prayer. He
that is slow to anger is of great understanding, but he that is hasty of spirit
exalts folly. It Is true, it is good to be angry, and not to sin, but then a
man must be angry at nothing but sin, and not as it is an offense to man, but
to God, nor yet so angry as to be unfit for prayer: Moses was angry at the
Israelites golden Calf, but could pray for them; Christ at the unbelief of the
Pharisees, but was grieved for the hardness of their hearts. Right anger is a
very tender virtue, and such as by reason of man's unskilfulness may be easily
corrupted, and made dangerous. The Spirit of Prayer, Meditation, Communion with
God, and the spirit of frowardness, will never mingle: the Spirit of Prophecy
came not upon Elisha until his heat was over; and his anger was charmed by the
music of a Minstrel, 2 King. 3. 15. A froward heart shall depart from God, a
meek and quiet spirit is of great price with him. God deals above the
thundering, tempestuous, and blustering clouds, and meets with men in the cool
of the day, speaking and appearing in the still voice. He that is slow to anger
is better then the mighty. U^ruly passions (says one) are those Turks with
whom we must ever make war: those Spaniards, with whom who ever made peace,
gained nothing but repentance; a deadly fewd must be between good Princes and
their lusts, which war in their members, fighting against their souls. A
passionate person, though he be not drunk, yet is he not his own man: It Is a
shame for a Prince to have his lusts his lords, and his vices his vanquishers;
He that rules his spirit, is better then he that takes a City,

Vince animos iramque tuam qui caetera vincis, Victory over himself yields him
greater glory, richer spoils, then all other victories: Here to overcome will
is his glory, to be overcome his shame.

Thirdly, Self-will is not his will, knowing that Sic volo, sic jubeo, etc. is
the Tyrants Charactar, and very incident to men in power, and their will is
frequently their woe. King Charles was a probatum est of this. Josiah one of the
most famous Kings recorded in the Book of God, for piety and goodness, yet he
never consulting the Prophets, resolutely would go to war contrary to counsel,
which cost him his life, 2 Chronicles. 35. 22. to the great loss and lamentation of
all his good people: Consilii satis est in me mihi, is the saying of Solomon's
fool, in whose eyes his own ways is right, Prove. 12. 15. But he that hearkneth
to counsel is wise. A person suspecting his own judgment, and taking advise of
wiser then himself, seldom miscarries. A woe is pronounced to that Land whose
King is a Child, that is, weak, wilful, and uncounselable; as Rehoboam, who was
a child at forty years old, whose father was a man at twelve; for age is no
just measure of wisdom: Solomon the wise chose him an excellent Council of
State, whom Rehoboam refused to hear, being as wilful as his father wise, being
heady, high-minded, he lost ten Tribes by his wilful and churlish breath. It
was said of old, Romani sedendo vincunt, Wisdom is better then strength,
prudence excels puissance, and counsel courage, which made Agamemnon set
such a price upon Ulysses: Where no counsel is the people fall, but in the
multitude of Counselors, (truly so called) there is safety; It is not titles,
but truths; not the name of counsels, and counselors, but the proper natures
of them, that will bless him, and the people under him. It is reported of
Xerxes, that in his expedition against Greece, he called his Princes together,
but gave them neither freedom of speech, or council, lest I should seem (said
he) to follow mine own counsel I have assembled you, but do you remember, that
it becomes you rather to obey, then to advise. To have a wise Council that must
not advise, or a weak Council that cannot advise, is much the same in the sigh^
of God, and wise men: for a Prince to resolve to follow the advice of his
Council, and yet to command them to give no counsel but what he tells them, he
will follow, i^, as if one should promise to maintain me so long as I live,
provided I live no longer then he will maintain me. He has weighty Affairs in
his head, in his heart, on his hand^; therefore all his purposes are
established by wise Counsel, which makes his proceedings neither unconstant,
nor uncomfortable: Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum est semel. He considers
long ^re he resolves upon any weighty enterprise, A Christian Prince first of
all, and above all advises with God, Woe be to the rebellious children, that
take counsel but not of me, Isai. 30. 1. David had able Counselle^s about him,
but his chiefest were Gods testimonies. Psalm. 119. 24. Thy testimonies are my
delight and my Counselors. Princes have had their Remembrancers, Moniters,
Councellers, as Themistocl^s, his Anaxagores, Alexander his Aristotle, Scipio
his Panaetius and Polybbius; but it is reported of Scipio Africanus that it was
his custom before day to go in Cellam Jovis, and there to stay quasi
consultans de Republica Jove, advising with God about his Commonwealth: David
in all his straits asked counsel of the Lord: With good ADVICE make war, said
Solomon. Great matters require great advice: The Soldiers rule is, Non sequi
non sugere bellum: neither to follow after war, nor to fly from it: and it is
the Christians Motto: N^c temere n^c timide.

He well understands his slippery standing, that he is a man in nature, though
a God in Name; that the end of all is alike to all, though no man's danger like
to his: That height of place endangers downfall, that the pinnacle of
preferment is a dreadful point, which causes his caution in all his steerage.

He considers that his honors are attended with dangers, his Crown with cares,
he knows that to keep and maintain the love of God, and the peoples good will
cost him study, for it, requires skill, That the Rulers duty is not soon
learnt, that his work is great, his strength is small, his dangers many, his
business curious, his head, his heart, his hand, with much diligence are all
employed.

He is the poor means Patron, the widows Husband, the Orphans Father, the good
man's pleasure, the bad man's terror, affable in speech, facile in access,
amiable in countenance, respecting no man's person, but every man's cause,
thereby he becomes the desire of all.

The Work of the Ruler is to judge the poor, that is his duty, and his
establishment. James the fourth of Scotland, was for this called The poor man's
King. Help, O King, said the poor woman to Jehoram. If thou will not hear and
right me, why do thou take upon thee to be King? said the poor woman to
Philip King of Macedony: It is a mercy to have Judges. Modo audeant quae
sentiunt. So that they have courage to do what they judge fit to be done. A
just Ruler is (as one says of a just Law) a heart without affection, an eye
without last, a mind without passion, a treasury which keeps for every one
what he has, and distributeth to every one what he should have. Such a Prince
shall sit firm on his Throne, the hearts of his people will be his Lifeguard,
and God his Protection, such an one is like God, the poor man's refuge in the
time of trouble, in him the Fatherless find mercy, and he will cause the widows
heart to sing for joy, if her cause be just, his conscience pleads it with him,
he regards not the greatness of her adversari^s, but the goodness of her cause;
he is no secret accepter of persons, Job 13. 10. he hears causes without
prejudicial impiety, and judiciously examines them without sinister obliquity:
and sincerely determins them without sinful partiality. It was said of Cato,
that he was one A quo nemo unquam rem injustam petere audebat, So just as no
man durst make any unjust request unto him.

He esteems royalty without righteousness, as eminent dishonor, gilded
putrefaction, glorious baseness, riches, retinue, splendour, and greatness, no
better then mere Pageantry, shows and shadows of Nobleness, which causes his
vigilance over his own heart, and his own family.

Righteousness is the way to ric^es, goodness makes men glorious. It was said
by one of Constantine the Great, Bonus Deus Constantinum magnum tantis t^rrenis
implevit muneribus quanta optare nullus auderet, The good Lord heaped so much
outward happiness upon (his faithful Servant) Constantine the Great, as no man
ever durst to have wished more; his glory (like Sarah's beauty) consists in
the hidden man, 1 Pet. 3. 4. He knows that Dignitas in indigno est ornamentum
in luto, That a jewel of gold in a swines ^nout, is as comely as gay clothes
upon vile persons, painted Sepulchers. Solomon's wisdom rendered him more
honorable then all his glittering and golden glory: the justice, wisdom,
righteousness of a pious Prince, these are Ornaments of grace, and Crowns of
glory, Prove. 4. 8, 9. Riches, honors, delights, pleasures, life, length of
days, seed, and posterity, are all entailed upon piety and holiness; outward
pomp, greatness and glory suck out the goodness of the heart, (as the Ivy from
the Oak) except there be curious caution; What are they but insufficient and
unsatisfactory, often provocations to vice, and hinderanc^s of virtue? The
Order of nature is inverted, when vile men are exalted, Psalm. 12. 8. It is a
foul incongruity, and of very evil consequence, vile persons are loathsome,
though veild with velvets, and the children of Satan though in Satin.

He has great vigilance over his own family; he sees who they are, and what
they are: every officer, every servant he keeps, is of his own choice or
approbation: He cannot rule well in the Church, much less in the Nation, that
rules not his own house well: He bewares of an Achitophel, a Doeg, an Haman.
It was said of a Prince of Germany, That esset al^u^ si esset apud alios, He
would be another man, were he with other men. He takes heed who gets the
royalty o^ his ear, lest he does with him what he list. David would not know,
i. e. own a wicked person, Psalm. 101. 4. and verse. 7. He that works deceit
shall not dwell within my house, he that tells lies shall not tarry in my
sight; An hypocrite, an Ismaelite shall not dwell wi^h him: He takes heed of
proud servants; knowing that men will be apt to mistake him in them, and think
they read him in them. A wicked person in his family is as an Achan in the
Army, a Jonas in the Ship. It Is his honor and wisdom to be loved and feared of
his family; which he will never be, except they be wise and honest: He that
delicately brings up his servant, shall have him become son at the length,
Prove. 29. 21. Solomon himself (that sometimes knew better how to give good
counsel then to take it) entertains Jeroboam, gave him great power in his
house, admitted him into so much familiarity, that he let loose the bridle of
domestical discipline unto him, in so much that he took state upon him as a
young Master in the house, and soon after turned Traitor: See the like in
Abner, Ishbosheths servant, who grew so haughty, that he must not be spoken to;
and so Zimri, whom his Lord and Master Elah, 1 King. 16. 11. advanced Captain
over half of his charets, being thus like a beggar set on horseb^ck, ^ides
without reins to the ruin of his Master and whole house:

Asperius nihil est humili dum surgit in altum. It is with a Ruler in respect
of evil servants, as with a creature called Millipeda, the more feet it has
the flower it goes: corrupt servants hinder the course of Justice; this
reflects upon their Lords. His frowns are upon evil, and his favors upon wise
servants, which is Solomon's counsel, Prove. 14. 3^. as was Pharaohs toward
Joseph, Darius toward Daniel, Henry the E^ght toward Cromwell, who for his
wisdom and faithfulness he raised from a mean person (son to a Blacksmith) to
be Master of his Jewel-house, Baron of Okeham in Rutland-shire, then Knight of
the Garter, Earl of Essex, Lord great Chamberlain, and at last his Vicar
General. A wise servant may have rule over a son without dishonor to the
father, and discredit to the son. Amongst his servants some may be wiser, some
better, some more in Gods favor then others: He lets such have rule over his
household by his commission, and suffers not the b^ambles to domineer over the
Ceda^s. The le^ity, luxury, idleness, wantonness of the quondam Court at
White Hall, together with their concomitants, were none of the l^ast on^^ns of
their destruction. It is observed by one, that among all the servants,
pleasures and delights which Solomon had, he got him no fool or Jester, which
formerly Princes could not be without in this Nation, no not when they should
be most serious. It is recorded of Henry the third King of France, that in a
solemn P^^cession at Paris he could not be without his Jest^r, who walking
between the King and the Cardinal, made mirth to them both: Was not here sweet
devotion? The truth is, ^^eir religious actions were all in jest, their wicked
in earnest: I hope no such vile and vicious persons will be ever found more in
our English Courts.

He is the joy of the just, the delight of their souls, the breath of their
nostrils: He lives beloved, he dies desired, is buried with lamentations, his
generation is blessed, and his name is had in everlasting remembrance.

The Death of Josiah struck the heart of Israel and Judah, making their eyes as
fountains of tears, and their mourning so great, that it grew to a Proverb, The
mourning of Hadadrimon in the valley of Megiddon, Zach. 12. 11. His memory
shall be blessed, his name shall be heir to his life, and h^s posterity shall
enjoy the fruit of his virtue, His children are blessed after him, Prove. 20. 7.
His righteousness is inherited by his posterity, and laid up in everlasting
remembrance, and his translation shall be unto an incorruptible Crown of Glory,
which is undefiled and fades not away, with the whole Family of God, and the
Spirits of just men made perfect, where he shall receive a prepared Kingdom,
and dwell among those Mansions, shining as the Sun in the Firmament, for ever,
and ever.

FINIS.

