THE VINDICATION OF Colonel General POYNTZ, AGAINST The false and malicious
Slanders secretly cast forth against him; As in a Letter to a Friend of his,
and a Servant to the State, does appear.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
February 3. 1645.

SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you have shown not only love, but fidelity to
your Kinsman, in that your freedom of advice and information, in both which I
cannot say whether I have the greater occasion of thanks for your goodness, or
sorrow for other men's malice, in aspersing him, who by an unfeigned heart and
diligence has sought to serve them. Yet me thinks when I consider what
personages of fidelity and honor have been abused by secret Emulations, and
the unworthy Scandals of weak and light spirits; I begin to question with my
self, Who am I, that I should be thus troubled at this fatal vanity, and in
such a time, when even the community of all things at present seems to suffer
under it.

Indeed, were not the tyranny of envious and depraving tongues become almost
universal, I had not wanted all reason for complaint; but seeing the Disease is
grown so Epidemical, too much sense thereof in me a particular person, would
render me not only too partial, but even ridiculous, which invites me to be as
patient of the affront, as I am hopeless of reparation; That alone which
sticks with me, beyond the strength of removal, is, That these false whisperers
have insinuated these palpable untruths into the ears of diverse in the
Parliament, this very Parliament under whom I serve, from whom I have received
such testimonies of trust and favor, the actions of whom I do not alone honor
but admire, And for whom I shall with all quietness and resolution submit me
to the extremest sufferings of life and fortune: When therefore I consider my
self presented to them in so rude and false a vizard, without any pretense of
merit, this I confess cuts me deep, even to the very soul, and compels me to
stoop so much to the importunities of truth and mine own conscience, as to
think it no misexpence of time, to give a true answer to the particulars of
those reproaches cast upon me.

I observe the first wedge by which these discreet Engineers have sought to
rend me, is matter of Religion; as though I neither were religious my self, or
respected it in other men; wherein, to challenge to my self perfection, were
more then Pharisaical, yet I may take the leave not only to say, but truly to
aver this, That I ever did, and trust ever shall sincerely love and honor both
Religion and religious men, and do profess, that generally I have and do value
honesty beyond mere abilities, even in my own element as a Soldier, and should
acknowledge my self truly convicted, might but one Example be produced, of that
honest man whom I have not countenanced and loved against all opposition. Truly
it has been my grief, that for public duties sake as well as private helps
and convenience, I never had a Chaplein allowed me to my Regiment, since I was
honored with the service of the Parliament, although I have solicited and
entreated the same from eminent and worthy Members of the House; yet I never
was (I thank God) without one, although in three months time be scarce ever
rested from a march on the Sabbath day, the necessity of the public Service,
and the just regards I owed to the Enemies motions and endeavors compelling me
thereunto. I have given so much obedience to advantage and opportunity, that
many times the exigency of Action requiring much dispatch, I have been censured
as rash by some who pretend to more Soldiery, then their Experience can make
them capable of: Certainly, if any necessities are to be yielded unto, those of
a Soldier may challenge place, where the obligations of life and fortune run
on equal hazards, and in the action it self, I rather care to serve the State
then to please men's fancies, wherein I may say, that had I not neglected
Objections and Scruples, but been guided by the safe contemplations of some,
the Kings army of horse had been yet unfought withal by this under my command.
I know very well how useless an army is without care and providence, yet when
action shall be converted into speculation, and to be then counselling when we
should be doing, is but indeed to undo all; For the loss of time is a mistake
of such a nature, as many times to fail once, is to be undone for ever.

For the other Objection, That I am an oppressor of the country; This is a
falsehood so notorious, that I call to witness the Gentlemen of all Committees in
my march from Yorkshire throughout the greatest part of England; nay I call the
people themselves to witness, Whether ever I assessed the country for Six
pence; and Whether I have not even before them in the head of an army given
strict order to the contrary, letting them know, my coming to them was for
their preservation, and that I was bound by my trust to see no injury should be
offered them; all that was desired, was no more but a nights quarter upon our
march, which with abundant cheerfulness and love they offered; neither knew I
how to spare this, unless I knew how to compound with the nature of men and
beasts, who must have food for their present subsistence: That some Offenses
may have been committed, I will not take upon me to deny, but yet as much
against my Orders and Desires as any man's living; yet when I consider the
tedious marches, accompanied with continual and hard duty, and comparing the
pay with the pains of these Forces, me thinks it deserves admiration as much as
censure; and how I endeavor here to prevent disorders, that all armies labor
under, and which the want of pay does produce, I refer to the judgment and
report of the Gentlemen in these parts residing with me.

There is yet a more blasting and spightfull report, not so weak as purely
false, which is, That I should assume the Title of Excellency, on purpose to
draw the Curtain of Envy upon me; this I do with all opennesse disclaim and
protest, I have been, am and will be, so far from the vanity of such Ambition,
that whenever it shall please the Parliament to command me, I will with as much
faithfulness as alacrity trail a Pike under that honored and gallant
Gentleman, Sir Thomas Fairfax, where that Title meets with proportionable
merit: And as my conversation is plain and open, so my Accusers shall since
neither my heart or actions incline to so much pride, as once to own so vain a
Contemplation.

I observe where the tongue has once broken the limits of its own Sphere, like
parralell lines it runs on for ever, else how can any man cloth himself with
so much and so brazen impudence, as to report me a debaucht person, for besides
that reverence I owe to God, I cannot as a Gentleman of quality, and that honor
the Parliament has thought me worthy of, stoop to any meannesse that way; for
if they mean by drink, I must acknowledge the constitution of my body will not
allow it, as being much accustomed to another climat, that very seldom or never
admits it, besides my disposition by nature (I will say nothing of my continual
and restles employments) does oppose it; and if they mean by women, I believe
he that knows I have not bin in a bed these 4 months, unles in my sickness at
Notingham, would easily excuse me should I be so unjust to my own Innocence as
not to deny it; and moreover the daily Alarums and restless pains I undergo,
may be thought a sufficient cooling card for such folly, for all those that
know my custom and propension, let it be by any creature living made appear,
that ever I used the least incivility or behavior that might not square with
the strict rules of temper and honor, and will acknowledge my self guilty of
what ever the malice of these people can invent against me; and here I take God
to witness who knows my thoughts as well as actions, that even herein I am as
clear and innocent as any man that lives, and when the Reporter shall be found
out, I dare appeal to him to give judgment of his own falsehood; for seeing I am
seldom (I may say never alone) I must challenge all or any usually with or
about me to vindicat or accuse me of this Scandal, which I do not more deny
then scorn and abhor: Yet as if these were not sufficient, I am like to be
rackt betwixt two contrarieties, for I perceive some there are who dislike me,
as over civil to the adverse party, when as the Enemy themselves have bound
their companions under severe execrations, never to give me quarter if they can
take me; in either sense I speak it with confidence, I never did any thing
which became not a Gentleman, and a Soldier of trust. Harshnes and cruelty to
an enemy under mercy and power, favors as much of a mean disposition, as
overmuch courting and fawning does of lenity and baseness; I hold a military
lawfulnes in that which suits with the honor, as well as the advantage of
those to whom I am a servant. Nevertheless it seems my courtesy runs not
throughout my actions, for by some I am censured as over severe to those under
my command, whilst others are pleased to throw their criticismes upon my
familiarity, as proceeding from too much easiness, and how a man may serve
these contradictory judgments, I should be glad to learn, especially seeing I
am representd to a third man in as several Colors as the Glasses of opposite
fancies can discover. I shall confess, that being accustomed to a formal
discipline so long beyond Sea, I may seem hard to those who know no better; yet
seeing it has pleased God to prosper the Force under my guidance, I may say,
that unless discipline were sometimes used, I am too sensible what the issue
of those actions had long since been, which has in some measure rendered
themselves acceptible.

There is yet one great mystery more concerning me revealed, which is, that I
am a Papist. Of all the rest I am least troubled at this Rumor, it being in the
power of so many thousands to Vindicate me, who have been witnesses of my
constant Profession, which from my first years, according to the Instructions
of this my Native Country, have been in the Reformed Protestant Religion, and
accordingly have for many years been an Elder of the Dutch Church, as is very
well known. Neither indeed could I devise the reason of this suspicion, till of
late I find it to be, because I served the Emperor against the Duke of
Saxony, and for my Service was Knighted in the Field; wherein I must say, That
Duke carried Himself so distastful in that Quarrel to diverse Protestant
Princes; that were I again a mere Soldier of Fortune, and to choose sides, I
should fight against so much falsehood as the Duke showed in the prosecution of
that Quarrel; and of what Religion the Duke of Saxony was, or whether of any,
is to me as yet unrevealed, however the world might style him; for indeed his
fighting was point of Interest, not Religion. In all Wars there are and will be
Factions, and even in this, mine ears have heard several Contests managed with
more height and ferver then became the merits of the Argument: For mine own
part, I came with an intent to fight, not to dispute for the State, and so the
Profession of Religion be rectified, and the means of Salvation clear and open,
for the forms of external Discipline; I am prepared to observe the Directions
and Commands of the Parliament, without interessing my self unnecessarily in
such Contestations. And however it has pleased the fancy of these Defamers in
such gross untruths, thus to Scandalize an honest man; yet according to your
Council, I will go on in this Service with all cheerfulness, and though I have
received such discouragements from my very first entering into this Command, as
will hardly be equalled, yet when I observe the judgment of the Parliament to
be right toward me, I am resolved to break through all difficulties to advance
their Service: For as the Justice of that Cause they maintain is a sufficient
spur to all honest intentions, to put all to the last hazard; so their
particular favors and obligations to me, shall force me through these petty
obstructions to approve my self, what you know me, an Englishman and a
Gentleman. For my care and fidelity, the Lord look upon me according to the
honesty of my intentions and poor endeavors, and discover truth from falsehood;
and then I question not but the time will come, when an honest man may be
thought upon answerable to his trust; and these Back biters and unprofitable
Slanders receive their merits. For your love and faithfulness in this
business, I desire you to persuade your self, there is none who shall more
thankfully acknowledge it upon the advantage of all occasions, then

Stoake, Jan. 20. 1645. Your assured loving Kinsman and faithful Servant,
Sydnham Poyntz.


