VValwins VViles: OR The Manifestators Manifested VIZ. Liev. Col. John Lilburn,
Mr Will. Walwin, Mr Richard Overton, and Mr Tho. Prince.

Discovering themselves to be Englands new Chains AND Irelands back Friends.

OR The hunting of the old Fox with his Cubs And the Picture of the Picturers
of the COUNCEL of STATE.

Declaring the subtle and crafty Wiles the Athiesticall blasphemous,
soul-murthering principles, and practices of Mr William Walwin, in plentiful
instances, confirming the same with some advertisements to Liev. Col. John
Lilburn, and Mr Tho. Prince.

By a Lover of the present and Eternal interest of Mankind.

April. 23. 1649.
Imprimatur,

Henry Whalley.



LONDON, Printed for H. C. and L. L.

TO THE NOBLE and SUCCESSFUL Englands Army, UNDER The Command of his Excellency
Thomas Lord General Fairfax.
Gentlemen Soldiers,
IT is hard to say whether God has appeared more gloriously with you in
breaking the powers or blasting the policies of your enemies, as he has been
your strength unto the one, so your wisdom unto the other, by whose presence
with you, neither wisdom nor weapon have prevaild against you: the great
contention between Christ and the Devil, and the seed of either, is to destroy
each others work in the world; and although the issue thereof shall be the
mortal crushing of the head of the o^^; yet shall the heel of the other be
bruised thereby.

Noble Sirs, the m^d^lling and managing, making and maintaining, preserving and
prosperi^g your happy Army, ^^ such a transparent work of God in the world,
that it dazels the eyes of all spectators: the presence of God and the prayers
of his people have always attended your valiant attempts, by means whereof your
ones have chased tens, and your hundreds have put thousands to flight: it is
too true, you have met with hardship abroad* and unkindness at home: but your
honor it is that neither the one or the other has made you bow unto a base
unworthy and sinful deportment: God has subdued the common Enemy by you, this
he may do more for others then your own sakes; but when he subdues your enemies
within you, it is more for your own th^^ other men's sakes; that he does in love
to others; this in love to you: that as he makes you executioners of his fierce
wrath; this When we speak of the Army we would be understood of the honest
party therein, which (we conceive) is of a greater number then there is the
like in any Army in this world.
as he makes you the objects of his free love: When you conquer men, you
conquer flesh, and so one beast may conquer another: but when you conquer sin,
you conquer spirit; and this is the work of none but Christ: the blood of your
Enemies may feed the root of your present power, but the blood of your sins
does water the root of your eternal happiness; that an Army should be humble
under victories, meek under injuries, patient under provocations, fear no men,
yet tremble before God, should be a terror to the wicked, and a tower to the
Saints, should be Lions in fields, and Lambs in families; this imports your
powerful hamering by the hand of the spirit upon the anvil of Truth into a
blessed battle-ax, completely aptified for the hand of God unto the breaking in
pieces the envious enemies of his Son and his Saints, according to the predict
counsels of his holy Word, and hence it is, that the Antichristian where is
filld with fears that you are the men co^mission'd by God to execute upon her
the Judgment written, to stain her glory and spoil her beauty, (...) bastards
brains against the stones, and to give her blood for blood to drink, to burn
her flesh with fire, for the prevention whereof that you may not torment her
before her time, she has summoned the Princes of the earth that have committed
fornication with her, with their sons of whoredom to band their might and
strength against you: but the Lord that raised you and called you to his foot
(Isa. 41. 2) gave the Nations before you, making you Rulers over Kings and
Princes, giving them as dust to your sword, and as driven stubble to your bow,
making you to eat up the Nations, your enemies, to break their bones, and
pier^^ them through with your arrows, and then causing you to couch down like a
Lion, none daring to sti^ you up; but this w^^rish Dalilah perceiving your
might by breaking her forces like Sampsons coards, i^ trying her tricks to
find^ out your strength, and the seat thereof, and well perceiving that it lies
in your hair, r^^ted together in your head. (we mean in your Union with Christ,
and each with other,) s^e has applied her self in her several Instruments, by
her enticing words to cut you from him, and then to divide you each from other,
whose curi^^^ cunning in that unhappy work is here set forth in one of her
supposed faithful factors Mr Willi^m W^lwyn, whose various manners in
corrupting and dividing (by himself, and others,) the honest and true-hearted
party to Religious, and the Kingdom interest in the Army, City and Country, i^
truly declared; having received satisfaction touching the truth of th^se
particular instances given concerning him, (though we kn^w his professed
principle is to say or do any thing whatsoever against him whom he thought
engaged against him to destroy him, yet) we cannot but subscribe our own
Observations and Experiences of his general course in all his ways, as they are
here set forth. As for Mr Richard Overton we know him not but by his Pen, the
complexion whereof has quit our desires of any further acquaintance with him.
Mr Lilburn, and Mr Prince (we verily hope) are for better in their ends and
aims, then in their game in hitting their marks (viz. the real Interest of
their native Country,) though (we must confess) we look upon them as
simplehearted, so simple-headed, to be drawn, as they are, into such ways as
they walk. For although in words they profess, yet in works they deny, and
destroy the Interest of England; for who sees not not that these clamorous
Complaints ins^^^ated into the Army, and spread abroad in the City and Country,
Vi^. That the People assembled at Westminster are not a lawful Parliament, but
there (...) by the power of the Sword to overawe and tyranni^^ over the
freeborn people of England, That it is against the Laws of the Land, that
there should be any Mar^^^^ Discipline over Soldiers in time of peace, (though
there should be an Army under pay,) (...) as if we were all in peace which we
are not like to be while such (...) of (...) are kindled by them, that the
design of the House at Westminster, (...) Council of State, etc. is to keep
down the people under (...) and Slavery by an Army, as if it was possible (a^
the (...) stands to settle this Commonwealth without an Army* (...) the
Commons of England (whom in their several Papers they have acknowledge^ to be
the Supreme Authority of the Nation, must be tied to govern by the known Laws,
not to alter the Government, viz. to establish a Council of State, and yet have
power to take away the life of the King, and to abolish the House of Lords,
etc. That the sending over Forces to Ireland is for not^^^^ else but to make
way by the blood of the Army to enlarge (...) territories of power and Tyranny,
That it is an unlawful War, ^ cruel and bloody work to go to destroy the Irish
Natives for (...) Consciences, (though they have killed many thousand
Protestants for their Consciences,) and to drive them from their proper natural
and native Rights, (though they have done the like to many thousand
Protestants, who, though English, had as true natural and native right to their
Lands and ^^heritances as the Irish had: We say, who is so blind as not to see
that the true design of all these chantings is to divide the Army, and break it
in pieces by jealousies and discontents, to hinder the happy and hopeful relief
of Ireland, to betray these poor Protestants that lie trembling and panting
between hope and fear, (not knowing whether yet they shall live or dye,) break
the Parliament and Council of State, and consequently by the utter and
irrecoverable loss of Ireland, ruin of the Army, crushing the present
Authority, dividing the honest party, the Irish Rebels may come with all their
Powers from all parts abroad, and in this Nation, like a mighty Torrent,
sweeping all before them, and put themselves into a capacity of putting into
execution their bloody, cruel, tyrannical and revengeful thoughts against the
honest party in the Land. We have ever observed, that this Mr Walwyn in all
viciscitudes, and turns of affairs, has still withstood the present
Government, yea, though modeled according to his former pretended desires,
which argues a hidden design in all his pretenses; It Is true, when Magisterial
Power ^^asheth against Divine, and men in authority ^ight against God by
oppression and tyranny, they shall be broken in pieces as a glass against a
Rock; for though the fountain of Government springs from the People, and the
end thereof ^^ their only benefit, yet while the Power in the People is
uncontracted, and their own Authority is untransfer'd, it is like (shall we say
a tallent hid in the earth without uses) ^ay rather as the inordinate heat in a
stack of corn, firing it self with its own heat. Where all men are alike
Rulers, none will be ruled, and then into what precipices should we run? To
live together is the Law of Nature, and how can this be when every man's lust
shall be every man's Law? For then every man's will shall be every man's wants,
and no man will content himself with what he has. While he has not that which
his neighbor has, the best of Governments cannot secure each individual from
oppression; but where there is no Government, so many men are so many Tyrants
each to others. The worst of Governments is good for some, but no Government
can be good for none: Where is no Government there can be no Agreement, and
certain destruction attends division. Valiant Sirs, be not deceived by these
Arch* deluders, neither be divided amongst your selves; Union has preserved
you, Division will destroy you: God has made you terrible by Union, the
Jesuit would make you contemptible by division: your enemies despair to
overcome you by Power, revive not their hopes to do it by policy; they could
not cudgel you, let them not cajole you: you have wrested their swords, their
spears, their trophies, their banners out of their hands, let them not cheat
them out of your hands again; they tell you, your Officers would lift up
themselves by your blood, but have not you better experiences of your Officers
then they? Have not they stuck to you, as well as you to them, in the day of
battle? What though men have not regarded you as you deserved, will not God be
faithful, though men are not? Will not he be true when they are liars? Are you
afraid to receive your wages, your rewards from the immediate hand of God
alone? That your honor shall be too great, your Crown too heavy at the great
pay day? He has made you famous in England, and famous in Scotland, and is it
your fear, that he will honor you in Ireland, (that any of you should be
dissuaded, from that happy work,) are you unwilling to be possessed of that
good Land, that Land that flows with milk and honey? Has not God fed you
with former Victories, to the amazement of all that he might steel you against
all future difficulties that you ^^^^t withal. The people of God in England, in
Scotland, (...) vis^n up and called you blessed for your help to them in the
day of trouble, and shall your poor Brethren in Ireland receive ^^ favor from
you? We beseech you by the Womb that b^^ a you, and the Paps that gave you
suck, by the honor of Englis^ men, by all the experiences of the presence of
God with you while you stuck ^^ the Interest of God, his people and your native
Country, that you pl^^^ off the Vizors of those Jesuitical Whifflers, that
(creeping in among you like the Serpents spawn under the green gr^ss) spy ^^^
your liberty, envy your approaching happiness, and would ^ow destroy you by
your own selves; the just Liberties of the Nation, the Freedom of the Gospel,
the Interest of England, the joy of all good men are in the fruitful Womb of
your former faithfulness, which is now ready to bring forth, if you help in the
how of tr^^^l, howsoever, that the happy work of God, begun in these three
Islands of England, Scotland and Ireland, shall go on and prosp^^ by the
honored Instruments of Gods own choice, is the faith and prayer of

Your faithful Friends and Brethren your daily Remembrancers at the Throne of
Grace, William Kiffin David Lordell John Price Richard Arnald Edmund Rosier
Henry Foster Henry Burnet.


Errata.
P. 7. l. 25. for first regal r. fort royal. p. ibid. l. 36. for ^arster-like
r. master-like. p. 8. l. 16. for contradictions, opinions r. contradictions
opinions. With several other, which the presumed ingenuity of the Reader will
correct and pardon.

VValwins VViles: OR The Manifestators Manifested.
THe greatest Hypocrisy is often palliated with the most specious pretenses of
the plainest sincerity, and the cheifest use that some men make of Religion,
and the language thereof is (after the similitude of Satan with our first
Parents) to muffle the understandings of overcredulous and flexible men, and
then to cheat them under a gilded bait of their seeming good into such actions
that are most conducible to their certain misery: It is the great unhappiness
of ingenious and plain-hearted people to be made instrumental to the disguised
design of maskt enemies, and to have their Integrity imposed upon by the
deceitful policy of those that dare not own their own actions, lest they should
allarum them whom they daily deceive, and hinder the increase of that party by
which they expect the accomplishment of their secret projects; to open the
windows of this dark Cabinet, and to discover the methods of th^se Imposters,
is worthy the ingenuity and charity of a more able pen. It cannot be imagined,
that such qu^^^^^ devout and public spirits, as did seem to breath in two of
these Manifestators, viz. L. C. John Lilburn, and Mr Tho: Prince, (with some
others adhering to them) should be wrought upon (by their late Proceedings in
print, and otherways) to serve the implicate Designs of the Kingdoms
Adversaries, were they not deceived by the fine and plausable expressions of
these cunning Impostors; and although the present distempers of their turbulent
passions (like the raging Seas) and the perplexed ebullitions of ^^^^r
discontented minds, have fomed out the dregs and dross of frail and sinful
flesh and blood (we mean) vented unworthy Callumnies, palpable falsities, and
most notorious scandals against those (saviors of the Nation) men, that God
has made happy Instruments of the Kingdoms Freedom from apparent slavery and
utter ruin, yet that ancient experience which we have had of the said persons
(especially the first named thereof,) together with those fore-sufferings by
him endured in his stout withstanding the Common Enemy in times past, though we
confess we have not observed his sufferings to have produced that quiet fruit
of righteousness) nor him to have learnt that meekness and lowliness of spirit
after Christ's example in bearing his Cross; yet well considering that
oppression obnoxiateth even wise men to that madness which may not be so
quickly recovered again) we are furnished with a covering for his present
nakedness, giving us to hope, that as heretofore (if we mistake not) in the
like case he may discern it, and be ashamed. We have of late observed several
expresses from three of these Manifestators so quallified, as if written by the
cheef Secretaries of the Prince of Slanders, through whose lines, as through a
prison-grate, such a distempered, furious, railing and raging spirit does stare
and gaze their sober and judicious Readers in the face, spitting such venum,
^ankor and malice against the most pious and deserving men of this Nation,
that they cannot do such homage to Beelzebub, the Prince of such Spirits, as to
hear the sound of his revengeful and envious language, and to wast their time
in reading such slanderous Declarations from his Infernal Court; but behold a
fresh appearance of these subscribers in a new dress of a latter date, as if
that spirit would show his master piece, in his crafty translation of himself
into the form of an Angel of light calling it self by the name of a
Manifestation of L. C. John Lilburn, Mr William Walwin, etc. bearing date the
14 of April 1649. whose devout, specious, meek, self-denying, soft, and
pleasant lips savours much of the sligh cunning and close subtlety of that
additional Subscriber, Mr William Walwin, who (as the Serpent that deceived our
first Parents was more subtle then any beast of the field which the Lord God
had made) is much more crafty then the rest of his brethren, of whose curious
spinning we have several reasons to presume this piece, for here is not the
licentious provoking daringness of L. Col. Lilburns pen, nor yet the notorious
profaness of Mr Richard Overtons pen, as for Mr Prince, he is a younger
brother, lately drawn in, and no further accomplished in his brethrens art then
in the lesson of Conformity unto their proceedings and conscription unto their
Expresses: Again, he that shall compare this Manifestation, subscribed by Mr
Walwin, with Englands new Chains, the first and second part, the Hunting of the
Foxes, and other scandalous Pamphlets, subscribed only by the rest, may easily
perceive the well known subtlety and craftiness, phrase and style, of this new
Subscriber above his Fellows, who of themselves are no more able to alter the
complexion of their pen, then the Leopard his spots, or the Blackamoor his
skin; these being Wolves in their own, but the other a Wolf in Sheeps clothing;
and that simple and plain-hearted men may no longer be drawn aside from their
public Interest and personal Comforts, temporal and eternal, hear the voice
of several years experience and observation, exhibiting a true and impartial
Manifestation chiefly and principally of this Manifestator, we mean this new
additional Subscriber, Mr William Walwin, whom we shall consider not at all in
reference to his Birth, Breeding, Trade, manner of life and conversation, any
further then only relating to his wiles and ways, methods and modes, in
deluding, cozening and deceiving a plain and honest generation of well-meaning
men, into such paths practices and manners that are most destructive to their
own Interest, and the public good: And here consider,

First, His game has always bin the unhappy perversion of honest men generally
observed to be forward on the Parliaments behalf against the King and the Royal
party, for the effecting whereof his custom was to frame his Endeavors,

First, To discern and feel their temper, genius, natural constitution, and
complexion, whether of meek, quiet, and peaceable; or rash, hasty, and violent
spirits: whether of quick, capacious, and nimble, or of dull, injudicious, and
low apprehensions: whether of a more pure, heavenly, and spiritual, or more
gross, light, and vain discourse: whether of a retensive, close, and tenacious
capacity in keeping secrets, or a more open, free, and liberal aptness in
discovering: whether of a richer, or mean condition: whether popular, or how
interessed in the Parliament, Army, City, or Country.

Secondly, Having well understood his game, he prepares his baits, those whom
he apprehends more solid, wise, moderate, judicious, of quick apprehensions,
reaching brains, good parts, and language, and withal notorious for Religion
and popular Interest, he first entertains with much civility, candor, and
courteous carriages, very good, rational, and acceptable discourse, fitting and
framing the same after such a manner as may represent himself an excellent
Commonwealths man, full of a public spirit, and furnished with rich and
plentiful observations, and propositions, fairly comporting with public good,
and insinuating (with what freedom or tenderness, plainness or covertness, they
are able to bear) the many pressures, burdens and grievances of the
Commonwealth, and insisting (if at all) yet very slightly upon the Redresses,
good, and benefit received from men in present authority; backing his discourse
of this nature either with some plausible stories of the cunning and crafty
behavior of Foreign Princes, or men in Power, pretending good for the Common
wealth and doing many things very promising thereunto, and at last exalting
themselves in the oppressions and vexations of the people, or else with
observations of Domestique Politicians, once very famous for their pretended
zeal for their Country, but when advanced, and lifted up, as infamous for their
baseness in Oppression and Tyranny: and by this means he is still fomenting new
and fresh jealousies against those that approve themselves most faithful in
Authority and Trust, ever observing what actions (if any such thing do fall
out) have been done by such men which may possibly (by wringing and wresting,
and malign interpretation) render them by his cunning art and skill (being very
dexterous that way) to be suspected for Self-seekers, Juglers, and Deceivers of
the People.

Secondly, Having by this means crept into the good opinion, love and
affections of his deceived friends, and new acquaintance (the result and issue
of several meetings and conferences in order thereunto,) and hereby wounded
their respects, and abated their zeal toward those that have the management
and steerage of public affairs in their hands, that he may make sure work with
them, with cunning and curious art he attempts the undermining of their
principles of Religion, but with a soft foot, and with much slight of hand, and
(Juglar-like) as if he had past his Apprenticeship, and served Journey-man to
the grand deceiver of the world; he employs his skill in casting a mist before
them, and in blinding the eyes of their minds, that the great mysteries of Life
and Salvation by Jesus Christ, and the Doctrines of Justification by his Death
and Resurrection, Sanctification and Mortification by his Spirit, etc. may
appear but mere fantasms, rediculous, irrational, ayry, vain, empty notions;
but thus he attempts very artificially in these gradations.

First, (That he may raze the very Foundation, and lay his Ax at the very root
of Religion,) he prepares his battery against the credit, honor and authority
of the holy Scriptures, as presuming that to be (as indeed it is) the very
first regal of Religion, the credit whereof being once lost in the judgment,
the conscience, will and affections, will quickly surrender, even upon Satan's
terms; but before he spends his Ammunition, viz. his Arguments and Reasons
against the same, with no small subtilety patlies with them a^ in the very same
case, and to the very same end, that envious one to the presence and eternal
Interest of mankind, did insinuate into a conference with our first parent by
way of subtle and crafty questions, and has God indeed sald, ye shall not eat
of every tree of the garden, etc. even so this most perficient Scholar, does
not use in a downright manner to deny the authority of the Scriptures, but
like master-like man he sets upon men quere-wise: How can you prove the
Scriptures to be the Word of God? What security have you concerning the divine
authority of the Scriptures, and consequently the articles of your belief, and
the grounds of your faith, but from the testimony of men? What better grounds
have you to believe the Scriptures came from God, then the Turks have for their
Alcharon, or the Jews for their Talmud? not that he himself would seem to
question it, but if you will believe him, it is to understand how men are
settled in their faith, and to help them therein; he writ for the defense of the
divine authority of the Scriptures, (as Satan himself, when he did tempt the
Lord Christ to destroy the Scriptures, in effect, by doing contrary to the
Tenor thereof, did quote the very Scripture, saying, It is written, he shall
give his Angels charge, etc.

Secondly, If he cannot presently surprise their Judgments by, his subtle
quries about the Scriptures, he waves the business for a season, and takes
another course, then he insinuates the contradictions, opinions of men about
matters of Religion, their various judgments, how opposite and cross they are
to themselves (declining distinctions whereby they may be reconciled) leading
his disciples upon the Lords Days from one Church to another, and staying no
longer then while somewhat drops from the mouth of the Minister, which he may
through his art (not minding what went before, and what followed) render
rediculous and weak, and so by degrees comes at last to improve all against the
validity of Religion, preaching, and other ordinances, this done.

Thirdly, He entertains them with as much excellency and strength of discourse,
as his capacities have attained, in setting forth the famous Governments of
such, and such Commonwealths, the excellent readings of Philosophers, their
moral ingenuity pa^s and learning, how far short the Government of this Kingdom
comes of them? What kind of breeding such States and Commonwealths gives their
children in the study of martial discipline, feats of activity, geomitry, etc.
by all which means he endeavors still to take off the minds of his Disciples
from Religion, and the thoughts thereof, if he sees the desired fruits of his
labors, and that he has gotten the Venison which his soul does so sorely
long for, viz. the betraying of poor men into the same condemnation with
himself into low and contemptible thoughts of God, of Jesus Christ, of the
Spirit, of the Scriptures, of hearing the Word, Prayer, of Heaven, of Hell,
etc. then they become his bosom friends, and are friendly received into his
house, and partake of his more intimate thoughts, and familiarity, as
presuming, that having perverted them, and strengthened them in his most
wretched ways, they might be able to go and do likewise, viz. pervert and
strengthen their brethren; and this is his method for the taking the more
solid, able, judicious and intelligent men, which are the first sort of men
whom he seeks to seduce from their faithfulness and integrity to God and man.

Before we come to show his art in drawing aside the other sort of men, take
some instances of his proceedings in the former kind, all which, with much more
of this nature, shall be manifestly proved as occasion is required.

Having once upon a Fast day (as his usual manner was both upon those, and the
Lords days) gone from place to place, hearing here a little, and there a little
what the Ministers said, making it the subject matter of his profane scorning
and jeering, came at last to his own house with one of his supposed Fast
disciples, (though even at that time his heart did rise against Walwins
wickedness, but having got within him, he did resolve, though with much
reluctance of spirit, to fathom the deep devout hypocrisy of this man for a
through detection of him,) being at home, he fetched out that profane
scurtilous Lucians Dialogue, come (said he) let us go read that which has
something in it, Here is more wit in this (says he) then in all the Bible.

And speaking of the book of Psalms, and the Proverbs, said, That there was no
heed to be given to them; for, said he, they were penned by Kings in order only
to their own advantage, and the promotion of their own interest, as they were
Kings.

And another, a presumed sure friend (having some familiarity with this worthy
Champion for, and asserter of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures Mr Walwyn)
professed, that this wretched man, Walwyn, speaking of the book of the Canticles,
said, That it was nothing else but one of Solomon's Epiphonema's or Rhetorical
Songs upon one of his Whores.

At another time speaking and discoursing of Hell, said, that it was a silly
thing to think that there was any hell, or condemnation, which the Ministers
keep such a noyce and prating about, and that all the hell that was, was that
only which was in an ill man's conscience in this life: and it being replied,
that the Scriptures speak expressly of hell, and eternal fire and damnation; he
answered, that is to be understood as the Scriptures also speak, they are
condemned already, viz. in their own consciences, which is no more but this,
they know they have not done well.

At another time speaking of hell, and everlasting fire, and eternal torments,
used words to this purpose, Pish, do you think, can it enter into your heart,
to conceive, that God should cast a man into everlasting burnings, where he
should be tormented for ever without end, for a little time of sinning in this
world?

Again, at another time speaking and discoursing of Prayer, (said he) What a
silly thing it is for a man to drop down upon his knees, and hold up his hands,
and lift up his eyes, and mumble over a few words for half an hour, or an hour
together, as if this did please God, when all this while he might have been in
doing that which is good in it self, releeving the poor and oppressed; there is
no other Religion but that which the Apostle James speaks of, consisting in
releeving the poor, judging the cause of the fatherless and widow, etc.

Again, speaking of keeping Sundays as we do, urged, That it was better on such
days to meet together, and spend our time in considering what is good for the
Commonwealth, read some good moral things, as Plutarchs Morals, Ciceroes
Orations, then reading the Scriptures, and hearing Sermons, glorying much of
the notable witty things in these moral Writers, and of the manner of their
governing of States.

Again, he did bemoan the simple practice of this Nation in bringing up their
children in learning Latin (forsooth) and the original Tongues, and I know not
what, it were far better to train them up in feats of Activity, Geomitry,
riding Horses, exercising Arms, studying Fortifications, and in such things as
may make them serviceable to the Commonwealth.

It would fill a Volume to declare the sad and miserable effects which by this
means have been brought to pass upon the judgments of some of very able apt,
and ingenious parts and abilities corrupted by this English man-hunter; one of
them, not long since (a man of very singular parts, and much ingenuity, that
might have been very useful for this Commonwealth,) having been but a little
and lately acquainted with this wretch, speaking with others about the nature
of God, his Grace, Mercy and Goodness, most profanely and lightly replayed,
Yea, I hope God is a merry old man, and will make a good companion when I am
dead. And again, one speaking to him of the Sweetness and Excellency of Jesus
Christ; replied, Yea, indeed Jesus Christ is very sweet, I love him better then
Capons; but I shall rather insist only upon his own expressions.

Mr Walwyn being asked by one of his intimate Friends, what he seriously
thought concerning the Scriptures, whether they were the Word of God or no?
Replied thus, I Will open my heart plainly unto you, said he, I believe it is not
the Word of God, and I believe again it is the Word of God; I pray expound your
self, said his friend; why, said he, the Scripture is so plainly and directly
contradictory to it self, that makes me believe it is not the the Word of God;
and yet again, all those passages therein that declare the nature of God, viz.
his Grace and Goodness to men, I believe are the Word of God, and so you have
my meaning; oftentimes declaring, that he did not believe that God would punish
men for ever for a little time of sinning.

There was a Gentlewoman (a Citizens wife, of very good quality, and well
known) formerly very famous in the profession of Religion, and of very great
repute amongst honest people, a woman of parts and abilities above the common
standard of her sex, whose sad and heavy condition it was to fall into
acquaintance with this unhappy factor for the region of darkness, who (as her
self declared unto some, very nearly relating unto her) was unhappily seduced
by this wretched man, who having improved his kill (with too much success) in
poisoning her judgment touching the truth of the Scriptures, and the precious
concernments of her soul, did frequently vent his most Atheistical and
blasphemous oppr^bies, scorns and scoffs against Religion, and the holy
Scriptures, as these passages do abundantly witness.

Upon a time speaking of King David, said to this purpose and effect, That King
James, and King David were a couple of crasty Foxes, and cunning Knaves, that
by their subtlety and policy, under religious pretenses, acted all things with
a design of abusing and cozening their people over whom they were set, and that
they were as like as ever he read of any two men in all his life.

Another time speaking to the same woman, demanded, why she did not come and
see his wife? and most jeeringly and scoffingly added, I protest, said he, thou
have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost for not visiting my wife; or to that
effect.

At other times visiting the same woman, and finding her in somewhat a
melancholy and sad condition, (for indeed she was a woman of quick and ripe
apprehensions in spiritual things, and could not likely degenerate from, and
decline the ways of God without regret of spirit, and trouble of conscience.)
Come, said he, we shall have you return to your religious mood again, you will
never do well so long as these thoughts prevail with you; or to that purpose.

Oftentimes did this wretched man suggest unto her to this purpose. That it was
abase and ignoble thing for any one to lie under such trouble, anguish, and
perplexity, as could not well be endured, having so easy and speedy a way of
riddance out of it, as is before every man, and that it was an Honorable and
valiant thing, for a man in such a case to put an end to his life by laying
violent hands upon himself, being a far shorter way of ^ase, then any other
way. Which Atheistical principle was so nourished by this poor woman, in her
distress and trouble, that she often attempted to destroy her self, and at
last, she did most woefully bring it to pass, by strangling her self, to the
great grief and trouble of her husband, children, and dear relations; Now let
impartial and judicious men judge, of the frame, temper and spirit of this man
touching Religion, the Scriptures, the nature and mysteries of the Gospel, of
heaven, of Hell, etc. and whether these instances, compared with his writing,
for the divine authority of the Scriptures, as also with the late
manifestation, do not manifest him to be a cunning hypocritical Jugler,
abuser, and deceiver of poor men and women that lend their ^are unto him, he
that can jeere at the Word of God, at the sin against the Holy Ghost, prefer
scurrilous, base Pamphlets above the Scriptures, etc. can notwithstanding in
this Manifestation. with a very devout and religious Pen (as if he had been the
most pious assertor of the things of God) pretend to build his comfort upon the
Scriptures, as he does page 4. of this Manifestation, where he says, that he
could pass over the many wrong done unto him, upon this consideration,
Remembering what is promised to be the portion of good men. Again, page 5. We
must suffer till God sees fitting in good time to clear, etc. With seveverall
other strains of this nature, as if Religion, and the affairs of the other
world, God, and Christ, and the Spirit were the main things that guide him in
all his ways; wherein both L. Col. John Lilburn, and others, know in their own
consciences, and have declared it, that they could never perceive him a man in
the least acquainted with the concemments of Religion, and the work of the
Spirit.

Having declared the crafty and subtle wiles and methods of this artificial
and great Impostor, in his Satanicall work of seducing and deceiving the more
able sort of men, I shall now proceed in setting forth his Mountebankisme in
his Jesuitical betraying of the weaker, more injudicious, and plainer sort of
people, and these likewise being of several tempers, constitutions, and
conditions, he has variety of Art to deceive them all.

If they be of a low, needy, indigent, and wanty condition, as many of them
are, he deals with them after this method.

First, (that he might hit the white of the mark in all his aims, viz. wound
the credit and authority of Religion,) he is ever and anon harping upon the
hard-heartednesse and uncharitableness of Professors (and I wish that he had
not straw enough to make this Brick) and those that are religious men, how
grinding they are in bargains, how penurious, base, and backward in works of
charity and mercy, how undermining and overreaching they are in buying, in
selling, how having and craving in the things of this life, how hardly any work
of mercy and charity comes off with them, how they let their brethren starve,
and dye, and perish, rather then help them, and how bountiful, free, and
liberal the very Heathens have been, and how beneficial even Papists, and
many that do not so much as pretend to Religion, are to the poor; and
therein, I confess, he speaks too true, but the Devil himself spoke truth, to
wound and destroy it, not to promote and propagate it; by this means he
cunningly insinuates the discredit and disparagement of that, that is called
Religion amongst us, and the Professors thereof.

Secondly, that he might likewise procure the second grand design, and desire
of his soul, viz. the trouble, misery, and ruin of this commonwealth, in
respect of those that now have, and formerly of late had the government thereof
in their hands, he takes notice of the neglect of the Parliament in regarding,
and encouraging their friends, how they do not at all consider the pressures
of those that have stuck unto them in their straights and difficulties; how
they bestow places of profit upon the rich, and prefer themselves, and their
Children, and Kinsmen, in places of greatest profit and advantage; how the
great things that have been done for the Parliament, have been done by the
meaner sort of men, and that by helping them they are now become low and poor,
and not at all regarded, etc. by this means, he raises up and increases
discontents, and ebullitions of spirit, heart-burnings, and repinings against
the present Governors.

Thirdly, having somewhat heated them by the means aforesaid, then he insists
upon the unworthiness of our times, in making riches and estates, and the
things of this world, the great badge of distinction between man and man; the
Charactaristical token of men's fitness for Government, and that it will not be
well, until such time as men shall be eligible into places of trust, that are
virtuous and able, though poor and low in this world; and that Butchers and
Cobblers be chosen into the places of Magistracy and government, as well as
others that are rich in this World; these kinds of plausible discourses are
very pleasing, and take much with discontented men that are poor and weak in
estate, and withal shallow and injudicious; now they begin a little to swell,
and be much conceited in, and of themselves: this done.

Fourthly, he is very frequent and diligent, in fomenting the consideration of
the disproportion and inequality of the distribution of the things of this
life. What an inequitable thing it is for one man to have thousands, and
another want bread, and that the pleasure of God is, that all men should have
enough, and not that one man should abound in this Worlds good, spending it
upon his lusts, and another man of far better deserts, not to be worth two
pence, and that it is no such difficulty as men make it to be, to alter the
course of the world in this thing, and that a very few diligent and valiant
spirits may turn the world upside down, if they observe their seasons, and
shall with life and courage engage accordingly.

These are his Methods in seducing the indigent and poorer sort of men.

Again, those whom he apprehends of passionate, cholerique, froward, and
peevish dispositions, of putting forth bold and daring language, and withal
weak, shallow, and injudicious, and yet men that are honest hearted in the
main, true to the interest of the Commonwealth, and zealous against tyranny
and oppression, he handles after this manner.

First, he is ever blowing up their spirits, by daily discourses of the
pressures, burdens, rates, and taxes, of the poor people of this Nation,
Excise, Free Quarter, Customs, etc. are the subjectmatter of his daily talk.

Secondly, the next thing, is the consideration of the Cause hereof, and they
are still those that are in places of Trust and Authority, and this is one of
his most constant, certain and uniform custom, to foment jealousies against the
most active, prosperous and successful persons of the Nation; urging, that it
was ever known, that men, under pretense of zeal for Religion, and the interest
of good people, have gotten into credit, and thereby lifted up themselves,
endeavoring to destroy others under a pretense of Justice, and doing righteous
things, that they may exalt themselves, and set up their own faction, and
promote their sons and their daughters, their nephews and their kindred, ever
blemishing the repute and credit of the most famous and deserving men of the
Times.

Thirdly, This done, the Remedy is to be considered of, and this must be by
remove (by some means or other) of those persons, adjudged the cause of all our
troubles, and miseries, and because he knows that they cannot bear the thoughts
of ass^ssinations, murdering and killing of them, (especially at first)
therefore the pretended miscarriages of these men must be printed and published
to the world, and these books must be dispersed among especially the known
well-affected and forward party in all places, to which end it must be so
ordered and managed, that these books may be upon free cost scattered abroad in
the Countries, and all those places and Counties especially that are adjacent
to the City of London, and do most abound with honest and well-affected men, as
Hertford-shire, Buckingham-shire, Cambridg-shire, etc. that so there may be a
general distaste and dis-affection among that sort of men against them.

Fourthly, When he has by this means wounded the repute and credit of the most
faithful and succesful Patriots of the Commonwealth, representing them as the
chief and only cause of the pressures, troubles and perplexities of the times,
etc. and by this means raised the heat, fury and passion of this sort of men
under present consideration, then (as if all the bonds of piety, civility,
modesty, education and discretion were broken) scornful, scandalous,
opprobrious, false and clamorous reports are suggested and raised against these
men, and happy would it be for this Nation that these men were ^^d out of the
way.

For a further confirmation of the truth of these things take some few
instances which follow.

This Mr Walwyn, to work upon the indigent and poorer sort of people, and to
raise up their spirits in discontents and clamours, etc. did one time profess,
^e could wish with all his heart that there was neither Pale, He^^ nor Ditch in
the whole Nation, and that it was an unconscionable thing that one man should
have ten thousand pounds, and another, more deserving and useful to the
Commonwealth, should not be worth two pence; or to that purpose.

At another time discoursing of the inequality and disproportion of the estates
and conditions of men in the world, had words to this purpose, That it was a
sad and miserable thing that it should so continue, and that it would never be
well until all things were common; and it being replied, Will that ^ver be?
Answered, We must endeavor it: It being said, That this would destroy all
Government; Answered, That then there would be less need of Government, for
then there would be no thieves, no covetous persons, no deceiving and abusing
of one another, and so no need of government, etc. but if in such a case they
have a form and rule of government to determine cases, as may fall out, yet
there will be no need of standing Officers in a Commonwealth, no need of
Judges, etc but if any difference do fall out, or any criminal fact be
committed, take a Cobbler from his Seat, or a Butcher from his Shop, or any
other Tradesman that is an honest and just man, and let him hear the case, and
determine the same, and then betake himself to his work again.

At another time, discoursing of Printing, and educating Children, etc, Wished
that Printing had never been known, adding, that since this practice and
custom of teaching of Children, and bringing up of youth in learning Tongues
and Arts, the world has been more troubled with suits and quarrels,
discontents and divisions, and that one man having more abilities of this kind
then another, men have got into great places, and this has made such
distinctions and divisions in the world, which otherways had never been known;
or to this purpose.

Again, to ratify the truth of his proceedings, in raising up the spirits of
the violent, furious, and passionate sort of people* against well deserving
men, take these instances.

In the beginning of our troubles, he has frequently vented base and unworthy
jealousies against that honored Coll. H^^bden, Mr. Pim, and others, whom God
made happy Instruments of the good of this Nation, envy it self not being able
to blemish them; yet did he insinuate, that there was no trusting them, for
they might be dispensed withal, to serve the Kings interest, etc.

What his invenctives have been against L. Genesis Cromwell, Comissarie Genesis
Ireton, Coll. Harrison, etc. is notorious to all that have had intimate
acquaintance with him.

That he might stir up the passionate and froward spirited people to work
mischief, having raised up their heat and distemper, speaking of the
obstructions of the good of the Nation by the House of Lords; Pish, said he,
here is a great deal of stir indeed about Lords, the Switzers, did cut the
throats of about forty of them in a night, and had peace ever afterward.

One of his presumed intimate friends assures of the truth of this story
following, (which was indeed the cause of his deserting this Walwin, and some
others, with whom he had formerly some familiarity, the story is this, viz.

That there was an absolute design by some Agitators at Ware, to murder the
Lieut: Gen: Gromwell, concluded upon, and the manner thereof agreed upon, to be
thus, the Agreement then concluded upon should be worn in the hats of their
Party, and a short Petition of about six lines should be presented to the Lo:
General, Petitioning him to join with them, in declaring that they were the
Supreme Authority of this Nation; and that upon this ground, the People made
the Parliament, the Parliament made the Lord General, and the Army, the
several Regiments of the Army made the Agitators, and so they were the supreme
Authority; and if the Lord General did refuse to join with them, they were
presently to unhorse him, resolving to destroy and cut the throats of all that
did oppose them; and that night, with a Party of Horse, at 12 of the clock,
they were to seize upon L* General Cromwell, and to shoot him to death,
adding, that he should never know who hurt him; and that then they had a Charge
ready framed against the King, which they would effectually prosecute, and
require the Parliament to join with them, resolving to cut the throats of those
that should refuse the same. The same Party assures also, that that very night
when this should have been done at Ware, the private Committee did meet, with
an expectation of the news of the succusse of this bloody project; but news
came unto them before it was expected; that the whole design was broken, and
the manner thereof, viz. L. Gen: Cromwels carriages, with his naked waved
Sword, daunted the Soldiers that had the paper in their hats, made them pluck
it out, and subjected to commands, etc. to their great dejection and trouble.

The Party informing of this cursed design, was not a member of the private
Commit, being a man (known) of more tender conscience, then fit to be
admitted into such secresies, but being of a more common meeting, he had the
business discovered unto him by another, as he is ready to assert.

Having spoken of the particular wiles and ways of this deceiver, touching the
subject matter of his attempts, viz. the seducing of the honest and well
affected Party, the manner thereof viz. his cunning, crafty, and politic
observation of their several tempers, constitutions, complexions,
quallifications, and conditions, and his various and suitable application of
himself, to gain upon them accordingly, having wrought them all to a free and
voluntary disposition and inclination to hearken to his counsels, and to stand
(as it were) at his right hand to receive his impressions and orders, which you
must still believe, are in order only to the public good, common freedom, and
safety of the freeborn people of England, to the pulling down of Oppressors and
Tyrants, he has his several works and employments for them all; according to
every man's aptness and fitness for the same.

Those whom he observes men of parts, witty and good language, quick
apprehensions, able to bridle passions, free from heat and choler, of a
composed deportment and behavior, and withal retensive in keeping secrets,
etc. these are of his intimate society, commerse and familiarity, and shall be
employed in observing the fitness and aptness of men for their proper
employments, these shall be of the whispering house, close Cabinet, and privy
Council, and their work shall be the increasing of that Party in the City and
Country, whose Letters by the advantage of a pollitique and crafty Pen may
propagate and help on their work in the several Counties.

Those that are of more bold, p^^emptory, pertenacious conceipted Spirits, of
fierce, daring, and provoking language, apt to heat, choler, and passion, and
withal shallow, weak, and injudicious, not able to see skin deep into state
affairs, and presuming themselves the best Commonwealths men, the greatest
Statists. the only lovers of their Countries Liberties, the freest men from
self-interest, and therefore the fittest for places of authority and trust.
These shall trumpet out matter of discontents, jealousies, and pretended
miscariages of those that are in Authority, how basely things go; what
oppressions, taxations, and vexations the poor people do endure? how this poor
betrayed Nation is bought and sold? how the cutting off of some Tyrants do
always make way for more and worse to succeed them? how nothing is done for
the Commonwealth? how basely the Treasure of the Kingdom is imbezeled? how
Parliament men vote moneys out of the purses of the poor ridden people into
their own? how they share the riches of the Nation amongst themselves? how to
day they vote this Parliament man into a great Office, and to morrow another!
and how they do nothing for the Commonwealth, but vote one another into places
of power and profit! how that though to abuse and cast a mist before the eyes
of the people, they make a self-denying ordinance, yet suffer no man to put it
in execution! how they promote their kindred and alies into great places every
where; if any use be for men in Custom house, in Excise-office, or in any other
places of profit, this and that Parliament man's friends, or brothers, or sons,
or nephews must be the men; nay, Parliament men and their Alies have place upon
place, and office upon office, as if they had several bodies to be employed at
one and the same time? What Is become of the infinite sums, the unconceivable
treasure of the Nation? the late Kings Customs, Ship Money, Coat, and Conduct
moneys, Monopolies, etc. were nothing to the Customs, Excise, Taxations, Free
quarter, Sequestrations, Papists moneys, Bishops lands, Revenues of the Crown,
besides all the Plate and Moneys lent freely by the people, and yet nothing
done; nay, how many for their zeal and good will to the State have lent freely
and bountifully, thereby beggering and undoing themselves, and now cannot
receive one penny to buy them bread, but may lie beging, petitioning, and
starving at their doors, and cannot be heard? nay, it may be have nothing but
course, hard, and cruel language from them; how one faction tears the
Commonwealth and share it among themselves one while, and another, another
while, neither of them regarding the ease or greevances of the poor people all this while, and what have they done since this purge and that purge, they have
voted the continuance of Tithes, the laying of more Taxes and Rates, they
imprison honest men, etc. these and the like charges are belched out from day
to day by these men: this is the main^ matter of their discourse, writing,
Printing, etc. never considering how far true or false, what may be said in
answer to any of these things, but blowing and blazing these clamours and
complaints in all companies and places where they come, and where they can by
writings, or other ways spread them abroad, and for this purpose, they have a
very singular advantage of the good will and affection of our weekly
news-mongers, the Tuesday-Moderate, the Fryday-Occurrances who were easily
entreated to spread abroad their late Manifestation, that their simplicity,
piety and innocence, and the Parliaments Oppression, Cruelty and Tyrrannie
might be the better known to the whole Kingdom, and Malignants hopes revived
again that at last these may restore them. etc. This raises up a spirit of
contempt, envy and malice, anger and discontent, against the Parliament, and
all that they do.

For those that are poor, indigent and low in the world, these likewise must
spread abroad their complaints, the deadness of tradeing, the dearth of the
times, the great burdens, assessments and taxations; These are all through the
neglect, and bymeanes of the Parliament, all burdens, rates and services are
laid upon them, they bear the heat and burden of the day: but they are
trampled upon, and is a piece of policy in men of great places, to keep the
poor low, and needy in the world, and that this course must not be suffered etc.

These and the like have been the particular ways of this cunning Artist, in
abusing simple-hearted honest men; briefly the seeming tendency, drift, and
scope of all his Agitations have carried the face of many fould design.

First, to root our Religion and the Principles and power thereof, out of the
judgments and consciences of those that hearken unto him; witness those former
Methods and Instances given in order thereunto.

Secondly, to root out the generation of honest godly religious and
conscientious sort of people, when he pretends to love above others, by putting
them upon such ways and projects, which if they take place, would render them
the most unsufferable generation in the world, not fit indeed to live in a
Commonwealth: And what can his design herein be, but to precipitate them into
their own ruin and destruction; and these are his Methods to that purpose.

First, to propose singular good things, and very promising, to the
Commonwealth: And indeed, either he receives his instructions in some
underhand way from others, (for we are not without ground, to suspect such a
thing, as shall be declared as occasion serves,) or else he has a politic and
crafty head in contriving, pretending, ordering and mannaging Propositions of
that kind; This advances and magnifieth him in the thoughts and opinions of
his seduced Disciples, for a man of admirable and good affections to the
Commonwealth, to public liberty and universal good: and withal, of
admirable parts, capacities, and abililities, and therefore very fit for places
of government, and worthy to be listened and hearkened unto.

Secondly, for the effecting of those things, and bringing them to pass, they
must be tendered to the Parliament by the welaffected in petitions; For what
way is so meet for the people as petitioning, and what can those that are in
Authority do less, then grant them just things, that every man's judgment
calls good? And here is one of the great Masterpeeces of his craft and
subtilty, viz. in the framing ordering and managing their Petitions.

First, the Phrase Style and Dialect of these Petitions must be always harsh,
unpleasant, and in case if denied, menacing and provoking, representing the
Petitioners: froward, imperious passionate, furious, positive and implacable:
men of low and mean birth, breeding and quality, proud, heady, high-minded,
vainglorious giving out themselves to be always the well-affected party, by
whom, chiefly and mainly, if not only the Parliament have bin chosen,
maintained, preserved: as if the whole burden of the charges, and service of
the Wars, was undergone by them, and by none else.

Secondly, The matter of those Petitions must not contain apparent good things
in themselves only, but always mingled with some things very doubtful and
questionable: causing many disputes, debates and meetings hereabout.

Thirdly, They must always be clogged and filled with such things, which (though
in themselves desirable, and (were they attained) hopeful and promising to the
welbeeing of honest men, and the interest of the Nation: yet unseasonable,
being of the greatest and remotest probability (as things stand) to be
procured: insisting with most importunities in plainness and peremptoriness of
words, upon such things: not contenting themselves with those which are
directly previous and infallibly conducing thereunto: but having a special eye,
either at the present incapacity of the House, (by reason of diversities of
judgments amongst themselves, the inabilties of the Nation in general, the
variety of the providence of God in ordering the affairs of the Commonwealth,)
to grant such things, though happily they themselves desire it, yet with much
impetuousness, they commandingly pray and proudly petition for the same, now
his game is started and he merrily pursues it.

First, He has divided the quondam united petitioning party, by the framing,
phrasifying and ordering these Petitions, some being for, others against the
same; now heat, jealousies, differences arise, one party censuring the other
(with hard words) for cowardice, dastardliness, and baseness of spirit, these
are our prudentialists, our wise, moderate men, that can never find a season
to do good for their Country; Is it not time to speak out? shall we always be
mealy-mouthed, and never speak plain? If this be not a season? when will it be?
are not the things just we desire? if they will not grant them, we may see what
to expect from them: Again, the other party looks upon them as rash, heady,
incogitant, fiery, furious spirited men that are like to bring all to ruin and
confusion, etc.

Secondly, the house is hereby unwillingly precipitated and hurried upon one of
these inevitable rocks, either by granting their Petitions they must obnoxiate
themselves to the disgust, displeasure, and irritation of the generality of all
sorts of the people of the Land, as also to the dangerous consequences of the
pride and ambition of these men, puffed up with their vain and vapouring
conceits, that they must not be denied, though their Petitions be never so
peremptory, positive and commanding; or else,

Secondly, by den^ing them, they must undergo the hard, uncivil and unworthy
Censures of these hot spirited Petitioners, viz The Parliament, what is it? a
company of base self-seeking fellows, a pack of knaves, as real Tyrants as the
King and his Patentees, a generation that will never do good to this Nation
that deserve no better at the hands of the people, then Weezils, or Polecats,
this Mr. Walwin himself, discoursing with others about modelling and framing
Petitions, so as to induce the Parliament to give a gracious answer, professed to
this purpose, that it would be better for the people, that the Parliament
should deny, then grant their Petitions, for then they would discover
themselves what they are, and what the people must expect from them; if any man
shall revise all those Petitions, whose model was the birth of his brain, he
shall find them spirited with such provocations, as have the greatest extention
to all considerable Parties throughout the Nation; that the Magistrates may be
provoked, their power must be taken away, the rigor of the Laws abated, as
incons^stent with the liberties of a free people, they must have no power to
impresse or constrain the people to arms by Sea or Land, etc. in short,
leaving them nothing but the bare ayrie empty title of a Magistrate without
power, and this pleases the rude and vicious sort of people; again, the
Ministers must be provoked, and thereby the Pulpits fieted, by taking away
their maintenance under the name of Tithes, no other way or means propounded to
encourage the preaching of the Gospel, whereby this ayrie, vain empty thing (so
reputed by this man) called Religion, may be exploded and expelled the Nation;
this pleases the ignorant, simple and covetous Party; the Lawyers they must be
provoked, by pretending the uselesness of them in a Commonwealth, which
pleases the irregular, quarrellous and offensive part of the people: The
Merchants must be provoked by complaining against their Monopolizing of Trade
in their own hands, and not admitting a free people to a free trade; it would
be no hard matter clearly to discern an ^^asperating irritating and irascifying
spirit in all their Petitions, whose apt, natural and genuine tendencies are to
kindle flames, distempers, divisions, jealousies, and discontents amongst all
sorts whatsoever.

Whether these former Considerations do not merely demonstrate his design of
mischief to the honest and well-affected party, let any man's reason determine;
as for the interest of the people, the freedom and Liberties of the Nation,
(the great desire of his soul, and the travel of all his conceptions, if you
will believe him) when any man shall seriously observe that the bent and
natural genius of all his foli^itation^ are the division of the honest party,
the alienation of their hearts from, and malignifying of their opinions
against, yea, the utter ruin and destruction of the successful and faithful
instruments of deliverance and safety to the Nation, his uniform hindering and
obstructing, by his manifold wiles, the happy progress of the complete
interest, deliverance and freedom of the people, when the Pa^^. and Army are in
a hopeful capacity thereunto, his constant re^arding and endeavors of
preventing the execution of those very things, when in a hopeful way thereunto,
which he formerly seemed most eagerly, and withal his soul and might to
pursue, his constant quarrelling with, and exciting his followers against,
those that at any time, since this Parliment began, have the public rule in
their hands, he, I say, that shall impartially, and in the exercise of his
reason; observe these and many the like uniform, certain, and constant
proceedings of this man; needs not be to seek how to make a most probable, i^
not indubitable judgment upon him in that point.

I shall only in a word add one thing more, and leave him, and that is his
constant endevor to hinder the relief of Ireland by exhibiting arguments and
reasons in justification of that bloody rebellion, and in puzzling the
judgments and Consciences of those that otherways would promote that happy
work, arguing that the cause of the Irish Natives in seeking their just
freedoms, immunities, and liberties, was the very same with our cause here, in
endeavoring our own rescue and freedom from the power of oppressors, waving
the consideration of that damnable, bloody, and unparalled Massacring,
murdering, and starving so many thousands of poor Protestants, whose blood, it
seems, this devout Manifestator, Mr. Walwin judges not worthy, so much, as to
be enquired after; but God, I hope, has, and will so discover the folly,
falseness, and deceits of this man, that he shall proceed no further in
seducing and deceiving the honest and plain hearted people, that have been apt
to hearken to him.

As for L. C. Jo: Lilburne, I am very apt to believe, and hope, that there are
yet some seeds of God remaining in him, which (though for the present very
strangely subdued, and kept under the clods of ambition, heat, and choler,
passion, frowardness, and height of spirit, pride, vain glory, and
affectation; rendering him for the present feirce, heady, high-minded, lofty,
peevish, revengfull, implacable, very unlovely, and unlike our Lord Jesus, to
whose service he does pretend,) will (notwithstanding all this) at last break
forth in beauty and strength, in much sorrow, repentance and humiliation, in
much humility, meekness, and sweetness of spirit, in much gentleness, patience,
and long-suffering, in (...)ch wisdom, prudence, and lowliness of mind, which
will at l^st grow up and ripen unto a rich and plentiful (...)est of honor
and praise unto God, of much complacency, satisfaction and con^^ntment to his
greived and offended brethren, of much inward, comfortable and contentfull
communion and followship with the holy Spirit, and of his eternal peace, life,
and salvation with God hereafter, which (the Judge of all hearts does know) is
the longing of my soul in his behalf.

As for Mr. Prince I have no acquaintance at all with him, but have heard a
good report of him, and am very apt to believe the same; for he is not the
first good man that has been seduced by the sleights of men, and therefore the
cognizance that I have of Mr. Lilburne, and the reports I hear of Mr. Prince,
have encouraged me (as presuming if I am not deceived in the one and the other)
to tender to them some few considerations, confidently believing, that the
serious and christian contemplation thereof; by virtue of that Spiritualis
tastus, that, I hope, is upon their hearts, will prove through the blessing of
God, a means of meekning, softning, and framing their spirits unto a pe^^^able,
quiet, and amiable disposition, life, and conversation.

Omitting then the consideration of the violent, ^^ious, and fiery language,
especially, of Mr. Lilburne, together with the roughness, rigidness, and
licentiousness of his tongue and pen, in abusing, ^naving, and rascallizing
(after a most ^^rious and unchristian manner) those that have given as ample
testimony of their integrity and faithfulness to this Nation, as ever any that
was bred therein, as also of their innocen^y in th^se very things ( viz.
self-seeking, self-interest etc. whereof they are accused having as great
advantages, seasons, and opportunities here^^to ^^ ever men had, by the many
and great Victories, successes, and forces vouchsafed unto them, and under
their command, whereby they have (through the presence of the Lord with them)
pulled down the pride and power of the enemy, and might have h^d what (...)
they pleased, for the particular advantage of themselves and (...)lies, would
they thereby have bin w^^^d, per(...)ded, and wrought upon to (...) and
unworthy comp(...) the ^^stre, brightness, and glory whereof, (...) most
pow(...) break through all those clouds; fogs, and mist^, ascending from the
rancko^, malice, and discontents; (...)ours, falsities, and scandalous tongues
and pens of these men, to the general satisfaction of wise observing and
considering men, having not only the testimony of God, and their own
consciences, but even of those, whose occasion^* condition, and conversation
have given them an opportunity of a peculiar, daily, and constant inspection
and observation of their ways, by means whereof they can laugh to scorn those
irrational accusations against them from day to day. I say, omitting these
things which may be insisted upon, Consider (whereas you are still complaining
of oppressions, sorrows, and troubles of the nation) that we cannot upon any
rational and Scripturall ground, expect a complea^, full, absolute, and
perfect freedom from all kind of pressures and greevances in the Land, surely a
natural and complete freedom from all sorrows and troubles, was fit for man
only before he had sinned, and not since, let them look for their portion in
this life, that know no better, and their kingdom in this world that believe no
other; to what end are the graces of Faith, patience, and self-denial,
vouchsafed unto us? what need would there be of the ordinances of Prayer, of
the promises of the comforts of the Holy Ghost? what should we make of those
sayings of Christ? asserting, That in the world we shall have tribulation, That
through many afflictions w^ must enter into the Kingdom of God, That here we
have no conti^uing City, but we look for one that is to come, etc. if we might
expect perfect freedom here below.

Again, consider whether your tongues, your pen^, your books should not as well
favor of the sense of mercy received, ^^ of complain^^ of what is wanting;
though the sorrows, troubles and grie(...) of the Nation be great, yet have we
no cause of thankfulness to God and men for his mercy, and their assistance*
what had become of this Nation, had not God stirred up those very men, which
are the men of your complaint, to interpose* between it; and the power, wrath,
and (...)e of the contrary (...)y and is it not hard measure, when ^^^ all
their hazarding and (...)ing their lives ^^ ^^e high p^^ce^, (...) all
disadvan^^ of numbers, powers, and strength, as you know they did, that you,
(...) you, (...)en of their own Party, should (...) them as now you do, could
you bear it your selves?

Again, consider, that the best of men, are but men at best, and will you give
no allowance for flesh and blood; doubtless, these men of your anger have their
spots, for they are but men, but have not you yours? if they are such as you
give them out to be: viz. base, tyrranicall, false and rotten hearted men, will
not God find them out, as he has done in our eyes? yes verily: and so will he
find you out, if you be like them, but if you think they are upright in the
main, pity them, pardon them, counsel them, and pray for them, as the like
measure is meted out for you: can you presume that perfection and temptation
can dwell together on this side the grave? Have you no covering for
infirmities? Make it your own case; was there no tang of pride, vain glory,
tyranny and oppression in you L. Col. John Lilburne, when you were lifted but
some few degrees above your brethren, and Fellow Soldiers in the Army? Will
all men give testimony of your meekness, wisdom, goodness, gentleness, that you
were free from self-seeking, using no Lordliness over your poor Soldiers, not
the least tincture of fingering their dues, rights, liberties? Can you think
that had you that power, place, and authority in the Parliament, Army, etc.
which these men have, that you would do better for the Commonwealth then they
do; if so be such vain conceits do swell within you, recollect your self, and
bear the langnage of a friend, what means then the imperious Magisteriall
Dialect of your tongue and pen, that you cannot bear the least dissent from
your opinion or judgment without flying beyond the bounds of your present
station, yea, and civility, and good manners, but your tongue let fly, Knave,
Rascal, I Will have his ears, I Will have his blood, etc. could you bear
contradictions having power in your hands, and cannot endure the same, no,
though it be in matter of opinion about State affairs, when you stand upon the
lower ground? Have not men hereby cause to presume you as full of tyrannical
principles, as a fish is full of spawn? can you tread upon the necks of Princes
and Rulers while you are upon the dunghill, and would not do the like even to
Peasants, if you sat upon the throne? though you seem to bless your self from
day to day in that you can steal away the hearts of the people from the
Parliament and Army, as Absalom did from David by your pretended zeal for the
Liberties of the poor oppressed people; saying to the disturbed and grieved
thereof for want of just administrations, as he hid, 2 Samuel 15* 2, 3, 4. Of
what City are you? of one of the Tribes of Israel: your matters are good and
right, but there is no man to hear you: O that I were made a Judge in the Land,
that every man that has any suit, or cause, might come unto me, and I would do
him right: The free born people of England, how are they oppressed, wronged and
abused? No man judges their cause: This must be mended; we will have this, and
that, and the other thing done, that will ease and please the people; and may
happily gather together such a number as he did, about four hundred silly,
shallow, heady, hasty and simple-hearted men to the Kingdoms trouble and their
own ruin; yet be persuaded in time, for you cannot prosper; surely your
spirit, your language, your dialect, stand at such palpable, plain, and open
defiance to that spirit, which breaths in the Scriptures, and in the hearts
of those that fear God (out of whose number I do not exclude you, though as I
said before, very strangely are the symptoms of godliness kept down in you) that
you cannot, you shall not thus go on, and prosper, no notwithstanding your
crafty methods and art which you use to incense and stir up the poor ignorant
Country, by sending your Papers, appointing this man to spread them abroad in
this part, and that man in that part; this man in this parish, and another in
that, exercising the like skill for infection of several Regiments, Troops, and
Companies of the Army, by means whereof you boast of your thousands and ten
thousands to stand to you, swelling up your vain spirit to that height, making
you forget what you are, yet let me tell you, that all this while you are but
making matter of shame, sorrow, and repentance for your self, and however you
may be puffed up with the ayry, empty, vain and flattering words of those that
applaud you* and cry you up for a valiant and brave spirit that has withstood
Kings, Lords, Commons, Army, fearing neither men or devils in your Countries
Cause, the wind whereof may blow you up and down as a Cloud without water, and
make your Sails swell beyond your Vessel; yet wi^e, judicious and seeing men do
evidently perceive you vainly hurried to the very brink of an inevitable
precipice from whence (if not prevented by a gracious hand of mercy from on
high) you will certainly fall into shameful issues as Absal^m did, to the grief
and trouble of your real, though not flattering friends: if therefore you have
any bowels of compassion to your native Country, in whose behalf you would seem
even to be eaten up with zeal, do not hinder the happiness thereof by
gratifying Malignants, whose only hope is you and your party, who rejoice in
your mad and surious proceedings, and take pleasure in your folly, and do boie
you up with vain, empty, and windy words, seeking your own, and your brethrens
ruin, and would rejoice to see us all destroyed and hanged together: Do you
think your Manifestation (wherein you would make them believe that you never
have been any way violent against the persons of the King and Queen, or their
party, though I confess I wonder with what face you could so speak) does
satisfy them? no doubtless they know you well enough, and you shall know it,
if an opportunity serves them Are you indeed lovers of your Country? why then
do you hinder the peace and happiness thereof by your present Commotions? Are
you indeed the servants of the most high God? where is his image? Are you the
Disciples of Christ? where is his meekness, patience, gentleness,
long-suffering goodness? Are you flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone?
where then is your love to his people? Can you make wi^e and judicious men to
believe your great professed real of your love to good men, while you hinder the
relief of Ireland, (though I now speak not to Mr Walwyn and Mr Ov^rt^^, because
I fear they have not hea^ing ears in matters of this nature,) yet, can you M.
Lilburn and M. Prince be^^ the thoughts of so many thousand Protestants
(amongst whom who can tell how many faithful servants of God) murdered and
massacred without any inquisition made for their blood? nay, that all that
remain of that generation must give up themselves to be b^^^her'd and
slaughtered by those sons of violence, and shall have no assistance? Could it
enter into any man's heart, the L* Col. Lilbur^ the grand Ze^ot for honest men^
interest should ever be so baffled with (...) glosses, je^uitical; (...) and
c^^^ing Sophistry, as to be persuaded to hinder the re^^^^ of Ireland? Do ^ut
the sc(...) and (...) of those slaughtered men, women and children fill yo^^
e^^s, (...) spruwlings and g^sping^ appear in your eyes, while you hinder the
just vengeance upon those b^rb^rous m^^there^^? What Is become of those wonted
bowels of love and affection to the honest party that did found in you? are
they restrained ^ can you resolve not only to deafen your ears to the cry of
the dead for Justice, but will you stop them also against the cry of the living
for mercy that are like to be slaughtered for want of relief? What Malignant,
what Papist, what Jesuit, nay, what Devil, under the notion of an Angel of
light, has thus bewitched you, that you cannot see the crafty jugglism and
jesuitism of your present transactions? Do not you perceive, not yet understand
that under the pretense, shape, and vizard of zeal for your Countries good, you
are furiously hurried and blindly cheated into such actions that threaten its
ruin? Will the raising up of a third war, the utter extirpation of the
Protestants in Ireland, the dividing, rending and b^^^king Englands Army, the
heating, fiering, and enflaming the spirits of the honest and united party, the
r^ising, increasing, and multiplying difficulties and troubles in this very
juncture of time, when all contrivances, plots and projects that malice it self
can study and invent by Sea or Land to prevent and hinder the hopeful change of
the late Government for the happy promotion of the Liberties and Freedom of the
people? will these things I say (the proper tendencies of your present
practices) promote the Peace and Interest of England? Or can they be any other
then the unhappy birth of the Romish, Malignant, Jesuitical and Satanical
Faction? and shall L. Col. John Lilbur^ and Mr Prince, professed friends to
Englands Interest, adjucate, help, and promote the same? or speak plainly, have
you quitted the tents of Israel, and struck hands with the Philisti^s? Is your
qu^ndam Religion and professed experiences thereof like ^^lt that h^th lost its
favor? is it now fit for nothing but the dunghill* do you make no other use of
your old profession then to ret(...) your credit with your q^o(...) companio^^
for your more (...) and quick dispatch of their utter ruin, by the course you
take; that so you may do their grand Enemy and his party the greater work in a
little time; if these things be the ab^o^^ing of your souls, what m(...) your
present practices? Destroy the Parliament and Council of State, break the Army
in pi^^es, ^et the Soldiers against the Officers, tell them it is (...) ^^ ^e
^^der M(...)ll Discipline, (though under pay) hinder the relief of Ireland,
make way for the Rebels to come over hither, let French, and Danes and Devils
come with them; do not you think that all this will promote Englands interest,
the Gospels through-fare, and happy success, the peace and prosperity of
Honest men? and have not your present ways, a direct face, yea, and a swift
foot after these things? or has the spirit of Tinmouth Lilburne, possessed
you, that you have resolved to betray the interest of the whole Nation into the
hands of the revengefull Enemy. Well, if it be so, you are about a work which
will devour the workman. For all they that hate Sion shall be turned backward
and perish,

Postscript.
Reader,
THe foolish, vain, inconsistent, malicious, and contradictions Scandals,
falsities and absurdities of the late Pamplets, subscribed by these men, are so
plain, clear and obviou^, that it would reflect disparagement upon thy
judgment, and difficiency upon thy observation to insist upon the same,
neverthless because they are a high-flown generation, presuming that
unanswerable which others judge intolerable, and men's discretion in slighting
their folly insufficiency to refute the same, thou shall (as occasion i^
offered, if thy nostrils can bear it) see the boyls and botches of their
ulcerous pens lancht before thee, wherein thou may expect such heighths of
confidence, and depths of ignorance, such impudence and arrogance, such
substantial vapors, such true falsities, such shallow deeps, such real
vanities, such irrational reasonings, such dividing propositions for the
settlement of peace, such reedy pillars for the establishment of the State,
such warring principles for the Peoples Agreement, as it is hard to say,
whether will move thy pity or laughter; but when men turn apostates from God,
scoffers of Religion, deny the Scriptures, neglect, co^temn, and despise the
means of Sanctification, grow haughty, pr^^d, vainglorious, passionate,
froward, fierce, fiery, etc. they will at last make nothing to strike hands with
the Devil and his party, Atheists and Papists, and prop^ane Malignants, no
longer help the Lord against the mighty, but the mighty against the Lord,
b^tray Ireland, s^ttle the Prince upon the English throne, ruin the ^onest
interest of the Nation, and then

Farewell.

