A SERMON Preached before the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS At Saint Margarets in
Westminster, on Thursday the 10. of May, being a day of solemn Thanksgiving
appointed by the Parliament, for the mercies God had bestowed on the Nation
through the successful conduct of the Lord General MONCK.

By John Price M. A. Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, and Chaplain to his
Excellency.

JOB 37.22. Fair weather comes out of the North: with God is terrible Majesty.

(...),
(...).
Gr. Naz. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in
Ivie-lane. 1660.

Thursday, April 26. 1660.
REsolved upon the Question by the COMMONS assembled in Parliament, That Mr.
Price, the Lord Generals Chaplain, be desired to Preach and carry on the work
of Thanksgiving, before this House at Margarets Westminster, on this day
fortnight, and that Doctor Clerges do give him notice thereof.

W. JESSOP, Clerk of the Commons House of Parliam.

Thursday, May 10. 1660.
ORDERED,
THat Mr. Price have the thanks of this House for his great pains taken in his
Sermon preached before this House, this day being a day set apart for public
Thanksgiving, and that he be desired to print his Sermon, and that he have the
like privilege in printing thereof, as has been given to others in like cases.

Ordered,

That Colonel Knight do give him the thanks of this House accordingly.

W. JESSOP, Clerk of the Commons House of Parliam.

To the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS.
SAint Paul telling us what enemies we must expect to encounter withal in this
life, Ephesians. 6.12. among others lets fall this hidden passage, that we are to
wrestle against (...), the worldly or the sublunary rulers of the darkness of
this age, and this age is every age: for since the fall of Adam it is the same
world still, and we have the same enemies only God, who is higher then the
highest, and is exalted above all Principalities and Powers, restraines or lets
loose the malice of our enemies, as our sins are lighter or heavier in the
scales of his justice. (...), sometimes the Trojans, sometimes the Graecians
got the worst, as Homers deity inclined the balance upon mount Ida. It Is a truth
to be found in Holy writ, when sometimes Israel, sometimes Amaleck (understand
it of any enemy) prevailed. So in our unnatural broiles, sometimes the balance
has inclined on this, sometimes on that side, but in the mean time both sides
did abuse themselves, and were abused (God justly suffering it) by others, I
mean, those now mentioned (...), spiritual adversaries of our Temporal
salvation as well as our Eternal: for the evidence whereof examine 1 King.
22.20, 21, 22. And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up,
and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? and one said on this manner, and an other said on
that manner, and there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and
said, I will persuade him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? and he said,
I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets.
And he said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also; go forth, and do so.

Had not the Lord been highly provoked with us, as with Ahab, and given a
Permission, not to say, a Commission, to evil Angels to infatuate and benight
our understandings, so that we were judicially given up to a spirit of
delusion, could we have thus fallen out (...), for points and pins, when the
(...), the essentialls of the Realm were acknowledged to be sound? I can safely
mind you of one instance; with what a frenzy were Church-windows battered
down! and if they were not broken into useless shivers, we were afraid that the
curse of doing the Lords work negligently would stick upon our consciences. And
what I say of this, may be said of other our brainlesse furies, that have
demolished things in themselves indifferent, and to unprejudiced men, as
inoffensive as painted glass.

A sad presage it was, that those errors that could never have got in at our
Church doors, should creep in at its broken windows; and the eyes of Sampson
being put out, the light of Israel was not long after quenched. But as we say,
there is never smoke without some fire, so there could not have been that
universal distaste without some male administration, and that in a long peace
through man's corruption come to an height and consistency. For as in the body
the sharper diseases arise rather from its own discrasie and distemper, then
from an infectious air; so all Regiments are more effectually destroyed from
within themselves, then from any violence without: that now we clearly see
through the prospective of our late miseries,

1. That the Church of England could not have fallen but by the heates of its
own Ecclesiastics; a grievance in Constantines days, that more damaged the
cause of Christ then all the ten famous Persecutions from the hands of
Heathens; for when violence is from those that are without, then that saying
holds good, Semen Ecclesiae est sanguis Martyrum, The seed of the Church is the
blood of its Martyrs; but when it is from within, then, Sanguis Ecclesiae est
semen Haeresium, the blood of the Church is the seed of Heresies: Loose
conceptions in matters of Faith as naturally growing out of a disturbed Church,
as Insects from a putrified carcass.

2. That the Country will never mischief the Court, unless the Court first
minister occasion of offense, either seeming or real. It is the fatal
unhappiness of Courtiers (as well as other men) to mistake their interest,
either by preferring their private interest above their Masters, or their
Masters above their Countries, and so wrong either themselves or their Prince,
and often both: Either they monopolize their Sovereign to themselves, a vain
attempt, as if the Sun should not shine but through the pin hole of my paper;
and more dangerous: for could I obtain a burning glass to contract all its
beams, 'twere a rare indulgence from heaven, if whilst I used it I did not burn
my own fingers: Or they would persuade their Prince that his interest is
distinct from his Subjects, a most apparent mistake, which the blind Poet saw,
who ever called his Agamemnon (...) the Shepherd of his sheep: and there is no
Shepherd that will leave all the fleece to one sheep, and no skin to another.
My Loyalty to my Prince, and my love to my Country, are so far from being
Contraries, that they are not Disparates, they are one and the self same thing:
He loves not his Country that loves not his Prince, and he loves not his Prince
that loves not his Country. And as there will never want Court-discontents, so
they will be ever watchful to mis-represent Court-favorites to the Country,
through whose sides the Prince sometimes bleeds: I shall desire the one to
remember who it is that gives favor in the sight of Kings, and for what end;
and the other, that the King of Kings never pleases all men. May the one and
the other preach to themselves, Pro. 19.13. A foolish son is the calamity of
his father, and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping. It is as
much a Political as an Occonomical truth, that till then the servants of the
household will not fall out.

3. That the throne of England cannot fall by the body of its Subjects; which,
as your present Loyalty to our lawful Sovereign does abundantly manifest, so
the abhorrency and disavowing of the late unparalleled assassination of his
Royal father, by the mockery of justice, the ahhorrency, I say, in those that
proceeded to a Reformation by the sword, does as fully evince.

4. It Is the Subjects advantage to keep the prerogative of the Crown unviolable.
A King is evermore the father of his Country, therefore the whole must be
preserved. Faith is said to be mysterious, sometimes above Reason, but never
against it: so his Authority must be sacred, sometimes, if need be, above Law,
so as not against it. It Is beyond your knowledge to make provision against all
evils. In our Articles of war there are some things left to discretion, so in
those of peace; there must be arwayes some reserved to a Princely prudence: And
here I cannot but mind you of the judgment of a Gentleman, who some weeks since
sent me a paper, wherein, among other passages he thus delivers himself; The
health of the body consists in the due temperament of the parts, when the
Sovereign power and the peoples interest are justly balanced: The dispute about
it cost this Land dear in the unhappy Reigns of Henry 3. and King John, where
the prevalency of one party demanded, and the necessity of the other granted,
what was unjust and dishonorable for the one to require, and the other to
consent unto, had Law and calm debate thereon been the judges; and that was the
reason their peace was never lasting: But these ways of working did
interchangeably take place for some scores of years, till this poor Land was
almost ruined.

And now, Gentlemen, the result will be this, That vain man, that would be
wise, takes a great deal of pains to ruin himself. Perditio tua ex te is the
charge against the State-sinner too; God also allowing to evil spirits to make
us drunk with Cebes's (...) cup of Error, with which God punished Israel, Isa.
29.9. I am sensible that these lines are swollen beyond the measure of a
Dedication to the ensuing Discourse, and I am more than sensible that I shall
be censured for an ultra crepidam: Sure I am, that if the Ministers of the
Gospel are commanded to tell Jacob his transgressions, they are by the same
rule authorized to direct his feet in the ways of peace. And if there are any
staid and inviolable rules of Truth, divested of interest and selfconceit, I
have not much swerved; but if the profaneness of any age shall say that it
consists only in Fancy, I can justify my self by the same argument that I
shall be arraigned. I have nothing in my eye but the beauty of the Church, the
dignity of my Prince, and the safety of my Country; which you have more
endearments from the world to defend than I have.

Therefore I shall conclude with this request, that seeing your forefathers
thought it their duty to remember their deliverance from the Gunpowder plot by
an anniversary Thanksgiving, you would recognize this your escape out of one of
twenty years standing, that had really taken effect, and blown up the Estates
of the Realm, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subject; and that in due time,
when it shall be judged convenient, some book might be bestowed on every Parish
Church, to show by what means and methods we were ensnared into a Civil war,
how far it was heightened, what calamities we felt under it, how God wrought
salvation for us, when all attempts to ease our selves of slavery were
fruitless; that as it should stir up in us thankful hearts to the God of our
mercies, so it should be a perpetual Caveat to us for the future, how we let
out the waters of contention, lest in washing of the dirt from our streets, we
drown our own houses.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. John Price.

1 SAMUEL 2.9. He will keep the feet of his Saints, but the wicked shall be
silent in darkness: for by strength no man shall prevail.


IN our Latin Bibles this first Book of Samuel is usually entitled The first
Book of Kings. The book begins thus, Fuit vir unus de Ramathaim, There was a
man of Ramathea, the husband of our thanksgiving Hannah in the Text. From
hence a Commentatour takes occasion to bestow onus this Observation, That when
we write or speak of Kings, all that we can say, is this, Fuerunt, they were:
for the fashion and pomp of this world passes away, and we pass with it. The
exterminating Angel knocks at their Palaces, as well as at our cottages:
whether for their, or our, or both our sins, present, or past, or sins of our
forefathers, the Laws of Method and Charity will not now allow me to make
enquiry. But Fuit vir unus, There was a man, and so fuimus Troes, and fuit
Ilium, and fuit ingens gloria Teucrorum. We had peace within our walls, and
prosperity within our palaces; but ferus Jupiter, our justly-provoked God, and
our impatience of being well and in our wits, sent the Sword amongst us, so we
were, and we can remember when our glory and our peace departed: but enough of
this.

The Text is part of a solemn Hymn of Thanksgiving, uttered by a devout woman
upon the receipt of a long pray'd-for mercy. She was barren, and therefore she
was upbraided. Her disgrace prompts her to her devotion. To the Temple she
goes, and even there her groans, and the silent motions of her lips, were
arraigned of drunkenness. How great is that misery, when we are not only
upbraided with our unhappiness, but abused and traduced in the using the most
lawful means to deliver our selves: when our prayers, as once the groans of
the Roman Citizens, are suspected of Treason. However God, who sees not as man
sees, grants the request of this long despised supplicant, gives her a Son, and
she gives him to God; and for the fruit of her body, presents him with the
fruit of her soul: for v. 1. Hannah prayed, so says the Hebrew, she
prophesied, says the Chaldee. She seems to have done both: for the whole Hymn
consisting of 10. verses, the first eight are a prayer of thanksgiving, the two
last a prophecy. I will give you the reading of both.

v. 9. He will keep the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in
darkness: for by strength no man shall prevail.

v. 10. The Adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces, out of heaven
shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, and he
shall give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed.

In which an Expositor will needs tell us, that there are 7. miracles. I shall
not trouble my self or you to find out his conceits. Let it suffice to inform
our selves from the whole, that God will at last hear the prayers of his
reproached and despised supplicants, and will stop the mouths of his insulting
enemies, who talk exceeding proudly, v. 3. (...), as if all were their own.

The text consists of 3. parts. 1. Gods mercy, He will keep the feet of his
Saints. 2. His justice, The wicked shall be silent in darkness. 3. Ratio
utriusque, the reason of both, for by strength no man shall prevail. The reason
is clear for Gods justice against the wicked, who put confidence in the
strength of their hands, or of their heads: The Chaldee Paraphrast helps us to
the reason of the first, thus; for there is no man (...) the strength of
purity and innocence, (...) for the day of judgment: that if God should sift
and examine the righteousness of the righteous, they could not plead their own
merit for his keeping of them, but must stand to the award of his free mercy.

1. Gods mercy, or protection and manuduction of his Saints, (...) He will keep
the feet of his Saints: wherein consider 3. things. 1. Qui servantur, who are
kept, his Saints. 2. Quomodo, How, or in what they are kept, He will keep their
Feet. 3. Quis servabit, who will keep, and that is Ille, He will keep.

And before I make an entrance upon the Text, I here mind my auditors, that
they are not to expect from me any set discourse from any one part or division
of the Text, the theme being too wide, and the time too narrow to attempt it.

1 Then, Qui servantur, His Saints.

And because we have lived in an age wherein every man (as it is Salomons
observation,) has proclaimed his own goodness and Saintship, and that to a
separation, in the language of the Prophet, Isa. 65.5. Stand by thy self, come
not near to me; for I am holter then thou. Wherein we have spoken the language
of Canaan, and invited spectators to come and see my zeal and my Saintship.

'Twould not be amiss to detain you a while upon this particle, H^s, his
Saints, and so represent to your consideration two sorts of Saints, Gods and
Mammons. The distinction is warrantable, seeing our Blessed Savior has
assured us, and our experience of our selves and others witnesses, that there
are two such objects of our hopes, aims and worship, God and Mammon. Mat. 6.24.

viz. Gods, wherein I shall not speak, of the grace that constitutes and
distinguishes them, nor of the privileges belonging to them, no nor of all
the duties incumbent on them, or their practice in them; but propound some few
(...), or characteristicks whereby we may discern them better then old Eli did
Hannah, and find them in our disturbed streets at noon day without the help of
Diogenes his lanthorn.

Shilo with Hanna, frequenters of the public worship and service of God, not
separating into corners, for I know not what niceties: Heb. 10.15.
Not forsaking the assembling of themselves together as the manner of some is,
and has and will be in all ages, where they have not only a Cephas or an
Apollo, but a Doctrine also of their own. But as for Gods Saints, they are men
after David's heart, as he after Gods, Psalm. 84. How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts
of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. Where the
devout Psalmist envies the habitation of the Sparrow, or every little bird that
builds her nest nigh the Altars of God. And being ravished with the happiness
of those that dwell in Gods house, pronounces a blessing on them, ver. 4. well
knowing that our public devotions and combined strength in the Assemblies of
Gods Saints, are our best security: ver. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength
is in thee.

Till I die I will not remove my integrity, Job 27.5. No, Job would not let
that go, his heart should not reproach him, v. 6. though his enemies did.

Caesar his due, and it is well when we can, when right takes place. And
certainly it is highly warrantable to follow a multitude to do good. As our
case stands, every good man can say fiat justitia, let justice take place,
though the Coelum and happiness of his private concerns should lie in the
dust.

are merciful, and charitable, ready to do good, think no evil to any, and
forget all done to themselves. And this note of being merciful is the proper
and Grammatical notion of the Word. So (...) a Saint, or a merciful man, is
by the LXX translated (...), Dr. Ham. in Psalm.
pious and holy, though that does not fully amount to the Hebrew signification,
as a learned Glossarie of our own observes, but I conceive that it may be
farther explained by (...) and (...), one that has bowels of compassion and
affection, not only to his nearer relations, or the household of his Blood and
Faith, but to mankind, and the whole creation is akin to him, he is merciful
as his heavenly Father is merciful, (...), whose offspring we all are, as the
Apostle taught us out of Aratus, Acts 17. and as it follows in his author, --
(...)
(...).
God being merciful and gentle to mankind, shows them a right path: so his
saints by their charitable endeavors would direct others, yea their enemies,
into the ways of peace.

Thus I have briefly given you these four marks, and but these four of His
saints, viz. Gods: because I would desire you to cast your eye upon the real
devotion and integrity, obedience and charity, of your fellow subjects and
christians: So I cannot longer deteine you on this subject; but pass more
briefly to examine Mammons, or the Worlds Saints.

Tim. 3. A place of Scripture that will ever stand upon record against them.
They zealously cry, The Temple, the Temple of the Lord, but indeed it is the
(...), the great goddess of lucre with the silversmiths of Diana: and rather
then they will fail of this they will wrest the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3.16. (...),
torture and vex them as the Alchymists do their mineralls to get gold, wrest
them though it be to their own and their countries damnation and ruin. Who
trembles not to think that they from Scriptures should find a Patent from
Heaven to subvert all governments, to bind Princes in fetters of iron, that
they themselves might wear chains of gold? Who is not astonished to consider to
what height of licentiousness, jusque datum sceleri, some men were arrived at,
that they deemed it lawful to cut any man's throat that was not of their own
conceptions, being as cruel and inhumane as that poetical Giant, who laid all
travelers he met withal upon his iron bed, if their stature were longer then
it, he cut off the overplus; if shorter, by torture he equalled them to his
rule. I call the laws of nature to judge of what spirit these men were of. Had
these insolences by Gods just judgments upon a sinful nation longer
continued, Non hospes ab hospite tutus; our Innes might have been our graves:
and were we traveling the highway, we needed to have a spirit of discerning,
and a second sight to know whether he that encountered us were a Jew or a
Samaritan, or at least we needed to follow Plato's direction to his Scholars,
(...), to enquire before hand of what principles and what Church the man was
with whom we were to converse.

I thought once to have propounded some distinct characters of such nominall
Saints, together with their (...), methods and designs of deceit to cheat the
World into a good esteem of them, that from hence I might take a fuller
advantage to incite you to the duty of the day, God having silenced almost in
darkness the professors of this Saintship; and withal to have taught you from
the mouth of our blessed Savior, how to beware of Wolves in Sheeps clothing,
should they again come amongst us: but I shall shut up this part by minding you
of two things.

Mark them that, under pretenses of Religion and vizards of Saintship, shall
cause divisions amongst you. I am the bolder to press it, because it is the
Apostles admonition, Romans 16.17, 18. and much concerns us at this time. Mark
them, and look well to them, who cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For they that are such, serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words, and fair
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. (...) mark them, who do (...), are
busy bodies in other men's matters, and are ready to set the mark of the Beast
upon every thing that disgusts them, who whilst they cry up the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to the disturbance of the Kingdoms of the Earth, do indeed
mind but Earthly things, and serve not Christ but their own interests and
Bellies; and though their speech may be as fair and smooth as Jacobs, yet their
hands are as rough and hairy as Esau's. These are none of His, viz. Gods Saints.

Genesis 34.21.) who are Gods Saints, and not the Saints of the time, who will
rather suffer wrong for Conscience sake, then do it to your, or the Nations
disquiet and disturbance. Let those men that have long prayed for the peace of
our Jerusalem, enjoy it, by the blessing of God upon your Counsels; that as
God has kept their feet from falling, so you would keep the foot of pride from
their dwellings. which brings me to the second part of this division,

Quomodo servantur, how the Saints are kept, and it is servabit pedes, he will
keep their feet: And that either Literally or Mystically.

1. Literally: The Devil did not mis-represent the Quomodo, and manner of Gods
protection, when he tempted our Savior, Mat. 4.6. He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone. For God does protect us in our going forth
and coming in, and we are to pray for it; but he tempted our Savior to put
himself out of Gods protection: for the Promise reaches only to our ways,
Psalm. 91.11. which the Devil de industria concealed, a trick that all
Heretics have learned from the Father of lies, to mince and mangle
Scripturall truths. Now our ways are not to throw our selves down from the
pinnacles of a Temple, or the battlements of a Turret, to try whether an Angel
will take us by the arm, and set us gently down. true then it is ad literam,
That God does keep the feet of his Saints, That he does protect and uphold them
as to an outward condition: which Saints of old have experienced and recorded
in Scripture; but we cannot lay down the Quatenus, to what measure, and to what
degree. Only know this, That God is as good, and his promises as true, when
Job's feet are in the stocks, as when David's are set upon a rock. Which I
therefore mention, because some of us possibly have been ready to question Gods
servabit pedes Sanctorum, when we have seen them fallen by the hands of violence
in our streets.

2. Mystically, or Allegorically, and so we may understand by the feet of the
Saints, their souls affections for God, their ardent desires toward him, their
resolutions to walk in the way of his commandments: Aust.
For Deum adimus animo, non vehiculo: They are inward affections, raised and
blown up by the Almighty's inspiration, that carry the Spouse as in the
Chariots of Amminadab to the Shulamite and Bridegroom of her soul, Cant. 6.12.
And here God has indispensably bound himself, that they that truly seek him,
shall as truly find him, Mat. 7.7.

Reasons for Gods thus keeping the feet of his Saints.

1. Because he will magnify the power of his grace: That when we are weak, we
shall become strong; and when we think our selves to be strong, he will let us
know our own weakness. Sperabam aliquando in virtute mea, quae tamen non erat
virtus, says S. Aug. I once put confidence in my own strength, which, when I
had occasion to use it, I found to be none at all. Dicebam enim, Hoc faciam,
illud perficiam, and tamen nec hoc nec illud fatiebam, I said I would do this,
and I would do that, and I plainly saw that of my own strength I could do
nothing. And of this the good Father makes frequent complaints in his
Soliloquies. It Is our duty with the Apostle to have recourse to that God whose
grace is sufficient for us.

2. He will keep their feet, because the wicked push at them: Psalm. 86.14. O
God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have
sought after my soul, and have not set thee before them. Wherefore v. 16. the
Psalmist puts up this petition, Give thy strength unto thy servant. And God did
help and comfort him to the shame of his enemies, v. 17.

3. Because the prosperity of the wicked makes their seet almost to slip. Psalm.
73.2, 3. But as for me my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-night slipped.
For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. No
wonder then if Heathens so often put the Question, Cur bona malis? Why wicked men
were often se prosperous? when as David could not resolve it himself, till he had
gone unto the Sanctuary of God, ver. 17.

The only improvement of this Point shall be this:

Does God keep the feet of his Saints? Then let them keep them for God, let
them look to it that their feet be ever shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of peace, Ephesians. 6.15. that they be not ensnared with the traps and pitfalls of
factious and schismatic Religion-makers, that would molest the peace of the
Gospel and their Country. I will only super-add a passage out of St. Gregory,
Duo sunt animae pedes; fortitudo and humilitas; The soul has two feet,
Resolution, and Humility: By the one good men dare attempt; by the other they
are not haughty when successful. I leave you to judge, whether such are not
his feet, upon which the tota moles, the whole fabrique of our hopes, under
God, has been raised. Deus servet.

3. Ipse servabit, He will keep the feet of his Saints.

1. He will keep them, who is (...) Genesis 17.1. who is a God all-sufficient, and
so is able to keep them.

2. He will keep them, who is a God keeping covenant with his people, and so is
Deus verax, a God faithful and true, so we should hold fast the profession of
our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised, Heb. 10.23. The
profession of our faith, it is (...), that we should confess the same hope, and
be confirmed in it.

3. He will keep them who has, and will in all ages of the world keep up a
visible Church, and so is Deus misericors, a merciful God, that has found an
ark for Noah in the flood, that has kept Israel in Egypt, and that has caves
and wildernesses for his Prophets and Saints, and reserves thousands of knees,
that shall not bow to Baal.

Thus far of Gods mercy in the first division of the Text.

2. Gods justice. But the wicked shall be silent in darkness, the LXX. (...),
The Lord will weaken his adversary, that is, God will set himself against every
proud sinner, that sets himself against his Maker.

1. Then, the wicked, the (...), not ordinary sinners, not the bare (...). God
is not extreme to mark every thing that we do amiss: nor are all sins of
the same tincture, and alloy; there are frailties, and there are presumptions;
there are peccata minuentia gratiam, and peccata vastantia conscientiam, Some
sins weaken our graces, others make inrodes upon our consciences. There is the
(...) 1 John 3.8. the habitual and presumptuous sinner, and he is (...) of the
Devil, has taken his presse-monie, and fights under his banners. For though
every sin may be said to be of the Devil, who first brought forth that monster
into the world, yet not every sinner: for the just man falls seven times,
Prove. 24.16. that is, in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. Even the (...) he
just man, that in Scripture is opposed to the (...) the wicked, has his
difailances, and yet is not out of the favor of God. True, every sin is
Grammatically (...), that is, an aberration from the scope: but as that archer
is not so much to be blamed that hits not the mark, as he that purposely
shootes at rovers, so every sinner that falls short of the observation of Gods
Law, is not so culpable as he that casts it behind his back.

So then the (...) the wicked in the Text, are not simply sinners, but they are
the (...), or as the LXX. here (...), such sinners as often in this life bring
down fearful judgments, upon their heads, God being obliged sometimes, and in
some cases, to vindicate the honor of his justice upon the stage of the world,
that such sinners should go before hand to judgment, as well as others follow
after, 1 Timothy 5.24.

Lets make a brief inquiry in some few things, what sort of men these are, and

1. They are Despisers of Gods word, Impii transgressores (...) verbi sui,
Chald wicked transgressors of his word. and this may carry a double sense. 1.
Either non utuntur, or 2. abutuntur: either they do notuse, or they do abuse
Gods word.

1. Non utuntur, They mind not whether God has a Law in the world to direct
them or no. They are a Law to themselves indeed, but it is, -- Deus est mihi
dira cupido. And those indeed are the (...) and the (...), that own no lawgiver
and no law, but what their own ambitious or revengfull lusts suggest unto them.

2. Abutuntur, They are abusers of Gods word. And these wicked men are more
dangerous and pernicious then the other: for Atheism is scorned and derided by
the greatest part of mankind, and is never like to gain any number of
Proselytes. The Devil had more cunning then to say, Dominus non dixit, the
Lord has not said. But when they come to search the Scriptures, thinking that
in them they shall find a place fit for their turn to palliate their
wickedness: when they say to us, Come, let us come to enquire of the Lord to
shed blood, These, as the serpent seduced Eve, may more likely find out, not
ill meaning, but not well-instructed accomplices.

2. These wicked are either the broachers or the supporters of Schisms and
Heresies. And if these are not sinners of the first rank and classis, I know
not why the Holy Ghost has so often affixed this title on Jeroboam, Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, who at one time had made a rent both
in Church and State, which for ever was perpetuated against the house of David,
and against the house of God. If that be true, the faith and martyrdom of dead
Abel yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. may we not say, that those that have led the van
for Schism, Heresy and Rebellion, still sin being in their graves, and the
mischiefs that they have left behind them, add some weight to their confusion.
Aeneas might have spared the life of his vanquished foe, had he not espied
about him the trophie of his friends blood, but then -- Pallas te hoc vulnere,
Pallas
Immolat. --
There are men whose life's have not been morally debauched, that have greater
sins to account for; the sins of their parties.

3. They are the sacrilegious persons, who rob God, but much more wicked, when
they dare ask God wherein they have robbed him? Mal. 3.8. and most of all, when
they dare plead, that the Gospel has discharged the sin, which the light of
nature detected. Callistratus in Aristotle accused Melampus (...), that he had
defrauded the workmen of the temple of three farthings. Rhet. l. 1. 6. 14.
It will become you to judge of a large proportion. The Philosopher reckons
this sin of sacrilege amongst the (...), the greater sorts of injuries, and
they are such that proceed (...), from the greater injury: Will a man rob God?
yet you have robbed me. So that in this case the lesser are the greater. He
that is so bold to take away a few things dedicated to a Holy use, is more
injurious then he that trespasseth upon his Neighbor in greater. And though
God does not send a Court of Angels to arraign and condemn us for this sin, as
we have our Common Pleas for common injuries betwixt man and man, yet our
consciences do, or should condemn us: and it is an observation of a learned
Antiquarie of our own, that God has strangely witnessed from heaven against
sacrilege, the estates gotten by it proving so vertiginous, that it was the advice of an Honorable Father to his Son, to look well, that if he purchased
Lands, the Church laid no claim to them. I Will conclude this. To give God his
due, is not more your duty, then your interest.

4. These wicked are bitter, and sworn enemies against the Ministers of God,
that serve at his Altar. When God had a sharp controversy with Israel, Hos.
4.1. because there was no mercy, nor truth, nor knowledge of God in the land,
for v. 2. by swearing, and by lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery (so the Prophet by this particle amplified their sins) they brake
forth, and blood touched blood, therefore v. 3. God denounced fearful woes
against them, but v. 4. seems to let fall the controversy, Let no man strive,
nor reprove an other. Let them go on still, why? what sinners are these that
they should thus be delivered up to themselves, and to a reprobate mind? why?
They are such as they that strive with the Priest, as if here were the
consummatum est, and accomplishment of all wickedness, nec quo progrediatur
habet. How near we were come to this, to the infamy of the Protestant
Religion, I leave our Pulpits to witness.

Thus far now I have found out those (...) wicked men, whom I may say in some
manner and measure God has.

I shall forbear to trace them farther: for it would be more injurious to you
then me, to mention all their broad, though crooked paths, wherein they have
walked with proud wrath both against God, and their Neighbor.

Neither shall I now subjoyn any distinct inferences to what I have already
spoken, save only that I will crave leave to reminde you of their first
character, that they are Transgressors of Gods word, as we all have been.

1. For their Non utuntur, their not using Gods word.

Aristotle, to tell you that (...), that the safety of a Commonwealth consists
in its Laws. Every Proletarian, that is a subject, and works to eat, knows
so much, That since we lost our Laws, our Babylonish commonwealth was but a
private weal, and a common woe. But if we study the laws of God more, we shall
have less use of the laws of the Realm: for which I refer you to 1 Timothy 1.9,
10.

2. For their abutuntur, their abusing Gods word.

An use of severe reprehension to those that interpret Gods word and will by
his Providence, which seems to have been their sin, on whom the Prophet
pronounces a woe Isa 5.20. that call evil, good, and good, evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. Like the Comedians buffoone, Ait? aio, negat? nego, that have
their yeas or nays for every scene, that never think that God is in good
earnest with them by the imposition of any Law. For if he were, then as it is
v. 19. Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the
counsel of the holy one of Israel draw nigh, and come, that we may know it. If
God be so holy, and this written Law be his will, let him descend to us in
lightnings and thunderings to defend it, as he did to promulgate it. But if
things run smoothly on, and we take off Apollos golden cloak, and Aesculapius's
golden beard, and have a fair gale with our plunder, then, Ecce quam faustum
navigium Dii sacrilegis praestant: we have found a prophecy out of Scripture
that it should be so. No! No! God says, Currat Naturae Lex, Let the Law of
Nature take its course. His sun shines upon the just, and upon the unjust. But
as for man, he has shown thee, O man, what is good, and what is required of
thee, Micah 6.8. It Is man's frailty, and it has been ours, that (...),
(...).
for (...), we shift our reason, and Religion too with the weathercock, we
spread our sails to every wind that blows, though it come from the Lapland
windsellers.

Thus far now I have detained you on the subject of this division in the Text,
The wicked.

2. Their doom, conticescent, they shall be silent, that is, such (...), that
have transgressed all Laws Divine and Humane, that have acted with a seared
conscience, and a high hand, that have walked upon the precipices of tyranny,
violence, and oppression, shall fall from them, and then, conticescent, they
shall be silent.

1. They shall be ashamed of what they have done, and shall find no arguments
to defend themselves, they have nothing to plead: for iniquity shall stop its
mouth. When Christ questioned the negligent and unworthy guest, Mat. 22.12. its
said, that he was speechless. A good conscience has an answer, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but an evil one is silent before God and Man.

2. They shall be amazed at the judgments of God, who has over taken and
ensnared them in their own doings. they thought never to have been plagued like
other men; Psalm. 73.5. Therefore pride compassed them about as a chain, and
violence covered them as a garment, v. 6. but now as in a moment they are
stripped of their ornaments, and their chains of pride are converted into
shackles of iron. They thought Sampson-like to have gone out as at other times,
but their strength was departed. Therefore,

3. They shall sit down, and not move hand or foot. The Sun is said in the
Hebrew to be silent, when it stood still, Josh. 10.12. they shall be only
spectators on that stage wherein they have been actors. These men of might
shall not be able to find their hands, when God finds them out. Psalm. 76.5. At
thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead
sleep, v. 6.

4. They shall be enforced to be at the disposal of Almighty God, they shall
be in silence, that is, with subjection, 1 Timothy 2.11. so Pharaoh and his
courtiers were content to let Israel go, when they could no longer detain
them. As a ravenous Lion falling into a flock, and snatching thence a kid, is
eagerly pursued by the country swains with spears and hounds, and being
overtaken is enforced to leave his prey and his courage behind him, though not
his stomach.

Thus much for the 2. member of this division, conticescent, they shall be
silent, that's their doom.

3. In tenebris, in darkness.

1. Darkness is defined to be a privation of light: so now those, as they
thought, smiling providence, and the light of Gods countenance are departed
from them and withdrawn. they thought themselves to be the Israelites, that
must needs have the cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night to direct
them; they thought that prosperity should have for ever spread its wings over
their tabernacles, and that they had chained victory to their scabbards; but
now they are swallowed up in night and horror. Their lamps are put out in
obscure darkness, Prove. 20.20.

2. In stead of the Sunshine of success, which at best is but the Turkish
Moonlight, an argument not fit for a heathen to allege, they are now
benighted in the shadows of darkness and misery.

Now I have done with the 2. division of the Text, viz. Gods justice upon the
wicked. I shall only mind you of 2. things.

1. That there are certain staid, and indispensable rules of righteousness and
truth, which God has naturally implanted upon the Consciences of all men,
which whosoever transgress do not only sin against God, but against themselves
too, and the reason of their own being, sin against their own souls. To trace
this truth in our civil converse with men, wherein it is most legible, nothing
can keep up the society of Mankind but Justice, (...), Right is an universal
good, which our Blessed Savior represented in that Golden Rule, Whatsoever you
would that men should do unto you, do that also unto them. I press this,
because it is in this that we have most offended. If a Roman Emperor would not
condemn a Malefactor before he had rehearsed the Greek Alphabet, what shall we
say of them that have condemned Nations to slavery without Laws or letters? Is
there no such thing as truth? has it no other rule but our own will? I have
heard of a Robber upon the Pyrenean mountains, that having made seizure of many
packs of Linen, the bereaved Merchants became his supplicants for some
restoration: he replied, that he was no Robber but a Sovereign Prince, that he
would buy the Cloth, and asked the price: 'twas so much the Ell, or the Yard,
the money was laid down, but when the Cloth came to be meted out, the
Sovereign Robber would take the choice of his own measure, 'twas his Pike. Even
the worst of men have some sentiments of Justice, but it must be modelled into
such a frame as will serve their own designs, that by the mockeries of Law
they might somewhat appease their own Consciences, and blind the vulgar.

2. As the violences of these Laws of Nature are in their own nature vile and
abominable, so the God of Nature, whoist he common Savior of his Creation,
will not suffer these violences to go unpunished: there is as verily a reward
of Justice upon the Wicked, as there is a reward of Mercy unto the Righteous;
that as God will inlighten the darkness and affliction of his Saints, so he
will cause the sun of the Wickeds prosperity and triumph to set in obscurity.
I Will shut this up, Psalm. 31.23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for he
preserves the faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud doer.

I have now represented unto you Gods Mercy, Gods Justice to his Saints, to the
Wicked, I come now to the

3. Division, for by strength no man shall prevail. And this is (as before)
ratio utriusque, the Reason of both, for by strength of Piety of Policy of Power
no man shall prevail.

1. Not by strength of Piety. True, a good man is as a precious Jewel in Gods
sight, but he must not still expect to be worn upon Gods right hand, sometimes
he must be laid aside, The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart,
Isa. 57.1. but God does; for his favor is as much upon Job on the dunghill, as
when he sets a Prince in the gates: for he does not intaile outward mercies in
this life to his Saints, for these Reasons.

1. To let us know we can challenge nothing at his hands by way of merit. Our
Goodness and our Godliness extend not to him: If thou art righteous, what
give thou him, or what receives he of thine hand? Job 35.7.

2. To prove and try us, whether we will be as dutiful Children when his rod
corrects us, as when his staff supports us? The Devil told God to his face
when he questioned him of his servant Jobs integrity and uprightness, Does Job
serve God for naught? many may improve mercies better then the Israelites did,
when they had Quails and Manna, may be thankful and holy, but God will try
their Faith, as he did Abraham's, and exercise their patience as he did Jobs.
Sometimes the Church is universally oppressed, whereby God makes trial whether
she will be faithful to the death, Rev. 2. It Is not by bread alone that she
must live, sometimes she must fast and pray.

3. When the Lord does send outward mercies, as victory over the enemies of our
peace, and when we are upon the borders and confines of our Canaan and
settlement, we should mind our selves of this, as Moses minded Israel, It Is not
for our righteousness, or for the uprightness of our hearts, Deuteronomy. 9.5. It
may be for the oppression of our enemies, which has swallowed up the heritage
both of God and Man, or their hypocrisy, which is become so odious, that the
Gospel it self seemed to be questioned.

2. Not by strength of Policy. Wisdom is a defense, says Solomon, but a weak
one unless Gods wisdom animate and inspire it. He has established the world
by Wisdom, Jer. 10.12. Man shall not: he shall find but a broken reed that
leanes upon his own understanding. God has de facto blasted the counsels of
the greatest Politicians. Achithophell was the renounedst statesman of his age,
and master of the craft, (for he had his extemporary prayers as Dr. Hammond
(...) tells us from the Jewish Antiquity.) We all know his end. We have lived
in an age where some of us have scarce gone to bed without a new government in
our heads. What have we gained by it, but the longer banishment of our own
peace and our Lawful Sovereign, whom his subjects can charge with no other
guilt then this, his own unhappiness: which I think I may safely say was
continued not so much for his as for our sakes. We have lately seen many
practical Paradoxes, that is, many things fall out beyond expectation. Give me
leave to propound two.

1. That honesty and plain dealing is the best Policy. When Christ bid us be as
wise as serpents so as to be as innocent as doves, he sufficiently furnished us
with a Rule of living happily: the reading of Machiavell to a stateman being of
no more use then the doctrine of Fallacies to a Sophister, only to detect
them. so we may be as Angels of God to distinguish between good and evil; for
besides that plain dealing has that God to protect it, the habitation of whose
throne is Righteousness, it morally conduces to a happy life, and has these
two advantages.

1. It gains us a reputation in the esteem of all men, both good and bad: and
he shall easily be trusted of whom all men say he may. That he is Cicero's
honest man quicum in tenebris mices, one that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, and speaks truth in his heart, Psalm. 15.2.

2. Plain dealing combined with those characteristicall duties of a Christian,
of doing good for evil, returning Blessing for Cursing, does even reconcile our
enemies to us. So when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies
to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7. yea they themselves will be. But without
this Dovelike innocence all those subtle and serpentine intreagues in which we
engage our selves will not at all avail us.

2. The second Paradexe.
It Is the most difficult and hazardous adventure to pass the bounds of Justice
and Righteousness. Cicero's is, omnes stultos insanire, That all fools are
madmen. I need not change his words if you will call those fools, whom the Holy
Ghost frequently does in Scripture, such that have not the fear of God before
their eyes: for, besides that wickedness brings a curse with it, so it is
detested by all men, though the most men practice it. He that has broken his
trust and faith, is as a sea-mark, or a cross upon an infected house, none
will come nigh him: and if he has power to prosecute his enterpriz'd
villainies, he must necessarily plunge himself into more and greater
difficulties. Those whom ambition and covetousness have engaged to enter upon
their neighbors field, must erect Naboth's Scaffold to shed his blood, Lycoph^.
(...), The support of Wickedness is Wickedness: but the root being not watered
with the dew of Heaven, and having the curse of God and Man, the flower must
needs sade. So by strength of Policy that is irregular, no man shall prevail. I
conclude this with Hosea 14.9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these
things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right,
and the just shall walk in them but the Transgressors, the (...), that
prevaricate with God and Man, shall fall therein: that is, their ignorance of,
and their prejudice against the measures of true wisdom and prudence, is the
stone of stumbling, and the rock of offense wherein most men, and the greatest
Statesmen have stumbled, and still will.

3. Not by strength of Power. God will not suffer his creature to set up for
himself. (...), 1 Pet. 5.5. God sets himself in battle array against the proud.
Talk no more so exceeding proudly, v. 3. but seeing they have talked and acted
proudly, The bows of the mighty are broken, v. 4. They forgot God who gave
them strength to draw them.

He is the Lord of Hosts. Heaven and Earth are his Militia, but he will not
give his glory to them: for the axe must not boast it self against him that
heweth therewith, nor the staff lift up it self as if it were no wood. God to
let us know how vain a thing Power is, gives us often ocular demonstrations,
calls for things that are not to destroy things that are.

So by strength either of Piety Policy or Power
no man shall prevail.

God will ever reserve to himself the prerogative of changing times and
seasons; for he removes Kings, The Corollary
and he sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21. All the Kingdoms of the earth are his,
and they must know that he is their only Lord, Isa. 37.20. All hold in Capite
from him. States and Princes are but Tenants at will: Wherefore let not the
strong man glory in his strength. A pebble stone kills a Goliath. The Chaldee
here, a Giant shall not prevail. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
Jer. 9.29. for the foolishness of God is wiser then men, 1 Cor 1.25. And let a
man put his Piety and his Godliness into the scale, it is nothing.

Ludit in humanis Divina potentia rebus. God will set the supreme moderator,
and dispense the favors of this lower World, without giving us an account of
them. Eccles. 9.11. I returned and saw under the sun, that the race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and
chance happens to them all. that no flesh might have whereof to glory in his
sight; that not a Gracious man, not a Moral man, much less a wicked man
should say, he shall prevail.

Having now surveyed the Text with as much brevity as I could, and promised;
let us now come nearer to our selves and the duty of the day. In the Text we
have had Gods mercy and justice represented unto us. 1. It must be our duty to
give him the glory of both. 2. It must be our care and wisdom to keep off
judgments, and to secure mercies; for let us not flatter our selves, by
strength no man shall prevail.

1. Let us give unto God the glory due to his judgments. My son give I pray the
glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and tell me now
what thou have done, hide it not from me, Josh. 7.19. said Joshua to Achan.

1. Then let us not stifle our consciences, nor say we were not the authors of
this misery and those mischiefs that have befallen our Nations, but we must
attribute them to such and such a party or faction of menamongst us; Let me
tell you in Nathans plainness, we all have been the men, all of us have been
the Achan's and the disturbers of the camp of our Israel. Nehemiah made a
solemn and ingenuous confession, chap. 9.34, 35. Neither have our Kings, our
Princes, our Priests, or our Fathers kept thy Law, nor harkened unto thy
Commandments, and thy Testimonies wherewith thou did testify against them.
For they have not served thee in their Kingdom, and in thy great goodness
that thou gave them. So if we will complain that the crown is fallen from
our heads, the woe was from hence, that we had sinned.

2. Lets confess that we have dug a pit and we have fallen into it; We have
broken the hedge and a Serpent has bit us, Eccles. 10.8. We have broken the
hedge of government. A serpent has a two-forked tongue, and we have felt its
sting, oppression in our gates, schisms and divided opinions amongst our
selves.

2. Let us give unto God the glory of his mercies, and this is the proper duty
of the day.

1. Then Benedicamus Domino; Let us bless the Lord who has delivered us from
an universal toleration, or rather the sole cherishing of the various humors
and phrenzies of our Religionists, which, if they had been longer fomented
under an Anarchy, must needs have ended in that Mormo and bugbear of Popery,
which was so much dreaded, I know not whether without cause, but sure not
without design. And we had almost fought our selves into it; which was so
legible by the eyes of wise men, that I remember a grave person seven years
since gave this caveat to a near relation of his, who had engaged himself in
the work of the Ministry, not to be over-forward in declaiming against Popery,
if he did intend to thrive in the world: Not that from hence I would allow
their Church that honor, as if by the weight of its reason, or the
demonstration of its truth, it could have won over our understandings, but
would rather have ensnared our affections.

For it is the nature of man in all our public addresses to our Maker to be
affected with exterior decencies, (wherein the Papist may be said to
superabound even to a pompous gaudinesse) which heathens practiced though the
object of their worship was idolatrous; and God, who best knows his own
creature, solemnly enjoined by a law to Israel, where their rites were
sacraments, and their ceremonies mysteries. And though Christ cancelled their
Types, yet by his Apostle he constituted decency and order in his Church, 1
Cor. 14.40. Where then weshall see God served without order, decency, and
veneration, know that service cannot long subsist, unless there be some rare
artifices of interest to buoy it up against a contrary faction; which I
therefore mention, to let you know that they have not been the worst enemies of
Popery that have most decry'd it. In a word, we have been building Babylon ever
since we have sung those Poeans, she is fallen, she is fallen. And had Popery
under this mask of toleration taken place, God had justly punished us for our
venient Romani.

2. Bless God who has not removed the Candlesticks of the Gospel, but has
kept the light in them, though glimmering, alive, amidst our various winds and
weathers; even then, when our sins under his rod provoked him to his face.

3. Bless God. Because we must needs bless God: were we as blind, and as
interested, as Pharaohs Magicians, yet we must needs say of this our
deliverance, Surely this is the finger of God. And the mercy is so stupendous,
that we scarce believe what we now enjoy; for though we cannot say, God has
appeared amongst us, as a man of war, to gain salvation for us by the sword,
yet as the Lord of Hosts, he has infatuated the policy, weakened the power, and
silenced the pride of our Enemies; And all this by small, indeed by no means.
It has been said, Omne malum ab Aquilone, All evil comes from the North; But
now Omne bonum, All good. And how little that All was, some of us here best
know: so we may say, that God has rescued a miserable nation from that corner
of our earth, from whence he brought destruction upon a sinful.

4. Bless God, who has called back his banished, and raised up the Tabernacle
of David, that was fallen amongst us: and may he be our Solomon, who is our
David's son. A Prince that most lively resembled that Princely Prophet in his
devotions and troubles.

I might here bring in the Chorus and Quire who are to bless the Lord for his
mercies.

1. The Nobility. That the Sun is restored, from whose influence their stars
must shine.

2. The Commons. That the common Father of their country is coming home.

3. The Clergy and the Ministers of the Gospel. That they shall see the
Defender of their Faith: And may it be their prayers and their faithful
endeavors (...), rightly to divide the word, and not (...), to divide the
Church of God.

2. Let it be our care, as it is our duty, to keep off judgments, and to secure
mercies.

1. To keep off judgments. And because the cry of profaneness is said to be so
great in the Kingdom, let us have a holy fear, and jealousy of our selves,
lest, whilst now our feet touch the brinks of Jordan, and our Canaan is within
ken, and before our eyes, God sends contrary orders, and commands us to march
back again into the wilderness of our former confusions.

Right Honorable, Do your selves therefore, the Nation, and the Church of
Christ that right, vigorously, and effectually, by your practice, by your
precepts, by your examples, and by your authority to discountenance and
suppress that spirit of profaneness. True, vitia crunt donec homines: but
when men glory in their shame, and are dissolute (...), 1 Pet. 4.5. to an
excess of riot, they are not the spots and blemishes of children, nor shall
they be reckoned as the bare infirmities of our natures, they are sins that God
will punish. And of such I understand that of Solomon, Pro. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, viz.
such sins as openly reproach God and the profession of godliness. And the
wise King provides a remedy against it, v. 35. The Kings favor is toward a
wise servant, but his wrath is against him that causes shame. 'Twill be no
disloyalty in you to prevent our Sovereigns zeal and piety in this, of which
it is said he has given sufficient evidence abroad in his Court, and taught his
subjects, that it is (...), a piece of topicall absurdity, to be drunk in the
Dutch-mans territories.

Let me therefore represent these considerations to your care and zeal.

1. There are various parties in the Nation, which if they do not cement, as
it is a question whether they will or no, who knows but that God will reserve
them to scourge the prevailing; if their mercies shall bear no better fruit
then the bitter grapes of Gomorrah, open debaucheries to the shame of Religion.

2. Of these parties, as some would plead a right, others may be at present
content with a toleration, yet all aim at supremacy, as woeful experience has
taught us: and seeing the great and effectual door to obtain it, has been
some extraordinary profession, taking advantage of the looser lives of others,
nothing can better counter mine them, then by powerfully suppressing
profaneness, which is so much complained of, and so loudly decryed. Whether in
respect to Gods glory, or any private design, as yet behind the curtains, the
searcher of all hearts best knows.

3. I offer it to your consideration, whether one main reason of our
subdivisions, and schisms, has not sprung from the licentiousness of the
(...), greater parties. And can you blame men for being sollicitous of their
souls salvation in lesser assemblies? who possibly may come over to us, when we
come over to God by a sober and Christian-like deportment.

4. I now especially lay this duty at your doors, because, I will not say you,
but others, have turned us out; neither do I see it so feasible to bring in the
discipline of the Primitive Church, which I may say has been lost some ages
since, and become as useless to us as the armory of our ancients, and all that
we can say is this, such men and such Christians were our forefathers: they who
shall attempt to recover it jure postliminii, should first go, and understand
that of Cicero to his brother concerning Cato, whose gravity and love to virtue
was commended, but his rigid and hasty zeal was thus censured by the Orator,
Cato optime sentit, sed nocet reip. lequitur enim tanquam in rep. Platonis, and
non tanquam in faece Romuli. The Roman Citizens were so far degenerated from
the frugality and austere life of the first Founders of their City, that to
compel them to it by a law, might prove to be of dangerous consequence to the
Commonwealth. True it is, all true and disinteressed Christians, such as are
not in love with their own conceptions, do heartily wish for the Primitive
purity and discipline, but we can only behold it, as the University Student
does the Mariners Card, where our Eye, and our Compass may trace such Rhumbs,
and such Climates, wherein we never dare to expose our selves. However if your
counsels shall bestow on us our keys, may our prudence be such that we do
not, as passionate Friars in a dark Cloister, break them about each others
heads. So much of this admonition.

2. Let it be your care to rebuke Bribery and Jnjustice. Some have so
represented God to us, as if he took no notice of any other sins then swearing
and drunkenness. As for covetousness, which is idolatry, and the root and
mother-sin of all evil, we cannot discry it, and it passes incognito. The
great qualifications of Jethro's magistrates, Exodus 18.21. were not only to be
able men fit for their employments, but they were to be men fearing God. And
this their duty to God was to be evidenced by their duty to man in their
callings, and discharge of their places; for they were to be (...) men of
truth, that should judge righteous judgment betwixt man and man. And that this
might farther appear, their hands were bound up from bribes: for they were to
be men hating covetousness. For a gift blinds the eyes of the wise, said the
wisest of men. Let judgment therefore run down as waters, and righteousness as
a mighty stream, Amos 5.24. Water is a free Element, and the streams thereof
are not to be narrowed and conveyed by silver pipes under ground. Banish that
proverb from your courts of judicature, Show me the man, and I will show you
the Law. Injustice, bribery and oppression, are sins that are decryed by the
light of nature: and Homer, as I remember, ingraves the punishment of unjust
ministers of State upon the armor of his Achilles. This I mention for the
subjects sake. Discountenance flattery, and false accusation. These are sins
that haunt the court of Princes: and I mention them for the Princes and for the
subjects sake. The Prophet seems to complain of this, Hosea 7.5. In the day of
our King the Princes have made him sick with bottles of wine, he stretched out
his hand with scorners; which was interpreted v. 3. They make the King glad
with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies. Flattery is as
grateful to most men, and most to men of authority, as bottles of new wine.
It Is the (...), the over-officious bounty sometimes of our nearest
acquaintance, which makes the Italian say, God deliver me from my friend.

As for false accusation, a clandestine reproaching our neighbor, it is the
Court gunpowder that blows up men, and they see not who hurts them. A
talebearer separateth chief friends: and God in Israel enacted a law against
such, Lev. 19.16. Lying lips do not become a Prince, says Solomon, no nor
lying ears. If a Ruler harkens to lies, all his servants are wicked, Pro.
29.12. it is an incouragment to them. And if the Court-aire be thus infectious,
we shall soon find the sad effects of it.

2. How to secure mercies.

1. Put a high and valuable esteem upon the profession and professors of
godliness: it is a dear-bought truth, That they are not the fittest subjects in
the Courts of Princes that seldom tread the thresholds of Gods sanctuaries.
They are not fit under-props to up^^ld a government that need the support of
every common hand in the streets. They in vain shall cry up their allegiance
and fidelity to the Crown, that contribute a mass of debaucheries to its ruin
and extirpation. Be ye therefore (...) truly puritans, not for faction but
conscience sake: possess your vessels in sanctification, in honor. Sanctify
therefore the Lord your God in your hearts, and hallow his name in your lives,
and encourage all that shall with Hannah frequent the place of Gods worship.
Good men by their lives and examples, by their prayers and devotions, do more
strongly bear up the pillars of the earth, then the greatest Politicians by
their counsels. So by well doing ye shall be able to put to silence the
ignorance and the faction of foolish and seditious men. For consider,

1. As real godliness has the promise of this life, as well of the other to
come, so God so far honors the shadow and counterfeit of it, Hypocrisy, that
he often bestows temporal mercies for a temporal profession, Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward, Mat. 6.2. Jehu's false zeal had some, and Ahab's
personated repentance, as it is judged, (though St. Augustine seems to be of
another mind) screen'd off a judgment. The Jews have a Proverb, that just men
uphold the World, it is Gods word, v. 30. If we honor him, he will honor us:
for it is not sufficient for us to discountenance profane persons, those (...),
as the LXX calls the sons of Ely, v. 12. wicked men, that are as infectious as
the plague and pestilence in a Nation, because they are the sons of Belial,
without God in the world, or (...) without any yoke or restraint upon them: but
we must put a due and a venerable esteem upon the profession of Religion. For
consider,

2. That it is not a bare Scriptum est, a regular, and uniform way of worship,
that gains Proselytes; there must be also a zeal in the professors thereof, and
that cherished and encouraged by you in Authority. This is so necessary, and so
behovefull to your interest, (not to name a higher) that it is well observed by
a countryman of our own, That the Cardinals owe their scarlets to the
mortification and austerity of the poor Friars. For there is a veneration due
to the face of Religion, Annis, and pietate gravem, si forte virum quem
Aspexere, silent: --
That a grave, and severe person can quiet a multitude of mutinous Barbarians.
And Princes too have not thought it below them to pay homage to converts, as
they have passed by: such too has been the state of Christendom, that
travelers in the Evening acknowledged the mercies of the day to God in his
Church, of which we still retain so much that we gaze upon the structure,
after we have seen our Host, but have forgot the Devotion, being scared by
superstition, though we scarce understand the word, much less the thing; Let
me not (I pray you) be misconceived, as if I thought the kingdom of heaven
consisted in these things: for I can worship Christ with the wise men of the
East, Mat. 2. whether it be in a stable or at Jerusalem. It Is the inward man
that commends us unto God, who is to be worshipped in spirit and in truth, Joh.
8.24. that is, in hearty affections; but it is the outward man that commends us
unto men; so our light is to shine before them, that they might glorify our
father which is in heaven.

For let me tell you, that if we own and countenance a profession of godliness,
and put a veneration upon it, we may in Gods due time win over those that are
truly Christians, though blinded with smaller circumstances, that as yet they
stand in their own light. I Will subjoyn this, Had there not been a neglect of
Gods worship, a contempt of his word and commandments, that some acted the
black Devil, because others did the white, the Throne of England could not
have so easily fallen.

2. Let the Church enjoy such Ministers of the Gospel as are worthy of double
honor, and let it be given them, an honor of maintenance, and an honor of
respect, that they may not be despicable. The Apostle enjoins them to be Lovers
of Hospitality. Tit. 1.8. which supposes a subsistence proportionable
thereunto, otherwise he might have bid them fly without wings. As for the
honor of Respect, its usually a concomitant of that of maintenance, and
follows it in the worlds esteem as the shadow does the substance. I therefore
press you to render unto them this (...), a due and a comfortable subsistence.
I add further, that our Universities, which are your nurseries for Church and
State, do not want (...), but (...), not bodies, but purses; and they
henceforwards shall be thrice best Benefactors that add to their maintenance,
not their number.

3. To secure mercies, let us labor and endeavor for a mutual compliance.
Charity is the bond and ligature of all perfection; Divine, Moral, Political,
and Oeconomicall. 1 Cor. 12.21. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of thee; nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. The Eye, viz.
the Seers and Pastors of the Church, cannot say to the hand, viz. the Civil
Magistrate, that bears the sword, either as a terror to evil doers, or as a
Minister of God for good, to those that are good, That there is no such need of
him to defend us; nor the head, viz. the Prince, can say to the feet (if you
please) his two Houses, That he has no need of them. For the Glory of a Prince
is his people, not for number only but affection. Upon these two Legs the Royal
head must be supported, and may they never be as Nebuchadnezzar's, part clay,
and part iron. If so, it must needs end in the ruin of the whole, which God
forbid. And what I say of this may be understood of all societies whatsoever:
for even the more feeble members are necessary, says the Apostle. And those
members of the body which we think to be less honorable, upon them we do
bestow more abundant honor, v. 22, 23. For this the Philosopher says, (...)
The law of nature and of nations provides for the most, much more therefore the
law of Charity.

4. Let there be a tender regard had to tender consciences: it is the Kings
desire, and every well-regulated Church will grant it. Philip. 3.15. Let as
many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing you be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this unto you. The (...), the perfect Christians, such as
have arrived to a growth and stature in Christ, are the head scholars of his
school, and can bear with the imperfections of the (...), the babes in Christ,
that have not attained to that measure of knowledge: for as Pastors and Elders
of the Church have this (...) and endowment freely bestowed on them of God, 1
Cor. 2.12. that they are the (...), the comparers of spiritual things with
spiritual, v. 13. by the same rule they are the (...), the Distinguishers to
know what is spiritual, and what not. So I doubt not to say but that they may
easily distinguish betwixt what is conscience, and what is faction, they having
not received the spirit of the word, v. 12. supposing them such that they have
no other interest or design to carry on but that of their Redeemer, and they
that are otherwise, are not (...) fit to serve in the Lords vineyard.

5. To secure our mercies, let Authority be sacred amongst us. 'Twas once your
Sacred Majesty, an offense to none but such as would make offenses. It Is a
fatal prognostique of the downfall of any Authority when it passes into a
byword. Even the Kingdom of David tottered when he was made the song of
Drunkards. And use has obtained amongst us, not to mention the King without a
God save him. Your Tenants address themselves to their Honorable and
Worshipful Landlords. When Majesty falls, your Honors and your Worships soon
will.

6. To secure all our Mercies, as we have received the same Blessing, with our
thanksgiving Hannah, the Blessing of a Son, and a Samuel, long prayed for, and
at last bestowed on a sinful and a distracted people; so let us follow her in
her duty, Praesentemus Domino, Let us bring him to the house of the Lord, and
his own, in peace, which God of his mercy grant.

When the sermon was ended, somewhat was spoken to this effect and purpose.

1. To the Honorable members of Parliament. 1. That that as God had made them
to forget their troubles, so they would forget the injuries done to them: that
as he had brought them together, and established them in peace, even then when
there were sad presages of a future disturbance, so they would be cautious how
they did shed the blood of war in the days of peace.

2. That as God had renovated their and our mercies, so they would be careful
how they did innovate them. The Prophets counsel did authorize me, Jer. 6.16.
Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good
way, and walk therein; and ye shall find rest to your souls. His late Majesty
said, if we take a watch asunder, and cleanse it, care must be had that in the
putting of it together, the least pin be not left out: for otherwise it would
be labor lost, and the watch would go worse then before. The greatest honor
that we can bestow upon his Martyred ashes, is to remember and follow the
counsel of a dead Prince, who when alive, was as unhapy as the Trojan
Cassandra, who proposed timely preventions, and made solemn protestations of
his integrity, and could not be believed.

2. I minded them of that Honorable personage, whose prudence and courage
themselves had mentioned in their Declarations for this day, and therefore I
thought it no flattery to say thus much of him. As for his prudence, I told
them, that I thought the Serpent and the Dove did cohabit in his breast, if
ever in any. As for his courage, I told them, that he had the soldiers noblest
virtue, without their noblest vice; courage without ambition: which the event
abundantly witnessed, notwithstanding there wanted not solicitations, and those
great ones, to the contrary. That I doubted not to say, he gave God the glory
of all his mercies wrought by him. And as the present age is most sensible of
them, so posterity would best judge of him.

3. To the soldiers, I said, that at last they had indeed lighted upon their
Good old cause, The King and Parliament, which, I hoped, they would maintain,
for which they were the hands of the Commonwealth, and not the heads to model
it; that when Christ taught them their duty to do violence to no man, severely
restrained them from public injuries, by forbidding private. Do violence to
no man, much less to a State. That such of them as had, or should hence
forward serve their King and their Country, should not distrust of reward and
encouragement.

4. I bespoke the discontented of the Nation (if any were there present) and I
rancked them into 2. sorts.

1. Such, that (I might say with reverence) God could not please, either with
fair or foul weather, that did love always to fish in troubled waters, though
they brought up a snake in stead of an eal, and such I left to themselves.

2. Of the second sort, that they might have private reasons of their own to be
discontent, which I could not soon search out, or if I could, I had not time to
enumerate. That God made not the world for any single part of his creation;
that the Sun did not shine only in any one sphere; that even contrary elements
concurred in their assistance to the Universe, that we must not be angry with
the Moon because of her spots; that perfection in this life must not be
expected even for this life. In a word, that they must needs confess the
calamities of a Civil war: wherefore I remembered them of Gods own counsel to
Job, that there being no contending against the Leviathan of a lawful power,
but at first or last it would swallow them up, they should take this Memento,
Job 41.8. Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.

THE END.

