The Case and Vindication of John Poyntz, alias Morris, and his Friends. OR
The first part of their long proceedings and oppression in the House of Lords,
who nev^^ could be released, notwithstanding the Judges of Englands Report for
their deliveranc^ but are denied the benefit of the Common Law, which is the
Subjects birthright and i^heritance: This is declared for the satisfaction of
all those that wish well, and that wi^^ stand up to maintain truth, and that
desire their brother Commoners deliverances, an^ to know the oppressors from
the oppressed, and what the right and interest of a Common^ is, by the great
Charter of England. (...) in the Year. 1648.
About (...) 1594 (...) between John Morris and Katherine (...) and daughter
of James Morris, Esquire of Chipping-onger, and of Gabriell Poyntz
no^thokenden Esquire; upon which Contract an agreement was made, and
conveiances draw for the settling the estates of the two Fathers, to the value
of above 2000 li per annum, upon the sa^d John and Katherine for life, and
their heirs male of their two bodies for term of life and in case or such
default, then upon Edward the second son of the foresaid James Morris for
life, and to the heirs male of his body for life, and in case of such default,
then upon the right heirs male of the body of the said James Morr^ce for ever.

That the foresaid John Morris and his heirs male have, (from the time of
settlement) born up the name of Poyntz, as they became heirs, from heir to
heir, and so does this that now is in prison; in order whereunto the said John
Morris that married Katherin was entered into the Heralds books by the name of
Poyntz, alias Morris upon his marriage, and the Arms of both families have
been born up by the Morrices ever since also: the succession stands thus;

James Morris had to male issue John and Edward. Gabriel Poyntz had to issue
Thomas, and the aforesaid Kath^rine.

John and Katherine had male issue, James, Points, and Uranus.

Uranus the youngest son dyed first, without issue.

Iame^ the eldest son of John and Katherine had to male issue Richard, who dyed
about the age of 20. without issue.

Poyntz Poyntz, the second son of John and Katherine enjoyed the said estate
after the decease of Richard his brothers son, and dyed without issue, at whose
death the male issue of John and Katherine ceased, and then the e^tate falls to
Edward the foresaid John's brother, the second son of James Morris senior as
aforesaid, Edward was dead before the said estate fell, and left male issue,
this John Poyntz alias Morris now in possession, according to Law, as
afterward will app^ar.

Thomas dyed underage, before this Contract of John Morris with his Sister
Katherine, leaving issue two daughters, Audry and Susanna, to wh^m the
Grandfather Gabriel Points set out 3000 l. for their portions out of the estate
settled upon John and Ka^herine, which 3000 l. was accordingly paid by John
Poyntz, alias Morric^, besides 1000 l. paid by the said John to the said
Gabriel, and James, in liew for the better advancement of them and their heirs,
not mentioned in the said conveighances, and to free the said John from all
incombrances and suits which might otherwise happen by reason of the said
Contract, Bond was given, that of the said Audry or Susauna should disturb the
heirs of the Morrices in their possession of the premises, they should lose
their portions.

And for the more effectual investing the title and right to the premises,
according to the said deeds and Contract. An Act of Parliament as obtained in
or about the 43 of Elizabeth, for the settling the same upon John Poyntz, alias
Morris, and the rest of the heirs male of the Morrices; by deeds and Act they
the said John and Katherine: and their heirs have held and possessed the said
estate.

Now that the estate was really settled upon the said heirs male of the
Morrices, and by them possessed 49 years, and never in any other name to this
day. I here are these clear evidences, besides all the Tenants to witness the
same.

1. Several evidences confirmed by an Act of Parliament; as for example, 3
fines levied at S. Albons, dated 37. of Eliz. A Plea in the Chequor, 38 of Eliz
A Pattent under the great Seal, 2. August, 38. of El^z. An Indenture dated the
1 of March, 38. of Eliz. Four several offices found upon this (...) Poyntz,
alias Morris. The first the 17. of September before John Tuke Esquire, 20. of
Caroli in Es^^. The second on the 12. often sepsember before the same Tuke in the
same year. The third on the ^^. of October, 21. of Caroli in Guild Hall London,
in the majoralty of Alderman Atkins. The fourth c 23. of December, 21. Caroli
in Guild Hall London, in the majorality of Alderman Adams, Two In^nctions for
possession given by Sir Rowland Wansford of the Court of Wards, one for the
Lands in ^^ssex, and the other for Lands in London, dated 31. of January 1645.
21. Caroli. The acknowledgment (...) all the Tenants upon sight of the same,
who upon knowledge of his title gave possession, and made ^^turnenent according
to Law. After all which by a verdict at the Kings Bench, upon a trial for a
^^ynture, concerning Lady Poyntz, alias Morris, who is now wife to M. Burrows
Esquire; the title was ^^nfirmed to this John Poyntz, alias Morris, as he was
found heir at Law, save about 400 l. per annum, ^^ring her natural life; upon
all which clear proofs the Committee at Haberdashers Hall issued our Bill in
his name the 4. of March 1645. for his twentieth part of the said estate, and
by virtue thereof ^^opt the Rent in the Tenants hands, till satisfaction was
given to that Committee. Notwithstanding ^^ll which, one Sir Adam Littleton,
that married Audry the grandchild of the foresaid Gabriel, upon pre^ence of a
collateral deed by which he pretends a title to the Lands in question, (as soon
as the last heir was dead,) Sureptitiously a Trunk of writings and evidences
were broke open in Sir Foulk Grevil his house in London, being the place of his
departure; his wife having the key in her pocket, who never knew it till three
days after, about which time Sir Foulk Grevil, and Sir Adam Littleton gave out,
that this said Poyntz, alias Morris was a bastard, although they both knew the
contrary, all which he was forced to clear by witnesses upon oath to his
damage 30. l. and not only so, but to obscure the truth, money was given, and
writings bought of the wife of the deceased heir for a thousand pounds; having
to this day by that indirected means withheld and concealed all the writings
and evidences taken at the breaking of the Trunk; and Sir Foulk Grevil
pretended a title by a will, alias deed of gifts, made by the deceased heir, of
200. l. per annum, given to his two sons, which has been produced amongst the
Tenants, and by them disclaimed, as declaring their knowledge, that the estate
was to pass from male to male of the Morrices. After all which the said Sir
Adam Littleton to color his wicked practices, and to obscure the truth, and
defraud the said Morris of his right, got the Land sequestered, to put Morris
out of his lawful possession, and has entered into a Combination with several
persons, viz. John Brown Clerk of the House of Lords, and others, etc. by whose
power and policy he the said Sir Adam Littleton and his accomplices has not
only got an advantage to secure themselves from condign punishment for their
wicked practices, but also has laid many false accusations upon the said
Poyntz, alias Morris, thereby endeavoring not only to blast his repute destroy
his title, and with hold his right, but also bring his life, and his witnesses,
and all that appear in his cause in danger, as shall appear by the subsequent
Narrative.

For when the said Morris found himself deprived of the benefit of his
evidences, by which his Ancestors enjoyed the estate, which used to be
delivered from heir to heir, he was necessitated to make a strict search in all
Courts of Record, by means whereof he made such a clear discovery of his title,
that had not Sir Adam and his accomplices sold themselves to do wickedly, it
had not been possible for him to have found out a way to deprive Poyntz, alias
Morris of his rights, or peaceable enjoyment of his possession in the premises.

For 1. Poyntz, alias Morris upon search found that there was an Act of
Parliament by which these Lands in question was confirmed on the heirs male of
the Morrices; a Copy of which Act he the said Poyntz, alias Morris procured
with M Brown's hand to it, given by M. Will. Hunt an under Clerk of the House
of Commons, which Copy was examined in M. Browns office, and afterward being
showed to M. Brown, and told it was questioned by Sir Adam Littleton, the said
M. Brown took it, and looked upon it, and gave it back, saying, who dare deny
it? And yet after all this the said Brown having entered into a Combination
with the said Sir Adam, and having as is conceived for the consideration of a
great yearly value paid out of the estate, to be conveyed and assured by
Littleton unto him the said Brown, his heirs, etc. has persuaded and warranted
the same estate unto the said Sir Adam; for Sir Adam said, that after he saw
the Copy of the Act he would not have troubled Poyntz, alias Morris, but by M.
Browns persuasions. In order whereunto he the said M. Brown has since denied
his hand, before acknowledged by himself, in saying, who dare deny it? and
being showed to diverse Councelors in Westminster Hall, every one said it was
his hand, or else they never saw it; and they the said Brown and Littleton
caused the said Poyntz, alias Morris his wife and witnesses, etc. to be
imprisoned by virtue of the Lords Order for a pretended forgery of an Act of
Parliament, although not one witness was examined to prove the truth, but only
M. Browns own report and Littletons, and caused the said Act to be condemned in
the Lords House as a forged Act, although it were upon record in his own
office, and so acknowledged to b^^ as will be proved, and upon record in the
treasury of the Court of Wards with other evidences, and Plea of a deed found
in the Tower, also settling the said estate upon the heirs male of the Morrices,
C^pies given and attested by all the respective Officers of several treasuries;
but now for fear of M. Brow. denied by all but M. Audly the master of the
office of the Court of Wards, who has and does stand (...) the attesting
Copies under his hands, (notwithstanding M. Brown has often threatened him for
deliv^ring the same, because they were against him, and not only so, but
endeavoring to have the said (...) Audly fined and turned out of his place,
pretending that all the said Records are forged by the (...) Poyntz, alias
Morris and his friends, which is both improbable and impossible, viz. That an
Act of Pa^liament should be forged, containing the names of several persons in
whose tenure and occupation (...) said Lands at the date thereof were, and that
the original should be shuffled into M. Browns treasu^^ and a Copy thereof with
other Records into the treasuries of the Court of Wards, and the Plea of (...)
deed into the Tower of London, and there be found under lock and key, lying
amongst all other R^cords, old and dusky, not to be touched without sweeping
first just at this time to make out an unknow^ title, and all by an illitterate
woman which can neither write nor read Lattin, nor knows not what La^^^ is, and
this is one of the chief slights (As these men pretend, and will make the world
believe it, a which will be a matter hardly to be credited by any rational
man.) But that it is not only improbab^^ and impossible, but also a false
slander, shall be clearly proved several ways. For although a Copy the Plea
found in the Tower had formerly been given and attested by M. Collet of that
office decease^ and although it was shown to M. Riley now Officer there by two
Council, and the original desired to (...) seen, the said Riley refused it
without an order from the Lords, saying, it concerned M. Brown; and afte^wards
when M. Rileys Clerk did search and find the original in his presence, and in
the presence (...) Poyntz, alias Morris friends; he the said Riley fell out
with the Clerk, saying, you might have chus^^ whether you would have found it,
for you knew it was against M. Brown, and locked him out of the offic^ two days.

2. The said Act has been acknowledged and examined with the Record in master
Brownes office and to be delivered out by M. William Hunt, with M. Browns hand
to it, as will be proved by many wi^nesses.

3. The said M. Brown and Littleton now acknowledge that there is an Act for the
sale of part of the estate, made in King James his time, when it was in the
possession of Sir James Poyntz, alias Morris, the son of John and Katherine.
Now it is clear, that unless the estate had been settled upon the father, an so
upon the heirs male of the Morrices by an Act, the son might have alienated
part of the estate for the payment of his debts by fine and recovery, as
firmly, and with less charge by far then by Act (...) Parliament; but being
settled by Act, he must of necessity have an Act to enable him in the alienation*

But thirdly, there was no reason why this Poyntz alias Morris should forge,
or cause an Act of Parliament to be forged to maintain his Title, he being able
to prove that his Ancestors enjoyed the sam^ estate 49 years, and never in any
other name since that setlement; and he himself having had so many offices
found for him, besides a Verdict confirming his Title by Law, and the Tenants
yielding him possession and turning Tenants unto him, which was a better Title
by far, without the Act of Parliament, then ever Sir Adam Littleton could make
or show for the premises, which is nothing but a Colatteral Deed made about
four years after the decease of the foresaid James that settled this estate, to
whom all the right and interest of the foresaid Gabriel was past, and to the
Heirs males of his body for ever; and besides the said Collateral Deed has no
fine and recovery upon it, neither is it enrolled, therefore is of no validity,
there being not any Vouchers to make it good when it was made, for James was
dead and John that married Katherine was but a termer for life; So that these
things being duly weighed and considered, it cannot be adjudged other then a
wicked and malicious slander cast upon the said Poyntz alias Morris and his
friends by the said Sir Adam Littleton, and Mr Brown, etc. Every particular of
whose proceedings herein, in relation to the Premises, shall be declared more
particularly in several subsequent Articles, for your better information.

But to proceed; Upon the false suggestion of Mr Brown and Littleton, etc. by
his prevalence in the Lords House, and making Littleton acquainted with all
Poyntz alias Morrice's proceedings, before any hearing could be had, he caused
the said Copies, of the Acts and other Records found as aforesaid, to
^ondemned, and John Poynnz alias Morris and Mary his Wife, Leonard Da^by, John
Harris, and Isabeln^th, to be seized upon by virtue of the Lords Order, and to
be carried to four several prisons, Ludgate, Newgate, Counter, and Kings Bench,
there to be imprisoned during pleasure. The date of Warrant by which they were
kept in prison above three weeks before they were brought before Lords upon Mr
Browns Command, was the 11 d^y, the date of the Commitment to prison by the
^^ds during pleasure; Die Lunae septimo Iunit, 1647.

^y color of which first Order, the said John Brown Clerk of the house of
Lords together with Mr Will. ^^leton, Mr Baker, and others, etc. about eleven of
the clock at night came with a Constable, to the (...) or the said John Poyatz,
alias Morris, whom the said John Brown commanded to break open door, and being
by the Constable asked for a Warrant, he replied, It is sufficient that I say
it, I am Clerk to the Parliament; or words to that effect; upon which the
Constable returned him answer, viz. That that was no sufficient Warrant for him
to break open any man's house, and there^^^e bad him do it himself, which he
according^y violently did, when having searched the house and not ^^ding the
Copy of the said act, he seized and took away all Poyatz alias Morrice's other
Writings and ^^oks of Accounts, all which he detains to this day, contrary to
Law, for the doing whereof he had Warrant but his own Will, who, it appears,
thinks himself above all Law, because he is Clerk to ^^e house of Lords. But
when he had thus broke up the house, seized the writings, and given them to ^^e
adversary Littleton to read, etc. he also, by virtue of the said Warrant,
attached the persons of ^^bella Smith, Mary Poyntz alias Morris, Leonard
Darby, and John Harris, and retained them in cu^^dy about three week before
ever any thing was laid to their Charge or they brought before any le^^l
Magistrate; all which proceedings of the said Brown and Littleton, etc. are
altogether illegal, shall be fully demonstrated.

For first, the Warrant it self is ^llegal, as not coming from persons legally
authorized to take the ^^^gnizance of the Crimes of Commoners; For no Freeman
ought to be taken, or imprisoned, or ^^^ized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or
Custom, or be outlawed or exiled, or any other ways de^^royed, neither passed
upon nor condemned, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law the
Land, viz. By the judgment of twelve men of his equals; If a Lord, by twelve
Peers; If a commoner, by twelve Commoners. And Sir Edw. ^ook says, in his
Exposition on the 29 chapter of ^agna Charta; page 54. That if any man or men,
by color of any authority, which they have not legally, in ^^at particular
case, for which they arrest, or cause any man to be arrested, or imprisoned,
That it is against ^^e great Charter, and is most hateful and destructive, when
it is done by the Countenance of justice. And it plain, That the Lo^d have not
the least legal jurisdiction over Commoners, and so cannot take the ^^^gnizance
of any pretended Crime, much less ought they to grant out Warrants to break the
houses (...) Commoners or to seize upon their Goods, and imprison the persons
of Commoners at their pleasures, ^hen they have neither been pa^^ed upon by
good and lawful men, nor nothing appears upon Record against them, as by Law
ought, no man being to be put so much as to answer, without presentment before
Justices, or matter of Record, or by writ original according to the old Law of
the Land, as appears by Magna Charta 28. E. 3. Chapter 3.37. E 3 Ch 8.42 E. 3. Chapter
3.2 ^art Cooks Inst. page 50

But second. The Warrant for the attachment of the said persons is illegal, not
having in it the seve^al ingredients which should make a Warrant legal.

1. A legal Warrant ought to be in writi^g in the name and under the seal of
him that makes it, expressing his office, place and authority by force whereof
he makes it.

But this Warrant is under the band of M. Brown, who does not only make but
execute it also, being both Judge and party, which is a practice which the Law
abhors; nay he is the person accusing, having accused them in the name of a
pretended power, (viz. the Lords,) he himself makes a Warrant in his own case,
then as an Officer or Judge be p^^s his own Warrant in execution, which practice
of his I presume will hardly be judged legal or reasonable, especially in M
John Brown Clericus Parhomentorum, (...) not only tending to the dishonor of
his Royal Masters, but also rendering him unfit for such a weighty and
honorable employment.

2. The Warrant ought to contain the cause, and that with convenient certainty,
if for treason, then for what treason, or if for felony, then for what felony,
etc. But this Warrant contains no cause (although the words of the Law are
postitive Nisi causa pro qua Captus, etc. unless the cause why a man should be
taken be expressed, the Warrant cannot be legal,) only to answer such things as
shall be objected, etc. Is the cause in this Warrant contained, which is indeed
no cause at all; (complaints being no crimes in Law,) a man being happily never
the more guilty because complained of; and if the La^^ should tolerate the
imprisonment or persons upon complaint only, before the hearing of both partie^
and matter of crime be proved, certainly we were the worst of slaves, as having
our liberties subjected t^ the power of great men, malice and envy of every
malicious or discontented person. But to preven^ this evil the Law has well
provided, that a freeman shall not be taken or imprisoned, unless he b^
presented before Justices by good and lawful men, or else that some crime in
Law appear upon record against him.

3 The Warrant must not only contain the cause, but it must have a legal
conclusion; viz. him safely to keep, till he be active^ed by due process of
Law, and not during pl^asure, or till further order, as this Warrant is; so
that upon the whole matter it is clear, that these persons are in prison
without either legal Magistrate, legal Warrant, or legal Crime, only prisoners
to the Lords (alias M. Brownes) will, all which proceedings are an absolute
subversion of the fundamental Laws of the Nation.

But to proceed, having as aforesaid broke open Poyn^z, alias Morrice's house,
seized his writings, and attached the person of his wife, Mary Poyntz, alias
Morris, Iss^bella Smith, and Leonara Darbie, and John-Harris, by virtue of the
said Warran^, they kept them in custody for the space of three weeks, without
lay^ng any thing to their charge, about which time they carried them before the
Lords, where they were examined upon several Interogatorie, which proceedings
was altogether illegal, and by themselves so adjudged in several cases. ^ut it
being demanded by the Lords amongst other things where they had the Copy of the
Act in question; answer was made by Darby and Smith, that William Hunt, an
under Clerk of the House of Commons gave it them, and produced their witness to
prove the same, who affirmed upon oath before the Lords, that Hunt did
acknowledge the delivery of the Copy of an Act for the joining the two old men's
estates together, Poyntz and Morris; and that he said further, if Brown would
be a knave, and deny h^s hand, yet he would not, notwithstanding they were thus
according to Law cleared, as was by their Council openly proved at the Lords
Bar according to witness, yet by the prevalency of M. Brown and Littleton, they
were by the Lords committed to four several prisons where they remain (all save
one, who was afterward removed by M. Browns command from Newgate to the
Gatehouse, because she had too much favor,) unto thi^ d^y, being often
examined, but never any one witness brought face to face against them, nor any
forgery proved; notwithstand^ng all which their imprisonment during pleasure
was continued, from the 7. of June 1647 unto this day; After which (although
^here was not any one witness produced to swear or attest that the said Copy
was forged, but many to p^ove the contrary, yet m. Brown and Littleton under
hand, and privately got the original of the said Act remaining in M. B^owns
office, condemned by the Lords; a book put ^ut in print of it against ^oyntz
alias Morris, and his friends, and hanged upon Romford Gallows, by Littleton's
instigation one Web did it, the like evil any never heard of (The Copy of which
Act under his hand he had formerly attested,) which Copy by means whereof was
condemned also, as being nothing when the validity of the original was taken
away and destroyed by the said Judgment; after which John Poyntz, alias Morris
was advised by M. Twisden a member of the honorable house of Commons, to go to
make a search in M. Audly his office, m. Audly having formerly told him, that
if his Client came to his office, he should find something which would ^o him
g^od; he remembering a suit that had been between John Poyntz, alias Morris,
that married Kat^erine, and one Dockery who married the mother of Lady
Littleton; which this Poyntz, alias Morris suddenly after did, in which office
of mr. Audly's was found by mr. Beasly a Clerk of the said office, in the
presence of mr. Bel^enger the bag-beater of the said office, and Sir John
Clav^r^ng, the said Act in question, and several other Records, in one bundle
of partchments together old and d^sty; the Copies whereof was taken out,
examined, and attested under mr Audly's hand the master of the said office, and
by him affirmed at the Lords Bar.

Now by the way it is requisite to observe (that whereas one of mr Brownes main
arguments to prove these persons guilty of forgery, is, that the said Records
are not Registered, whereupon he and Littleton, falsely suggests unto the Lords,
that the woman Mrs Smith shuffled them into the several offices for him) this
Poyntz, alias Morris had never known, neither she that he could have got any
knowledge of the strength of his title by a search in M. Audly his office, if M.
Audly himself had not by his words to M. Twisden, and M. Twisdens advice given
thereupon, induced him thereunto; when if he or his friends had counterfeited
or shuffled them in, as is alleged, being questioned, they would consequently
have at first and at once produced all those testimonies, as well as the single
Copy of the Act under Brownes hand; but it is clear, that they never knew that
the Act was upon Record in mr. Audlies ^ffice, till after it was questioned,
and therefore cannot be concluded guilty of that slanderous accusati^n, framed
on purpose to blast the credit of Poyntz, alias morris his title and
witnesses, to the end that mr. Brown may the better make good his Warrant upon
the estate to Littleton and his heirs, of whom he neither to receive some
consideration, or else has bought the estate for some inconsiderable sum,
other^ise sure mr. Brown would never have dug so deep into hell, to the
hazard of his soul, and the ship^rack of a good conscience, to secure, the
interest of the Littletons, making their cause his, and employ^^g all his
power, policy and interest that he has or can any way make to support them by
the de^truction of several innocent persons, as shall afterward be more fully
manifested. For mr. Brown and Littleton went from prison to prison for the
space of 12. months threatening the Keepers, if that they ^^lsowed morris or
his witnesses any liberty they should lose their places, and gave command to
the Keepers to lock them close, and let none come at them, and if that they did
perish it was nothing to them, they need take no notice of it; and mr. Brown
being asked for his order, said, he was sufficient. And after he got the
knowledge that the foresaid Act, with other Records (which made good Poyntz,
alias morris his title to the estate in question,) were upon record in master
Audlys office; also (having first gotten the original and Copy thereof with mr
Browns hand to it, delivered to him by mr Twisden, to be condemned,) he went to
Mr. Audly and threatened to have him fined if he should dare to maintain any
thing against him: In order whereunto he caused the said Audly to be brought
before the Lords, and endeavored to have him fined and turned out of his
office; notwithstanding all which the said Mr. Audly pleaded by two Council,
viz. Sir The. Witherington, and M Maynard, and extreme honestly, and like an
Englishman, and a Christian, maugre Browns threats and menaces, justified the
finding of the said Records, and delivery of Copies thereof, and was by his
Council, and the Clerks belonging to his office, justified and cleared in
giving Copies, and by the Lords discharged, v^z. in regard there was no witness
produced against the said woman Mrs Smith, who was charged ^o foyst them in by
Brown and Littleton, and yet the said Records were brought up to the Lords
after this and condemned, at the request of M. Brown, and Littl^ton, and
Poyntz, alias Morris, and his witnesses adjudged and fined for a supposed
forgery of the said Act and Records.

The said Poyntz, alias Morris, and Mary his wife, Issabella Smith, Leonard
Darby, and John Harris have continued prisoners ever since May 11. 1647.
notwithstanding several Petitions to the Lords, and several Orders of the
Lords, whereby the business has been referred to the consideration of the
Judges, to consider how they might be released, and the opinion of the Judges
given in that behalf, viz. That they might be released, being they was
imprisoned not for any fine, but during pleasure; but M. Brown absolutely
refused to sign the said Report, because it should not be authentic; and when
the Lords yielded to have released them upon the making of the said Report, M.
Brown fa^sly informed the Lords, that they were imprisoned for debt, when they
never had any action laid upon them, and put in a Petition to crass the Judges
report, and the Lords intention, pretending they were in contempt for not
delivering in writings, which they have not, neither if they had, do concern
the estate in question, and this he does on purpose to starve them in prison;
and as a further evidence of his inveterate spleen against Poyntz, alias
Morris, and his enjoyment of his right, (having got him and his witnesses into
prison, and thereby disabled them of making their defense themselves,) and
being discerted by all their Council for fear of M. Brown, who breathed out
continual threats and slanders against all that should dare to appear in their
cause against him; they were necessitated to engage one M. Pendred in the
prosecution of their business, who with great fidelity and courage did for
several months manage the same, and was in fair possibility by his continued
addresses and importunancy, to effect, not only their delivery from their
imprisonment, but also to bring the said cause to a trial at Law; for
prevention whereof M. Brown charged the said Pendred with speaking several
seditious words against the House, by means of which false report he got him
committed to the Gatehouse Westminster, not so much as allowing him one hours
liberty to put in Bayl. But the said Pendred afterward putting in sufficient
Bayl before Sir Edward Powel, one of the Justices of the Peace for the Liberty
of Westminster, was freed, which M. Brown hearing of, and knowing that Poyntz,
alias Morris was to have a hearing before the Judges that day, at Sarg^ents
Inn in Fleet street, immediately together with Justice Manly, and others came to
the said Sir Edward Powel and rated him for taking Bayl, threatening him, that
if he did not send a Warrant and attach Pendred, he would make him loose his
Commission, whereupon the said Sir Edward Powel being informed by the said
Pendred, that that afternoon he would be at Sergeants Inn, at Poyntz, al^^
Moorice's referrance before the Judges, got Sir John Woolastons Warrant to
attach Pendre and carry him to the Gatehouse, without being carried before any
Justice at all, or returnin^ the Bond of his sureties formerly given; all which
proceedings being clearly declared in a P^tition to the Lords from the said
Pendred, M. Brown took the Impudence to affirm, that h^ Bayl were Knights of
the Post, in the open House of Lords, although it be known that they a^^ men of
more honesty and better credit then himself, and for Estate, for ought I know,
(settin^ aside his office) far before him; by virtue of which Warrant he the
said Pendred has als^ been kept in prison about 8. weeks, contrary to Law; M.
Brown not thinking himself sa^^ if any person be left at liberty to discover
his unjust, unparaleld, wicked practices: But let hi^ know, that neither his
power, policy or friends shall be able to protect him from the hand (...)
Justice, or keep his gross knavery concealed; for what he does in secret shall
be published o^ the house top: And though Justice seem to slumber for a season,
yet she will awake and stretch out her arm, and weigh his actions in the
balance, and finding them too light, with one stroke sweep him and them from
the face of the earth, which they have polluted: Therefore it were to be
wished, that he would consider and repent, lest a worse mischief befall him
then yet has happened.

Thus have you a true Narrative of the state of the Case of Poyntz, alias
Morris, and his witnesses, who have bin imprisoned about 17. months, although
they in all their Petitions have desired nothing but their freedoms, a fair
trial at Common Law, according to evidence and witness on both sides heard,
that so the benefit of Law, and birthright of the Subject may effectually take
place, and that the writings taken away may be restored. ( Poyntz, alias
Morris himself having never so much as bin before any Magistrate since the
time of his imprisonment:) Now if this be not an imparraleld piece of
injustice, if this be not a wickedness in high places, if this be not an
abomination that will make desolate, if not only redressed but also repented
of, I leave to all rational men to judge, especially all you, the peoples
Representatives, who have bin entrusted, and have taken upon you to hear,
receive and redress the grievances of the people whom you represent, and punish
their oppressors, be they high or low, rich or poor, friend or foe, without
respect to any thing but pure Justice; here is a fit Subject for you to insist
upon, here is a piece of injustice of a bloody tincture, of a scarlet dye: Oh
that your speedy Justice herein might prepare a place for you in the affection
of the people of this Nation, who for want hereof have in a great measure
estranged themselves, and divorsed themselves from you, which they had formerly
espoused; Oh therefore if you have the hearts of Englishmen, if you be
Christians, if you would hope for protection in the evil day, rouse up your
selves, awake from that Lethargy of sottish security that you have long bathed
your selves in; gird your sword unto your thigh, and be what you should be, a
terror to evil doers, a protection to the innocent, and relief for the
oppressed; then shall your Enemies be confounded, your reproaches removed, and
your reproachers silenced; then shall the people love you, and your honor not
only continued but enlarged, and which is best, your consciences will bear a
sweet testimony of peace and comfort, when all other dependencies shall take
wings and fly from you.

And all you Englishmen and Christians, to whose hand this paper shall come, I
beseech you lay these poor men's condition to heart: By the same means that they
are like to be destroyed, thou may be destroyed also; if Records, nay Acts of
Parliament, may, at the will Clerk, because they cross his interest, be
cancelled, removed, destroyed, and annulled, what ^ecurity can be had in the
enjoyment of any estate? This is the Tyranny indeed so much fear^d, and decryed
against in others, but ip^o facto practi^^d by the Lords, and Mr Brown, and ^is
Accomplices. Therefore if thou have any sense of compassion, or christianity,
join in a petition to the Honorable House of Commons for the execution of
speedy Justice in this and ^uch like Cases: See you not how the Prisons swarm
with Prisoners of pleasure? suffer not their undoing to be made a president for
your own misery. For by the same Law that Poy^tz ^lias Morris and his
Witnesses etc. may be imprisoned seventeen months without hearing, without
Crime, without Witnesses, by the same Law you may be imprisoned also; you
having no more protection then they, or any other; all the liberty you enjoy
being but during the pleasure of a few men, who are acted by no other rule but
their wills, and friends persuasions: For if M. Brown say, you forge an Act,
the Lords will believe it, and you shall be imprisoned and fined: If M. Brown
say, you speak seditious words against that House the Lords will believe it,
without Witness, nay against Evidence upon Oath to the contrary; although the
Law has provided that a Freemans liberty should not be taken from him, unless
a legal Crime be proved upon Oath against him before a Judge or Justice of the
Peace, etc. The due Execution of Law is your birthright and protection; let
therefore your timely endeavors be employed for the due Execution thereof, now
while you have an opportunity, lest by your sencelessness of their, unjust
sufferings, you bring an irrecoverable mischief upon your selves and posterity,
and then, when it is too late, you repent, but cannot prevent your destruction.

Gentle Reader, Know that this is no Pamphlet or Scandal, but certain Truths,
which diverse well-affected people are satisfied in, and have knowledge of; and
if Justice, in this case, do not the speedier take place, then thou may
expect a Charge by way of Articles, promised thee for thy better satisfaction,
at sight whereof the heart of every Englishman, that has either fear of God,
or the least spark of grace, will stand amazed, and rend his heart with grief
to see such horrible Oppression in a Land where the Gospel is planted, and
Christianity professed, and especially in time of Parliament, and days of
Reformation.

FINIS.

