Poyer's Vindication, In answer to a lying Pamphlet, Entitled A Short Comment
upon the Grounds and Reasons of POYER 's taking up Arms in the second
Differences, Which are monstrous false Lies: Scattred abroad To uphold the
broken reputation of a poor Solicitor, for those Cowardly turncoat Cavaliers in
the County of PEMBROKE, Who (for reducing of them unto the Parliament) uses
all means to have mine and my Fellow Prisoners blood; which they (and their
Cavaliering Army) durst not attempt when they were in Arms against the
Parliament.

Published for satisfaction of all those that desire the Truth herein:

By Col. JOHN POYER, now a Prisoner at Whitehall.

READER,
I Can judge no other to be the Author of that ridiculous Pamphlet, wherein I
am so much mentioned, but one John Elliot; who to satisfy his unsatiable
desire, has thus masked himself in a dark Scene, (without name) being ashamed
to own such falsehood as is there set forth. I delight not to speak any thing of
my own well-doing, but to remove those base aspersions cast upon me (by
inveterate enemies to me, and all those that first affected the Parliament)
somewhat I shall briefly say.

I praise God, for though I boast not of my Parents, yet it is well known they
were not such as did accompany the Relator Elliots Father from place to place
for livelihood: And whosoever shall look upon former Subsi^i^ Rolls, and the
Subsidies granted in the beginning of this Parliament, shall find me an high
Collector, and equally charged with his Worship; who has succeeded so well in
his false Informations, that he believes to be credited beyond Records. The
best Gentleman in the Town of Pembroke bound his Son to be my Apprentice, my
dealings being in Wool, Corn, Skins, Butter, and Tallow; and it is well known,
I employed more poor on work in making of Cloth then any man in that Country;
and that I dealt in these Commodities with Merchants of B^istol for many
thousands yearly, and have given them full satisfaction in all things.

That for sixteen years together I was thought worthy to have the command of
the Trained Bands of the Town of Pembroke, wherein I gained the love of those
Inhabitants generally; that when the unhappy differences first began, they did
unanimously joys with me (by the encouragement of some noble Gentlemen) ^o
preserve and fortify the Town and Castle of Pembroke to the use of the
Parliament (the Castle being my right (long before these troubles) as Captain
Cowney can justify when all other Towns and Counties in Wales were against the
Parliament. It is also evidently known, how I have promoted and endeavored the
Parliaments Interest in that Country, by raising one Troop of Horse, two Troops
of Dragoons, and three Foot-Companies, all armed in their Service: by
fortifying several Garrisons, and furnishing them with Ordnance, Arms, Men,
Victuals and Ammunition: By relieving the Protestants in Dublin and Yaughall in
their extremities: By taking Irish Rebels, Priests and Papists (which the
Relator Eliot terms well-affected:) By taking two of the Kings Men of War, and
by assisting and encouraging the Parliaments Ships within the Harbor of
Milford. For these and many other Services the House of Commons was pleased to
Order I should receive Thanks.

As for the aspersion cast upon me for an irreligious Person, it is well known,
my Religion to be such as is professed by the Church of England, I refer my
self to diverse worthy Divines and Gentlemen; whereof some of them are now
Members both of the Parliament and Army, who knew my life and conversation,
and had encouragement from me for shelter, when they and my self were
persecuted and prosecuted for our Religion by the said Eliot and other of the
Kings party, and can justify those Aspersions cast upon me, to be altogether
false, scandalous and untrue.

Whereas it is all eadged in that lying Pamphlet, that I did plunder Roger
Lort, and others well affected to the Parliament; and that I seized upon Ships
and Goods of the well-affected, ( viz. Papists) having the Kings Commission) and
have pursed it to my own use, being no lawful prize.

I wonder with what impudence their Solicitor Elliot, can charge me with the
plundering of Col. Lorts house, it being well known to hundreds in this City,
that the said Lort fortified his house against the Parliament; and I being
commanded to assist Major General Laughorn, Col. Powell and others, to go and
besiege the said Lorts house so fortified against the Parliament, who did with
the effusion of much blood, take it upon Storm, to the use of the Parliament,
and what was taken by the Soldiers in the heat of blood, cannot be imputed to
our dishonor.

And for that aspersion concerning the Ships, it is likewise well known that
they were the one Commissioned by the Marquess of Ormond, and the other by Sir
John Pennington to be Men of War against the Parliament, as by their
Commissions appears; one of those Ships and goods, (except the Ordnance,
Arms, and Ammunition) was by order of the Earl of Warwick sent to Dover, and
the other Ship rescued by the Kings men of War, invited to that Harbor by the
Relator Elliot, Roger Lort, and their Confederates; It cannot be made appear
that I advantaged my self Six pence by those Ships, much less 6000 l. as Elliot
fa^sly alleges; nor can they make it justly appear, that ever I took the
goods of any (...), though Roger Lort did plunder (or steal) the Goods of Capt.
Cowney and others for their wel-affection to the Parliament, and converted them
to his own use without any satisfaction to the owner.

Reader, I shall acquaint you a little further, how that Roger Lort, Sampson
Lort, and John Lort, would have drawn me to their treacherous Confederacy in
the year 1644 being shortly after their coming in to Major General Langhorn,
inviting me to a feast, where great show of kindness was offered by them, the
conclusion was, to engage me to join with them against Major General Langhorn
and his party, and they would procure me the Kings Commission to Command the
Towns of Pembrook and T^^^^, with the Country thereabo^^d, this was presently
after the (...) given the Earl of Essex in the West, though they were then
named Committee Men for the Parliament.

The Relator Elliot, says, That I was not put forth of my Commands by the
Parliament, yet tells what I did was without Commission. It is known to most
of the well-affected in South Wales, how the Relator Elliot, Roger Lort,
Sampson Lort, and their party, have prosecuted me and the rest of the Soldiery
in that Country; Mr. Sollcitor General Cook may be pleased to remember (who
was then my Council) much of the passages of that Faction; and how rigorously
they did prosecute me, and did cause me to be Arrested in 2000 l. Action, and
cast in prison to hinder my lawful proceedings against them; and I being
afterward freed from that unjust Arrest, without paying of Fees; which so
wrought with Elliot, that he procured another Writ to be delivered to the
Bailiff of Westminster, immediately on the discharge of my former troubles, he
conceiving me not out of custody, thought thereby to have continued his
enterprise; and on a new Rising in Glamorganshire I was commanded to my Charge,
where being come to the County of Pembrooke, the Lorts did set upon me several
times in the highway, likewise attempted to have murdered me in the Church,
and did with the Relator Eliot, combine together that no indemnity should be
granted me, as by their Letters may appear. And whereas they charge me with
disobeying of his Excellencies the Lord Generals Orders, it is to be proved,
that (in obedience to his Excellencies Order) I was coming to the Headquarters
to give account of all particulars: Roger Lort and his Confederates finding my
inclination of an appeal to his Excellency, did send forth an Hue and Cry, and
diverse Warrants from the high Sheriff of the county to apprehend me, and to
keep close watch and wards on all the high ways, to intercept my going to the
Headquarters; and shortly after (without any Order from the Parment or his
Excellency) to render me more odious in the eye of all people) proclaimed me
Traitor. All which considered, might well give me caution to stand upon my
guard against those bloody Rebels, who were (as aforesaid) reduced to the
obedience of the Parliament.

That Roger Lort, Samson Lort, James Lewis, John Lout, and their Confederates,
contrary to an order of free debate unanimously agreed upon by the Committee of
Pembroke-shire, kept and maintained (upon the public charge) the Relator Eliot
here in London these three or four years, to be Solicitor for them and cloak
their knavery: under color of which employments, they have procured unto him
many hundreds of pounds, with which he has clad himself in fine garbs, ( viz.
Scarlet, gold Lace, silver and gold Buttons, etc.) although he had not a cloak
to wear when he went to Oxford to be Knighted for betraying the Town and Castle
of Tenby to the Kings party; his habit and visard being such, that the King
would not afford him the title of Sir John Eliot, though he much labored it;
his moneys being so short to pay the fees of Knighthood, that he returned home
with his Title of Honor, called the Jeppo Gentleman.

The Relator Eliot having not wearied himself with lies in his Pamphlet, he
adds one more, and such a one as he hopes will strike home to my reputation and
destruction: His malice rests not upon me only, but upon my poor Wife and
Children, making my Wife a Whore, and my Children Bastards. But Relator, be
thou assured to give a good account (above all the rest) of this base slander.
I do very well know how thou thirstest after my blood; and if thou obtain thy
longing desire to glution thy self with it, be assured that God will find
means to right my Wife and Children, whom thou and thy Confederates have so
evidently wronged. Relator, thou do not well, to charge the innocent, and let
the guilty go free: Remember thy Sisters, and thy best friends of the female
sort. Eliot, was it not a merry time at Carmarthen, when a Insty Cavalier
courted a bonny Lass? Fie, be more modest then to believe that any woman went
13 months, and the honest Doctor Millard must not administer after so great a
Club. Eliot, had thou looked about thee when thou wentest into the County of
Pembroke with thy dark Lanthorn, and wast for thy false Services feasted by thy
Masters, Roger Lort and James Lewis, thou might have seen many Bastards, a
lovely Less feasted, and the poor Wife starved.

The Relator makes men (if he could) believe, that all the old Cavaliers and
his turn-coat Friends are faithful men to the Parliament; and most shamefully
denies that himself or his Confederates were Commissioners of Array, or ever
for the Kings party; I doubt not but to make it evidently appear, that they
were chief Agents, prime Actors and Abettors of Judge Jenkins and others; that
did proclaim my self and several Gentlemen of the County of Pembroke Traitors
for acting in the Service of the Parliament.

The Relator further says, That one of my Friends is sequestered for sitting in
the Juncto at Oxford, citing Sir Hugh Owen Knight and Baronet; whom I grant,
was both my friend and the States, in preservin the Parliaments Interest
against the Relator Eliot and his Confederates, for which he was proclaimed
Traitor, and carried prisoner to Oxfora; and if Eliot be pleased to remember
his own being, and the passages there, he could tell, that Sir Hugh Owen (for
not joining with him and his Confederates, was sent close prisoner to
Wastingford, and afterward remanded into the County to be ^^yed by Commission
of Oyer and Termin^r for his life; and upon success of the Parliaments Forces
in Pembroke-shire, carried prisoner back to Oxford: but for his sitting in the
Juncto, as I do not believe it, so I can soy nothing to it, not finding him
incerted amongst the rest that sat there, in the Book of Ordinances printed by
the Authority of Parliament: As for his Sequestration likewise, I can say
little, it being long after I was a prisoner; only I have heard that those
that formerly for his Service to the Parliament fought his life, did now
sequester him; and their main Witness and Sequestrator was one Rees ap Rees
Gerrard's Hangman, and now int^led their loving friend; who before these
unhappy Differences had suffered the Pillory for false Oaths; A fit instrument
for their justice, and one that they delight much in his company.

For the Mountebanks losses, the Relator speaks of himself and his
Confederates, I can say little having formerly fully answered their gains, out
of their Countries ruin, and their own particular; it is known to to the whole
County where he lived, that the Port and Garb which he now lives in, could not
be maintained in the best of times by his Revenue: And that he lived these
twenty years generaly hated by all the honest hearted men in that Country, as
being a temporiser, and sower of Sedition, having for lucar of petty gains,
viz. a Cockshut, betraying the trust reposed in him, by the Tennants of
Nerbert, who were his neighbors, and employed him as solicitor in a suit
between them and the Lord of (the Manor.

I have formerly offered the charge following against the said Eliot and his
Confederates, (which caused them with that violence to persecute me) and still
am ready to make it good, by a hundred Witnesses if admitted thereunto.
First, That Roger Lort, James Lewis, Griffeth White, Thomas Bowen, Herbert
Perrot, Sampson Lort, and John Eliot, was of several Commissioners for the
King, ( viz.) of the Array the Association, the Commission of Peace, and did
endeavor as much as in them lay, to establish the County of Pembrook for the
Kings party, All which was by them effected, except Pembrook. Town and Castle.

Secondly, That the said Confederates did associate the Counties of Pembrook
with the Counties of Carmarthen, Cardi^an for the King, and did Petition the
King that the Earl of Ch^rb^ry, should command the said association and did
likewise go out of their own Country to the Kings Army and did their declare
each to other and unanimously subscribe a declaration to assist his Majesty's
with their lives and fortunes against all Rebels and Rebellion.

Thirdly, That the aforesaid Confederates, did march with the Kings forces into
the County of Pembroke, and did subscribe under their hands and seals, to raise
^^^^ Pounds to be present in Testa- of their Loyal hearts, to his Majesty's
sacred hands, and did subscribe to raise Men Horse and Arms, for the Kings
party, and did force many hundreds of men to serve the king, and to the great
anoyance of the well affected, did raise many Thousands of Ponds to maintain
the war against the Parliament.

Fourthly, That the said Confederates, to further their horrid design against
the Parliament, did send John Eliot, Thomas Brown, and Roger Lort, to the King
to Oxford, who did there for themselves and in the name of all the rest,
subscribe to fortify the Harbor of Milford against the Parliament, and to
disarme, all the well affected to the Parliament in the County of Pembrook; the
said Lort, Bowen and Eliot, having returned from Oxford, all the aforesaid
Confederates did with them join together and fortify seven or eight several
Garrisons against the Parliament in the County of Pembrook, and did obstinately
keep the same until they had been several times beaten and routed, most of
their Garrisons taken by storms and batteries, to the obedience of the
Parliament.

Fifthly, That Roger Lort, and John Eliot were ring leaders, to promote the
Kings party in that Town, the said Lorts House being as aforesaid, a Garrison
against the Parliament, and did keep correspondencie with Gerrard who did ruin
the whole County of Pembrook in the year 1645, and that Roger Lort, though a
committee man, yet he had a protection from Gerrard for his Estate, as may
appear by the oaths of Mr. Anslow his brother in Law, and James Rees his
servant.

Sixthly that notwithstanding all aforesaid, the said Confederates, did by
sinister means, made by some of the secluded Members who obstructed the
Kingdoms right, get themselves to be Committeemen, Commissioners, Justices of
Peace, Sequestrators, and (...) offices of trust, by virtue of which power they
have kept back (...) questration from themselves and other the most Active
Malignan^^ in those three Counties to the hindrance of the State 2000^ Pounds.

Seaventhly, that the asoresaid Confederates being entrusted (...) the
Parliament, did use all means of revenge on my self and (...) Souldery, for
forcing their obedience unto the Parliament, (...) did obstruct all that of
right did belong unto the Soldiers and (...) self, the Soulders being
senceable of their own present suffering* and their hard duty and loss of
blood in several Leagures (...) Skirmishes until they had reduced them, did
run into such a discontent, that nothing would satisfy the Soldiers, till
Justice (...) showed on those Caterpillars of their Country, the Relator (...)
Roger Lort, and their Confederates, finding the Inclination of the Souldery to
be moved against them, did never give over until they had procured some of
their favorites, who had formerly endeavored the kingdoms ruin (by disbanding
the whole Army) to yet them all disbanded without any security for their
Arrears, supplies for there present necessities or indempnities for what past:
The Soldiers taking the same into Consideration, having a former presi^^^^ by
his Excellencies Army) would not upon the malice of their Exemies be disbanded
until justice were showed to them and executed upon Roger Lort, Sampson Lort,
John Eliot, Herbert Perrot, John Lowt, etc. who were the Causers of them, and
their Countries ruin, and had never compounded for their Malignancy, but had
intruded themselves into several Offices as aforesaid, contrary to the
Declaration of both Houses, and Ordinance of Parliament in that case provided,
the well affected to the Parliament being thereby aggri^^^^ and generally
oppressed, which made the Soldiers so much to stand for (...) of their Arrears
and indemnity.

This true and hasty Answer, (to a scandalous Pamphlet, spread abroad by the
the Relator Ellior as a foresaid) I have thought good (...) forth, left
falsbood (for want of Reply) should be taken for verity; the Innocent guilty,
and Knaves shot free.

By Colonel John Poyer,
FINIS.

