An Answer to GRIFITH WILLIAMS LORD BISHOP of OSSORIE His Book, Entitled, The
great Antichrist revealed; before this time never discovered, And Proved to be
neither Pope nor Turk, nor any Single Person, nor the succession of any one
Monarch, or Tyrant, in any Polity. But,
A Collected pack or multitude of Hypocritical, Heretical, Blasphemous and most
Scandalous Wicked Men, that have fulfilled all the Prophesies of the
Scriptures, which have fore-spoken of the coming of the great Antichrist; and
especially have united and combined themselves together by A Solemn League and
Covenant, to slay the two witnesses of God Moses and Aaron, as Christ
interprets them; they have Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29. that is the
^^^reme Magistrate of the Commonwealth, and the chief Pastors and Governors of
the Church of Christ.

And the Christian World is requested to Judge,

WHether the Assembly of Presbyterians consulting at Westminster; together with
the Independants, Anabaptists, and Lay-preachers, be not the false Prophet and
the mystical soul of that great Antichrist? And whether the prevalent faction
of the Long parliament, termed of late the Rump-parliament, and their
Adherents; that killed the two witnesses of Jesus Christ, Charles the the First
King of great Britain, and in him civilly all his Magestrates; And William
Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and civilly all the suppressed Bishops, and
silenced Preachers of these three Kingdoms, be not the gross and visible body
of Antichrist?

Answered by George Pressick of Dublin.

BUt before I come to answer his Arguments, whereby he endeavors to prove what
is above written in his Title Page; I shall if the Lord will be pleased to
enable me, from several Texts of Scripture that points out Antichrist, and
without Wire-drawing of any Text, show you how we may know Antichrist, who he
is, and were he is: and when as near as can be gathered from the circumstances
of time, place and passages concerning him, when he first appeared.

But before I proceed to that, I must crave the Readers patience to take notice
of some passages in his Title Page, and in his Epistle; as to his Title Page, I
answer.

First, That if the Bishop could prove what he asserts viz. that Antichrist,
was never before this time discovered; and if he had the art to persuade men to
believe him, in so doing he should do the Pope of Rome (who will appear to be
Antichrist) more service, then all his Cardinals and Roman Clergy could ever do
for him this Thousand years; for so long he has been suspected to be the
Antichrist: for I doubt not but I shall make it appear that he had his birth at
the least fifteen hundred years agone.

Secondly, Whereas he says that the Assembly of Presbyterians at Westminster,
together with Independants, Anabaptists and Laypreachers, and the Long
parliament; that they have fulfilled all the Prophesies of Scripture which have
fore-spoken of the coming of Antichrist.

I answer, That what he says of these persons, is as true and no truer, then
the next following words that he speaks of the abovenamed persons, viz. That
they United and Combined themselves together by A Solemn League and Covenant,
to slay the two Witnesses, and Christ; for I think that he will never be able
to make that appear, that there is any such Clause or Article in the Covenant,
as to bind them that took it, to slay the two Witnesses of Jesus Christ; or
that that was the end and aim for which it was taken, when it was taken; but as
to other things I am so far from excusing them, that I do confess that many of
the Parliament, and Anabaptists and Lay-preachers, were both Hypocritical and
Heretical: and it is well known to most part of the Bishops in Ireland, and to
some in England, that I did Write and Print three Books against Anabaptists and
Lay-preachers even when they were in their greatest prosperity; that no Bishop
that I knew but one, did appear in public against them; for I was always
persuaded that the chief Ringleaders of them were of an Antichristian brood,
either Jesuits or Friars: and I wish the Church be free of them now.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he says, That he has long studied, and long
prayed to know the meaning of the Holy Ghost in those Scriptures that foretold
of the coming of Antichrist, and that he might have the true understanding of
them, who Antichrist should be, where he should rise, what feats he should do,
how long he should continue, by what means he should be subdued and destroyed;
he says, he now believes God has granted his request, and that he has
rightly explained these Scriptures.

I answer with the Apostle, Gal. 4.18. It is good to be zealously affected
always in a good thing; So if his zeal and study had been guided to a right
object, it had been well. But the Prophet Jeremiah tells us, that the heart of
man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; therefore it is
dangerous, least it mistake out of an over-valluing opinion of some worth in
ones self, or the prevalence of their prayers; especially when a man has
conceived a prejudicate opinion either of persons or things: and I think it
will appear upon trial, that he has missed the mark in finding out who the
Antichrist should be, etc. as we shall see hereafter, and his faith whereby he
said he believed that God had granted him rightly to explain these Scriptures.
I think he might do well once more to examine whether that faith were not a
fiction; except that part of his prayer, where he prayed, that if his
endeavors in explaining these Scriptures might not be for Gods glory, that it
might be like the untimely birth of a Woman, that perishes before it see the
Sun: And so I hope it will perish, and never gain credit with any man of
understanding that needs it.

But some men are like Balaam, they mind not what answer God returns to their
prayers; but first resolves with themselves to go on in such or such a design,
and then all after go to God by prayer, as though they would seek direction
from him: when they have resolved before hand thus and thus they will do: like
Johanan the son of Kareah, and the rest of the Captains and people of Israel,
when they entreated the Prophet Jeremiah to pray to the Lord for them, that the
Lord would show them the way wherein they should walk, Jer. 42. and promised
the Prophet they would do whatsoever the Lord should send unto them by the
Prophet for to do; and yet they were resolved before hand that what answer
soever they received from the Lord, into Egypt they would go: and therefore the
Prophet tells them, ver. 20. Surely ye dissembled in your hearts when you sent
me unto the Lord your God, saying, pray for us unto the Lord our God, and
declare unto us even according unto all that the Lord our God shall say, and we
will do it; and I have this day declared it unto you, but you have not obeyed
the voice of the Lord your God, nor any thing, for the which he has sent me
unto you: the reason was, because Gods answer did not suit with their former
Resolutions: therefore they told the Prophet he spoke falsely, the Lord had not
sent unto him to say unto them go not into Egypt: and thus it was with many
men, as to the answer of their prayers, when they are intended before that,
such a thing they will do, and then they go to prayer to seek direction from
God: and it may be for once God answers by some notion in prayer contrary to
their intended purpose, as he did Balaam the first time: but they will not take
this for an answer because it suits not with their mind, but have a hankering
the other way, and will yet go again as Balaam did, and seek for divinations,
and try conclusions again and again as Balaam did: and then oftentimes they
are encouraged to go on in their own way to their own hurt; and thus it fares
oftentimes with men and women, seeking of Wives or Husbands. First, They
resolve what they will do, and then they will pray to God for direction, and
ask friends advise, when they are resolved for what they will do, let God and
Friends advise and do what they will: I know some has smarted for so doing,
this is a point ought well to be regarded by all men in every weighty
undertaking.

Again, he says in his Epistle to the Reader, That if the Presbyterian can
give him satisfaction that he is mistaken, he will willingly recant and be
sorry for his error; but withal, he says, he assures himself that the Beast
with all his power, and the false Prophet with all his skill, shall not be able
to do it; that is, to give him satisfaction; that he is mistaken,

I answer, that in these very expressions of his is proved the truth of what I
have writ above, that many men first resolve what they will do, and then they
will by prayer seek direction from God, and from friends: so here the Bishop
promises that if the Presbyterian can give him satisfaction that he is
mistaken, he will recant; but he is resolved and assured before hand, that they
shall not give him satisfaction with all their power and skill. And it cannot
be expected that the beast or false prophet will ever show the Bishop his
mistake; for in so doing Antechrist the Pope, who is the beast or false prophet
should act against himself, to the ruin of his own kingdom; nay, the beast
will rather stroke his head, and hug him, as we use to say, as the Devil hugged
the Witch, for the good service he has done him in taking so much pains to
excuse him, that we should not think him to be the Antichrist, and when he dies
he will cannonize him with Thomas Becket, for another English or Welsh Saint.

But to deal engeniously and truly with you, though I confess I have heard some
of every sort preach, yet was I never united and joined in Church Fellowship
neither with Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, or Lay-preacher as yet; and
therefore being I am none of them, I will endeavor in the strength, and by the
assistance (I hope) of the Spirit of God, to show you your mistake; and if you
be so wedded to your own opinion that you will not be satisfied, yet it may
perhaps satisfy some others, and then my labor will not be lost, therefore I
am resolved to put it to the trial; yet it cannot be expected that I should
answer every particular whimsey and cavil that is in his book, for there is
much Greek and Latin in it, and I was never so great a Scholar as to
understand either Greek or Latin, and therefore I must entreat the Christian
Reader to bear with my weakness, if I do miscall some words, or not spell them
right, and endeavor to pick out the sense. Neither will I answer all nor half
of what he has writ in English, but so much as I think may give satisfaction
to the impartial Reader to judge whether the Bishop or I be most mistaken.

And as I said above, we will in the first place see what the Scriptures say as
to this business, to show who is Antichrist etc. It is said in the 1 John 2.18.
as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, Marks to know Antichrist by.
even now there are many Antichrists; that is, all that walk contrary to
Christ's instituted Ordinances, or his Commandments and Precepts, in their
practice and conversations; these act against Christ, and so are Antichrists.
But these are not the Antichrists here spoken of, that should come, though he
speaks of many inferior Antichrists that was then; but it may be demanded
where or from whom did they hear of the great Antichrist that was to come? and
what other answer can be given, but that they heard of him in the Scriptures
the word of truth, where he is spoken of under other names, which is given him
as so many marks and characters to know him by; and if you can find any man
that fits in such a Throne, where one succeeds another in the same Throne and
government, acting the same things, we may undoubtedly conclude that this is
he, as what is said Revel. 17. of his seat upon seven hills or mountains,
interpreted by the Angels of the Ten Kings that should give their power and
authority to the Beast, etc. of him that reigns in the great City, that raigns
over Kings of the earth, and that exalts himself above all Magistrates, which
are called Gods, as 2 These. 2. and that is called the man or that man of sin;
the Mitre of iniquity, he whose coming is after the working of Satan, and with
all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, and teaches the Doctrine of Devils,
with many other like Characters to know him by, etc.

I will begin with this last Text I named, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. Now the spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith,
giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils, speaking lies in
Hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared as with a hot Iron, forbidding to
Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meat etc. Some shall depart from the
faith, and give heed to seducing spirits; by seducing spirits, I understand the
Ministers of the Gospel, that fell from the truth to Error and Heresy: and
Mr. Brightman says, That about the time of Constantine the great, there was
many Pastors of the Church that fell from the truth, at which very time
Antichrist had his birth or first appearance, as shall appear by and by: for
this Text, and 2 These. does so discribe him that he that runs may read that
this is he. First, He is said to be a seducing spirit, and teaches the Doctrine
of Devils, forbidding Marriage, that he shall work with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteteousnesse in them that perish, etc And thus Antichrists Doctrine is
described to be a dying Doctrine, a falling from the faith a Hypocritical and
Divilish Doctrine, carried on with deceit and fraud, The Popes ^ivellish
do^rine of for^idding Mar^^age.
all which does ^minently appear in the Pope of Rome; for who is there in all
the world besides the Pope and his Clergy, that teaches this Divilish Doctrine
to forbid Marriage, to those whose age and temper may require a help meet for
them, but the Pope who is that Man of sin and Antichrist of Rome? which the
Apostle here charges to be the Doctor that teaches this Divilish Doctrine of
forbidding Marriage, which is a holy Ordinance of God instituted in Paradise,
and allowed in all Nations, and to all persons whose age and temper does
require it, as 1 Cor. 7.2. to avoid fornication, let every man have his own
wife, etc. and it was so until this Imposter and seducing spirit the Pope
prohibited it unto the Clergy: and this is one way of his exalting himself, not
only above earthly Gods, as Magistrates, but above the God of Heaven; for what
God allows, this Antichrist the Pope disallows, and that for bad and wicked
ends. As first, To bring a Revenue into his Treasury, by allowing Brothel
Houses or Stews, which paies him yearly no small Rent: for in Pope Paul the
first his time, which was 976 years since, that Pope had upon Record in his
Register, the number of five and forty thousand Whores in the stews that paid
him Rent for liberty to play the Whore, as Mr. Beard says in his book of the
Delusions of Antichrist, and there his Clergy, etc. to whom he denies Marriage
have liberty to go for their recreation, and because the Pope allows them, it
is not accounted any sin.

And Secondly, by this means he has all the Clergy at his beck, to send when
he will, and where he will to act their Father the Devils part, by their
Hypocritical lies to seduce the Nations and Kingdoms of this world: for they
would not be so willing to rainge abroad in such swarms in every Kingdom if
as other men they had wives and children to provide. for at home; Peter Marter
Chap. 16. says, How are the stews punished at Rome? Whores in Rome attended
like Ladies by Cardinals.
instead of punishment, they dwell in the fairest houses; they are carried with
honor through the City, as if they were Ladies, they are mounted on ambling
palfries, they are arraid with Chains of Gold, attended with persons disguised,
and sometimes with Cardinals, and especially in the night? season; in the City
of Rome the Stews or Courtezans pass through the streets, or ride on Mules like
honest Matrons or Ladies; in the midst of the day, Noblemen, Cardinals, and
Priests attend upon them; we never saw such corruption but only in this City;
this info^m^tion was presented unto Pope Paul the Third, says Bishop Jewel,
against Harding; also Luit Prandus in his sixth book, Chap. 6: says, the Popes
Palace at Lateran, sometime the harbor of holy Saints, is now become a stew of
Whores. Amphilocheus that wrought the life of Thomas Becket, reports a woman
called Emphrosyna, that dwelt 36 years in a Monks apparel among the Monks:
likewise Marina a woman lived many years in an Abbey, as a Monk in Monks
apparel: and this is the cause of the Popes divilish doctrine in forbidding
marriage: and herein lies another part of his deceit and hypocrisy, in making
them believe that he can pardon them, and persuades them that it is less sin
for a Clergy man to have a Whore, which the Law of God forbids, then to have a
Wife, which the law of God allows, and all because they could not be so fit to
send for his purpose abroad: Now Bishop Williams, did ever the Presbyterians,
or Independants, or Long-parliament fulfill this Prophecy in teaching this
Doctrine of Devils, to forbid marriage, which is one mark or Character of the
great Antichrist, and not the least mark: and let the Readers Judge by this
mark, whether they or the Pope be most like Antichrist; now this doctrine of
Divils forbidding of Marriage, and which is the doctrine and practice of the
Church of Rome only, and no other Church that I have read of, and which
occasious so much uncleanness and ungodliness, and that with toleration and
allowance, who can doubt that the Popes who are the Authors of this divi^ish
doctrine successively one after another, but he is the great Antichrist that
was prophesied that he should come into the world and that man of sin and son
of perdition; and who exalts himself above God in this particular doctrine, in
forbidding of Marriage to those whom Gods allows to marry, Forbidding marriage
the doctrine of devils.
and which doctrine the holy Ghost in the word of truth tells us is the
doctrine of Devils, that is, of Popes succeeding one another, and teaching that
doctrine; and that they that teach it, are apostatized and fallen from the true
faith, and are hypocritical liars, and seducers of Millions of souls, and all
to establish himself in his cursed Throne; those that think the Pope not to be
Antichrist, I desire them to rouse up their spirits, and rub the scales from
their eyes, and observe how lively here and else where, as shall be showed, how
the Apostle has drawn Antichrists Picture in every point and limb, so just
like the Pope, that all men that reads may say this is he; That marriage
instituted of God in innocence, honored by Christ's presence at Canaan in
Galile, the seed plot of the Church, the allowed remedy against incontinency
and lust, and which the the Apostle commands as honorable in all men, Heb.
13.4. and yet forbidden by the Pope, the Scarlot Strumpit of Rome to all the
whole Clergy.

Wherein besides the divilishness of the Doctrine, denying men subject to
sinful lust: the lawful remedy which God allows them, and so cast men upon a
necessity of sinning: they teach this Hypocritical lie with a seared
Conscience; for with what Conscience, says Mr. Anderson can they make marriage
a Sacrament in Laymen, and sacrilege in the Clergy? with what Conscience
permit Stews and forbid marriage? with what Conscience confess fornication to
be a sin against the Law of God, and Priests marriage, only against the Law
of the Church, and yet make Priests marriage a fouler sin, then for a Priest to
commit fornication or incesse; is not this to make the transgression of the
Popes laws a greater sin, then the transgression of Gods laws? with what
Conscience to forbid lawful marriage to some, and yet by dispensation to allow
unlawful marriage in others? who but Antichrist does such things? therefore the
Pope that does them, must be the great Antichrist and man of sin; for the
Long-parliament, nor Presbyterians, nor Independents, etc. never did those
things, to forbid marriage and the like, which the Apostle lays down as a
Character or mark to know Antichrist by, and we have reason to believe the
Scriptures before Bishop Williams.

A second Mark or Character the Apostle lays down to know Antichrist by, is
that, as he forbids marriage. So secondly, He commands abstinence from meats,
which God has created to be received with thanksgiving, etc. which words
declare thus much unto us, that neither Marriage nor Meats, nor any other
Creature, nor Ordinance of God is to be refused upon any tie of Conscience,
provided, they be received with thanksgiving of them that believe and know the
truth, with such other requisite conditions as becomes Christians; in 1 Cor.
10 25. the holy Apostle bids us, Whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that eat,
asking no question for Conscience sake, etc. and Titus 1.15. To the pure, all
things are pure; so that to forbear the use out of a tie of Conscience, or a
Superstious Opinion, as being unlawful at such or such a time; it is against
Christian libert, either to charge the use of them with sin, or to place
holiness in abstaining from the use of them.

It is the Doctrine you see the Apostle tells of, that Antichrist should teach,
and this is the Pope of Rome's doctrine; for he says, it is a sin deserving
death to eat of meats prohibited by the Church they teach, that fasting
consists only in abstinance from meats, and not from drink; I have seen them,
that upon one of their Superstitious fasting days, they would eat no meat but
they would eat plentifully of Fruit, Raisons of the Sun, and Figs, and the
like, and drink largely of Wine, Ale and Beer; and such kind of Fasting with
them is esteemed satisfactory for sin, and meritorious of eternal Life; and
this is another Hypocritical mark or Charracter of Antichrist, for such
Hypocritical lies as these, passes current among them for sound doctrine from
their holy Father the Pope, so seared is his Conscience as with a hot Iron: for
with what Conscience does the Pope allow an ordinary Priest to absolve for
Murder, Adultery, Fornication, or perjury, but the great and heinous sin of
eating flesh upon a Friday or Emberdays, is left to the censure of a
plenepotentiary as being beyond the power of an ordinary Priest to grant
absolution for, as being a greater sin, because it is against the Law of the
Church, then Murder or Adultery, etc. is, which are sins against the Law of
God; or with what Conscience can the Pope make the tasting of the coursest
flesh, A Popish Lent Fast.
a breach of Lent-fast, and surfeiting upon the delicatest Fish, to be no
breach of Lent-fast? and with what conscience can he forbid the use of such and
such meats, for the taming of the flesh, when he allows the use of those things
which are more nourishing of the flesh, and more provoking to fleshly lusts; as
strong Wines and such like? with what conscience can he enjoyne fasting for
penance, and then presently release that penance for a penny? the Gloss upon
the Canon says, That he who gives a penny to redeem his penance fast, though
he give money for a spiritual thing; yet he does not commit Simony, because the
contract is made with God: that is the excuse, though the contract be made with
the Priest, and the Money come to the Priests pocket; well did the holy Ghost
say, that Antichrist should teach lies with a seared Conscience; for if the
Pope and Cardinals, Prelates and Priests, etc. if all their consciences were
not seared, they would not use such pretenses to varnish over their
Hypocritical lies and errors, to damn so many thousand souls; and thus you see
what marks and characters the holy Ghost has laid down to know the great
Antichrist and man of sin by; which things the Parliament nor Presbyterians,
etc. were never guilty of.

The next Text I shall handle, that shows us who this great Antichrist is, we
have in the 2 These. 2. to the 12. verse; where first the Apostle earnestly
beseeches the Thessalonians Church not to be shaken in mind, nor troubled,
neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, says he, as if the
day of Christ were at hand; here we have in this verse such a plain
demonstration of Antichrist in his cheating, deluding and cousoning practices
as we can scarce find the like; What is meant by spirit, word and letter.
for by spirit, word and letter, I conceive the Apostle means all false ways
that Antichrist shall make use of to deceive, as false Teachers signs, lying
Miracles, Inthusiasts: such as pretend to have the spirit to work miracles, as
your Priests that pretend to cast out Devils, 2 Cor. 11.13. which transform
themselves as the Apostles of Christ, as all the Popes houlings which pretend
to imitate the Apostles, of which I have hinted in the former part of this
book; there is no less then 150 several Orders, or Degrees of them, and all
pretending to holiness, both in Doctrine and Discipline, and yet not one of
them of Divine institution: but are all popish and Antichristian humane
inventions and institutions of men? and this is one main argument that the Pope
is the great Antichrist, that he sets up so many Orderers, Officers and Offices
in the Church of Christ, against Christ; in as much that Christ did never
institute nor ordain them, and to bind men's consciences to submit to them, and
other of his humane institution; and that under such penalties, as is showed
above, that he makes the breach of his own Laws, which he calls the Laws of the
Church, a greater crime then the breach of the Law of God; who then can deny
the Pope that thus acts to be the great Antichrist, and all these several
Orders, to be the limbs and members of Antichrist, and Seducers: who in their
several places make it their whole business to keep people in obedience to this
Antichrist, their great Lord and Master: by their lies, and lying doctrines,
and lying wonders; exalting and extolling the relics of Saints and Martyrs,
and the instituters of their Orders: the holiness and sanctity of their
habits, and the like; which things are more preached, and praised, and cried up
among them, then Christ Jesus is preached or cried up; And to gain credit to
their delusions, they report what miraculous things have been done by the
virtue of St. Austins Lethern Girdle for curing diseases, and easing of pains,
etc. Satan's delusion to deceive
And indeed it is possible that God may suffer Satan by weak means to do some
such cures, which the Devil may by permission be the Author and cause of the
disease himself; and by his withdrawing his operation and working, the disease
or pain may cease: and all this to make good what the Apostle in this Chapter
foretold should come to pass; that because they received not the love of the
truth that they might be saved, therefore God shall send them strong delusions
to believe lies, that all they may be damned which believe not the truth, but
have pleasure in unrighteousness; Another story goes, that St. Katherine
Girded her self, with an Iron chain so close, that it cut her flesh: and that
she used to chastise her self three times a day with that chain an hour and an
half at a time, until the blood run from her shoulders to her feet; those that
can believe it, If Christ were married, why may not Priests marry? See for this
Hospinian, Antonius Franc. Modeus.
are more credulous then I can be: many strange stories are recorded of her as
that Christ appeared and married himself to her with a Ring; it may be that was
the reason of using the Ring in marriage; but if they believe their own
doctrine, that Christ took St. Katherine to Wife; why do they hinder the
Priests, etc. from Wives? will they not give them leave to follow Christ's
example in such a thing to, as is so easy to follow him? and that Christ
opened her side, and took out her old heart, and put in a new one instead of
the former; if that be the way of giving a new heart, then certainly all
Papists hearts are old ones, there is not one of them new: and that he clothed
her with a bloody colored garment, drawn out of his own side, so that she
never felt any cold afterward. Some say this order began 1372.

They also teach, that he that dies in the habit of St. Frances, shall not be
overtaken with an untimely death: and yet Friar Barnwell hanged himself in an
Apple tree hard by Dublin, in St. Frances habit: see Paul Harris book of Friars
be sober: and they teach that he that dies in the habit of a Capouchan, he
shall not be in Purgatory but till the fourth Saturday after his death; and the
Pope has granted the Carmalites the privilege, The privilege of Friars.
that they shall not be in Purgatory, but till the Saturday after their Death:
it seems by this, that Saturday is the day of Goal delivery, and the Cardilians
have privilege granted them, to draw a soul out of purgatary, by saying five
pater Nosters, and five Ave Mary's; but if the Pope have this privilege, to
give this power to others, as he pretends he has; then why does he not draw
them all out of purgatory, but suffer his servants and children to lie in a
burning fire so many hundred years; but this is another of their Juggling
Deceitful tricks to get money: for no money, no pater Noster to fetch any out
of purgatory: and these are some of the great Antichrists hypocritical lies,
and damnable doctrines, which they pretend that they are such spiritual men;
that they can do all this I have named and much more; but the Apostle warns the
Thessalonians, that they be not removed from the truth, nor troubled in mind by
such spirits.

Secondly, Nor by word, nor by letter as from us; by word, I understand
traditions, the Apostle by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, did foresee that
Antichrist would intrude upon the Church his unwritten traditions, and urge
their observation of them, and expect as due obedience to be given to them, as
to the written word of God; and so it is at this day in all the Roman Churches,
the Popes Traditions is received and observed with as much, if not more care
and diligence, as any precept of the word of God; as for example, the second
Commandment forbids Idols and Image worship; the Pope by his Traditions
received from his predecessors, commands Image, Worship and Adoration, and his
command is obeyed and Gods neglected; God requires that prayer should be made
unto him only: O, (or because) thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all
flesh come. Psalm. 65.2. Nay, that they shall not, says the Pope; they shall
pray to the Virgan, and St. Dominick, and St. Frances, etc. The Apostle
foreseeing this, warnes believers not to be troubled, nor turned aside from
the truth, neither by deluding spirits, nor by words of traditions, says he,
as from us; for they will pretend that they received their tradition as from
us; therefore says he, ver. 14. Irrethren stand fast, and hold the traditions
which ye have been taught, whether by word or our Epistle: as if he should say,
Brethren, what traditions you have received from us by word, and what you have
received in our Epistle, that observe and do: but go no further to any other
traditions, but what you received from us; for if an Angel from Heaven shall
teach you any other Gospel, then what ye have received from us, let him be
accursed: and this Anathama excludes all unwritten Traditions, and all humane
institutions and inventions of men, in point of Gods Divine Worship, but what
we have precept or example for from Christ and his Apostles: let the Pope and
his prelates, and all his followers brag as much as they will for their
traditions and ceremonies: let men observe the Scriptures that cannot deceive,
Isa. 8.20 to the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no truth, nor no true light in them; they either
are blind and ignorant in the ways of God, or else they fight against their
own light: for we ought not to swerve from the written word, Phil. 4.9. These
things, says the Apostle, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do, and the God of peace shall be with you: he does not bid
them follow what they should hear and see done by the Pope, or any other that
should come after him; for he says, Act. 20.29. That he knew after his
departure there would grievous Wolves enter in among them not sparing the
flock; and that from among themselves would men arise, speaking perverse
things; which things we find true by woeful experience: and so again in the same
Epistle, 2 These. 3.4. We have confidence, The trial of Traditions by Gospel
rule.
says the Apostle, in the Lord, touching you, that you both do, and will do
the things which we command you: and we command you in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the traditions which ye received from us; see how
careful and earnest the Apostle was, least the Church should be drawn away
with any other traditions then what you received, says he, from us; the the
Apostles Traditions was suitable to the Gospel rule and institutions of Jesus
Christ: and we ought not to follow any Traditions of men, that do not in all
things suit with the Gospel-rule and institutions of Christ, clearly deduced
from the Scriptures; for your selves know, says he, how ye ought to follow us:
not the Pope, nor his Prelates: but to follow us, as you have us for an
ensample; For we behaved not our selves disorderly among you, nor eat any man's
bread for naught, but wrought with labor and travel night and day.

But the Pope with his new Traditions and new Orders of Friars; how many
hundred thousand is there that work not at all, but are busy bodies, going a
begging from house to house, and do not walk according to the gospel rule nor
example of the Apostles; Alexander Rosse says, there was from the year 1211.
to 1384. that is, 169 years erected in Christendom, 1500 Monasteries, of the
order of St: Frances: and page 304. he says in the time of Sabellicus, about
the year 1494. there was reckoned 4143 Monasteries of Dominicans, besides
diverse Cloisters of them in Arminia, and Aethiopia; and 150 Covents of
Dominican Nuns; what may be thought there was then of all the rest of their
Orders, that live in idleness, contrary to Paul's command, ver. 10. that if any
would not work neither should they eat, and ver. 14. if any man obey not our
word by this Epistle, note that man, set a mark or brand upon him, and have no
company with him: much more must we not submit to his Traditions; but these
devourers of the fruits of the earth, and the labors of the poor, observe the
Popes Rules and Commands, but not the Rules and Commands of Jesus Christ nor
his Apostles; and upon this account they are all against, and therefore so many
little Antichrists under their great Lord and Master the Pope, who is the great
Antichrist, and man of sin, and son of perdition: for he I mean the
succession of Popes have confirmed all these inferior Antichrists in their
several Orders, and appointed them their work, who will pay their wages they
will know in time.

2 These. 2.2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as that the day of Christ is at hand; These
words do sound, as if some false Teachers or Seducers did counterfeit letters,
and send from one to another in the Apostles name, pretending as they had been
his, which did disquiet the peace of the Church; for it seems by the Text, as
if the effect of these letters and teaching should be, that the day of Christ
was near at hand; as Hemeneus and Philetus disturbed the peace of the Church of
Ephesus, teaching that the resurrection was past, 2 Timothy 2.18. So here it
should seem in this Church of Thessalonica was some counterfeit false Teachers,
that did counterfeit letters as from the Apostles, as that the day of Christ
was at hand; against which the Apostle does exhort them not to be shaken in
mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, or false revelations, nor by word of
false teachers, nor by letters from any counterfeits, pretending as from us, as
if the day of Christ is at hand; let no man, says he, deceive you by these or
any means: for the day of Christ shall not come, except there come a departing
or falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, even the son of
perdidition; what the meaning of these words is, the day of the Lord being at
hand, I will not undertake to determine; whether by it be meant the day of
Judgment, or the day of the Jews conversion which must be, before the general
Judgment; and Christ's revealing himself to his people in the unvailing of the
mysteries of the Gospel: wherein as the Prophet says, Dan. 7.27. The Kingdom,
and Dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole Heaven shall
be given to the people of the Saints of the most high. And Isa. 6.12. The
Nation and Kingdom that will not serve the Lord, shall perish, and shall be
utterly wasted; which of these two is meant, I will not possitively determine:
but I rather think the latter is meant; but our main business now is in the
next verse, that,

That day shall not come, except there come a departing or falling away first,
and that man of sin, which is the great Antichrist be revealed by his falling
away, which must make way for Antichrists appearance: I do conceive is meant,
both the Apostasy of many in the Church to Heresy, and the Apostasy of the
Church, from the right manner of Government and Discipline which was instituted
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles; The Apostasy to prepare the way for
Antichrist was double.
I take this Apostasy here to be meant of both these: forth first the greatest
Heresy, and that did the most hurt, was the Arian Heresy, which began about
the year 290, and over spread a great part of the Christian world; there was
other Heresies at that time, but this was the most destructive to the Christian
Faith; about the year 300, when the Churches began to have some rest from
persecution, and so from that time forward, Bishops had some care of preaching;
but Mr. Brightman says, the doctrine was much defiled in many heads of it, and
Relics began to be of great account in the Church, and all kind of
superstition increased, and pride in Bishops: Church dignities were increased,
and all things sought for that might make for outward pomp and glory in the
world, more then truth was sought for; and Bishops began to be at variance one
with another, as appears by Constantines Epistle, to Miltiades Bishop of Rome,
about the year 310, thus he writing, Constantine the Emperor, unto Miltiades
Bishop of Rome, and Marcus sends greeting, in so much, as many such Epistles
are brought unto me from Alininus Livel of Africa: in which it is said, that
Cicelianus Bishop of Carthage, is reprehended in many things, and this seems
unto me very grievous, etc. That among Bishops there should be such disagreeing
and variance: it seemed good unto me, that Cecilianus himself, together with
the Ten Bishops that seem to reprehend him, and Ten other Bishops whom he
thought expedient in the behalf of this Cause, do sail into Rome, that there
in the presence of you all together, etc.

By this it appears, here was an Apostasy from the primitve purity, even among
the Bishops, as well as by Heretics; and this dicension and difference
increased daily more and more: Bishops striving for pre-eminence and
augmentation of their Revenues, The beginning of the conception of Antichrist.
for honors and dignity, power and command, that the institutions of Christ
and his Apostles, their example and practice in Government and Discipline, was
laid aside and forgotten, and new inventions brought into the Church, and new
Titles, Jurisdiction, and power granted to the Bishops, by the Council of Nice,
which was unknown and unheard of before in the primitive Church; which
Apostasy, from the Apostolical Government and diception, (if I mistake not) was
a greater advantage to Antichrist and made more way for his appearance, then
all the Heresies did; for this pride and contention, and striving for
pre-eminence and jurisdiction, increased still, until the calling, together of
the Council of Nice: at which very time Antichrist had his Birth and first
bringing forth into the world; for there he received his first authority of
pre-eminence above other Bishops and Churches; he was conceived long before,
and was growing in the womb of the Church; for the Apostle tells us, 2 These.
2.7. That the mystery of iniquity did even then begin to work, only he which
now lets, will let until he be taken out of the way; I shall show you what
it was that did let and hinder his appearance and then return to our main
business again.

Now that which did let and hinder Antichrists appearance, until it was taken
out of the way: was the Roman Heathen persecuting Emperors, that did hinder,
for Antichrist could not settle himself where he was to have his Throne, until
they were removed: and a Christian Emperor came in place, under whom he might
have shelter in his minority, until he grew up to some strength; which
Christian Emperor was Constantine the great, who besides his defending of
Christians from persecution; he left Rome holy to the Pope to reign and rule
in, and himself went to Bezantum, which now is called Constantible, and settled
himself there.

We read in Revel. 6. what fell out in the Churches upon the opening of the six
seals. I must give you a hint concerning them, before I come to the business I
intend; Upon the opening of the first seal, St. John beheld a White Horse, and
he that sat on him had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went out
conquering and to conquer, or that he might overcome: by this Vision, some
think is meant the Ministry of the word of God, preached by the true
Worshippers in the primitive Church next after the Apostles and their
Successors, Psalm. 45.3, 4. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty,
with thy Glory and Majesty ride on prosperously, because of truth, and
meekness, and righteousness; for Christ did conquer wonderfully while his
Ordinances was kept pure, without mixture of humane inventions and
institutions, and superstitious observations; which it may be is the cause why
the Ministry does so little good, and does not work so effectually upon the
Hearers as it did in former times.

And upon the opening of the second seal, there appeared a Red Horse, and he
that sat thereon had power given him to take peace from the Earth, and that
they should kill one another: by which is meant the cruel persecutions, blood
and war, that followed the preaching of the Gospel, which is to be understood
of the Ten persecutions; and I think also what has happened in every Kingdom
since* where the Gospel has prevailed, Antichrist and his instruments has
raised war and persecution and sowed sedition, and endeavored to corrupt the
Ordinances, and to kill men in their souls, if they cannot kill their bodies.

And upon the opening of the third seal, there appeared a Black Horse, and he
that sat upon him had balance in his hand: by which is signified samine and
scarcity of Food, which for the most part does follow wars; for the contempt of
the Gospel brings wars, and wars brings famine; and it is recorded that about
the year 316 there was a grievous Famine etc.

Upon the opening of the fourth seal, there appeared a Pale Horse, and his name
that sat on him was death: which signifies the Pestilence, and other Contagious
diseases, whereby men are suddenly taken away by death.

And upon the opening of the fifth seal, John in a Vision, saw under the Altar
the souls of them that were kiled for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they held, erying, How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge our
blood on them that dwell upon the earth? but we must not imagine that these
Marryrs have any real desire of revenge: for Saints in Heaven are not affected
with any such passion: but it is rather to be understood, that as Abels blood
crved for Vengeance, Genesis 4.10. So the^e Martyrs blood cries for Revenge. But
Mr. Brightman rather thinks this revenge to signify, their earnest desire of
delivering the innocent party from their persecuters, which the blood of these
souls cries for; and the answer that they receive is, that they must rest for
a little season, until their brethren and fellow servants which should be
killed, as they were meaning under Antichrist, were fulfilled, for Antichrist
was not far of.

And when he opened the sixth seal there was a great Earthquake, and the Sun
became black as sack cloth, and the Moon became blood, and the Stars of Heaven
fell to the Earth etc. by Earthquake in Scripture, is oftentimes signified
^omotions, troubles, uproars in Commonwealths, and alteration of State and
Kingdoms; as when the Psalmist speaks of the Children of Israel coming out of
Egypt, Psalm. 68.8. The Farth was moved, the Heavens also dropped at thy
presence O God, and the Sun became black, etc. shows that the persecution
signified thereby, should be very cruel. So the Prophet speaking of the
destruction of Babylon Isaiah 13.10. The Stars of Heaven, and the
Constellations thereof shall not give their light, the Sun shall be darkened in
his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine. And Ezekiel.
32.7.8. I will cover the Heavens and make the Stars to be dark, I will hide the
Sun in a Cloud, and the Moon shall not make her light to shine: all the lights
that shine in the Heavens will I make dark upon thee, and will bring darkness
upon thy Land, says the Lord God. Aretas reports out of the works of Andreas,
that many said this Earthquake was taken for the persecution, until the coming
of Antichrist: and that thus, the Scriptures are wont to speak of any notable
change, by the name of an Earthquake, and he said truly, only he mistook the
time af Antichrist coming.

For Mr. Brightman says, by this Earthquake is to be understood, that
persecution which was more cruel then any that was before it, which fell out in
the reign of Diocleasian and Maximinian, the last two persecuting Emperors,
about the year 300. and by the stars falling in this book of the Revelation is
meant, the Ministers and Pastors of the Church, who are called stars for the
shining light of the Gospel, which they Minister, while they preserve the
doctrine of the Gospel pure from Heresy: and the discipline from mingling it
with the inventions of men, are compared to stars; and by the stars falling
from Heaven, is meant, their falling from the sincerity of their profession to
Heresy. Superstition, or Idolatry, either in Doctrine, in Discipline, or
Practice; and many did fall about this time, through the rage of these two
parsecutors, who endeavored to rout out Christianity and the Scriptures by the
Roots: and published their Proclamations, that the Books of Scriptures should
be burned in the Market place; we saw, says Eusebius, with these very eyes,
the holy and divine Scriptures perish in the very Fire where they were thrown.
The Scriptures for it is glorious light, may well be compared to the Sun: and
here you see how this Sun, the Scriptures was darkened in this Earthquake, and
consumed with fire in this persecution, a City in Phrygia, wholly inhabited with
Christians, the soldiers compassed it about, and burnt it to Ashes, and the
Men Women and Children that were in it; and besides the demolishing of
Churches, and burning the Scriptures, and Slaughter, and other Tortures of
Christians; there came forth another Prolamation, to attath the Governors and
Pastors of Churches, and compel them to sacrifice to Idols; here many held out
manfully, and suffered Martyrdom: others with terror were like blocks and
became feeble, and out of heart at the first onset, says Eusebius, in his
Eighth Book, Chap. the Third: so that the whole Church was covered over with
blackness, that it did scarce appear any where.

And now follows the last act of this Tragedy, in the 15 and 16 verses of this
6 Chapter of the Revelations; And the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men,
and rich Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men, and every bond Man,
and every free Man hide themselves in Dens, and the rocks of the Mountains, and
said unto the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him
that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of
his wrath is coming, and who shall be able to stand? And here we have reason to
stand admiring at the wonderful grace and mercy of God, who by his spirit in
his servant, John 1. has so punctually set down these passages throughout the
whole Revelation: whereby we may find out the great Antichrist, the man of sin:
and when he first appeared in the world, for all these passages relate to
Antichrists appearance, as Aretus said, though he missed of the time; for
observe, here in the fight of these calamities, how Jesus Christ the Lamb, that
sits upon his Throne, put forth his divine power from Heaven, and suddenly
alayes these Tempests, that these persecuting Emperors and Nobles should fly
at his appearance: for what other thing could it be, that forced these two
Tyrant Emperors, Diocleasian and Maximinian, when they both were at the top of
honor, and so raging mad, with desire to root out Christianity: that they both
should so suddenly, and voluntarily put themselves out of their Empires, and
betake themselves to a private life. Eusebius in his 8 Book, Chap. 14. and
Ignatius to the same purpose, says, that it is a mavelous matter, (and to
this time the like unknown) that both these Emperors should give up their
Empires, and return to a private life, being not oppressed with old age, nor
difficulty, and greatness of matters: but some impute it to Frenzy: and
Nicephorus says, it was rage and madness, because they saw they took pains in
vain to root out Christianity: but they mistook the matter, for we may learn
from these Texts, that the true and real cause was only this: that the Lamb
that sits upon his Throne, and who is the deliverer of his Church, did smite
them with inward terror, wounding them with the sting of conscience for their
wickedness, and with fear of Gods vengeance: that they were ready to cry to
the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide them from the wrath of the
Lamb: and as he is a Lamb to his Church, so he is a Lion, the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, who when he begins to reckon with his Enemies, he will tear them in
pieces, and rent the Gall from the Liver: and accordingly, the Lamb showed
himself a Lion in this respect, and smote the chiefest of these persecuting
Emperors, Maximinius, as Eusebius says in his 8 Book, and Chap. 17. That a
plague from above light on him: The dreadful Judgment of God upon the
persecutors.
First taking root in his flesh, and after proceeded even unto his soul: for
there arose in the secret parts of his body, an impostume or running sore:
afterward in the lower parts of his privities a botch corrupt boil, with a
fistula: whence issued corrupt matter, eating up the inward bowels, and an
unspeakable company of Lice swarmed out with such a stinck, that the Physicians
were not able to abide it, nor able to help with any Physic; therefore they
were cruelly executed, and the Tyrant in this loathsome condition died.
Dioclesian in like manner pined away with diseases, and Maximinian hanged
himself: and you must think, though Histories mention it not, that these three
Emperors did not feel the stroke of Gods hand alone, but as the Text says,
The chief Captains, so also the great Men, and rich Men, and bondmen and free,
were all driven to their wits end with this stroke: that they were ready to cry
to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and hide them from the wrath of
the Lamb; for some write, that besides the pining diseases that Dioclesian had
to hid himself from the Lambs wrath, he drank poison; and Gelerius ran into
the bottom of the River Tyber to hid himself.

Thus these Heathen persecuting Emperors, which hindered the great Antichrists
coming to his Throne, 2 These. 2.7. being as the Apostle says, taken out of the
way; Constantine the great, a Christian Emperor, came in their place about the
year of Christ 306. this Emperor put an end to the Heathen persecution: That
which hindered was removed.
he sent out his edicts to encourage the Christian Assemblies, and to build the
Churches the former Tyrants had caused to be demolished: but after a while, now
the Churches having rest, the Bishops were set on Fire by spiteful contentions
among themselves, striving for dignities and pre-eminence, and also about
several points of the Christian faith; it is conceived by some, that what is
said, Rev. 8.3. Of the Angel with the golden Viol that offered odors, with the
prayers of the Saints upon the Golden Altar which was before the Throne: that
this is meant of such as were sound in the Faith, that their prayers was to
this effect, that it would please God, who had so wonderfully appeared for his
Church and people in removing the persecuting Emperors, that he would not
suffer the truth (which now for a short time had triumphed) to be clouded
again by the pride and contention of the Bishops, etc. but that some way might
be found out to establish the truth, and that those that did outwardly profess
themselves to be of the household of Faith, and yet made such dissension in the
Church, that some way might be found out to stay such strife and controversies;
and indeed Constantine the Emperor used his endeavor to calm and quiet these
contentions; for besides the Epistle I mentioned before, that he wrote to the
Bishop of Rome, that Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, and the ten Bishops that
were against him, and ten Bishops more that he should choose of his side, etc.
should meet before the Bishop of Rome about that controversy; he also write
another Epistle to Christus Bishop of Syracusa, where he intimates to him, that
he had commanded diverse Bishops out of sundry Provinces, to meet at the City of
Orleance, where he requires him also to be, that such things as was in
difference might be ended; he also writ another Epistle to Alexander Bishop of
Alexandrea, about contentions that arose in that Church.

But notwithstanding the Emperors godly endeavors, these contentions ceased
not, but rather increased; whereupon he called the Council of Nice, in which
Council after they had determined the business about the Co-essentiall nature
of the second person in the Trinity; and made the confession of Faith against
the Arian Heresy; They address themselves to make Canons, whereby the
Ecclesiastical Discipline should be governed, where the Bishop of Rome was
made Primate and Metrapolitan of the first See: and that the Bishop of
Alexandria should have power over all the Churches of Egypt, or Libea and
Pentapolis: because the Bishop of Rome had the like privilege and so the
Church of Antioch and others, every one had their honor and dignity appointed
them, and what other Bishops and Churches should be under their Jurisdiction,
etc.

Now Josealil to the Reader, whether here began not all the misery where they
thought to end it: so great difference there is between the ways of God and the
ways of men, for here at this time was the very first birth of Antichrist, the
Bishop and Pope of Rome, the Primate and Metrapolitan of the first See: this
was his beginning, for the Bishops before the council, by their contentions and
the Bishops in the council, both falling away and departing from the sincerity
of the Gospel, and from the institutions of Christ and his Apostles, and making
new officers and orders in the Church, with new titles of Primacy and
Metrapolitans, and Diocesans, with a number more that depend upon them, as is
showed in the former part of his book, one hundred and fifty by name, Here was
the birth of Anrichrist.
of several Titles and Religious Orders now in the Church of Rome and not one
of them of Jesus Christ nor his Apostles institution, but all of humans
invention, without any president, precept or example, or any Text in the New
Testament to ground them upon: the original and chief Titles of all, was
devised and decreed in this council for making the Pope of Rome Primate and
Metrapolitan of the first fear; from this Title and Jurisdiction then given
him, he took occasion thereby from that very time, to advance himself, and to
claim authority over all other Churches, and as I said above Antichrist, had
his conception long before; for Rome being the chief City of the Empire, and
above all other Cities; so the Bishop of Rome thought to be above all other
Bishops; and the Apostle tells us, 2 These. 2.7. That the mystery of iniquity
did even then begin to work in his time: Antichrist had this conception then,
and he grew biger and biger in the womb of the Church, until this Council sat:
and then this Council was as the Midwise to his birth to bring him forth, and
so by the power he received by that decree, he was nursed up and grew stronger
and stronger, until the year 606, and then he came to the full strength of a
man or rather a Beast, for so the Scriptures terms him, Rev. 17. And the man of
sin, 3 These. 2.4 For then he obtained the Title of universal Bishop, and after
in the year 684. he obtained to be called Christ's Vicar; so that now he was
armed with Titles, and Authority, to make him the complear Antichrist, to act
against Jesus Christ: so as never none before him nor since, did nor could do:
for none had the like Authority, Power and Pre-eminence, as this Council of
Nice gave unto him, and that by their falling away and departing from the
Apostolical institutions, and Gospel puriey; so that from the time of this
Council, every age grew more corrupt then the former, as shall appear in
several particulars.

For first, Whereas in the first Primitive Church, according to the
appostolical institutions, Bishops, or Pastors and other Officicers of the
Churches, they were elected and chosen by the believing Church or Churches, to
whom they were to officiate; for we see the Apostles themselves, even when they
were altogether in Council; and had more authority then ever any man or council
had since, yet durst not they, as Arelatenses said in the council of Basil,
they durst not, nor would not take the power that belonged to the believing
Church from them, no, not to appoint inferior officers of the Church, much
less Bishops or Pastors; as you may see Acts the 6.2. etc. The Twelve called
the multitude of the Disciples unto them and said, look ye out seven men among
you of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this business: and the saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose
Steven a man full of faith, and of the holy Ghost, and Philip, etc. The salling
away from Gospel institutions.
whom they set before the Apostles; and when they had prayed they laid their
hands on them, and the word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples
multiplied; that is, they multiplied while they walked in Gods way, in divine
institutions; but this way the Bishops before, and also the council of Nice
were fallen away from, and then and ever since Bishops or Pastors, and other
Officers of the Churches are not elected and chosen by the believing Disciples
of the Churches, but are chosen by Money and Friendship, as Pope (...) before
mentioned, sold for Money three hundred of the best Benefices in England at
once unto the Romans, to place their Friends and Children in: Thus you see what
the falling away of these Bishops and council, from the Apostolical
institutions brought to pass: together with their new devised Titles and
Jurisdictions given to Bishops, etc.

Secondly, As the Bishops, and after the council were fallen away from the
Apostical institution, as to the election of Inferior Officers of the Church:
so also they were fallen away from the order of electing of Bishops or Pastors
of the Church; you shall see this in Acts the first, when they were to choose
one in Judas place, Acts 1.15. In those days Peter stood up in the midst of
the disciples, and said (the number of the names were about an hundred and
twenty) men and brethren; this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which
the holy Ghost by the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, which was
guide to them that took Jesus, etc. wherefore of these men that have
accompanied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst
us, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto the same day that he was taken up
from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection: and
they appointed two, that is I conceive 120 of the Church, as they did the
Deacons, Act. 6. The Church elected and appointed two Joseph's, called Barsabas,
who was surnamed Justas and Matthias: and they prayed, that is, the Apostles
and the 120, and said, Thou Lord which know the hearts of all men, show
whether of these two thou have chosen, that he may take part with this Ministry
and Apostleship: and they gave forth their Lots, and the Lot fell upon
Matthias, and he was numbered with the Eleven Apostles; mind this beloved
Christian Friends, for thus it appears by these two places, that by the
Apostolical institutions, Bishops ought first to be elected by the believing
Churches, to whom they are to officiate, and to elect two or more, and bring
before other Bishops, who have been elected in like manner: and then after
prayer and supplication to God, their Lots to be given out, Election and Lots
would end all strife.
that God who knows the hearts of all men, may make his choice, which he in his
wisdom knows is most fit for that office; for the Lot is cast into the Lap,
but the whole disposing thereof is from the Lord, Prove. 16.33. And also the
Holy Ghost says, Prove. 18.18. The Lot causes contention to cease, and parts
between the mighty; and if this order were observed our contentions would
cease: if Bishops and other Church Officers were elected and chosen according
to the Apostles institutions, then every man would think himself bound in
conscience to own and obey them, which perhaps do now think otherwise, because
the Gospel order is not observed; for since the falling away of the Bishops
before the council of Nice, and the falling away of the council of Nice from
the Apostolical institutions, and first primitive purity, and their making and
giving of new Orders and Officers in the Church, with new Titles and
Jurisdictions, which was never of Christ's institution, nor never heard of, nor
known in the first primitive Church, and which is the very falling away the
Apostle speaks of, 2 These. 2 3. which was to make way for the great Antichrist;
whereby he was not only brought forth to the birth, but has been nursed up
until he came to his full growth, and so has continued this 1300 years, and
has been the occasion of all the slaughter, blood, and burnings, vexation and
martyrdom that has befallen the Christian Churches to this da^, by falling
away from the Apostles institutions; and setting up Bishops and others for
Money and favor of Friends, and those to whom they should officiate, that
ought to elect and choose them to their offices, and after been confirmed by the
Supreme Magistrate, they are rejected and cast off, and Gods ways and
institutions rejected and neglected, and men's humane inventions and
institutions is followed and practiced; and this has been and is the cause of
difference.

And thirdly, they fall away from the Apostolical institution, of electing
members to sit in council: for though it belong to the Supreme Magistrate, to
call a council or S^nod, and to order the time and place for their meeting and
sitting; ye I have not found in all that I have read in my life, that either
this council of Nice, or any other council or Synod since, that the members
that sat were elected and chosen according to the Gospel order and
institution; so that it seems, the falling away of the Bishops by their pride
and covetousness, malice and envy, contention and strife, which occasioned
the calling of this council, together with the falling away of the council, by
their acting and decreeing so contrary to the Apostles institutions, as is said
above; and also the members sitting in Council, not being elected to sit,
according to the Apostles example in the like case, and the practice of the
first primitive Church; who can deny but this was the greatest falling away
that ever has been since the Apostles days unto this day? considering as we
shall hear after the things that followed after, and does still continue
occasioned by this their falling away.

And that the Members of this Council, nor of any other Council or Synod since,
as far as I can learn, was not elected nor chosen according to the
institutions and example of the Apostles; and first Primitive Churches, it will
appear very plain from, Acts 15. that the believing Church, as is showed above
by the Apostles order, had their votes in electing and choosing, First, Of
Bishops, Acts 1. Secondly, Of Inferior Church Officers, Acts 6. Thirdly, Of
Members to sit in Council, as here Acts 15. The Apostle Paul and Barnabas, who
I dare say had as much Authority and more, and more lawfully called to their
Authority, then any Pope and Prelate in the world; Members of Synod ought to be
elected.
yet durst not they when the difference fell out in the Church of Anteoch,
about which they had no small disputation; go to the Council about that
question, without a lawful call, until they were lawfully elected, and chosen
by the believers, the Church of Antioch: as ver. 3. They determined (that is,
the Church determined) to send Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of the
brethren, to go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders; Mark here, the
Elders sat in Council with the Apostles about this question, which was such
another question as was disputed in the Council of Nice; but neither Paul nor
Barnabas, nor the other members of the Church would offer to go, until they
were elected, and appointed by the Church to go; and when they came to
Jerusalem, they were received of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders:
where you see the Apostles and Elders are not here called the Church, as some
do vainly think, that the Apostles and Elders are the Church; they indeed are
members of the Church, but not the Church it self: for here the Church is
spoken of distinctly from the Apostles and Elders; they were received of the
Church, that is, of the Congregation or body of believers, and of the Apostles
and Elders; and thus our Nineteenth Article of the Church of England, discribes
the visible Church of Christ to be a Congregation of faithful men, etc. But I
have discoursed more largely of this in the former part of this book, and
therefore will say no more here.

And it cannot be doubted, but these brethren of the Church of Antioch, though
Laymen that were elected by the Church of Antioch, to go with Paul and Barnabas
to the council at Jerusalem: but they were permitted to sit in council with the
Apostles and Elders; that, as well as to acquaint the council with the state of
the Church, that had elected and sent them: so also that their vote and
conscience might go along in the determination; and according to this,
Arelatenses disputing against Lodovicus and Paenormetan, in the Council of
Basil, says, that the dignity of Fathers is not to be respected in the
Council, but only reason, nor any thing more to be looked after then Truth;
neither, says he, will I prefer a lie of a Bishop, though he be never so
great, before the Truth of a poor Priest: neither ought a Bishop to disdain,
if a man be unlearned, for wisdom dwells oftener under a bare and ragged
cloak, then in rich Ornaments and Apparel; wherefore, says he, I pray you my
Lord Bishops do not so much contemn your Inferiors; for the first that dyed
for Christ; and opened the way of Martyrdom, was no Bishop but a Levite; but
if we repeat the example of old Councels, we shall find that the inferiors
were always present with the Bishops in Councels: and what is more comely says
he, for us to follow, then the doctrines and customs of the Apostles; as it is
said, Acts 15. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us: that is, the
Apostles and Elders with the Church, and the word it seemed good, signifies in
this place, not only consultation, but decision and determination; whereby it
appears that others besides Apostles or Bishops had determinating voices in
Councels; and in another place says, that is Acts the 6. which is spoken to
above, says he, when the Apostles would entreat of any weighty matter, Laymen
a Ministers ought to in Counce with Bish
they durst not determine by themselves, but the twelve called together the
multitude. And seeing all things were written for our learning, it seem the
Apostles would give us example that in such weighty matters we should admit our
inferiors, as Athanasius in the Council of Nice, who then was but a Priest,
yet he did manfully withstand the Arrians. Also in the Council of Calcedon,
which was counted one of the four principal Councels, there was present four
hundred Priests, and we have most evident testimony for inferiors in Councels;
for the chief and principal of all the divines St. Augustine says upon these
words, where Christ says to Peter, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; he says, by these words judicial power was given not only to Peter,
but also to the other Apostles, and also to the whole Church, Bishops and
Priests. If therefore Priests have a judicial power in the Church, what should
let but that they also may have determinate voices in the Councels and Synods;
and says he, if Abbots who were not instituted by Christ, have their
determinate voices in Councels, as they always have, why should not Priests
have the same? mark here the Council confesses that Abbots are not of Christ's
institution: see for this, the Acts and monuments of the Primitive Church page
624.

Thus you see what the practice of the Apostles was, and their admiting of
Ministers and Laymen that were godly and lawfully elected into their councels;
and which was also practiced in ancient councels, though since this council of
Nice; I do not read that Laymen have been admitted, though hear in this
council of Basil, God stirred up this man to contend for the truth: but the
occasion of this dispute in the council of Basil, was not about Laymen, but
the Bishops would have had Priests and Deacons, and all excluded from having a
determining Vote, but only Bishops, and I think they have had it so ever
since, both in Councels and Synods: except it were some of their own creatures,
that would say as they say; but as to the due election of members to be in the
councels, according to the Apostolical institution that has been altogether
neglected this 1300 years, since the council of Nice, through the pride and
presumption of Bishops, and the prevalence of Antichrist then brought forth by
that council: which practice you see is contrary to the Apostles institution
and example, and is also contrary even to reason, and to the practice of
Kingdoms in civil affairs; as Parliaments that give and make Laws for the
Government of the Kingdom in civil affairs, they are elected and chosen by the
country, so that what Laws they make as to the Government of the outward man,
they are bound to stand to and obey, for it is their own act; they elected and
entrusted them to make such Laws as should be for their wealth and safety.

And can any man be so brutish, as to think that believers, who are the
mystical body of Jesus Christ, and who alone are the Church in Scripture
sense: and can any man think that Christ would have them excluded from meddling
with the affairs of the Church, which particularly belongs unto them, and which
Church they are: is there not as much reason, that they should have their Vote
in electing them, that are to sit in councels, or Synods, to make Laws to bind
their conscience, as to have a vote in electing those in Parliament, that make
Laws to bind the outward man: and are not these examples and practices of the
Apostles and first primitive Church, in these three several points spoken to
above, as sure and safe rules to walk by, as can be showed for any other
assembly or meetings to make Laws by, etc.

For can it be thought that Jesus Christ would appoint for such a work,
Necromancers, Witches, Conjurers, Sorcerers, Astronomors, Simoniacks,
Sodomites, abusers of themselves with mankind, incesteous persons, and covetous
Idolaters; Liars, Swearers, Judge if these be sit to make Laws for the Church
of Christ.
Sabboth-breakers, Murderers. Per jured persons, full of Wrath and Strife,
Malice and Envy, Sedition and Heresy, Adulterers, Fornicators, Drunkards,
abounding in all the works of the flesh, as a great part both of Popes and
Prelates have been and are: that these and such like should give Laws to his
Church and Spouse, that their acts and determinations should be reputed and
taken for the acts and determinations of the Church; who are not, as I have
proved in the former part of this Book, so much as true members of any
particular rightly constituted Church of Jesus Christ in Scripture sense
themselves, and who never had a right call to their office, nor to sit in
council, nor Synod, according to the Scripture order as is showed above: they
came not in at the door, but at the window like thieves and robbers: that these
should make Laws for Christ's Spouse, to bind their consciences to Superstitious
and Idolatrous Observations, and will worship contrary and against the written
word of God; and by their magnificent outward power and authority to compel men
to obedience against their conscience, and restrain them from worshipping God
according to his own institutions. Beloved, such ways and doings as these are
not of God: consider it in time, and lay it to heart, for the Lord is a God of
Judgment, by him actions are weighed; and thus all these things said together,
and justly weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, it will appear, that this
Apostasy and falling away of the Bishops, before the council of Nice, and of
the Bishops in the council of Nice, to be the greatest Apostasy and falling
away from the institutions and example of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and of
the longest continuance that ever was in the world, this 1660 years: for it is
of 1300 years continuance, and the greatest evil and mischief it has produced
to the Churches of Jesus Christ; for the Arian Herefie, is gone, and other
Herefies are gone, but the effects of this falling away continues still.

O ye Christian Princes, An admonition to Christian Princes.
into whose hands God has put the Sword of Justice; you see by what is said
above, that there is an absolute necessity of a Reformation, according to the
word of God, and you bear not the Sword for naught. O therefore set upon this
good work of Reformation: happy and blessed will he be both by God and Men,
that first begins an effectual Reformation; God expects your endeavors in it,
for he works by means, and you are the persons prophesied of that must do it,
Rev. 17.16. and who knows how near this prophecy is to be fulfilled; For her
Plagues shall come suddenly, Rev. 18.8. and the holy Ghost shows the reason
why it shall so come to pass, For strong is the Lord that judges her,
therefore whatsoever your hands find to do, do it with all your might, for
cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently: Try all things by the
word of God, so as nothing may be done against the word; as it is in our 34
Article of the Church of England; For it is not lawful (says the 20 Article)
to ordain any thing that is contrary to the word of God written; nor it has
neither strength nor authority (says the 21 Article) unless it may be
declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture; and the good Lord direct you
according to that rule, for then you will have the prayers and assistance of
many Thousands, whose hearts now are made sad, because of these abominations.

But yet a word or two more, to show how great this Apostasy and falling away
of the Bishops was, before the council of Nice. Alexander Bishop of Alexandria,
wrote in an Epistle to his brethren and fellow Ministers through the Churches,
after this manner; But in as much as Eusebius, now Bishop of Nicomedea,
supposes the whole state of the Church to be under his Jurisdiction; by which
you may see what contention and strife there was amongst them for superiority
and pre-eminence; and for that he is become the Patron and Ringleader of
Apostacies: I think it necessary, etc. The first Book of Socrates, Chap. 3. And
this was a little before the council of Nice, which falling away of the Bishops
appears further by the Testimony of Constantine the Emperor; for besides his
Epistles I have already spoken of, which shows, that the Bishops contentions
was the cause of calling the council of Nice; and the next day after the
council met the Emperor in the council made an Oration, and exhorted them to
concord and agreement: and to remove from their minds all private malice and
grildge, which they had one toward another; for diverse of them had accused one
another, and the day before had put up Libels to the Emperor against one
another. See Socrates first, book, Chap. 5. See also Chap. 22. At another
council at Tyrus, where thus he writes; Verily I know not what matters Assembly
through Tumult and Troublesome stir has decreed; Methinks the truth it
self, you have in a manner subverted, The Apostasy of the Bishop a very great
Apostasy.
by means of your Hurleburly, and kindled heat of contention; for you prosecute
your private spite and hatred one toward another, and seem to neglect the
service of God, and furtherance of truth; and after he charge them that seem
to maintain the holy Mysteries of Christ's Church, that they do practice
nothing else but that which breeds discord and discention; to be short, that
which tends to the utter overthrow and destruction of mankind, by all which
it does manifestly appear, that this Apostasy and falling of the Bishops and
the council, was a very exceeding great falling away from the Apostles
institutions and example; and most like of any to be that very falling away
that the Apostle spoke of, 2 These. 2.3. With the which the great Antichrist and
man of sin should be ushered in.

So that it is manifest, all the evil and misery that has befallen the
Christian Churches ever since, by the prevalency of the Pope, the great
Antichrist: came in by the falling away of the Bishops, What evil the Decree of
Nice producued.
and by the falling away of the Council; for that decree of Lord Primats,
Metrapolytans, and Lord Diocesans, etc. and giving them such large Jurisdiction
and Authority over others, their equals; though they might pretend that these
should sit as in so many watch towers, to oversee the rest, and to keep out
Heresy and Schism; but how fair a pretense soever they, or any else can
devise to excuse their doings: it may teach us how dangerous a thing it is, to
step aside out of Gods way, for their decree being a humane instituion, and a
falling away from the institutions of the Apostles, as you heard above; the
event that it produced, was not only the bringing in of Antichrist, but a
multitude of Heresies more, and the increasing of those Heresies that then was.
I think you may easily read the sin in the punishment, as you shall hear anon;
for Eusebius, Bishop of Necomedia, and Theognis Bishop of Nice, and Marris
Bishop of Calcedone, etc. all Arian Bishops; they also were enabled and
authorized by this decree of this council, with such power and jurisdiction in
their Provinces, over inferior Bishops etc. that they compelled the other
Bishops to side with them, or else they cast them out: that in short time this
Heresy overspread a great part of the Christian World; for they called Synods
and councels in their own jurisdictions, and condemned, and excommunicated the
Orthodox Bishops and Pastors; the other party again condemned and
excommunicated them, so that these councels and Synods, cursed and
excommunicated one another, as I have showed in the former part of this book,
of above Twenty councels, that cursed and excommunicated one the other; And
Athanasius, who was a great stickler in the Nicen council, in making that
decree; he felt the effect of what it produced, for he was five or six times
banished into Exile, and forced by Heretics to fly for to save his life; and
thus persecution began again, for many tumults and bickrings there was and
great slaughter made, and cruel Tortors and Torments devised and executed upon
such as would not be of their side; so that the persecutions is said by some,
to be as cruel as the former, only it had changed the name; for the former
persecutions was by Heathens, and this was by pretended Christians; thus it
appears in part what misery that decree and falling away from the Gospel
institutions did bring forth: for it furnished the Pope with authority to make
him the Antichrist: he took occasion from these broyls and discentions, to hear
and determine causes of both sides, whereby he ever after clamed a Supremacy
over all other Churches, and at last attained it; that decree also furnished
and enabled Arians, Masidonians, Novisians and other Heretics to work their
feats, so that soon after this council had made that decree Heresies never came
in to the Ghurch half so fast, neither before nor since, as at that time, for
the space of 30 years. For Pope Liberus, about the year 352 was an Arian, and
Pope Felix, about 358, was also an Arian, so that this falling away of the
Bishops and council was exceeding great, and has produced so many new
inventions in Religion, and so many ceremonies; and that is another part of
their falling from the examples of the Apostles. Acts 15.28. Their care was to
abolish ceremonies, and lay no heavier burden upon them but necessary things;
but the Pope and Prelates has burdened the Church with unnecessary
ceremonies; and with above 150 Religious Orders, that not one of them is of
Divine institution, to all which this Council of Nice in that decree laid the
foundation.

But this was not all that followed upon that new decree and bumane
institution: Bishops Authority cannot keep out Heresy.
for immediately followed a number of Heresies more, which that decree made way
for: that every Bishop in his own Province might make what Laws he pleased. As
first the Photiniuns, about the year 323, Photinus was Bishop of Syrmium, the
Luciferians in 333, there was another sort of them called Homonymians, the
Jovinians in 335, the Aetians in 331. Aetius was a Deacon; the same time the
Eunomians, whose Author was Bishop of Cyzicum; the Audians in 338, and were
after called Anthromorphets, the Semarians, the Author was Bishop of Cesaria in
the year 330. the Meletians from Meletus a Theban Bishop, a little before the
Council of Nice; the Manichees, of which came the Catharists and Macarii in
340; the Donatists from Donatus, who because Cecilian was preferred to be
Bishop of Carthage before him, he turned Heretic, so ambitious were they of
honor and jurisdiction in 348, from him sprang the Parmetiaists and Montenses,
the Priscilliunists in 348. the Apollinarists in 350 the Antedico Marianits,
and the Heluidians 355: the Messalians in 341. whose Heresy was divided into
several Sects, as Martyrianies, Inthuaste, Euphemite Satanici; the
Metangismonits in 341. the Proclianits and Patricians in 387. the Collyridians,
and the Paterniani in 357. the Aerians in 340. the Abolenite 370. the Pilagians
in 382. The Predestinati and Timotheans, about the same time there was also the
Enstathius, who renewed the Heresy of Sabilecus and Paulus, Somosatenus, and
the Ancyrogalatian, the Patropassians, the Nestorians and Eutichians,
Theodotians and many others; here is 40 odd, of which there was about 55 of
these Heresies came rushing into the Church in Twenty years time, after the
Council of Nice; whereby the Church was almost as much distressed, if not
altogether, as it was under the Heathen Persecutors: The Judgment that befell
the Church after the decree of Nice.
that however the Council and others since may pretend that these new Officers
and Offices invented by them of Pope and Lord Primate, and Lord Metrapolitan,
and Lord Dioceasan etc. together with their large Jurisdiction and Authority
given them: with preheminency of priority and superiority, was the way to keep
out Heresy: yet that God might let both them and us see how dangerous it is to
leave his divine institutions, and embrace or devise novelties in any part of
his Worship or Service, though upon never so fair pretenses; how suddenly
after did all these Heresies arise in the Church, to let them see both their
sinfulness and foolishness, in forsaking the institutions and rules laid down
in the Scriptures for us to walk by; the forsaking whereof, with what it
produced, which continues to this day, may convince us both of the sin, and
show us the punishment; and it is not to be past over without taking notice of:
that the City of Nice, where first this wicked decree was made, it was the very
first City that was given up into the hand of the Oramen Family (which now we
call Turks.) as a punishment upon the very place, as we have ground to think.

This Nicen Council, Mr. Brightman says, did sit under the blowing of the
second Trumpet; the effect of which is, that a great mountain burning with Fire
was cast into the Sea, and the third part of the Sea became blood, etc. by the
Sea, he understands the Doctrine of the Gospel in it is purity: and by a third
part becoming blood, is meant, the mingling of Prince-hood, and Lord Primacy,
with the Doctrine of the Gospel, and institutions of Christ and his Apostles:
which was done by this Council, as you have heard above: that through the pride
of Bishops striving for dignities, they were embroiled in bloody wars and
Persecutions, Mingling Doctrines of men with the Gospel.
as then it came to pass; and by Mountains, is meant in Scripture, Princes,
and Peers, and Great Men, as Isa. 2.12.14. The day of the Lord of host is upon
all that are proud and haughty, and upon all the high Mountains, and upon the
Halls that are lifted up: and which may well be applied to the pride of Popes
and Prelates: and by the 3d part of the creatures in the Sea dying; if by the
Sea we understand with Brightman the Doctrine of the Gospel, then by the 3d
part dying in the Sea, we may understand, the destruction of the multitude that
have received the doctrine of that humane decree of Nice, and mingled it with
the pure doctrine of the Gospel, and the doctrines of the Popes and Prelates,
and all the rabble of Monks and Friars, etc. that mingle their inventions of
doctrine and discipline, ceremonies and the like, with the institutions of the
Gospel, of which a third part died.

So insatiable they were of honor, and to have preheminency, that in the next
age following, that, three most holy Popes, who no doubt could not err; which
was Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine; yet were all three convicted of Forgery,
for falcefying the Act; of the Nicen Council, to exable their Principality,
though the Council of Nice had given them more before, then Christ had left
them; but what authority the Council had given them, they labored to improve,
and did, until they accomplished their desire to have a universal power over all
Churches; and this made them the great Antichrist and man of sin, other wise he
could not have been Antichrist; for it was foretold of him, that he should
exalt himself above all that was called Gods, that is, above all Magistrates
and Officers who are called God, Psalm. 82.6. I said ye are Gods, etc. Therefore
the Council of Carthage writ to Celestine, and admonished him, not to commit
such a sin, as to bring in the Smoke and and Swelling pride of the world, of
Antichrist they might have said, into the Church of Christ; and thus in time
their impudence grew up to its height: you may see from hence, how dangerous it
is to bring innovations into the Church of Christ to mingle men's institutions,
with Gods institutions; to make and institute Officers and Offices in the
Church, which Christ ordained not, nor will not own, but will say unto them,
Get ye behind me, or depart ye cursed I know ye not; by these Lordly Titles and
Jurisdictions that you have exercised, I ordained them not; for will any man
fearing God, that is in his right wits, think that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, who had an immediate call from Christ to their office, and were
endowed with an infallible and unerring spirit that they did not know better
then any Pope or Prelate, council or other, what Officers and order was best
for the Church: but that men dare presume to reject and neglect Christ's order
and institutions, and make orders and institutions of their own; it is good to
draw near to God, but it is dangerous to go from him, and run out of his way
that he has prescribed for us to walk in; it is said, Rev. 2.1. That Christ
holds the stars in his right hand: by stars is meant the Pastors of the
Church, which while they walk in Gods way, Christ holds them in his right hand,
to keep and direct them: as it is said, He shall keep thee in all thy ways:
and he is a powerful keeper, and a faithful maintainer of all his faithful
servants; but those that walk out of Gods way, have no promise of protection in
such cursed crooked ways.

Thus having hitherto set down the manner of the great Antichrists appearance,
how he came to his Throne by the removing of the Heathen Emperors, which was
it that hindered, until it was taken out of the way: and also of the falling
away of the Bishops before the council, and of the Bishops in the council of
Nice: how both fell away from the institutions and example of Christ and his
Apostles, and the first primitive purity, both as to the election of Bishops,
and other Church Officers, and as to the election of membert to sit in
councels: all which rules is laid down in the Scripture for us to walk by,
which the Bishops and council; not only fell from, but they made new
institutions and canons of their own without, and contrary to the Scripture,
which was both as Midwife and Nurse, to bring forth and Nurse up Antichrist, to
his full strength, etc. And now I come to speak of the thing, that Antichrist
should do after he is come; and the Apostle says; 2 These. 2.4. That he should
oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, How Antichrist exalts
himself above all Gods.
or that is Worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Bellarmine to excuse the Pope, that he should not be
Antichrist says from this Text, That Antichrist shall not suffer any God,
either true or false, nor any Idol to be worshipped, but only himself: but this
cannot be here meant by this Text, for the Text says, He shall sit in the
Temple of God; the Scriptures notes out Antichrist to be a false Prophet: now a
Prophet whether true or false, must be a Prophet to some God, and when he sits
in the Temple of God; let Bellarmine tell us, whether this must be in the
Temple of another God, or in his own Temple: if in another Temple, then he
must own a God above him: if in his own Temple, then the Apostle spoke
improperly, for he should not have said, He sits in the Temple of God as God,
but rather, He sits in his own Temple as God: and how should Antichrist be
known by this sign, when it is not known what manner of Temple he should have?
but we will take the words as they are in the Text, and leave Bellarmines
deceitful Gloss.

St. Hierom interprets Antichrists sacrilegious pride, to be a kind of
immoderate power over all Religion; for thus he says; Autichrist shall war
against the Saints, and overcome them, and shall be puffed up with so great
pride, as he shall attempt to change Gods Laws and Ceremonies, subjecting all
Religion to his own will; In which he points out the Pope of Rome to the life
to be the great Antichrist, for that humane Authority the Council of Nice gave
him, he has improved: that in the present Church of Rome and so far as the
Popes power extends, the Laws of God are almost abolished, and new instituted
Orders, Officers, and Discipline is established, and almost all things is
become new, as is showed in the former part of this book, yea 150 new Religious
orders, and not one of them of Christ's institution, and many more things the
like; so that by the Testimony of St. Heirome, the Pope of Rome must be the
great Antichrist and man of sin, and son of perdition, that exalts and opposes
all that is called, God, that is, Psalm. 82.6. all earthly Magistrates; I said
ye are gods, but ye shall die like men, etc. and it is manifest that the Pope
of Rome does claim and excreise authority over all Emperors, Kings and
Princes, who are earthly gods: and over all authority Civil and Ecclesiastical,
and he has promo^ed and established false worship, and siteth in the Temple of
God showing himself that he is God; that is, he sits both in his own person,
and by his power and authority in the Christian Congregations; showing himself
that he is god, that is, an earthly god and the greatest of all earthly gods,
by his commanding power over other earthly gods; and that Christian Assemblies
where the Pope exercises his power, is called the Temple of God, see the
Ephesians. 2.22. In whom you also are builded together for a habitation of God
through the Spirit, and 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of
God and if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; Look to thy
self Pope, and all Popelings, for^ve have defi^ed the Temple and Church of God,
and him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is Holy, which Temple are ye,
that is all true believers, and 1 Cor. 6.19. What know ye not that your body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God and ye are
not your own, for ye are bought with a price: Let the Pope and his Prelate then
take heed how they defile these Temples that God has bought with so dear a
price, that they defile them not with their humane institutions and ceremonies,
etc.

So that as it is said of the Pope of Rome in his extravigance, that he is
neither god nor man, but a middle person between both: so he sits in the Temple
of God as god over all Emperors, Kings and Princes etc. He sits in the
Christian Assemblies and Congregations, which is the Temple and House of Gods
there he sits claiming and exercising a power over them all as a God; thus you
see how lively the Holy Ghost in this Text has Pictured out the Pope of Rome
to be the great Antichrist and man of sin; sitting as a god, over all other
earthly gods that is worshipped with a civil outward worship; But what less
then divine worship was it that was given to the Pope, and which he did
arrogate to himself, when the Ambassador of the Emperor of Sicily lay grouling
up on the ground, and cried to the Pope, The blasphemous honor given to the
Pope.
Thou that take away the sins of the World, have mercy upon us; Thou that
take away the sins of the World, grant us thy peace: See Paul Amicla, Book 7.
also Simon Bigimus, Bishop of Modrusium: speaking to Pope Leo in the Council of
Latteran ses. 6. Behold, says he, speaking of the Pope. Behold the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, the root of Jesse: we have waited for thee O blessed Leo to be
our Savior: O wicked blesphemous Bishop, and wicked blasphemous Pope, to
receive such Worships: unto these we may join Cornelins Bishop of ^^pontum,
who laid open his blockishnesse in wondering at this Beast the Antichrist, in
the Council of Trent, in these words; The Pope is come a light into the world,
and men love darkness more then light: out pon you blasphemous Claw backs,
says Mr. Brightman: Is it not enough for you to adore the man of sin, with the
praise of the Saints, but you must rob God, and give that honor to Antichrist,
that is proper only to Jesus Christ: Gregory says, in his 4th Book, Chap. 38.
What answer will thou make unto Christ the head of the Universal Church, when
thou shall be examined at the last Judgment, that thou have called thy self
the only Bishop, and go about by the name Universal, to make all his members
subject unto thee: and in another place, I speak it boldly, says he, whosoever
calls himself universal Bishop, or in the pride of his heart desires so to
be called, he is the fure-runner of Antichrist: The testimony of ancient
writers against the Pope.
and I have showed you, that before the Council of Nice, they were aiming at
such a thing; as Alixander Bishop of Alixandrea write to other Bishops and
Churches, That Eusebius Bishop of Necomedia, supposed the whole state of the
Church to be under his Jurisdiction; whereby you may perceive Bishops had
aspiring thoughts, that was, as John Bishop of Constantinople writ to Pope
Gregory, That he might be called Universal Bishop, etc.

Armulphus in the Council of Remes, says thus, speaking of the Pope: What
think ye Reverend Fathers of this man, siting on high, in his Throne glittering
in purple and cloth of Gold? what think ye him to be? Verily if he be void of
Charity, and blown up with pride, then is he Antichrist, siting in the Temple
of God, and showing himself that he is God.

Bernard speaking of that time, says, The Bishops who new have charge of Gods
Church, are not Teachers, but Deceivers, they are not Feeders, but Beguilers,
they are not Prelates, but Pilates; and in Vincicto Remancie, he says, Ye are
called Bishops, but ye are Raveners. O my Brethren, Jesus at this time has
chosen unto him many Devils to be Bishops; they are not Feeders, but they are
Traitors; but Fernard mistook, for they were not of Jesus Christ's choosing:
Christ's institution was cast aside, for if they had been chosen as they ought
to be, by Lot as Matthias was, Acts the first, Jesus Christ would have made a
better choice, but they were chosen by men that had not right to choose them and
that was the reason that they were such a plague to the Church as they were.

Abertus in his 10 Chap. speaks to the same purpose: they says he that now
governt the Church, for the most part be Thieves and Murderers, more catchers,
then feeders, more spoylers, The Fathers testimony concerning Antichrist.
then defenders, more killers, then keepers, more deceivers, then Doctors, more
boguilers, then guids; these be the forerunners of Antichrist, and the
subverters of the sheep of Christ: See for this Bishop Jewels book against
Harding: what need we any further witnesses to prove what is said above, and to
prove the Pope to be Antichrist: for he has already been set out by such marks
of Scripture, and by the Testimony of these Authors, so proved against him, and
which cannot properly be applied to any but the Pope of Rome, that no man need
be any longer in doubt, but that we have found out both, who Antichrist is, and
where he is, and when he first appeared: namely, that the succession of the
Popes of Rome, is the great Antichrist, and that he had his first birth, in the
first Council of Nice: there he drew his first breath, which has been so
contagious, that it has insected almost all the Christian world.

In the first book of Socrates, Chap. 5. it is said, That there was in the
Council of Nice, certain Logicians, who were ready to defend each others part
that came in controversy; but a Lay man, one of the number of Confessors, of
a simple and sincere mind, set himself against them, and told them in plain
words, that neither Christ nor his Apostles had delivered unto us the Art of
Logic, neither vain Fallacies, but an open and plain mind, to be preferred of
us with faith and good works. which when he had spoken, all that were there
present, held with his sentence, and the Logicians quieted and settled
themselves aright. It seems that the primitive order of admitting Laymen into
the Council, was not altogether laid aside by this Council of Nice, though the
primitive order, as-to the election of members to sit, was neglected: and also
the manner of acting: for the Apostles in their council did abolish ceremonies
Acts 15.28. this council and others since, have burdened the Church with
unnecessary ceremonies: which has been a clog to many a tender conscience: so
that all things duly considered, this falling away has been the greatest that
ever was, since Jesus Christ lived upon the earth; the effect whereof has not
only brought forth Antichrist, but has been his support to this day, even he
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
Amichrist, deceitful workin^
and lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish; and I pray you, what is this power and deceit that Antichrist
works by? is not the power of the council of Nice, that first set him up, and
gave him his Authority, that he works by, and which has been confirmed to him
since by other councels; that if any question his authority, is not that his
refuge, such and such councels, says thus and thus to confirm my way, and what
I do: and all these councels had their original from this of Nice, and from
that apostatising decree that furnished them all with authority: and they have
been such apt Scholars, they have ever since writ after their copy: the Arian
Apostasy, and all the Heretics that have been since, putting them all
together, could never have served Antichrists turn to bring him forth, and to
furnish him with such authority, as the falling away of the Bishops and the
council of Nice has furnished him withal; for the Arian falling away was
palpable and known to the world, therefore men were more shie of it; neither
would it serve Antichrists turn to shelter himself under it, for Antichrist
was to be one that should pretend to truth, but by deceit; now this falling
away of the Bishops and the council, fitted them to the life, for they, as he,
pretended to the truth: and as gross as their actings and falling away was,
comparing it with the Gospel institutions, as above from which they fell; yet
few has discerned it, if they have, they have been so over-powred, that they
durst not mutter against it; and the acts of that council, has been cried up
as lawful acts, of a lawful council; whereas you see by these four Scriptures
above mentioned; neither was the council lawful, nor their act lawful, and so
undiscernably it was the bringer forth of Antichrist, that man of sin and son
of perdition, which has been 1300 years in the world, and yet was so covertly
brought forth, that men will not yet believe he is come.

The next Text I shall treat of for the discovery of the great Antichrist, is,
Rev. 9. For I shall but give a hint at some of the chief, ver. 1. And the fifth
Angel blew the Trumpet, and I saw a Star fall from Heaven unto the Earth, and
to him was given the key of the bottomless pit, and he opened the pit, and
there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnice, and the
Sun and the Air was darkened by the smoke of the pit, and out of the smoke came
forth Locusts upon the Earth, and to them was given power, as the Scorpions of
the Earth have power: and in the 11 ver. it is said, That they have a King over
them, which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew is
Abaddon, and in the Greek Apollyon, which Expositors say, do both signify
destroying. By a Star falling from Heaven to Earth, is meant, some eminent
person in the Church, falling from heavenly things to earthly things; which
some think, is meant of, some Master of an Heresy: but Joachimus Abbas thinks
it to be some Clergyman, and both is true, and may easily be found in one man:
namely, the Pope of Rome, the great Antichrist, for he is both a Clergyman and
a Master of Heresy, yea, and of more Heresies then ever one man was Master of.
For as I have proved in the first part, the present Religion of the Church of
Rome is composed of above forty several Heresies: and this Star falling from
Heaven to earth, cannot so fitly be compared to any man upon the earth, as to
the Pope; for this Trumpet is thought to blow about the year 607. at which time
Pope Boneface the Third, obtained of Phocas, the Traitor and Murdering
Emperor who murdered his master, granted the Pope to be called universal
Bishop: to get the Popes favor to help to uphold him in his usurped Throne of
Murder; and he again as a requiral, confers upon the Pope this usurped and
Heretical Title of universal Bishop over all other Churches; other preceding
Popes had been striving long to obtain that dignity of universal Bishop but
could not obtain it till now: also John Bishop of Constantinople sought for it:
upon which account, Gregory the great did write in his Fourth book, Epistle the
34. By this pride, says he what thing else is signified but that Antichrist is
at hand; and again, in the same book says he, The King of pride (meaning
An^^christ) is near coming to us: and which is not lawful to be spoken, there
is an Army of Priests ready to fight his battles, that is these Locust, here
spoken of: that when the Pope, the fallen Star, opened the bottomless pit, the
Locusts came out of the smoke of the pit, which is these Priests Gregory says
should fight Antichrists battles; for when the Po^e received this Title of
Universal Bishop, he also received the Key of the bottomless pit, to let out
these Locusts: for now his authority and jurisdiction was enlarged. I hope
Gregory being a Pope himself, and in a manner prophesied of this but about
three or 4 years before it came to pass; methinks Bishop Williams and others
might give some credit to it seeing it did come to pass so soon after, and
should not thus fight against the truth as he does, etc.

The Key was given to the Pope after this manner, the Emperor by his Edict
decreed that the Pope of Rome should have full power to call and dismiss
Synods, to confirm or abolish whatsoever was decreed in the Synods at his
pleasure; and that the City of Rome should be the head-s^ring from whence all
Ecclesiastical government and orders should issue and how forth, whereas before
that Constantinople was so accounted, because there the Emperor had his feat,
unto whom those prerogatives did formerly belong, as Pompon letus says in the
history of Phocas, Antichrist has the Keys of Hell not of Heaven.
and what was there then that this Key could not open, after he had received
this power: there was other Popes that fell before this, as lesser Stars we may
count them, because their fall was not so great: Antichrist was but then in his
groth, but now he was grown up to his full Stature; This Pope was the great
Star to whom the Key of the bottomless pit was given; for now he was furnished
with complete Authority every way, to do all the works that belonged to
Antichrist to do, he brags indeed that he has the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; but you see the Holy Ghost tells us, that he has the Keys of the
bottomless pit of Hell, and calls him the King of the Locusts, which come out
from thence: and so he is, for all the rabble of the popish Clergy are at his
command: for when the order of Jesuits, which does exceed the rest for
Learning, etc. were confirmed, it was ordained that they should be at the Popes
command, to undertake any service that he should require of them in any
Kingdom, and that readily and willingly, without putting him to any charge, or
asking a question or reason of the thing commanded: this shows his Kingly power
over these Locusts, for as Solomon says, Who may say unto the King, what do
thou? thus you see how lively the Holy Ghost has set forth the Pope, by what
his practice now is, to be the King of the bottomless pit: see for proof of
this, Christianus, Franken Colloq. Surius, and Hospinian.

This King of pride, Antichrist the Pope, he opens the bottomless pit, and
there arose the smoke of the pit; Mr. Brightman says, by this smoke is meant,
the over-spreading of Heresy, both in Doctrine, and Superstition in Worship:
and we may well take the words in that sense, for as a great smoke does darken
the Sun and the Air: so corruption in Doctrine, and Superstitious Idolatrous
worship, does darken and Eclips the heavenly light of Gods truth: and there was
never in the world such a great over-spreading Heresy, as popery is, as is
proved before, that the present Church of Rome is both Heretical, Blasphemous,
and Idolatrous; there was some smoke and darkness before the Council of Nice,
The Pope of Rome, the greatest Hererick in the world.
among the Bishops and in the Council of Nice an Heresy in falling away from
the institutions and example of Christ and his Apostles; but now the smoke and
darkness grew both thicker, and spread further by reason of this universal
Title and Jursdiction, obtained by Phocas the Traitor and Murderer; it was
unlikely to be any profit to the Church of Christ, that was brought forth by
such an instrument; indeed the Council of Nice laid the foundation hereof, but
the Popes were never able to accomplish what they desired, and aimed at, until
now: and from this time the smoke and darkness grew Thicker and Thicker; for
this Popes next Successor, Pope Boneface the 4th. The Temple called Pantheon,
Dedicated to all the Heathen Gods; this abominable stye of wickedness, this
Pope converted to the honor of all Saints, and ordained a yearly Feast to be
kept to it, and to exercise the same impiety as the Heathens had done, but
under another name: but no more command or precept in the word of God for the
one, then for the other, and therefore no more pleasing to God; and as the
Heathen had their Idol Gods to pray unto, so these had their Idol Saints to
pray unto, to whose honor the Idol Temple was appointed, etc. Then come in the
shaving of Crouns, the Chanting in Quires, the forbidding of Priests marriage;
the Lattine Mass, and Kissing of the Pax, and soon after the varnishing of
Images, with a number more the like, whereby the smoke and darkness increased
more and more: the next Successor to this Pope Theodotus, and decreed, that
parents who had been witnesses together to any Children in Baptism, should not
live any longer together in marriage, but must be separated, and the Woman have
her Dowry again, and a year after have liberty to Marry another; this was a
strange kind of incesse, by means of a spiritual Kindred, being witnesses
together in Baptism, which the Pope found out that God had no knowledge of,
when he made Laws concerning incesse, and unlawful Marriages, Levit. 18.
Boneface the 5th. which was the next Pope that succeeded after him, added to
these, That men are delivered by Christ from Original sin, which is the
Doctrine of some of the Anabaptists: he added moreover, That the Law does
require no more of a man, then what he is able to perform by his own strength,
or at least by the help of Gods grace. And the next that succeeded, was Pope
Honorius, who was censured by the third Counsel of Constantinople, to be a
Monothelite: that is, to ascribe only one will, and one nature unto Christ;
Thus you see after the receiving of the Key of the bottomless pit, what a
smoke came out under these five popes, after one an another, and so continued
whereby the darkness did so increase, that the light of the Sun of the Gospel
is almost quite obliterated, and put out; to be short, it came to this at lasts
to bring every man's neck under this yoke, that every soul that meant to be
saved, ought to profess the form of the Romish Traditions, and to acknowledge
the decrees of the Pope were to be received and believed, as if they had been
confirmed by a divine voice, etc.

And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, and what are these,
but all the whole crew or spawne of Religious orders in the Church of Rome, of
which I have named in the former part of this book one hundred and fifty
orders, and all of humane invention and institution for the brood must be like
the dam; for after men attributed their salvation to their own meritorious
works, and new devised ways of will worship; there was daily new Religions and
new Religious orders and ways of worship invented: all men desire salvation and
when once they were persuaded by their Leaders, that it was in their own power,
in observing such things as they could easily perform, there could be no
Superstition devised, from which they would hold back their hands so that one
man is not more commonly begotten of another, then these orders of locusts were
increased and multiplied, and one order divided into several branches out of
this smoke; to such members that one general of the Minorites promised the
Pope, toward the leavying of an Army against the: Turks, thirty thousand tall
Warriers out of the family of Franciscans; what an infinite number was there
then of all the rabble of other orders?

These kind of Vermin are called Rev. 16.13. Three unclean spirits like Froggs
coming out of the mouth of the Dragon the Beast and the false Prophet, they are
the spirits of Devils working miracles and which go unto the Kings of the
earth, to gather them to battle, etc. The Dragon, that is the Devil, by which
was understood, the Heathen Emperors for their rage and madness against the
Church of Christ; for they acted the Devils part, and when the Devil saw that
he must be cast our; that Diocleasian and Maximinian must be gone, the Devil
made sure to provide himself of a successor, sending the Beast the Pope into
his seat before; for Dioclesian lived at Nicomedia, and Maximinian at
Mediolanum, when they gave over their Empires: leaving Rome empty for the Beast
to domineer and play rekes in, for says the Text, Rev 13.2. The Dragon gave
him, that is, the Beast with Seven Heads and Ten Horns, The Pope proved to be
the dragon, beast, and false Prophet.
the Dragon gave him his power, and his Throne, and great Authority: and when
Constantine came in to be Emperor, and see the seat taken up by the Pope,
Constantine got him away to Byzantum, now called Constantinople, and there made
himself a place, so that Antichrist the Pope of Rome, is in this sense called
the Dragon; the dragon gave him his power, and throne, and authority, from
whence we learn by whose power and authority it is, that the Pope of Rome acts
by; namely, the Devil the Dragon, and the Beast and the false Prophet is one
and the same Antichrist; as he has a double power, both spiritual and
temporal, he is the Beast in respect of his civil power, and the false Prophet
in respect of his ecclesiastical power, out of whose mouth, these unclean
spirits, like Frogs, are said to come forth: these three unclean spirits do
signify all the Popes Clergy, especially the three orders of Dominicans,
Franciscans, and Jesuits, from whom the greatest part of their other orders do
proceed: They are compared to Frogs, because, as Frogs delight in miery and
filthy places of dung and filth: so do these delight in the filthy stinking
abominations of their own inventions and doctrine of merit, and justification
by the dung of their own righteousness; for so the holy Apostle Paul judged
his righteousness as loss and dung, Phil. 3.8. but these Frogs, for so they
are rightly termed in this respect, they will be saved by their own dungie
works of righteousness, which they have done (...) they will not be beholding
to Christ for his righteousness, for which cause they are called ver. 14. The
spirits of Devils: for who else but Devils will reject Christ and his
Righteousness, to be justified and saved by their own righteousness; they are
also said, To go unto the Kings of the Earth, to gather them to battle: and
what Kings Court is there where these Frogs are not Crocking, yea, in
Parliaments, Councels and Synods, and all Assemblies to bring about their
mischievous designs: and if they cannot prevail, then to stir up Kings and
Princes to Wars, yea, and Subjects to, to fight and devour one another:
witness the late Horrid Rebellion in Ireland, where a hundred fifty four
thousand of Men, Women, and Children were murdered, as it is recorded: besides
what was killed in battle: and the Irish Rebels were stirred up thereunto, by
these Frogs and spirits of the Devil: many more the like passages might be
showed, but I would not be tedious: Thus the holy Ghost has given such a
character of them, to know these Frogs by, that any man that is not wilfully
blind in judgment, cannot deny, but these I have named are they: And they are
said to come out of the mouth of the Beast, etc. because the Popes breath does
authorize them, as I said above: the Jesuits at their mission, do engage to go
at the Popes command, where he will send them, without asking a reason: and
they are called spirits, perhaps, because they shall approve themselves to be
no less industrious in dispatch of their business then spirits, or because
they are like to that breath that comes out of the mouth, which has great
affinity with those from whom it is breathed, for cooling and giving life: for
these three golyasses are joined in great league and friendship with their Lord
the Pope: they draw life and heat from him, and they mutually return the like
to him again, by their industry for him; but these things cannot be applied to
the Long-parliament nor Presbyterians. etc.

They are said to be the spirits of Devils working miracles, because of the
divilesh and prodigious works that they are employed in, by the Devil, who has
given to the Pope his power, and his throne, and great authority; for the Pope
is the Devils instrument to work by, and he is Lord and King over these Locusts
and Frogs to command them upon his service. And as to their miracles I have
spoken something before, and therefore will not relate it here again; only this
I will say, that suppose these miracles they tell us of were true, as they are
not probable they should be; yet we read that Pharaohs magicians by permission
and by the help and assistance of the Devil, did work as great miracles as
they, and the Devil both has done, and will do the like among them for their
delusion, Popish miracles though true, yet they are delusions, and in effect
saying, Come let us go after other Gods
and to advance his own kingdom, and to hearten and encourage both the Actors
and beholders in their Superstitious Idolatrous worship; and upon this account
I wonder not, if the Devil suffer himself to be cast out by their conjuration,
and exercisme, or rather willingly go forth of the possessed at such a time:
for by such means he has drawn away many hundred thousands from the right way
of truth, and this does fulfill what was prophesied, what Antichrist and his
Instruments should do, 2 These. 9.11. that his coming should be, by the working
of Satan with power, and signs and lying wonders, and in all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness in them that perish: that because they received not the love
of the truth that they might be saved, therefore God shall send them strong
delusians to believe lies, etc. and such delusions as these God has given us
warning of, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. That if there arise among you a Prophet, or
Dreamer of Dreams, and shows thee a sign or a wonder, and that sign or wonder
whereof he spoke unto thee, come to pass, saying, let us go after other Gods,
thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, for the Lord thy God
does it to prove you, whether ye love the Lord with all your heart, and with
all your soul; Mark ye, God does not suffer such signs and wonders to be
wrought to try us, whether we will hold fast the truth or turn aside to such
delusions: for though the thing prove true, yet it is but a delusion, because
it is beyond what is written for our instruction, for miracles are now ceased
in these days, and therefore to the Law and Testimony, Isa. 8.20. If they
speak not according to this word, it is because the light is not in them; so
that what the Prelate, Priest or Friar, Jesuit or other does in that respect,
though the thing prove true, yet the effect is, as if he should say, Come let
us go after other Gods, as in the Text above, and is a mere delusion.

For such Conjuration and Exercisme is no institution of Jesus, Christ nor his
Apostles; no not the Mass it self, nor their Frenzy carriage and deportment
at M^sse, the Jestures, Vestments, etc. The Priest begins with a Psalm, then
he combs his head, and washes his hands, then he sprinkles holy water, then
they sing again, while the Priest is approaching toward the Altar, between a
Priest and a Deacon, if there be so many; before whom march two Taper bearers,
and before them is carried the Censor and Incense; in going up to the Altar,
the Priest bows himself, then at the Altar the Priest opens the book and
kisseth it, A description of a Popish Mass.
during the time of Mess he bows himself eight times: after Confession and
Absolution he blesses the incense and puts it in the censor, then kisseth the
Altar, and remove^h, to the right side of the Altar; the Kyriele^son is said
nine times in one Mass, then the Angelical Hymn is Sung: then the Priest
turning to the people, he salutes them with these words, The Lord be with you,
the Quire answers, And with thy spirit; seven times in the Mass, the Priests
salutes the people, but turns to them but five times, then the collects or
prayers are read, and the Epistle; then the Priest removes to the left side of
the Altar, and the Gospel is read by the Deacon in a high place, with his face
toward the North: the Cross, the Cenfor, and two Lights is carried before the
Gospel; at the reading of it the people stand up and cross themselves, after
that the Creed is read, and all this is but the first part of their Mass; it
would be to long to relate it all: sometimes the Priest prays softly to
himself, sometimes with an audible voice, several times Crossing the Host and
Challis, first three times, next five times, in all 25 times, besides other
crossings of himself, etc. the Priest washes his hands three times in the
Mass. I do here but give a hint of the Fopperies that these Locusts and Frogs
uses, their Agnus Dei, their Tapers, their Candels, their reading one part of
their service in own place, another part in another place, their Tracting
forward and backward to the right hand and to the left, like Stage Players or
Conjurers with their oil, salt, water and wine mixed, which they use at the
dedication of Churches and in baptism; at the consecration of their Alters,
they use water, salt, wine, and ashes mixed; but in this they make the same
things to have another signification then they had before. They are like the
devil whose works they do, for they can transform themselves into several
shapes, and make one thing have several significations; they consecrate all
their ornaments, garments, vestments, etc. of their service, the Euchristical
or Pix, whereas they pretend Christ's body is kept representing Christ's
sepulcher, their Censors, Insence, Christ's coffers in which the Saints bones
are kept, their Crosses, Images, Tapers, Fonts, First Fruits, Holy Water, Salt,
Oil, Wine, Ashes, Churchyards, Bells, all are consecrated; Bells are
baptized, and are given names. All these are but part of their antic tricks,
wherewith these locusts and frogs delude the simple, and make them believe that
the devil is afraid of these consecrated things, they are so holy after the
Priest has muttered a few conjuring words over them, but I can hardly think
that the Devil is such a coward as (...).

But to make it yet more plain, Friar Dominick etc. like barred horses.
who these Locusts are, it is said verse. 7. that the form of the Locusts were
like unto horses prepared to battle, that is for fierceness; and I pray you
what soldiers did Pope Innocent the 3 d. muster up against the Abbeneses but
Friar Dominick and 12 other Abbots sent with him and they were so fierce, as it
is said above, in stirring up the Kings of the earth to battle, that these 13.
so stirred up the Princes that they took up arms and slew one hundred thousand
of the Abbenenses, so that Dominick and his fellows proved themselves to be as
fierce as barred horses running to battle. This Dominick a little after became
one of the 4 Capcains over the begging Friars, of whom an army was raised to
root out all heretics as they called them; and this was declared before by
Gregory the great as is said above, that the Antichrist should have an army of
Priests to fight his battles.

And on their heads were as it were Crowns; these Crowns is the polling or
shaving of Friars crowns, for when the locks are cut round and the top of the
head is shaven it shows like a Crown, for the text does not say they had
crowns, but like as it were crowns; and so their shaven crowns appears; and
what account was made of shaven crowns Bellarmin shows out of Hieroms 26.
Epistle to Augustine I beseech your crown to salute in my name my Lord Alipius
and my Lord Enolius; and Augustine, in his 147 Epistle to roculian the Bishop,
Your men do abjure us by our crown, and our men do abjure you b^ your crown; by
this we see what great esteem their crowns were had in at that time, and their
faces were like the faces of men; these Locusts make a pleasant outward show of
humility, but it is without sincerity; full well did Hildegard prophecy of
them, They shall says she, be courteous but yet great flatterers perfidious
traitors, holy hypocrites, I shall anon set down the whole prophecy. Thus they
are but like men in outward appearance, and shape of men for inwardly they are
little devils, in malice against Gods truth and people; and differ not from
great devils but want of power, as is manifest by their proceeding against the
Albegenses.

And they had hair as the hair of women. Before shaving came in fashion it is
said that Epiphanius inveighed against the Monks of Mesopotamia for wearing
long hair like women; but the signification may be this, that they shall shroud
themselves under the names of women, as the Hagarins had their name from Hagar
Sarahs handmaid; which people are now called Saracens, as is thought, they
changed their name from the handmaid to the mistress. So these think it their
glory to shroud themselves under the name of women, as they call the Virgin
Mary their protectriss, they pray to her to command her son to have mercy on
them, and to turn the countenance of God toward them; they trust in him, (...)
and ascribe their salvation and all they haveto her, as the author and giver
of all good, as is showed in the former part. Besides, there are many orders of
Friars that have their names from her, as St. Mary's servants, Monks of Jesu
Maria, the Order of the Virgin in Mount Carmell, Monks of St. Mary of the
Redemption, and of the Annunciation of our Lady. Friar Dominick divided one
part of his Monastery to be for contemplative sisters, some of his Order wear
a white coat under a black, which they say was prscribed by the Virgin Mary.
Pope Honorius the 3d. called the Carmelites Monks of the Virgin Goddess. Pope
Urban the 2d. ordained the Cesterian Monks, and that they should observe
Canonical hours to our Lady, and every day Mattins, and hours of the day
should be observed to her, and that every Saturday should be said our Ladies
Mass, and the day spent to her service, and Anthims appointed to be sung. There
was also Monks of Sr. Bridgit, and of St Mary Magdalin: Now women's hair being
given to them for a covering, and these Locusts making the Virgin Mary their
protectoriss and patronisse, and so many of their Orders having their title and
denomination from her and other women, praying more to her then to Christ
himself; for whereas they say one Pater noster they say 4 or 5 Ave mary's. From
all which we may see with what hair the Friars are adorned, therefore it may
well be said, they have hair as the hair of women; for as hair is given women
for a covering, so the Friars takes women for their covering, Friars are
effeminate
to cover their sins, and to deliver them from sin, and that she should command
her son to have mercy on them as is made appear before, for they expect not to
have Jesus Christ favorable to them any other way, but by the mediation of the
Virgin; for so they call her their Mediatrix, their patronisse, and
protectresse: thus in this sense they have hair as the hair of Women, also they
are effeminate persons given to delicacy, lust and wantonness; they are
drowned in Whordome, and Fornication, and Sodomy, and all Beastliness,
witness, their Stews of both kinds, etc. They have hair as the hair of Women.

And their teath were as the teeth of Lions, that is to snatch and catch all
they can come by; they Croke like Frogs every where, and give not over Croking
until they have their prey; they have such teeth that they devour all the fat
morsels: they got Church livings into their hands, they first made
impropreations, they incroached upon temporal men's Lands: if you look upon
Abbeys, Priories and Nunneries also the Jesuits increased so fast, that 75
years after their order began, they raised, as Ribadneira says, A yearly
revenue out of their Colleges, of twenty hundred thousand Crowns yearly: you
may easily judge by this what Teeth they had.

Ver. 9. And they had Habergions like Habergions of Iron; that is, they are so
strongly armed with the defense and countenance of the Pope, who is set over
them, and which the 11 ver. calls the King of the bottomless pit: they are so
strongly armed by his defense and privileges granted to them, as if they were
covered over with Capapee, that no secular power dare quitch them. Pope Gregory
the 9th. Canonized Friar Dominick for a Saint, and granted him privilege, that
his order should not be subject to any ordinary but the Pope: that they might
preach in any man's pulpit, without asking leave of the Bishop, and to make
Noblemen and Ladies confess to them, and not to their Curates: to administer
the Sacrament when they pleased: See here the armor of the Locusts.
to be exempt from all ecclesiastical censors; the Franciseans likewise had
many privileges, which is ascribed to him, as that should bear Christ in his
arms, that he had the mark of Christ's five wounds upon him, and that his
mantion in Heaven is next unto Christ's; who dare then disturb them on earth,
that have such power and place in heaven? they have privilege to make masters
of Divinity among themselves: Pope Paul the 3d. granted to the Jesuits, for the
advancement of their order, to admit as many into their society, as their
general shall please: he also gave them power to preach, administer the
Sacrament, hear confessions, and to absolve in any place where they please;
their general may excommunicate and imprison delinquents, and is not this
better to them then any armor of proof? who dare oppose them that are thus
privileged? they are exempted from all secular power, from all Taxes and
Tithes; they have power to exercise all Episcopal functions, to ordain, anoint,
exercise, confirm, consecrate, dispense, all these privileges was given by
Pope Paul the 3d. Pope Julius that succeeded, privileged them to erect
universities where they pleased; to confer degrees, to dispense with fasting
and prohibited meats; Pope Pius 5th granted them leave to read in any
university where they come, without asking leave, and that none must hinder
them, but all are bound to hear them; See for this Alix. Ross, His view of all
Religions, p. 304. and 340. Thus you see with what armor of proof, these
Locusts and Frogs are armed withal: that when the University of Paris brought a
blasphemous book to the pope, written by the Domicans, which they called the
everlasting Gospel; the pope disalowed of their book, yet would he not have it
publicly condemned, least the dignity of the Monks should thereby be
impeached. Magdeburg Centur. 13. Chap. 8. So that you see, whosoever durst dart
against these Locusts, it was all one, as if they cast a dart against an Iron
Brigandine, or Habbergion of Iron. And the sound of their wings, was like the
sound of chariots, when many horses run unto battle; you heard above how these
Locusts are armed, that they are without all fear, even as chariot and horses
running into battle; they stand in awe of none, but keeps others in awe to
them; for if they be moved, that any dare to speak against their Religion and
Authority, what a fluttering do they keep, with terrible noise and threatenings
to uphold their Kingdom, as once Friar Dominick, etc. did against the
Albigenses; for if these Locusts do but flutter and stir up themselves, they
are a Terror to all Kingdoms to keep them in awe, to the pope their King and
Governor; for when they consider that there are so many Thousand of these
Vermin within the bowels of their kingdom, ready at the popes command, that by
the clapping of their wings in Churches, Pulpits, and all Assemblies; how soon
can they set all on an uproar, as if they were running into battle, to maintain
the pope and themselves in their gainful Trade of Idolatry and Superstition,
etc.

And ver. 10. They had Tails like Scorpions, and stings in their Tayls; the
Tail is every thing that is the worse in its kind, so that by Tail in this
place, we may understand the begging Friars, for they are the worse of that
kind of Vermin, as Isa. 9.15. The ancient and honorable he is the Head, and
the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the Tail, for the leaders of this people
cause them to err, and they that are led of them are destroyed; See how fitly
they are compared to the Tail, for their Venomous Doctrine is their sting,
wherewith they have slung many hundred thousands to death; so faith the
Prophet, They that are led by them are destroyed, and they had power given them
to hurt men five months, that is, all the time of Antichrists reign, until he
and they be destroyed together.

Ver. 11. And they have a King set over them, which is the Angle of the
bottomless pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon, that
is, destroying; and so he is called, in 2 These. 2.3. The Son of perdition:
which shows, that this King of the Locusts, and that Antichrist, 2 These. 2. is
all one, and to show you that the Pope is this King over these Friars the
Locusts. Pope Boneface the 3d. received the Key, about the year 607. and opened
the bottomless pit for these Locusts to come out; and Boneface the 4th. 2 or 3
years after made them of his Clregy: it was after decreed in the Council of
Lateran, by Pope Innocent, that no man without the Popes approbation, should
devise any new Religion: and that whosoever would convert to any Religion, he
should join to one that was before allowed of, and this decree was again
renewed by Gregory the Tenth, at the Council of Lions. Now what else is this,
but for the Pope to make himself King over these Locusts, to bind them with
Laws in those things, which before was free, and this is his Kingly power over
them* so that no man, can now as they are described, justly make doubt, either
who is the Angel of the bottomless pit, or who are his hellish Army; I think it
is plainly made out by undeniable reasons and arguments, that the Pope, and the
succession of popes, is the Angel of the bottomless pit; and that his whole
Clergy, especially his several orders of Friars, they are the Locusts and Frogs
here spoken of, and that these things cannot so properly be applied to any in
the whole world, as to them; the Bishop of Osserie with all his skill shall not
find us out any other, to whom these things do so suit, as with the Pope and
his Clergy.

The Prophecy of Hildegard.
And to make the matter yet more clear, I will now set down the Prophecy of
Hildegard the Abbatisse, which is not easy to be come by; yet you may find it
in Mr. Foxes Acts and Monuments of the primitive Church, he speaking of the
Friars, says, In those days there shall rise up a sort of blockish fellows,
proud, covetous, perfidious, and crafty, that shall eat up the sins of the
common people, carrying a certain show of foolish superstition, under a feigned
coverture of beggary: preferring themselves before all other men, by reason of
a counterfeit Religion; men of an arrogant disposition and feigned holiness,
void of all shame or fear of God; in inventing many new mischiefs, strong and
stout; but all prudent men and faithful Cristians shall curse this pestilent
order, men who will shun labor, and give themselves holy to idleness, rather
choosing to get their Living by flattery and beggary, and that will bend
themselves with all their might every way they can: perversely to resist the
Teachers of the Truth and hinder them; and for this end they will flatter
Noblemen, that they may assist them in this purpose; they shall also deceive
the Nobles, and draw them into errors that they may furnish them with all
necessaries, yea, and all the delights and pleasures of this world; for the
Divil shall ingraft these four principle vices into their minds, flattery,
envy, hypocrisy and slander, wherewith to purchase great matters to
themselves; envy, when they shall see Benefice; bestowed upon others besides
themselves; hypocrisy, whereby they shall speak to please men, counterfeit
praises by derogating from others, that they alone might be renowned among men,
especially the simplier sort that are deceived by them; they shall preach
indeed diligently, but without all sense of piety, and not after the manner of
the holy Martyrs of old: they shall derogate from their secular Princes, they
shall take away the Sacraments from the true pastors, and shall take alms of
those that are sick and miserable, insinuating and by little and little winding
themselves into the hearts of the common people: they shall have familiarity
with Women, teaching them how to deceive their Husbands and Friends with
sugered and dissembling words: how to rob them of their goods, and then to give
the same being thus purloyned unto these their Teachers, for they shall lay
hold on whatsoever men get, or howsoever it be gotten, by stealth, robbery or
by any lighter demand, and will say unto them, give it unto us and we will pray
for you; so that laboring to covet other men's sins, thy shall quite forget
their own.

And alas they shall receive any thing from rogues, filtchers, thieves, robbers
that steal by the high way side: sacrilegious persons, usurers, adulterers,
heretics, schismatics, apostates, whores, bands of Noblemen, perjured
Merchants, corrupt Judges, Soldiers, Tyrants, or any that live contrary to
Gods Laws; perverse and wicked men they shall be embracing the persuasion of
the Devil, the sweetness of sin, a soft and delicate life, and a certain
fullness and abundance of all wordly things, though it be to their own eternal
damnation; all these things shall manifestly appear to be in them, and they
shall every day wax more and more wicked, and that with minds more and more
obdurate; but when as once their crafty conveyances shall be found out, and all
their other wickednesses: then shall their large gifts cease, and they shall go
from house to house, like hunger bitten mad Dogs, looking down upon the earth,
and drawing in their necks like Doves, and all to get their fill of bread, then
shall the people pursue them with this out-crie, woe be unto you miserable
wretches, that are ordained to sorrow: the world has deceived you, the Devil
has guided you with his rains hitherto: your flesh is frail, you are
altogether without wit, grace and wisdom, your minds are unstable and
wavering, and your eyes are blinded with vanity and folly, your Idol bellies
have lusted after dilicate dishes of meat, and your feet have been swift to
wickedness; remember the time when you were in sight happy, yet privily
envious: poor abroad, but rich at home, courteous in show, but great flatterers
in deed, unfaithful treacherous, perverse, backbiters, holy hypocrites,
supplanters of the Truth, immoderately just, proud, unchaste, unconstant
teachers, dilicate Martyrs, gain-thirsty Confessors, gentle, but yet
slanderers, religious but yet covetous, humble, but yet proud, merciful, but
yet impudentlyers, pleasant flatterers, peacemaking persecutors, oppressors of
the poor, bringers in of new Sects devised by your selves, men that were
counted merciful, but are found out to be wretches, lovers of the world,
conjurers, drunkards, ambitious patrons of wicked facts, the pollers and
pillars of the whole world, unsatiable preachers that seek to please men, and
to decive women; sowers of discord, of whom that famous Prophet Moses spoke
wisely in his Song, A people without Counce^ and understanding, would to God
they had knowledge and understanding, and could have foreseen their latter end:
ye have built your nests on high indeed, and when ye could rise no higher, ye
fell down, like as did Simon Magus, whom God destroyed with a mighty plague; so
shall ye also he thrown down upon the earth out of the clouds, and that by the
means of your false-doctrine, your wickedness, lies, slanders and detestable
facts; then the people shall say unto them, out upon you, get you packing
hence, you Captains of mischief, over-turners of truth, ye hunamitish brethren,
fathers of heresies, false Apostles, that counterfeit the life of the Apostles,
whereof ye have been imitators by no means, you Sons of iniquity: we will not
follow the manner of your ways, for pride and arrogance have seduced you, and
insatiableness has entangled your erring minds; and seeing that you would
needs ascend up higher then was meet and equal, ye are fallen back headlong
into everlasting shame and reproach by Gods just judgment; These things
wrought Hildegard threescore years before the begging Friars were known, whom
yet he does paint out in such lively colors, that he seems rather to make a
narration of a thing paste then to foretell a thing to come; for who can
discribe the disposition of these Locusts more evidently? who can declare their
destruction more clearly? This Prophecy was turned into English out of an old
Copy written in parchment in old Characters, by Mr. John Fox, in the acts and
monuments of the Church.

But yet to give some further mark that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist, it will
further appear, Rev. 11.7, 8. where it is said, that the beast which comes out
of the bottomless pit^, shall make war against Jesus Christ's two witnesses, and
shall overcome them, and kill them. You have heard it proved who this King of
the bottomless pit is, and who are the Locusts and Frogs who are his followers;
there he is called the King of the Locusts that comes out of the pit, and Chap.
16.13. he is called the Dragon the Beast, and the False prophet and here he is
brought in under the name of the Beast coming out of the bottomless pit; but
this was not his first coming out, for he was come out long before in his
predecessors, though in a more obscure and hidden manner, and was not so easily
discerned; for about the year 352 and 358 Pope Liberius and Pope Felix were
both fallen from the true faith, and were Arians. Boniface the third, about the
year 607 received the Key to open the pit Pope Honorius, about the year 626 he
was a Monothalite, and in 684 Pope Benedict got to be called the Vicar of
Christ: but now this Antechrist an adversary walks no longer covertly, but
comes out of the bottomless pit, upon the open stage of the world, to make
war, that is, openly to oppose Jesus Christ and his two witnesses, that is
all the faithful pastors and professors of Gods truth in Religion that have in
all ages opposed popery and other heresies: and against all these the Pope he
makes war and fights; as pope Honorius 2d. about the year 1132. against
Armulphus who was a witness to the truth in those days, as you may see in the
beginning of this book; and the year 1150 Gerhardus and Dulcimus Naverenses,
and 32 more with them were Martyrs for preaching against the pope, as says
Iliricus and Robert Guisburne; and how he warred against the Waldencians, who
began the year 1160: and about the year 1207. one hundred thousand of
Albegenses were murdered by pope Innocent the 3d. About the year 792. Albinus
an Englishman writ a book against Images, and in the 8 Centry Iconoclaste did
the same; 9 Centry Claudius Bishop of Taurinum, and Godescalus, and Photius, in
the 10 Cent, Johanes Scotus, and Bertramus a presbyter, in the 11 Cent.
Berengerius and Marcellus of Padua, Peter de Bruce, The Witnesses that were
slain
with hundreds more that the popes made war against for their winessing for
Christ against him and his Locust. And pope Constantine about the year 712
caused Philippecus the Emperor to lose both his eyes and his Empire for
opposing Images; pope Gregory 2d. excommunicated Leo the Emperor for opposing
Images; in 731 and in 757 pope Paul excommunicated the Emperor of
Constantinople for opposing Images. And whence could such fighters against the
witnesses of Gods truth, and such heretical Idolatrous Image-worshippers come,
but from the devil, out of the bottomless pit, from whence this beast came? the
holy Scriptures also of the Old and New Testament are a witness for Christ, and
you shall see what war the popes have made against the Scripture and stobbed it
to the very heart. When that cursed Council of Trent sat in the year 1546. in
the third session April 8. there the fountain of the Greek and Hebrew copies of
the Bible was refused, and a corrupt Latin translation was established for
authentical; their unwritten traditions was placed in equal dignity with the
holy Scriptures, there was the power of an interpreting Scripture by Scripture
taken away from Scripture, and it was brought into Thraldom to the will and
pleasure of men, to make it like a nose of wax, turning it what way they please
by their glosses, that they put upon it especially the Pope, the holy books of
Scripture was never so murth^red and dispitefully disgraced, and that openly
and by public authority, not from the foundation of the world, or since any
Scripture was written, by any that did pretend outwardly to profess
Christianity, would ever, or did ever any in the world attempt to act thus
against Jesus Christ, but the Pope who is the great Antichrist, and Beast that
came out of the bottomless pit; thus to make war against the holy Scriptures
that bears witness of Jesus Christ, and also against other witnesses, and killed
them as many thousands have been by fire and sword, and other Torters: all
which is so manifestly known, that all the Devils in the bottomless pit, and
the Council of Trent to help them, cannot excuse and clear the Pope, but that
he is the Beast, and great Antichrist, and man of sin.

This Beast the Pope, to prove himself to be the Beast, that no man might doubt
of it, stirred up a War the same year that the Council of Trent thus took away
the life and power of the Scriptures, against the Protestants in Germany, and
the year following, the 22 of April 1547, the forces of the Protestants were
put to the flight, and John Frederick of Saxony himself, and Ernestus Brunswick
the Lantgraves son, and not long after the Lantgrave himself were taken
Captives, and many other Nobles and diverse Cities were grievously afflicted.
The Pope a murderer of the witnesses of Jesus.
Theador Peza bewailed the misery of these times: thus, Whatsoever had been
built up in so many years, and with so great labors, seemed to be overthrown
as in a moment: and they only were counted happy by the most, whom timely death
had delivered from these troubles. Thus you see how the witnesses of Jesus
Christ were killed, and by whom, namely, by the procurement of the Pope, who is
here called the Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit: but he has many
assistants that perhaps do not think themselves such, nor do not make the end
and aim of their proceedings purposely as an assistance to the Beast, and yet
occasionally it proves to be so; for as in 2 These. 2.8. If this Beast the great
Antichrist must be consumed and wast away with the spirit of Gods mouth, that
is, by the Ministry of Gods Word; and if he must be abolished with the
brightness of Gods coming, that is, in the purity of Gods Ordinances, without
the mixture of Romish, or any other humane institutions: as a means whereby the
beasts humane institutions and ceremonies must be consumed and abolished.
Whether silencing of Ministers do not occasonally uphold Antichrist in his
throne.


Then whether is not the silencing of ^odly Ministers very near of kin to the
killing of the two witnesses, and so occasionally if not intentionally
assistant to the Beast of the bottomless pit; for if Antichrist must be
consumed by the spirit of God in the Ministry of his word, then it behooves that
all the faithful Preachers that preach against Antichrist be encouraged and not
restrained from their office and ministry, under pretense of outward
conformity, as touch, not taste not, handle not, which all must perish in the
useing after the commandments of men, Collos. 2.21. for the holy Apostle,
which I think knew as much of the mind of God, as any Pope or Prelate now
alive: He did rejoice that the word of God was Preached, because it is the
power of God unto falvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16: And where
vision fails the people perish, Pro. 29.18. Therefore says the Apostle,
Phil. 1.15. etc. Some indeed says he, preach Christ even of envy, and strife;
I take not upon me to determine who these are, and some also preach Christ of
good will, the one preach Christ of contention, not sincerity, the other of
love: however, notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth,
Christ is preached, and I therein rejoice, ye and will rejoice. Here you see
the temper of St. Paul, that he rejoiced at the preaching of Christ upon any
terms whatsoever, whether of good will or ill will, so that Christ was
preached, for the reasons above; but what spirit of malignity has possessed
this age I know not, for even those whom charity might judge, would preach
Christ of good will, yet are restrained: and whether this do not occasionally,
though perhaps not intentionally, help to uphold the Beast of the bottomless
pit in his seducing way of error and heresy: and as much as in them lies who
are the Authors thereof, hinder the work of God in consuming Antichrist by the
spirit of Gods mouth in the Ministry of his word, I leave to wise men to Judge.

Then as to these Witnesses, it is said, ver. 8. Their Corpse shall lie in the
streets of the great City; which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where
also our Lord was crucified. As to the witnesses of the Scriptures, Dioclesian
and Maximinian they burnt the Scriptures, and would not suffer the Carcass of
it to remain, but buried it in ashes: but this Beast of the bottomless pit, the
Pope, after he had by the Council of Trent taken away the life and spirit of
the Scriptures, by which it should have acted, and brought it into subjection
to his will: he was content the Carcass of the Scriptures should remain
unburied, for now it was but as a dead Carcass without life and authority: when
all the interpretation of it is challenged as a prerogative belonging to the
Apostolical See of Rome, which is the great City spiritually called Sodom and
Egypt; and as to other witnesses, whose mouths the Beast does stop and shut up
in prison, they are killed and dead as to the execution of their ministerial
office, and yet their Carcasses are above ground unburied; by this great City
is not only meant the Mother City of Rome, but all the whole Empire or
Jurisdiction how far soever extended, whereof Rome is the Mother City, and
the dead Carcasses of all that have been murdered in all these Countries and
Provinces by Antichrists Tyranny, or by his Agents, these Locusts or Frogs; and
that have been scattered as dung upon the earth, may here be meant, unto whom
they have not allowed the honor of burial, as has been known in Germany, and
of late in Ireland and other places; that as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 79.2.
The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat to the souls of the
Heavens, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the Earth.

Rome is here in this Text spiritually called Sodom, and Egypt Sodom: for
besides their pride, fullness of bread and abundance of idleness, Rome compared
to Sodom, Egypt.
which were the sins of Sodom; Neither did he strengthen the hand of the poor
and needy, Ezekiel. 16.49. Rome is compared to Sodom, For man with man wrought
filthiness, as Romans 1.27. and that by this Antichristian Beast, his Toleration
and Approbation; and Pope Sixtus the 4th. built up in Rome a Stews of both
kinds, about the year 1484. whereby he got no small Revenue, for to the
Cardinals that was before, he created 32 Cardinals more, and gave them and all
other liberty for 3 months in the year to use Sodomy, that was June, July, and
August; and Pope Paul had in his time no less then 45 thousand Whores in his
Register, that paid him yearly Revenue for liberty to commit Whoredom, as is
showed before; therefore may the present City of Rome, by the holy Ghost, well
be compared to Sodom for filthiness, and all manner of abominations, both
spiritual and natural: and I think I should not say amiss if I said unnatural,
as to Sodomie and incesse, etc, they exceed in uncleanness by reason that the
Pope and his Locusts and Frogs, makes them believe, that either for a little
money to say Masses for them, or for some small penance performed by
themselves, they can pardon them; therefore Mantuan did sing notably to this
purpose.

Shame get thee to the Country Town,
If that they do not use,
The same corrupted filthiness,
Rome now is all a Stews.
Another took his farwell thus.
Rome farewell now, I have thee seen,
Though vile thou art to see.
I Will come again when Bawd I mean,
Knave Brothel Beast to be.
But that you may better know that Rome is another Sodom, hearken what one
answered when he was demanded what Rome was, saying thus,

Say what is Rome Amor Love.
If buckward you it Spell.
Some love the Male kind say no more.
I know thy meaning well.
These abominable lusts O Rome, says Mr. Brightman, Have made thy Stews seem
honest, the which thy most holy father the Pope does nourish in his bosom; and
that forsooth as he pretends to avoid a greater incontinency; the Apostle
speaks of some that say, let us do evil that good may come, whose damnation is
just; for while he pretends that he would avoid a greater evil, he falls
into one of the greatest evils reigning in the world, being given up to a
reprobate sense, as may appear to all men that are not wilfully blinded with
his delutions; and as Rome is a spiritual Sodom, so she is a shop of all
monstrous Idolatry, as has been declared before.

The second name is Egypt, not any City, but a whole Country or Province; and
therefore in a spiritual or allegorical sense, as is said in the Text, does
comprehend all Cities, Kingdoms, or Provinces, so far as Antichrist the Pope of
Rome has any power or jurisdiction exercised by himself or his agents; who are
here compared to Egypt for their Superstition and Idolatry, which is spiritual
Whoredom that the Pope of Rome stands guilty of, as well as carnal Whoredom
and Sodomy, as you have heard already; And even as Pharaoh held the three
Children of Israel in bondage, and would not let them go to serve the Lord and
when they did break off from him and were going, he pursued them, thinking to
destroy them, though it proved to his own destruction: even so shall it be now
and has been that when any has been touched in Conscience, of the error of
their way, and have begun to fall off from their Canonical obedience, to the
Pope and his Popish ways; how have they been pursued with all the malice and
hard dealing that Men or Devils can invent, who are the Devil and the Popes
Agents to persecute Gods Church, as Jer. 50.33. The Children of Israel and the
Children of Judah were oppressed together; and all that took them Captives,
held them fast, they refused to let them go; but what follows, their redeemer
is strong, the Lord of Host is his name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause,
that he may give rest to the Land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. The
Egyptians had Isis and Osyris for their Gods, but I could name a multitude of
St. Gods the papists have, almost for every several disease, a several Saint
God to pray unto, which I pass over, because I have spoken of it before.

The last words of the Text, Where also our Lord was Crucified: this may seem
strange to some, for they may say Christ was not Crucified at Rome but at
Jerusalem: but this is easily answered, though it be true in respect of the
place he was Crucified at Jerusalem; but if we look upon the power and
authority that put him to death, he was Crucified at Rome: for he was put to
death by a Roman Judge, Christ was crucified at Rome in an alle^^^^^
and by the Roman Laws and Authority and by a kind of death only used among the
Romans, and in a place that then belonged to the Roman Empire; And the Jews
confessed plainly, when Palate bid them take him and Judge him after their own
Law, the Jews said unto him, it is not lawful for us to put any man to death,
John 18.31. So that no man need to doubt, that Rome is both Sodom and Egypt in
her whole Regiment as you have heard, and also the place where our Lord was
cricified, in respect of the Roman power and authority that Crucified him, and
the extent of the Roman Empire at that time even to Jerusalam, where he was
Crucified; so that by all these marks, it does appear that the Pope of Rome is
the Beast that came out of the bottomless pit, and so the great Antichrist and
man of sin; and let Doctor Williams take notice, and help the Pope as much as
he can with all his Learning; these Texts cannot so properly be applied to the
Long-parliament, Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, etc. as they are
applyable to the Pope and his whole Clergy, especially the Friars and Jesuits.

Rev. 13.11, 12. It is said of the second beast that rose out of the Earth,
that he had two Horns like the Lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon: Horns in
this Book of the Revelation, do signify, power and strength, for so the Holy
Ghost expounds, The ten Horns to be ten Kings, Rev. 17.12. Some think, that by
the two Horns of this Beast is meant, the Popes Civil and Ecclesiastical power
which he exercises, and pretends his Jurisdiction from the Lamb Jesus Christ;
for says he, in the decretals it is not to be thought, that this my Church of
Rome has been preferred by any general Council, but obtained the primacy only
by the voice of the Gospel and the mouth of the Savior; but take notice, that
it is the Popish Gospel of unwritten Traditions is there to be understood; for
there is not a word in all the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that gives the Pope his
primacy: also Pope Innocent the Third, said, Whosoever understands not the
prerogative of my Priesthood, let him look up to the Firmament, where he may
see two great lights, the Sun and Moon, one to rule the day, the other to rule
the night: so in the Firmament of the universal Church; therefore our dignity
is so much the weightier, as we have the greater charge to give account to God
for the Laws of men, as well as for the Laws of the Church: whereby it is
manifest that the pope does exercise both Civil and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: Mr. Dent says, That by the first Feast that rose out of the Sea,
spoken of in the first verse of this Chapter, is meant, The Heathen Roman
Empire: but I conceive not that to be the meaning, For that Beast is said to
have seven Heads and ten Horns, and the Heathen Roman Empire was but the Sixth
Head; for when John writ the Revelation, he said, Five of the Heads were
fallen, that is, the five several Governments that had been in Rome from the
time that it was built until that time was fallen, which chief or head
Governments called the heads of the Beast, were Kings, Consuls, Dictators,
Decemures and Tribunes: The Pope is a double head.
these five says John, are fallen, one is, that was the Government of
Emperors which was in being, when John writ, which was the sixth, and another
is not yet come which was to be the Seventh head or p^pacy and Kingdom of
Antichrist which was to be, and did succeed next after the Heathen Roman
Emperors; so that both this first beast that rose out of the Sea that was the
Head, and the beast that rose out of the Earth, that had two Horns like the
Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon: by both these beasts, is meant, the Pope,
whose one and the same person is discribed under a double resemblance of two
beasts: for Antichrist the Pope is a double Head, in respect of his Civil power
and Jurisdiction he is the first beast: and in respect of his Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, he is the second beast: which is the eighth, yet
one of the seven, as Revel. 17.11. in respect of the Popes double power of
Prince-hood and Priesthood exercised in one and the same person; or as Mr.
Brightman says, He is the first beast in regard of the wound he received by
the Goths, Vandals and Hunnes; and he is the second beast, as he was exalted
in his height again after his deadly wound was healed, and the Goths and
Vandals were destroyed, and the Pope rose to have great possessions of Cities
and Lands.

Thus you see it is clear he is the first beast as he exercises a civil power
as did the Roman Heathen Emperors, and so he is the seventh head, and he is
the second beast as he exercises an Ecclesiastical power; and in this respect
he is called the false Prophet. It is said also in this 11 verse. That this
beast rose out of the Earth, whereby is meant, that the Pope and all his brood
of Prelates, Priests and Friars, etc. should not be heavenly, but earthly
minded persons: and their Religion is earthly, and heavenly, for it is
composed, as is showed before of more then forty Heresies, and one hundred and
fifty Religious Orders, all of humane institution, and not one of them divine;
their service and worship also is not spiritual, but carnal; consisting
altogether of outward bodily exercise, and lip labor, muttering over prayers
upon Beads, when their minds are running as the Prophet says, With Fools to
the ends of the Earth; so that any Pagan, Hypocrite or Reprobate may perform
all the parts of their Worship and service, that the present Church of Rome
requires of them to be done: and after he has done all, he may go to Hell for
his pains, being all that he did was but an outward form, a husk or Hell of
godliness, denying the power thereof; and both the Pope and his instruments,
with all the means they can use, labor to hinder the power of godliness in
others, and bind men to outward conformity of humane inventions, and not divine
institutions; there is no favor of Heaven nor Heavenly things amongst them,
but all manner of abominations, Covetousness, Hypocrisy, Ambition, Pride,
Tyranny, Murders, Treasons: witness The Gunpowder-plot, poysonings, Sorcery,
Enchantments, Necromancy, Witchcraft, Conjuration, Delutions, Idolatries,
Superstitions, Adulteries, Fornications, Sodomy, Incest, Exercismes, Perjuries,
Crouching, Crossing, Washings, Pilgrimages, Numbering prayers upon Beads, with
false Spittle Oil, Holy Water, Crisme Crucifixes, Agnus Dei, Crosses,
Relics, Images, Altars, Penance, Intercession to Saints, etc. with a number
more the like, and which even the best of them, their Popes, Prelates,
Cardinals, etc. have been exercised in all these things, and these are their
Devotions, which consists in outward bodily exercise, which an Hypocrite or
reprobate may do, yea, and has done much more: all which shows that they are
carnal, earthly, sensual, and divilish; For though he have two Horns like the
Lamb, he pretends fair in outward show, but he spoke like the Dragon; for verse
Second, The Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority: his
Throne is the Seven hilled City of Rome, his power and authority by which the
Pope does act: the Holy Ghost says plainly, It is not from God, but from the
Devil the Dragon, for from whom else can these works named above, The Pope has
his power and throne from the dragon.
and the like proceed but from the Devil: he speaks like the Dragon in deed, in
all his words and doctrines: and his works declare from whence, and from whom
they come, all his false Doctrines and lying Miracles, and unwritten
Traditions, and service in an unknown Tongue, and prayers in a Language not
Understood by them that pray, and the like; you see here from whence the
authority came, that sets up that kind of Worship and Service. Chrysostom in
his 48 Hom. what is it, says he, that Antichrist shall not attempt, he will
pretend the works and offices of Christ, to serve himself of Christ, and to
fight against Christ under fair pretenses to introduce his pernicious
traditions upon Christians for their practice.

And he did all the first Beast could do before him, and he caused, etc. in
which Text is showed that this second Beast the Pope, by his Ecclesiastical
Authority and Jurisdiction he could do all that the first Beast could do by
his civil Authority: but we must take notice that he has his power from the
Dragon, as well as the first Beast, both their power is from him, and are both
as one in the largeness and extent of their power, for their power is both
included in this second beast, as you have heard, in regard of his double power
and Jurisdiction which he exercises, whereby he was able to do all that the
first. Beast did before him, even in the sight and open view of the whole
Empire; And he caused the earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the
Beast, whose deadly wound was healed: that is, Papists, worldlings, and
Counterfeite Christians to worship the first Beast, to receive and set up
Superstitious and Idolatrous worship: such as the Heathen Emperors had, only
it changed the name, for the Popish Superstition and Idolatry is as great as
ever the Heathen was; and by compelling them to worship the first Beast, and
not to worship himself, is his pretending to Antiquity, that he might have the
more esteem in the world, as if he should say, he challenged no new thing to
himself, but that which his predecessor had left him by inheritance; so that,
though this worship come under the name of Christ, yet it is as abominably
wicked as was the Heathens, for they condemned the true Worship of God, and set
up false Worship: and so do the Popes, and labor by cruel Laws and Decrees to
force men to their Idolatry, and false Worship, and humane Inventions.

To Worship the Beast whose deadly wound was healed; in these words the Holy
Ghost speaks of a second Condition of the Beast, whereby his first dignity had
been somewhat diminished, by having one of his heads wounded; the seven Heads
here, are the seven Hills of the City of Rome: they are also seven Kings, Rev.
17.9. or seven Kingly Governments, The beast received his deaths wound in 415.
whereof five were fallen when John writ on his faith he and another is not yet
come; and when he comes he must continue but a short space, that is, until he
should have his deadly wound: but the deadly wound should be healed; the sixth
head which then was when John writ, was the Heathen Roman Emperors; the
seventh head was the Government by Popes, which began in Constantines time,
after the Heathen Emperors was removed, the short space that he continued
after he came, before he received his wound; First by Alaricus, about the year
415. wherein he took Rome and wasted it which Hierome speaking of says, That
the most glorious light of all the world was put out, yea, the Head of the
Roman Empire was out off: or as it is in the Text, The head was wounded as it
were to Death; The whole world (says Hierome) was undone in the destruction of
one City: and in another place, he says. That City which vanquished the whole
world, was vanquished. I said before that Antichrists Kingdom began at the
Council of Nice, about the year 328. so (...) the time of his continuance,
before he received this wound, was about 87 years, which was but a short space
in comparison of the time that he has reigned since his wound was healed; but
Rome was taken again after this by Adulphus, who gave it such a deadly blow,
that he began to advise with himself about changing the name thereof, and to
call it Gothia. Rome was taken the third time by Gensericus the vandal, and the
foutth time by Odoaces Rugianus, who reigned there 14 years; but Theodorecus
King of the Goths killed him, and Totilas followed after him, in a certain
order of succession, and he destroyed it and brake it down the fifth time, and
brought it to such desolation, that it is said, there was neither man nor woman
found in it for 40 days; who would not have thought but that the seven hilled
City had been utterly perished? who would not have thought but that the Popes
dignity, that is the seventh head, but that it had seen his last and utter
decay: for it was now at that time wounded as it were unto death; whereupon it
was that the Bishops of Constantinople and Ravina, supposing that the authority
of Rome had been quite overthrown, they strove to appropriate the dignity to
their Churches, as if they had been the next heirs; thus it appears, that not
one Jot or Title of the word of God shall not fail until all be fulfilled; for
though the City of Rome was the Mistress and Queen of all the World, yet by
the invation of the Goths, Vandals and Hunnes, she had a fearful downfall: yea,
more then any other City, being so determined of God to fulfill this Prophecy;
that after Antichrist did come, he should continue but a short space, before he
should have a wound, as it were to death. Now my good Lord Bishop, I think I
have showed you several Texts that Prophesied of Antichrist, which was never
fulfilled by the Long parliament, nor Presbyterians, etc. nor cannot properly
be applied unto them.

But this deadly wound was healed, after the space of 132 years, about the year
547. in Justinian the Emperor his time, by means of the Prowess and Valor of
Bellisarius and Narses, The beasts wound was healed in 547.
the Goths were never so shattered; the Emperor played the Physicians part in
good earnest, for he first took away bad humors, by repressing the Barbarians,
and utterly destroying them: and then he powered in Wine and Oil; for that
decree in the Novel constitution of Justinian, being 131 in number, was instead
of a soft healing plaster: we decree according to the decrees of holy Synods,
that the most holy Bishop of old Rome is the first and principal of all the
Priests; how greatly was the wound healed up by this decree that seemed to be a
deadly wound? says Mr. Brightman.

Thus it does evidently appear, that the Beast that had the wound of a Sword
and did live, is the Pope, the great Antichrist of Rome, of whom it is said in
the 15. verse of this 13. Chapter, that it was permitted unto him to give a
spirit unto the Image of the Beast, so that the Image of the Beast should
speak: after this beasts deadly wound was healed, men began to adore this Beast
like an Idol, his affliction did not reform him, but he returned to the
Idolatry and superstition of his Predecessors; so that his Idolatry was a
lively Image of the Idolatry both of former Popes, and of the Heathen Emperors
Idolatry; and he caused them that dwelt on the earth to make the Image of the
Beast; that is, to commit the same Idolatry: and it was permitted unto him to
give a spirit to the Image of the Beast, that it should speak; that is, it is
made to speak by the whole Crew of the Popish Clergy, crying up the Antiquity
of the Roman Church, of their Doctrine and Ceremonies and traditions, as
received from the Apostles, though the Apostles were strangers to such things,
and knew nothing of them: but it would avail the Pope but little to erect such
an external way of Idolatrous worship, with so many Ceremonies, and vain humane
Inventions. If it were not for his Clergy his Locusts and Frogs that are in
such multitudes in every Country, that puts life in this Idol or Image by
their terrible threatenings, and Excommunications against all that shall dare to
mutter any thing against their holy Father, the Popes proceedings, affirming
him to be the universal Bishop, Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor, and that
he cannot err, and therefore his Decrees, Cannons, Injunctions and
constitutions are to be received and obeyed as divine Oracles, upon pain of
damnation; so that he deceives (says verse the 14.) them that dwell on the
earth, and causes that those that will not worship this Image should be
killed, as many thousands have been for denying that Idolatrous worship: thus
these Instruments with their threatenings and delusions, put life into their
Image-worshiping, and all other their Idolatries.

You shall hear what delusions and Idolatrous means they used just about this
time of healing the Beasts wound, Chosroes a great Tyrant destroyed Antioch
with Sword and fire Seleucia, Daphne, and came to Apamia whereon Thomas a Monck
was Governor of the Church; the people were all in expectation of death, and
Thomas (says the Story) brought forth the wholesome and lively Cross, and set
it before them all, to the end they might behold and embrace it when their last
hour came, for therein (says the story) the only health of man consisted; and
now taking their Voyage into another world, they might have the reverend Cross
for their way-fair to safe conduct them into another Soil; Thomas lift up his
hand and let all see the wood of the Cross, whereby the old Curse of Sin was
wiped away: Oh cursed Idolatry! to ascribe the looking upon a piece of Wood a
means to wipe away sin. I could show several more such passages, even about
that time, See Evagrius Book 4. Chap. 25. As the Vision at Sergiopolis, and of
the Picture which they feign God himself made, and not the hands of man; which
Picture, say they, Christ sent to Agbarus, when he desired to see Christ, which
Picture the People of the City of Edessa drew through a Ditch between them and
Chosroes Army that besieged them, into which Ditch they conveyed water, See
here Popish delusions.
the which Water set the besiegers Works on fire; if you will believe the
story, See the former Book, Chap. 26. Thus Antichrist and his Agents makes fire
to come down from Heaven in the sight of men, as it is Revel. 13.13. Also of
Barsanuphius the Monck that shut himself up in a Cabin fifty years, and was
never seen of any man, not never took sustenance, and of Simond the Monk, and
also of the Hebrew Boy, Chap. the 35th of the same Book, of whom they report,
that the remainders of the Sacrament, which they call The Body of Christ, at
Constantinople their Custom was to give it ^o Children which went to School,
among which was a Hebrew boy who had share, and tarrying longer than ordinary,
his Father examined where he had been, and what he had done? who when he had
related, his Father took and threw him into the fiery Furnace where he made his
Glass: the Mother sought the Child, and could not find him; the third day,
being spent with lamenting and weeping for her Child, sitting in the shop door,
as she sighed she called the boy by his name, who answered her out of the fiery
Furnace; the Mother burst open the door, and spied her Child in the middle of
the hot burning coals, and yet preserved from hurt by virtue of the Crumbs of
the Sacrament of the body of Christ that he had eaten, if you will believe
Popish stories. All these delusions were feigned about the time of healing the
Beasts wound, which served very well for his purpose, to have the Image of the
Beast worshipped.

It is said by some, that the Roman Heathen Emperors assumed to themselves not
only the Dignity Royal, but also pontifical, calling themselves Sovereign high
Priests: but this was but a dead Image without life; but when once the Pope
came to exercise both the Emperial and Ecclesiastical power, he put life into
this dead and dumb Image, The terrible voise of the Image of the Beast.
and caused it to speak out plainly; for as Christ said of himself, Matthew.
28.18. All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; even so the Pope, who
calls himself Christ's Vicar, assumes unto himself upon earth all power in
heavenly and earthly things, that both Emperors and Kings should stoop to him,
and hold their dignity from him; As Pope Adrian said in an Epistle to the
Archbishop of Trevir, From whence has the Emperor his Empire, but from us?
therefore he rules by us: also behold, the Empire is in our power, to give it
to whom we will; for this cause are we set over Nations and Kingdoms by God to
destroy and pluck up, to build and to plant; for by me Kings reign: assuming
that to himself which is due only to God. And Pope Innocent, Look what
difference there is between the Sun and the Moon, so great is the power of the
Pope, ruling over the day, (that is, says he) over the Spiritualty, above
Emperors and Kings ruling over the night; that is, over the Laity. To me,
says Pope Galasius, Emperors and Kings be more inferior than Lead is to Gold.
I could multiply things of this nature, but I do but hint at things, and leave
it to more able pens: but these are most terrible voices of an Image; for the
Pope is, as you have heard above, both the first and the second Beast, and
therefore he is, both the Beast and the Image of the Beast, and whatsoever
Adoration is given to either it is given to the Pope; for he gathers all the
water to his Mill, and he being so powerful and so proud, it is no marvel if he
cause, that so many as will not worship this Image, that they should be killed:
And thus he makes the Image of the Beast to speak what he pleases, and makes
Emperors and Kings, much more Peasants, to swear fealty unto him.

And verse 16. And he makes all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and
free, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their forehead, and that no
man might buy or fell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the Beast, or
the number of his name.

Antichrist is not contented to have the Image of the Beast made and worshipped,
that is in an external form of Ecclesiastical Government, like unto the form
and government that had been among the heathen Romans and Egyptians, for
Idolatry and superstition, in which indeed the Pope does exceed them; for he
has more feigned Idols, Saint gods, of he gods, and she gods, and breaden
gods, than ever the Heathens had; nor is he content to have all these gods
worshipped and adored with the same Adoration that is due to the true God, nor
to put a spirit into this Image to make it speak by his Clergy with such
terror as you heard above: all this will not satisfy this insatiable Beast,
but he will have them marked as his hired servants, or rather as his Vassals or
Slaves, as men use to mark their beasts and sheep, that they may be known to be
his, and to whom they do belong: this mark is all those ways and means whereby
men show their obedience to this Beast; and it is said verse 8. That all shall
worship him whose names are not written in the book of life: let the followers
of the Beast consider it in time, for the Text tells them, that they have no
part nor portion in Jesus Christ while they follow Antichrist. If it be the
good pleasure of God, I desire that their Understandings may be enlightened to
see the danger before it be too late: we heard above, that those that would not
worship the Image of the Beast should be killed; now this may be some other
punishment to refuse the Beasts mark, as fines, or imprisonment, or
confiscation of goods, or the like; besides their not being suffered to buy and
sell: the mark of the Beast in the forehead or right hand, is a submission to
practice and proofess, and yield obedience unto the Decrees, Canons, Laws, and
Religion that is commanded; for the forehead does signify the profession, and
the right hand the action; so that in one of them every man must acknowledge
the Pope to be Lord of his Faith, and show it forth either in profession or
practice, or else he must not buy nor sell; that is, they must not enjoy those
privileges, nor be capable of such preferments a others are that profess and
subscribe their canonical obedience.

The mark or his name, or the number of his name: what the mark is I have
declared above, and as for the name, the Pope would have his Vassals to bear
his name, as children bear the name of their Parents, and what is that? Three
marks of Antichrist the beasts name.
it is from his own name Pope, to be called Papists, or from his usurped title
of universal Bishop, to be called Catholics, for the name universal signifies
Catholic, so as children bear their Fathers name, so they bear the Popes name
to be called Catholics: but this title both the Pope and his followers do
falsely assume to themselves, for the Catholic or Universal Church does
comprehend all believers from the beginning to the end of the world, which the
Romish Church cannot do, for there was Churches that is included in that name
almost 4000 years before there was any Church at Rome, but besides these, there
is another mark or number of his name, which Expositors say is Latinos, that
is, Professors of the latin Religion, or latin Kingdom; and to acknowledge
the primocy of the latin Pope; now here are three sufficient witnesses to
prove the Pope to be the Beast here spoken of, that no man must buy nor sell
that has not the Beasts mark, or his name, or the number of his name; and here
are three names derived from the Popes name, his title and his latin service,
which all are applied to his followers, and cannot so fitly be applied to any
one in the world besides, and the Scripture tells us, that in the mouths of two
or three Witnesses every word shall be established, therefore I see not how it
can be evaded, but it must be granted upon this evidence, that the Pope is the
Beast here spoken of, and so consequently the great Antichrist and man of sin:
and that no man shall buy nor sell, preach nor pray nor enjoy the privileges
that other men enjoy, if either the Pope or his instruments can hinder them,
except they have the mark of the Beast, or his name, or the number of his name;
for it is ordained in a Decree, that no man ought to speak to those with whom
the Pope is at enmity, Gratian said that sovereign obedience was due unto the
Pope, and that it was not lawful for any man to commune with him with whom the
Pope was at enmity for some deeds of his; neither can he be in the Church that
forsakes Peter's Chair, It is therefore no easy thing to traffic without the
Beast's mark or his name, or the number of his name.

In the 14. Chapter 9, 10. verses is held forth the punishment of the Beast and
his followers suitable to their sins, verse 9. the third Angel followed them,
that is, the two Angels mentioned before verse the 6. and 8. saying it is
fallen, it is fallen, Baby lon the great City, because she gave the Wine of the
wrath of her fornication to all Nations: these words does manifestly declare
the utter overthrow and destruction of the City of Rome, which here is called
Babylon, and the reason why she shall be destroyed, because she has given the
Wine of her fornication to all Nations, that is, because she has propagated
her Idolatry, which is spiritual whordom and fornication, unto all Nations, so
far as her power extended, and which they have received and drunk in her
Idol^trous Doctrines, with as much eagerness and delight as a thirsty man
drinks wine; and verse 9. the third Angel fellowed them saying, if any man
shall worship the beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or
in his hand, he shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, by Angels in this
prophecy immeant the Ministers of the Gospel, The ruin of Rame for their
idolatry.
as the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, the 2. and 3. Chapters, that is,
the Ministers of the seven Churches, so these three Angels mentioned here, must
be understood all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, that witness against
the Idolatrous doctrines and practice of this Beast the Pope: here is a certain
number set down for an uncertain, of which Angels and their preaching, every
one seems to be more terrible than the former, the first peaceably publishes
the glad ridings of peace by the Gospel, saying, feal God, and give glory to
him, etc. the second thunders out the ruin and desolation of Rome, here called
Babylon, for their Idolatry and contempt of the Gospel: the third does by the
spirit of God declare the innevitable and irrevocable sentence of ruin and
destruction of soul and body, of them that worship the Beast, saying with a
loud voice, If any man, there is none exempted for his greatness, If any man
shall worship the Beact and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or
in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without maxture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be
vormented with fire and brimstone, before the h^ly Ang^ls and before the Lamb:
here is a punishment denounced suitable to the sin, as it is said in the 8.
verse, she gave, that is, the Beast and Whore of Babylon, gave to all Nations
the wine of the wrath of her fornication, which is her idolatry and
superstition, which men drank in as if they had drunk sweet Wine, and therefore
God will give them of the Wine of his wrath to drink to all eternity, for so it
is in the 11. verse, And the smoke of their torment shall ascend up for ever
and ever, and they have no rest neither day nor night, who worship the Beast
and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name; that is, all
Papists and Roman Catholics, as they call themselves, for these, as you have
heard above, are the marks of his name.

In the 17. Chapter verse 1. the Angel tells John he will show him the
damnation of the great Whore that sits upon many waters: by the great Whore
here in this place, is meant the seven hilled City of Rome, the Throne of the
Beast: by waters, is expounded by the Angel verse 15. to be meant people and
multitudes of Countries, Kingdoms and Provinces of People that the City of Rome
sits upon, or rules over, and yet in a literal sense Rome may be said to sit
upon many waters, for it is built upon Tyber, into which it is reported that
besides fountains and small brooks two and forty rivers discharge themselves,
and verse 3. I saw a woman sit upon a searlet colored Beast, full of names of
blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten horns, which Beast is Antichrist the
Pope of Rome: the seven heads are the seven hills upon which Rome is built,
which is the Beasts Throne, How the Beast sits upon the Whore, and the Whore
upon the Beast.
they are also seven Kings or Kingly governments, as verse 9 and 10. and the
ten horns are ten Kings, verse 12. but it may be demanded how this can be, that
the Beast which is Antichrist should sit upon the Whore, which is Rome, for
Rome the seven hilled City is his Throne, and the Whore, which is the City of
Rome, is said verse 3. to sit upon this scarlet colored Beast? I answer, that
Antichrist the Beast has his seat and Throne in Rome the seven hilled City, it
is proved above, there in the overthrow of Rome by the Goths and Vandals the
Beast received his wound, as you have heard, he received the wound of a sword
and did live; there is a very near affinity between these two, the Beast and
the Whore, for many in our propriety of speech takes the one for the other, and
sometimes both for one, calling Antichrist sometimes by the one name and
sometimes by the other, though improperly, but first as Rome is called the
Whore, that is, a spiritual Idolater, she may properly be said to sit upon the
Beast the Pope, because he is the basis or foundation upon which her Idolatry
is seated: she rides triumphingly in her Idolatrous ways upon him, and by his
authority and jurisdiction, he has so exalted her over all the Cities and
Kingdoms in the world by his double anthority Civil and Ecclesiastical, that
for her magnificence she is said in the 4. verse to be arrayed in Purple and
Scariet, and to be gilded with Gold and precious Stones and Pearls, and to have
a golden Cup of spiritual fornication in her hand, to allure others to her
abominable idolatries and filthiness. 2ly Pope Leo will tell you by what means
she rides upon the Beast, in his first Sermon upon the birth day of the
Apostles, when Popes were in their height about the year 683. O Rome, says he,
which art made the head of the World through the holy See of St. Peter, thou
rulest more largely through divine religion, than through any earthly dominion,
for thou have enlarged thin^ Empire and privileges by Land and Sea, being
amplified with many victories, yet that is less which thou have had subdued to
thee by warlike labor, than that which Christian peace has brought under thy
power: so says Pr^sper. Might it not then be said as properly, that Rome did
ride aloft upon the authority and dignity of the Popes, as to say a man does
ride upon his horse?

Full of the names of blasphemy, but why is this blasphemy set out here by
names? but upon this account, the Holy Ghost did foresee the Pope would cast
off the Ordinances and institutions of Jesus Christ, and would devise and
institute new Ordinances, Offices, and Officers in the Church, as I have named
before, a hundred and fifty new religious orders, and not one of them of divine
institution, which are as so many names of blasphemy whereby Christ's
Institutions, his Laws, his Truths, his Ordinances are rejected and blasphemed
by their Idolatry and Superstition, besides the blasphemies named before of the
Ambassador of Cicily, who cried to the Pope, thou that take away the sins of
the world have mercy upon us, and grant us thy peace, and the Bishop of
Modrusium in the Council of Lateran, calling the Pope the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, The Popes blasphemous names.
and their Savior, and the Bishop of Bepontum, who called this Beast the light
of the World, all which blasphemous titles the Pope applied to himself, and
many more the like, so that he is full of these and such like names of
blasphemy: and as for his scarlet color, by it may be meant his abominable
wickedness in sheding the blood of the two Witnesses, and other of the saints
and servants of God, of which monstrous murders, both the Whore and the Beast
are guilty, and also his Cardinals and Prelates, they are said to be drunk with
the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus Christ, as if they had died their
Robes in the blood of Martyrs, for they have all their scarlet Robes as badges
of the scarlet colored Beast, that they may be known to whom they do belong;
each one resembling the children of Kings, Judge. 8.18. nay Cardinals peark up
above Kings, Lord Metropolitans above Earls, and Lord Diocesans above Barons,
and every one in their order, above those that are in civil honor: Bellermin
in his third Book of the Pope Chap. 13. does confess that by the Whore in this
place is meant Rome, but he would have it understood of heathenish Rome the
first 300 years from Christ, and not of Rome as Christians, but that cannot be;
for then Antichrist came while heathenish Rome stood, and in so saying they
contradict themselves; for they say that Antichrist shall not come till three
years and an half before the last Judgment: but this is most false. For, first
how should Antichrist do all that is to be done by him in three years and a
half: Secondly Rome is not the Whore at any time but when the Beast has his
residence there, for she is to sit on him; and Antichrist could not be there
while Rome was heathenish, for then Antichrist had been come and gone long
before; but this is the Beast and Antichrist that now fits Pope in Rome.

I think it is sufficiently proved that this Beast is the Pope the great
Antichrist whose seat and throne is the seven hilled City of Rome, which is so
clearly described and set out by several marks and characters in the
Scriptures, that he neither has been, nor never will be found in the world if
not in Rome, for these things cannot properly be applied so universally to any
c^ner place in the world as to Rome, nor to any other person so as to the Pope,
who by the true applications of all these prophecies is the great Antichrist
and man of sin; and Rome is not the Whore of Babylon at any other time before;
until Antichrist the Pope had his residence there: It is he that teaches the
Doctrine of Devils, forbidding marriage and commanding to abstain from meats,
usurping authority over the consciences of men, which is the greatest tyranny
in the world, laying impurity upon those things he sorbiddeth, as marriage and
meats, which God allows of both, and annexing an operative holiness and power
both satisfactory and meritorious to the observation of the things he
enjoineth, though it be contrary to what the Law of God allows: and this very
thing, if there were nothing else, proves the Pope to be the great Antichrist,
for herein he is honored and obeyed before Christ and above Christ, The Popes
trial, proving him to be Antichrist.
for Christ's precepts and his word is rejected, and the Popes words and
orders, his canons and institutions is observed and obeyed, let the Bishop of
Osserie and the Pope, and all his Conclave deny it if they can, that this very
one thing makes him to be the great Antichrist, and this thing cannot properly
be applied to any one else in the world besides him.

It is this Antichrist that took his beginning from the falling away of the
Bishops by their pride and contention before the Council of Nice, and the fall
of the Bishops in the Council of Nice, falling from the primitive institutions
to human institutions; this is he that came to his Throne upon the removal of
the Heathen persecuting Emperors which hindered his revealing, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.7,
8. this is the great Antichrist, who had his first birth and bringing forth
about the year 328 in the Council of Nice, this is he that exalts himself
above all that is called God, etc. this is the Antichrist that intrudes his
unwritten traditions upon the Churches of Christ, with more vehemence than
Canonical Scripture; this is he that falcified the decrees of the Nicen Council
to establish his own principality over all other Churches, this is the
Antichrist that assumes to himself a divine power, and is honored with divine
honor, which he received from the Ambassador of Cisily, the Bishops of
Modrusium and Bepontum, etc. this is he that has a hundred and fifty religious
orders in his Church, and not one of them of Divine institution, which also
shows that he is before and above Christ for number of Officers and Offices in
the Church, and therefore he is the great Antichrist: Let Papists if they can
find these marks in any other besides the Pope.
this is he whose Religion is composed of above forty several Heresies, this
Popish Antichrist is the Star that fell from Heaven to Earth, Revel. 9.1. unto
whom was given the Keys of the Bottomless-pit, etc. This is he that challenges
an universal power as head over all Churches, as Christ's Vicar: this is he out
of whose mouth came three unclean spirits like frogs, which are the spirits of
Devils working miracles, he it is who is the Patron of all the legends of Lies
and fained Miracles; this Pope and Antichrist it is to whom the Dragon gave his
Power, his Throne and great Authority: this is he who is the King of the
bottomless Pit, who has the Locusts and Frogs at his command as his subjects;
this is he that made war with the Saints, and killed the Witnesses of Jesus
Christ, and took away the life and authority of the Scriptures in the Council
of Trent: This is he that for money has tolerated forty five thousand Whores
at once, for himself and his Clergy at Rome, and allows of Sodomy, etc. This is
he who has his Seat in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, etc. This is the Pope and
Antichrist who has two horns like the Lamb, but he speaks and acts like the
Dragon the Devil: this is he that compels all, etc. to worship the Beast and to
make his Image, and that no man must buy or sell, preach nor pray, that has
not his mark, or his name, or the number of his name: this is the Beast with
seven heads and ten horns, who had the wound of a sword and did live; this is
the Antichrist which the Angel showed St. John the condemnation of, and which
shall certainly come to pass in due time: these things I think are cleared to
the meanest capacity, that we need not doubt who is the great Antichrist, nor
where he is, etc.

At the 9. verse of this 17. chapter of the Revelations, the Angel begins to
expound and unfold this mystery; here is the mind that has wisdom, the seven
Heads are seven Mountains whereon the woman sits, etc. that is the seven
hills or mountains whereupon the City of Rome is built, (for which it is samous
through the world) and is called of the Gretians the seven topped or seven
crested City, and that because of these hills: Let the Papists if they can,
find us out any other City in the world built upon seven hills or mountains,
which has had seven several Governments, and no more nor less, and the seventh
Government to exercise an universal, or at least to challenge an universal
power over all Churches and Kingdoms, to fulfill this prophecy; find us out any
such besides the City of Rome, and then they do something; but if they cannot do
that, all they do, and all others that take their part do but labor in vain
and fight against God and against the truth, and without repentance will heap
up damnation upon themselves and many more. Papists have confessed that Rome is
the Whore here spoken of, but they cannot endure to hear that it should be the
seat of Antichrist, as if these two could be parted; the one sits and is born,
the other carries; there is as near a communication between them, as between
the head and the body, as the Angel interprets it verse 7. I will show thee
the mystery of the woman and the Beast that bears her, having seven heads and
ten horns; so that if they will send away the Beast to any other City than
Rome, they must send away the Body without his head, the seven hills are the
heads, and Mr. Brightman says where the seven heads of the Beast remain fixed
and stable, there is the very seat of Antichrist; but Rome is the City where
the Heads of the Beast remain fixed, therefore Rome is the seat of Antichrist.

Thus the Angels tells us the seven Heads are seven Hills or Mountains, they are
also seven Kings; five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come, and
when he comes he must continue a short space: the seven King, are not seven
singular persons, but the succession of seven several Governments, that had
been in Rome, and that should be, even from the time that Rome was built, until
the time that it shall be destroyed: from whence we have a sufficient argument,
that not any one Pope, but a succession of Popes is the Antichrist: for as the
first six Heads or Governments, nor no one of them did rest in any one single
person, that when he died, the next set up another Government, for so instead
of 7 there might have been sevenscore; but every one of the six several kinds
of Governments, remained in the succession of several singular persons, to make
up one Government; even so the seventh Head or Government, which is of Popes,
does not rest in any one single Pope to make up the Antichrist, but in a
succession of Popes, from the first Council of Nice, even so long as there
shall be a Pope in Rome, the succession of Popes; the seventh Head or
Government makes up the great Antichrist and man of sin, and son of perdition;
of the six Governments, the first was Kings, the second Consuls, I named them
all above, of which, the first five were fallen, and was past and gone when.
John writ; for so he says five are fallen, one is, which was the succession of
Emperors that Governed in John his time, and the other is not yet come, which
proved to be the Government and succession of Popes; which came in as soon as
the heathen Emperors were taken out of the way, 2 These. 2.7. they were it that
hindered Antichrists appearance, until they were taken out of the way, and
after the seventh Head or Government was come, for his continuing a short space
before he had the wound, I have showed you above, that Antichrists birth was
about the year 328 from the Council of Nice; the short space that he continued
before he had the wound was 87 years, for in the year 415. Alaricus took Rome
and wasted it: and it was taken five times, as is showed before, so that from
the receiving of his wound, until the wound was healed, was 132 years; for in
the year 547 his deadly wound was healed by the decree of Justinian the Emperor.

Verse 11. And the Beast which was, and is not, and yet is, is even the eighth
and one of those seven, and goes into destruction, the Beast which was and is
not, etc. Is the Pope who was in great prosperity and increased wonderfully in
glory and wealth from the Council of Nice, for the space of 87 years, and then
Rome was wasted by the Goths, Vandals and Hunns, etc. so that for the space of
132 years, Rome was so destroyed, that at one time for sorty days there was
not a man nor woman seen in it, and this was the time in which it is said, the
Beast is not, for he did not now at that time seem to be; but was as Chap. 13.
it is said, he was as it were wounded unto death, so as the friends of the
Beast did wonder when they beheld the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is;
that is, to behold the Beast that was in such great Majesty and glory, and is
not so now; that is, during the time of those calamities, he is not so as
before, and yet is; that is, he was not altogether wounded to death, it was but
as it were unto death, for he yet is, though in a low condition to what he has
been.

The Beast that was and is not, and yet is, is even the eighth, and one of the
seven: Antichrist the Beast here is spoken of under a double resemblance in one
and the same person; he is the seventh Head in respect of his civil power, and
he is the eighth in respect of his Ecclesiastical power; because it is a power
of it self: and yet he is one of the seven, because these two Powers are both
joined and exercised in one person, and both make up one Antichrist in the
succession of Popes, who does exercise both Civil and Ecclesiastical power and
jurisdiction, and so is the eighth, and yet one of the seven, because of his
double authority: the Angel speaking of these seven Heads, that five were
fallen before John writ, and one is, which was the government of the Heathen
Emperors, that was the fixth; he does not say, and the seventh is not yet come;
for that might have employed, that the seventh should have been a Civil Head
only, as the other six were; but he says, and the other (or another) is not
yet come; implying, that he should be another of a diverse nature, differing
from all the former Kings, for they only were Civil Governors, but this seventh
should be of a mixed kind, he should be both a Civil and an Ecclesiastical
Governor, in respect of which Ecclesiastical Government he is said to be the
eighth, and one of the seven, as the Ecclesiastical and Civil Governments are
both included in one person; therefore the Christian Emperors cannot be
understood to be the seventh head because their Government is only Civil; and
therefore cannot properly be said to be the eighth, and one of the seven:
neither had they their seat at Rome the seven hilled City, where the former six
Governed: from all these Prophecies that I have touched upon, and opened in a
slender manner, yet as well as I can; I think it will evidently appear to the
impartial Reader, that the succession of Popes is the Beast and great
Antichrist, and Man of sin, and Son of perdition, that exalts himself above all
that is called God, etc. and is the great Antichrist that was to come into the
world: much more might be said, but I hasten to another business.

The ANSWER to part of Bishop Williams his Book, called, The great Antichrist
revealed, before this time never discovered.
By GEORGE PRESSICK.
IN the 6 first pages of his Book, he endeavors to possess the Reader that the
persecution in these late days of the Long Parliament, etc. did exceed in
cruelty the persecutions in King Henry the eighth, and Queen Mary's days.

I answer, and do confess, that in reference to his Majesty, both King Charles
the first, and King Charles the scond, it did exceed the former; for King Henry
and Queen Mary were not persecuted, but they were the chief causers of the
persecutions: but what he says to the persecution of any others, I think
moderate men that are not oversway'd with prejudicate opinions, they will say
that the persecutions that was in these late days, was much inferior to that
in King Henry the eighth, and Queen Mary's days: when the Bishop of
Canterbury, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Farrar of
Saint David's, all five Bishops were burned to ashes; also long time after their
death, the bones of Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius were taken out of their
Graves and burnt, and the body of Peter Martyrs Wife taken out of her grave and
baryed in a dunghill, by Cardinal Poules order, the year One thousand five
hundred fifty seven, bloody Bonner himself in three years condemned three
hundred Christians to the fire; what was there then in all parts of the
Kingdom, it would amount to some thousands: did ever any man before you, except
he were a Papist, say as you affirm in your fourth page, that these Bishops and
other Martyrs in King Henry and Queen Mary's days, were used after a far
better manner, and were more justly proceeded against, and more fairly handled,
and less cruelly dealt with, than others were by the Long Parliament, etc.
these, it is true, plundered and cast out of part of their estates; but the
others suffered flames of fire, and their whole estates confiscate, etc.
mistake me not, I come not in the least to excuse them, for it is granted they
were too cruel; but my aim is, if you will not be made sensible of your own
mistakes, yet to endeavor to make others sensible of it; because I would not
have all, nor any thing that you have written in excuse of the Pope, the great
enemy of God and of his Church, to be believed; for if you had not excused the
Pope, I had held my peace, and should not have troubled my self nor others.

In the seventh and eight pages, he says that the prevalent faction of the
Long Parliament, did move him to settle his thoughts to search the Scriptures
that foretold of the coming of the great Antichrist, and to pray most earnestly
night and day for the help of Gods grace and Spirit to guide him in the true
understanding thereof, and by reading the best Authors to help him in the same.

I answer, I will not say much of what force his prayers might be, but the Tree
is known by the fruit, and when men obtain the thing prayed for or something
equivolent to it, they have ground of comfort that their prayers are heard; but
as I said in the beginning, some men are like Iohanan, etc. 42. of Ier. that
resolv beforehand that thus and thus they will do, and then they go and pray,
though they intend not to alter their Resolution: for, though he prayed to
understand the meaning of such Texts, by reaping the best Authors, yet in his
24th. page he says Mr. Mead, Doctor Hamond, the Magdeburgenses, Calvin, Beza
and in another place the Author of the Revelation unrevealed, and says, he
found many good and probable arguments produced by them, and Luther, Iuneus,
Chytreus, Tilenus, Mouresius, Powel, Whitaker, Tomson, Brightman, Downham, and
many others, whom he says do unanimously affirm, Rev. 17.5 that Text mystery,
that great Babylon, the mother of Whoredom and Abomination of the earth, is the
same with 1 Pet. 5.13. the Church that is at Babylon, and is interpreted-by the
Ancient Fathers to signify Rome, as Papius, Eusebius, Tertullius, Adversus,
Iudeus, S. Hierom, Augustine, and diverse others of late Writers. Here you see
the names of above twenty Authors, and says them and diverse others besides,
that he has read, and finds many probable arguments from them all, and prays
that by reading of Authors he may be helped in his work; yet observe the fruit
of his Prayer, for he says he must crave leave to dissent from them, and all
others, as he says in the 43d page of the second part of his book, and that
you may know what his Opinion is, and wherein he dissents from all men; I will
set down his own words in that place, When (says he, by the Wars of Alaricus,
The Bishops dissent from all other Authors, and in what.
in the year 410. and of Attalas in 451, and Gensericus in 455. Heathenism and
Idol-worship was fully destroyed in Rome, and Christianity became victorious. I
desire the Reader to consider what truth can there be in what he here says,
that Heathenism and Idol-worship was fully destroyed in Rome, and Christianity
was victorious, at this time when Rome was in the hands of bar barous Heathen
Idolaters, as the Goths, Vandals, and Hunnes, so that in 132. years Rome was
taken and ransackt five times, and Odoaces that took it the fourth time,
reigned there fourteen years; and if you look Socrates seventh Book, chapter 10.
you shall see that this Alaricus that he speaks of his taking Rome the first
time, he ransackt and spoiled both Town and Country as he went, at length he
took the City of Rome, and ransackt the City, defaced and fired many Monuments,
and violently spoiled the Citizens, executed many of the Emperor; and if you
look the 7th. book of Evagrius Scholasticus, chap. 7. you shall find that Rome
was taken by Gensericus, being a Barbarian, who set the City on fire, carried
away the spoil, took away Eudoxia the Empress, and her two daughters with him
to Libia. This was the very time of the beasts being wounded, as it were unto
death, And about this time Heresy did more prevail than at any time before or
since.
as above is showed; and that the Barbarians, Goths, Vandals and Hunnes who
were Heathens had the upper hand, how then should Atheism, Heathenism, and
Idol-worship be fully destroyed in Rome, and Christianity be victorious, as he
says, let the Christian Reader judge, whether the Bishop be not mistaken or
not, though perhaps he will not own it? for he is resolved before hand, that no
man shall convince him, for he will be singular, all other Authors are but
Novices to him.

In the 10th. page he says, That Bishop Mountague sets down Reasons which this
Bishop complyes with, why the Turks should rather be Antichrist than the Pope,
and his first Reason is, the Turks apostasy from the Doctrine and Gospel of
Christ.

I answer, I dare not betray my Master Christ his truth, and therefore must
make bold to tell both the Bishops that their first Reason has no reason in
it* for the Turk did never own Jesus Christ, as he is truly Christ, to be King,
Priest, and Prophet to his Church; the which thing the Turk did never own, and
therefore it cannot properly and truly be said, that the Turk did fall and
apostatize from the Doctrine and Gospel of Christ, because he never did receive
it nor own it as the Doctrine and Gospel of Christ, as King, Priest and Prophet,
but has always denied it, and been an Adversary unto it: But the Pope and
Church of Rome has outwardly in words, though they deny it in their Deeds, as
is proved be^ fore; yet in outward profession they own Christ as King, Priest
and Prophet; but are apostatized from the doctrine and institutions o^ Christ,
and therefore the Pope is the great Antichrist.

Page 14. He says, It is agreed of all sides, not only by Bellarmin a^^ other
Popish Writers, but also the most learned Protestant Divine^ That as Darnel
grows among Wheat, so Antichrist should arise out (...) the truest and purest
Church of Christ: and if so, and that he will ha^ the Pope to be Antichrist,
then the Church of Rome not only was, (...) must be confessed to be and
continue still the truest Church of Christ, a^ so Calvin and others are out of
the true Church in separating from t^ Church of Rome.

I answer, That for the agreement of the Writers, I shall n^ say much, but I
find no Scripture that says it, neither does (...) prove it; for as to Darnel
growing among Wheat, it no more relat^ to Antichrist, than to any other wicked
man's being in the outward visible Church, and suppose that Antiochus be a type
of Antichrist as you say, yet that proves nothing as to the place where he
shall arise, only it types out what he shall do when he is come. But suppose I
grant that Antichrist should a^ise out of the purest Church, and so catch you
in your own Snare; it is easily proved that the Church of Rome was once the
truest Gentil Church that was in the World; and that when the Apostle writ his
Epistle to the Romans, as Romans 1.8. I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you
all, that your Faith is spoken of through the whole World; which commendation
is not given to any other Church in the World; therefore by your own Argument
Antichrist was to arise in the Church of Rome, for it was the truest and purest
Church; but that it should so continue, and be the truest Church at the time
when Antichrist should appear, is but yours and Bellarmin's, etc. fancy,
without Scripture or reason to ground upon: For if the Church where Antichrist
did arise, had been the purest Church when he did arise, Antichrist would then
soon have been discovered and opposed, and hissed at, he could not have
shrouded himself and his hypocritical ways, but would have been discerned;
neither do you, nor can you prove, that the Church of Rome, being once a true
Church, that it should so continue still, and that we are Schismatics for
departing from it: This is fine Prelatical Popish Doctrine, without proof of
Scripture, but if you, or Bellarmin, or an Angel from Heaven (says the
Apostle) teach any other Doctrine than we have received in the Scripture, let
him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. The seven Churches of Asia, and many more besides
them, were true Churches, but are not so now: And so the Primitive Church of
Rome, the first hundred or two hundred years, was a true Church, but is not so
now, as is proved in the former part of this Book at large.

But besides these Reasons, I will come a little nearer to you by Scripture
proof, that Antichrist should arise out of a Church, which at that time of his
rising should be a corrupted Apostatized Church, 2 These. 2.1, 2, 3, verses.
Consider whether the words of men or Scripture is fit to be believed.
I beseech you Brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our
gathering together unto him, that ye be not shaken in mind, nor troubled,
neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter from us; And I may add, nor by
Bellarmin^e, nor Bishop Williams's Interpretations, as if the day of Christ
were at hand, for that day shall not come except their come a falling away
first, and that man of sin which is Antichrist be revealed; Here you see in
this Text is plainly held forth that the Church where Antichrist should arise,
should be one that was a true Church, but should fall away from the Truth, and
that Antichrist could not come until first the Church where he should arise
did fall away from the Truth, and then Antichrist should be revealed, that so
in this apostatized Church he might the more covertly work his feats and not be
discerned: Now here is set before you Truth and Error, choose whether you will
believe a poor man confirming what he writes by Scripture, or believe Cardinal
Bellarmin, or a Bishops words without Scripture.

Page 15. he says, but I do not believe him, That it is agreed of all sides,
and by all Interpreters, old and new, Papists and Protestants, that the great
Antichrist should come toward the end of the World, and at the last period of
the last times, as the Scripture (he says) does evidently testify.

I answer that these Scriptures he means to prove it by, is yet unwritten, for
I am sure he never read them; for though he quote 1 Timothy 4.1. that Text makes
directly against him, and nothing for him; For says the Apostle, Now the
Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, and give heed to seducing spirits, What is meant by latter times.
and Doctrines of Devils; and those devilish Doctrines are said ( verse 3) to
be the forbidding of Marriage, and commanding to abstain from meats, etc. I am
glad the Bishop does confess this Text to be meant of Antichrist: But because
the Apostle speaks of the latter times, must it therefore needs be understood
as he says, of the last period of the last times, or as he says in the 30.
pape of his 2d. Book, That Antichrist shall reign but three years and a half,
or much about that time, and very shortly after must be the last Judgment. But
let us see what other Scriptures say, that we may expound Scripture by
Scripture; Genesis 49. Jacob called his Sons together that he might show them what
should befall them in the last days; surely this is not meant three years and
a half before the end of the World, as he calls it, the last period of the last
times, etc. Verse 19. Gad a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at
the last. So Daniel 4.8. and 1 Peter 1.20. and so Matthew. 26.60. By the last
times in these Texts, is understood the fullness of the time appointed and
determined of God, for the affecting and bringing to pass what God has
intended to have done, and the time he has appointed; and so that Text before
1 Timothy 4.1. in the latter days, that is, the days before determined and
appointed, that Antichrist should forbid marriage and meats, and it is now 980.
years since marriage was forbidden in the Council of Constance, and Antichrist
does reign still, this is a long three years and an half, that is stretched out
to more then three times three hundred years, since Antichrist preached that
Dectrine, and yet the Bishop either cannot, or will not see his mistake.

Page 16. he says, He cannot sufficiently wonder at M^. Meade, Marefius,
Tilenus, the Synod of Gappe, and other Divines aforesaid, that they should
imagine that God would be so regardlesse, so unmindful, and so severe, though in
Justice he might, as to suffer the great Antichrist to reign and rage against
his Saints so many hundred years, as they prescribe that makes the Pope
Antichrist.

I answer, Who can sufficiently wonder that a man of such a place and dignity
as a Bishop, should be so far mistaken himself, as in writing less than half
one Leaf so grossly to contradict himself, The Bishop contradicts himself.
etc. For even now he said that it was agreed upon by all Papista and
Protestants, old and new, that Antichrist should come toward the end of the
World, and now he confesses that Mr. Mead, Maresius, and Tilenus, and others
aforementioned, which was above twenty, are of contrary opinion, and the Synod of
Gappe to boot, who can, to use his own words, sufficiently wonder at this, so
great a Doctor, a finder out of a new Antichrist, which the world never dreamed
of; but besides his slighting the Judgment of so many Authors before-named by
himself, together with the Magde^urgerses and Synod of Gappe, who can
sufficiently wonder that he should charge God to be regardlesse, and unmindful
of his Saints, to suffer Antichrist so many hundred years to tyrannize over
them, as if Gods Actions were to be measured by his Reason; he has forgotten
that God suffered all Nations, except the Jews, and some few Proselites, to
walk in their own ways almost four thousand years, For with him a thousand
years is but as one day, etc. And as is said above, the Beast, that is, the
seventh Head, When he comes he must continue a short space, Rev. 17.10. and
yet this short space was 87. years before he received his wound, and then was
132. years after before the wound was fully healed, which was but a short space
in comparison of the time that Antichrist has reigned; was ever the Church of
God without enemies since the Creation, that you should count it a greater
wonder now, then it was in former Ages, but I let this pass.

Page 17. he tells us, That the Apostle shows, but he neither does, nor can
tell us where the Apostle showed it, nor to whom, that God would raise up
Reformers to root out Errors out of the Church, and to prescribe a Form of
Godliness, these are his very words, A Form of Godliness, and then follow^, or
a Set-form of God's Worship, whereby the Church should be guided in the true
Faith, and these Reformers, he says, are styled ^

I Answer, I do not read of a Form of Godliness in any place of Scripture, but
in 2 Timothy 3.5. in which Text the holy Apostle does admonish us to turn from
such, as have no more than a Form of Godliness: And in the four foregoing
Verses, what manner of persons they would be that would set up a Form of
Godliness, That perilous times should come, A Form of Godliness for the
Government of the Church of Christ.
that men should be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
cursed speakers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
them that are good, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more than
lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, from
such turn away; or because they are such, therefore turn away from such: Is
such a brood as this (Sir) your Reformers, to root out Heresy, as you say, and
to settle a Form of Godliness, whereby the Church of Christ should be guided;
a woeful condition is that Church in who have such Reformers, and such Guides.
The Apostle branches them into eighteen several ranks or qualities, of which I
dare say there was never a one of them, that ever was a good Refomer of the
Church of Christ, but rather Deformers. And as for that Text you bring, which
you say calls such Reformers good men, as they were indeed, say you; But I know
not who will believe it, for under favor, I must tell you, it is falsely
applied, for the Apostle there is foretelling what Antichrist should do when he
came into the World, viz. That he should depart from the true Faith, and be a
seducing spirit, that he should be a liar, an hypocrite, that his conscience
should be seared, or benumbed in the practice of wickedness, that he should
teach the Doctrine of Devils, as the forbiding of marriage, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which may be received with thanksgiving of them that
believe and know the Truth. And says holy Paul to Timothy, If thou put the
Brethren in the remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good Minister of
Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of Faith and of good Doctrine,
whereunto thou have attained: But the Apostle does not say as you do, that if
thou bring in a Form of Godliness, or a Set-form of God's worship, thou shall
be a good man or a good Minister of Jesus Christ, that was far from the
Apostles meaning; he rather meant, If thou put the Brethren in remembrance to
shun a Form of Godliness, and turn from them, and all other wiles and deceits
of Antichrist, then thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ.

Page 23. he says, That as Christ and the whole multitude of Believers, his
Members, make up one Christ, so likewise the Congregation of the wicked, the
whole body of the Devil, which are all the company of wicked Reprobates and
ungodly men, are as it were the Spouse of their Head and Husband the Devil, and
the Soul and Body of the Beast and Antichrist, and page 26. he does confidently
avouch, That the great Antichrist is a great pack or company collected and
combined together by a Solemn League and Covenant, to do such and such feats
and facts, etc.

I answer, First, That if all the whole Company and body of wicked Reprobates
and ungodly men are the Spouse of the Devil, their Head and Husband, and so the
Beast and Antichrist; then he may if he please see his own mistake, in applying
it to a particular company of wicked ungodly men, the long Parliament and
Presbyterians, etc. for they were neither all nor the hundred thousand part of
all the wicked Reprobates and ungodly men that were in the world, which are, as
he says, the Spouse of the Devil, and makes up the body of Antichrist, whose
seat and residence is not in any particular City in the world: but he says,
page 60. to be understood for the great and spacious confused City of the
world, and indeed he makes a confused business of it; for if it be so, then
this pack or company of wicked Reprobates, that is, the Spouse of the Devil,
and the Antichrist, The Bishop contradicts himself.
must contain all the wicked Reprobates of his spacious confused City of the
whole world, and therefore is improperly applied to the long Parliament, etc.
and what he says in the 60th. page is a flat and absolute contradiction to
what he says in the 26th. page.

2ly. If the long Parliament and Assembly of Divines at Westminster, etc. had
been all the body of Reprobates and ungodly men in the confused City of the
world, (that there had been no more to be found in the world but they) then
sure he might have found many purer Churches in the world for Antichrist to
have risen up in than the Church of England was, which by his computation
contains the whole company of Reprobates and wicked men; for before this their
Apostasy there was many wicked Reprobates in it. Thus all men that reads may
see what pure nonsense here is brought to prove the long Parliament and
Presbyterians, etc. to be the great Antichrist, and to excuse the Pope, who is
the Antichrist; for his own Arguments makes directly against himself, as to the
business for which he intended them, and yet he thinks no man can show him his
mistake.

3ly Whereas you avouch, That Antichrist is a company of men combined together
in a Solemn League and Covenant, to do such and such feats and facts; of which
feats and facts you say, page 24. that this conglutinate Pack have one mind or
will, one course or end, and one main scope and desire to destroy the Truth, to
overthrow the Church of Christ, the right service of God, and all Piety from
the Earth; as you say, the Holy Ghost says, these wicked Senators have which
are thus combined in a Solemn League, etc.

I answer, and first advise you herafter to take heed of fathering Lies upon
the Holy Ghost, for I dare avouch you never read where ever the Holy Ghost said
any such thing, of any people at Westminster in a Solemn League and Covenant,
and you know how dangerous a thing it is to sin against the Holy Ghost; and
your base assertion in things of such concernment, is not sufficient without
Scripture Proof; and where can you, or any else that will take your part, as
you have too many, show us one text of Scripture that says Antichrist shall be
such a Pack, etc. and then cunningly propound the question. Whether the
Assembly at Westminster were not such a Combination, and fulfilled all the
Prophecies that prophesied of Antichrist. I take not upon me to defend the
Covenant, but demand of you, or any else, how it can be proved, that those that
took it were thereby conglutinate to have all one mind, one will, one course or
end, to destroy the Truth, and overthrow the Church of Christ, etc. as you have
affirmed? And suppose it were so, that an accursed Assembly combined together
to do mischief were the great Antichrist for as you say truly, page 25. A
multitude of men in such a Case can do more mischief than one single Person,
yet so as one single Person may be the Head, By right applying the Bishops
words, the Pope and Council of Trent is the great Antichrist.
etc. Then where in all the world will such a cursed wicked pack of men be
found as the Pope, taking him for the Head, as you say, and the last Council of
Trent for the Body, to destroy the Truth, as the Pope and that Council did, who
in the third Session of that Council, April 8. 1546. rejected the Hebrew and
Greek Copies of the Scriptures, and established a corrupt Latin Translation to
be Authentic. These, Sir, are your own words in your 32. page, if you had
applied them right, but you bring it in upon another account, where also their
unwritten Traditions were set in equal dignity with the Scriptures, where they
took away the power and authority of the Scriptures, making them subject to the
Popes will and pleasure, to put what sense or interpretation upon the
Scriptures he pleases, and none else to be received, but what he will allow
of, so that the Scriptures were never in this world by any so much disgraced
and undervalued; Here indeed was a pack of vile wicked persons combined
together against the Lord and his anointed Jesus Christ, and who had all one
mind and one will, and desire and end to destroy the Truth and Authority of the
Scriptures, which is the ground and pillar of Truth, the like wickedness
against the truth and right worship and service of Jesus Christ was never
known, nor never acted by the long Parliament nor assembly of Divines, nor no
Assembly under Heavens that owned a God and Savior, never since Christ himself
was upon earth in person. If you apply it right this is the great Antichrist,
that changes Laws, yea, even the Law and Word of God, utterly abolish the
second commandment, and making another Commandment into two, assuming to
himself an universal authority over all Churches as head thereof, as if the
whole state of the Church did hang so upon the Pope, that if there were no
Pope, there were no Church; or that if the Pope were not the Pope, the Church
were not the Church.

Page 27. He demands, if they be rightly applied, Whether all Notes, Acts,
Arguments and Testimonies of Scripture that are set down as marks of
Antichrist, are not all to be found in the long Parliament and Presbyterians,
etc.

And it is answered, That they are not; for the long Parliament and
Presbyterians, etc. did never forbid Marriage, nor 2ly. they never commanded
abstinence from Meat, 3ly. they did not exalt themselves above all that are
called Gods, as the Pope does; though they exalted themselves here, yet not
above other Emperors and Kings; 4ly. they did not delude with lying Miracles,
Signs and Wonders; 5ly. the key of the bottomless pit was not given to them
to let out the Locusts. 6ly. they did not deny Jesus to be Christ in his three
Offices of King, Priest and Prophet; 7ly. they had not their seat and residing
in the City built upon seven Hills or Mountains; which reigns over the Kings
of the earth; 8ly. they could not properly be said to be the Beast that was and
is not, and yet is; 9ly. they were not the seventh head, which John spoke of,
saying, five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet come; 10ly. they are
not the Beast that had the wound of a Sword, and did live; 11ly. nor the Beast
with seven Heads and ten Horns; 12ly. they did not shed the blood of all the
Saints and Martyrs, as Revel. 18.24. though I must needs say they shed too
much, but all these and many more are applycable to the Pope, and cannot
properly be applied unto them.

That which the Apostle in the 2 These. 2 calls a falling away or apostasy, he
perverts the Text and calls it a Rebellion; and because he would excuse the
Pope from being Antichrist, where the Apostle speaks of an Apostasy before
Antichrist should be revealed in his 34th. page. he says, We find no rebellion
in the Church of Rome against their Governors, but (says he) the Leaders of
the Church de^ive the Church, and so her Apostasy is the more excusable, and
less abominable to God. Observe here how he contradicts the truth and himself
both, for page 31. he speaks of the Heresies that was in the Church of Rome,
and he names the Nicolaitans, the Ebionites, Cerinthians, Montanists,
Valentinians, Arians, Nestorians, Eutyehians, Pelagians, Manicheans, and
Donatists, and many others whom he says rebelled against their Governors; and
here he says, there was no rebellion in the Church of Rome, and I have in the
former part of this book showed that there was twenty times two Popes at once
one rebelling against another, and many times the pople rebelled and deposed
one Pope, and set up another; Thus you see he shames not to write any thing, so
he might defend and excuse the Pope not to be Antichrist. Besides, take notice
he says, The Leaders of the Church deceive the Church, therefore their
Apostasy is the more excusable: I beseech you, whether is the greater Apostasy,
of the Leaders of the people, that should know the truth and teach others, for
them to apostatize and draw multitudes after them, and for most part sin
against the light of their own Consciences; or for ignorant common people to
apostatize and sin through ignorance, is not the apostasy of the Governors of
the Church the greater, and does the more mischief, and leads the more astray?
and yet this Bishop says, the apostasy of the Governors of the Church is more
excusable and less abominable in the sight of God: It seems he thinks that God
sees as he sees; I will not say that this, What less than Blasphemy?
and some other things we have spoken of, are blasphemy against God and his
Truth: but I refer it to wise men to judge.

There is little more of account to take notice of until the 58th. page, where,
in a sort, he contradicts himself in what was said last, viz. that Governors
apostasy are more excusable than others; and here he tells us, That the Church
of Rome compels all men to submit unto her, more with the Sword of the
Magistrate than with Aarons Rod, witness their cruelties to the poor Indians,
their massacres in France, their inquisition in Spain, and their unmerciful
persecution in England in King Henry the 8th. and Queen Marys days, and the
Gunpowder-treason: and then he tells of the cruelty of the Arians against the
Orthodox was more than barbarous, they infected and afflicted the Church, most
grievously, being armed with several weapons; and he tells us, that Novatus
exceeded all the rest, for he would neither give his Father bread when he was
ready to starve, nor bury his corpse when he was dead; he spurned his own Wife
out of doors being with child, and killed the child in her belly; these are the
Bishops own words, but he says above, that (...) prove it; for as to (...)
growing (...) Apostacies are more excusable, because they were guides of the
Church.

Page 59. he says, The most learned of the Jesuits do confess the Assirian
Babylon to be the type and figure of the Italian Rome, and is so understood by
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.13. The Church that is (...) Babylon salute you.

I Answer, If in this Text, as is granted, by Babylon Italian Rome is
understood, then we must in all those places in the Revelation where Babylon is
spoken of understand Rome; which if it be granted, as the Bishop does grant it
here, and says, that the most learned of the Jesuits do grant it, then must
Babylon, which is Rome, be the Seat and Throne of Antichrist, which Rev. 1^.5.
is called mystery, great Babylon the mother of whoredom, and abomination of the
earth. And Chap. 18.2. It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon, that great City,
the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a Cage of every
unclean and hateful Bird, for all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the wrath
of her Fornication, etc. this notes out her utter ruin and destruction: And
this is Rome, as Rev. 16.19. And that great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, to give unto her the Cup of the fierceness of his wrath. Yet nevertheless
he has said above, that by Babylon is meant Rome; so self willed and
self-conceited is our Bishop, that he flies off again, page 61. and says, that
what is said Rev. 17.18. cannot be understood of Rome without trope or figure,
for that it is said, that in Babylon was found the blood of the Prophets and
Saints, and all that were slain upon Earth, which cannot (says he) be referred
to any one City in the World, but only the great City of the World, and so in a
literal sense true, and what need we use tropes and figures, when the sense is
true in the letter. But observe, I pray you, how often he contradicts himself
to maintain an Error; for first he says, Observe how many Contradictions is
here together.
That by Babylon is meant Rome, then he says, It cannot be so without a trope
or figure, and says, It is true in the Letter as to the great City of the
World; but I say no, it is not true in that sense neither, without a trope or
figure, for there is no Text in all the Scripture that calls the universal
World, the great City of the World, as he does ^o find out a Babylon that the
Scriptures do not speak of, and reject that Babylon the Scriptures do so often
speak of, and he must go to tropes and figures for this Babylon too, but if his
eyes were open, he might here see his own f^lly in another thing, which is
this, for where will he find a Text of Scripture, as it is in the letter, that
says, the long Parliament and Presbyterians, etc. is the great Antichrist,
which he brings so many senseless Arguments to prove, and labors altogether to
prove it by tropes and figures in a mustical (...) it about, which never no man
thought of but himself, that he might appear to be some body. And if he will
allow of tropes and figures, and a mystical and spiritual understanding
Scriptures to prove a false and a seigned Antichrist, why does he not allow the
same Arguments and means to find out the real and undoubted of Antichrist in
the judgment of many reverend and worthy Diviner, all whose Judgments this man
rejects, because he will be singular.

But besides, If Babylon be the great City of the World, then where must they
fly that go out of Babylon.
you shall see the absurdity that will follow, by taking Babylon to be the
universal World, or as he calls it, the great City of the World, Rev. 16.4. And
I heard another voice from Heaven saying, go out of her my people, lest ye be
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; but where must
they go, they cannot go out of the World, therefore it is not to be understood
of the great City of the World, but this Babylon from which they are bid to go.
Two Verses above he speaks of the fall of this Babylon: And so Jerem. 51.6. Fly
out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his Soul, be not cut off in
her iniquity: And Chap. 52. and 8. But if by Babylon be meant Bishop William's
great City of the World, then the People of God has no place to flee unto, but
must there abide, and partake of her plagues; and then whereunto serves that
Admonition, or rather a command to fly out of Babylon: And thus you see he is
one time here, another while there, saying, and gain saying, and contradicting
himself, that his whole Book is a Babel of confusion.

But this is not all, he does not stay here, for in the 65. Page he says,
There are heaps of Expositors of this Point that understands Babylon literally
to be Rome; but he understands it not so Grammatically as they do, but
altogether mystically, for the great City of this World, so that one while he
is for a mystical sense, and another time he will have a literal sense, so that
he will be any thing, so he could persuade the World that the long Parliament,
etc. were Antichrist, that he might excuse the Pope. And he says further in
the same Page, That we ought to accept and follow a late and newly delivered
Truth, and recede from the old and ancient Error, though never so generally
embraced by former Authors, because Truth, whenever, or by whomsoever
discovered, is to be received and preferred before Error, how ancient or how
generally soever it has been delivered. To which I do willingly subscribe, if
it be a Truth that is delivered, and confirmed by evident Texts of Scripture,
it ought to be received: For I have read twenty years ago, that a Lay man
bringing Scripture to prove his assertion, was to be preferred before a (...)
whole Council that decreed things which could not be made good by Scripture,
but by wresting and abusing the Texts: But the Doctrine this Bishop teaches,
is not only new, but it wants both Scripture and Reason to confirm it, and
therefore not to be received, though he be a Bishop that teach it.

Page 71. He tells us of the Prophet Daniel's Description of the four Beasts,
which typified the four great Monarchies of the World, the Assyrian, the
Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman, and the little horn that sprang up among
the other ten horns, and he says that Antiochus Epiphanes was the little horn
that sprang up among the ten horns; and in the next words he says, He was not
another Horn besides the ten, but the last of the ten Horns.

I answer, That we have no reason to believ one word that this Bishop writes,
for still all along he either contradicts the Scriptures, or himself, one, or
both. For Dan. 7.7, 8. speaking of the beast that had ten horns, considered the
horns, and behold the incom up among them, that is, among the ten horns,
another little horn. And in the 20. ver. Daniel desired to know the truth of
the fourth Beast, Another Contradiction.
and of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up
which other was the little horn. And ver. 24. The ten horns out of this
Kingdom, are ten Kings that shall arise, and another shall arise after them,
and he shall be unlike the first: This other is the little horn, for all these
three Texts speaks of the little horn distinctly from the ten horns, and that
before it three of the ten Kings shall fall: Here are three witnesses of
Scripture speaking of a little horn distinct from the ten horns; And the
Scripture says, In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be
established; but Bishop Williams, in effect, says no, it shall not be so
established, for he has found out another interpretation, For he says, The
little horn was not another besides the ten, but the last of the ten horns; so
that it appears the Bishop sticks not to contradict God in his Word, and the
Angel expounding the meaning of the little horn to Daniel, and all men, let
them be never so Orthodox, he will contradict and forsake all their sayings, to
have his own whimsie to find out a new Antichrist, and to excuse the Pope, and
this is it which he calls his late and new delivered Truth, Page 65.

And he further says, That Antiochus Epiphanes is as the little born, and that
he was very little indeed at first, and was to come to his Kingdom by the
destruction of other Kings, which he says, are three Kings that fell before
that born, and says that Antiochus is the most lively type of Antichrist that
is in all the Scriptures, -- which he applies to the Parliament coming to this
Kingdom.

I Answer first, That if this Argument of his were of force, we might easily
prove the Pope to be Antichrist, the Bishop himself confesses, Page 72. That
many of the Popes came to their dignity by the destruction and ejection of
other Popes: The Bishops arguments prove the pope Antichrist.
Yea, I have showed that twenty times there were two Popes at once until one
was overcome, but the Popes got not their dignity only by the destruction of
other Popes, but by the destruction of Emperors and Kings. Pope Gregory the
7th. called Hildebrand, because the Emperor Henry the 4th. opposed him, the
Pope, in his Emperial dignity which he claimed over Emperors and Kings, sought
his destruction, and after twice excommunicating him, and making him take a
long Journey in frost and snow barefoot, and stand three days and nights
barefoot at the Popes gates to beg pardon, while the Pope was playing with his
Dallilah. Pope Constantine deposed the Emperor Philipicus, and caused his eyes
to be put out; Pope Zechary caused the Emperor to kiss his foot; Pope Adrian
deposed Deserius the Lombard King, and took his kingdom to the patrimony of
Peter; was not Childrick King of France deposed by the Pope, and Pipin his
Servant set up in his place; and Phocas murdered the Emperor his Master, and
made himself Emperor. What murders and deposing of Emperors and Kings did the
Popes exercise until they got the Temporal Imperial dignity into their hands,
as well as the Ecclesiastical by blood and murder, Histories are full to this
purpose: so that if this were a sufficient argument to discover who is the
Antichrist, it were an easy matter to prove the Pope to be the Antichrist.

2ly. I must tell you, that many godly and able Divines takes Antiochus to be
rather a type of the kingdom of the Turks than, of Antichrist, and Mr.
Brightman says, upon the 11th. of Daniel, that many men are in doubt whether
the things there spoken of belong to Antiochus or to some other King, and
says, that Calvin does avouch that it can by no means be referred to
Anticchus; for how should he do what he list against God, when the ships of
Shittim limited him, verse 30. we will not deny, but, as you say, he was for a
time one of the cruellest enemies to the Jews that ever the Church had, and a
Blasphemer of God: but that does not prove him neither to be the fourth Beast,
to whom the ten horns belong, nor the little horn that sprang up amongst them;
What is meant by the little Horn.
for the fourth Beast is the fourth Monarchy which is the Roman Monarchy, which
Anti^chus had nothing to do with, and the ten horns in the seventh of Daniel,
and those ten horns in Revelations 17. signify (...) and the same thing,
which is the Roman Monarchy, only (...) Daniel mentions another little horn
that sprang up among the ten, and which should be diverse from the first; and
therefore I think it may rather be referred to Antichrist the Pope, who is
diverse from all that were before him, because of his double government, and he
sprang up among the ten horns, that is, in the Roman Monarchies, the which
Antiochus did not, and it is true in the Pope which you apply to Antiochus page
71. that he was at first but a very little Horn, and had no right to the
Kingdom, and Jurisdiction, and Authority that now he exercises, for both his
Civil and Eoclesiastical power is usurped, but he grew up to such dignity, that
as Daniel says verse 20. His looks were more stout then his Fellows; for what
Emperor or King was there in Europe but a few years since, that he did not look
over with such stoutnesse, that he had them all at his beek, none durst oppose
him, for he had a mouth that spoke great things, for he calls himself Universal
Bishop, and Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor: And speaks great words
against the most High, and wear out the Saints, speaking presumptuously of his
Apostolical Authority and power to forgive sins, which is against the most
High, for none can forgive sins but God only: I could enlarge my self much in
these things, but I strive for brevity.

Moreover, this little Horn is to continue till the ancient of days sit, verse
9, 11. I beheld because of the voice of the presumptuous words which the Horn
spoke: and I beheld till the Beast was slain: Here the Horn is called the
Beast, as Antichrist is in the Revelations; by the ancient of days sitting, I
conceive is not meant the day of the last Judgment, but the determined time
appointed, that God will judge Antichrist the Pope of Rome, at the pouring
forth of the fifth Vial upon the Throne of the Beast, and that will when God
shall put it into the heart of the ten Horns, that is, ten Kings belonging to
that Monarchy, or that did belong unto it, which hitherto has given their
Kingdoms to the Beast, that is, their aid and assistance to maintain and uphold
the Pope in his Kingdom, until the Word of God be fulfilled, as Rev. 17.13, and
17. for v. 16. the ten horns are they that shall hate the whore, etc. for God
is strong that judges her, and so may well be made for the conversion of the
Jews, for when the ancient of days shall fit, and Judgment shall be given,
Dan. 7.22. in the Saints behalf, and the time come, says the Text, that the
Saints possessed the Kingdom, as verse 26, and 27. Judgment shall sit, and they
shall take away his Dominion, that is Antichrist's, the little horn, to consume
and destroy it unto the end, that is, it shall never recover again, and the
Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heavens, shall be given to the Saints of the most High, his Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him, that Nation
and Kingdom that will not serve the Lord shall perish, yea, those Nations shall
be utterly wasted, Isa. 60.12. Take courage all ye that truly fear God, for
such a time is not far of, it bastens greatly, though to the outward appearance
it seems contrary, I believe every tittle of Gods word shall be fulfilled, for
as soon as that blasphemous Horn is cut off, there will be a gathering of the
Saints, for these things belong to the little Horn, which is Antichrist, and
not Antiochus, for the effects of the little Horns working, you see by Dan. 7.
and Rev. 17. must continue until Antichrist be destroyed. I refer the
consideration of this to the godly wise, whether Antichrist or Antiochus be
meant by the little Horn.

Page 77. he says, That the tricks and fallacies of the Antichrist to get
Proselites and Followers after him, to effect his wickednesses, are six-fold.

First, A feigned and dissembling sanctity to be well thought of by all men.

Secondly, Smoothness of Language, and fair speeches to gain love and favor.

Thirdly, Wit and Eloquence to persuade men to aid and assist him.

Fourthly, Large promises and great gifts to win them unto him.

Fifthly, Signs and wonders, all pretended to be done from God, to draw men to
a good belief of all his actions, and if all these cannot serve the turn to
make men become his Adherents and Assistants, then

Sixthly, Terrors and Tortures shall do the deed.

Whence it is demanded if this six-fold Art was not most exquisite in the
Presbyterians, and the prevalent Faction of the Long Parliament?

And the Question is Answered and proved, that these six Arts, as you call
them, are more exquisitly to be found in Antichrist the Pope of Rome, then they
are to be found in these you name, or any others in the World besides.

First Antichrists feigned and dissembling sanctity appears in making above
fourscore holy days in a year, besides Sabbath days; which are kept and
observed with no less reverence and devotion than the Lords day: and also his
feigned dissembling holy water, Crosses, Crucifixes, Agnus Dei, beads,
baptising of Bells, consecrating of Altars, Garments, the corporal body of
Christ, the Chalice, the Linen to cover the Altar; the Eucharistical, the
Sensor, Incense, the Chests or Coffers wherein the Saints bones are kept:
Crosses, Images, Easter Tapers, Fonts, First Fruits, salt Churchyards: all
these things are consecrated, and these are but a part of Antichrists feigned
dissembling sanctity.

Secondly, His smoothness of language and fair speeches, appears in that he
calls himself Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor, a Father to the Church, and
the people are his Children, and bears his name, Papists, from the name Pope,
he tells them that he is the servant of all Christ's servants, which if he were
so indeed, as they believe him to be, this were sufficient to make him to be as
well thought on by all men, as he is by all his followers.

Thirdly, His wit and Eloquence to persuade men to aid him, appears in his
insinuating himself into the affections of Emperors, and Kings, and Clergy,
etc. calling them his most honorable and obedient Sons; as Pope Julius to the
Synod of Constantinople, salntes them thus, In that your charity, my most
honorable Sons, does yield due reverence to the Apostolical Chair; therein ye
get unto your selves much reverence, for although it belong unto us especially
to sit at the Helm, which we have taken upon us to govern in that holy Church
where the holy Apostle sat as Doctor, yet we acknowledge our selves unworthy
of so great honor, Theodor. Book 5. and 9. I think he showed his wit and
eloquence here, to get aid and assistance to set him a step higher; and also in
the benediction, and privileges which he grants to his obedient Sons.

Fourthly, His large promises and great gifts, appears in that he promises the
pardon of sins, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and such promises are of great force
with those that believe that he has power to do it; for to win men unto him,
for he not only pardons what is past, but if they please him well, he will
pardon sins for a great while to come, and establish Emperors and Kings in
their Kingdoms, and if they displease him, he can soon turn them out, whether
they belong to Church or State, and set up others in their stead; therefore it
is no wonder if his promises and gifts gain men unto him, and seek all ways
and means to please him.

Fifthly, His signs and wonders pretended to be done from God, appears in this,
that whatsoever is done to confirm an error, may be said to be a fraudulent
sign or miracle, as to confirm their ^ransubstantiation, it has been said the
Priest has so ^^nningly ordered the matter, that after consecration, the wafer
being pricked with a bodkin a drop of blood has appeared, but we will set down
the famous miracles of Pope Sylvester, one is, that by sacred Baptism he cured
Constantine of a leprosy: but this is a Romish lying fable to increase the
Popes authority; for he was not baptized by Sylvester; but by Eusebius at
Nio^medea, as Socratis 1. book chap. 26. His second miracle, that he raised up
a great Bull, that was killed by Zambres a Jewish Sorcerer: his third that he
bound a Dragon after a miraculous manner; says Mr. Brightman in his
confutation of Bellermin, these are some of Antichrists signs and wonders. I
have spoken of many of them before, and therefore shall pass it over here, for
Antichrists Church of Rome is known to exceed all the world for signs and
wonders.

Sixthly, If all these will not serve his turn, then terrors and torments must
do it, and that appears first by his thundering excommunications, as Pope
Hildebrand said in an Epistle to the Germans that Henry the fourth was stricken
with a Thunderbolt, when he was excomunicated by Hildebrand, that which once
was said of Nebuchadnezzer may not be unfitly applied to Antichrist the Pope;
for his power was once extended so far, that all Nations feared before him, for
whom he would he set up, and whom he would he pulled down; and Gentius King of
Iliricum would not submit to this Tyrant, until he was taken Prisoner to Rome
with his Wife and Children: did not Pope Alexander cause Henry the second to go
barefoot with bleeding feet to Thomas Beckets Tomb at Canterbury, for
displeasing this Tyrant? and did not Pope Innocent the third, because King John
would not submit to him, at last so terrify him, that he made him kneell down
to Pandolphus his Legate and kiss his foot, and also to kiss Steven Langton;
Bishop of Canterbury his foot? and Pope Innocent the second took th Dukedom of
Sicily from the Emperor and made Roger King thereof, and Pope Alexander made
Fredrick the Emperor to fall flat upon the ground while the Pope trod upon his
neck; one might multiply examples of this nature to prove, that what the Pope
cannot do by other means to make men adhere unto him, that he compels them by
terrors and torments for to do it: so that, if these be infallible signs of the
great Antichrist, as Bishop Williams produces them for that end, but then it
cannot be denied that the Popes of Rome are the great Antichrist; for they have
exceeded all the Christian world in the exquisite practice of these six signs
of the Antichrist, which cannot so properly be applicable to the Long
Parliament and Presbyterians, etc. nor to any one else in the world, as to the
Pope of Rome.

Page the 79. he says the Apostle, in calling Antichrist the Man of sin, and
not the Man of sins; 2 These. 2.3. gives us to understand, and his meaning is,
that Antichrist should commit some singular and peculiar, sin, that should only
and properly be the sin of the Antichrist, and of none else; and which he says
is not the sin against the Holy Ghost, nor Idolatry, nor Infidelity, nor
blasphemy, but the highest degree of manslaughter, or the unjust murdering of
an innocent Person; Page 80. and page 82. he says it is worse than Adams sin,
and page 87. he further says, this sin is a judicial condemning of an innocent
Person or Persons, their superiors, (as Christ was) unto death, and that by a
representative of a whole Kingdom.

I Answer first to the latter part, how? or by what Scripture? or what
authority can be produced for proof of what he says page 80. and 82. and 87?
for his bare word is not sufficient ground for any man to pin their faith upon,
without either Scripture or reason to confirm it, but such fancies or fictions
as these, you may remember that in his 65. page he calls them new delivered
truths, and therefore says, we should recide from former errors or opinions,
though never so generally embraced by former Authors; for he is the only man,
for to find out a new Antichrist, and to clear the old Antichrist from that
stain and polution, if any man will believe him.

But secondly, how can any man of any indifferent knowledge, believe any thing
that he writes, who does so often, as you have heard, contradict himself and
the Scriptures also? and so again, here in this place, where he says the
Apostle gives us to understand in that 2 These. 2. that Antichrist shall commit
one singular peculiar sin, that should only and properly be the sin of
Antichrist, and none else: whereas neither that text, nor any other in the
whole Scriptures, does speak of any singular or peculiar sin that makes him to
be Antichrist; but the Scriptures speak of many sins, in many several places,
that should declare him to be the great Antichrist, as is showed in many places
of this Book, and even in this Text from whence he would gather his assertion;
His contradicrion of Scripture.
the Text speaks the absolute contrary: as first, that Antichrist shall exalt
himself above all that is called God: Secondly, that he should sit in the
Temple of God: Thirdly, that he should show himself that he is God; that is,
the highest God on earth, above all other Gods either in Church or State:
Fourthly, that his coming should be, after the working of Satan, with power;
and that is showed above, how he claims and exercises a power above all, etc.
Fifthly, that he should come with sigus: Sixthly, with lying: Seventhly, with
working wonders, with deceit and unrighteousness: Eighthly, that he should
forsake the truth, and not receive it in love; besides several sins spoken of 1 Timothy 4. and 1 John 2. and all along in the Revelations, and elsewhere, of many
sins that Antichrist should be known by: and this man rejects all, and will
have him known by one singular, peculiar sin, which no Text in all the
Scripture, nor no Author that ever did write, did particularly point him out
by, for if that had been the peculiar sin to know him by, then should they have
been Antichrist that crucified Christ, the Apostle would not after have writ of
another Antichrist, and which the same sin should make him Antichrist; which
never can the like be committed with such a height of rebellion against God,
and with such a rage reaching up to Heaven, by any other rebellion, or murder,
neither by Parliament nor Phocas, or any else.

And as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was put to death by a Roman Power and
Authority, I think we may upon better grounds than you bring, argue that it may
imply thus much, that Antichrist should have his rise, seat, and residence in
that very place from whence the power and authority came, that crucified our
Lord Jesus Christ; and though there be no Text of Scripture to prove this,
except perhaps it might be proved by consequence, comparing Scripture with
Scripture; yet I will not be curious to search into it, but leave it to the
judgment of others: however if I mistake not it, it seems to carry more force
in it, than all the new fangle stories you tell us of.

Page 95. he draws a conclusion from the writings of Tremellius and Beza, that
Antichrist shall exalt himself above the Bishops, and indeed, in this I grant
that he says very true, for the Pope of Rome has so exalted himself by his
universal Priesthood, as head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar, and Peter's
Successor, that he claims an authority over all the Bishops in the World, and
does exercise that authority in many Kingdoms, more than any one does besides;
and therefore by the Bishops own argument the Pope of Rome is the great
Antichrist and man of sin, etc. for the Pope says, it stands upon necessity
to salvation, that every humane creature be subject unto him; and therefore
requisite and necessary for men that will be saved, to know the dignity of his
See, and excellency of his Dominion, for his Priesthood was prefigured in
Aaron, and other Bishops under him was prefigured by the Sons of Aaron, to be
under him: thus he exalts himself above the Bishops, as is said before.

Page 99. he says that the denying Jesus to be the Christ, is the proper note
and undeniable mark of the great Antichrist, who is the head of all other
inferior Antichrists, as 1 John 2.22. Who is a liar but he that denies that
Jesus is Christ, the same is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son.

I answer, I shall not trouble the Reader to relate what the Bishop says from
this Text to the purpose he aims at, but I shall (as I have done by other Texts
and Arguments) show you how undeniable this Text rightly applied does prove the
Pope to be Antichrist: first, he is said in this Text to be a liar, and so in
the Text before named 2 These. 2.9. that is, a crafty deceiver of the People, by
granting pardons and indulgences, and many other privileges which are so well
known I need not repeat them, and which are all as so many lies, for there is
no truth in them; nor no Scripture to prove that he has any such power or
authority, but that by his lies he causes the People to believe him; and he is
a liar also, in professing outwardly in words, what he denies in his practice,
as might be made appear in many several things, and as appears in the former
part of this Book; he is a liar that denies Jefus to be Christ: Jesus signifies
a Savior, thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sine; and Christ fignifies anointed, that is, to be King, Priest and
Prophet to his Church; a King to rule and govern his Church, to appoint Laws,
and Officers, and Ordinances in the Church; a Priest to offer Sacrifice for the
sins of the People, and that he did, especially when he offered himself, Heb.
9.13. If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling
the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the
blood of Jesus Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without
spot to God, cleanse your consciences from dead works to serve the living God?
3ly He is a Prophet to teach and instruct his Church; every man would be
content to have him for their Jesus to save them from their sins, but few are
willing to have him for their Christ, that is, to be their King, Priest and
Prophet, to rule and govern, etc.

And first, the Pope denies Christ his Kingly office in his Church, to rule and
govern it by his own instituted Ordinances, and Officers, etc. for the Pope
has in his Church one hundred and fifty several Orders of Church Officers and
religious Orders, which not one of them is of Christ nor his Apostles
institution, which in the former part is nominated by their names. Secondly,
the Pope denies Christ his Kingly office, in challenging an universal Power and
Authority over all Churches; which Power and Authority belongs only unto
Christ, The Pope denying Christ his Kingly office.
and not to any man upon earth: Thirdly, in making his Laws and Decrees equal
or rather above the Decrees and institutions of Christ; for the Popes Laws are
observed, as forbiding marriage, and commanding to abstain from meats, and many
other the like; and Christ's Laws are rejected that does allow of these things,
which the Pope prohibits; and forbideth many things, as invocation of Saints,
worshipping of Images, Adultery and Fornication, and many the like, which the
Pope allows: thus Gods Law is neglected, and the Popes observed: Fourthly,
the Pope denies Christ's Kingly office in his instituted Ordinances, by
establishing his own humane inventions, of Masses, Crosses, Crucifixes, Prayer
upon beads, and in an unknown tongue, Pilgrimages, Conjuration or exorcism and
the like, and seting up a religion composed of above forty heresies, as is
named and showed before: And fifthly, in denying and bloting out the second
Commandment, that forbids the worship of false Gods, or of the true God in a
false way, and giving the worship and honor that is due to God to the Virgin
Mary, to Saints and Images; all which is a denying of Christ his Kingly rule
and Government; and which makes the Pope of Rome to be the great Antichrist
here spoken of in this Text, as well as in others before named.

Secondly, The Pope of Rome denies Christ the exercise of his Priestly office,
for first, whereas it is said Heb. 9.25, 26. that Christ is entered into Heaven
to appear in the presence of God for us, not that he should offer himself
often, for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world:
and Chap. 10.14. for with one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified; but this the Pope denies in his practice, The Pope denies Christ in
his Priestly office.
that Christ's once offering himself is satisfactory to take away sin; and
therefore he is offered again by the Papists every day, and sometimes in many
thousand places in one day, in their Idolatrous Masses, from which practice of
theirs I shall propound one question, viz. where, or what Text of Scripture can
they or any man bring to prove, that either the Pope or any of his shaveling
Priests, Jesuits or Friars, are commanded to offer Jesus Christ an unbloudy
propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead? or in what part of Scripture
are the massing Priests called Sacrificers in the New Testament, and authorized
to sacrifice Jesus Christ? or did ever the Apostles offer Jesus Christ a
Sacrifice for the quick and dead? if these things cannot be proved by Scripture
to be of Christ's institutions, then it cannot be denied but the Pope does deny
Christ both of his Kingly and Priestly offices, and so he is the great
Antichrist and man of sin that was prophesied of, to come into the world.

Secondly, the Pope and all Papists deny Christ his Priestly office in offering
up their prayers to God in any other name or by any other intercessor or
mediator but Jesus Christ only, John 16.23. verily verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name he will give it you; and 1 John
5.14. this is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us; but we have no assurance in any text of
Scripture to be heard in the name of the Virgin Mary, nor any other Saint, nor
no Scripture to prove that to ask in their name, or to make them mediators, or
she Mediatrix, as they call the Virgin; no Scripture proves it to be according
to his will, and therefore have no promise to be heard with acceptance; for
there is no other Mediator between God and man, but the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. so that by these Scriptures it is clear that the Pope does reject and
deny Jesus Christ in his Priestly office; and not only so, but the Pope is
guilty of the sins of many hundred thousands more, whom he does make to deny
Christ in his Kingly and Priestly offices, and leads them without repentance to
destruction with himself.

Thirdly, the Pope of Rome denies Jesus to be Christ, in denying Christ the
exercise of his Prophetical office, to teach and instruct his Church, for
whereas all the Service and worship that is given and done to God, ought in
every thing, to be performed, both as to the matter and the manner of
performance according to the word of God, and the example of Christ and his
Apostles, and their institutions; both for Ordinances, Officers and Offices;
the Pope of Rome, and Church of Rome does not, so far as I know, perform any
one part of Gods worship and service in any one Ordinance, Pope de^^ Christ
(...) Propheti^^ office.
nor with any one Church Officer rightly elected to his Office, according to
Jesus Christ and his Apostles examples and institutions: in their preaching
they come the nearest, but both their Sermons are stuffed with many foolish
fictions and fables, so that a man may justly say, they do not preach but
prate; for no man preaches, but he that preaches Christ; and their Preachers,
even those that are esteemed the best and greatest Scholars, are not of divine
institution, no more than Anabaptists, and lay Preachers: their Eucharist,
their Baptism, their Prayers, their Masses, name what you will, there is so
much of human invention mixed with it, that bring it to the touchstone of the
word of God, and divine institution, and it will upon trial prove so full of
dross, that it will not hold out weight in the B^^lance of the Sanctuary,
therefore the Pope of Rome is Antichrist.

Did ever Christ or his Apostles institute any one of 150 neligious Orders,
they have in their Church? or did they eestablish a Religion, and force men
with fire and sword to the observation of it, and that composed of above forty
Heresies? did they ever in Baptism use Crism, Spittle, Oil, Salt, or holy, or
conjured Water to scare the Devil? did they ever use such Vestments, with
Crosses in Banners, Tapers, Altars, etc. after Christ's ascension? did they hold
black and green, white and red colors more sacred than others? did they
observe canonical hours, pray for the dead? go processions, keep 86 holy days
in a year, besides the Sabaths? did they ever use relics of Saints, etc.
Pictures, Images, Crucifixces, Crosses, Agnus Dei, or such like? did they say
Masses to deliver souls out of Purgatory, or teach that there was a Purgatory,
or that men might merit salvation by their works? and not only so, but do
works of super-errogation, to be by the Pope converted into payment for others
and the like? did they ever teach that the Cordilians should draw a soul out of
Purgatory, for saying five Pater nosters, and five Ave Mary's with more the
like? did the Apostles ever worship the Cross, or teach others to worship it,
with the same worship that God is worshipped with, as Thomas and other Popish
Doctors teach? or did they ever pray in any Language that themselves did not
understand, or pray upon a string of Beads? or did they ever teach abstinence
from marriage or meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving? or did they forbid marriage and allow Whores, and Sodomy, as the
Popes have done? dare any man say that these are the Ordinances and
Institutions of Jesus Christ and his Apostles? are they not more like the
Doctrines of Devils, and those that teach and practice them, the Slaves and
Vassals of the Devil, to do his drudgery? If these things cannot by Scripture,
be proved to be the Ordinances of God, instituted by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles; then it cannot be denied but the Pope who is the Author, and ^he
Papists who are the practisers of these things, they do ^ll reject and deny
Jesus to be Christ, in all his three Offices ^f King, Priest and Prophet; and
will not suffer him to rule ^^m as their King, nor to be their alone and only
Mediator (...) Intercessor between God and man as their Priest; nor ^o be,
their Prophet to teach them the Laws and Ordinances (...) Church, nor the
Officers and Offices in his Church, etc. I therefore the Pope, as chief Author
of these things, does deny Jesus to be Christ: and upon that account cannot be
denied to be the great and abominable Antichrist, that was prophesied should
come into the world: for this is the plainest Text in all the Scriptures, to
prove who is the great Antichrist; 1 John 2.22. namely, he that denies Jesus to
be Christ, that is, to be anointed King, Priest and Prophet: and to confess
that in words, and deny it in deeds, is no more than the Devil does, for he
will confess it in words; and how it is proved that the Pope denies it in
deeds; you have heard how he is the great Liar, professing Christ in words to
be King, Priest and Prophet, and denying it in deeds; who is a liar but he that
denies that Jesus is the Christ? he is Antichrist that denies the Father and
the Son: for in denying the Son he denies the Father also, for that follows in
the next vetse; whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father:
therefore the Pope denies both, he is the great Antichrist, etc.

These as you have heard are some of the Doctrines and of their practice,
whereby Antichrist the Pope does in a most high and contemptuous manner rejects
and deny Jesus to be the Christ; and will not allow of those Ordinances and
Officers of the Church, which Christ has taught us in the New Testament and
instituted for the Churches use; Antichrist sound out who he is.
but Antichrist the Pope has framed a new form of worship, with new Ordinances
and Officers, teaching for Doctrines his own precepts and inventions, so that
now we have found out the great abominable Antichrist, that does in the highest
and most contemptible manner of any one in the world reject and deny Jesus to
be the Christ anointed of the Father, King, Priest, and Prophet to his Church:
and therefore we may conclude that the Pope of Rome is the great liar and the
Antichrist.

In the 7. page of his second Book, he says that the 1260 days spoken of
Revel. 11.3. they are to be understood of so many years, which in the 8. page
he says that the 1260 years began at the year 382. and ended in the year 1642.
during which time, he says the Orthodox Bishops in all the Christian Kingdoms,
of Spain, France, Germany, England, S^^land, Ireland and others had full power
and free liberty (...) preach the Doctrine of faith, and they were not only
pr^^cted from wrongs and violence of their opposers; but (...) were also
assisted to reduce all transgressors to repeutar And in the 27. page he says
that Ecclesiastical Histories do undoubtedly declare, that from the Reign of
Teodosius for 1260 years, until the year 1642. the Churches of God had rest,
and was freed from any bloody persecution; for any profession of the true
faith, and the right service of God, and the two Witnesses of Christ, the Kings
as chief; and the Bishops and Preachers in their Cloisters and Monasteries as
in in a Wilderness, secluded from all Worldly affairs; had free liberty
(through the protection and assistance of nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers)
to publish the mysteries of our Christian Religion, and the truth of the two
Testaments and Doctrine of Faith, etc.

I answer first, by comparing together what the Bishop says in these two
places, we must examine what he means by Orthodox Bishops, whether Protestant
Bishops, or the Papist Bishops; which he says in all Christian Kingdoms of
France, Spain, etc. had free liberty to preach the Doctrine of Faith, and were
protected from the violence of their opposers: The Bishop has now confessed
himself a Papist.
certainly he means the Popish Bishops; for who else could they be for 1260
years, which was he says from the year 382. unto the year 1642. that could, or
had liberty freely without persecution, to preach the Doctrine of true Faith,
in that 1260 years, but Papists, and be protected from all violence of
opposers: for he says further in the 27. page that these Orthodox Bishops were
one of Christ's Witnesses; which he describes to be Bishops and Preachers in
their Cloisters and Monasteries: which must be understood of Bishops, Priests,
Friars, and Jesuits, for these live in Cloisters and Monasteries; and not our
Protestant Bishops and Preachers: and these Orthodox Bishops and Preachers, in
their Cloisters and Monasteries, were says he, secluded from the world, and
protected in our Christian Religion; where by our Christian Religion, it must
be supposed he means his own Religion, together with those that are of the same
opinion with him, and that is the Bishops in Cloisters and Monasteries, who are
Papists: so that now at last he has openly declared himself (...) be a Papist,
if they be Papists that live in Cloisters and Mo^^steris, secluded as he says
from the world; who did preach the true Faith, and right Service of God, and
published our ^^^istian Religion; in which word our Christian Religion,
includes himself for one of that Religion, preached by the Cloisterers, etc.
for the space of one thousand two hundred and fixty years, free from any bloody
persecution, for the profession of their faith, which no Church in Europe was
but the popish Church: therefore seeing it is thus, that we have now found him
out what he is, we need no longer wonder why he misapplyeth Scripture, and
forsakes the opinion of all other Writers, to find out a new Antichrist, and
to stickle so hard to excuse and defend the Pope.

And that it may clearly appear that he takes the Papist Church of Cloisterers,
etc. to be the true Church, and their Doctrine, to be the Orthodox Doctrine;
and their Faith and Service of God, to be the true Faith and right Service of
God: as in his 27. page so in the 7. page speaking of one of the Witnesses,
which he says, is these Orthodox Bishops, and of the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloath 1260 years, by his own interpretation, he says their prophesying in
sackcloath does signify their conforming themselves unto the Doctrine that
they preached, and not their mourning for the polution of the true Church;
which says he, during that time of 1260 years of their Prophecy, was not
poluted: as Mr. Mead and others do suppose: a strange interpretation differing
from all men that ever I read or heard of, that the true Church of Christ
should be without any bloody persecution, and without any polution, The Church,
says the Bishop, without trouble 1260 years.
for the space of 1260 years; and yet the Witnesses of Christ to be all that
time clothed in Sackcloath, which is a mourning weed, and did always signify
that those that wore it were in a sad and low condition, a deformed and
mournful estate; stripped of all their glory, as those are that go in black and
mourn at Funerals: whereas if the Bishop's interpretation of the glory and
beauty of the Church had been true, that it had been without trouble and
without polution; the Witnesses should rather have put on their glorious and
beautiful garments, and have rejoiced in the prosperity, and glory, and purity
of the Church, which he says was without polution: but the word of God tells us
another story, of the cause of the Witnesses wearing Sackcloath, Revel. 17.7,
8* that the Beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, should make war
against them, and overcome them, and kill them, and their corpse should lie in
the street without burial, etc. and was this a time in which the Church was not
poluted, (...) the Witnesses and faithful Worshippers persecuted: wh^ they must
be slain, and their bodies lie without burial? I leave it to the godly-wise to
judge, how the Bishops interpretation can be true, that is so contrary to the
Scriptures.

And whereas he says the true Church of God had rest, and was freed from any
bloody persecution for the profession of the true Faith and right Service of
God for 1260 years, beginning the year 382: the quite contrary will appear to
be most true; for as ancient Histories do relate, the Apostolical Protestant
Religion, Of the first planting the Gospel in England.
was settled in England in the later end of the reign of Tyberius the Emperor,
under whom Christ suffered: Gildas says that Joseph of Aramathea was sent by
Phillip the Apostle into Britain, who here laid the foundatiou of Christian
Religion: Origin in his fourth homily on Ezechiel says, that the true Faith of
Christ was in Britain before Elutherius was Bishop of Rome, which was about
the year 180 after Christ: Nicephorus in his second Book Chap. 40. says that
Simon Zelotes did also preach the Gospel in Britain; by all which it does
appear, that England received the Christian Faith long before Austin was sent
hither by Gregory the great; for he indeed sent him hither to settle Popery 600
years after Christ, but not to settle the Gospel of Christ, for that was
settled before, as does appear in the beginning of this Book. At a treaty
between the Nobility of England, and Hingist King of the Saxons, about the year
460. where neither party was to have any weapons; Hingist secretly ordered the
matter, his men had every one a long knife in his hose, that upon the watchword
given every man should kill him he talked with: so that there was murdered
that day upon the place of English Nobility, some stories say 460 by the
Saxons; the King was taken prisoner, for whose ransom, London, York, Lincoln,
Winchester with other strong holds, being granted; the Saxons made havok of the
English Nation, destroyed the Citizens, pulled down Churches, killed the
Pastors of the Churches, burned the Books of holy Scriptures: and all this and
more to be done by Heathens upon Christians, it seems is no bloody persecution
in Do^^or William's account; the Church had free liberty, etc. says he: This
persecution continued in Britain, for in the (...) 568 Ministers were driven
out, so that the Archbishop London and York were both forced to fly into
Wales; but fore this there was eleven thousand Christian Virgins murdered:
there was about this time above two thousand Monks at the Abbey of Bangor in
Wales, who were driven out of Britain: who all lived by the sweat of their
brows, and labor of their hands; these men differed nothing from other
ordinary men, but only in strictness of life, and were such as now are called
Puritans or Roundheads: for Augustine says, ^imative ^onks were such as now
are called Puritans, etc.
there was such as were called Monks, that were but laymen, only led a more
severe and strict kind of life than others, in his Book De moribus Ecclesioe
Chap. 13. also Hierom, ad Heliodorum, one thing says he, appertains to Monks,
another thing to them of the Clergy; and in the 4. Canon of the Council of
Calcedon, it is provided that Monks should not meddle with matters of the
Church; Sozomen says in his 3. Book, Chap. 16. speaking of Monks of that time,
which lived in Cities and had several Mansions and differed nothing from other
men, but that they were of a stricter life: which since by their enemies have
been called by other names; as names of infamy, as some in our time are called
Puritans; which if, says he, taken in the right sense if they deserve it,
tends to their comfort and prayers; Athanasius a man to be credited of all, in
his epistle de Dracontium, says that he knew both Monks and Bishops married
men and had Children, and such were the Protestant Monks of Bangor: this is
showed more fully in the beginning of this Book.

About the year 833 the Danes invaded England, spoiled Churches, murdered
Ministers with men women and children after a most barbarous cruel manner, the
space of 255 years: and after them William the Conqueror slew of the English
66654 about the year 1264 was four bloody battles in England, between the King
and his Barrons; also between King Edward and the Scots was slain in two
battles of the Scots, besides English 57000 about the year 1295 and 1298. and
was all this nothing with you? was there none of your Orthodox Bishops in all
these broils? were they free from blood and persecution?

What say you then to the Wars among the Popes and Emperors; Pope Alexander the
second, and another Pope set up by the Emperor, about the year 1062 they had
two great Battles, and many slain of both sides; but the Pope brought it at
last, that he set his foot upon the Emperors neck: an Pope Hildebrand by giving
the Empire from the Emperor Henry to Rodolphus, there was four bloody Battles
fought between their Armies: and by means of Pope Pascalus there was two great
Battles between Henry the 4. and his own Son, in 1102. and about the year 1234
there was such Wars between Pope Gregory the 9. and the City of Rome, that
there was 30 thousand of the Citizens slain in one battle: and about the year
1251 the Sarazens slew of English, French and other Nations 80 thousand; also
there was great War between the Pope and Fredrick the Emperor: and in 1255 the
Pope having Wars with the Apulians, the Popes Army was utterly destroyed but
only the Family of Marchisius: in 1241 a great Army of Sythians invaded Europe
in two places, and at the same time an Army of five hundred thousand of
Tartarians who spared neither sex nor age: about the year 1409 King Henry the
fourth of England, wrote to Pope Gregory about the division between the two
Popes, which then had continued 29 years, intimating to the Pope that he had
received intelligence, that there had been slain in the Wars between the two
Popes two hundred and thirty thousand men; and Pope Julius who died in the year
1513, it is related by Writers, The Bishops mistake as to the Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloath.
that there was slain in his Wars two hundred thousand more: and Sir, is all
these nothing with you? that by the divisions of three or four Popes that four
hundred and thirty thousand men should be slain, besides all other Popes and
Emperors Wars, and these of your Orthodox Cloisterers, etc. and yet you are not
ashamed to write and print that the Church was at this time at rest, and free
from any bloody persecution for 1260 years together: and could these murders,
and slaughters, banishment, and riping of women with child, as was in England,
etc. be without persecution: I could produce more the like if I were minded,
but I think here is enough to let others see your mistake, if you will not see
it your self; I could add to this the burning and martyrdom of many hundred
thousands more in England, Scotland, France, Spain, Germany, Tholose, Piedmond,
Waldensea, Albe^ences, and many other Countries in Alsatia one hundred ^artyred
in one day for defending the truth; and much more might be said, to prove the
direct contrary to what you (...) said to be true; namely, that the 1260 years
of the ^^^nesses prophesying in Sackcloath, that it was a mournful time of the
persecutions of the true Church of Jesus Christ, and not a time of freedom and
liberty of the Churches enjoyment of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ in their
purity, and that with protection and defense against all their opposers as you
pretend.

In the 24. page, he compares the light that was held forth to the Church of
Christ by the ministry of the 12 Apostles, but to the light of 12 stars; but
after the year 382 spoken of before; the ministry held forth by Hierom,
Ambrose, Augustine, Basil, Gregory, Nazianzen, Epiphanius, and Cirillus, he
says, was as the light of the Sun in the firmament.

I answer, we need not now so much wonder at the corruption of the Church of
Rome, who equal their Mass with the Gospel of Christ, and the Popes unwritten
traditions with the Canons of the Scripture; The Bishop says the Ministry of
the Apostles was (...) the Stars, and the ministry of the ^ncient Fathers as
the Sun.
when our Bishop so much undervalues the doctrine and ministry of the
Apostles, who had an imediate call from God to their ministry, and were guided
by the Holy Ghost in their ministry; and what they writ was left unto us as
the athentick Word of God for our istruction, and testified by the Apostle
Peter, 2 Pet. 1.20. that it is not of any private interpretation, but holy men
of God spoke as they were endowed by the Holy Ghost: and yet that these
servants of Jesus Christ, that their ministry should be but compared to the
light of the Stars, and the ministry of Herom, Ambrose, etc. should be
compared to the light of the Sun: so far exceeding the ministry of the
Apostles, as the light of the Sun exceeds the light of the Stars, for that is
the meaning: it is such a Doctrine as I think was never taught by an English or
Irish Bishop before, that ever I read of; nor I hope the like will never be
taught again: a man would think that upon a review of what he has don, he
should own his mistake, for if these be not mistakes I know not what is: but I
must correct my self and remember what he confesses of himself before, as to
the freedom and liberty of the Orthodox Bishops, in their cloisters and
Monasteries the 126 years; which he further speaks of in his 44. page, and
says, that the two Witnesses were furnished with a larger measure of
Gospellight, to enlighten the Church, being fled into the Wilderness from the
face of the Dragon, and to govern the Church in a far better manner, than ever
they did or could do before: but this is strange if it could be so, in their
Sackcloa^^ and mournful condition; and he further says, that when Phocas the
Traitor, the murdering Emperor granted the pre heminency to Pope Boniface the
third to be universal Bishop; then the Sword of Satan, he says, had neither
edge, strength, nor ability, to suppress the Word of God, nor to abate one
jot of the power of the Witnesses, but that the Church was freed from all fear
and tyranny, etc. this, I confess, is true understanding it of the Pope and
Papist Church; which I never knew any but Papists yet that ever took it in that
sense as the Bishop does: for as is showed above, that time of the Church being
in the Wilderness, was the time of the Churches affliction and persecution;
and Phocas granting that power to the Pope, instead of blunting Satan's Sword it
sharpened his Sword, and made it cut both ways, so that he ceased not until he
had gotten both Civil and Ecclesiastical Government into his hands, and
suppressed the Word of God, as is showed above by the Council of Trent, and
made it subject to his will and interpretation, and set up his own humane
institutions; and the institutions of Christ and his Apostles, was, and is
rejected, so as Christ has not the exercise of his offices among them, neither
of King, Priest, nor Prophet, as before is showed; which I leave to the
judgment of the Christian Reader.

Page 30. he says, that time, times, and half a time, are interpreted by many
of the learned to be three years and a half; or as some think three years, and
half three, that is four years and a half: but he conceives it should be taken
for some short time, but for a certain truth it shall either be at that time
directly, or much about that time, though not exactly to a day, yet it may be
to a minute; which he takes to be the time that Antichrist shall reign and rage
against the two Witnesses.

I answer, how can this he here says be true? and yet the Long Parliament,
etc. be the Antichrist; for they reigned above twice three years and a half, or
twice four years and a half; and therefore according to his own computation,
the Long Parliament, etc. cannot be the Antichrist: and as the Bishop and
Bellermin agrees in the reign of Antichrist to be but three years and a half;
so Bellermin says that this three years and a half is to be a little before
the end of the world: therefore if the long Parliament had been Antichrist, and
their opinion true of the end of the world a little after; then should the Jews
have been converted er'e this time, for they must, the Scriptures say, be
converted and gathered to their own Land; and there must be the Battles of Gog
and Magog, and many things to be done which will require a longer time than
they allow for them, by their interpretation; for how is it possible that
Antichrist should do all the feats that is to be done by, him all the world
over? or if it were him Europe, and Asia, he must course over many hundred
thousand miles every day, to effect it in three years and a half, which is
unreasonable to imagine: but the Bishop and Bellermin does both agree, that by
the little horn in the seventh of Daniel is meant Antichrist; and becausent is
said verse 9. I beheld till the Thrones were placed, and the Ancient of days
suit, etc. the Angel expounding the vision, shows that this little horn
Antichrist, should subdue three Kings, and they shall be given into his hand,
until a time, times and the dividing of times; which they take for three years
and a half; The Bishop and Bellermins mistake concerning the little horn.
but the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion to consume
and destroy it unto the end: now here is their mistake, because it is said, the
Judgment shall sit, and they shall destroy his Dominion unto the end; therefore
they conclude that in a very short time after Antichrists three years and a
half reign, that he shall be destroyed, and the world shall have an end: not
considering what is said in the 13 and 14 verses, that one like the Son of man
came to the Ancient of days, in the clouds of Heaven, and dominion, and
honor, and Kingdom was given him, and all Nations and Languages should serve
him: that is him that shall destroy the Pope, the Antichrist who is the little
horn; for this Judgment as I have said before; is not meant of the last and
general Judgment, but of the judgment and destruction of Antichrist; and Jesus
Christ shall be universal King, whom all Nations shall serve: but shall there
be any distinction of People, Nations and Languages after the last Judgment?
but this is made more plain, for verse 22. it is said, the ancient of days
came, and Judgment was given to the Saints of the most high, and the time
approached that the Saints possessed the Kingdom; mark ye, upon the judgment
and destruction of Antichrist the time approached that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom: and verse 27. and the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most high; whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all powers shall
serve and obey him: that is, Christ's Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; but
this Kingdom of the Saints after the destruction of Antichrist is an earthly
Kingdom under the Heavens, verse 27. that the Saints must have before the last
Judgment, says Mr. Brightman.

Where first we may observe that the jurisdiction of this Kingdom must be of
things under Heaven, for the time appreached that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom: and secondly, that it shall be a Kingdom of holy and high Saints, and
that all powers shall serve this Kingdom, as Isa. 60. for there will be an
universal flowing in of the Jews to the faith of Christ: under the pouring
forth of the fifth Viol Antichrist is to be destroyed, and Rome which is his
Throne; for the fifth Viol is poured out upon the Throne of the Beast, and many
do think that the Jews will not be converted until after Rome is destroyed; Mr.
Brightman says that Rome and the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, is a main
impediment and hinderance to their conversion: and after once it is destroyed,
they shall embrace the true Faith, for it is not possible, says he, that the
people that crucified the Lord, should acknowledge him to be their Lord, as
long as Rome flourishes, yea, or has any being in the world, as which was the
place that gave them power and authority to crucify him: and the sixth Viol is
to be poured out upon the great River Euphrates, and the waters thereof will be
dried up, that the way of the Kings that come from the East may be prepared;
Euphrates slideth through Mesapotomia on the east side of Judea: the event of
this Viol, is the removing of what impediments may hinder the passage into that
Country, and drying up the waters, as the Red Sea was dried up before the Jews
in old time; and it is conceived most of these people are in those eastern
Countries: the reason why they are called Kings of the East, is, as Rev. 1.6.
Christ does make all true believers Kings and Priests unto God his Father, and
Mr. Brightman says, as soon as Rome is destroyed, there shall be a rumor among
all the true Churches of the Gentiles, of the gathering of the People of the
Jews unto their own Land, the Christian faith shall flourish exceedingly among
them, Romans 11.25, 26. the Apostle says, I would not brethren that ye should be
ignorant of this mystery, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in: and so all Israel shall be saved as it is
written, the deliverer shall come out of Sion, and turn away ungodliness from
Jacob, for this is my Covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins:
Lactantius says, in his 7. Book Chap. 15. the Romish name and authority
wherewith the world is now ruled, my heart trembles to speak it, but yet says
he, I will speak it, because it is a thing that shall one day be taken away
from the earth, and the Empire shall return into Asia, and the east shall have
the dominion once again, and the West shall be in subjection: you see how his
words does agree with the Scriptures that that prophecy of the downfall of
Rome, and of the glory of the eastern Church, when the Jews shall be converted,
and therefore they carry the more force.

I think it not amiss in this place, to show how great a hinderance the
Idolatry of the Roman Church is to the convertion of the Jews, to set down one
thing I have observed in a narrative written by Mr. Samuel Brette an English
man and a Traveller, concerning the proceedings of a great Council of three
hundred Rabbis of the Jews, assembled in the plain of Ageda, the 12th of
October 1650. to examine the Scriptures concerning Christ, he says that the
seventh and last day of their Council the question was, if Christ were come,
then what was the rules and orders he left his Church to walk by; whereupon two
Jesuits, two Friars of the order of Saint Augustine, and two of the order of
Saint Frances, sent thither by the Pope, these being admitted into the Council,
began to open unto them the Rules and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, instead
of the Rules of Christ, which they magnified to be the holy Catholic Church of
Christ, and their Doctrine to be the infallible Doctrine of Christ, and their
Rules to be the Rules which the Apostles left to the Church for to be observed,
and that the Pope is the holy Vicar of Christ, and the Successor of Saint
Peter, they affirmed the real prelence of Christ in the Sacrament, the
religious observation of their holy days, the invocation of Saints, praying to
the Virgin Mary, and spoke of her commanding power in Heaven over her Son, of
the holy use of the Cross, and Images with the rest of their Idolatrous
superstitious worship, all which they commended to the Assembly of the Jews,
for the doctrines and rules of the Apostles. But as soon as the assembly of the
Jews had heard these things, they were generally exceedingly troubled thereat,
and fell into high clamours against them and their religion, crying out no
Christ, no woman God, no intercession of Saints, no worshipping of Images, no
praying to the Virgin Mary, and cried out aloud blasphemy, blasphemy, and rent
their clothes, and cast dust upon their heads; and upon this the Gouncel brake
up, the Relator says, he does believe there was many Jews there that would
have owned the Lord Jesus, if it had not been for these Jesuits and Friars,
and that there had been Protestant Ministers in their stead: thus it appears
what hinderance the idolatry of the Roman Church is to their conversion.

Page 31. he says that Antiochus who is the most lively type of Antichrist
that is to be found in the Scriptures, reigned but just three years and a half,
and so the persecution of Antichrist should be but three years and an half.

I answer, that what is said before might be a sufficient answer to this, but
besides I shall disprove what he says, in the first Chapter of the first book
of Maccabees, for Antiochus Epiphanes after he came to reign, he made war
against the King of Egypt and wone many strong Cities, and took away the spoil
of the Land, and returned in the year 143, and went up against Jerusalem, verse
21, 22. and Chap. 3. verse 37. the King took the half of the Host, and
departed from Antiochia his royal City, in the year 147. and Lyfias whom the
King left Overseer of his business, at the same time sent Ptomeas, Nicanor and
Gorgius with forty thousand footmen, and seven thousand Horsemen into the Land
of Juda, which Army was defeated: then Chap. 4.28, the next year following
gathered Lysius threescore thousand footmen and five thousand horsemen to fight
against Jerusalem: and Chap. 6.16. Antiochus died in the 149. year of his
reign; that was six years he reigned after he made war against Jerusalem,
besides the time he reigned when he made war against Egypt, and took many
Cities and brought away the spoil; and this is but all three years and an half
with our Bishop, if you will believe him; which these chapters makes it appear
to be fix years.

Much more such like stuff might be showed, but I forbear; thus far I thought
good to answer him in his folly, lest he should be wise in his own conceit; and
I thought not fit to answer him any further, lest I should be like him: and my
book is swelled biger already than I intended it at first, and although it be
but small, yet it is biger than I can well spare money to pay for the printing,
to bring it forth to light.

By GEORGE PRESSICK.

FINIS.

