THE PRINCESS OF FESS: OR, THE AMORS of the COURT of MOROCCO. A Novel.

In Two Parts.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden, 1682.

TO HER GRACE The DUCHESS of RICHMOND, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
NO sooner was the Princess of Fess ready to appear in public on our English
World, but ambitious to Kiss Your Graces hands, she is come to claim the
protection of Your Illustrious Name, not without all imaginable hopes of
finding a favorable reception from that Person, whose qualities are observed
with such admiration, by those of the first rank in Vivacity of Wit and
Profoundness of Judgment, who have Unanimously voted, that it is as easy for
the distressed to find a Sanctuary in the Arms of Your Graces generous
Safeguard, as it is difficult to be supplied with apt expressions to set forth
Your Graces perfections.

For my part, Madam, the Knowledge of my own difficiency has been a Sovereign
antidote against the vanity of endeavoring such an Herculian labor on my own
bottom, and of attempting those impossibilities, and when I have gone to borrow
from the most exquisite of the Ancients Panegyricks, I have found all so short
from Your Graces Merits, that looking down with Contempt on those little things
which the Modern Writers have used in the setting forth of Your Graces Virtues,
I have avoided the presumption, and rested Contented with the Honor of
Subscribing my self,

May it please Your Grace, Your Graces most Humble, and most Obedient Servant,
P. BELLON

THE PRINCESS OF FESS.
PART I.
THE Arabian Empire has been one of the most flourishing of the World, both by
the Duration and the Large Extent of it. Its Principal Seat was in Africa,
though it has likewise possessed Large Territories in the other parts of the
World. It was not without diverse considerable changes, that it Flourished so
long, and which have caused its decay; amongst which, there happened an
alteration about 150 years since, which for some time did raise their
Reputation.

The Family of the Benimerignis having enjoyed the Throne for a long time, and
possessed the Empire with Splendour and Dignity, did thereby restore unto it
that Luster in which it had formerly been under the Almanzors: But having at
last torn one another in pieces through Partialities, they were driven from
thence, in the beginning of the late Age, by the Cherifs; which name is assumed
by all those that pretend to be of Kin unto Mahomet, and is of great use to
those that bear it, to attract the veneration of that People who are the most
superstitious of the World.

The Cherifs having rendered themselves formidable by that Mortal War which they
made against the Portugais, and having almost driven them out of Africa, they
gained so much the Love of these Nations, that they easily did destroy the
Benimerignis, which were then the Masters of Mauritania, and they possessed
themselves also of diverse other Parts of Africa.

Mahomet Cherif did reunite all their former Authority in his own Person, and
did enjoy, even unto an extreme old Age, one of the greatest Empires of the
World. His Successors had easily preserved it, if they had not had more than
Foreign Enemies to Combat: But being at variance amongst themselves, that vast
Empire was in our time divided into several Parcels. Fess, which had been the
chief City of the whole Empire, had its particular Kings, which were not
acknowledged by the rest of Africa: Morocco had its Sovereigns; the Kingdoms of
Tremeson, of Suss, and of Tarudant, had theirs also, and acknowledged none
other: And in a Word, diverse Petty Princes did possess all those vast
Territories, which in former times yielded obedience but unto one only.

Bembuca King of Fess, and Gayland Prince of Suss, had rendered themselves
formidable to all the others, through that Bloody War which they made against
their Neighbors, or through the Jars which they had betwixt themselves, which
they always decided by Arms, and the advantage of which did frequently remain
on Bembuca's side. Though Bembuca was extreme Cruel toward his Enemies, there
never was a more kind Father. The Prince of Fess, and the Princess Alzira, his
Children, were so dear unto him, that he would continually have them in his
presence, and it was with great difficulty that he would bear their absence
some hours of the day in order to their Education: He would never grant any
requests but at the prayers of one or the other of them; and most particularly
at the recomdations of Alzira, who always employed her self in the behalf of
the unfortunate. She had a delicate and an advantageous Shape. Her Eyes were
blew and full, her Air was Majestic, mixed with store of Sweetness, and with
such insinuating Actions, that it was impossible to behold her without some
concern for her Person. Her Beauty, which made a great noise throughout all
Africa, had already engaged diverse Princes to demand her of her Father, who not
being able to resolve on the absence of a Daughter so lovely as his, did always
avoid the Marrying of her, under the pretense, that he believed her yet too
Young. Gayland would once have Wedded her himself, but there was so little
proportion betwixt the Ages of Alzira and of that Prince, who had been Married
twice before, that Bembuca had rejected the Proposals with anger; which
contempt had contributed very much in the renewing of the War between those two
Princes.

Gayland, who was Childless, had a Young Prince of the House of the Cherifs, a
Kinsman of his, brought up at his Court, who had an equal right on the Kingdom
of Fess, and on the Principality of Suss. At first he had not taken care of his
Education, but to have one day a pretense to drive Bembuca out of the Kingdom
of Fess, if at any time he should get an advantage over him by force of Arms.
But Ali Hamet (that was the name of the Young Cherif) had something so
admirable in his Person, and had rendered himself so complaisant to all
Gayland's desires, that he had entirely won his favor. Never had any Prince a
more piercing Wit, a Mind more bent unto great Enterprises, and who did more
passionatly love Arms. Gayland, who did sometimes send him into the Field, was
surprised to to hear him discourse on all the particulars thereof, with the
same exactness as an experimented Commander would do. He had been brought up in
so great an aversion against Bembuca, that he was continually discoursing of
the means which he should use to drive away that Usurper. And being very
desirous of knowledge, he would take great delight in entertaining of
Strangers. A certain English Captive, named Talbor, had so well taken his
measures on his Princes Curiosity, that he was preferred by him in his
conversation before all others. Talbor would never speak to him but of Armies,
of Mortar-pieces, Grenados, Canons, and generally of all those things that the
Princes of Europe use in War. He would inform him, that for the eafie taking of
a place, it was requisite to know both the Strength and Weakness of it, to
attaque it at those places which were the eafiest to overcome. Ali Hamet did
take a fingular delight in hearing the Slaves reasonings, and in reducing all
that he said unto those designs, and to that hatred which he had against
Bembuca; he fancied that if he could see the Fortifications of the City of
Fess, which was Capital of the Kingdom of that name, he should have the less
difficulties in rendering himself Master of it, whenever he should besiege it,
as he hoped he should one day. He expressed to Talbor the extreme desire which
he had to go in a disguise to Fess, with him, and observe that City. Talbor
would have diswaded him, telling him, that without exposing of himself unto the
success of an Enterprise so dangerous as that, it would not be hard to get a
Draught of that Place, and to observe all its defects. But Ali Hamet, who did
not comprehend how that could be done on paper, gave the Slave to understand,
that the business was of such a concern as would invite him to see the reality
of it with his own Eyes, though there were never so much danger in the
enterprise. Talbor durst not contradict him any longer. The next day Ali Hamet
absented himself from his Uncle, under other pretenses, and having disguised
himself in a mean habit, he set forwards toward Fess, followed by Talbor, and
a Marabout, (those are Mohammedan Monks, under whose safeguard one may travel
with great safety.) After a long march they arrived at Fess, where Ali Hamet
did apply himself with a World of diligence to observe the Situation of that
City, and those Posts that were fortified. He was walking on the Rampart, when
there passed by him a certain kind of Chariot, drawn by Arabian Horses. The
Prince having observed some Ladies in it magnificently dressed, had the
curiosity to see their Faces, but it was impossible for him to have that
satisfaction, by reason of the distance, and that the Ladies had their Backs
turned toward him; he contented himself with following them at a distance.
Scarce had he made Twenty steps forwards, when he heard a great noise of
confused voices, which obliged him to double his pace toward the Chariot.
Lions are very common at Fess, and diverse persons keep of them: One of the
biggest size had broke loose from his Masters House, and was walking quietly on
the Rampart, as the Chariot was going by; the Horses were affrighted at it, and
set themselves a running, notwithstanding all that the Coachman could do to
stop them. The Lion perceiving them to run, failed not to follow. A company of
People, who knew the nature of Lions, who equally become furious, when they are
pursued, or that they see any thing to fly before them, did cry out at a
distance, to have the driver stop his Horses. Mean time the Chariot was
overturned, and the Lion was already exercising his fury on the Horses, not one
person daring to approach near him; when that Ali Hamet came up, who seeing
fear and despair spread over the Ladies Faces, did presently go about to assist
them all; and having perceived that there was one which was easily to be
distinguished from the rest by her beauty and the magnificency of her dress, he
busied himself chiefly in setting her our of danger. But the Chariot was
overturned in such a manner, that it was impossble to assist her, without
exposing her to the fury of the Lion. Ali Hamet in that extremity consulted
nothing but his Courage; and having drawn his Cimiter, he attaqued the Lion
with great Valor, and with a blow of his Cimiter he wounded him very
dangerously on the Head. The Lion roaring with rage, was going to tear in
pieces the Person that had wounded him: But Ali Hamet not being daunted, did
courageously resist him, and wounded him in so many different places, that he
put him out of Combat.

After this happy success, he drew near unto that Lady who had appeared so
beautiful to him, and lent her his Hand to help her out of that place. The
Lady, who was already struck with astonishment at the surprising Valor of her
Deliverer, had then leisure to admire his good mien, and to return him thanks
in terms that were full of acknowledgments. Ali Hamet, who had never seen so
beautiful a Person, did at that instant feel some ceratin motions, of which he
had been ignorant all his life time. A great number of Persons of all sorts and
conditions that came thither, gave Ali Hamet to understand, that she who he had
so happily rescued was the Princess of Fess, which obliged him to behold her
again with the more attention: But he enjoyed not long that pleasure, for
Alzira was in an instant encompassed round with Ladies, who conducted her back
to the Palace to consolate Bembuca, who had newly been advertised of that
misfortune. Ali Hamet was in so great an admiration at the surprising Beauty of
the Princess, that he mixed himself with the Crowd of those that followed,
scarce knowing what he was doing. Talbor, who had not had his Eyes off of him,
foreseeing that Bembuca would cause a search to be made after that Person that
had rendered so great a Service to his Daughter, did advise him to retire in
haste, lest he should be known. The Prince was unwilling, as having no mind to
distance himself from the charming Alzira, who he hoped to see again. But
Talbor did so well represent to him those Evils which he was to fear if Bembuca
should come to know him, that his Love, which was but just budding, had not
power sufficient to hinder him from following the Counsels of his faithful
Slave. They went to rejoin the Marabout, who was staying for them at the City
Gates, and got away from Fess with great diligence. Mean time Alzira, who had
her Idea filled with her generous Protector, and who did already feel in her
self something more than a bare acknowledgment, did conjure her Father to send
for him, and give him a recompense suitable to that service which he had so
lately rendered her. Bembuca, who desired to know so Valiant a Person, gave
orders for a search. His cares were fruitless, no body knew him, and though
that all those who had seen the Combat, did speak of him with admiration,
there was not one found that knew who he was. New perquisitions were again
made, but still with the same success. Mean time there being daily some new
circumstance of his Valor mentioned, that business did much contribute to
attract the Veneration of the People on Bembuca, and his Family; for he had the
subtilty to publish, that their Prophet Mahomet, perceiving a Princess of the
Blood of the Cherifs, and his Relation, in so eminent a danger, he had come in
Person himself to deliver her, and had disappeared presently after so brave an
Action. The People of that Country are very superstitious; that made them give
credit to the Story, the noise of which was presently spread far and near,
throughout all the Kingdom of Fess, and all the World did speak of it, as of a
miracle. What Glory soever it was for the Princess to have been assisted by the
pretended Prophet, her Heart had some repugnancy to believe the public
opinion; and every time that she did reflect on the good mien of her Deliverer,
she did wish, at least, that there were some Mortal that did resemble him;
while that her Modesty did oblige her to conceal her resentments. But when she
was in private with Balabai (who was one of her Women that she much affected)
Balabai made no difficulty to own, that she had rather have owed her life unto
some African Prince, than to the Great Mahomet. But Alzira, who had her Mind
continually filled with an Idea of the Strangers good mien, did not agree to
that, and did so often represent his Picture after so advantageous a manner,
that Balabai was obliged to acquiess, that all the Princes of Africa did not
come near in good mien unto him that had preserved her life.

Ali Hamet, who was returned to Suss, did lead so private a life, that all the
World were surprised at so sudden a change. Alzira's Beauty, those Words which
she had said to him, and a Charming and Majestic Air which he had never seen
in any other Person, did continually come into his Mind. He delighted to be
alone, that he might freely spend his thoughts on his amiable Princess, and he
continually did prefer the Slave Talbor's conversation unto that of the
greatest Lords of Suss. What a fatal Journey have we had, said he to him? while
I did design to have drawn from thence great advantages against Bembuca, I have
lost my self. I love the Princess, I confess it to thee; but what will now
become of me? Bembuca, who possesses a Throne that is mine, has doubtless
confirmed her in sentiments of hatred and aversion against me; so that I must
never hope to make her sensible of my Love, seeing that I cannot so much as see
her to inform her of it; she will never hear any thing concerning me, but
either to my Glory or to my Shame; the one and the other are dangerous to me,
and will equally draw her anger on me; for if I have any advantage over
Bembuca, she will doubtless hate the Enemy of her Father; and if I am
vanquished, she will have a contempt for a miserable Prince. Talbor did
endeavor to comfort him, in representing, that a Peace might be concluded in
some short time between the King of Fess and the Prince of Suss; and that he
being of the Blood of the Cherifs, it might not be impossible but that he
should one day Espouse the Princess of Fess. But Ali Hamet did think his
reasons too weak, and too far fetched; he was for more practicable means
wherewith to serve his Love. And whereas he looked upon Talbor more as a Friend
than a Slave, he did put him in mind, that seeing that he had been engaged in
the undertaking of this Voyage, which he durst not call fatal, though he had
lost his liberty in it, he ought also to give him some expedients whereby to
inform the Princess of his passion. Talbor, who did find him to be deeply in
Love, and who knew by experience what strange disturbances Love does cause, did
offer to go to Fess, to introduce himself into Bembuca's favor, under pretense
of teaching him the use of Fire Balls and Canons, and by those means endeavor
if it were possible, to inform the Princess of those sentiments which he had
for her. Ali Hamet was so satisfied with that proposition, that he deferred no
longer the affranchising of Talbor, thereby to engage him the more to serve
him, with the greater affection, toward Alzira. After that he had caused those
Passes to be dispatched which were necessary for the security of his Journey,
he conjured him with Embraces not to spare either Care or Charges in giving him
news of his Princess with all diligence imaginable.

Talbor being arrived at Fess, did endeavor to introduce himself at Court,
giving out, that he had left the Service of a great Prince of Europe to apply
himself unto Bembuca's Service, whose Merit and Valor had been made known to
him by an English Officer of Tangire, who had Sojourned for some time at Fess.
Such a probable discourse did presently flatter Bembuca's Vanity: But those
experiments which Talbor made in his presence with Gunpowder, whose different
and various effects were unknown to the Moors, did absolutely incline him to
take him into his Service. The King desired also that he should make some
Fireworks to divert the Princess, who was become very Melancholy of late. Those
happy beginnings did make him hope that he should shortly be in a condition to
render some Services of importance unto Ali Hamet. Most part of Courtiers love
Novelties; diverse young Persons of the Court did express their great desires to
be acquainted with this Stranger. Talbor answered their Wills with respect, and
having observed that the rest of the Gentry had some deference for a young
Cavalier named Maucaden, he had the Curiosity to learn on what account; he was
informed, that his own merits did much contribute toward the receiving those
respects, and that he was also considered as being the Brother to Balabai, the
Princess Alzira's Favorite. That last reason did oblige Talbor to show him a
great respect. Maucaden did give him in sundry occasions some particular marks
of his esteem, and also promised to mention him to his Sister. Which he
performed so well, that his good Offices had like to have proved fatal to him:
for Balabai, to oblige her Brother, did so highly extol Talbor's good qualities
to the Princess, that she desired to have him in her Service. Alzira spoke of
it to the King, who granted her that favor, and gave order that Talbor should
be made an Eunuque, that he might be in a condition to serve the Princess,
because that the Eunuques only have that privilege. All those mean sorts of
persons that envy those sorts of Emploies which put them in a condition of
having great Preferments, and of raising their Friends and Relations, do
patiently suffer themselves to be made Eunuques, in order to those great
advantages that they hope from thence. Maucaden having learned of his Sister
the resolution which the King had taken of making Talbor so, to dispose of him
afterward to the Princess, was willing to be the first that should inform him
of his good Fortune, and immediately went to joy him of it. Talbor extremely
surprised with a compliment of that nature, and so little expected, did entreat
Maucaden to divert that evil from him, confessing that he had rather serve as a
Slave in a Gally, than to be a Favorite in the Palace, seeing that there was no
getting in by any other means than under those cruel conditions which he had
mentioned to him. Maucaden surprz'd to hear him talk so, did tax him of
Barbariousness, and told him, that though he himself was not sensible of that
good which was offered him, he would make him happy even against his Will. But
Talbor affrighted at his pretended good Fortune, did so earnestly entreat him
to alter that resolution, that Maucaden left him after he had told him, that
seeing he had not sufficiency of Ambition or of Courage to bear so great a
Fortune, he would tell his Sister that he had been deceived in that good
opinion that he had had of him.

While that Talbor was fearing those fatal effects of his pretended good
Fortune, the Prince Ali Hamet impatient in his Love, had taken the Field at the
head of a great Body of Horse, much less to gain a Conquest, than to take some
Prisoners, that might tell him some news of Alzira: His march did alarm
Bembuca, who sent diverse Troops to oppose him. Maucaden, who had the command of
them, did ask permission to lead Talbor along with him, and by that means he
saved him from that resolution which had been taken of making him an Eunuque.
He marched long Journeys, and in a short time found himself near unto the
Enemy. Ali Hamet, who was wholly taken up with his Love, and the design of
taking some few Prisoners, permitted his Troops to refresh themselves in a very
commodious Camp, and did march one whole Night at the head of some few Men, to
observe the Enemy, or peradventure, to more commodiously make some Prisoners.
But the Day Light having surprised him, he perceived that he had advanced too
far, and found himself compassed about with diverse Squadrons of Enemies,
without any possibility of retreat. That great number with which he was
surrounded, did not hinder him from defending himself with an unimaginable
Valor; yet he was taken, or rather overpowered than vanquished. His Troops
having been informed of his misfortune, they suddenly Disbanded themselves, and
Maucaden returned to Fess, to conduct thither in Person his Illustrious
Prisoner. Talbor did avoid appearing before him, for fear of losing himself, if
it were perceived that he had formerly had some Commerce with Ali Hamet.
Bembuca, who had always feared least that Ali Hamet should one Day drive him
from the Throne, did learn with all the joy imaginable, that he was made
Prisoner. All his Grandees did Compliment him on that good success, Alzira only
appeared indifferent in the midst of such an universal joy; she was not
sensible of any thing, since the adventure of the Lion, the Idea of her
Deliverer had continually remained in her mind; and though she had been
persuaded that it was Mahomet who had rendered her that Signal piece of Service,
she still pleased her self, in thinking that she would have Loved most
passionatly some Prince that had been like her Deliverer. These chimerical
fancies did continually possess her mind, and Balabai had all the pains
imaginable to draw her out of them. Though Bembuca had a mortal hatred against
Ali Hamet, he seemingly treated him well, to let the People know, that he
honored the Blood of the Cherifs, even in the person of his Enemy. He Lodged
him in his own Palace, and ordered that all the honors which were used toward
the Prince his Son, should be rendered unto him also, and likewise desired that
Ali Hamet should go make his Reverence to the Queen and Princess. Mean time,
Alzira was so oppressed with her continual restlesness of mind, that she
entreated her Father to dispense her from being at the Queens Appartment, when
Ali Hamet should go to Visit her. But the whole Court ringing of his good mien
with admiration, Balabai had the Curiosity to go to see him. Ali Hamet, who had
hoped to see Alzira in the Queens presence, and who thought himself already but
too well recompensed for the loss of his Liberty, did in vain seek her with his
Eyes, and stayed them on no Person, not finding out his most Charming Princess.
He was ready to ask where she was, but he durst not give himself that
satisfaction, for fear of being wanting in respect toward the Queen, or it may
be least that the particular interest that he should express for the Princess
might be perceived. Those great respects which were rendered to Balabai, did set
him in a doubt whether she were not the Princess of Fess; though he was well
assured that it was not the same Person that had made him in Love. He retired
himself from the Queens Appartment, in a much more restless mind than he had
come thither. Sometimes he imagined that there was no other Princess of Fess
than Balibai; and a moment after he would represent to himself all those
Features of that lovely Person whom he had delivered from the fury of the Lion,
and did very well remember that all the People had treated her as a Princess.
Finally, after diverse reflections, he believed that he had confounded that
amiable Person with the Princess, and that doubtless it was some Woman of hers,
whose extreme Beauty had made him mistake her for the Princess. But who ever it
were, he did feel so strong a passion for that person, that without troubling
himself whether she were a Princess or a Slave, he did Love her with an equal
ardor, and did continually think of the means to see her again

Mean time Balabai, who had looked on Ali Hamet with great attention, had been
so charmed with his good mien, that even from that very first sight it was
impossible for her to resist a certain tendency, that did engage her to love
him almost against her Will. When she came to Alzira, she entertaind her with
nothing but what did concern Ali Hamet; and as she never did conceal any thing
from the Princess, she confessed to her with blushes, that she loved that
Prince; and added, that she strongly fancied, that the good mien of her
Deliverer, which she so much praised, did come very near to that of Ali Hamet.
Alzira, without making any reflection, did at the first chide her, for loving
her Fathers Enemy. But afterward believing that Balabai's Love would give her
an occasion of retaliating all those Jests and Droleries which her favorite had
made on the account of her melancholy, she was not sorry that she should love
Ali Hamet.

Love was the Subject of all their Conversations. Alzira had a most sensible
pleasure in frequently speaking of him who had saved her life, and Balabai,
whom love had rendered more diligent than ordinarily, did no longer reproach the
Princess of that passion which she had for a Chimera; and Alzira did in her
turn make her confess, that there was much more weakness in loving a Man by
mere fancy, than in loving one unto whom great obligations are due. Balabai,
not opposing her self directly unto the Princess's sentiments, did however
insinuate unto her, that a passion in which a heart does engage it self of its
proper motion, is much stronger and more certain, than that in which an
acknowledgment had some share, seeing that the one was an effect of
inclination, while that the other lay at the mercy of diverse Accidents. The
Princess did not wholly agree on that, and did maintain, that there never could
be any love produced by bare acknowledgments; that inclinations, had always a
great share in Love, but that persons were willing to deceive themselves, that
the heart might have the least shame in owning its own weakness, under pretense
that some acknowledgedment did force him to Love.

Mean time, Talbor had found out a means privately to see Ali Hamet, and to let
him know how much he was concerned that he had not been capable of rendering him
some Service toward the Princess, who did never see any but Women or Eunuques.
The Prince was not surprised at it, seeing that he himself, though lying in the
Palace some days since, had never had any opportunity of seeing that Charming
person, who had given him so much Love, for he no longer did believe that it
was the Princess. He did every day walk in a certain Gallery of the Palace,
much less to observe the Curious pieces of panting with which it was adorned,
than to think without restraint, on his misfortunes. Balabai having taken
notice of it, passed through that Gallery, making as if it were her way to go
into the Queens Appartment. She was very desirous to speak to Ali Hamet, and to
ask him his Judgment on those Pictures: But by ill fortune, he understood her
not, and he spoke to her again in a Language that she was ignorant of. Those of
Fess speak a Language which is particular to themselves, but those of Tarudant
and of Suss speak a corrupt Arabic. The Courtiers speak Portugais, and for the
most part the African Princes take a particular care to have their Children
learn that Language. Balabai, who had proposed to her self this occasion, of
being informed whether one day Ali Hamet should become sensible to her Love,
was in an extreme anguish to find they understood not one another. Yet as all
Lovers are apt to flatter themselves, she did expound to her advantage all the
Princes Civilities, who remained in a comfortless condition for having lost so
fair an opportunity of of clearing his doubt, if that that Person who would
have spoken to him, were the Princess, and of learning whether that Person whom
he had delivered from the Lions fury were still in the Palace. Balabai
remembering that the Princess had learned Portugais from a Slave of that Nation,
gave her an account of her late adventure, and did entreat her to serve her as
an Interpreter, on this account. Alzira did at first excuse her self from it,
expressing an aversion of conversing with her Fathers Enemy. But her Favorite
did so well represent to her how that she could not confide the secret of her
Love unto any other person than to her self, that the Princess being moved with
her reasons, and softened with her tears, did consent to give her that mark of
complaisancy. But it was on condition that she should not pull up her Vail, and
of passing for one of Balabai's Servants. Ali Hamet being returned into the
Gallery to contemplate, as he used to do, Balabai did presently repair thither
also; accompanied by Alzira, who having cast her Eyes upon the Prince through
her Vail, which was of a very thin Stuff, did presently know him for her
Deliverer, with whom her imagination was continually prepossessed. Such an
unexpected rencounter, did give her so much joy, such an emotion of Spirits,
and so many other different motions on the sudden, that she swooned away.
Balabai affrighted with seeing her in that condition, did carry her to her
Chamber, with the assistance of another Woman. So soon as the Princess was
recovered out of her Swoon, she cast her Eyes on all sides, perhaps thinking
still to see that dear Object which had caused so sudden a change in her: But
she perceiving no body but Balabai, who was weeping on her Beds side, Alzira,
recalling to mind that passion which her favorite had for Ali Hamet, and
thinking withal, that the Prince was the same Person who had saved her life, or
at least was so much like him, as to awaken in her Heart all the sentiments of
Love and acknowledgments she had had for that Generous unknown Person, did no
longer look on Balabai but as her Rival, from whom it was requisite that she
should conceal her secret for the future; and to that purpose she did persuade
her, that her Swooning was an effect of the aversion which she had for that
Prince, and of the disturbance which she had been in at the sight of her
Fathers Enemy. Balabai, who trusted to her Words, durst no longer propose unto
her the Office of Interpreter. But Alzira, who had an extreme impatiency of
seeing the Prince again, did feign to be concerned at her Favorit's misfortune,
and did promise to overcome for her sake all the Antipathy which she had
against Ali Hamet, and even to speak kindly to him. Balakai pierced thoroughly
with the Princesses bounty, did make use of that good disposition she was in,
and having learned that the Prince had continued in the Gallery, she went
thither again with Alzira, who did no longer mind the hiding of her Face, as
she had done the first time. Ali Hamet troubled at the loss of so many
opportunities of learning some news of that Person which had given him so much
Love, did begin to fear of never more seeing that charming Object, when that he
perceived Balabai drawing near unto him, accompanied with Alzira, who coming
up, did speak Portugues to him. Ali Hamet was so pleasingly surpised at the
second sight of this Beautiful Person, that he remained immovable, all his
Senses being so employed on her, that her forgot to give her an answer. Balabai
seeing him thus surpised, did fear that he understood not the Portugues
Language. But Alzira having inquired of him if he had never been at Fess before
that Maucaden had made him Prisoner; It was no difficult thing for Maucaden to
make me a Prisoner, replied the Prince, seeing that another Person had already
deprived me of my Liberty, and that I sought after nothing more than the
returning into my Chains. That Answer caused some disorder in Alzira, fearing
least he should mean that to Balabai: Mean time, the more she examined him, the
more did she confirm her self in her passion, finding in him all the same
features of that Person who had made her in Love: But she could not comprehend
by what adventure that Prince had happened to be at Fess so opportunely to save
her life. She was going to inquire that of him, had not Balabai interrupted
their conversation, to learn from Alzira what 'twas he said. She gave her to
understand, that the Prince had a most tender Heart, and that he was
discoursing concerning the loss of his Liberty, when she interrupted them.
Balabai ravished with that answer, did conjure her to continue the
conversation. Then did the Princess entreat Ali Hamet to inform her how he had
come to lose his Liberty, and who was that Person that had deprived him of it.
The Prince, after a sigh, told her, that the desire of acquiring some
reputation, by rendering himself Master of the City of Fess, engaged him to
examine the Place in a disguise; but that the fates had designed it otherwise.
His Modesty had hindered him from faying more, had not the Princess pressed him
to continue. What can I say, that you know not better than I do my self?
continued Ali Hamet. A roaring Lion, that I had the good Fortune to overcome,
gave me the opportunity of saving you, and of losing my self: For from that
very moment that I did see you, I loved you with the most real and the
strongest passion that ever was. Though this discourse was very conformable
unto Alzira's sentiments, she could not forbear blushing, and being discomposed
at it. Palabai, who perceived the disorder she was in, had the curosity to
learn the cause. The Princess told her, that Ali Hamet had caused some
disturbance in her at the recital which he made her of a Combat which he had
had on her Fathers Territories. With your favor, inform me, continued the
Prince, who it is that I love in you; the knowledge of your condition can
neither increase nor diminish my Love, and I even feel an inward joy, at the
thoughts that you are not Bembuca's Daughter. Then you would not have loved the
Princess of Fess? replied Alzira hastily. Alas! replied the Prince, Love gave
me not time to deliberate, when I beheld you; and I had so little power over my
passion, that I believe I had loved you, though you had been a Christian Slave.
The Princess ravished that she was beloved for her mere Beauty's sake, and
without any assistance from her birth in this conquest, was preparing to answer
him something very obliging, when an Eunuque came, and told her that the Queen
had asked for her. The Prince remained very well fatisfied with this
conversation, perceiving well by his Mistrisles discourses, that his passion
was not displeasing to her. Mean time Gayland had sent to Fess a confiderable
Person to treat with Bembuca, in order to Ali Hamet's Liberty. Bembuca, who had
other designs, did continually propose great difficuties to the conclusion of
that Treaty; yet he expressed a very great esteem for Ali Hamet. And whether it
was to delude the Vulgar, by his seeming pretenses, or that he designed to
amuse the Prince, that he might have no distrust of his Artifices, he had him
invited to all the diverisements of the Court; and did endeavor by all sorts
of means to render his detainment less wearisome. Ali Hamet had passed two Days
without seeing of his Mistress, and was fruitlesly busying of himself in
finding out an opportunity to speak with her, when that he was entreated by the
Prince of Fess, to see the Combat of a furious Lion against a most Savage
Bear. Those kind of Spectacles being of very great request amongst the
Africans, the Kings of Fess do often use such kinds of divertisments. Ali
Hamet hoping that there he might behold that Charming Person who had made him
in Love, did greatly rejoice at his going thither. So soon as he was entered the
place which was designed him, he looked on all sides, and particularly in that
place where the Queens Maids of Honor were seated, in hopes to find Alzira
amongst them, and did begin to be in some disorder at his not seeing of her,
when at last he espied her fitting next to the Queen, which very near that
place in which he himself was. Alzira, placed thus amongst the Royal Family,
did extremely surprise the Prince; and though the Splendour of her Beauty did
tarnish the Luster of her Jewels, yet the magnificent Apparel in which she was
dressed, did afford him new Charms. He doubted then no longer, but that she was
the Princess of Fess; but he already Loved her with so much passion, that this
new knowledge caused no considerable alteration in his mind. The Beasts did
fight with an extraordinary fierceness. And while that the Spectators were
giving their approbations on this Combat, Ali Hamet had continually his Eyes
fixed on the Princess, who did not take off hers from beholding him, but to
look down in modesty, and so soon as she raised them up again, they would meet
with the Princes, which did speak in their Language a thousand tender and
passionate things to her; all which she easily Interpreted, through the great
Sympathy which was already between them. The Combat, which had lasted a
considerable time, was at an end through the death of those fierce Animals. The
two Lovers were obliged to separate themselves soonner than they would have
wished. Love, who was the only Subject of all their thoughts, did continually
set them on contriving some means of seeing and entertaining one another again,
with their Amorous passions. Ali Hamet, did constantly walk in such places of
the Palace as he judged that the Princess might pass by, where he would build a
thousaind different projects; sometimes he was for going into the Princesses
Appartment; a moment after, he would propose to himself the gaining of some
Eunuque to his Service with some Liberalities, who might deliver his Letters to
Alzira. But so soon as he was going about the executing of either of his
projects, he would fall again into his first irresolutions, and finally would
resolve to Love her for ever, without undertaking any thing that should
displease her. Alzira, mean time, who did continually entertain her self with
Balabai on the merit and good mien of Ali Hamet, observed in their
conversations that her Rivals passion did increase as often as she beheld her
Lover, which made her once resolve to bring as many obstacles as she could to
their enterview. But by reason that Balabai was never absent from her, and that
she her self had an extreme impatiency to see Ali Hamet, she changed her mind,
and chose rather to see her Lover in the presence of her Rival, than to deprive
her self any longer of that pleasure. And taking advantage of Balabai's Idle
passion, she advised her not to neglect those favorable dispositions in which
the Prince was for her sake; giving her to understand, the better to deceive
her, that she should no longer be sorry to see her espouse the Prince, seeing
that it might contribute toward the peace betwixt Bembuca and Gayland. Balabai
being persuaded through the Princess's Bounty, did confide her secrets unto one
of those Eunuques that served her, and having engaged him by presents and
promises faithfully to serve her, she did propose to the Princess to write to
Ali Hamet, to give him notice that he should repair at night unto the Eunuques
Chamber, where they might entertain him at leisure. Alzira overjoyed that her
Rival had thought on this expedient, did write to him a short Note in
Portugues, to give him notice that he should not in the least scruple to follow
that Eunuque, who would conduct him to a place where he should find some
Persons that were very desirous to learn whether his conversation was as
agreeable as his mien was advantageous. After that every body was retired, the
Eunuque did carefully carry that little Note to the Prince, who received it
with all the joy imaginable, and deferred no longer to follow the Eunuque, than
what served to read the Note. You may easily imagine with what excess of joy Ali
Hamet was transported at his entering into the Eunuques Chamber, where the
Princess and Balabai did expect him. They were so ashamed at such an Action,
that they scarce would lift up their Eyes to look on him. Alzira would have hid
her bashfulness under pretense that this Action was under her Rivals name, and
she thought that at the most she could but tax her self for having too much of
complaisance for her Friend. And Balabai, being authorized by the Princess's
presence, did cast on her again all those secret reproaches which her Modesty
and her Virtue did make her to conceit. In fine, both the one and the other did
think their weakness very pardonable, when they reflected on the good mien of
the Prince. Alzira told him in Portugues, that the assiduous earnestness with
which he had looked on her during the Combat of the Lion and the Bear did make
her fancy that he had something to say to her -- You are not deceived in that,
most charming Princess, said Ali Hamet, interrupting her, I had so much joy to
be satisfied as to your real Condition, finding that you were born of the Noble
Blood of the Cherifs, that I thought my self obliged to you, for that innocent
fraud which you had used, in the concealing of your Rank from me. But you had
assured me, replied Alzira, that that knowledge should have no considerable
advantage over your mind, and that it would produce no alteration in your Love.
I do confess to you, replied the Prince, that it had been difficult for me to
have added any thing unto that strong passion which I had already for you. Yet
I was so surpised to see that a Person of so perfect a Beauty, and of so high
a Birth, did not disapprove of my Love, that it has entered me into new
engagements; and I was resolved to expose my self unto all sorts of perils to
see you again, when the Eunuque brought me the Bill. Alzira, who was in some
kind of Confusion at those last Words, would have excused her self from having
writ that Note; and having less designs of pleasuring her Rival, than of
preserving her Modesty, she told him, without any further reflection, that it
was to Balabai, and not to her self, that he was indebted for that kindness.
The Prince turning him immediately toward Balabai, and taking her by the hand,
he kissed it with some little force, and returned her thanks for the good
Office that she had rendered him. Balabai deceived thus by this show of Love
that was so like to a reality, and believing that the Princess did really serve
her with good success, did after that hearken with a great deal of satisfaction
to all the tender discourses of the two Lovers, and did facilitate to them at
diverse times, the means of frequently seeing and entertaining one another. Ali
Hamet's long detainment did serve but to make his Merits the better known at
the Court of Fess, and to cast new fears and jealousies in Bembuca's mind, who
did not doubt but that a Prince that had such singular qualities would one Day
set up the interest which he pretended to the Crown of Fess. Those reasons,
with that hatred he had for Gayland, did resolve him on Ali Hamet's ruin. He
sought diverse ways to accomplish it, without the least distrust by any body,
fearing least he should draw on himself the hatred of his People, in spilling
the Blood of Mahomet. After diverse considerations on this Business, it came in
his mind, that Talbor had done wounderful things with Gunpowder, which made
him of opinion that he might contrive such a Mine as should make no great noise
in the blowing up under the Princes Chamber, and yet crush him to Death under
the ruins of that building, without any distrust that it had been designed,
seeing that the use of Gunpowder was yet scarce known at Fess. He proposed his
design to Talbor, who not knowing that it was intended against the Prince, did
promise the King to make a Mine that should act in the same manner that he
desired, and with little or no noise. He went about it very secretly, and when
it was ready to spring, he gave the King notice, who was overjoyed at it. The
Eve to that Execution Day, Bembuca being only with the Prince of Fess, and the
Princess Alzira his Children, he advertised them of his design, that they might
not be surpised with the noise that they should hear; and to set forth that
important piece of Service, which he designed to render them by Ali Hamets
death, he spoke to them in these terms.

Our Blessed Prophet, the most intimate Friend to our Great Alla, has always
been favorable to me: For after that he had destroyed the Almanzors, and the
Benemerignis, he was pleased to place me on the Throne, preferably unto the
Father of Ali Hamet, and of diverse others of our Kindred, which the Right of
Blood did call unto it before me. He has given me the Victory over mine
Enemies, and he has come in his own Person to defend my dear Daughter from the
fury of the Lion. But he did never give me a more sensible token of his
protection, than in causing Ali Hamet to fall into my Hands, through the
assistance of my Friend Gayland, who is the only Person that might one Day
disturb my quiet, and hinder you my Children from succeeding me in the Throne.
All these reasons, my dear Children, have made me resolve the destruction of
that Enemy. Talbor the Stranger, has by my order contrived a Mine under his
Appartment, this Night you will hear it fall, be not concerned at it, and
before the People feign to lament the fate of that unhappy Prince.

Alzira, struck through the Heart at the news of this cruel resolution, was in
the greatest trouble imaginable to constrain her self before her Father: Yet
she did represent to him, that the Great Mahomet might be offended at such an
Action, and that it were much better to leave to that Prophet the care of his
own Revenge, than to undertake it himself. But Bembuca not regarding her
reasons, made answer, that Mahomet had sufficiently given him to understand his
Will in that, by Ali Hamets Imprisonment. The Princess daring not to reply any
further, thought of nothing more but of concealing that disorder she was in.
The King, after he had enjoined them silence, did retire, and Alzira returned
into her Appartment overcome with grief and sorrow. But yet she took Ali
Hamet's interests in hand, without abandoning of her self unto a fruitless
despair, and did resolve to hazard all, for the safety of her Lover; wherefore
under some other pretenses, she caused an Eunuques dress to be brought to her,
and having subtly rid her self of those Persons that were about her, she
changed her habit, and went into Ali Haemet's Appartment. The Prince, who
presently knew her face, was very much surpised at this disguise: The
Princess, who did blush to see her self in that condition, did entreat him to
suspend all the Judgments that an Action seemingly so rash might oblige him to
make of her. I confess, continued she, that I have not had leisure, to make
reflections, a too pressing interest has made me act, and I have not waved to
expose my self to Ruin, when your Life was concerned. The Prince greatly
moved at his Mistrisses bounties, cast himself at her feet, and would have
spoken tender and passionate things to her, as he used to do. But, Lose no
time, replied Alzira, interrupting him, my Father has resolved your ruin, and
by Morning this great Appartment will be but Rubbish, under which you are to
perish; you must instantly retire, and return into your Territories, where I
flatter my self, that for Love of me, you will endeavor a Peace, and that you
will not fail to send me of your news so soon as arrived. She with that gave
him a Pidgeon, which she had carefully brought up, and assured him that if he
sed it with a certain Seed which she named, it would be easy for them
frequently to Write to one another; because that that kind of Pidgeon did never
fail of returning into those places where they have already been fed; which
thing is so well known, that they are made use of as swift Posts in diverse
places of Africa. Ali Hamet, scarce minding the danger that he was threatened
with, had much to do to resolve to depart, and to distance himself from his
Princess. But Alzira did so earnestly press him to think on his safety for her
sake, seeing that he neglected it on his own account, that at last he went out,
followed by the disguised Alzira, who had already taken all the necessary
measures to prevent all obstacles. She did accompany him unto the last Gate of
the Palace, and having not the power to take leave of him, she suddenly stole
from his sight, taking the way to her Appartment, very much afflicted at the
Princes departure, though well satisfied that she had saved her Lovers life.
She was scarce got into her Chamber, when that the Mine was sprung, with that
success that Talbor had promised. All the Palace was alarmed at it, the
Princesses Women came about her in a great disorder, and at every moment there
came into her Chamber some Eunuque which brought her some new circumstance of
that extraordinary event. The confusion was so great, that it was long before
the truth of what had passed was known. At last the Princess was assured that
Ali Hamet was the only considerable Person that had perished under the Ruins
of that Fabriek. There were some also that positively said they had seen his
Body shattered in a thousand pieces. Though Alzira had been prepared against
all those discourses, she was much concerned, fearing lest that peradventure
the Prince might have returned into his appartment. But those disturbances of
mind were over, when the King sent her word of the misfortune that had
happened, and of the fruitless pains that had been already taken to unbury the
Body of Ali Hamet, which had not yet been found. Balabai came in that instant
to the Princess, and in her presence did yield unto all the effects that so
great a sorrow could inspire into a most afflicted Person. Alzira did endeavor
to comfort her, and lest that those disorders that she was in should be
construto her disadvantage, she discreetly gave out, that a Maid Servant whom
Balabai had loved very well had perished under the Ruins of that Appartment,
in which she lay. Mean time Bembuca, who applauded himself for the happy
success of his design, and who made use of all the cautiousness imaginable to
prevent that he should ever be suspected of having any Hand in Ali Hamets
misfortune, who he thought certainly dead, gave out orders to have Talbor
convy'd to the next Seaport, that he might be sent back to Tangire, which
belongs to the English. Thus every one in Fess did believe that this great
accident had happened through the fault of those Architects that had had the
ordering of that building. After diverse fruitless cares to distinguish the Body
of Ali Hamet from others, the King perceiving that all those that were found
involved in the Ruins were so shattered that it was impossible scarce to know
one, he, to impose the more on the People, ordered that a Body, which he
pretended to be that of Ali Hamet, should be Imbalmed; after which he had all
things got in a readiness for the celebration of his Funeral Rites after the
same manner as they used to be rendered unto the Princes of the Blood of the
Cherifs.

Alzira sympathising with Balabai in her afflictions, did not omit any thing
that might give her comfort. She was even on the point of letting her know that
the Prince was not dead; but well foreseeing that the Joy of a Rival would
cause her more trouble than would the sorrow of a Friend, the interest of her
affections did always diswade her from giving so much satisfaction to that
afflicted Lover. Alas! would Balabai say, you love but a mere Chimera, whose
single remembrance affords you both Joy and Delight; judge by that of the
sorrow which I do feel in the loss of a Prince so accomplished as was the Young
Cherif, who had infused a passion in me from the very first time that I had
seen him, and who already had such advantageous thoughts of me, as you are
sensible of. The Princess not answering positively unto her discourses, was
endeavoring to comfort her, when that the King sent her Word, that at last the
Body of the unfortunate Ali Hamet had been taken up, and that it was requisite
that she should prepare her self to assist the the next Day at those
magnificent Funerals which he had ordered should be performed for him. The name
of Ali Hamet did renew all Balabai's sorrows, and Alzira was no longer in a
condition to assist her; she was so troubled her self with hearing this cruel
news, that she remained without senseor motion, not being able to believe that
it was true, neither having the power of satisfying her self on a thing which
she so feared; and apprehending also lest that her Favorite should take notice
of the concern which she took in the Prince's interest. Balabai shed tears,
while that Alzira was making a thousand reflections: Now she feared that the
Prince might have returned into his Chamber, a moment after she would please
her self with the thoughts of his departure, remembering that she had
accompanied him unto the farthest Gate of the Palace, neither could she see any
likely hood, that that Body which was talked of could be his. Yet all her
reason could not settle her alarmed Love, she was obliged to give out, that
she was Sick, taking to her Bed, under that pretense to conceal from every Body
the disorders that she was in. The King, who did most tenderly Love his
Daughter, was extremely afflicted at her Sickness, and did not appear at Ali
Hamet's Funerals as he had designed: He would go every moment to the Princess,
and so soon as he was returned from thence, he would send thither the Prince
his Son. The Prince having one Day observed, that Balabai was weeping by the
Princess, he was moved with a tender compassion at the tears of so Beautiful a
Person, and endeavoring to consolate her, compassion draw tears from him also,
which caused an effect somewhat extraordinary. For Balabai being surprised with
seeing the Prince to weep, was willing to make Alzira observe her Brothers good
Nature; but the Prince interrupted her, and assured her, that his Sister had no
share in those tears, which compassion had forced from him at the sight of the
sorrow of so Beautiful a Person as she her self was. That answer caused Balabai
to blush, not expecting it; and how great soever her sorrow was, she was
somewhat moved with that flattery, which made her return the Prince thanks for
his Bounty. Alzira, who maugre all her disturbance of Mind, did still flatter
her self with the hopes that her Lover was not dead, was not displeased that
the Prince her Brother had spoken so obligingly to her Favorite, and did
resolve to advantage her self by that good disposition, in making Balabai
wholly to forget Ali Hamet. So that at all times that her sorrows did give her
some intervals, she would not lose any occasion to mention the Beauty of
Balabai to her Brother, and of entertaining her with the great advantages that
a Person who should have the good Fortune to please the Prince, might expect.
The Prince would hearken to her with pleasure, and Balabai would confess, that
if after the loss which she had so lately had, she could be capable of being
moved with any thing, the Prince should not be indifferent to her. Alzira, who
would not appear till she had received news from her Love, did pass many Days
without stirring forth of her Chamber; which gave means to the Prince, who did
hourly visit her, frequently to entertain Balabai. He found her much to his
mind, and those enterviews did greatly increase that esteem which he already
had for her. There being no great distance between that kind Sentiment, and
Love, the Prince stayed not long before he passionately loved her. Balabai, who
had at the first hearkened unto the Prince but through a complaysancy to
Alzira, had much to do to suffer him to speak of Love; she had resolved never
to love any thing more after the unhappy success of her first Amors; the
thoughts of her dead Lover, did contribute to confirm her in that resolution,
being prepossesed, that only Ali Hamet was worthy of being beloved.

While that the Prince of Fess was endeavoring to make her alter her mind, the
Court of Suss was in the extremest affliction imaginable. The Prince Gayland
had received news from all parts, of the death of his Kinsman Ali Hamet; the
certain knowledge which he had of Bembuca's wicked Nature, did make him think
that Ali Hamet's death had been designed, which obliged him to a War, and to
exhort all his Subjects to do their utmost, to revenge such a perfidious
Action. The Young Cherif being highly regretted, every one did put himself in a
posture of revenging his death, and Gayland had soon found himself at the head
of a numerous Army, had not Ali Hamet returned, which did most pleasingly
surprise the Court. His Uncle gave him a thousand marks of his affection and
tenderness. There was no other talk but of divertisements, and every one did
set forwards in expressing the joy which they received by the Princes Arrival.
Ali Hamet bearing in mind how that his Mistress had recommended to him, the
disposing of things toward a Peace, did highly praise to his Uncle all the
good Offices which he had received from Bembuca, and did persuade him, the
better to serve his Princess, that Bembuca not being able to resist the
instances of his Council, who did continually inspire him to rid his Hand of so
dangerous an Enemy, he had the Generosity to give him notice of it, and
deceiving all the Ministers of State, in secretly conveying him out of the
Palace unknown to all. Gayland, who could not know Bembuca by all those Actions
of Generosity, was in a strange surprisal at the Princes recital, and not being
able to comprehend how that the King of Fess should be so strangely changed, he
judged that nothing but Ali Hamet's merit could work so great a Miracle.

The Prince having thus disposed his Uncles mind to Peace, thought of nothing
more but of giving his Princess some news of himself. He had with great care
preserved that Pidgeon which she had given him, and having observed all that
she had prescribed him as to the feeding of it, to oblige his return, he let
him go, after he had fastened to his Feet this following Letter.

ALLA, and his Great Prophet, have conducted me to Suss, where I have found my
Uncle preparing himself to revenge my death; the noise of which had already
reached so far. My return has caused an universal joy, I am the only Person
that cannot rejoice, when I think that I am at an hundred Leagues distance from
that which I love. Why would you not let me die when you could not save me
without sending me from you? I am so well taught to despise death, that it
cannot startle me at any time: But to live without you, that only thought is
more horrid to me, than all the most Cruel deaths. Judge of the Power which you
have over me, seeing that notwithstanding all the reasons which I have to have
Bembuca, I have told my Uncle, that I owe him a thousand Obligations, that he
had frequently opposed himself against his Ministers of State who did advise
him to destroy me, and that, finally, not being able to defend himself any
longer from giving them his consent, he caused me to be conveyed secretly out
of the Palace, and after that, had deceived his whole Court in publishing that
I was dead. I hope that a Peace will be in a short time concluded. Mean time
send me some news from you, and be persuaded that it is the only joy that I can
receive in the condition that I find my self at present


The Pidgeon being arrived into the Princesses Closet, she read her Lovers
Letter with all the pleasure imaginable; her joy was so visible on her Face,
that it had been impossible for her to have concealed it. The Prince and
Balabai having afterward taken notice of it, she told them that her joy did
proceed from that her Sickness had given an occasion to a good intelligence
between two Persons which were very dear unto her: For Balabai, who was of the
humor of most part of Women, had at last accustomed her self unto the Princes
passionate discourses. The two Lovers thought themselves obliged unto her for
her complaisancy, and if at any time she retired her self in private, to read
over again that Letter which Ali Hamet had sent her, they judged that she did
it expressly to favor their Amors. Mean time she had an extreme care of her
Pidgeon, which she sent back a little while after, with the following Answer,
having first left him a whole Day without Food.

YOU have restored me to life again, in informing me that yours was in safety.
For, notwithstanding all the assurance which I had of your going out of the
Palace, I was so troubled to hear so many different circumstances of your
death, that my alarmed heart did begin to fear lest I had been deceived, when
that I thought you gone. I have a thousand times revolved in my mind all that
did pass at that cruel departure, and a thousand times I have doubted if I did
not deceive my self. I was so tired with all the ridiculous stories which were
made on your death, that I have been on the very point of undeceiving all the
World; having almost less repugnancy against the discovering of my love, than
at the hearing that you were no more. I am obliged to you for that noble deceit
that you have put upon your Uncle. I hope that the King will be moved at so
generous a proceeding, and that at last he will open his Eyes to do justice to
your merits, or rather that he will a second time give his Daughter her Life,
in uniting me to you. Alla grant it; and let his intimate Friend, our Great
Prophet, Crown you with prosperity, and preserve you for your Alzira.


The End of the first Part.
THE PRINCESS OF FESS.
PART II.
GAYLAND, who had observed that his Kinsman since his return was much more
Melancholy than usual, did in vain endeavor to guess at the cause thereof.
Bembuca's Generosity he did very much distrust, and though he was but too
certain of the Princes virtue, to fear any private intelligence between him and
the King of Fess, all together did cause some disturbances in his Mind. He was
one Day walking with his Nephew on a Tarras, with a design cunningly to pierce
into the reasons of his sadness, when that Ali Hamet did perceive the Pidgeon
which was bringing to him Alzira's answer. A joy did so surprise him, that
without thinking that he was with his Sovereign, he abrubtly left him, and went
up into his appartment, to learn some news of his Mistress. This odd kind of
proceeding raised new doubts in Gayland, who had very well observed that that
Pigeons arrival had caused some disorder in his Nephew. And whereas it is a
very ordinary thing in that Country to make use of Pigeons to send Letters by;
he no longer doubted but that Ali Hamet had received some Letters from Bembuca.
All those things that had preceded did confirm him in his doubts, which made
him resolve to inform himself at what rate soever. The African Princes for the
most part, are very curious in Falconry. Gayland, who had all kind of Falcons,
made choice of a cast of the best Hawks, he ordered that they should not be fed
of one whole Day, and the next Day he had them kept by two Falconers on the
avenues of Ali Hamet's Appartment, with order to let them fly, so soon as they
should see a Pidgeon go from thence. The Prince failed not the next Morning to
write a very tender Letter to his Princess, which he entrusted to his faithful
Messenger. The Falcons having perceived it setting forth, did presently follow
that innocent Courier, and being pressed with hunger, they devoured him in an
instant. The Men took up the Letter, and carried it to Gayland, who found it to
be a most passionate writing: He guest by those terms in which it was penned,
that the Prince was beloved by Alzira, and compatising in his Nephews love, he
was sorry for what he had done, and did no longer doubt, but that the Princess
had obtained from her Father, both the Life and the Liberty of her Lover. Ali
Hamet being extremely dear unto him, and besides he being weary with making
War, he resolved to contribute toward that Marriage, and to surprise his
Nephew, in informing him of his resolution. The same Day he called him in
private, and after that he had expressed much kindness toward him, he told
him, that he had a design to marry him, and that he would no longer expose him
unto the perilous hazard of Wars, till he had given him some Successors. Ali
Hamet not doubting but that his Uncle had cast his Eyes on some of his Subjects
in order to his Marriage, was so affrighted at that proposition, that he
remained speechless. Gayland did press him to speak, and to declare his mind to
him without constraint. The Prince grown more bold, did assure him, that Glory
only was his whole ambition, further saying, that it would be shameful for him
to Marry before he had wiped off the shame of his Prison by some signal action.
I had resolved, replied Gayland, to send some magnificent presents unto the
King of Fess, to return him thanks for having set you at liberty, and I was in
a mind at the same time to have the Princess his Daughter asked in Marriage for
you, but since I see that you have some aversion against it -- The Princess
Alzira, Sir! replied Ali Hamet, surprisingly. Yes, Bembuca's Daughter,
continued Gayland; but because that I will not compel you to any thing, I will
not think any longer on it: Ah! my Lord, replied Ali Hamet, are not you my
Sovereign? and are you to consult my Will in any thing that concerns the good
of your People? It is not with you, replied Gayland, that I will make use of my
Sovereign rights; and seeing that it is Glory only which takes up all your
ambition, I will permit you to follow that noble design. Saying of this, he
retired, and gave not time to the Prince to answer him. Yet he omitted not
sending an Ambassador secretly, laden with costly presents, with order to
present them to Bembuca, and to demand Alzira of him, for Ali Hamet, who mean
time was under most cruel perplexities, for having lost so favorable an
occasion of engaging his Uncle to concern himself in his Marriage. Sometimes he
was for an entire declaration of his Love, a moment after, he would alter her
mind, fearing lest that Gayland should ill resent his designs on the Princess
of Fess, without his consent. While that he was in those agitations, Alzira was
laboring with an extreme application to render happy her Brother and Balabai,
who did most passionately love one another: she had already spoken to the King,
in favor of those two Lovers, foreseeing that one Day she might stand in need
of a like complaisance from them; or peradventure that she did take that care
to recompense Balabai in some measure for the loss of Ali Hamet. It being
customary for the African Princes to Espouse those of their own Subjects that
they best like, Bembuca made no opposition unto the two Lovers happiness,
considering that this Marriage would preserve an union in his Family. Balabai's
Relations, who were very considerable at the Court of Fess, did not omit any
thing in which they might express their joy, in public rejoicing; and the
Prince, who was very galant, having wished that there might be some Tilting,
caused it to be published throughout all the Cities of the Kingdom of Fess and
Morocco. All things were getting in readiness against those great Festivals,
when that Gayland's Ambassador arrived there. Bembuca, who was the most subtle
of all Men, was extremely surpised at the Magnificent presents, and much more
at the Ambassadors demands, being fully persuaded, that Ali Hamet was dead;
which made him think that Gayland, who had no Successor, did peradventure fear
some revolt in his Dominions, and that he designed to impose on his People,
under pretense of this marriage, in concealing from them the Death of his
Nephew. Those reflections did oblige him to answer this piece of craft by
another, and to say to the Ambassador, that with joy he did yield the Princess
unto his Masters Nephew; but whereas it was the belief of the whole Court that
Ali Hamet was not living, it was necessary that that Prince should appear in
Person in the City Fess, to undeceive the World, lest that otherwise his
Council and People should oppose themselves unto that imaginary Marriage.
Bembuca having given this Answer, was impatient to inform his Children thereof,
and more particularly Alzira, who had so great an interest in the business. The
Princess, being surpised with her Fathers discourse, did perceive that her
Lover had acted according to her intentions, and being desirous to anticipate
the Kings designs, she told him, with an affected modesty, that she knew her
duty, and that she should obey him without repugnancy. It will not be hard for
you to do so on this occasion, replied the King, since that we all know that
Ali Hamet is dead. But what if he should come, Sir, replied the Princess? would
you keep your word? That cannot be, replied the King; but should he return, I
should assure my self better of his death, in causing him to perish before my
Eyes. Alzira, affrighted at those last Words, What, Sir, said she, with tears
in her Eyes, you would then make me be the pretense under which you would make
an unfortunate Prince of the race of the Cherifs to perish? May the great Alla
make me die first. In ending these Words, she cast her self at his Feet, and
did protest, that she would not rise again, till he had first promised her that
he would offer no wrong unto Ali Hamet, if he should chance to return, seeing
that it was not impossible but that the Prophet Mahomet might have wrought a
Miracle to preserve a Prince of his own Blood. Bembuca admiring his Daughters
Credulity, caused her to rise, and granted her request, being prepossest with
this Princes death.

Gayland's Ambassador, who according to the custom of the Country, had taken
along with him diverse Pigeons, wherewith to give notice to his Prince of the
good success of his Negotiation, gave him an account of Bembuca's Answer, and
advertised him also of the Princess of Fess his Marriage, and of the famous
Tilting which was preparing to that purpose. So soon as Gayland did receive
that Letter he passed into Ali Hamet's Appartment, and after that he had told
him that he had newly rereived Letters from Fess, he told him that Bembuca had
Married both his Children, that there were great Festivals preparing for the
Marriage of the Prince with Balabai, which was already consummated, and would
suddenly be followed with that of Alzira with another Prince, unto whom her
Father has promised her. How! my Lord, interrupted Ali Hamet, news are sent you
that Bembuca is Marrying of the Princess Alzira? Her Father has already passed
his Word for it, replied Gayland, (giving his Ambassadors Letters;) you will be
better informed of this by this Letter which you may read, while I am going to
dispatch a business of consequence. The Prince remained so astonisted at this
cruel news, that he had scarce so much strength left him as would serve to open
the Letter which his Uncle had given him. In an instant a thousand violent and
passionate designs came in his head, having no other thoughts but of
sacrificing that happy Rival unto his Love. That hatred which he already felt
against him, did set him in an impatient desire to read the Letter, to learn
his name. Never was there a surprise like unto that of Ali Hamet, when reading
the Letter, he found the great Obligations which he had to his Uncle; he read
over the Letter diverse times, not easily believing a good Fortune so little
expected, and though he knew very well that Bembuca did design to draw him to
the Court of Fess, to rid himself of him by some new artifice, he took such
delight in thinking that in some short time he should be permitted to behold
again his most dear Princess with the Kings consent, and that of his Uncle,
that he did cast aside all those other considerations that might give him any
distrust of Bembuca's designs. Gayland, who had purposely absented himself to
let him relish at ease all that joy which he judged that those happy news would
afford him, did return into Ali Hamet's Chamber, who presently went to embrace
his Knees so soon as he did see him appear, expressing in his actions, and by
the disorder of his discourses, how sensible he was of this new Obligation. He
confessed to him, that he was sure of Alzira's heart, and then humbly entreated
him that he would be pleased to give him leave to depart with all diligence,
that he might be at the Tilting that was preparing at Fess, to have the
satisfaction of breaking a Lance or two there, in favor of his dear Princess.
Gayland gave his consent, and the time pressing, the next Day he sent back the
same Pidgeon which was come from Fess, with a Letter which he writ to his
Ambassador, to order him him to get in readiness, as secretly as he could
possible, all such things as the Prince should stand in need of for the
Tilting. Though that the Ambassador did think it impossible for the Prince to
come in time for the Tilting, yet he performed exactly his Commission. Mean
time Ali Hamet, unto whom love did facilitate all things, made such diligence,
that he rendered himself at Fess before the Tilting was ended. He hastily did
Arm himself, and being mounted on an Arabian Horse, he presented himself at the
Bariers at the same time that the Prince of Fess, who was very dexterious at
those kind of exercises, had already overcome diverse brave Cavaliers, and was
going to receive the Prise from his far Balabai's hands; only Maucaden, who
might have disputed it with him, declining the running against him. This
Prince, ambitious of his Conquests, was demanding in a haughty accent whether
there was any person more that would be born down, or unseated, when that Ali
Hamet made sign with his hand to give him notice that he would brake a Lance
with him. The Prince of Fess, being impatient to punish that presumptuous
Person, did presently set himself in a readiness to give him satisfaction. The
Equipage of the unknown Person being very magnificent, did oblige all Persons,
and especially the Ladies, to cast their Eyes on him. He was so well on Horse,
and he did handle his Lance with so good a Grace, that it was presently judged
that he might give the Prince some work. Yet were not the opinions divided, and
after those proofs that the Prince had already given of his valor, and
dexterity, no body did doubt but that he would gain the advantage likewise over
the stranger. The signal being given, they both set forth with such a swiftness
as did show the impatiency which they both had to join one another. At this
first encounter they disordered each other with almost an equal advantage,
which did increase that good opinion that every one had already for the
Stranger. The Prince of Fess being fretted at the resistance that his
concurrent had made, did not stay long without setting forth the second time.
Ali Hamet went off also, and did justle the Prince of Fess with so much
strength, that having caused him to quit his stirrups, he bore him down. The
Princes fall did alarm all the Spectators. The Ladies were already making of
imprecations against this Stranger, when that the Prince blaming of their
injustice, let them know that he had received no hurt; and he himself did there
admire the strength and dexterity of his Conqueror. The brave Maucaden, who
through respect had waved running against the Prince of Fess, did entreat the
King that he might have leave to revenge him, thinking that after he had
overcome two Cavaliers of Morcco, who had the reputation of being the most
valiant of all Africa, that this Stranger would have much to do to resist him.
The great attention with which the Ladies did look on Ali Hamet, made them to
take notice of his Shield, on which there was pictured a Cavalier that was
overcoming of a Lion with one hand, and was holding forth his other hand to a
Lady, with certain Arabic Words, which signified, In saving her, I my own self
have lost. No body did comprehend the sense of those Words. Alzira, who did
find them very conformable unto her Lovers adventure, did observe him more
carefully than she had done before; and the more that she examined him, the
more did she find his port, shape, and good mien to be like Ali Hamet's. Then
this unknown Persons Valor did the more confirm him in her thoughts: But when
she did reflect on Ali Hamet's hundred Leagues distance from thence, and that
the Justing had been but very lately published, she did fear that her love did
deceive her, seeing it was impossible that her Lover could be advertised of
that Festival and got thither in so short a time. While that the Princess was
in those agitations of Spirit, the brave Stranger did increase that admiration
which was already had for him, by the advantage which he had over Maucaden.
Balabai, who was to give the Prise appointed for the Conqueror, did entreat
the King to dispense her from that ceremony, expressing some repugnancy against
recompencing of that Person who had deprived the Prince and her Brother of the
Victory. The King unwilling to constrain her, did appoint the Princess Alzira
for the presenting of the Prise to the Victor, who was already alighted, and
was drawn near to the Kings Scaffold; every body had an extreme desire to know
him, and he was earnestly pressed to pull off his head piece, as is the custom;
but the stranger did still put it off, till being called by the Princess to
receive the Prise which he had so well merited, she required him to discover
his Face. Ali Hamet had not the power to refuse his Mistress: He presented
himself bare headed to her, and did receive from her fair hands a Cimiter
studded with precious Stones. It is easy to imagine how much the sight of a
Person that was thought dead, did surprise the whole Court. Balabai remembering
a Face which had been so agreeable to her, was so surprz'd at it, that she fell
into a swoon after she had given a great shriek. Alzira, who notwithstanding
all the reasonings which she had framed within her self, did still retain a
secret foreknowledge that this brave Stranger could be none other than Ali
Hamet, was agitated with a thousand confused notions, joy fear, love, did all
at once move in her Soul, but the surprise that every one was in, did cause
that the less notice was taken of hers. The King more surpised than all the
rest, did however constrain himself, and expressed a great many civilities
toward the Prince, who said as he came up to him, Sir, here are I once again
your Prisoner. The King assured him that he was free, and unwilling to enter
into any kind of clear understanding, in presence of so numerous a company, he
had him to the Palace, where having commanded all Persons to retire, he
inquired of him by what Miracle he had escaped death. Alzira, who was in most
cruel perplexities on her Lovers behalf, did leave Balabai under her Women's
care, and ran into her Fathers Chamber, she conjured him to remember the
promise that he had made her of not attempting any thing against the life of
Ali Hamet. The King angry at a transport so unsuitable to the modesty of his
Daughters sex, did give her a kind of angry answer. Alzira afrighted at the
Kings anger; It is no longer time to dissemble, Sir, said she to him, our Great
Prophet has already appeared unto me diverse times, and has threatened me with a
long continuance of dreadful evils, if I did not Marry this Prince. Bembuca
astonished at Alzira's boldness, and discourse, was at a stand what to answer
her, when that Ali Hamet taking advantage of his disorder, did assure him that
Mahomet had warned him to go forth of that place where he was in danger of
being destroyed, that he himself had led him out of the Palace, giving him
great assurances, that he should ere long be happy with a Princess of the Blood
of the Cherifs, that he was not returned to Fess but by order of that Prophet,
and finally, that he did hope that having obeyed unto all that had been
prescribed to him, Mahomet would take care of the rest.

Bembuca, who was a Person that did never give credit to Miracles, any further
than they agreed with his interests, gave the two Lovers to understand that it
would be a great presumption to oppose the Decrees of Heaven: But that for his
part, he durst not give his consent unto that Marriage, until the Prophet had
first given him to understand his pleasure therein: Alzira was going to reply,
but the King did interrupt her, saying, that after so much fatigue, Ali Hamet
might stand in need of rest, and under that pretense, he gave order to one of
his Officers, to conduct him to a certain Appartment which he named. They were
thus all three separated. The King extremely surpised, Ali Hamet passionately
enamored, and the Princess divided between hope and fear. So soon as she was
returned into her Chamber, she passed into Balabai's, where she found the
Prince of Fess, who who was in vain tormenting himself to cheer up his Wife,
who was become very much out of humor ever since her recovery from her swoon.
The Prince entreated his Sifter to make use of all the power that she had over
Balabai, to oblige her to change her humor. Alzira, who was wholly taken up
with her Love, did promise to her Brother to do what he desired, and at the
same time did let him know that it concerned his honor to take a special care
of Ali Hamet, and above all to prevent that the King, through his Councils
advice, should take any violent resolutions against that generous Prince.
Balabai concealing the disorders of her heart, did also entreat the Prince to
be near the King to discover his design, and did pretend to do out of
complaisance to Alzira, that which she did through that interest which she had
in the person of Ali Hamet.

The Prince, who had no thoughts but to please those two Persons that were so
dear unto him, went forth to meet with the King. Balabai, finding her self
alone with Alzira, let fall those tears which with much ado she had kept in,
in the Princes presence. Sympathise, dearest Princess, said she to her, with me
in the most sensible sorrow that ever was felt. You know better than any one
else, the strong passion which I had for Ali Hamet, even from the very first
moment that I did see him; we have thought him dead, and you may remember how
sensible I was of his loss. All my affliction did not take away those few
charms which have caused my misfortune. The Prince of Fess found me to his
liking, you had the goodness to speak to me in his behalf, my vanity rather
than my love did make me condescend to his entreaties; I have given him my
hand, and my faith, being prepossest that Ali Hamet was no longer living. Mean
time the Heavens have taken care to preserve a life so precious to me, you have
seen him as well as I, all my senses have withdrawn themselves in beholding
that dear Object, my heart ashamed of its treachery has abandoned me, and it
seems as if I had returned from my Swoon but to be the more sensible of my
misfortunes; for what shall become of me, if I cannot lay aside my affections,
nor defend my self of those engagements that I am concerned in with the Prince
of Fess? In this extremity, I expect no succor but from you, most dear
Princess, you ever did take pity of my weakness, with your favor continue your
bounty to me in this occasion, and give me some comfortable advice. Counsels
are useless, replied Alzira coldly, when that our duty does prescribe us what
we ought to do; you know yours, follow it, that is all the Counsel that can be
given you. Alzira not being able to maintain any longer a Conference that
wounded her Love, would have retired in ending these Words; but Balabai, who
was melting into tears, being startled at so harsh an answer, cast her self
about the Princesses neck, entreating her not to abandon her, and to remember
that she had always honored her with her affection. I must confess to you,
replied Alzira, that your ingratitude does surprise me, your Prince forgetting
what you are, does make choice of you to raise you to an honor unto which you
could never have pretended. The King at my request consents to it, for which
you have returned me thanks; and now through an unruly passion, you are asking
of me advices against my own Brother, and such as would destroy my own work.
When that our passions grow unjust, our reason must be of power to suppress
them, before they ever come to be able of obliging us to act any thing against
our own honor. Alas! replied Balabai, it well appears that you know not Love,
it is a Tyrant who acts but by Caprichios, he neither harkens unto reason nor
honor, and he is so well obeyed, that very frequently the heart approves of
those things which reason condemns. This conversation had lasted longer yet, if
the Prince of Fess had not come in, who informed them that the King had newly
resolved the Marriage between Alzira and Ali Hamet, on condition that he should
renounce all his pretentions on the Kingdoms of Fess and Morocco; he begged
their Pardon that he could stay no longer, because that he was going to propose
it to Ali Hamet, as from his Father; and so he presently went out. This
difeourse did surprise the Princess and Balabai, in two different manners. They
observed each other, endeavoring to conceal from one another the motions of
joy and of rage which these news did produce in their Souls. Mean time, as it
is more difficult to conceal a despair than a joy, Balabai lifting up her Eyes
to Heaven, Great Alla! said she, can it be possible that Ali Hamet should
espouse my Princess? Cruel Fates! what would you have of me? Am I not miserable
enough already, in loving a Prince without hopes of ever possessing him? Must
I, in losing him, lose also that Person which is dearest to me in the World?
Yes, my dear Princess, continued she, addressing her self to Alzira; I am so
little Mistress of my self, that in spite of all the obligations I owe you, I
feel that it were impossible for me to hinder my self from hating you, if you
should espouse my Lover: But I create chimerical terrors to my self; you will
never consent to that Marriage, the Match is too unequal, and it is to be
believed that our great Prophet who has taken care of your life does reserve
you to some great Empire. Alas! replied Alzira, dissembling her joy, Persons of
my rank never Marry by their own choice, we are the States Victims, and we have
but the satisfaction to obey with a good grace unto our Parents Wills. Could
you, continued Balabai, obey with a good grace in such a like occasion? And
would you be so cruel as to espouse a Man so indifferent unto you, and which
you know I adore? That you adore, interrupted Alzira, do you remember that you
speak unto your Husbands Sister? A Person that has such unruly passions, is
unworthy of my Friendship; your passion, which was but a weakness before you
had given your hand to my Brother, is now become a crime which is most horrid
in my sight. Seek out for another Confident; and remember, that I favor you in
not informing the Prince of your treachery. Balabai would have answered her, but
Alzira went forth without giving her time so to do, shutting the door after,
that Balabai might not follow her.

The Prince of Fess, who had not found Ali Hamet at home, was returned
immediately to the Princesses; but having observed that Balabai was speaking
with vehemence, he stopped at the door, and did hear the whole conversation
between his Wife and his Sister; those terms of Crime, Horror, and Treachery,
that the Princess had used, did give him such an horrid Idea of his Wives
perfidiousness, that he had already resolved to Sacrifice her unto his revenge,
in plunging his Dagger into her bosom. Alzira, who met him as she went forth,
and that guest, by the wildness that appeared in his looks, that he had heard
all, did ask him where he had left Ali Hamet. The Prince, without answering,
went about to break open the door of his Wives Chamber. But Balabai, being
affrighted at the Princes violence, and Alzira's outcries, who was endeavoring
to hinder him, fled away by a back Stairs, which were joining her Closet, and
by that means did save her self from that incensed Princes fury. The Princes
action made a great noise in the Palace. The King that was informed of it would
know the truth. The Prince, who was very well pleased with his Sister, let his
Father know that she could best inform him of it. Bembuca sent for his
Daughter, and after that he had expressed to her the sorrow that he had caused
by Balabai's Perfideousness to the Prince, in favor of Ali Hamet. Alzira
observing that the King had some distrust that Ali Hamet might be in League
with Balabai, she did Sacrifice her Friends secret, having no other thoughts
but to justify her Lover; and to make appear that he had no share, nor so much
as any knowledge of Balabai's foolish passion. The King that did find much
probability in all that the Princess said, did cause his Son to consent that
Balabai should live, who was guilty but of an involuntary Passion. And the very
next day she was conducted unto a little City in the Confines of the Kingdom of
Morocco, where a very mean Pension was assigned her. Mean time Ali Hamet did
accept all those terms that Bembuca did require of him, in giving him his
Daughter. Yet he having exact measures to observe with Gayland also, he got
leave of the King to return to Suss, to get his Uncles consent, being confident
that he loved him sufficiently not to oppose his happiness. He had the pleasure
to entertain his Mistress before his departure, and whereas they loved each
other with the most sincere and strongest passion that ever was, the Reader may
judge how tender was their conversation. Ali Hamet did promise her that his
Voyage should be very short, and Alzira did assure him that she should not
enjoy any pleafure and content till his return: After his departure, the King
who would have this Marriage accomplished with a great deal of Splendor, gave
out his orders to have all necessary things got in readiness.

While that the whole City of Fess was admiring the magnificent preparations
which were in hand for this Marriage, Balabai grieved at the ill treatments
which she had received at Fess, and jealous of her Rivals good Fortune, she was
filled with rage and fury, continually thinking of some means to revenge her
self of Bembuca, and of hindering Ali Hamet's Marriage; as she came to the place
of her Exile, she learned that Taffilet, who since has made himself so famous
by his Conquests, had possessed himself of the Territories of an Ancient Jew,
and that he began to impose Laws on diverse petty Princes of his Neighborhood.
Balabai, consulting nothing but her own despair, went to Taffilet, who she
found at the head of a considerable Army. He received her very civilly,
especially after she had assured him, that the report of his great exploits had
obliged her to come and crave his protection, against Bembuca's injustice. And
the more to engage him to concern himself in her interests, she was so subtle
as to tell him, that Alzira who was the most Beautiful Princess of the World,
and the most sensible of greatness, had diverse times mentioned him to her,
complaining of her Fathers bestowing of her by force on Ali Hamet, who had no
other merits but of being of the House of the Cherifs, in lieu of giving her
unto a Prince of the merit and reputation that Taffilet was. Taffilet, who was
the most ambitious of all Men, was ravished to learn that love did furnish him
with such a plausible pretense of satisfying his ambition; and he having
already heard something of Alzira's Beauty, he expressed much joy to learn
those advantageous thoughts that Balabat did assure him that Princess had of
him. He promised her that he would never lay down his Arms till he had revenged
her of the King of Fess, and delivered Alzira from the Tyranny of so unjust a
Father. He made great advantages of Balabai's coming to him, for having given
out amongst his Soldiers, that one of the greatest Princesses of Africa was
come to demand his protection, and magnified to them the great honor which
they received by such an Action, and given them great hopes of recompencing
them liberally, they all promised to follow him wherever he should lead them.
He marched long Journeys, and he had such care of providing all necessaries for
the sustenance of his Men, that his Army, far from growing weak by its
fatigues, did Daily increase. He overcame diverse petty Princes that lay in his
way, and the news of his march did so affrighten all Africa, that diverse great
Princes did seek after his Friendship at his own rates. Finally, without
amusing himself about small places, which might have made him lose time, he set
Siege to the City of Fess, which is the Capital of the whole Kingdom, at that
time that Ali Hamet was there every moment expected to Celebrate his Marriage
with the Princess.

Bembuca, who always had a great Body of Horse in readiness, thinking to
surprise Taffilet before that his Retrenchments were made, did send the Prince
of Fess at the head of all his Cavalry to charge Taffilet's tired Troops. But
Taffilet, who very well understood his business, and who had foreseen this
Sallying forth, did so vigorously receive the Prince of Fess, that after a
great Combat, Bembuca's whole Cavalry was defeated and made to fly, and the
Prince his Son taken Prisoner. The very next Morning Taffilet sent a Trumpet to
the King of Fess, to let him know that if he did not send to him that very Day
the Princess Alzira, he would the next Day send him back his Sons Head in a
Sack. The whole Court of Fess was in an extreme consternation, when that
Taffilet's Trumpet arrived there. The King, having heard what he had to say to
him, did find himself in so great a confusion, that he remained a long time not
knowing on what to resolve. His Ministers of State, being affrighted at
Taffilet's threatenings, did in vain press him to determine, and to save his Son
in sending the Princess to Taffilet. This unfortunate Father was in so great a
consternation, that he had not so much power as to propose it to his Daughter,
foreseeing that she should be forced to depart, with such Violences, which he
found himself incapable of doing. Mean time, as the business was pressing, he
went to his Daughters Apartment, and told her, that it was in her power to
restore the Peace unto his Dominions, and to save her Brothers life. Alzira not
comprehending that she could do so much good at once, made answer to her Father
with a great deal of submission. Bembuca moved with her answer, retired without
having the power to say more to her; a moment after he sent her one of his
Ministers of State, accompanied with Taffilet's Trumpet, to let her understand
what was expected from her, or rather to force her to depart. For, after having
shown her the necessity there was of sacrificing her for the good of the
Kingdom, she was placed, without heed given to her tears, in a sumptuous
Chariot, which had been prepared for Ali Hamet's Marriage. There were Women
given her to serve her, and nothing was forgot that might contribute to gain
the Conquerours favor.

Those Persons which did accompany the Princess did exhort her in vain to
conceal her grief, and to constrain her self when she should be in Taffilet's
presence, to obtain the more advantageous conditions in favor of the King and
his Subjects. Alzira, who thought she had nothing more to care for after the
loss of Ali Hamet, did represent unto her self nothing but horror, and did
show by her answers, that she was very far from buying with her complaysance
Taffilet's favor. She on the contrary did attempt to cast her self from the
Chariot, in order to destroy her self, complaining of the charitable cruelty of
those that would prevent her. A Portugais Slave, who had long served her, told
her, that seeing she was not afraid of death, she should stay to the last
extremities to use that remedy, and in the mean time endeavor to oblige
Taffilet on other pretenses to defer her Marriage for some time, to give unto
the brave Ali Hamet time to raise an Army on Foot, and to Fight Taffilet.
Alzira, who did expect all from Love and her Lovers Valor, did approve of her
faithful Slaves advice, and did promise to follow it, being however resolved
rather to lose her life than Marry Taffilet. After that she had taken a
resolution so conformable unto her Love and despair, she suspended all her
sorrow, to take care of her dress, being persuaded, as all Ladies are, that
Beauty is a great help to succeed in all their designs. Taffilet being
prepossest with the thoughts that the Princess did love him, as Balabai had
assured him, set his Army in Battalia to honor her the more; he went to meet
her, and did receive her in a very gallant manner, with the noise of an
infinite number of Drums and Trumpets; he assured her that he had not taken up
Arms but to deliver her from her Fathers force, and to return her thanks for
those advantegeous thoughts which she entertained of him, in laying at her Feet
the Crowns of all those Sovereigns that he had Vanquished. Alzira, who could
not make any thing of that discourse, made him no answer but by diverse
reverences, of which Taffilet was very well pleased, being persuaded that the
Princesses silence was an effect of her Bashfulness and Modesty. After this he
did accompany her into a magnificent Tent which he had caused to be purposely
prepared, where she found Balabai, who gave her the reception, and did joy her
in Taffilet's presence, of the happy Change which had happened in her fortune,
seeing that in lieu of Espousing a Prince without Territories, she was going to
give her Hand unto the Conqueror of all Africa. Alzira, who had not been able
to retain her tears at the hearing of her Lovers Name, gave occasion to
Taffilet to enquire after the cause of it. Balabai, without giving her time to
speak, made answer, that the remembrance of those Violences that her Father
would have used in Ali Hamet's behalf, did doubtless draw those tears from her.
Taffilet, being at this transported with an amorous Zeal, did swear by the
great Mahomet that he would punish that bold Person, and that he should not
think himself worthy the possessing of so charming a Princess, till he had laid
at her Feet the Head of Ali Hamet. What! Sir, said Balabai, interrupting him,
as affrighted at that threatening, would you retard so long your happiness? My
own honor, replied Taffilet, and what I owe unto that good opinion that this
Princess has had of me, oblige me to impose on my self that necessity; however
if that should not please her, her pleasure shall ever Rule my Will. The
Princess, ravished to hear Taffilet of his own accord offer to defer the
Marriage, was ready to take advantage of the proffer which he made her, but
then recollecting that by that answer she in a manner did ask him for Ali
Hamet's Head, she remained unresolved, rather being willing that Taffilet
should think that she approved not of that delay, than to say any thing that
might advance her Lovers Ruin. Taffilet thinking that the Princess would
declare her mind unto Balabai, did assure her that he was going to send back
her Brother the Prince, and so went out. So soon as Balabai found her self
alone with the Princess, she cast her self down at her Feet, to conjure her to
divert Taffilet's cruel designs, and to give her Hand to that Prince without
any further delay, lest that he should endeavor to give her some marks of his
Love and Valor at Ali Hamet's cost, who might be surpised by a Victorious
Army, if the Princess had not the goodness to stop this Conqueror. You
question not, continued she, but that that violent passion which I have for Ali
Hamet has engaged me to require Taffilet's assistance, to prevent your
Marriage. But I do confess to you that your particular interest has also very
much contributed in making me take that resolution, through the Honor and
great advantages that will accrue unto you thereby, when throughout the whole
Earth it will be said, that after that the most famous Taffilet had vanquished
all Africa, he has laid so many Crowns at your Feet, and has terminated all his
Conquests with the possession of your Heart. Live happy with that worthy
Spouse, enjoy long your prosperity, and only prevent that the same Hand which I
have Armed to procure unto you so much good, serve not to destroy my Lover, who
I love a thousand times more than my life. Alzira affrighted at her Rivals
transport, perceiving that it was very necessary to dissemble with her, did
tell her that she had a most particular esteem for Taffilet, and promised
without doing her self any great violence therein, that she should never
require any thing from him against Ali Hamet. Balabai, who was not satisfied
with that answer, was continuing her request, when that one of Taffilet's
Officers entered the Tent, who was sent by his Master to Compliment Alzira on
the Death of her Brother, and to assure her that he had no hand in the
business; that Prince having been killed as he was returning to Fess, by a
Vanguard who had Charged him unknown. These news did variously surprise the two
Princesses. For Alzira was extremely afflicted at the Death of her Brother, and
Balabai, who looked on that Prince as on an obstacle unto that strong passion
which she had for Ali Hamet, did from that moment flatter her self, that she
should ere long be happy. Mean time Taffilet did make so good use of that
consternation in which Bembuca, and the inhabitants of Fess, were, that he made
himself Master of that Place, still declaring, that he would not alter any
thing; he also persuaded Bembuca that he had no hand in the Prince his Sons
misfortune, and did assure him that he would retire out of the Kingdom of Fess
so soon as he had Married the Princess. Bembuca being deceived by those
discourses, did Write to the Princess, and after that he had conjured her by
all the tender affection which he had for her, to defer no longer the giving of
her Hand unto the famous Taffilet, he also made use of his Paternal authority
to command her to do it. Taffilet himself did carry this Letter to Alzira; but
that Princess, who did find a certain kind of consolation in the death of her
Brother, seeing that it helped her with a pretense of bewailing her own
sorrows, did entreat Taffilet to afford her two Days to dry up her tears.
Taffilet, who did affect a very great submission unto Alzira's Will and
Pleasure, did consent to her desires, and did even assure her that he had
resolved to gain her Heart by his obedience and services, but that the King had
thought it fit to defer no longer their Marriage.

While that Taffilet was disposing of all things in a readiness to Espouse
Alzira with all the pomp and magnificence that he could think on, that
Princess, who did detest her Fathers weakness, did melt into tears, and
resolved to destroy her self, before the term which had been granted her were
come. The Portugues Slave, who did never abandon her, did in vain endeavor to
make her change her resolution. But the Princess did conjure her not to mention
any more to her the living without Ali Hamet, and she did so work upon the
Spirit of this faithful Slave with her tears and sobs, that she promised to die
with her. They proposed to open their Veins, and to render to each other that
reciprocal Cruel Office. The night seeming to them the most fit time to execute
their violent design, they did resolve to stay till the Sun were set, and
embraced one another, very well satisfied with that resolution which they had
newly taken. A Jew, Portugues-born, who was an Officer in Taffilets Troops, and
that accidentally did Command that Day the Guard that was at the Princesses
Chamber door, did over hear their discourse, by reason that the Princess, who
spoke Portugues to her Slave, not thinking that that Language would be
understood by any Person, had not been so cautious as to speak low. This
Officer being amazed at this Tragical design, was moved with a sense of
Compassion, and did resolve either to save the Princess or to lose himself. A
little time after, he entered her Chamber, as if to ask her for some orders.
Alzira did mildly recommend to him, that no Person should approach her Tent
till the next Morning, because that she was very sleepy, and was desirous to go
early to Bed. The Jew, who had Wit, looked fixedly on her, and feigned to have
just then discovered something of extraordinary in her Face. Then did he speak
Portugues, and told the Princess, that she was threatened with a most Tragical
accident, but that if she could avoid it, she would be filled with content, and
in a short time would find her self the most happy Princess in the whole World.
Alzira startled at so surprising a discourse, did admire this Strangers
wonderful knowledge, and asked him, with tears in her Eyes, if it would be as
easy for him to inform her how she should attain to that happiness which he
promised her, as it had been for him to guess at the accident with which she
was threatened. I shall not find any thing difficult to serve you, replied the
Jew, and seeing that you have such an aversion against Taffilet, I offer to
have you to a Port that is but a Mile distant from this Place, and from thence
I shall conduct you to Oran, which is the nearest City, and that belongs to the
Spaniards: Mean time things may have a new Face, and I promise you, that if you
will follow my advice, you will soon enjoy that happiness which I have already
foretold you. Alzira moved at a discourse which flattered her Love and Hopes,
durst not however trust to a strangers bare Word. But the Portugues Slave, who
peradventure began to repent, did give her such good reasons to oblige her to
follow the Jews Counsels, that at last she resolved to do it, being persuaded,
that seeing he had guest at her misfortunes, he would likely prove true in what
he had told her of her good Fortune. The Jew went forth to dispose so of all
things, as that they might make their retreat without a surprisal; he also sent
a considerable Person to the Port, to make sure of a Barque, and a while after
he returned into Alzira's Chamber, who he found ready to undertake all things.
She presented him with a rich Diamond, and after that she had exacted from him
with a thousand Oaths, that he should not betray her, she went forth, followed
by her Slave, and came to the Port, without complaint of the length of the way,
though she had gone on Foot. The fear which they had of being surpised, did
oblige them to embark hastily on the first Vessel they met with: So soon as
they were embarked, the Jew, who had not betrayed Taffilet, but in order to
enjoy the Princess, who had appeared so charming to him, had the boldness to
mention his Love to her, and to propose to her, to retire with him into Europe,
where he assured her that she should live in a private condition a thousand
times more happy than all the African Princesses. Alzira disdaining so insolent
a proposition, did reproach his perfidiousness to him in very outrageous terms,
and she did so disturb the Mariners through her tears and outcries, who could
not understand one another at their Work, that they threatened to put her in
Chains. Alzira, not daunted at their threatenings, gave them all the Jewls which
she had taken along with her, to appease them; and perceiving that those
liberalities did make them more respectuous, she did exhort them, showing them
the Jew, to Chain up that Villain, who had betrayed her; and did speak to them
with so much assurance, that they deferred not the obeying of her. But judging
by Alzira's extreme Beauty, that in the Sale of her they might get a
considerable Sum, they resolved to conduct her to Tangire, which belongs to the
English, left that if they should carry her into any Port of Africa, she should
be known, and they punished. They did not alter a resolution so conformable
unto their avarice, and the next Day being arrived at Tangire, they exposed to
Sale the Princess of Fess, the Portugues Slave, and the Jew. The Care that the
perfidious Mariners did take in setting forth Alzira's Beauty, and the
greatness of her Birth, though they knew her not, did invite diverse English Men
to go to see her. They all found her so Charming, that through the Emulation
which her Beauty gave them, they did offer an excessive Sum for her, and yet
those insatiate fellows would not be satisfied with it, which caused some
disorder. The Governor of Tangire was at that time gone into England, and had
left to Command in his place the Count Talbor, who was a very experienced
Soldier, the same who had been Slave unto Ali Hamet. This Commander being
informed of that Slaves Beauty, and of the exorbitant rate that her Masters
would sell her at, gave order that she should be brought to him, that he might
judge of the business. The Count, who had diverse times seen Alzira in the
Palace of Fess, did easily know her again, and remained in an extreme surprisal
at the seeing her, in a condition so different from her own. He endeavored to
assure himself better of it, in speaking Portugues to her, having heard that
the Princess of Fess did know that Language. Alzira, who had a confused Idea of
having formerly seen elsewhere the Count Talbor, and that guessed by the
respectous manner in which he spoke to her that she was known, did inform him
of her disasters in few Words. The Count admiring the Princesses generosity, or
rather love, who had chosen rather to expose it self to all kind of misery,
than to give her hand unto the Conqueror of Africa, did assure her that he
would contribute with all his power to sweeten her misfortunes, and at the same
time did mention to her the great obligations in which he was indebted toward
Ali Hamet, and of the pleasure which he should do to himself in showing her his
acknowledgments, by rendering some kind of services unto a Person that was so
dear unto him. Alzira, who had hearkened but with much indifferency unto all
this Commanders Civilities, was so moved to learn that it was on Ali Hamet's
confideration that she did find a protector and a friend in the place of a
severe Judge, which she had feared, that from that moment she began to hope
that the Jews predictions would be found true, and she begged his pardon from
the Count, who had already resolved to have him punished, as well as the
Mariners, who were Chained up, in punishment to their perfidiousness. The Count
Talbor having after this caused a magnificent Appartment to be prepared for the
Princess, she was then treated with the same respect as if she had been still
at her Fathers Court.

Taffilet, mean time, grieved at the Princesses flight, and at the cheat which
had been put upon him, in assuring him that she loved him, did turn all his
fury against Balabai, who he did treat most unworthily; and after that, he
added her to the number of those Women that followed the Army to supply his
wantonness. Bembuea was no better treated; for Taffilet, who was always seeking
for some pretenses to his Ambition, did accuse him of having had an hand in
Alzira's flight, and secured his Person, after that he had possessed himself of
his Estates.

Ali Hamet alarmed at Taffilet's progress, and particularly at the noise which
was spread abroad, that he was going to Espouse the Princess of Fess, did raise
an Army with an incredible diligence, and made great have to meet Taffilet, who
having had notice of his March, did save him half the labor, and went before
him with the confidence of a Person who is at the head of a Victorious Army,
surprising in the mountains the fatigated and ill experienced Troops of Ali
Hamet's Army, which he did Charge so advantageously, that he entirely routed
them. Ali Hamet, after that he had done diverse surprising Actions, made his
escape with much ado, and returned to Suss, unto his Uncle Gayland, who was so
affrighted at this defeat, and at the news which he not long after received of
Taffilet's being entered on the Territories of Suss, that he deferred not a
moment of Embarking himself, with what he had of Riches, to retire to Algar,
resolved to end his Days in a private condition. Ali Hamet, who was less
afflicted at the loss of his Country than at that of his Mistress, perceiving
that there was no Prince in Africa of power to protect him against the
redoubted Taffilet, remembered that formerly a certain Prince of Europe had
re-established Muley on the Throne of Tunis; and making some reflections on all
the strange actions which Fame did already report of the Emperor of the
French, he did think that that Monarch was the only Person that could assist
him against Taffilet, which made him resolve to pass into France, to desire
succor from that great Prince. But having not met with any fit Vessel to
perform the Voyage, he went to Tangire on a light Frigate, with an intention to
make use of the first opportunity to go to France. The Count Talbor, who had
had already advice of Ali Hamet's rout, did conccal that ill news from the
Princess, and did still comfort her, in assuring her that it was impossible
that Taffilet's good Fortune should last long. Mean time, he was advertised
that Gayland was retired to Algar; and concerning himself very much in Ali
Hamet's business, he was in a great anxiety of mind to know what was become of
that Prince, when he was informed, that there was a Frigate from Suss newly put
in at the Port. He had not patience to stay till the Pilot was sent to him, but
run to the Port to inform himself more particulrrly of all that passed at Suss,
and at Tarudent. Ali Hamet, whom he presently knew, did make him fear, seeing
him, that his business was desperate; the Count received him with all the
imaginable respects, and treated him as if he had still been his Slave. The
Prince, after he had Embraced him, put him in mind that they were together the
first time that he had seen Alzira, and did confess to him, that he was less
concerned at the loss of his Dominions, than at the Princesses grief, who was
exposed unto Taffilet's Violence. The Count ravished that he could inform him
of something that would consolate him in that Consternation that he saw him,
did assure him, that the Princess of Fess was not in Taffilet's power; and
having told him the resolution which she had taken, rather to die than to give
her Hand to that Prince, he acquainted him after what manner she had arrived at
Tangire, and presently did accompany him to her Chamber. Never did any one pass
in so short a time from an extreme affliction to so great a joy: Ali Hamet, who
thought that he had lost all, was so ravished to have found his fair Princess,
who was more precious to him than all the Crowns on Earth, that he abandoned
himself to the pleasure of re-seeing her again with the same transports as if
he had had no loss: and Alzira, who had not dreaded Taffilet, but through the
fears that his Arms should prove fatal to her Lover, was so satisfied with
seeing him, that she thought not so much as to ask news of the Battle;
imagining to have gained all, now that she had met again with her dear Ali
Hamet. The Count Talbor, who took a particular delight to contribute to the
good Fortune of those Illustrious Lovers, did propose to the Prince the
Espousing Alzira, without staying till his ill Fortune should once again take
that charming Princess from him. Ali Hamet being convinced by such reasons as
did so pleasingly flatter his Love, did resolve to propose it to Alzira. But
when that he found himself near her, and that he made some reflections on his
misfortunes, he durst not propose any thing to her, and repented having had the
thoughts of so doing, having much less trouble in bearing himself alone his own
ill Fortune, than to share it with that amiable Princess. His courage would
inspire him to attempt new things to re-gain his Estates, and his Love would
make him find out a thousand difficulties of performing the design which he had
of passing into Europe to ask for aid. The Count Talbor, finding him in those
resolutions, did advise him to go to Gayland, who was retired to Algar with
vast Riches, and did assure him, that if that Prince would but furnish him with
a considerable Sum, he might easily raise another Army, and hazard a second
Battle against Taffilet. The Prince approving much this Counsel, set himself
about the executing of it; and for fear he should be molified with his
Mistrisses Tears, he departed without taking leave of her. Gayland, who
notwithstanding his great Riches, did already begin to grow weary of living in
an obscure condition, did not spare any thing to forward Ali Hamet's Generous
designs, and he was so well assisted, that in a short time he found himself at
the Head of an Army, accompanied with diverse Officers of Merit, which the Count
Talbor gave to serve with him.

The Nobility of Fess, who could not brook the Violences and Scorns of
Taffilet, sent up their prayers for Ali Hamet. Taffilet alone despising an
Enemy whom he had already beaten, went against him at the head of his Army,
where he had incorporated Bembuca's Cavalry, which was still Commanded by
Maucaden. Though that Ali Hamet had much the lesser Number of Troops than his
Enemy had, he expected him Manfully, with a resolution to vanquish or to die.
Taffilet did Charge him with the confidence which is so common to Victors. But
Ali Hamet's Trorps, animated by that. Princes example, who was in all places,
did combat with great Valor, and Taffilet was beginning to fear the success of
the Battle, when he caused his Body of reserve to advance, in which was
Bembuca's Horse. Maucaden, fretted at Taffilet's Violences, and particuat the
wrongs which he had done his Sister, did exhort his Men to abandon that Tyrant,
and take Ali Hamet's Party, who was of the Blood of the Cherifs, and
consequently the true Successor to the Crown of Fess. He instantly did Charge
with so much resolution those that would have opposed his designs, that the
greatest part did follow him. Taffilet advertised of this misfortune did
despair of Victory, and thought no more but of saving part of his Men with
retreating. But Ali Hamet, who was desirous to put an end to the War, taking
advantage of his Enemies disorder, did press him with so much Valor, that
Taffilet was forced to change his mind, and to hazard all. There he was killed,
performing of surprising actions, and Ali Hamet did gain a most signal Battle
by his death, besides his fair Mistress, and diverse considerable Kingdoms. The
Count Talbor, who had sent on the Coast of Fess a Yatch, to be informed of of
the success of that great Day, did learn with all the imaginable joy, the rout
and death of Taffilet. He carried these good news unto the Princess, who
burning with impatiency of seeing her Father again, and of joying her Lover,
did conjure that trusty Friend not to retar'd her from that pleasure, and to
send her back to Fess that very Day. The Count ravished to contribute to her
satisfaction, Embarked her in a Yatch, and gave her one of his Relations to
acconmpany her. Ali Hamet, who was not sensible unto so many happy successes,
but in relation to his Mistress, did send a Person of Trust to Count Talbor, to
give him an account, and rendered himself at the nearest Port of Tangire, there
to wait for news from Alzira, who was just Imbarking when that her Lover
arrived there. It would be difficult to express the reciprocal joy which they
had at the sight of one another. The remembrance of their late disgraces did
contribute also to make them relish with more delight the pleasure which they
had of being together, and of thinking how worthy they were of one another.
They came to Fess, where Ali Hamet, after that he had Re-established Bembuca on
the Throne, gave his Hand to Alzira with all the satisfaction imaginable. Soon
after, he sent Magnificent presents unto the Count Talbor, and did not forget
any thing that could express his acknowledgments to so faithful a Friend.

FINIS.

