The Preacher sent: OR, A VINDICATION Of the Liberty of PUBLIC PREACHING, By
some men not Ordained.

In Answer to two Books: 1. Jus Divinum Ministerii Euangelici. By the
Provincial Assembly of LONDON. 2. Vindiciae Ministerii Euangelici. By Mr. John
Collings of Norwich.


Published by John Martin, Minister of the Gospel at Edgfield in Norfolk. Sam.
Petto, Minister of the Gospel at Sand-croft in Suffolk. Frederick Woodal,
Minister of the Gospel at Woodbridge in Suffolk.


LONDON. Printed for Livewel Chapman and are to be sold at the Crown in
Popes-Head-ally. 1658

To all faithful Ministers, and truly Christian People, professing the Order
of Church Fellowship and Government, called Presbyterian.
Beloved Brethren:
It Is surely an error in practice, when upon a plea of error in judgment, men
write actually and effectually one against another, discharging themselves as
guns laden with prejudice, wrath, and discontent; giving out but little light,
yet roaring and wounding exceeding much. We desire to be found innocent from
this transgression, and do present what we have written as for you, and not
against you; having had it in our hearts to design, if possible, some
communication of light, however some provocation of Love: whilst you see our
help, from the (seeming at least, but to us) real countenance of the Scripture,
you may find reason to believe, we are nes presumptuously wilful, though
extremely weak.

We may not conceal two things as heavy weights upon our spirits, when the Lord
was calling us out to minister unto him in the publication of this work; which
though we have been enabled to cast from us, yet we are jealous lest they may
lie as stones of stumbling in your way, and obtain sentence of condemnation to
pass upon us as criminals, before you have heard us plead our cause.

1. The exceeding great abuse of that liberty we plead for, whereupon we had
almost said, Let us not do good, lest evil come thereof. But in this we were
satisfied considering, 1. That the having and reading the Scriptures in our
tongue, is the first occasion of the manifold errors and divisions found
amongst us; yet the loss of that liberty would be an intolerable loss. 2. Did
Ordination pass upon every Preacher, there is no such virtue in it to make
pure, or to keep pure: as some vessels under that mark bring us gold and
silver, so some are laden with little else, but apes and peacocks. 3. The
allowableness of an act is founded in the authority by which it is performed,
when attended with dueness of circumstance, not in issue, success, or uncertain
event: the active humiliation of our blessed Lord was the greatest-stumbling
block, and an occasion of the saddest blasphemy to the Nation of the Jews, that
ever any people were acquainted with; yet therein he was obedient, and
therefore honored. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. 4. Such men as are through Grace (...),
taught of God, and through gift (...). apt to teach. are as vines and fig-^^es,
where the cursed fruit of error and division with obstinacy persisted in, is
not found; and for such only we plead.

2. That we hereby keep open bleeding wounds, which had need be healed: the
answer whereunto we trust also of a good conscience, is this: It is a duty to
contend, Jude 3. although to be conte^tious is sin: a contending Spirit may be
healing, a contentious spirit is w^unding evermore. We profess our selves bound
for peace, as far as the shoes of the Gospel will carry us; and say with
Calvin, Opranda quidem est pax, summoque Caivin de v^ra Christianae
pacifi^^^^^is, and ^cclesiae reformandera^ione.
studio querenda: sed p^tius quam redimatur ulla pietati^ au^ veritatis
jactura, Coelumterra si^pus est misceatur.

And because the many controversies concerning Officers issue from a diverse
apprehension of the nature of the Church it self, we shall crave leave in a few
words to give an account of our persuasion thereabout, with the grounds and
reasons thereof.

It is unto us clear as the shining light, That a Church formed unto fellowship
in New-Testament-Ordinances (we would not found a controversy upon a word) a
Church capable of Officers, immediately to be set in it, and over it, who may
take heed to all the flock, oversee and feed it, which also must know Act 20.
28. 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Heb. 13. 7, 17.
them, obey and submit unto them, as to such as watch for their souls; is a
particular company of Saints in mutual union for mutual fellowship in the means
of worship appointed by Christ, for the glory of God, the edification of their
own souls, and the good of others.

1. It Is a company; one cannot be a Church. Tell the Church, is not, Tell the
Bishop; though some have had it, and still would have it so.

2. It Is a particular company: indeed there never was, never will be a company
existing in rerum natura, any other then a particular company: we grant an
Universal company of Saints in a reformed sense, comprehending ever individual
Saint-member thereof, whether formed unto fellowship, or unformed; but as
Saints, not as Churches of Saints: as the world is universal, of which all
Creatures are a part, yet did a man stand where he might see all Countries and
all Creatures, he should see but a particular world, really particular, but
intellectually Universal: so when all Saints shall be gathered together at the
right hand of the Lord, there shall be seen a particular company of Saints,
really particular, though intellectually universal; this being apprehended,
viz. here are all, there are no more: it is otherwise with Companies of Saints
formed into fellowship; did a manstand where he might see all Corporations; all
particular civil Societies of men, he might acknowledge the general nature of
Corporations existing in either of them, and yet deny an universal Corporation
consisting of them as parts thereof: So were all the particular Churches
represented to his view at once, he might grant that the universal Universalis
natura est una in multis.
nature of a Church, is in either of them, yet deny an universal Church
consisting of them as parts thereof.

Neither can we understand how that Scripture, 1 Cor. 12. 28. so often pressed
into the service of the Catholic Church, can be found really a friend
thereunto: for God has set some in the Church, is equivalent to that which is
written, ver. 18. God has set the members every one in [the] Body; now if this
has no strength, God has set the members in the Body, Ergo, There is a
Catholic, Body; then this is weak: God has set some in the Church, Ergo,
There is a Catholic Church. And let not our Brethren impute it to a spirit of
faction and division in us, that we renounce the name and thing of a Church, of
Churches, or of such a visible Catholic Church: for,

1. Every part is incomplete, not having the power of a whole in it: but every
particular Church rightly constituted, has in it the power of a whole Church,
therefore it is not a part: and whatever our Brethren deny us in our
Congregations, yet may they obtain a concession for a National
Churchconstitution, we doubt not but they would be therein Independent, and not
allow the Authority of any Nation, or of all the Nations in the Christian
world, to impose a form of order or Government upon them, wherein they are not
satisfied; acting in all Church-work, not as a part, but a whole: which they
could not regularly do, if but a part of a Catholic Church.

2. Every whole is really distinct from every part, and from all its parts
collectively considered: they are constituting that is constituted; but where
that Church is, which is really distinct from all particular Churches, or
wherefore it is, we profess we know not.

3. There is no Universal visible meeting to worship God, Ergo, no Universal
visible Church. The Synagogical meetings of the Jews were the meetings of
several parts of that Church, and there never was in them the power of the
whole Church; and we know not how it can be styled, a National Church (unless
it be from a national meeting, Statis temporibus) the word (...) being never
used, either in a civil sense, as Act. 19. 32, 41. or a Sacred sense, but
propter Conventum, either in fieri or in facto esse, because the persons were
met, or under engagement to meet together: yea the Church of the firstborn,
however dispersed and scattered upon the Earth, yet does as an invisible Church
meet invisibly and in Spsrit to perform the acts of worship required of such a
Church: we are confident, whatever it be is called (...), assembling together
is the formal reason of that denomination, which is Coetus convocatus, or the
Congregation, as it is every where Coetus a Coeundo.
translated by Mr. Tindal in his translation of the New Testament.

4. There are no distinct Officers appointed for such a distinct Church, ergo
there is no such Church: Diocesan Bishops, Provincial Archbishops, National
^atriarchs, universal Popes, would surely have been found in the Scripture, had
a Diocesan, Provincial, National, or Universal Church been found there.

5. There is no Church greater then that which has the power to hear and
determine upon offenses committed in the Church; but that Church is particular,
Mat. 18. 17. We know dissenting parties lay claim to this Text on both sides:
we say but this, If it means the Congregation, it excludes all other; if it
means the any other, it excludes the Congregation; which is unscriptural,
irrational, absurd.

Obj. If notwithstanding all this, some may judge, that although Churches do
not meet in their members actually, yet they may meet in their representatives,
which being met, may be called, The Classical, Provincial, National, Universal
Church.

Answ. We answer each of us in the words of Zuinglius, to a like argument,
Representativam credo veram esse non credo: i. e. That such a Church is a
representative I believe, but I believe not that it is a true Church.

3. It Is a holy company, a company of Saints, Rom 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. said
therefore to be in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, 1 These. 1. 1. --

1. It Is the Kingdom of Christ, the Body of Christ, the Church of Christ, yea
Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. implying neerness of relation unto him; but none visibly
related unto Satan, as the visibly uncalled are, can be respected as visibly
related unto the Lord Jesus; therefore not of his Kingdom, Body, Church, etc.

2. The visibility of that which constitutes a member of the invisible Church,
declares a man meet to be received unto Communion in the visible; but the
Heavenly Call constituteth a member of the invisible Church, ergo the
visibility of that Call declares a man meet to be received unto Communion in
the visible, the members whereof are Saints by calling: no Churches of Christ
by institution, but are Churches of Saints by constitution, 1 Cor. 14. 33.

3. Every Body is to be considered, first in its essential state, before it can
be determined such a body in its integral, or organical state: as man is
compounded of soul and body, and so constituted an essential whole, who has
further more eyes and ears, hands and feet, parts and members, which put him
under another notion; yet cannot all his parts and members which are integral,
complete him in the being of a man Univocally, if he be deficient in any part
which is essential: so is every aggregate in forming a flock of sheep; it is
necessary to consider the nature of the creatures to be formed; and none, not
sheep, can be numbered to such a flock: in forming a Church of Saints, it is
necessary to consider the nature of the members to be formed; and (...) Saints
visibly, can be numbered to such a Church: Invisible unbelievers may as well
belong to the invisible Church, as visible unbelievers to that which is visible.

We forbear multiplying arguments for further proof, because we have the
consent of our Brethren in the general: as to the necessity of Saintship, the
whole strife being at the door of visibility, and about the rule for the
judgment thereof; which some mistaking, have their charity so large, as to
embosome nations of men, Separatim and conjunctim, as Saints, upon the account
of a bare dogmatical faith, especially if it be not contradicted with enormous
scandals; reckoning it among the errors of Jus Divinum Regim. Eccles. preface.
the Independents, that they affirm, the matter of the visible Church must be
(to the utmost judgment of discerning) such as have true grace, real Saints.
Concerning therefore a judgment of visible Saintship, we are thus minded
according to rule.

1. Errors of judgment overturning the foundations of faith, are inconsistent
with grace and Saintship, Tit. 3. 10, 11.

2. Errors of life everturning the foundations of holiness, are inconsistent
with grace and Saintship Gal. 5 19, 20, 21, 24. and thus far we suppose our
Brethren will walk with us.

3. Total ignorance of the way and working of Christ in the heart, is
inconsistent with grace and Saintship, 1 Pet. 3. 15. We ask our Brethren, what
rule they would walk by, in applying comfort to particular souls? if they would
not enquire after truth of grace, what experience of sins burden? what
experience of Christ's relief? yea further we would know, what reason they have
to justify a practice of enquiring after truth of grace in order to Communion
in the Lords Supper, and yet condemn us for the same practice in order to the
Communion of Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, and Ministry, printed
1650.
Saints, who write thus: He that would come to the Sacrament must examine
himself: 1. In general, whether he be worthy to come, etc. 2. In particular,
whether he have true faith in Christ, without which he cannot worthily eat this
bread, nor drink this cup. 2. Whether be truly repent, etc. 3. Whether he be
truly united by love to Jesus Christ and his members etc. Vind. p, 52. 53. They
further say, that such as are grossly ignorant (and such they intimate them to
be, that cannot examine themselves, their faith, repentance, etc.) should be
kept from the Sacrament by Church Officers, upon diverse reason: else, 1.
Church-Governors should be very unfaithful Stewards, 2. They should be guilty
of polluting and profaning the Sacrament. 3. They should express much cruelty
to the Soul of him to whom they give the Sacrament, because they give it to one
who will eat and drink his own damnation. 4. They make themselves accessory to
his sin of unworthy receiving. 5. They grieve the Godly members of the same
congregation; and as much as in them lies, defile the whole Congregation, For
know you not (says the Apostle) that a little leaven does leaven the whole
lump? 6. They bring down the judgments of God upon the Congregation, page 54
55. 56. Upon this they build a third proposition, viz. It is the will of
Christ, that Church-Governors have some way sufficient to discover who are
ignorant, etc. page 57. What they would do at the table, we would do at the
door, and entrance into the house, receiving thereinto all those whom the Lord
has received (to the best of our discerning) and no more; knowing no rule for
an ordinary suspension of complete and owned members of the body, from the
privileges given, and by our Lord bequeathed thereunto.

Let not any stumble at the corruption found in some of the Gospel-Churches: an
incestuous person was a member in that of Corinth; and more disorder may be
found in it: to which we say, filthy matter may be found in a Church rightly
constituted, which is not fit matter in the constitution thereof. It were
absurd to affirm, an unclean person may de jure be a Churchmember, because a
Churchmember de facto was unclean. As for the National body of the Jews, we
respect it as a typical president: purge out the leaven, remove the leper, him
that has an issue, that is unclean by touching of the dead, etc. and we are
satisfied concerning the matter of the Church.

4. It Is an united Company. A Company however qualified, are not a Church,
except an united Company: Member-hood speaks relation: relation, if Political,
is founded in consent: my brother indeed is my brother whether I will or no,
this relation is natural; so believers are brethren without consent: but my
companion not so, the mutual relation found in Companies and Societies of men,
is not so. We would not quarrel about a word, expressing the meaning of union;
may we obtain a grant of the thing it self, call it consent. agreement,
covenant, or joining, Act. 5. 13. Thus we argue, That whereby a number of fit
persons are joined together, to walk and worship God together in the same
Ordinances, is the form of a particular Church. But by Covenant, consent, or
agreement, a number of fit persons are so joined: Ergo. The Minor we prove
thus: That which gives being of Member-hood, distinction of Churches, and
power of Ecclesiastical operation, is that, by which a number of fit persons
are joined together, etc. But Covenant, consent, or agreement, gives being of
member-hood in a particular Church, distinction of Churches, and power of
operation: Ergo.

1. The being of Member-hood is conveyed in Covenant: not in profession or
baptism, Ergo, in Covenant: the excommunicate Corinthian was a visible
believer, and also under baptism, before he was received into the Church again
by consent; yet till then, he was no member.

2. The distinction of every member, and so of the whole Church, from other
members and other Churches is by Covenant. The members of Smyrna are not
members of Ephesus, nor e contra: the distinction is not in place: Phebe is a
member and servant of the Church at Cenchrea, when she is at Rome. Did the
Church of Smyrna convene at Ephesus, and do an act there, it were the act of
the Church of Smyrne, as much as if it had been done in Smyrna, where ordinarily
they meet and walk together: nor is the destinction from profession: what is
common to the Members of every Church cannot be the form of any Church; but the
destenction is from mutual engagement. The power of acting as Members one
toward another is hereby; when a way is solitary, work solitary, a man may
walk alone work alone; not so where social: how can two walk together except
they be agreed? The Associated Pastors and Churches in Worcestershire upon
their debate about consent, conclude: We have reason to require, as things now
stand, a more express signification of our peoples consent to our Ministry,
and Ministerial actions, and their Membership of our particular Churches:
Christian Concore, page 11. Which conclusion is strengthened with many reasons,
wherein they urge Antiquity, Reason 11. Convenience, Reason 12. and speaking of
the Primitive Churches to that Question, Whether express consent were required
then, among other things they (or M. B^xter for them) affirm, that without the
peoples express consent none could then have ruled them by meet Ecclesiastical
rule. page 15. Who have therefore the form of a covenant drawn up and added to
the profession of faith to be taken by the Members of every particular Church
respectively.

And the late Assembly in their answer to the reasons of the dissenting
Brethren, against the instance of the Church of Jerusalem, attribute so much to
consent in a Church organical that although they say Elders receive their power
and commission for the whole Church of Christ. yet they may not exercise that
without a Call; and the mutual assent and agreement of the persons among whom
and to whom they should exercise it is proximum fundamentum exercitii, page 10.
So it is of every act of special duty, by one man in reference to another,
according to Mat. 18. 15. that should a man proceed upon that rule in dealing
with one not in special covenant engaged, he would soon see his error, and that
he had no call, because no consent.

Our Brethren need not be so much offended, that we make consent the form of a
congregational Church, when themselves, as it seems unto us, make it the form
of a Presbyterial: For granting that the Elders of a bordering Presbytery
(though Neighbors) may not intermeddle with the congregations under, another
Presbytery, they say, They take themselves bound in a special relation to those
Congregations, who are associated in that Presbytery, in those things for which
they are asscciated; and their mutual consent and agreement Assemblies Answer.
gives them that relation and calling to those things. page 11.

Moreover, considering how far our Brethren are agreed in this matter, we much
wonder at their offense at our Covenant or Agreement: for they will grant,

1. That the members of particular Churches are under special engagement, to
special duty in taking the care of, and in watching ever one another; so that
the Church neglecting duty herein is guilty of the sin of every member, as the
Church of Corinth of the sin of the incestuons persons, 1 Cor. 5. and the seven
Churches of Asia of the sin of their several members respectively: and not
otherwise.

2. That members of a particular Church ought by the institution of Christ to
walk together in Ordinances; and that walking in Ordinances with another
Church, and not with the same Church, is sinful separation.

3. The obligation upon a member to walk with a particular Church cannot be
dissolved by the private will of that member, nor by the consent of any other
Church, but that of which he is a member; according to the known Rule, Ejusdem
est destituere cujus constituere: only in this they are contrary unto us, That
they judge the removing of an habitation a disanulling of former relation: but
if cohabitation gives not member-hood. though that cease, member-hood is not
taken away; but co-habitation, gives not member-hood, no, although joined with
profession and baptism: the incestuous Corinth excommunicate had all these, but
no member-hood, until by consent received again into the Church.

These things considered, we plead but the way of coming under an acknowledged
institution, whereby members in their private personal capacites altogether
free, become engaged to fellow members; which we apprehend to be by mutual
Combination, Consociation, Consent or Covenant; and know not what rock of
offense is herein for any to stumble at; b^ believe, as white Wine, put into a
blew-coloured Glass, is in appearance blew and not white; so the innocent Truth
observed in a glass of Prejudice, appears prejudicial, and not Truth.

5. A company united unto fellowship in means of worship, appointed by Jesus
Christ: all worship is either natural, i. e. founded in the nature of God, and
knowable by the light of Nature, as Faith, Love, etc. which are invisible: and
hearing what God does speak calling upon God, Singing praises unto God; which
are visible parts of worship: Or instituted, i. e. founded in the will of God,
and knowable by the Scriptures, as Baptism by Water, breaking of Bread in the
Lords Supper, etc. No worship is founded in the will of man, but Will Worship.

The Papists whose Church is so full of power as to make Decrees of equal
authority with the ten Commandments, yet are modest in the reason of this power
which they plead, because say they, The Church has the Spirit to guide her,
and the Decrees thereof are from the same Spirit whence the ten Commands were;
but we are satisfied concerning Revelations, and shall expect none, regard
none, in nova materia, in new matters to be revealed, yet shall plead them, and
pray for them in novo actu, in new acts of discovery of that which in
Scripture is revealed; being persuaded that he which has entered into his rest
has ceased from his work, as God did from his; from his Priestly work, in
bearing iniquity; Heb. 4. 10.
his Regal work in destroying Satan, Death, and the Grave; from his Prophetical
work, in giving Laws and Ordinances, to his holy Church; the Sabbath-work of
the Son (as the Fathers also) being another kind of work then that which was
antecedent to his Sabbath.

But we shall say no more of this, our Brethren being not baptized into a
belief of the same truth, asserting Presbyterial Government to be from heaven,
in the Jus Divinum of Church Government: although the confidence of our late
Assembly could speak no more but this: The Scripture does hold forth, that many
particular Congregations The third Proposition in the Assemb. presented to the
Parliament.
may be under one Pesbyterial Government: may be they would have said. Must be,
had they seen the stamp of Jus Divinum upon it.

6. The end of this fellowship is the glory of God. Edification of members,
good of others; in this also we are agreed: and truly Brethren, we desire to
end in agreement; but we are jealous lest the displeasure of some may be
provoked against us, not only for our judgment, but for our p^actice;
declaring it in contradiction to men of such eminency, engaged against it: As
therefore we have gaven an account of the reason of our Judgment, suffer us
also, in a few words to give an account of our practice, which is this: A pit
has been diged, and lays uncovered some time, diverse have fallen thereinto,
crying up the Arguments to which we reply as unanswerable probably because not
answered: whilst others cry down the Congregational men for their silence, as
more Papistico, because they now cease replying unto Books extant against their
practice: the pit must be filled up or covered; in which attempt let us not be
smitten for speaking, and also for holding of our peace.

But why do we come so late into this service? Ans. We waited to have seen it
done by others before this time, supposing the next of the kin, viz. some
principal man, would have espoused this truth, and raised up a seed to his
elder Brether. We acknowledge our selves in the relation; if none else will we
must raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance. Ruth. 4. 4, 6.


We are threatened (as We hear) with an Answer: we fear it not, only let it be
the answer of a good Conscience; and let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away. Brethren, Grase be with your
spirits.

So pray the unworthiest of the Lords Servants, who yet desire to love Christ
in his, and his in him.

To the judicious Reader.
Reader,
It Is matter of Lamentation, that Errors and erroneous Opinions do so abound in
our days, which being baptized into the name of Truth, and coming with specious
pretenses, obtain, get entrance, and take possession of the Heads and Hearts of
many; who being influenced thereby, become unfriendly unto Truth; making her a
sufferer like Princes Children, who ofttimes smart because they are of the
Blood Royal. But however Truth appears to the purblinde eyes of men, and be
oppressed; yet she is lovely; beautiful, glorious, and shall not always lie
amongst the pots. Truth is of such esteem with the Lord, that he magnifies it
above all his Name, and loves Truth more then all his Saints: for it is Truth
which sanctifies them, and makes them lovely; and in case they make Truth to
suffer, he will make them sufferers for it. There is nothing in this World more
dear unto Jehovah, then his Truth, Hence these injunctions are laid upon men:
Buy Pro. 23. 23. 2 Timothy 1. 19. Jude 3.
the Truth, and sell it not: hold fast the form of sound words, and contend for
the Faith. Thus should the Children of Truth do: but such is the unhappiness of
our times, that some deny Truth, others corrupt Truth, many question Truth, and
most are so contentious against Truth, that if the Lord did not raise up some
Worthies to plead for, and rescue her, she would be carried away Captive, or
lie fallen and oppressed in our Streets. The learned and judicious Authors of
this Treatise; has the Lord stirred up at last to vindicare some Truths, which
seemed to them to suffer wrong: therefore are they come into the Field; and
whether they quit themselves like men, the ensuing Discourse will declare. It Is
of a Polemical Nature; and Controversies are seldom managed without heat: in
such engagements men are apt to offend persons, whilst they defend Truth; and
proceed too far upon the account of their own interest; minding not so much
what is to be said for Truth opposed, as what is to be laid upon the Opposers.
These Brethren, and Friends to Truth, have no such Spirit in them: they contend
for the Truth, yet are not contentious; like Moses and Michael, they are mild
and meek, having nothing provocative in their Lips or Pens: their Moderation
will appear to all men: more love, sweetness and candor, in a work of this
nature, can hardly be found or expected.

Reader, would thou know whether men unordained may warrantably preach;
whether Election or Ordination do give the Essentials to a Minister or
Church Officer; whether such an Officer relate to the Church universal, or to a
particular Church, which are things of great concernment: consult this
Tractate, read it without prejudice, weigh things seriously, and doubtless thou will find much satisfaction, and see cause to bless the Lord for the labors
of these his Servants. That the God of Truth would give us all hearts to love
the Truth, and receive the love of the Truth, is the prayer of

Thy Friend in the Truth, M. L.

A Catalogue of Books, printed for, and sold by Livewel Chapman, at the Crown
in Popes-head-Alley.
AN Exposition of the nineteen first chapters of Ezekiel, in three volumes,
quarto. By William Greenhil.

Sermons on Christ's last discovery of himself, octavo. By William Greenhill.

An Exposition of the 13 chap. of the Revelations. quar. By John Cotton.

Jacob's Ladder, etc. octav. By Fr. Raworth.

Truth with time: proving none of the 7 last Vials are yet poured out. quar. By
J. Can.

The time of the end: A treatise of the last Apostasy, the little Horn, and the
Beast that slays the Witnesses. octav. By J. Can.

The holiness of Church Members. quart. By John Cotton.

Singing of Psalms a Gospel-Ordinance. quar. By J. Cotton.

An explicit Declaration of the testimony of Christ, according to the plain
sayings of the Gospel. quar. By Tho. Moor, Senior.

A Treatise of the Person of Christ, etc. quar. By Tho. Moor, Senior.

An Antidote against the spreading Infections of the Spirit of Antichrist in
these last days under many Wizards: being a Discovery of a lying and
antichristian Spirit in some of those called Quakers. quart. By Tho. Moor,
Junior.

The Knowledge of Christ, etc. wherein the Types, Prophecies, Genealogies,
Miracles, Humiliation, Exaltation, and the Mediatorial Office of Christ are
opened and applied. quarto. By John Davenport of Newhaven in New England.

The legislative power Christ's peculiar prerogative. quar. By William Aspinewal.

A presage of sundry sad calamities yet to come. quar. By William Aspinwal.

The abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath, or the Sabbath of the 7th day of the
week. quar. By William Aspinwal.

Arrows against Babylon. By John Pendarves.

Sighs for Sion. By John Pendarves.

The Fear of God, what it is, and exhorted to: a Sermon preached by John
Pendarves.

The Voice of the Spirit: A discovery what the witnessing-work of the Spirit
is: how the Spirit witnesses; who are capable of attaining the witnessings of
the Spirit; how a Soul may know its enjoyment of them; by what means a Soul may
attain them. octav. By S. Petto.

A Voice from Heaven: a testimony against the remainders of antichrist yet in
England. octav. By Gaulter Postlethwait.

Christ and Moses excellency: a triplex Treatise, distinguishing the 2
Covenants. octav. By V. Powel.

Saving Faith, set forth in three Dialogues. octav. By Vavasor Power.

Generation-Work in three parts: 1. part, showing what Generation-work is; that
Saints in their several generations have the peculiar works of their
generations: that its of great concernment for a Saint to attend to, and be
industrious in it: wherein the work of the present generation lies: how a man
may find out that part of it, which is properly his work: how it may be so
carried on as God may be served. 2. part, being an exposition of the 7 Vials,
Rev. 16. 3. part, an exposition of the 7 Vials, Rev. 16. 3. part, an exposition
of the prophecy of the 2 witnesses, from the 11, 12, and 14 chapter of Rev. to
which is added, a Key to unlock the mystical numbers of Daniel and the
Revelations. By John Tillinghast.

Mr. Tillinghasts 8 last Sermons, viz. The fifth kingdom founded on the new
covenant: the signs of the times: Christ the only Foundation: the promise of
the Father: the evil of the times: look to your aims and ends: the idols
abolished. oct.

6 several Treatises, viz. the promises made and fulfilled in Christ: absolute
promises made to sinners as sinners: the life of Faith, in justification,
sanctification, expectation: the Saints anchor rightly cast: Christ's new
command: of offenses. octav. By John Tillinghast.

Knowledge of the times, or a resolution of the question, how long it shall be
to the end of the wonders. By J. T. Elijah's Mantle, or the remains of that
late worthy and faithful servant of Jesus Crhist, M. Joh. Tillingh. viz. 1. the
conformity of a Saint to the will of God. 2. the will of God and Christ
concerning sinners. 3. no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. 4.
Christ's love to his own. 5. true Gospel-humiliation. 6. the most effectual
means to kill and subdue sin. 7. the advocateship of Jesus Christ, a great
ground of Saints comfort and support under sins and infirmities. 8. the only
way for Saints to be delivered from the errors and evils of the times. 9. of
the old covenant, being so far as the Author had proceeded in a Treatise of the
two coven. before his death.

The Contents of the CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. WHerein is shown, that Office is not a relation to the work or
employment of the Minstery, but a relation to a Church. Chap. 2. Wherein is
proved, that Officers stand in relation to a particular Church only, and that
they are no Officers to a Church Universal. Chap. 3. Wherein is given a
Description of Office, and the several parts of it are proved from Scripture,
and some conclusions drawn from the whole precedent discourse. Chap. 4. Wherein
the question is stated about the preaching of gifted men, and several things
propounded for the clearing the state of it. Chap. 5. Wherein two Arguments are
urged, proving the lawfulness of the preaching of gifted Brethren, though not
Ordained. Chap. 6. Wherein the third, fourth and fifth Arguments are urged for
the proving the lawfulnes of gifted Brethrens preaching, though not Ordained.
Chap. 7. Answering the first Argument brought against the preaching of men
unordained to Office. Chap. 8. Answering diverse Arguments brought against the
preaching of men unordained to Office. Chap. 9. Answering such arguments as are
brought to prove that none may do the work of the Ministry, without Ordination.
Chap. 10. Answering several arguments brought by Mr. Collings, to prove gifted
persons may not ordinarily preach; without a solemn setting apart to Office.
Chap. 11. Concerning Election, as belonging to a particular Church. Chap. 12.
Concerning Election, as Essential to a Call to Office. Chap. 13. Wherein many
arguments are answered, which are brought against Election, as giving the
Essence to the call to Office. Chap. 14. Wherein is shown, that the Essence of
the Ministerial Call does not consist in Ordination. Chap. 15. Wherein is
proved, that Ordination does not so belong to a Presbytery, but that a Church
or, the people may in some cases lawfully act in it.
ERRATA.
Page 15. line 24. for the, read their. or else after intervention, add of some
acts put forth by these p. 18. 1. 8. r. ex officio p. 37. 1. 2. add and the
preaching of a gifted person. p. 40. 1. 12. r. undoubted. p. 41. l. 3 r. r.
privately. p. 44. l. 28. r. private. p. 54. l. II. after about, add it. p. 67.
l. 20. r. mentioning. p. 92. make a parenthesis before else, l. 6. to end after
assert l. 10. p. 92. l. 11. after if, add it be said. p. 94. l. 19, 20. 21. r.
secondarily, thirdly, etc. p. 94. l. 25. r. offices. sol. 27. p. 114. l. 12. r.
tongues. p. 123. l. 27. r. party. p. 203. l. 17 r. ingenious. p. 208. l. 4. r.
name argues. p. 208. l. 15. r. if. p. 210. l. 9. r. teaches. p. 211. l. 15.
r. restrain. p. 212. l. 31. r. restriction of. p. 225. l. 12. r. firstly. p.
231. r. l. 17. r. it. p. 243. l. 21, 22. r. chose. p. 252. l. 13. r. firstly.
p. 23. 1. l. 17. r. it. p. 243. l. 21, 22. r. chose. p. 252. l. 13. r. was
ordinary. p. 256. l. 9. blot out to, also l. 10. p. 258. l. 9. blot out Act. 6.
2, 4. and put it in l. 8. after the word prayer. p. 260. l. 14. r. promise. p.
264. l. 6. r. subsequent. so l. 9. p. 270. l. 13. r. there.

Of Preaching without Ordination.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is shown, that Office is not a Relation to the work or employment of
the Ministry, but a Relation to a Church.

AMongst the many Books lately published against the preaching of Gifted men,
and for Ordiantion as that which gives the Call unto that work of the
Ministry, there are two, which (we suppose) have the strength of all the rest
in them; the title of the one is, Jus Divinum Ministerii Enangelici or, The
Divine Right of the Gospel-Ministery: published by the Provincial Assembly of
London. The title of the other is, Vindiciae Ministerii Enangelici; by Mr.
Collings of Norwich.

In these we find some positions which we can freely subscribe unto; but there
are other assertions, wherein we profess our dissent. And though we intend not
to reply to every particular, yet we shall give such Animadversions upon the
most considerable things, as will leave it unnecessary to speak to the rest.

We freely acknowledge, That Officers are necessary in the Churches of Christ
by Divine Institution; and also, that they are to continue until the second
coming of Jesus Christ.

And therefore we shall not put in exceptions against the Arguments brought by
our Brethren in their Jus Divinum, for the proof of these Propositions.

Only we shall except against part of their explication of their first
Proposition.

The Proposition is, That the Office of the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments is necessary in the Church by Divine Institution. For the
understanding of this, they undertake to show,

1. What is meant by Ministry. 2. What by Office.
Quest. What is meant by Ministry?

Answ. Ministry (as our Brethren well observe) stands in opposition to
Lordly Domination or Principality; as Matthew. 20. v. 25, 26, 27. The Princes of
the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
Authority upon them; but it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your servant.

Ministry is not Dominion, but service. Officers in a special sense are
called Ministers, yet (we conceive) that others may properly be called
Ministers also, according to the service they do for Christ. Both the words in
the Original which our Brethren here mention to express the Office of the
Ministry, viz. (...) and (...), are frequently in Scripture applied to Saints
that are no officers; as 2 Cor. 9. 1. For as touching the Ministering to the
Saints. Act. 24. 23. Forbid none of his acquaintance [to Minister] or come unto
him. In these and other places, Christians who are no officers are said to
Minister, in giving Alms, etc. and therefore let none think that the name
Minister is appropriated only to officers. It is the office of Deacons to
Minister about carnal things, and yet other Christians do Minister about such
things also; as the forecited Scriptures show. So Officers, Pastors or Teachers
do Minister in the Gospel, and yet gifted men may be said to Minister in the
Gospel also: for there is ministration or service in their preaching; and
therefore gifted brethren, whose ordinary work or calling it is to Preach, may
properly be called Ministers of the Gospel, as well as those who are officers;
for ordinary Ministration denominates the person a Minister. Occasional acts of
preaching may be called Ministering, and the persons therein do Minister in the
Gospel; but because they do not addict and give up themselves to that as their
work, hence they cannot properly be called Ministers of the Gospel: for such a
denomination follows an ordinary, and nor an occasional acting in any work.

A general course of acting is necessary to the making a general title proper
to any person. As a man is not denominated a Brewer or a Baker, that does but
occasionally brew or bake; but he that does it ordinarily or constantly, and
makes it his work to do it. So here. This we have added the rather, because
some call gifted men Speakers, and their preaching, speaking, and that to
distinguish them and their actings from officers and their acts: they are
afraid to call gifted men preachers or Ministers; or their actings preaching or
Ministering.

Quest. 2. What is meant by the word Office?

Our Brethren give us a description of Office, and it is this: The Office of
the Ministry, is a spiritual relation to the whole employment of the Ministry
in a person qualified, founded upon a special and regular call. This
description we apprehend to be very faulty: and because a right understanding
of this, What Office is, does much conduce to the clearing this whole
controversy, we shall declare wherein we do dissent in this matter, and upon
what grounds.

Answ. That Office is a Relation which respects employment as its end, we
grant: that it is a Relation to the employment, or whole employment of the
Ministry, as its correlate, we deny. Unto all Relations, there is a Relate and
a Correlate absolutely necessary, so as no Relation can have a being without
these two. Now office is a Relation, and so must be between two: and there is,

1. The Relate, viz. the Officer, as is undeniable.

2. The Correlate, viz. the Church. Our Brethren in their definition of Office,
seem to make [the whole employment of the Ministry] the Correlate; and in the
same page they assert, That Office is better defined by Relation to the work,
then by relation to a particular people, who may easily out him of his work,
but (they say) not of his Office.

Afterward in their Jus Divinum (page 151.) say they, That every Minister has
a double Relation, one to the particular Church of which he is a Minister; the
other to the Church Universal.

In their definition they would have [the whole employment of the Ministry] the
Correlate; and elsewhere they grant a Church to be the Correlate, both a
particular and the Universal. So that there will arise two questions.

Quest. 1. Whether Office be a Relation to the work and employment of the
Ministry, or to a Church?

Quest. 2. What Church has Office Relation to? Or, Whether Officers stand in
Relation to, or be Officers of an Universal Church, or of a particular Church
only?

Quest. 1. Whether Office be a Relation to the work and employment of the
Ministry, or to a Church?

Answ. We affirm Office to be a Relation to a Church, and we deny it to be a
Relation to the work and employment of the Ministry, as its Correlate; and that
upon these grounds.

Argum. 1. From that certain rule of Relations, Relatum and Correlatum qua
talia, sunt simul natura, adeoque se mutuo ponunt and tollunt. The Relate and
Correlate as such, are together in nature, and so do mutually put and take away
themselves. One Relate gives being to the other; one cannot be in act, or
actually, without the other. Relatorum uno posi to, ponitur and alterum. If one
be in being, the other is in being also: If there be a father, then there is a
child; if there be a Master, then there is a servant; and so in all real
Relations. The Relation is destroyed or denied, if both be not in being. It is
no Relate, unless there be something that it is related to: Now our Brethren
grant, page 2. [the work] of the Ministry is separable from the Office, by
sickness, imprisonment, banishment, rejection of the people. And they say, page
3. That the people may easily out him of his work, etc. By all which it is
evident, that according to the own principles, Office does continue and remain,
when the work and employment of the Ministry does cease, and is at an end: And
thence we infer, that it is impossible, that Office should be a Relation to the
employment of the Ministry; for Office must cease, as often as the work or
employment of the Ministry cease; if employment be the Correlate: for
Relatorum uno sublato, tollitur and alterum; Take away one of the Relatives,
and the other is taken away also. Take away the employment of the Ministry, and
Office must cease, if the employment and Office be Relatives. As well you may
affirm a man to be a father who has no child, or a master, who has no
servant, or a husband, who has no wife; as you may affirm a man to be an
officer, who has no employment, if Office and employment be Relatives.

So that instead of avoiding that supposed inconveniency of a man's being outed
of his Office, by a peoples outing him of his work, they do unavoydably bring
themselves into it, by asserting Office to be a Relation unto the employment of
the Ministry.

Argum. 2. From the necessity of a praeexistence of the means unto the end, of
the cause unto the effect; the means must have a being in order, before the
execution of the end; the cause must have existence, before the production of
the effect. The Relation must be antecedent unto that action which is peculiar
to that Relation. Now (according to our Brethrens principles) the employment of
the Ministry, is the end of Office. page 39. They interpret Ephesians. 4. 12. of
the ends for which those gifts were given, which are mentioned ver. 11. He gave
some Apostles and some Prophets, etc. and the work of the Ministry is mentioned
ver. 11. and so that is one end of those Offices. Yea, our Brethren say, (Jus
Divin. Minist. page 81.) God has designed special Officers of his own for the
preaching of the word; therefore none ought, or may preach the word, but such
as are designed unto this Office.

They make Preaching an act peculiar to Office, and say, a man must be an
Officer, before he may do the work, and so (according to their principles)
there must be the Relation (which cannot be without a Correlate) before the
employment of the Ministry; and therefore the employment cannot be the
Correlate, because that comes after the Relation is completed. This must be
an argument to them, whether it be suitable to our principles or not. And thus
far we assert it, That men must be Officers, Pastors or Teachers, before the
employment of the Ministry, Office-wise; and therefore of necessity there must
be a Correlate in being, before that which is the work of the relation is
performed, and therefore work cannot be the Correlate. We say [Office-wise] for
we shall show afterward, that some part of the same work which Officers
perform, may be done by such as are no Officers; the matter is alike, but the
manner is different.

Argum. 3. From the Gospels owning a Church as the Correlate. Act. 20. 17. The
Elders of the Church. Here the Holy Ghost declares, that Church and Elder are
the Relatives: and ver. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all
the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the
Church of God. The Flock, the Church of God, and Elders, or Overseers, are
declared to be those between whom the Relation is. Officers are related to
Churches, not to the employment of the Ministry. The Relation lays
obligations upon Officers to do the work of the Ministry, but the Relation
must be before employment Office-wise, and is between Officers and Churches.

Argum. 4. From the Titles given in Scripture to Officers: It is observed by
Logicians, that Relatorum uno cognito, cognoscitur alterum. Of Relations, if
one be known, the other is known also. We call no man a father or master,
unless we know he has a child or a servant. The very names of Relatives do
decalre between whom the Relation is. The name of a father intimates a child
to be the other Relative, and e contra; the name of a son does imply a father
to be the other Relative: and so for other Relations.

Now the names and titles which the Gospel gives unto Officers, have such
reference unto a Church, as they do aloud proclaim that Officer and Church are
the Relatives, and not Officer and employment. If the question be asked, To
whom are they Officers? the answer must be, To a Church. Officers are called
Pastors; and that intimates, that they are related to some flocks. They are
called Teachers, and that speaks them to be related to some who are Learners.
Therefore we conclude, that Office is not a Relation to the employment of the
Ministry, but to a Church; one special end of which Relation is, the work of
the Ministry therein.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is proved, that Officers stand in Relation to a particular Church
only, and that they are no Officers to a Church universal.

Quest. 2. WHat Church has Office Relation to? or whether Officers stand in
Relation to a Particular Church only, or whether they be Officers of an
universal Church?

Answ. We affirm, That Officers stand in relation (as Officers) to a particular
Church only: and we deny that they are Officers to a Church Universal. Our
Brethren at last grant a Relation between Officers and a particular Church,
page 143. and 151. and it is proved from Act. 20. 28. We shall here hint a few
words, chiefly to show, that they are not Officers to an Universal Church; and
then it will necessarily follow, that the Relation is between the Officer and a
particular Church only. We deny Pastors or Teachers to be Officers to an
Universal Church.

Argum. 1. Because we can find no Scripturewarrant, for any
Universal-visible-Political-Church. The Gospel knows no such Catholic or
Universal Church, that we can any where find.

Argum. 2. Because the Titles given unto Officers, do speak their office to be
limited unto a particular Church, and do forbid or deny their bearing any
officerelation to a Church Universal. In those Scriptures where (our Brethren
say) there is an enumeration of Officers, and so where it is most needful that
their properest Names and Titles should be given them; yet there those Officers
which are still continuing, are called Pastors and Teachers. 1. Cor. 12. ver.
28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets
thirdly [Teachers.] And Ephesians. 4. ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists and some [Pastors and Teachers.] And also where
the qualifications of such Officers are laid down, and so the properest Titles
are necessary, that it might ever be known, what Officer ought to be so
qualified; there they are called [Bishops] which is no more but [Overseers] as
Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock. over
which the Holy Ghost has made you (...) Bishops or, Overseers. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2.
[A Bishop] must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober. Tit. 1.
v. 7. For [a Bishop] must be blameless, etc. These Titles being given upon such
special occasions unto Officers, they must undenyably be such Names and Titles
as are proper to them so long as they are Officers. It were an impeachment to
the wisdom of the Holy-Spirit, to say, that then it did impose such names upon
them, as they might lose before they lost their Office. We suppose our Brethren
will not say, that any are Preaching-Officers, who are neither Pastors,
Teachers, nor Bishops, or Overseers.

Now we argue thus:

Major Proposit. That Church only that is a man's flock, does or can he bear the
Relation or Office of a Pastor to. That Church only that is committed to ones
charge for teaching, does or can he bear the Relation or Office of a teacher
to. That Church only that is committed to a man's oversight, does or can he bear
the Relation or Office of a Bishop or Overseer to. All this appears from
those Relative names. You may as well say, a man is a father to that which is
none of his child, or a master to him who is none of his servant, as you may
say, a man is a Pastor to any that are not of his flock, or a Teacher to those
that are not committed to him to be taught, or a Bishop and Overseer to those
that are not under his oversight. So that if a man cease to have a flock,
then he must needs cease to be a Pastor: if he cease to have a Church to be
taught by him, then he cease to be a reacher by office: if he cease to have
any to be overseen by him, then he cease to be a Bishop or Overseer.

Minor propos. But only a particular Church is a man's flock, or is committed to
a man for teaching and oversight, and not the Universal Church.

Concl. Ergo, A man bears the relation or office of a Pastor, a Teacher, or a
Bishop or Overseer, only to a particular, and not to an Universal Church.

That only a particular Church is a man's flock, or is committed to a man for
teaching and oversight, and not the Universal Church; We suppose our Brethren
cannot deny: for in their Jus Divinum, page 143. they have these words. Though
we believe that every Minister is a Minister of the Universal Church, yet we
are far from thinking, that he is actually an Universal Minister. The Apostles
had the actual care of the Church Universal committed unto them, and they were
not fixed to any particular charge, but were Ministers alike of all the
Churches of Christ. But it is far otherwise with ordinary Ministers, they are
fixed to their particular congregations, where they are bound by Divine right
to reside, etc. So that according to the judgment of our Brethren, ordinary
officers, such as Pastors and Teachers are, have only the care of particular
Churches committed to them; their actual power is limited by Divine right to
these, and not extended to the Universal Church: they have no actual power to
perform Ministerial offices, or administer the Ordinances of Christ in any
Churches without a special call, but only in those particular Churches, where
they are fixed.

And that it is only a particular Church, that is a man's flock, or is committed
to him, for teaching and oversight, and not the Universal Church, we prove thus:

Because every Pastor, Teacher, or Overseer, is expressly commanded by Christ,
actually to feed, teach, and oversee [all] the flock that is committed to him
or them. Act. 20. verse. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves and to (not
only some, but) all the flock over the which the Holy-Spirit has made you
Overseers, to feed the Church of God. All that flock or Church, over which the
Holy-Spirit has made any man a Bishop or Overseer, he is commanded actually to
feed and take heed to all the Universal Church, so as he sins if he does
not. Ergo, The Universal Church is not that flock or Church, over which the
Holy-Spirit has made any man a Bishop or Overseer. If they were to feed and
take care of all the Universal Church, then their power were as extensive and
large as the Apostles; and then they must not fix and abide with any particular
Church, for that would hinder the feeding all the Universal Church; but they
must travel all the world over, that they may feed all the flock. And it is
impossible that any particular Officer should feed his particular Church, and
all the rest of the Universal Church also; and therefore all were under a
necessity of sinning against this command, if that were the flock intended.

The same Argument holds as well for Pastors and Teachers, for they are the
same Officers under different names. The Pastors work is to feed all the flock,
and he is plainly intended in that Text. And all that Church which is committed
to any man for Teaching, he is commanded to Teach, and he is unfaithful in his
trust, if he does it not. And seeing it cannot be the Universal Church, hence
undenyably, its only a particular Church that is a man's flock, or that is
committed to him for Teaching and oversight.

The Argument may run thus: That Church only that a man is a Pastor, or
Teacher, a Bishop or Overseer to, does he stand in the relation of an officer
to: the Names and Titles of Officers do evidence this.

But it is only a particular Church that a man is a Pastor or Teacher, a Bishop
or Overseer to. Act. 20. 28. and not an Universal Church:

Ergo, It is only a particular Church that a man does stand in the relation of
an officer to, und not an Universal Church.

Object. If any should object and say, If a man for a time be destitute of a
place, or be fixed to no particular Church, yet preaches constantly in one
place or other, may not that name of office [a Teacher] be properly applied to
him, seeing he does reach, and some are taught by him?

Ans. 1. In a general sense he may be called a Teacher, if any be taught by
him; but if the word Teacher be taken in a special sense, to express Office, in
that sense we deny he may be called a Teacher. Men are not Teachers by Office,
to all that are taught by them. As for example, Our Brethren often urge it,
that ordinary teachers by office must be [sent] Romans 10. 15. How shall they
preach except they be [sont?] and the word for sent, is (...). and therefore in
a general sense they must say, that ordinary Officers, as Pastors and Teachers,
are [Apostles] because Apostle signifies one sent. Yet Pastors and Teachers
are not Apostles by office; the Office of the Apostles, is distinct from the
office of Pastors and Teachers; and in this special sense the name of Apostles
is to be denied them.

So they are not Teachers by Office to all that they may preach to, and may be
taught by them. If a man preaches to Heathens and Indians, though they retain
heathenish principles still, and will not receive instruction, yet in respect
of his teaching, they are said to be taught; and such as stumble at the word
are said to be taught, Matthew. 13. ver. 54. He (i. e. Jesus) taught them: and
yet ver. 57. They were offended in him. But a man is not a teacher by office
unto such Hearhens, Indians, and opposers: for without some knowledge or
profession of Christ, our Brethren will not account them members of the
Universal Church; and if they will say they stand in the relation of officers
to such, then they must assert that they have a treble relation as officers;
one to a particular Church, another to an Universal Church, and a third to the
World, or to Heathens and Indians, who are of no Church of Christ; or else they
must say, that they preach as officers to those they are no officers to: and it
will hardly be proved, that they are officers to the world, or to any out of
the Church.

2. Only that Church which a man is set over, has taken the charge of, is
committed to him for teaching, is he a teacher by office unto: if he preaches
in an hundred places, and thousands receive instruction, and in that sense are
taught by him, yet we deny that he stands in relation to any of these as a
teacher by office, unless as a Church they be committed to him for teaching.

For it is [setting over, taking the charge of, and the committing a Church to
the care of such a person, for such and such ends] which gives being to
office, or makes one an officer. It Is the committing of a flock to such a
person for feeding, or his taking charge of it, that only makes him a
[Pastor.] It is the setting one over a flock, or Church for oversight, that
only makes him [a Bishop or Overseer:] and hence Act. 20. ver. 28. The flock
[over which] the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. They are limited in their
oversight unto the particular flock, and the nature of their of their office is
expressed, by their being over the flock for that end.

For this, see more in our description of office, in the formal cause of it;
and in our Arguments to prove that election gives the Essence to the call to
Office.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is given a description of Office, and the several parts of it are
proved from Scripture, and some Conclusions drawn from the whole precedent
discourse.

FRom all which has been laid down, we may gather this description of Office.

Office, is a spiritual Relation between a particular Church of Christ, and a
person rightly what Office is.
qualified, founded upon a special and regular call.

Or more particularly.

Office, is a spiritual Relation, arising upon a regular Election on the
Churches part, and Acceptance on his part who is Elected, by which the Lord
commits a particular Church to his charge, or sets him over it, for the
work of the Gospel, or employment of the Ministry.

In these Descriptions there is,

1. The general Nature of Office: It is a Relation; and for its property, it is
a spiritual Relation, to distinguish it from natural and civil Relations. The
relative names by which the Gospel expresses office, as Pastor and Teacher,
do prove it to be a Relation.

2. The terms of the Relation, the Relate and the Correlate. The Relate is a
person rightly qualified, i. e. qualified according to Gospel rules. 1 Timothy 3.
v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A Bishop must blameless, the husband of one wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitallity, apt to teach, etc.
Tit. 1. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Correlate is a particular Church of Christ. Act.
20. 17. The Elders of the Church. Act. 14. 23. Rev. 2. 1. Unto the Angel [of
the Church.] And ver. 8, 12, 18. Rev. 3. ver. 1, 7, 14. They are Officers to
the Churches of Christ, not to the world, nor to civil Societies or Assemblies;
and to particular Churches, as the distinguishing each from other shows. Rev.
2. and 3.

3. The efficient causes. The principal efficient cause is the Lord, he
instituted and appointed officers to be in the Churches: It is the Lord that
gives qualifications suitable to office. It is the Lord that gives in his word
rules and directions to be observed in the constitution of officers. 1 Timothy 3.
ver. 1, 2, 3. etc. Act. 6. And when there is a due observation of those Divine
rules, then the Lord makes the officer. Act. 20. 28. The instrumental causes
are [the flock or Church, and the person qualified:] It is by the intervention,
that the relation is introduced. The Lord makes use of them in the making
officers, or the Lord does make officers by some acts put forth by these. Act.
6. 5. Act. 14. 23. 1 Timothy 3. 1.

4. The formal cause of office, [a special and regular call; or, the Lords
committing of a flock, or Church of Christ to a man's charge, and setting him
over, by election on the Churches part, and acceptance on his part who is
elected.] We term it [a special call] to difference it from the call which
officers may have to lay out their gifts occasionally amongst those that are no
Church, or they no officers to; and to distinguish it from the call that gifted
Brethren may have to preach; which calls are common, we term it [a regular call]
because it is to be made according to Gospel-rules.

The external or outward call (which is to be so regulated) consists in
election with acceptance. A Church is to choose its officers. Act. 6. ver. 5.
They chose Stephen. An inferior officer, a Deacon, must be chosen; much more is
a free choice necessary to a higher officer, who is to take care of Souls. Act.
14. 23. In every Church they chose them Elders. Let any prove that the Gospel
allows any man to take the charge of a Church by compulsion, or whether the
people will or no. And a Church cannot compel or force a man to be over it, or
to be a Pastor to it, without his free consent; and therefore acceptance on
his part is necessary to the introduction of the Relation. 1 Timothy 3. 1. If a
man [desire] the Office of a Bishop. An inclination or disposition to the
office, is to accompany an entrance upon it. The doing the work of office would
be by constraint, and not willingly; contrary to 1 Pet. 5. 2. if the
undertaking that work were not with free consent. By election the Church
offers to commit it self unto his charge who is elected: By his acceptance,
he actually takes the charge of that Church. I Gospel-rules be observed in
both, then the Lord does set him over it. The Lords committing of a flock or
Church to a man's charge, or setting him over it for the work of the Ministry,
is the formal cause of office, or that which gives being to it: this is the
specificating distinguishing thing of an officer from no officer. For duty is
commanded from a man upon such a setting over a flock, as from an officer, he
is to feed and take heed to all the flock or Church that he is over. Act. 20.
28. Take heed -- to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers, to feed the Church of God, etc. And that Church is commanded duty
toward him that is over it, as toward an officer. Hebr. 13 ver. 7, 17. Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your Souls, as they that must give account, etc. That which is not committed to
a man's charge, he is not to give an account for; and therefore it is here
intimated, that he which is over a flock, has the charge of it committed to
him; the flock ought to obey and submit to him as an officer: which could not
be, if setting over or giving the charge of a flock, did not give being to the
Relation or office. That the setting over is by Election with acceptance, we
shall afterward demonstrate more fully.

5. The final cause, or the end of office, [the work of the Gospel, or
employment of the Ministry] i. e. in that Church he is set over, for he does
not act as an officer to any other. The Apostle gives this as the end of
office-gifts, Ephesians. 4. ver. 11. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for what end? ver. 12. For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edisying of the
body of Christ, etc. And thus we have shown what office is.

From what has been already cleared, we might draw many conclusions; take two.

Conclus. 1. Hence it follows, That there is no difference between that which
makes a man [a Minister, a Pastor, a Shepheard] and that which makes a man
[their Minister, their Pastor, their Shepherd;] and so that distinction so
often repeated by our Brethren, and so often called in for their relief, will
lend them no help at all, being a distinction without a difference. For we have
proved, that a man is an officer to a particular Church only, and therefore
that which makes him an officer, a Pastor, makes him their Officer, their
Pastor, as the same that makes a man an husband, or a woman a wife, does make
him her husband, and make her his wife. We would not overstretch the
similitude, to say that the Relation between an officer and a Church, does in
all things agree to that between man and wife; but in this it may agree, and
does illustrate very fitly.

Conclus. 2. Hence it follows undenyably, That the distinction between
preaching and office, and ex dono, by office and by gift, is Scriptural, or
founded on Scripture: for if a man be a Pastor or officer only to a particular
Church, then if he preaches to any other Church but that he is an officer to,
or to any other persons but of that Church, he preaches to them but ex dono,
by gift, not as an officer to them. Now our Brethren cannot deny the lawfulness
of preaching to those that are not of a man's particular Church; preaching is a
special means for the conversion of Heathens, and Indians, etc. 1 Corin. 14.
24. If all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not. -- So that
unbeleevers, and such as are no Church Members may be permitted to come into
Church-meetings, to hear the Gospel preached. And it is lawful in some cases,
to go and Preach to unbeleevers, when they do not come to Church-meetings. Act
16. 13, 16. and 11. ver. 19, 20, 21. Yet they are no officers to such
unbeleevers, they have not the charge of such unbeleevers souls committed to
them, they are not over them in the Lord; they cannot as officers exercise
Church Government toward unbeleevers, that are no Church Members: they are not
their flock, for then they might do it: and therefore in preaching to Heathens,
Indians, -- they do not act as officers, but merely as in the capacity of
gifted brethren; and this leads us unto that great question, about the
preaching of gifted Brethren.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein the Question is stated about the Preaching of Gifted-men, and several
things propounded for the clearing the state of it.

The Question is this,

WHether some men who are not ordained Quest.
Officers may preach? Or, whether persons who have preaching gifts and graces,
or are apt to teach, may ordinarily exercise those gifts in Public Assemblies,
though they be not ordained Officers?

Before we come to the determination of this question, we shall premise four
things.

1. That the question is not, Whether every Christian may publicly preach?
But, whether some not in office, who have such eminent gifts and graces, as
render them apt to teach, may not exercise those gifts in a way of Preaching?
That objection which our Brethren bring from 1 Corin. 12. 29. touches not us;
for many Christians have not such gifts, and so all are not Prophets, all are
not Teachers: Our inquiry is not, whether every believer, but whether those
believers who have such gifts and qualifications as the Gospel (1 Timothy 3. ver.
1, 2, 3.) requires preachers should have, may preach?

2. Neither is the question, Whether Ordination be necessary for an officer. We
grant that when a man undertaketh to be an officer to, or takes the charge of
a Church of Christ, there ought to be ordination, before the exercise of his
Office. Act. 6. 6.

Our question is, Whether a man who has grace and such gifts as render him apt
to teach, may exercise those gifts ordinarily or frequently without Ordination,
he being no Officer to any Church of Christ?

3. Neither is the question, Whether any man that thinks himself gifted may
preach? If some think themselves gifted who are not, and thereupon preach, we
plead not for them. But if a man be really gifted as the Lord requires
officers should be, 1 Timothy 3. ver. 1, 2, 3. If really he be apt to teach, etc.
Our question is, Whether he may not publicly do it, though he be not ordained?

It is another question, Who shall judge of his gifts? Yet if a man be judged
able by those who are able to judge, or by those that are appointed by Christ
to judge of his gifts, we apprehend he may preach. And the Apostles referred it
to the Church to judge of their gifts and qualifications who were to be
Deacons, Act. 6. ver. 3. Look ye out among you seven men of honest report,
full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom. There is not a fillable about any other
proving of them after; and the Church was required to look out men so
qualified; and therefore a Church of Christ is to judge of the gifts of its
Members. Deacons are to be proved, 1 Timothy 3. ver. 10. and it is by the Church,
Act. 6. ver. 2, 3. And though one that is really gifted for such a work (for
ought we know) may lawfully (especially in some cases) preach without such
approbation from a Church, or others who are able to judge of gifts; yet it may
be inexpedient, and sometimes it proves of ill consequence to others, and
uncomfortable to himself.

4. By preaching we understand, any publishing or declaring, opening or
applying Gospel truths to any persons for the uses and ends they serve to.
Sometimes the word for preaching is, (...), which signifies to tell good news,
or bring or publish glad tidings. Luke 16. ver. 16. The Kingdom of God [is
preached, (...)] Heb. 4. 2. Unto us was the Gospel preached. -- 1 Cor. 9. ver.
16. Though [I preach the Gospel] (...). And the same word is used for preaching
in many other Scriptures, and denotes a declaring or publishing Gospel Truths;
and hence it is so translated often, and that necessarily. Act. 13. ver. 32. We
declare unto you glad tidings. The word for [declare, is (...). Romans 10. ver.
15. How beautiful are the feet [of them that preach the Gospel] (...), and
bring glad tidings of good, (...). Here the same word is used, and signifies
to bring glad tidings. In the beginning of that verse another word is used for
preaching. Romans 10. ver. 15. How shall they preach, (...); and this word
signifies, to publish as Heralds or cryers do; it is explained twice in the
latter end of the same verse, why he is called a herald or crier, because he
publishes or tells glad tidings. So that to preach, is to declare or
publish, to open or apply Gospel Truths to any persons, whether publicly or
privately. Though a Herald or crier does deliver a matter in an open place, yet
that Metaphor may be uused, because preaching is by lively voice, and
frequently in a public place; yet it may be properly called preaching, though
it be in private. Act. 5. ver 42. Daily in the Temple, and in every house they
ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. Here is preaching not only
publicly in the Temple, but also privately in every house. Yea, Philip is said
to preach to one man. Act. 8. ver. 35. So that it is preaching, if the
Scriptures be opened or expounded to a particular person, as well as if it be
to a public Assembly. And therefore our Brethrens description of preaching is
faulty: They say, (Jus Divinum page 77.) By preaching they understand an
authoritative explication and application of Scripture, for exhortation,
edification and comfort, to a Congregation met together for the solemn worship
of God, in the stead and place of Christ. They say, The subject is the word,
the work the explication and application of this word. Nehem. 8. 8. 2 Timothy 2.
15. The end is, the exhortation, edification and comfort of the Church; for
which they allege, 1 Corin. 14. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 16. The object, a Congregation
met together for the solemn worship of God; for which they allege, 1 Corin.
14. ver. 23. They say, The word is to be preached to infidels. Matthew. 28. Mar.
16. But the principal object of this work is the Church. 1 Corin. 14. 22. 1
Corin. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 12. The manner of doing this work,

1. Authoritatively, not Magisterially, as lords of faith; but Ministerially,
as being over the Church in the Lord. 1 These. 5. 12. Tit. 2. 15.

1. In the stead and place of Christ. 2 Corin. 5. 20. Luke 10. 16.

From this description, they give us five distinctions, wherein they grant us
several things. We say,

1. That place, 1 Corin. 14. will serve for us to prove a gift of prophesying
to be still continuing, as well as it will serve to prove their description of
preaching. If prophesying were an extraordinary gift, as they say (page 97.
98.) it was, why then do they allege it to prove the way of that standing
ordinance of preaching?

2. It is properly preaching, to publish, declare, and open Gospel Truths,
though there be not a Church or congregation for the object of it; or though
the congregation be not met for the solemn worship of God. Act. 8. ver. 35.
Philip preached unto [him] Jesus. Here is preaching, and yet no congregation,
but only a single person for the object of it. So Act. 5. ver. 42. And it is
properly preaching, when Gospel Truths are published, opened, and declared to a
Congregation, though it be not met for the solemn worship of God, but for
other, even contrary ends. Act. 14. 15. We also are men of like passions with
you, [and preach unto you] that ye should turn from these vanities unto the
living God. Paul and Barnabas are said to preach unto those that met for
Idolatrous ends, not for the solemn worship of God. So Act. 17. ver. 16, 18,
22, 23, etc. While Paul waited -- at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him,
when he saw the City wholly given to idolatry. and v. 18. [He preached] unto
them Jesus. -- And his sermon we have epitomized, ver. 22, 23, etc. Here was
preaching, and yet it was to an idolatrous Assembly; so that if the work be
performed (which our Brethren say, is the explication and application of the
word) whoever be the objects of it, yet it is preaching; and therefore their
third, fourth, and fifth distinctions (Jus Divin. page 79.) will make against
them. They grant that a General may give an exhortation in the head of an Army,
and a Judge on a Bench, from the examples of Joab, 2 Samuel 10. Of Abijah, 2 Chronicles. 13. Of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 20. Joshua, Chap. 23. 24. But they say,
there is a vast difference between this action and the work of the Ministry;
for neither is the object of it a Congregation sacred, but merely civil;
neither is the authority Ecclesiastical and from Christ, but merely political.
We have proved, that it is properly preaching, if the work be done for its
proper end, though it be not a congregation that is the object of it, nor a
congregation sacred, but profane and idolatrous. A Church is a proper object of
preaching, but not the peculiar or only object thereof: for by their own grant,
Infidels are to be preached to, Matthew. 28. 19. Mar. 16. 15. And such a good end
of meeting together, viz. solemnly to worship God, may help to render the
action of the hearer good; but it does not make the action of the Speaker,
Preaching. As for a Judge on a Bench, it is but a political-civil action that
he is about; and if he mentions some Scriptures, it is but to qualify a
natural or civil action Christianly; and this may hinder that from being
preached, not the objects being a congregation merely civil. But if a General
of an Army or any other man does take an opportunity to open and apply
Scriptures, or declare Gospeltruths, not for a civil end chiefly, but for the
instruction and edification of those he speaks to, or to acquaint them with
the mind and will of Christ; and this not in an intermixed way, to qualify civil
actions; how this can be denied to be preaching, we know not: And therefore let
our Brethren consider, whether their own grant from those Scriptures, will not
speak for the preaching of gifted men?

The same we say to their fourth distinction; (Jus Divin. page 79.) they
distinguish between Divinity-exercises in the Schools and University, and the
preaching of the word: they say, these are not performed to a congregation met
together for the solemn worship of God, they are rather reducible to the work
of Schoolmasters instructing their Scholars, and Scholars rendering account to
their Masters, then Ministerial preaching.

We have proved that if such a solemn action, as the declaring, opening and
applying of Gospel Truths be performed for its proper ends; it is preaching,
though the congregation be met together for irreligious and wicked ends, and
did not meet for the solemn worship of God. Act. 14. 15. Act. 17. ver. 16, 18,
etc. and therefore it must needs be preaching, when the object is, an assembly
met for lawful ends; and though the trial of gifts, and the persons rendering an
account of their proficiency in such studies, may be subordinate ends of such
actions in the University, yet the edification of the hearers ought to be the
main and principal end of Divinity-Lectutes, or common placing. We know no
Gospel-rule for such actions, without this as the chief end.

3. By our Brethrens grant (we suppose) it will be lawful for gifted men to
preach charitatively. They distinguish (Jus Divin. page 78, 80.) between a
private brotherly teaching, admonition, exhortation of one another; and an
authoritative public teaching. The first (they say) is grounded on charity,
and is the common duty of all Christians, by the royal Law of Love, and
prescribed to all, even to women, by the law of God, under pain of sin. -- Also
they distinguish between the teaching of Parents and Masters in their families,
and Schoolmasters, and Ministerial Preaching; the former they exhort even
Mothers unto; but the Ministerial teaching they deny them. They also
distinguish between the act of Members in any sacred or civil Assembly,
debating, counselling, and admonishing one another out of the word of God; and
the preaching of the word: because (they say) this action of theirs towords one
another is not authoritative, but merely brotherly; is rather (...), a
Christian conference, then Preaching, and no other then private Christians met
together by mutual consent may perform.

By all this it appears, that it is only an authoritative public Ministerial
teaching that their arguments are brought to deny unto men not ordained: for
(Jus Divinum, page 78.) they use these words, [It is authoritative teaching
only which we deny.] Ministerial actings, themselves oppose to Magisterial;
Ministry is no more but service: but here they seem to oppose Ministerial
teaching, unto parental domestical teaching; and yet they know there is
Ministration in a parents teaching his children, or a Master his servants; this
is service to Christ, as well as more public preaching. But take Ministerial
teaching in a special sense, for the public dispensation of the word. The
Question is, What they intend by Authoritative Teaching?

1 [Authority] is taken sometimes for a right or lawful power, enabling to do
some public work; as Luke 20. ver. 2. Tell us by what [authority] do thou
these things? or, who is he that gave thee this [Authority;] i. e. by what
right, or lawful power, do thou these things? In this sense we think they
cannot take it here, because in their description, they reduce it unto the
manner of performing the work, and that presupposes a person authorized, and
so does the Scripture they allege for it. Tit. 2. 15. The person was empowered
before he was enjoined to rebuke in this manner; viz. with all command, or as
they call it Authoritatively. And they need not prove it; for it is granted,
that none may preach, but those that have a right and lawful power to do it;
but then the question is, Who has that right and lawful power to preach? We
conclude therefore, that this is not that which they intend by Authoritative
teaching.

2. [Authority] is taken for that Majesty, gravity, fervor, and efficacy that
is to attend the dispensation of the Gospel in him that speaks; as Mark 1.
ver. 22. He taught them as one that had [authority] and not as the Scribes.
Here the manner of Christ's teaching is set forth, it was with [authority] i. e.
with such gravity, life, and zeal, as it did penetrate and come home to the
consciences of the hearers: and [not as the Scribes] i. e. not coldly,
slightly, or doubtingly. That place which they allege for authoritative
teaching, partly intends this. Tit. 2. ver. 15. These things speak and
exhort, and rebuke with all authority, or command, i. e. such as are
refractory, rebuke them with such severity, gravity, zeal and fervency, as if
it be possible may render the word convincing to their consciences. We suppose
our Brethren do not take [authoritative-teaching] in this sense neither; for
undoubtedly all that preach, are to do it with life and zeal, and to use
utmost endeavors that the Gospel may come in power to the hearts of those they
speak to, that so they may not labor in vain. They will not allow gifted
Brethren to Preach in a contrary manner to this.

3. But [Authority] is taken by some for that power which an Officer has over
those that he bears Office to; and because our Brethren in their
aforementioned distinctions do oppose it unto, and difference it from Brotherly
Charitative Teaching, therefore we judge that they take Authoritative teaching,
in this sense, viz. for the preaching as Officers, and the exercise of
Office-power therein. And those two Scriptures which they allege to prove
Authoritative teaching, do both of them speak of preaching Office-wise; as 1
These. 5. 12. Only Officers were over the Church of the Thessalonians in the
Lord; and therefore none but Officers could so admonish the Church: but we
assert that gifted Members may admonish a Church in a Brotherly way, though not
as over it in the Lord. So Titus 2. 15. This is not only a direction given to
Titus an Officer, but also about a special act, wherein he was to put forth
Office-power, viz. in the case of rebukes, When any Church Members were
obstinate, he is directed how to exercise his Office then, [Rebuke] not only in
a Brotherly way, but as over them in the Lord [with command] yea, [with all
command.] Churchmembers are obliged to hearken unto admonitions or just rebukes
from the mouth of any brother. Matthew. 18. 15. But they are under special and
double obligations to hearken unto admonition and just rebukes from the mouth
of their Officers, because else they are guilty of contemning another Ordinance
of Christ, viz. Officerelation; it becomes a sin, not only against him as a
Brother, but as an Officer; it is an offense not only against the relation of
Brotherhood, but against a higher relation, of Office. There is a breaking of
their own engagements which they made in committing themselves to his charge;
it is against that command, Hebr. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you,
and submit your selves. So that Officers may give special Commands in the name
of Christ, to those they bear Office unto, that they obey the will of Christ;
and may rebuke them with all command for disobedience.

An Officer of one Congregation cannot (by any Gospel-rule that yet we find)
either give such commands or rebukes, to the Members of another Church. He may
in a Brotherly way, or Charitatively preach on Lecture-dayes, or Lords days to
another Congregation, and tell the Members of it, what Christ has commanded
from them, and urge duty upon the penalty of sinning against God, tell them of
the danger of neglecting duty, or rebuke them in a Brotherly way; but not with
all command, not Office-wise, because he is not over them in the Lord, for he
cannot orderly be an Officer to many Churches: as a man may tell his neighbors
child of its disobedience to the parents, or his servant of disobedience to
his Master; and a gifted man may for a time, upon request, or charitatively,
teach all the Scholars, in the Schoolmasters absence; yet not as being over
the child, or servant, or School, not as having the charge of them; only the
Parents, or Master, or Schoolmaster do command, or rebuke authoritatively, as
being set over them.

Now, if our Brethren take Authoritative Preaching in the sense of the
Scriptures they allege to prove it by, as we suppose they do; then their
third Proposition, viz. That none may take upon him the Office of the Ministry
without a call, and that none may do the work of the Ministry (authoritatively,
i. e. Office-wise) without Ordination; and all their Arguments to prove it (if
they prove no more then they bring them for) may be granted, and yet they have
gained nothing against the preaching of gifted men without Ordination. For we
may say, though gifted men may not preach in public Assemblies, or Churches
authoritatively, i. e. Officewise, as being over them in the Lord; yet they
have authority, i. e. a right and lawful power from Christ, Charitatively to
preach in public Assemblies. In a Brotherly way, they may with life, fervor,
and zeal exhort to duty, and show the danger of neglecting it; and rebuke for
sin, not as being over them, but as being desirous of their eternal good; and
Officers out of their own Churches can do no more.

Yet because our Brethren would (as by some expressions we gather) be
understood to speak against all preaching of gifted men (in ordinary cases)
without Ordination, therefore we shall give some grounds for it, and answer
such Arguments as they bring against it.

CHAP. V.
Wherein two Arguments are urged, proving the lawfulness of the Preaching of
Gifted Brethren, though not ordained.

Our assertion is,

THat some men, who are not Ordained Officers, may preach: Or,

That persons who have Preaching gifts and Graces, or are apt to teach, may
ordinarily exercise those gifts in public Assemblies, though they be not
ordained Officers.

This appears by these Arguments.

Argum. 1. From the Antecedaneousness of Election to Ordination.

If Election from a Church ought by Gospel Order to precede, or go before
Ordination of Officers; then persons not ordained may ordinarily preach.

But Election ought by Gospel Order to precede, or go before Ordination of
Officers:

Ergo, Persons not ordained may ordinarily preach.

The consequence of the Major is cleared thus: Because good experience that a
man is gifted for Office, and that his gifts are suitable to that Church, is so
necessary as antecedent to Election, that it cannot be grounded or regular
without it. A Church cannot in faith, elect or choose a man, and commit their
souls to his charge for teaching and oversight, if they have not grounds to
persuade them that he is gifted, and qualified as Christ requires Officers
should be. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc. and that his gifts are suitable, and so like to
be very profitable and advantageous to their souls which chose him. A knowledge
of their having suitable qualifications, is prerequired unto a Churches choosing
of Deacons, Act. 6. v. 3. much more is it necessary unto a Churches choosing one
unto a higher Office, to take care of, and feed their souls. And because many
that are otherwise eminently gifted, yet are not found able to speak publicly
unto edification; hence it is impossible to gain a knowledge of a man's being
endued with suitable qualifications, without a frequent and ordinary exercise of
gifts in a way of preaching: a little time will not discover it. Therefore an
ordinary preaching is pre-requisite unto Election; and so if Election must go
before Ordination, then it necessarily follows, that some men not ordained
may preach.

The Minor is proved, Act. 6. ver. 5, 6. They chose Stephen, -- ver. 6. Whom
they set before the Apostles; and when they had prayed, they laid their hands
on them. The Church first chooses, before they are ordained. Now it is Mr.
Collings Argument, (Vind. page 77.) As the Apostles ordained Gospel-preachers,
so they ought to be ordained. But they used ordination after Election; and
therefore so it must be used. And it is granted by Mr. Collings and others
(Vind. page 18) that Ordination is, but Actus ultimus, the last and perfective
Act. And we desire one Scripture to prove Ordination to Office, as antecedent
to Election, or without it. If in any case Ordination might go before Election,
then either a man might be an Officer to some particular Church without their
choosing him; whereas themselves grant, (page 155.) that it is their choice,
that makes one their Minister, their Pastor, their Shepherd: Or else he might
be an Officer, and yet have no particular Church that he bears Office to; and
how absurd is it to say, that a man is a Church Officer to no Church: Or that a
man is an Officer to an Universal Church, when yet he is no Officer to any
particular Church!

Neither will their distinction of habitual and actual Officers, salve this
sore; for if a man preaches to the Heathen people, as now in New England
(which case themselves put, Jus Divin. page 149.) either he preaches not as an
Officer, but as a gifted Brother, empowered by Christ to do such a work; or
else he must be an actual Officer to no Church; for he actually preaches to
them, though they remain all of them unconverted and no Church.

Argum. 2. From Gospel-Commands.

All that are required by Gospel-commands to Preach, they may and ought to
preach; because else they sin in breaking those Gospel-Commands that require it
of them. But some men who are not ordained Officers, are required by
Gospel-Commands to preach.

Ergo, Some men who are not ordained Officers, may and ought to preach.

The Major is undeniable; for no man may sin, or disobey any Gospel-Commands.

The Minor we prove thus.

All that have preaching gifts and Graces, or are apt to teach, are required by
Gospel-commands to preach. But some men who are not ordained Officers, have
preaching gifts and graces, or are apt to Teach. Ergo, Some men who are not
ordained Officers, are required by Gospel-Commands to preach. The Minor is
undeniable, viz. That some men who are not ordained Officers, have preaching
gifts, or are apt to Teach. For it is a qualification pre-required to a man's
being an Officer, that he be apt to Teach. 1 Timothy 3. ver. 2. A Bishop then must
be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given
to hospitality [apt to Teach.] Tit. 1. ver. 9. None have a ground to Elect and
Ordain any, unless they be apt to Teach, before they choose or ordain them; and
therefore many not ordained have preaching gifts. And for Grace, it is as
unquestionable.

The Major, viz. That all who have preaching gifts and Graces, or are apt to
teach, are required by Gospel-Commands to preach, we shall prove from 1 Pet. 4.
10, 11. Heb. 10. ver. 25. The former we shall insist upon most, viz. 1 Pet. 4.
ver. 10, 11. As every man has received a gift, even so Minister the same one
to another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any man speak,
let him speak as the Oracles of God. If any man Minister, let him do it as of
the ability which God gives, etc. Where observe,

1. Gods communication of gifts to the Saints. As every man has received a
[gift] i. e. any spiritual gift; he speaks indefinitely, and so it may
include every gift, whether public or private. It is not limited to one gift,
though it be expressed in the singular number, but may extend to all those
gifts which the Lord conferreth on his people; as 1 Corin. 11. ver. 28. it is
spoken in the singular number, Let [a man] examine himself, and so let him eat
of that Bread. -- [A man] i. e. every man who approaches to God in that
Ordinance, let him examine himself: So [a gift] i. e. any spiritual gift, which
he has received from above, let him use it.

2. There is particularizing of that special gift of speaking to others
edification, in the things of Christ. 1 Pet. 4. ver. 11. If any man [speaketh]
i. e. has a gift to speak a word of exhortation unto others to edification,
[Let him speak, as the Oracles of God] i. e. with reverence, zeal,
faithfulness, humility, as it becomes the word of the Lord to be spoken. The
nature of this direction how to speak, viz. as the Oracles of God, and the
reference this has to the foregoing verse, do argue, that it is not common
speaking, but some special gift of Scripture-interpretation that is intended;
and so it is usually carried by Interpreters. And this aptness to teach, being
so suddenly mentioned, or following immediately after, and agreeing so sutably
to what is expressed ver. 10. hence this 11. verse cannot rationally be denied
to have a special relation to, and dependence upon verse 10. but must be
concluded to be an explication, how one particular gift is to be laid out,
which is included in that general, viz. how those that have a preaching gift
ought to use it.

3. There is a Divine Command to exercise such gifts as are received: [As]
every man has received a gift, so Minister the same one to another. -- Every
believer has some gift or other, and that gift which the Lord has bestowed in
an eminent way, that is he under a special obligation, to lay out for the Lord.
Romans 12. 6, 7. There are different Gifts: one man excels in one gift,
another excels in another gift; and that way which a man's gifts especially
lies, he is especially to endeavor the promoting of the interest of Christ, in
the good of others; in that degree that any gift is afforded, in that measure
is he to lay it out, [As] he has received, so he is to Minister; he that has
received much, of him will much be required. Such as a man's gift is, such his
Ministration ought to be. Of what nature soever the gifts be, such the use of
them must be; private gifts are to be used privately, and public gifts (i. e.
such as are fit for public use) publicly; else a man does not Minister a
gift, as he has received it; which this Text commands. If public gifts be
exercised only in a private way, that man does not give as he has received:
others are without that benefit which they might have by them.

4. This command is Universal, i. e. to all that have such gifts. 1 Pet. 4. 10.
As [every man] has received a gift. -- and the gift of preaching is instanced
in ver. 11. and therefore every man that has that gift of
Scripture-interpretation, is required to Minister unto others. We do not say,
that every Christian is to preach; this Text limiteth the note of Universality
unto such as have a gift that way: many Christians have not a gift to speak
publicly unto edification; but we say it holds out thus much, that every man
who has that gift, is to Minister with it. If a Father commands every child
who has ability to work, and then directs how to do some particular work;
it is undoubted he intends that every child who has ability to do that
work, should act in it; and that child which is able, and does not set about
that work, disobeyeth his father, unless his father gives him a particular
dispensation or prohibition, which the other have not. Now the Lord commands
that [every Saint] or Steward of his manifold grace, who has received a gift,
should Minister with it unto others, ver. 10. and particularly directs, how
they which have a gift to speak profitably unto others, should use that gift:
ver. 11. He that speaks, as the Oracles of God. -- and therefore it is to be
concluded, he intends that every one who is a Steward of his manifold Grace,
and has received such a gift, should Minister with it unto others; and he
sins if he does not, unless a particular prohibition or dispensation be
given him, which others have not.

Here is a general rule requiring every gifted man to preach, and therefore
unless some particular Scriptures can be shown which give a prohibition, or do
forbid all un-ordained men's preaching, every gifted man ought to preach. We do
not say barely thus: The preaching of gifted men is nowhere forbidden in the
word of God: Ergo, It is lawful. But we say, By a general command of God, every
gifted man is required to preach: Ergo, Every gifted man who is not forbidden
preaching by some particular word of God, ought to preach; because else he
sins in breaking that general command. And in regard the command is not here
annexed to Office, but to gifts; it is not said, every man that has received
an Office; but, every man that has received a gift, let him Minister; and this
preaching gift is particularized, ver, 11. and seeing there are many men who
are no Officers, nor in an immediate capacity to be ordained unto Office-work
(because they are not chosen to it by any Church) who yet are eminently gifted,
and apt to teach; hence many not ordained to Office, may and ought to Preach.

Object. 1. Is not this Text chiefly to be understood of giving of Alms? and
is not the Mr. Collings, p. 57.
gift spoken of this worlds goods?

Answ. 1. If it be meant chiefly of Alms, then not chiefly of Office: if this
worlds goods be the gift, then Office is not the gift; and then it is the
calling of any Christian, who has the gift, to Minister with it; and so the
objector fights with himself.

2. Then any Christian who has this worlds goods may properly be called a
Steward; and so, that it must be administered as Stewards, is no Argument that
Office is intended, as he would make it.

3. The Ministering of that gift, is to be as Stewards, not of this worlds
goods, but of the Grace of God; yea, as Stewards, not of one Grace only, viz.
Charity; but of the manifold Grace of God. 1 Pet. 4. 10. The Ministration is to
be of the gift which they are Stewards of, and that is said to be manifold. In
giving of Alms they may show themselves to be good Stewards of this worlds
goods; but not of the manifold grace of God: and therefore giving of Alms
cannot be chiefly intended.

4. It is added, ver. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of
God. And therefore it cannot be meant chiefly of Alms; but the gift of
preaching is declared to be one of those manifold gifts, which every man that
has, is to Minister unto others.

Object. 2. But here is not only a liberty granted, but a duty enjoined, so
that by this Text (if it were to the purpose) gifted persons were Mr. Collings.
pa. 57.
bound to preach, and that without Election and calling; for the Churches
neglect of their duty, must not make him neglect his.

Answ. 1. We grant it is the duty of gifted persons to preach, and that this
Text holds out so much. Yet,

2. It is not here determined either when or where gifted persons ought to
preach. Here is power given to gifted persons to Preach; and therefore it is
lawful for them to do it: yea, it is commanded, and so they sin if they will
not do it. But other things must concur before the exercise of this power at
this time or in that place. This distinction our Brethren (Jus Divin. Minist.
page 144.) give us, and so we shall pay them with such coin, as they would have
us take. We distinguish (say they) between a Minister of Christ, and a Minister
of Christ in such a place; between the Office it self, and the ordinary
exercise of it, to such or such a people: so we distinguish betwixt the
preaching of a gifted person in such a place; between his power to exrcise his
gifts, and his power to exercise his gifts to such or such a people, or at such
a time. Suppose ordination did make an Officer, or a Minister, then all those
Gospel-Commands that require it of Officers, that they diligently and
constantly preach, they not only give a man, who is ordained, liberty; but
enjoin it as a duty, that, he preaches in this manner. But if this man either
by banishment, or the unjust rejection of a people, be put out of employment,
and be cast into some place, where his gifts are not desired; none gives him a
special call to exercise his gifts for a great while together: in such cases,
our Brethren will not say, that he has sinned or broken those Commands when he
would have preached, if others would have heard. So gifted persons are enjoined
to preach, yet if they be not called out, or desired to exercise their gifts a
great while together, they may not sin; and if other things do not concur to
open a door, or give an opportun y to preach at this time, or in this or that
place; their duty may not be neglected, or that command broken. Our Brethren
grant, that men ordained have not power to administer the Ordinances of Christ,
without a special call. Jus Divin. page 144.

Gifted persons have power to preach; and the Churches calling, or desiring
them to exercise their gifts, may be sufficient to give an opportunity to
preach; yea, the desire of a particular person sometimes may be enough, Act. 8.
34, 35. And the Eunuch answered Philip, and said, [I pray thee] of whom
speaks the Prophet this? of himself, or of some other man. Then Philip opened
his mouth, and began at the same Scripture, and [preached] unto him, Jesus. The
Eunuchs request [I pray thee -- ] was sufficient to give Philip an opportunity
to preach.

Yea, the desire even of an unbeleeving Magistrate in some cases may give
opportunity to exercise ones gifts in a way of preaching. Act. 13. ver. 7. The
Deputy of the Country Sergius Paulus a prudent man called for Barnabas and
Saul, and [desired] to hear the word of God. -- and ver. 12. Then the Deputy --
believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord. So Act. 13. ver. 15,
16. The rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and Brethren, if
ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. Then Paul stood up,
etc. The desire or call of a Magistrate or Minister; yea, the desire of the
people, as Act. 13. ver. 42, 44. may be call sufficient in some cases to
exercise a man's gifts in a way of preaching. But when a gifted person has no
such call to exercise his gifts, he does not sin in not preaching, though
possibly others may sin in not desiring him to preach.

3. In such cases there ought to be a waiting in the use of means to satisfy
the Church, before the exercise of gifts; though it be a duty in it self, and a
Church may sin in hindering a man from preaching, either in the Church or
elsewhere; yet at this or that time it may not be his duty to do it, until
other duties be done. It is his duty to use means to satisfy the Church, that
he may act in it without offense to that; and until this be done, we conceive
it is not immediately his duty, in case of a Churches dissatisfaction, about
his ability to preach.

Obj. 3. This will prove that women may preach; if every one that has gifts
may. Mr. Collings.


Ans. A particular exception is enough to restrain any general rule. Women are
expressly forbidden, and that is one limitation of this general rule. 1 Pet. 4.
10, 11. But let it be shown, where all men, not ordained, are forbidden
preaching: without such a particular exception, every gifted man may preach,
and find a warrant for it from that general rule. It Is said, Genesis 2. 16. The
Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of [every tree] of the garden thou may
freely eat. But will Mr. Collings say, That this will prove that Adam might (i.
e. lawfully) eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; because it is
said, [Of every tree?] -- does not the particular exception, v. 17. limit that
general rule, v. 16? It Is said, 1 Cor. 14. v. 31. Ye may [all] prophecy, --
will he therefore say, Women may prophecy in the Churches? and does not [all]
bring them in here, as much as it does, 1 Pet. 4. 10.? Every gifted man not
excepted by some particular rule, may preach.

Obj. 4. If all that have gifts and abilities to preach, may do it, then those
who are fitted with abilities to be Generals of an Army, or Captains, or
Parliamentmen, or Pleaders at the Bar, may do the work of Generals, Captains,
and Parliament Men, and plead at the Bar.

Answ. 1. Those that have abilities for civil or military employments, may
exercise those abilities, if a King or Supreme Governor does command them to
do it: He that has abilities to be a Captain, may do the work of a Captain, if
the General bids him. He may do the work of a General of an Army, or a
Parliament Man, or a Pleader at the Bar, (being fitted with abilities) if the
King, or those who are to appoint unto such works, do empower him thereunto.
Now, Christ the King of Saints, and the great Captain General of our Salvation,
who had all power in Heaven and Earth given unto him, he has commanded every
man that has grace, and is gifted, to preach; and therefore, every man who
has Grace, and is gifted, may Preach.

2. He that does the work of a General of an Army, assumeth an office in the
Army; the General is the chief Officer there. And he that does the work of a
Parliament Man, assumeth the office of a Magistrate: and so the Argument is
impertinent. We grant that Election and Ordination both, are necessary in Order
before the exercise of gifts Office-wise.

3. Our Argument is not taken from a general Rule only, but from a
particularizing of Preaching gifts therewith, when a general Command is given
to every man who has a gift, to minister with it unto others; and one gift is
particularly mentioned, then it is undouted, that every man who has that
particular gift ought to minister with it, unless he falls under some special
prohibition: and let our Brethren show any such prohibition, else their
consequence is not good. And let this always be observed; it is not Gifts, but
Christ (by Gospel-Rules) that warranteth and gives the Authority or power to
gifted persons to preach. Gifts do qualify and enable a person to the Act.
Christ by Gospel Rules warranteth the acting in that way. Gifts (with graces)
are declarative, that the person is warranted or authorized to Preach: Charity
binds to follow Gospel-Rules in the exercise of gifts for the good of others.

Obj. 5. Every one is to use his gift with respect to the gift it self, and to
his place and calling, and no otherwise.

These spiritual gifts are to be exercised by every one in his own Sphere, (Jus
Divinum, page 102.) by private persons, privately; by those that are in Office,
publicly, and in the Congregation.

Aquila and Priscilla, private persons, yet of eminent gifts (insomuch as they
knew the way of Christ more perfectly then Apollos himself --) kept their own
place; they as gifted Christians did not undertake to preach publicly, but
took him to them, and privately expounded to him the way of God more perfectly,
Act. 18. This is a notable pattern for private Christians, even of the highest
form to walk by; in this way, that they may find employment for all their
gifts. Those women whom the Apostle honors with the Title of Laborers with
him in the Gospel, Phil. 4. 3. they labored not by public preaching, for this
the Apostle permits not to women, 1 Timothy 2. but by private Advertisements and
Admonitions as opportunities were administrd.

Therefore it follows not, that because all gifts are to be improved, therefore
a gifted Brother may preach: for, first, there are other ways of making use of
our most excellent gifts, then by preaching only; and secondly, it is required
in him that will preach warrantably; not only that he be fitted for the work;
but that he be appointed to the Office of the ministry, etc.

Answ. 1. The third Answer to the foregoing Objection may serve here also; if
it will not follow, that because all gifts are to be improved, therefore a
gifted Brother may preach; yet it will follow, that because every man is to
minister unto others, that gift he has received, and the gift of preaching is
particularized: therefore every man who has that gift, is to minister with it,
i. e. is to preach; and that is our Argument, from 1 Pet. 4. v. 10, 11.

2. The Examples of Aquila and Priscilla do not at all deny the lawfulness of
any gifted man's preaching publicly. Because they did this privately; therefore
they might not preach publicly: it does not follow. The Apostles preached
privated, in every house, Act. 5. v. 42. but it did not follow, that therefore
they might not preach publicly: for, in the same verse they are said to teach
in the Temple also. And as to the case alleged:

1. It is not determined whether Aquila had preaching gifts, or were apt to
teach publicly or not: it is frequently found in our experience, that persons
eminently qualified for the giving private Advertisements and Admonitions, yet
are not gifted to speak publicly unto Edification. Our question is, Whether
such as have public gifts, may not use them in a public way of preaching? It
is not proved that Aquila had such gifts.

2. It was a particular person, Apollo, that was by Aquila and Priscilla at
this time to be instructed; and therefore rules of expediency require that it
should be in a private way. If Aquila and Priscilla had been Ecclesiastical
Officers, it had been expedient to instruct Apollo privately. If an Officer
hears another preach, and perceives by his speaking, that he is much
unacquainted with some way of Christ; were it according to Gospel Order for
that Officer to tell him publicly, and before all the Congregation, that he
does not understand the way of the Lord, and to direct him into it? Because one
man, viz. Apollo, was instructed more perfectly in the way of the Lord, by
Aquila and Priscilla in a private way: for any to say, Therefore Christians who
have public gifts, may not preach in a public way, when many desire
instruction from them; how feeble is this Consequence?

3. Though private instruction be one way of improving eminent gifts, yet it
does not follow, that this is the chief, much less the only way, wherein the
Lord would have any man be always improving public gifts, i. e. gifts fit for
public use. If Aquila had public gifts, because at this time he used them in
a private way, it does not follow, that he always did so; and therefore this
single act can be no warrant to any that have public gifts to find employment
for all their gifts, always, privately. Those women, Phil. 4. 3. if they
labored in the Gospel, by private Advertisements and Admonitions, seeing such
a particular exception, as 1 Cor. 14. 34. cannot be found forbidding gifted
men's preaching: and seeing it is not expressed what gifts those women had;
hence its far short of proving, that public or preaching gifts, may always be
made use of, in a private way.

3. We apprehend that it will necessarily follow, that because all gifts (i. e.
spiritual gifts) are to be improved, therefore a gifted Brother may preach. Or
rather, in the words of that text, Because every man that has received a gift,
is to minister with it; therefore every gifted Brother may preach.

Abilities to preach are called gifts, Romans 12. v. 6. Having then [gifts]
differing -- and v. 7, 8. Teaching and Exhorting are put amongst those gifts.
So 1 Cor. 12. v. 4, 8. And our Brethren (Jus Divinum, p. 102.) grant, that 1
Pet. 4. 10. extends to all spiritual gifts. Now [all gifts] include these
preaching gifts; and how will the Consequence be avoided? Every man that has
preaching gifts is to improve them: Ergo, every gifted Brother (i. e. with
those preaching gifts) is to preach. For preaching gifts are not to be
improved, unless there be preaching.

Neither the examples of Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18. nor of those women,
Phil. 4. do intimate that there are ways of making use of preaching gifts,
which will excuse from sin, if they preach not. There cannot be an improvement
of any gifts without an use of them. Mat. 25. 25, 27. There is not an using of
preaching gifts, or not for their proper end, if there be no preaching; and
therefore, if all that have preaching gifts do not preach, then all gifts are
not improved, or every man does not minister that gift which he has received.

4. It belongs to his place and calling who has preaching gifts, to exercise
those gifts in a way of Preaching, and that publicly, as opportunity is
offered: The chief weight of the Objection lies here: Our Brethren suppose
that it is a going out of their Sphere, out of their place and calling, for any
that are not in Office, to exercise their gifts in a way of preaching;
especially if it be publicly. Whereas that place, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11.
determines it to belong unto his place and calling who has received such a
gift, to minister with it. The commanding every man to use that gift he has,
is a determining it to be every man's place and calling to preach who has that
gift. Those men which do not use their gifts, do disobey this Command which
extends to every man. But we shall add several other Considerations, which
(taken together) may serve for the evincing this; that it appertains to their
Sphere, place and calling, who have such gifts to preach, and that publicly.

1. It belongs to the place and calling of persons gifted (though not in
Office, to do the same work for substance, that Officers do in their preaching.
Our Brethren in their Description of preaching, say, (Ius Divinum, p. 72.) The
Subject of preaching is, the Word of God: and the work of preaching is, the
Explication and Application of this Word: And persons gifted, who are not in
Office, may lawfully do all this; and for the proper end of it, viz. the
Edification and comfort of those they speak to, a privite Brotherly teaching.
Admonishing and Exhorting, they grant (page 78.) to be duty, and they exhort
and charge their people not to neglect it. Persons gifted, though not in
Office, may exhort others, Hebr. 3. v. 13. But [exhort] one another daily, --
They may rebuke others, Lev. 19. v. 17. Thou shall in any wise [rebuke] thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. They may teach and admonish others,
Collos. 3. v. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom,
[teaching and admonishing one another.] -- These last recited words, may be
referred to the foregoing, as well as the following words. The Apostle would
have the Word of Christ so dwell in Christians, as they may teach and admonish
one another; and the following words may properly be read thus [Singing in
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, with grace in your hearts to the
Lord:] The Grammatical construction of the words does not at all enforce it,
that the teaching Zanch. Colos. 3.
and admonishing should be in or by singing of Psalms. From this place Zanchy
observes that Christians are bound to reach and exhort one another privately:
yea, persons gifted, though not in Office, may expound the way of God to
others. Aquila and Priscilla took Apollo unto them, and Acts 18. v. 26.
[expounded] unto him the way of God more perfectly.

That all the forementioned places hold out the duties of porsons out of
Office, may easily be perceived by any judicious Reader: for the exhortations
are directed generally to believers, and even those that most stiffly oppose
the preaching of men out of Office, acknowledge so much, and therefore we shall
not insist on the proof of that: the very Objection we are answering, asserteth
Aquila and Priscilla to be private persons.

That those acts of Exhorting, Rebuking, Teaching, Admonishing, Expounding, --
are the same, for substance with Preaching, is also clear; for, these acts
cannot be performed without an Explication and Application of the Word of God;
Aquila could not expound the way of God to Apollo, without an opening and
applying of the Word to him, and Colos. 3. 16. It is in and by the opening and
applying that Word of Christ unto others, which is within them, that they are t
teach and admonish one another. And the work of Officers when they preach, is
expressed by the same words that are used in these places to express the acts
of men not in Office; and therefore the works are the same; though we do not
say, That the way and manner of acting is the same in all respects. Officers
preaching is exhorting, Tit. 2. 15. These things speak and [exhort.] It is
admonishing, 1 These. 5. 12. are over you in the Lord, and [admonish] you.

And thus it appears, that persons gifted, not in Office, may do the same
work, that is called preaching; and yet in this they do not act out of their
Sphere, place or calling. And we cannot see how it can be denied, the name or
title of preaching, when the subject is the Word of God; the Work, the
Explication, and Application of the Word: the End, the Edification and Comfort
of others, as it is in the preaching of Officers.

Our Brethren do grant that all this may be done by men not in Office, but they
deny, That they may do it Authoritatively: and this we may grant them also, if
by Authoritative, they mean Office-wise. It is enough to our purpose if they
may do it charitatively.

2. They deny that it is the place and calling of gifted men not in Office, to
perform these acts [publickly;] they grant they may in private: we have proved,
that they may do the work of preaching; and if we can prove that it belongs
to their place and calling to do this work publicly, it is as much as we
contend for; and diverse of the ensuing Considerations shall be chiefly to
evince that.

1. Every Churchmember sustaineth a relation to the whole Church he is fixed
in; and it belongs to the place and calling of every gifted brother to teach,
exhort, admonish every member thereof, as occasion is offered: there is some
duty that every member owes to the whole Church; those that are most eminently
gifted, yet have need of the helps, assistances, experiences, and prayers, of
the weakest and meanest Members in gifts and abilities. 1 Cor. 12. ver. 21, 22.
The head cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you. -- those members of the
body which seem to be more feeble, are necessary: and that those duties of
teaching and exhorting (which are the same for substance with preaching
Office-wise) are required from every gifted person toward all fellow members,
the aforementioned Scriptures will evidence. Hebr. 3. ver. 13. Coloss. 3. 16.
They are urged amongst the general directions which were given to those
Churches, not amongst domestical or family duties. And Levit. 19. ver. 17.
Rebuke [thy Neighbor.] Not only those in a man's own house; but neighbors. And
seeing a gifted Brother may exhort and admonish all the Members of the Church
severally, why may he not do it when they are together?

3. A public gift cannot be fully improved, nor Gods end in giving it be fully
answered, if it be used only in a private way: the nature of the gift shows
that the chief use of it should be in a public way. A talent [is hidden] when
it is not used in some way of proportion to the talent it self, as well as when
it is not used at all; and they are unfaithful servants that hide their
Talents. Matthew. 25. ver. 18, 25, 26. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required. Luke 12. ver. 48. And if the Lord has bestowed a gift
fit for public use, and it has been cooped up, and used only privately;
there much is given, and little (in comparison of what might be, if it were
used in a public way) is returned. A gift might in a public use of it, reach
many, that in a private use of it, can reap no advantage by it; and so there is
a hiding a Talent. A man does not Minister his gift, or not as he has
received, if he uses a public gift, only in a private way.

And Gods end in affording a public gift is not only a man's own private
advantage, or the benefit of his family, but the public advantage of the whole
Church. 1 Cor. 12. ver. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal. He speaks of profiting the Church, and not a man's
family only; for all the gifts particularized, ver. 8, 9, 10. were to be laid
out for the profit of the Church; and the scope of the Chapter shows, that a
public profiting with gifts is intended. And the manifestation of the Spirit
is given, not to Officers only, but to every man, for this end, that he may
profit withal. Every man that enjoys those eminent manifestations of the
Spirit, those eminent gifts of the Spirit; to whom is given by the Spirit, the
word of wisdom, or the word of knowledge, as ver. 3. i. e. to whomsoever the
Spirit has afforded a gift, either wisely to speak, and apply Gospel Truths to
the souls of others, for the uses and ends they serve to; according to the
various conditions, streights, exigencies, necessities, temptations, which they
are in, that are spoken to; or understandingly to give an exposition of the
Scriptures, every man that has such gifts, it belongs to his place and
calling, to use those gifts for the common good of the Church, or for the best
advantage and profit thereof, else he crosses the end of the Spirit, in
bestowing those gifts, which is, that he might profit with them.

4. Public actings are not peculiar to Office, and therefore it cannot argue,
that a man not in Office, goes out of his place and calling, because he acts
publicly: one great ground of their mistake seems to lie here, they suppose
(but they have not proved it from any Scripture) that publickness in acting, or
in preaching, is limited and restrained to Officers only; Spiritual gifts are
to be exercised (say they, Jus Div. p. 102.) by every one in his own Sphere, by
private persons privately, by those that are in Office publicly, and in the
Congregation. Whereas publickness does not make an Act to be an Act of Office,
nor privateness hinder it from being so. An Officer may put forth Acts of
Office privately; as, when he rebukes or admonishes a Brother as one set over
him in the Lord, though it be not before the Congregation, yet surely it is an
Act of Office. The Act may be preaching Office-wise in a private house, as we
proved before.

The publickness of the Act does neither make it preaching, nor (as they call
it) Authoritative preaching. And therefore gifted Brethren cannot be said to
assume the Office of a Pastor or Teacher, because they exhort and admonish
publicly. Also in many cases a man not in Office may act either in civil or
religious matters publicly, and so may exercise both natural and spiritual
gifts, when yet he takes no Office upon him, nor goes out of his Sphere. As,
in any business of public concernment to a Town, the management whereof is
committed chiefly to the Officers of the Town or place; yet another man of
eminent natural abilities, and fit for the management of such a work, (though
he be no Officer) may be called in for assistance, or may act publicly in the
case. Constables may ordinarily call in others, for their assistance in public
works; and so, in many other cases, men that are no Officers, may do the same
works that Officers do, either alone, or as Assistants, and that publicly.

It is an ordinary thing for men to distribute worldly goods openly in public
Assemblies, to the use of poor Neighbors, or of such as live at a distance,
who have sustained losses by fire; and it is not unlike that they did it
publicly, Act. 11. v. 29, 30. Now it is the work of a Deacon (who is a
Church Officer) to distribute: our Brethren interpret that so, Romans 12 v. 8.
[He that giveth] i. e. the Deacon; and if Jus Divin. Regim. page 125.
any man may do the same work publicly which a Deacon by his Office does,
without going out of his place and calling; why may not a gifted Brother do
part of the same work, which another Officer does? why may he not teach and
exhort, and that publicly, without going out of his place and calling also?
Nay, Church Members that were not in Office, did publicly act in that
Assembly. Act. 15. v. 12. Then all the multitude kept silence -- This
necessarily implies that the multitude did speak before in the Assembly; and
it cannot be restrained unto Officers only, for the whole Church did help to
make up the multitude in that Assembly, v. 22. Then pleased it the Apostles and
Elders, with [the whole Church] to send chosen men of their own Company, etc.
There [Church] is distinguished from Apostles and Elders, which were the
Officers; and the Church is said to Cooperate with the Apostles and Elders in
those public acts of choosing and sending Messengers. So verse 23. All which
does fully prove, that it belongs to the Sphere, Place, and Calling of men
not in Office, to act in religious matters [publickly:] and therefore unless
some special Gospel-Rule can be found, forbidding gifted men to teach or exhort
publicly, it will not appear that they go out of their Sphere therein.

5. Charity binds sometimes, to an acting occasionally in some works that
belong not to a man's own, but another Calling; and then it cannot be a going
out of his Sphere to act therein: in civil employments, what is more ordinary,
then for a man of one Calling, upon request to do the work of another man's
Calling? yea, to leave his own work, to do work for his Neighbor? Yea in
public employments, who questioneth the lawfulness of a gifted man's tending a
School, occasionally, for a few days, at the request of the Schoolmaster? and
this is a public work; and yet a man that is no Schoolmaster does not go out
of his Sphere, Place, or Calling herein, though he does the work occasionally,
that belongs not to his own, but another Calling. And why may not gifted men
as well preach in public, without any sinful going out of their Sphere, Place,
or Calling?

Charity puts upon doing good to others to the urmost of our ability, 2 Cor.
8. v. 3. 1 John 3. 16. We ought to lay down our lives for the brethren; and
therefore surely Charity calls to lay out a man's gifts for the good of
others, to the utmost of the gift and opportunity; it is less to lay out gifts,
then to lay down life.

And if a man has public gifts, and does not use them publicly, he neither
acts to the utmost of his gifts, nor lays them out in that way wherein he
may most promote the good of others.

6. A man may lawfully choose it for his Calling to preach, if he be gifted and
qualified according to Gospel-Rules for the work; and then it is no going out
of his Sphere, Place or Calling, to Preach: Some men from their Childhood have
an inclination to that work of the Ministry, and spend many years in
preparation for it in the Universities, and elsewhere; are blessed with Grace
and gifts fit for the employment; they can find no rule for Ordination unto
Office, until a precedent Election from a Church: how can it be a going out of
their Calling to Preach, who never owned any other Calling but that? if
Ordination did give the Call to the Office, yet would it hardly be proved that
it made it a man's Calling to Preach, or that he could not have that as his
Calling without Ordination. Men may (being fitted for that work) many years
Preach (for ought we find) in order to, or before they undertake Office, if
they have no Call from a Church unto Office, or no such Call as they can with
clearness accept of, in that time: for, every man is to minister his gift;
which warranteth a constant as well as an occasional use of gifts, as
opportunity is offered.

And the same is to be said for men who have used other Callings; if they be
gifted for the work of preaching, have a Disposition thereunto, and the Lord
opens a door for a constant use of those gifts, then they may lawfully leave
their other vocations, and then they go not out of their Place or Calling if
they ordinarily preach, it being become their Calling to do it. That place
speaks much this way, Heb. 5. v. 12. When for the time ye ought to be
Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, -- This implies that those
Christians who are not Teachers, and so are of other Callings, (for Christians
are not to live without Callings) may afterward (being gifted) become
Teachers; and so may change their Callings, or else preach, and hold other
Callings too. Yea, it imports that it is the duty of Christians to endeavor
after such a growth in grace and experience, as they may become Teachers. As
the Apostle exhorreth the Corinthians to covet that they might prophecy, 1
Cor. 14. 39. so here he exhorts the Hebrews to covet to teach, or to be
Teachers. And it is not like that private teaching is only or chiefly intended;
for though these Hebrews were believers, yet he denies them to be Teachers in
the sense he intended, for verse 12. he blames them that they were not
Teachers, but needed milk; and therefore he means such Teachings as babes in
Christ do not attain unto, and such as is reached unto, by long time or much
experience: [for the time,] i. e. considering how long it is since your first
conversion to Christ, ye ought to be Teachers. Whereas all Christians, even
babes in Christ, are Teachers in that private brotherly way; as themselves
grant, (Jus Divinum, p. 78.) it is the common duty of all Christians, and
prescribed to all, even to women, by the Law of God, under pain of sin. Only
grown Christians of long time or much experience are the Teachers the Apostle
here intends, v. 12, 13, 14. And therefore more then teaching in a private
brotherly way is intended: and either they must hold two Callings, or else
leave their worldly Calling, to give up themselves to teaching.

Some do allege against the preaching of men that have followed other
Callings, 1 Cor. 7. verse 20. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein
he was called. Whereas this Text does neither forbid an occasional doing the
work of another, nor the changing of ones own Calling. The meaning is, Let him
abide with God in his Calling; and so it is interpreted, v. 24. Brethren, let
every man wherein he is called, therein [abide with God.] He does not forbid
changing or leaving the Calling, but the leaving or forsaking God; the thing
blamed, is a not abiding with God in a man's Calling. The occasion of this
Exhortation appears to be this: The Corinthians questioned the lawfulness of
a believers Co-habitation with an unbelieving Yoke Fellow; and the lawfulness
of that; the Apostle asserted in the former part of the Chapter, and proceeds
to lay down a general rule, which reaches other relations, v. 24. Let every
man abide in the same calling -- i. e. it is lawful for him to continue in the
same condition or course of life that he was in, when he was called or
converted: his being called does not free him from or destroy his relation to
Infidels and unbelievers: many temptations will be met withal from the Infidels
or unbelievers to whom the relation is, to a leaving the Lord and his ways;
but this does not break the relation, or free from keeping Covenant with the
unbeliever; and therefore let him abide in the same Calling, only let him be
careful to abide with God therein. If one be not in relation to Infidels or
unbelievers, it is best (as much as may be) to keep free; but if when one is
called or converted, he be in relation to such, let him abide in that Calling;
yet so as to abide with God. He instanceth in the relation of a servant, v. 21.
Art thou called being a servant? i. e. if thou be'st a servant to an
unbelieving master when thou art called, [care not for it:] i. e. distract not
thy self about, do not scruple or question the lawfulness of thy continuance,
or Co-habitation with him: [but if thou may be made free, use it rather:] i.
e. if the unbeliever will release thee of thy service, and of thy promise to
dwell with him, thou had better be free; it is better to have Communion with
and relation to believers, then to unbelievers. So that seeing the Apostle
instanceth in servants, v. 21. and bids them continue or abide in that
Calling, i. e. course of life, they were in when called, as one particular
included in that general, v. 20. hence he does not forbid here, the changing of
ones Calling or condition of life; for, he that is now a servant, may lawfully
marry, and become a master of servants. As well may they assert from v. 20, 21.
that he who is a servant, must abide always a servant; as that he who is now of
some worldly Calling, must abide in that, and not preach.

7. Gifted men have a Divine allowance to teach and exhort publicly; and
therefore they go not out of their Sphere, Place, or Calling therein. There is
a command for it, Heb. 10. v. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is: but exhorting one another -- Here is a
command to keep up Christian meetings, or Church Assemblies [not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together.] And there is a duty commanded to be
performed in these public assemblies, [but exhorting one another. -- ] The
particle [but] argues that this has reference unto the foregoing words; he
tells us that the manner of some was to forsake the assemblings of themselves
together; and in Opposition to them it is added, [but exhorting -- ] i. e. but
do you assemble to exhort one another. And it is not limited or restrained to
Officers, that they only should give Exhortations in these public assemblies,
but it is left upon the Christians in general to exhort one another; the same
persons that are to provoke one another unto love and good works, v. 24. and
the same persons that are to assemble together, v. 25. it is left amongst them
as a duty in their assemblings together, to exhort one another; and therefore
it cannot be limited to Officers. Any men that had abilities to exhort unto
Edification, here had a liberty granted, to give Exhortations in these public
assemblies; here is no exception of any, that all might be provoked to cover
gifts which enable to the duty.

Yet we do not think that every individual Christian did give Exhortations in
those assemblies, but only such as were gifted; because they only were able to
exhort unto Edification, which was the end of the meeting. It was not unlawful
for any (that we can find) if they were able to do the work: they that cannot
do it, cannot be supposed to be required to do it. As for Women, they are
excepted elsewhere. It Is certain that more then Officers are intended, for not
Officers only, but all in the Church are to beware of forsaking the assembling
of themselves together; and the duty of exhorting one another lies in general
amongst those that are to assemble, and is not limited to Officers more then
the duty of assembling. If a Father does bid his Children meet together, and do
such a work; as it is supposed he does not require a Child in the Cradle to
meet with the rest, or to do the work, because it has not ability: so it is
supposed that any, or all who are able to do it, may, or ought to set about it.
And, how can those who are able to exhort others in public assemblies, free
themselves from disobedience to this command, which is left in general amongst
them, if they do it not publicly? Also there is example for it, Act. 18. v.
26. Apollo spoke, i. e. preached [in the Synagogue,] i. e. publicly; and verse
28. He mightily convinced the Jews, and that [publickly.] And that Apollo was
not at this time in Office, or was not ordained, but acted herein as a gifted
person, we shall show afterward. And this proves that gifted persons do not
act out of their Sphere, Place, or Calling, in preaching publicly.

Obj. By Gift, 1 Pet. 4. 10. it is very probable may be meant Office: for, 1.
He says it must be administered as Stewards. 2. The Apostle M. Collings. page 57.
instancing in particulars, v. 11. instanceth in two acts of Office, Exhorting
and Ministering, Romans 12. v. 8. and if so, the meaning is only this: As any one
has received any Office in the Church, so let him minister. --

Others (Jus Divinum, page 103.) speak thus: v. 11. does not permit every
gifted man to be a Preacher, but direct every Preacher in the right
Dispensation of that weighty Office: [he that speaks,] i. e. he that by
public Authority is rightly ordained to speak. And thus some restrain the
word gift, v. 10. [a gift,] i. e. an Office; and that not without probability:
for so the words (...) and (...) are taken, as Romans 12. 6. Having gifts, which
the Apostle in the verses following expounds of Officers. So 1 Timothy 4. 14.
Neglect not this gift -- i. e. the Office, if the Apostle may be his own
interpreter, Chap. 1. 18. This charge I commit to thee, Son Timothy, according
to the prophecies that went before of thee, etc. -- So Ephesians. 3. 8. To me -- is
this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles: his being made the
Apostle of the Gentiles, is called (...). So Romans 1. 5. Grace and Apostleship,
i. e. The grace of Apostleship. The order which the Apostle makes between
Gifts, Administrations, and Operations, they would have taken notice of, 1 Cor.
12. 4, 5, 6. Gifts qualify for Ministries, Ministry authorizeth for Operation.
A Physician might not judge of Leprosies, though he had skill; nor a Butcher
kill the Sacrifice, though he knew how; these things belonged to the Priest:
nor every gifted Brother undertake either the Office or the work of a Minister.

Answ. 1. Those verses have relation to, and dependence upon each other; for,
those are gifts which are mentioned v. 11. and Ministration is required in both
verses; and so the meaning is plain, [he that speaketh] i. e. he that has a
Gift to speak to Edification, or Preach. And this speaking being one gift which
must be reduced to the general rule, v. 10. (as the connection of the verses
shows) hence [every man] that has that gift, (with grace) is permitted, yea,
commanded to preach, or to minister his gift. Some would evade the Argument by
taking the word [gift] for Office; therefore we shall answer further.

2. Neither the Context, nor the Subsequent verses, can be restrained unto
Officers; neither does it appear by the verses themselves, that the persons are
changed who are spoken to; and therefore the word gift, v. 10. cannot be
limited to Office: The Apostle exhorts to Sobriety, and watchfulness unto
prayer, v. 7. To charity, v. 8. To hospitality v. 9. Use hospitality one to
another without grudging.

All these Exhortations were plainly directed to Christians in general: for
surely none will say, That only Officers were to be sober, or to watch unto
prayer, or to have charity, or to use hospitality. And the persons spoken to,
are the same, v. 10. He spoke in the foregoing verses to all the Saints, and
continues his speech in general terms to the same persons, [as every man -- ]
and that by this [every man] should be meant Officers only, who were very few
in comparison of those before spoken to, how unconceivable a thing is it?
especially seeing no distinguishing Character is laid down to notify Officers
alone to be intended; it is not said, As every Pastor, Elder, or Overseer has
received a gift, nor as every man has received an Office; but he writes to
the scattered Saints in general, chap. 1. v. 1. and urges duties in common,
upon all of them in the foregoing verses; and what a rupture would it make in
the Text, to thrust in an Exhortation only to Officers, without any plain
nomination of them, and in terms applicable to all that were before spoken to?
[every one] includes all the Christians, as well as Officers; [Gift] may be
applied to others also; for, all believers have some gifts which they are to
use, and some that are no Officers, have eminent gifts; and therefore it is a
safe interpretation to take it for every individual person that is gifted: and
the taking such a general expression, in so restrained a sense, that most who
have gifts, should be excluded, or not intended, when the notification of the
persons to whom the Exhortation belongs, is by the word [Gift,] and when it
runs in general terms, [every one -- ] this were a dangerous way of
interpretation of other Scriptures. Gal. 6. v. 4. Let [every man] prove his own
works, -- were it not dangerous to say, that here, but a few men, or only
Officers, are required to prove their own works?

And how any of those, to whom this Epistle was directed, who had received
gifts, and eminent gifts, could in faith or groundedly conclude that this
Exhortation did not belong to them, because they were not Officers, or that
[every one] should not include them, we find not.

3. The Apostle speaks indefinitely [a gift] and an indefinite proposition is
equipollent usually to an Universal, so it may be extended to all gifts in
general, and therefore cannot without some special reason be restrained to one
particular gift, viz. Office: there is much in the Text to forbid the limiting
of it to Office, as we have shown; and there is nothing in the Text to enforce
or prove, that it must be meant of Office; and therefore it is to swerve from
right rules of interpretation, to take gift for Office in this place; for (by
these) Scripture-expressions are to be taken in the la^^est sense, unless where
necessity enforces the contrary: and here no such necessity can be found.

1. That the words (...) and (...), are taken sometimes in Scripture not for
gifts simply, but for an Office; this does not at all prove that they must be
taken so here: when some particular word is used with gift, that does speak it
to be limited unto Office; if then it be to be understood in that sense, yet it
does not follow, that it should be so taken, when it has general terms affixed
to it [every one.] We may use the same Argument against those that bring it; we
may say, (...) and (...), are frequently and far more usually taken in
Scripture for other gifts besides Office, and such gifts as persons not in
Office do enjoy: and therefore gift is rather to be taken here in larger sense
then Office. (...) is used, Romans 5 ver. 15. Not as the offense, so is [the free
gift.] ver. 16. The [free gift] is of many offenses unto justification. Romans 6.
ver. 23. [The gift] of God is eternal life. -- Romans 11. ver. 29. [The gifts]
and calling of God are without repentance. 1 Corin. 1. ver. 7. Ye come behind
in no [gift.] 1 Cor. 12. ver. 31. Covet the best [gifts.] -- In all these
places, and many more, the word for gift is, (...), which is the same word that
is used for gift, 1 Pet. 4. ver. 10. And in those places gift cannot be taken
for Office, with any color of reason: in most of the places such gifts are
intended as every Christian does enjoy. And (...) is used for Grace. Act. 13.
ver. 43. -- Persuaded them to continue in [the Grace] of God. Romans 1. ver. 7.
-- [Grace] to you, and peace. -- 1 Cor. 1. ver. 3. 2 Cor. 1. ver. 2. and
therefore the words (...) and (...), will not necessarily limit it unto Office;
for these are applied unto all Christians.

2. That it is to be administered as Stewards, does not restrain it unto Office:
for it is not said, as Stewards of the Mysteries of God, as 1 Cor. 4. 1. but,
as Stewards of the manifold [Grace] of God. And every Christian is a Steward of
the Grace, yea, of the manifold Grace of God; for he shall give an account of
all the Grace he has received, as Stewards do; as the parable of the Talents
shows. Mat. 25. 14, etc. and Luke 12. 48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of
himshall be much required. Whether gifts or Graces be afforded, an account will
be required; not of Officers only, but of whomsoever they be given unto. And
how harsh would it sound to read the Text that way? As every man has received
the Office, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the
manifold Office of God. How improper is it to say, a man is a Steward of an
Office? If Steward were a name of Office (as our Brethren would have it) then
it were to be read thus, As Officers of the manifold Office of God.

3. The acts of exhorting and ministering are not peculiar to Office, and
therefore the instancing in those two acts ver. 11. does not prove it to be
restrained unto Office. Such as are no Officers may exhort others: Hebr. 3 13.
and 10. 25. and also they may Minister. 2 Cor. 9. 1. and Hebr. 6. ver. 10. Ye
have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. -- Here not the Officers only,
but the believing Hebrews in general, are highly commended, for ministering to
the Saints; and therefore Ministering is not peculiar to Office.

All which considered, how that Text 1 Pet. 4. 10. 11. can safely be restrained
to Office, we find not, especially seeing Officers are particularly and
plainly directed unto their duties in the next Chapter of the same Epistle, 1
Pet. 5. ver. 1, 3. The Elders which are among you, I exhort. -- That the
Apostle should crowd in this exhortation to Officers only, and then spend eight
verses in admonitions to all the Saints, and then begin again to speak to
Officers, Chap. 5. ver. 1. ^^. how unlikely a thing is it? Surely this is not
usually found to be the method of this Apostle.

And therefore that interpretation of ver. 11. He that speaks, i. e. he that
by public authority is rightly ordained to speak, or he that is in Office,
has nothing from the word to warrant it. Who may speak, is declared ver. 10.
Every man that has received the gift.

And whereas it is said, Abilities do not authorize to act out of our Sphere
and calling; We answer, Though abilities do not authorize to act, yet
Gospel-rules do authorize those that have abilities, and do speak it to belong
unto their place and calling, to Minister one unto another.

If it had been said in the time of the Law. As every man has received the
gift, even so Minister the same. -- He that judges of Leprosies. -- He that
kills a sacrifice. -- A Physician might then have judged of Leprosy, or a
Butcher have killed the Sacrifice, if no particular prohibition had been found
elsewhere. Unless some word of God does limit preaching to Officers, as it did
judging of Leprosies and killing of sacrifices to the Priests, such argnings
are of no force.

As for what they observe from 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. the Apostle declares, that
though there be diversities of gifts, administrations, and operations, yet
there is the same Lord; but if the operations be not intended of miraculous
operations, as some think, yet such as have gifts may be authorized for
Ministration and operation, for ought is there clearly asserted. None can
Minister without gifts; but such as have gifts are not there denied liberty for
Ministration; nay, they seem to have an allowance, ver. 7.

Thus much for the second Argument from Gospelcommands.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Arguments are urged for the proving the
lawfulness of Gifted-Brethrens Preaching, though not Ordained.

Argum. 3. From a Gospel-promise.

THat practice which has a Gospel-promise annexed to it, is undoubtedly
warrantable. But the preaching of some men who are not ordained Officers, has
a Gospel-promise annexed to it. Ergo, The preaching of some who are not
ordained Officers, is undoubtedly warrantable.

The Major is undeniable; for the Lord will not countenance any sinful practice
with his promise. That which has a promise annexed to it, a man may act in
faith therein; and so the practice must needs be warrantable.

The Minor is proved Matthew. 25. 29. For unto every one that has shall be
given, and he shall have abundance. --

1. Here is a promise, He that has, i. e. if he uses, exercises, and
improveth what gifts he has, to him [shall be given. -- ] i. e. he shall
increase his gifts, his labors shall be followed with a Divine blessing, he
shall be abundantly blessed. The talent is taken away from that servant that
hid it, that did not improve it; and it is given to him who had used his
Talents, ver. 28. And Christ adds this as an encouragement to an improvement
of all Talents received, [for unto him that has. -- ]

2. Here are the persons who share in this promise, not Officers only, but
every man that has, i. e. that improveth what he has. Whatsoever gifts or
Talents a man has, here is a promise annexed to the laying of them forth for
Jesus Christ.

We restrain not these gifts to preaching gifts; it is enough to us, that these
are included; neither do we say, that every Christian ought publicly to
preach; many have not the Talent of preaching gifts. But whatseover Talents any
man who is a professed Servant of Jesus Christ has (as verse. 14. -- Who called
his own servants) he falls under this promise in the improvement of them,
that to him shall be given. -- He that has private gifts, if he uses them, to
him shall be given; he that has public gifts, if he uses them, to him shall
be given.

Now, none can deny that many un-ordained men have preaching gifts, i. e. gifts
that render them apt to teach; for a knowledge of their having such gifts, is
prerequired unto ordination. And here is a promise annexed unto the use of any
Talents, that any professed servant of Christ has; and therefore they that
have preaching gifts, whether they be ordained or not, do fall under this
promise in the use of their gifts.

Object. 1. There is no great trust to Arguments for positive truths from
parabolical expressions: what Talents are there meant, is not expressed.

Answ. 1. Parables are proofs of some positive truths, else of what use are
they? To strain parables beyond the scope of Christ in them, is unsafe. But
that by Talents are meant gifts; by trading, a using or improving those gifts
by Servants, not only Officers, but visible Saints, professing subjection unto
Christ as their Master, etc. it is not to be denied with any color of reason.
So that Arguments drawn from the parable this way, would be strong.

2. Our Argument is not from the parable, but from a general rule that has a
promise included in it. Indeed it is applied to the parable, as a reason of
that proceeding, ver. 28. but also it is applied unto other things, as Mark. 4.
24, 25. Take heed what you hear, -- and unto you that hear, shall more be
given: for he that has, to him shall be given. -- If they improve
Gospel-opportunities, if they keep the word themselves which they hear, and
measure out or communicate unto others what they have heard, they shall not
miss of their reward, more shall be given them. So that it is no
parabolical-argumentation, but from a clear rule, that says, whatsoever gifts
the Lord has bestowed upon his servants in the Church, they are in a way to
enjoy the promise of increase, if they be in the improvement of them.

Object. 2. This will prove that women may preach too.

Answ. It is denied; because women are excepted. It is said, Josh. 5. ver. 5.
All the People that came out (i. e. out of Egypt) were circumcised; will any
conclude, therefore women were circumcised? [All] includes women in that case,
as much as [all that have gifts or Talents] do include women in this case.

Object. 3. But may it not be meant of Ministerial Talent, and a called
Ministry, ver. 14, 15. his servants.

Answ. Though the parable of the Talents might be understood of them, yet this
general rule and promise cannot be restrained to them, because it is applied
even to hearers, Mark 4. 24, 25. Unto you that hear, shall be given. For -- and
because the rule is so general,

2. Neither can the parable be restrained to them, seeing others besides
Officers are in the Kingdom of Heaven, are servants, have their Lords goods,
and must give an account. --

Obj. 4. But they must do it orderly; first, be ordained, and then preach: and
is there no way of improving gifts, but in public preaching? he that that has
them, must improve them in his Sphere.

Answ. 1. It is granted that he must be ordained when he undertaketh to be an
Officer; but Election or a Call from a Church must precede that: let it be
proved that a man may have ordination to Office-work, before he has Election
from a Church; or that he may suspend the exercise of his gifts, until he has
such a Call from a Church. It is possible that a man may have gifts, which
render him apt to teach, diverse Years before any Church may elect him to
Office: but he would be in danger of losing the benefit of this Promise, [to
him that has, shall be given,] and of falling under that dreadful threatening,
[from him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he has.] if all
this time he should not exercise his gifts.

2. It belongs to his Calling, who has gifts fit for public use, to improve
them publicly: the very end of the Lords affording such gifts, is, That they
might be laid forth in such a way. 1 Cor. 12. 7. The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. If one ordained to Office-work
should use his gifts in a private, and not in public, he would be called to an
account for not using or improving his gifts, and not barely because being
ordained he did not use them publicly. Men shall not be called to an account
barely for the not using gifts, but for the not using them in that way wherein
they might most have promoted the Lords glory, and the public good.

Argum. 5. From Gospel-presidents or examples.

That which is holden forth by Gospel-presidents or examples, with Divine
allowance, that may lawfully be practiced. But the ordinary exercise of
preaching gifts in public Assemblies, by persons who are not ordained
Officers, is holden forth by Gospel-presidents, or examples, with Divine
allowance. Ergo, The ordinary exercise of preaching gifts in public
Assemblies, by persons who are not ordained Officers, may lawfully be practiced.

The Major we suppose will not be denied. It is our duty to walk as we have
Christ, the Apostles and primitive Saints for a pattern. Phil. 3. 17. Brethren,
be followers together of me, and mark those that walk so, as ye have us for an
ensample. There was the same rule of obedience then, as now, viz. The Gospel;
and therefore what those Saints did (unless by an extraordinary Call) with
Divine approbation, must needs be our duty, as well as it was theirs; the Lord
would not then give allowance to any sinful practice.

The Minor, that the ordinary exercise of preaching gifts, in public
Assemblies, by persons not ordained Officers, is holden forth by
Gospel-presidents, or examples, with Divine allowance; we prove,

1. From the preaching of Apollo, Act. 18. 2. From the preaching of the
scattered Saints, Act. 8. v. 11.
1. From the preaching of Apollo, Act. 18. v. 24. And a certain Jew named
Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures,
came to ephesus. ver. 25. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and
being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord,
knowing only the baptism of John. ver. 26. And he began to speak boldly in the
Synagogue: -- ver. 28. He mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly,
showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

From these verses, we observe these things.

1. That Apollos preached, v. 25. He spoke and taught diligently. --

2. That he preached in public assemblies, v. 26. He began to speak boldly [in
the Synagogue: -- ] and v. 28. and that publicly showing by the Scriptures --
and the expressions laid together, will speak it to be his ordinary practice.

3. That Apollos had Divine allowance, in this his preaching: the Holy Ghost
would never have vouchsafed to give him such high Commendations for his being
mighty in the Scriptures, v. 24. for his knowledge, v. 25. instructed in the
way of the Lord, for his Zeal, and this as an occasion of, or a leading thing
to, his preaching, v. 25. being fervent in Spirit, he spoke and taught -- if
the Lord had not approved of his preaching. And the mentioning so many matters
of his praise to usher in a narration of his preaching, without limiting any
word of dispraise for that, does strongly intimate Divine approbation in his
preaching. Yea, his preaching it self is declared with Commendation.

He is said to preach:

1. Diligently, not negligently: v. 25. He spoke and taught diligently. --

2. Boldly, not with a carnal fearfulness. v. 26. He began to speak [boldly --
] the same, as a Commendation, is given unto Paul, when the Disciples were
afraid of him, Act. 9. 27, 28. But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the
Apostles, and declared unto them -- how he had [preached boldly] at Damascus,
in the Name of Jesus.

3. Successfully, or prevailingly, v. 28. -- He mightily convinced the Jews --
his labors were seconded with a Divine blessing.

All these Commendations of his preaching, do evidently speak forth his having
Divine approbation therein. And this is enough to answer that Objection which
some bring, viz. That this is but an instance of the liberty given by the Jews,
or taken, where as yet there was no Church in being; and the liberty given in
the Jewish Synagogues, is no more a president for Christian Churches, then
their exercise of power. --

We say, That if only the Jews had given such a liberty, that would not have
been enough to make it a president for us; but Christ's approbation in
Gospel-days of such a practice as the Jews gave liberty for, is enough to speak
the warrantableness of such a practice, and to make it a president unto us.

We do not urge the lawfulness of gifted men's preaching, because the Jews gave
such a liberty to Apollos, but because with Divine allowance Apollos took the
liberty to preach.

4. That Apollos was not an ordained Officer; and that we prove, thus:

He that knew only the baptism of John, was not under the Ordination to
Office-work, which was instituted by Christ. But Apollos knew only the baptism
of John, Act. 18. 25. -- He spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord,
[knowing only the baptism of John.] Ergo, Apollos was not under the
Ordination to Office-work, which was instituted by Christ.

The Minor is undeniable, being the very words of the Text.

The Major, That he that knew only the baptism of John, was not under the
Ordination to Officework, which was instituted by Christ, we prove, thus:

1. Because the instituting of Ordination was Subsequent to the baptism of
John: the baptism of John spoke nothing of Ordination of Officers; and
therefore he that knew only the baptism of John, could know nothing of that
Ordination; especially seeing in order of time, the baptism of John was
precedaneous to the institution of Ordination of Officers. He that knew only
the baptism of John, which was Antecedent to the instituting of Ordination, he
did not know that Ordination which was Subsequent to that baptism.

But Apollos knew only the baptism of John, which was Antecedent to the
instituting of Ordination. Ergo, Apollos did not know that Ordination which was
Subsequent to that baptism.

2. Because the importance of the expression does deny his being ordained: for
the Baptism of John is distinguished from the baptism of Christ, Act 19. v.
3. Unto what then were ye baptized? and they said, Unto John's baptism. v. 4.
Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying
unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him,
that is, on Christ Jesus. v. 5. When they heard this, they were baptized in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. Whence we observe, 1. That the baptism of John, and
the baptism of Christ, are they which in Scripture Phrase are distinguished
each from other, as appears by comparing v. 3. with v. 5. and therefore to
say, That Apollos did know only the baptism of John, is to say, That he did
not know the baptism of Christ; without which he could not know Ordination,
which appertained only to the baptism of Christ, and not to that of John.

2. That the baptism of John does comprehend the Doctrine and Ministry of
John, as well as the outward sign of water, v. 4. The baptism of John did
teach repentance, and faith in Christ: it declared that Jesus of Nazareth was
the Christ, the Messiah, and no other to be expected, and [that he should come
after] i e. openly to show, manifest and reveal himself to be the Redeemer of
the world.

The baptism of Christ teaches, That Christ is already revealed; and in his
death and resurrection our Salvation is made perfect.

So that [to know only the baptism of John,] is to know Jesus of Nazareth to
be the Messiah, and to have repentance and faith in him, as afterward to
reveal himself; but to be without a knowledge of Christ, as already revealed
in his death, resurrection, and in those clear doctrines of the Gospel, and
Miracles for the confirmation of those doctrines, which are given forth by the
Apostles as fruits of the Ascension of Jesus Christ. And therefore he that knew
only the baptism of John, could not know the Ordination which was instituted
by Christ, because the institution of Ordination is found amongst those
doctrines which belong to the baptism of Christ and was not given forth before;
yea, the knowledge of Ordination presupposes a knowledge of many other
doctrines of the Gospel, as concerning Christ's establishing Church Order for
his Worship, and the profession of his Name: and that he has instituted such
Offices, etc. which none by the baptism of John only could reach unto.
Therefore there being this defect in Apollos knowledge, hence he was not an
ordained Officer; for then he had known more then the baptism of John: yea, he
had known the baptism of Christ; which to assert, were directly to cross the
words of the Text, which declare, that he knew only the baptism of John.

Obj. 1. But was not Apollos an extraordinary Officer, or had he not an
extraordinary Call to preach?

Answ. 1. Let him prove it, that will assert it. The Text speaks not of any
thing extraordinary; a man may be eloquent without extraordinary gifts, and
mighty in the Scriptures: ordinary Officers are to hold fast the faithful Word;
and to be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and convince the gainsayers,
Tit. 1. 9. and this is to be mighty in the Scriptures, Act. 18. 28. He mightily
convinced the Jews -- and ordinary Saints are commanded to be fervent in
Spirit, Romans 12. 11. Therefore these will not prove an extraordinary Call.

2. His being so uninstructed in the way of the Lord, as Aquila and Priscilla
excelled him in knowledge therein, v. 26. strongly argues his not being
extraordinarily gifted.

3. The people at Ephesus, where he preached, v. 24. 25. were, after his
departure from them, ignorant of those extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost,
Acts 19. v. 1, 2. -- We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy
Ghost. If Apollos (who before preached to them) had been endued with those
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, surely they should have heard of it.

Obj. 2. But how will it be proved that Apollos being one of John's Disciples,
had no commission from John to preach?

Answ. 1. Let those that can, prove that he had such a commission from John;
the Gospel is silent about it: we read that he was gifted, v. 24. Might in the
Scriptures. -- and that he had a zealous disposition to exercise those gifts,
and that put him upon preaching, v. 25. Being fervent in Spirit, he spoke and
taught. -- This seems to hold out, that persons really gifted, being fervent
in spirit, may speak and teach, where opportunity is offered.

2. We cannot find that John gave commission to any of his Disciples to preach:
the Objection is built upon this Supposition; and this being denied, it is
altogether groundless: we ask, how it will be proved that John gave a
commission to any to preach? if it cannot be proved that he did, the Objection
is vain.

Obj. 3. Apollos abilities were eminent; he was eloquent, and mighty in the
Scriptures -- and he preached where there was no Church; and therefore this
will not warrant their preaching, who have not such gifts, in places where
Christ is known.

Answ. 1. It matters not how eminent his gifts were: the Question is not,
whether persons not eminently gifted, may preach? but the Question is, whether
persons so eminently gifted, as (according to Gospel-Rules) Preachers ought to
be, may exercise those gifts in public Assemblies, though they be not ordained
to Office-work? If they will grant, that men of like abilities with Apollo, may
preach without Ordination; then they cannot with any color of reason deny a
like liberty to others to preach without Ordination, if their gifts be so
eminent, as (according to Gospel-Rules) Preachers ought to be, though far
inferior to Apollos.

2. The Objection supposes, that gifted men, without Ordination, may preach,
where no Church is; we wish that liberty were not denied them. But, let it be
proved, that it is more unwarrantable to preach where a Church is, then where
no Church is.

3. If it be said, that because there was no Church, therefore Ordination could
not be had, and so he might lawfully preach without it, which otherwise he
might not have done, if there had been a Church to give Ordination; We answer,
Though Ordination could not be had there, if there were no Church, yet it might
have been had elsewhere, at Jerusalem. --

Obj. 4. Apollos seems to be more then a gifted Brother; for he is ranked with
Paul and Peter, 1 Cor. 1. 12. he is called a Minister, 1 Cor. 3. 5.

Answ. That was afterward; when he was at Corinth, he might be an Officer for
ought we know, and be ordained; but his preaching at Ephesus, Act. 18. 24, 25.
was before his going to Corinth, v. 27. when he was disposed to pass into
Achaia, the Brethren wrote, exhorting the Disciples to receive him, -- Act. 19.
1. And it came to pass, that while Apollos was at Corinth, -- This intimates
that Apollos going to Corinth, which was in Achaia, was after his preaching at
Ephesus: his being an Officer afterward at Corinth, does no more prove that he
was an Officer before at Ephesus, then his knowing the baptism of Christ at
Corinth, does prove his knowing of it at his first coming to Ephesus, when he
is said to know only the baptism of John. And, those who are now but gifted
Brethren, may afterward become Officers.

2. From the preaching of the scattered Saints, Act. 8. and 11. we infer the
lawfulness of gifted men's preaching, though not ordained.

It is said, Act 8. 1. -- And at that time there was a great persecution
against the Church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad
through out the regions of Judea, and Samaria, except the Apostles -- v. 3. As
for Saul, he made havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling
men and women, committed them to prison. v. 4. Therefore they that were
scattered abroad, went every where preaching the Word. Act. 1. 1. v 19, 20, 21.
And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed, and turned
unto the Lord. -- From hence we observe:

1. That these scattered Saints preached publicly, Act. 8. 4. they went every
where preaching the Word.

2. That they had Divine allowance in this their preaching, Act. 11. v. 21. The
hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed -- the Lord
eminently owned their labors with his blessing; which argues his approbation
of them in their work.

3. That these scattered Saints who preached, were (many of them at least)
unordained. This may appear from Act. 8. v. 1, 4. The persons who preached, are
said to be the scattered Saints, v. 4. They that were scattered abroad, went
every where preaching -- and who were scattered, is declared v. 1. There was a
great persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were all
scattered abroad. -- We argue thus:

Those who were scattered abroad upon the persecution, they preached the word
with Divine allowance. But many men un-ordained were scattered abroad upon the
persecution. Ergo, Many men un-ordained did preach the word with Divine
allowance.

The Major is proved Act. 8. 4. The scattering abroad is the very Character
which the Holy Ghost does set out these preachers by, neither is it said,
[some] of those that were scattered, but [they that were scattered. -- ]
therefore very very many, a very great, if not the greatest part of those who
were scattered, they preached; otherwise, if but a few of them had preached, it
had been improper to set out who were preachers by the scattering. Those that
had not abilities could not do it; but all that were scattered who had gifts,
did it, else the phrase were improper.

The Minor is proved, Act. 8. ver. 1. If it was the Church at Jerusalem that
was scattered abroad upon the persecution, then many men un-ordained were
scattered abroad; for surely none will say that the Church was ordained;
Church, according to the usual acceptance of it, must imply the generality of
the members; and surely our Brethren will not say, that the generality of
Church Members were ordained, or were Officers. But it was the Church at
Jerusalem that was scattered abroad upon the persecution. Ergo, many men
un-ordained were scattered abroad.

The Minor is plain, Act. 8. ver. 1. There was a great persecution against [the
Church] which was at Jerusalem, and [they] were [all] scattered abroad. --

Our Brethren (Jus Divin. Minist. page 110.) assert, That they were men in
Office who were scattered, and that these all were all the Church Officers.

The Text says, The persecution was against the Church; they say it was only
against the Officers of the Church. The Text says, [all] were scattered. --
They say, only the Officers, who were few in comparison of the Church, were
scattered. We confess we cannot but wonder at such interpretations.

1. The very Grammatical construction will forbid its being restrained to
Officers, or their being chiefly intended. For ask the Question, Who were all
scattered abroad? The answer must be, [The Church which was at Jerusalem?]
there are no other persons spoken of, for it to have reference unto: Officers
were not mentioned before Church was; and therefore it was the Church, and not
Officers only, that were scattered, and did Preach.

2. The Apostles, who were the chiefest Officers, were not scattered, ver. 1.
-- They were all scattered -- except the Apostles.

Now if the persecution and scattering had been of Officers only, then the
scattering would have been rather of the Apostles, who were the chiefest
Officers, then of inferior Officers. Therefore it is probable their spite was
rather against Church Order, and their design rather to break the Church, then
to scatter Officers.

Object. 1. All the Believers were not scattered, for it is said, ver. 3. That
Saul made Jus Divin. page 110.
havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and women, committed them to
prison. And Act. 11. 22. There is express mention made of the Church at
Jerusalem, notwithstanding the persecution. Had all the Believers been
scattered, what should the Apostles have done at Jerusalem?

Answ. 1. That by Church is not meant Officers only, ver. 1. is cleared, ver.
3. and that the persecution was against more then Officers; for men and women
suffered by it.

2. Paul's making havoc of the Church, might be one means of the total
scattering of it: it may be a narration how the Church came to be scattered,
rather then of what followed its scattering. It may be a declaration of Saul's
carriage in this persecution, rather then after it. It is not said that all
were scattered, and then Saul made havoc of it; his making havoc of it, might
be that which fully scattered it: and hence the scattering is mentioned again,
after his making havoc of it, ver. 4. Therefore they that were scattered. --

3. All the Believers might be scattered, and yet Saul might be said to make
havoc of the Church, entering into every house, -- after scattering. Some of
that all might be scattered in Jerusalem, and so Saul might be said to make
havoc of the Church, in haling our individual Members of the Church, out of
those private houses into which they were scattered, and putting them in
prison. The Church might be said to be scattered, when deprived of liberty to
hold up Church-meetings, though the Members had not been driven out of
Jerusalem. The Text does not say that they were all driven out of Jerusalem by
this scattering, though it mentions other places into which they were
scattered. The Church might be scattered thorowout those places mentioned, and
in Jerusalem too, and Saul might make havoc of it at Jerusalem.

4. Whereas they say, there is express mention made of a Church at Jerusalem,
notwithstanding the persecution, Act. 11. 22. We answer, This does not hinder
but that all the believers might be scattered; but only denies that the
scattering was perpetual. Before the dispersion, we read only of a Church at
Jerusalem; but before the time mentioned Act. 11. 22. we read of Churches in
Judea: Act. 9. 31. new Churches were planted in the time between; and therefore
it is easy to conceive, that there was space enough for so many of the
scattered Saints to return (the persecution ceasing) as might walk as a Church
at Jerusalem again. And for this end might the Apostles tarry still at
Jerusalem, to put the Church in order again, when the heat of persecution
should be over; and to preach for the conversion of others, so soon as liberty
should be offered. And Saul's entering into every house, and haling men and women
to prison, ver. 3. does argue, that not the Officers only, but the Church was
now scattered; why else should he mention women, or make such a narrow search
in every house for them, if Church-meetings had still continued, where he might
have taken many together? Therefore the beginning of the scattering seems to
be by depriving of liberty for public Church-meetings; the full scattering, by
haling out of private houses. --

Object. 2. The word all is used here with an exceptive partcile, which
necessitates to be meant, not of Believers, but of men in Office; for if all
relate to Believers, then it will follow, that there was not one Believer left
in Jerusalem except the Apostles. The particle (...) with the Genitive case in
the New Testament, being always exceptive to the utmost, as appears, Joh. 8.
10. Act. 15. 28. and 22. 22. Mar. 12. 32. but this we are sure is false. --

Answ. 1. All is frequently taken for the generality of those persons spoken
of, yet not including every individual as is often urged against those that
assert Universal Redemption: as Matt. 21. v. 26. [All] hold John as a Prophet.
Yet many did not know John, and so could not take him for a Prophet. Mark 1.
ver. 5. There went out unto him (i. e. to John) [all the land of Judea,] and
they of Jerusalem, and were [all] Baptized. -- [All] i. e. very many; every
individual went not out, nor was Baptized by John; we read of some that were
not Baptized of him, Luke 7. 30. And if we take [all] in this sense, it
amounts but to thus much, [all] i. e. the generality, or very many of the
Church were scattered.

2. There are like expressions used in other terms, which are not exceptive to
the utmost: as Mat. 24. 22. Mar. 13. 20. Except those days should be shortened,
there should no flesh be saved. i. e. very few would be saved; not but that
some individuals might be saved, though they were not shortened. Surely some
shall be saved whilst the tribulation does last, viz. the Elect, for whose
sakes the days are shortened.

And if we take [all] in this sense, it arises but to thus much: [All] were
scattered abroad, i. e. very many were scattered, so as there remained very
few, except the Apostles.

3. Admit that all used with the exceptive particle, should be exceptive to the
utmost; yet this does not follow, that then there was not one believer left in
Jerusalem, except the Apostles; the utmost it would amount to, is, That there
were not any believers which were not scattered abroad: or that all the
believers were scattered abroad, except the Apostles. But many of them might be
scattered about Jerusalem, for all this.

To show how great the dispersion was, it is said, Act. 8. 1. They were all
scattered abroad; and to show how far it did extend, it is added, [thorowout
the regions of Judea and Samaria.] Yet not excluding Jerusalem or other parts,
from being places to which some were scattered. Their being scattered thorowout
the regions of Judea and Samaria, does not deny their being scattered about
Jerusalem and other places also.

Or the meaning may be, None continued together in Jerusalem except the
Apostles; no visible company of them continued worship together, but the
Apostles; the rest were driven into corners.

Obj. It is (Jus Divin.) said, That they that were scattered, went every where
preaching the Word: it is not said, Teaching, which may be actus Charitatis;
but Preaching, whith is actus Officii: how can they preach, except they be
sent? Romans -- (...) refers to the act of men in Office.

Answ. 1. Teaching and Preaching in Scripturephrase are the same, Act. 4. 18.
They called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name
of Jesus. Can it be imagined that they should only prohibit teaching, an act
of Charity, or do they not forbid all preaching in Christ's Name? and Act. 5.
42. They ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. Here teaching and
preaching are made all one, and the very word (...), is here used for
preaching, as one with teaching, for both are in the Temple, and in every
house; and if our Brethren will allow teaching in the Temple, i. e. publicly,
as a Charitative act, that will be as much as is contended for. Here it is
said, [Dayly in the Temple and in every house, they ceased not to teach and
preach Jesus Christ.] And therefore in that it is said, They that were
scattered went every where preaching; it is all one in Scripture Phrase, as if
it had been said, They went every where Teaching the Word.

2. It is evident even by their own grant in the very Objection, by the place
they allege. Romans 10. that (...) is all one with (...); for to prove preaching
to be an act of Office, they allege that Romans 10. v. 15. How shall they
preach, except they be sent? and the word there for Preach, is (...); and in
the same verse it is added, [as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the Gospel of peace, (...), and bring glad tidings of good
things, (...). Here in the same verse, (...) and (...) are used promiscuously,
and declared to be of the same signification; now (...) is used for such as are
no acts of Office, Luke 8. v. 39. The man out of whom the devils departed,
cannot be proved to be an Officer; yet he went his way and published thorowout
the whole city, how great things Jesus had done unto him. The word for publish
is (...), So Mark 1. 45. Christ cleansed the Leper. v. 42. And then charged him
with silence. v. 44 See thou say nothing to any man, -- Yet v. 45. But he went
out and began to publish it -- (...). --

And Mark 7. 36. He charged them that they should tell no man; but the more he
charged them, so much the more a great deal (...), they published it

By all which it is evident, that (...) which in Scripture Phrase, and
according to the judgment of our Brethren, is of the same signification with
(...), and signifies to preach, yet this (...) is used to express acts of men
out of Office; and therefore it cannot be evidenced, that they who were
scattered, were Preachers by Office, from thence, because they went about
(...), preaching the word.

Obj. 1. Act. 8. 5. There is but one of this scattered number named, and he was
a person in Office, to wit, Philip, not the Apostle, but who is numbered among
the Deacons, Act. 6. and called an Evangelist, Act. 21. 8. By the singling out
of this one, who was in Office, we may judge that the rest were persons in
Office as well as he. Philip was ordained, Act. 6. 6.

Answ. 1. The consequence is very feeble: Because one of those that were
scattered was an Officer, ergo all that were scattered were Officers, non
sequitur. Some of those that were haled out of houses by Saul were women, yet
all that he haled out were not women: Act. 8. 8.

2. Philip's Ordination was to the Office-work of a Deacon, not of a Preacher,
Acts 6. 6. that Office and Ordination could not authorize him to preach. It was
to take off encumbrances from Preachers, that he and the rest were made
Deacons: Acts 6. 2. It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and
serve tables: verse. 3. wherefore brethren look ye out among you seven men. --
If he were now an Evangelist, it follows no more that the rest were Officers,
(which were scattered) because he was, then it does follow, that all who were
scattered were Evangelists, because he was one.

Obj. 5. It is probable that these that were scattered, did baptize, as well as
preach. Act. 11. 26. It is said there, there was a Church settled at Antioch;
which could not be, unless they were first baptized: but there were none in
Antioch to baptize them, if they of the dispersion did not; for Barnabas and
Agabus, and other Prophets, came not to Antioch till the Church was founded,
Act. 11. v. 26, 27. and this Church of Antioch is expressly said to be founded
by the scattered Brethren, Act. 21. 19. Now baptism is to be performed only
by men in Office, Mat. 28. 19.

Answ. 1. We cannot find that it is said, there was a Church settled at Antioch,
before Barnabas had been there; much less do we find it expressly said, that
this Church was founded by the scattered Brethren: Act. 11. 26. says, that a
whole year they (i. e. Barnabas and Saul, v. 25, 26.) assembled themselves with
the Church, -- which clearly shows that then there was a Church at Antioch,
and also that Barnabas and Saul (Church Officers) were there: but Barnabas had
been at Antioch before this, v. 22, 23. They sent forth Barnabas, that he
should go as far as Antioch. Who when he came, and had seen the grace of God,
was glad -- and after this he departed to seek Saul, v. 25. But when the Church
was settled, whether before Barnabas came, or after, we find not, nor by whose
hands. The place alleged to prove expressly that it was founded by the
scattered Brethren, is falsely quoted by the Printer, Act. 21. 19. for it
speaks nothing about the business. If they mean Act. 11. v. 19, 21. It is
said there, that the Hand of the Lord was with the scattered Saints, and a
great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. But this is far from speaking
expressly, that a Church was founded by them.

Surely by their believing they were not founded Church; or if they were, this
will destroy our Brethrens Objection altogether: for then either they first
baptized them before they did believe, and that will cross Gospel Order, which
pre-requireth believing in those that are Adulti unto baptism, Mar. 16. 16.
Act. 8. 36, 37. Or else they were first a Church by believing, and afterward
were baptized: and then the Objection falls; for then there could be a Church
settled at Antioch, though they were not first baptized; and they of the
dispersion might settle a Church, and yet might not baptize. Barnabas and Saul
might do that afterward.

2. We apprehend there might be a Church settled at Antioch, before they were
baptized: if baptism be to be performed only by men in Office, Mat. 28. 19.
and men be Officers only to a Church, as is proved before, then they must
first become a Church, before they can orderly be baptized. And then they might
be a Church, and yet not be baptized until Barnabas came to them.

3. If a Church could not be settled at Antioch, til first they were baptized;
yet in such a case of necessity where no Officers could be had, why might not
the scattered Christians baptize those that were converted, though no Officers,
as well as by our Brethrens first Answer to Act. 8. they might preach in such a
case of necessity? yet we assert not, that men out of Office may baptize.

Obj. 3. These scattered Brethren are said to be Prophets and Teachers, Act.
13. 1. where mention is made of Lucius of Cyrene, who in all probability, was
one of the scattered Preachers, as appears, Act. 11. v. 19, 20. where it is
said, that some of these scattered, were men of Cyrene.

Answ. 1. This is a mere conjecture without any proof; for it is no where said
that those Prophets and Teachers, Act. 13. 1. were of those scattered
Christians. Lucius might be of Cyrene, and yet be none of those mentioned Act.
11. 19, 20.

2. But suppose they were, this was above a year after the dispersion, some
think years, that these Officers are said to be in Antioch, Act. 13. 1. For
Barnabas and Saul assembled a whole year with the Church, Act. 11. v. 26. and
after that, Barnabas and Saul were sent with relief to Judea, v. 30. and
returned, chap. 12. 29. and after this, are these Prophets and Teachers said to
be in Antioch, Act. 13. 1. And in such a space, gifted Brethren might become
Officers at Antioch.

3. It is expressly said before this, that there came Prophets to Antioch, Act.
11. v. 27. And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And why
might not Lucius be one of those Prophets? However, it does not appear that
these Prophets and Teachers were of the scattered Brethren: and if they were,
yet they might be but gifted Brethren at their scattering.

Obj. 7. But had they not an extraordinary Call, seeing it is said, Act. 11.
21. The hand of the Lord was with them, and many were converted?

Answ. This does not prove it to be extraordinary; for a plenteous Conversion
is promised to ordinary means, Isai. 60. 5. The Hand of the Lord, is put for
his Power, as Psalm 11 8. 15, 16. For his Hand to be with, is for him to bless,
and show tokens of love: as for his Hand to be against, is for him to correct,
scourge, and punish, Judge. 2. 15. How the Hand of the Lord was with these
scattered Saints, is declared, A great number believed, -- he blessed their
labors unto conversion. And the Hand, yea the Arm of the Lord must be
revealed, else none will effectually believe, Isa. 55. 1. Romans 1. 16. And
therefore the Hand of the Lord is with those that have but an ordinary Call to
preach the Gospel.

Obj. 8. But might they not be of the seventy Disciples, or have mission from
the Apostles?

Answ. 1. The Gospel is silent about it, and therefore none can in faith assert
it.

2. It is improbable that they should have such a mission, in regard the
persecution occasioned their travels, Act. 8. 3, 4. Saul made havoc of the
Church -- [therefore] they that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the word. [Therefore] because Saul persecuted the Church: it is not
said therefore they preached, as if they might not lawfully have preached, if
the persecution had not been; but because they could not enjoy peace and
liberty at Jerusalem, therefore they went every where, and in their travels
they were not idle, but exercised in preaching the word.

Then, 1. The persecution, not the Apostles mission, occasioned their travels:
had they received mission from the Apostles, they must have gone whither they
were sent, though there had been no persecution; and then it had not been
[therefore,] as it is said it was, v. 4.

2. The persecution and scattering, in all likeliness, made them want
opportunity to receive such mission from the Apostles, if they had desired it.

3. The Church was scattered. i. e. the body of the Church, for the most part,
v 1. and they that were scattered, preached, v. 4. And therefore Deodat.
if the seventy. Disciples were there, yet it cannot be limited or restrained
unto them, as if they only preached.

Obj. 9. But this was an extraordinary case, it was a time of persecution. Some
rationally distinguish between a Church constituted, and a Church scattered and
dissolved; between what may be done in a Church gathered, and in an ordinary
way, and in the gathering of a Church, and in the cause of necessity. It is not
recorded that these did preach while they were at Jerusalem in a settled Church,
but when they were scattered; it cannot warrant preaching by persons uncalled,
where Churches and Ministers are, or may easily be had. This is no better
Argument, then if one should argue -- Because when there was no King in Israel,
every one did as it seemed good in his own eyes: therefore Subjects at any time
may do so.

Answ. 1. It is true, that a man may do some things, (necessity driving to it)
that at other times would be unlawful, where there is no such necessity. But,

1. Though persecution necessitated these Disciples to travel, yet that laid no
necessity upon them to preach; and therefore necessity can be no plea in this
case.

2. It is questionable whether necessity, or an extraordinary case, can make
that which which is in it self unlawful, become lawful: if a man does swear
falsely, because else he shall suffer, he sins in it; as Peter did, when to
avoid suffering, he with oaths denied Christ. But that which is not in it self
unlawful, but only at this time, or in this or that case, may be lawful in
time of persecution. If it were in it self unlawful to preach without
Ordination, then it were to be questioned, whether in a time of persecution it
could be lawful? If when there was no King, the people did what was right in
their own eyes, and not what the Law of God required, they sinned in it, and
they had no Divine allowance therein; but these had a Divine allowance to
preach, Act. 11. 21.

3. The Question is, when is there such a case of necessity? when is the case
so extraordinary, as a man may lawfully preach without Ordination, who
otherwise should sin in preaching without it? Surely when Ordination can be
attained in Gods way, those who are required to submit unto it, may not
lawfully be without it, upon any pretense of necessity, or an extraordinary
case. And if Ordination cannot be had in Gods way, or according to his will and
appointment, then the case is extraordinary, and necessity may be pleaded for
being without it, as well as if it could not be had at all: for a man sins
who takes up an Ordinance of Christ out of Christ's Way, or not as he has
appointed; and it were to be under a necessity of sinning, to be obliged to do
any thing out of Christ's Way.

Now we find no rule for Ordination to Office-work without Election from a
Church, as antecedaneous thereunto; and it were to go out of Christ's Way, and
to act not according to his Will and appointment, to be ordained to Office-work
before such a Call from a Church: and therefore all gifted men lie under such a
case of necessity, or it is an extraordinary case, until some Church of Christ
has given them such a Call; and so they may preach until then without
Ordination.

2. They that preach in such an extraordinary case, either they are Officers,
or no Officers.

First, If they be no Officers: then preaching is not an act peculiar to
Office; then there is a difference between preaching by Office; and preaching
by Gift; then there is a notion besides Office, under which men may warrantably
preach; and this will be applicable to gifted men: as (...) says, it is a
contradiction, that the formal act should be before the form be introduced.
That which one who is no Officer may do, cannot be an act of Office in it self,
but as performed in this or that manner.

Let not gifted brethren, then, be charged with assuming the Office of the
Ministry, or intruding into the Office, because they preach: if they do no
more then persons who are no Officers may do, then there is no usurpation of
the Office in doing of it. That which can be done in any case lawfully, by a
person that is no Officer, cannot without contradiction be said to be an act
peculiar to Office, or an act of Office in it self.

Preaching it self then is not an act of Office; but preaching in such a
manner, or under such a relation. And let not gifted brethren be denied liberty
to preach, but only to preach Office-wise; seeing Preaching may be by a person
not in Office.

Secondly, If those that preach in such extraordinary cases be Officers, then

1. Ordination is not essential to Office. Office, nor any other thing, can
subsist or be, without its essentials: if essentials, Matter and Form, be not
found, the compositum is denied to have a being. If Office may be preserved in
being, where Ordination is not, then Ordination cannot be essential to Office,
much less be the formal cause of it. As well may there be a man without a
reasonable soul, as Office without Ordination, if Ordination be the formal
cause of Office. Take away the essence of Office, and the formal cause, or that
which is constitutive thereof, and there can be no Officer.

2. Then another Mission must be found out besides Ordination; or else men may
preach who are not sent, and men may believe without hearing a Preacher sent:
and then that Rule is not universal, Romans 10. 14, 15.

3. Then if men baptize without Ordination, their acts may be valid, according
to their own arguing: for say they,

Those that may preach, may baptize, Matthew. 28. 19. And (by the way) why may
not Baptism be valid, when performed by persons whose Ordination by the
corruptness of it is a nullity, as well as when by persons who are altogether
without Ordination?

Argum. 5. From Gospel-Rules about Prophesying.

All that are Prophets, may publicly preach.

But some men who are not ordained Officers, are Prophets:

Ergo, Some men who are not ordained Officers, may publicly preach.

The Major, That all that are Prophets may publicly preach, is proved, 1 Cor.
14, 29. Let the prophets speak -- verse. 31. For ye may [all prophesie] one by
one -- Here is an universal liberty given to all the Prophets to exercise their
gifts publicly in a settled Church: verse. 23. If therefore the whole church be
come together into some place -- verse. 24. if all prophecy -- This prophesying
therefore was publicly, in a Church-meeting: and not only some, but all the
Prophets have a liberty of prophesying granted to them, verse. 31. We do not
say, that [all] has reference to every member of the Church of Corinth, as if
all the people of the Church might prophecy, whether they had the gift or no:
we grant the liberty does not extend so far; and therefore many Arguments used
by our Brethren, to prove that [all] does not include every member in the
Church of Corinth, do not touch us. That all the Prophets in that Church had
the liberty of prophesying granted to them, is as much as we assert: and this
our Brethren cannot deny.

The Minor, That some men who are not ordained Officers are Prophets, we prove
thus:

All that have the gift of Prophecy, are Prophets.

But some men who are not ordained Officers have the gift of Prophecy:

Ergo, Some men who are not ordained Officers are Prophets.

The Major, That all who have the gift of Prophecy are Prophets, is evident,

1. From their denomination: the name Prophet is properly applicable unto all
that have a gift of Prophecy: yea, the reason of that name must be, either
only because they do actually prophecy; and that cannot be, because they must
be Prophets before they can warrantably do that; or because they have a gift to
prophecy. How can they be denied the name of Prophets, who enjoy that gift
which gives the denomination?

2. From the Apostles calling prophecy a gift, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Though I have
[the gift of prophecy, -- ] and Romans 12. 6. Having then gifts, differing --
whether prophecy, let us prophecy. Those that have the gift of prophecy, are
commanded here to prophecy.

3. From their being no Church Officers, who are by the Apostles called
prophets, and are commanded to prophecy: that some of these prophets were no
Church Officers, we shall endeavor to prove by and by. And if they were not
prophets by Office, then they must be prophets who have the gift of prophecy.
Either an Office, or a Gift, must give the denomination. If the gift be enough
to give the denomination, then all that have the gift of prophecy, are
prophets. To clear the Minor, viz. That some men who are not ordained Officers,
have the gift of prophecy, There are three things necessary to be proved:

1. That prophecy is a Gift, not an Office. 2. That some men have the gift of
prophecy; or that prophesying is a gift still continuing. 3. That some men who
are not ordained Officers, have that gift of prophecy.
This last position is proved thus:

1. Because there is no Scripture-warrant for the ordaining prophets: and
without a Scripture-warrant, they may not be ordained. Let any be produced.

2. Because they cannot warrantably be ordained Prophets, until they be
discerned to have the gift of prophecy: they must have the gift first; and
therefore some men not ordained have the gift of prophecy, if it be a
continuing gift.

3. Because there are some who have the gift of prophecy, who are no officers,
as will appear in what follows; and Ordination (according to our Brethrens
Judgment) is the essential constitutive thing of an Officer. He that is
ordained (say they) is an Officer. Many of these Prophets are no Officers, and
therefore not ordained.

For we suppose they will not say, that a man may be lawfully ordained, and yet
be no Church Officer. Our greatest difficulty therefore is, to prove the former
Propositions.

Prop. 1. That the prophesying spoken of 1 Cor. 14. is a Gift, not an Office.

Argum. 1. Because all who have the gift of prophecy are Prophets. Our two
first Arguments before given, prove this; we shall not here repeat them. The
Consequence is clear; because all who have the gift of Prophecy, are not
Officers; they must first have the gift, before they can be made Prophets by
Office. If they be Prophets so soon as they have the gift, then they are
Prophets who are no Officers: for if there had been such an Office, the gift
must have been before the Office.

Argum. 2. That which ought in duty, and might warrantably in faith, be coveted
by every man who was a Member of the Church at Corinth, that was a gift only,
not an Office. But the prophesying spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. was such as ought in
duty, and might warrantably in faith be coveted by every man who was a Member
of the Church at Corinth. Ergo, The prophesying spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. was a
gift only, not an Office.

The Major we prove thus:

1. That which the Lord had no where promised to accomplish, that could not in
duty, nor warrantably in faith be coveted; for it is a humane faith that has
not a Divine promise to bottom upon. But the Lord had no where promised to make
every man who was a Member of the Church at Corinth, (or any other Church) a
Church Officer. Let them show a promise of it, that will assert it. Ergo, Every
man who was a Member of the Church at Corinth, could not in duty, nor
warrantably in faith covet to be a Church Officer. Ergo, That which ought in
duty, and might warrantably in faith be coveted by every man who was a Member
of the Church at Corinth, that was a Gift only, not an Office.

2. That which was impossible to be attained, that could not in duty, nor
warrantably in faith be coveted. It Is in vain to covet that which can never be
had, or which is unattainable. But for every man who was a Member of the Church
at Corinth, to covet to become an Officer, had been to covet that which was
impossible to be attained. 1 Cor. 12. v. 17. If the whole body were an eye,
where were the hearing? v. 19, 29, 30. Ergo, It could not in duty, nor
warrantably in faith be coveted.

3. To say that the Prophets were extraordinary Officers, as they must be, if
they were Officers at all, else being ordinary Officers, they must be still
continuing, and so there is still another Order of preaching Officers in the
Church, besides and distinct from Pastors and Teachers, which they will not
assert, is more absurd.

If they were extraordinary Officers, that makes the case worse. Can it be
imagined, that every man who was a member of the Church at Corinth, ought in
duty, and might warrantably in faith covet to be an extraordinary Officer, when
it does not appear that he might covet the ordinary Office of a Pastor or
Teacher?

Does it not sound harsh, to say, that every man in a Church ought to covet to
be an Officer in the Church? Can our Brethren exhort all the men that walk with
them in Ordinances, to covet that they may be Pastors or Teachers? or do they
unfeignedly desire it? If they did, surely they would not lay so much
discouragement before gifted men, to hinder their preaching. And can they
imagine that the Apostle should exhort the generality of men in the Church of
Corinth to covet to be extraordinary Officers, when themselves cannot exhort
the generality of Christians to covet to be ordinary Officers?

Thus we have proved the Major of our second Argument for the evincing that the
prophesying spoken of 1 Cor. 14 is a Gift only, not an Office.

The Minor, viz. That the prophesying spoken of 1 Cor. 14. was such as ought in
duty, and might warrantably in faith be coveted by every man who was a member
of the Church at Corinth, we prove from verse. 1, 5, 39. There is a command for
it, verse. 1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that
ye may prophecy. Verse. 5. I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather
that ye prophesied. -- Here he wishes, that not some only, but [all]
prophesied: the gift of prophecy then may lawfully be wished to all men that
are members of a Church: and he adds a reason of his wish; [for greater is he
that prophesies, then he that speaks with tongues, except he interpret, that
the Church may receive edifying] because prophecy tends more to the
edification of the Church, then speaking with tongues without interpretation.
v. 39. Wherefore brethren, covet to prophecy. -- Here is an exhortation left
in general among the Corinthians, whereby he lays it upon them as a duty; and
therefore it was that which any man amongst them might warrantably in faith,
covet to attain unto. All had not attained to it; but every man might covet to
prophecy. Ergo, It was no Office.

Obj. Prophets are enumerated amongst Officers of the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28,
29. God has set in his Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, -- Ephesians. 4 11, 12. Yea they are set next Apostles, Mr. collings.
above Evangelists, and Pastors and Teachers -- Apostles and Teachers were
Officers set by God in his Church, so also were Jus Divin.
the Prophets.

Answ. 1. The placing of Prophets before Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers,
cannot prove them to be in dignity above Pastors or Teachers.

Our Brethren themselves use these words; Priority of Order is no infallible
Argument Jus Divinum Regim. page 133.
of priority of worth and dignity. -- we find (say they) Priscilla, a woman,
named before Aquila, a man, and her husband, Act. 18. 18. Romans 16. 3. 1 Timothy 4.
19. is therefore the woman preferred before the man? the wife before the
husband?

And in another place (Ib. p. 147.) they say, Sometimes the Pastor is put
before the Teacher, as Ephesians. 4. 11. sometimes the Teacher before the Pastor, as
Romans 12. 7, 8.

We may add further, that according to their own interpretation of 1 Cor. 12.
8. the Jus Divinum Min. page 97.
word of wisdom denotes the Pastors work, the word of knowledge the Teachers
work; and yet prophecy is put after these, v. 10. To another prophecy -- And
if any will build a conclusion upon the order of words, which order will they
stick to? v. 8, 10. Prophets are put after Pastors and Teachers, and v. 28, 29.
Prophets are set before Teachers.

2. The enumerating of Prophets amongst Officers of the Church, is not
sufficient to evidence that Prophets were Officers: for though some Officers be
named, yet we conceive that all which are named are not Officers; for here are
eight enumerated, 1 Cor. 12. 28. first Apostles, second Prophets, third
Teachers, fourth Miracles, fifth Gifts of healing, sixth Helps, seventh
Governments, eighth Diversities of tongues; and elsewhere there are others to
be added, v. 10. and Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12. ninth discerning of Spirits, tenth
the interpretation of tongues, eleventh Evangelists. Can any conclude that
there were eight, or eleven Officers in the Church in those days? You may say
that there were so many distinct Officers, because so many are enumerated
amongst Officers, as well as that Prophets are Officers, because reckoned up
together with Officers. Whereas some of those enumerated are gifts, v. 4, 30,
31. and particularly prophecy is called a gift, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Though I have
the gift of prophecy, Romans 12. 6. Yea, diverse of those gifts mentioned, 1
Cor. 12. 28. did meet in one Officer; the Apostles were Officers, yet they
wrought Miracles, had the gift of tongues, Act. 2. v. 3, 4. Nay, the gift of
tongues is one Office, (if they be all Officers that be enumerated, 1 Cor. 12.
28. Diversities of tongues) and this gift was granted unto some before they
were baptized, Act. 10. v. 46, 47, 48. On the Gentiles also was poured out the
gift of the Holy Ghost, for they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify
God. Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be
baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded
them to be baptized --

Here was the gift of tongues before baptism; and therefore according to our
Brethrens principles, before Church Membership; and if they were not yet
Church Members, how could they be Church Officers? if they were not set in the
Church, how could they be set as Officers in it? Yet if the enumerating of
Prophets amongst Officers, would prove them to be Church Officers, then the
enumerating of the gifts of tongues amongst Officers in the very same verse, 1
Cor. 12. 28. would prove those that had such gifts to be Officers also.

3. If Prophets must be Officers, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. those places
may be intended of the extraordinary Prophets, who did foretell of future
events, as Act. 11. 27, 28. In those days came Prophets from Jerusalem unto
Antioch, and there stood up one of them, named Agabus, and signified by the
Spirit, that there should be a great dearth thorowout the world If such
Prophets be intended in those forecited places, and be extraordinary Officers,
yet this hinders not, but that the Prophets mentioned 1 Cor. 14. may be only
by gift: especially seeing the fourteenth Chapter is an entire Exhortation of
it self, and chiefly spent in holding forth Directions about prophesying, and
that to the whole Church, without hinting any thing about foretelling things to
come; which must be their main work as Prophets, if such a sort of Prophets
were intended.

And this leads us to the second Position.

Propos. 2. That some men have the gift of prophecy, or that prophesying is a
gift still continuing.

Argum. 1. That which was in use by Divine appointment in the primitive times,
and no Gospel-Rule can be shown for the repeal or ceasing of it; that must
needs be still continuing: If the Law which established the use of it be still
in force, or unrepealed, surely the use of it ought to be continued, for else
the Law of Christ is broken, and sin attends it. But prophesying was in use
by Divine appointment in primitive times, and no Gospel-Rule can be shown for
the repeal or ceasing of it. Ergo, prophesying must needs be still continuing.

That prophesying was in use by Divine appointment in primitive times, it
cannot be denied; this 1 Cor. 14. almost thorowout, is purposely to reprove an
irregular use of prophesying, and to direct in the right use; and therefore, as
Mr. Shephard well observes, the Apostle does grant and establish an use of it.

Now let our Brethren show any Gospel-Rule to evidence that prophesying is now
ceased, which we have proved was once in use by Divine appointment We should
not need produce a Rule to prove it is not ceased; it is their work to prove
that it is ceased.

Yet we shall add a few things which will conduce to the proving that it is not
ceased.

Argum. 2. That which was practiced in primitive times, which was ordinary, is
still continuing. But the prophesying mentioned 1 Cor. 14. was ordinary. Ergo,
That prophesying mentioned 1 Cor. 14. is still continuing.

The Major will not be denied, if that which was practiced then, which was
ordinary, be not obligatory and binding to us, we are to seek for a Rule for
our duty.

The Minor is, That the prophesying mentioned 1 Cor. 14. was ordinary: for
this, we may refer the Reader to Mr. Rutherford's Due right of Presbyteries, p.
466, 467. where he proves by eight Arguments, That these very Prophets
mentioned 1 Cor. 14. were ordinary Prophets. Indeed he asserteth that they were
Officers; in which he is against us: but if his Arguments will hold to prove
that they are ordinary Prophets, then our Brethren must say, either that they
are Prophets by gift only, or else assert another sort of ordinary Officers
for prophesying, distinct from Pastors and Teachers; or else retract and unsay
what they have said. For, in their Jus Divin. Minist. p. 97. they speak thus:
The gift of prophecy is reckoned amongst the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, and put in the midst of them, 1 Cor. 12. 9, 10, 11. and
contradistinguished from ordinary gifts, verse. 7, 8. The word of wisdom, the
word of knowledge: the word of wisdom denotes the Pastors work, the word of
knowledge the Teachers work: but prophesying is different from both these. --

Here our Brethren do plainly assert, that prophesying is different from the
work of Pastors and Teachers; and therefore if prophesying prove an ordinary
Office, and continuing, it must be a different office from Pastor and Teacher.
And here we cannot but observe how the Lord has left them to a
self-contradiction, (if the sundry Ministers of London publishing the first
Book, be of the province of London, which published the second.) For in this
Book called Jus Divin. Minist. p. 96, 97, 98. they would strongly urge it, that
these Prophets are extraordinary Officers: but in their other Book, called Jus
Divin. Regiminis, p. 228. they use these words: And though these Prophets had
extraordinary gifts, (as the Church of Corinth excelled all other Churches in
gifts, 1 Cor. 1. 7.) and were able to preach in an extraordinary singular way;
yet were they the ordinary Pastors and Ministers of that Church of Corinth, as
the whole current of this 14 Chap. evidenceth; wherein (as Mr. Rutherford, in
his Due Right of Presbyt. p. 466, 467. proves by eight Arguments they were
ordinary Pastors.
some have well observed) so many Rules and Directions aptly agreeing to
ordinary Pastors, are imposed upon them, for the well-ordering of their
Ministerial exercises. --

Here they say these Prophets 1 Cor. 14. were ordinary Pastors: what is this
short of flat self-contradiction? Mr. Rutherford's Arguments, which they
approved of very much, in writing their Book called Jus Divin. Regiminis,
whereby he proves ordinary Prophets to be intended, we may now produce to
answer their later book called Jus Divin. Minist. wherein they assert the
Prophets to be extraordinary Officers.

Mr. Rutherford speaks thus:

They did here prophecy according to the Analogy of faith; and that they have
common with Prophets now adays. 2. They are by the same rules regulated, that
our Pastors are now. 3. They exercise these same acts of Jurisdiction which
Pastors do now exercise. 1. They are to prophecy in a known tongue, verse. 19,
20, 21, 22. and that to the edification and comfort of the Church, verse. 31.
even as Pastors now adays: only the internal principle, to wit, the infused
gift of prophesying, made them extraordinary prophets in fieri, as our prophets
become prophets by ordinary industry and studies, in fieri: but in facto esse,
and according to the substance of the acts of prophesying, these extraordinary
prophets and our ordinary prophets and pastors differ not in specie and nature.
As the eyes put in the man born blind, Joh. 9. and those eyes which we suppose
he was capable of from his mothers womb; and the wine miraculously made out of
water by Jesus Christ, Joh. 2. and the wines that grew in Judea, according to
their manner of production and in fieri differed, but in facto esse they were
of the same nature. Hence you see in the Text these Prophets are every way
regulated as ordinary Prophets, and as the Prophets of the Church of Corinth.

1. Because it is acknowledged by all Interpreters, that the scope of the
Chapter is to prescribe what is order and decency in the public worship in the
Church of Corinth, as the last verse says, v. 40. Let all things be done
decently, and in order; and consequently, how these Prophets should edify the
Church of Corinth, v. 4, 12, 16, 17.

2. That these Prophets should not speak in public the language of a
Barbarian, v. 11, 12. to the which the hearer could not say Amen, v. 16. and
this way are our ordinary Prophets regulated, except the Papists will but say
service in Latin.

3. A direction is put on the Prophets, on those who speak with tongues, that
they be not Children in understanding; and that they be in malice as Children;
but as concerning understanding, men, v. 20. which agrees well to Prophets, as
they are ordinary Pastors.

4. What more ordinary then the coming together of the whole Church for
prophesying, v. 23, 24. and convincing of unbelievers? as v. 25.

5. The Prophets are to be limited to a way of speaking to Edification; as he
who speaks with tongues, who must speak by an interpreter, or then be silent
in the Church, v. 27, 28.

6. These Prophets, as our ordinary Prophets, must speak orderly, and that but
one at once, to eschew confusion, v. 29.

7. What they speak, is to be judged, and put under censure; for the whole
College must judge, v. 29, 8.

8. And as the women are here put under a Rule, when to speak, and when to be
silent, v. 34, 35. So are these Prophets: all which, and diverse other Rules,
do regulate our ordinary Prophets; which clearly says to me, (says Mr.
Rutherford,) that this is a pattern of a College of ordinary Prophets, etc.

Thus we have given you Mr. Rutherford's eight Arguments, to prove that
ordinary Prophers are intended in that place: we do not say, that every one of
them is conclusive; but diverse of them are very considerable: and possibly
will be more readily received from his mouth, then from ours; and all laid
together, they will amount to little less then that they are ordinary Prophets.

That so many ordinary Rules should be laid down about prophesying, and none
extraordinary; and that yet the act about which all the Rules are given, should
be concluded to be extraordinary, seems very strange and ungrounded.

1. The Rules to regulate the work are ordinary.

2. The description of the work itself is ordinary, 1 Cor. 14. 3. He that
prophesies, speaks unto men unto edification and exhortation, and comfort.
This description holds forth the act of prophesying, [exhortation,] and the
ends of it [edification, and comfort.] It is true, extraordinary gifts were to
be employed to these ends of edification and comfort, and some things were
ordinary in extraordinary Officers: exhortation for those ends of edification
and comfort, was not the proper work of extraordinary Prophets; but prediction,
or foretelling things to come.

He that has a gift to speak unto exhortation, edification and comfort, has
all that is here required unto these Prophets: but a gift of prediction is
required besides unto all extraordinary prophets.

In this Chapter no word is mentioned of foretelling future events, which is
that which should make them extraordinary Prophets; and diverse ordinary acts
are mentioned, and that largely: that their main work as extraordinary
Officers, and so as Prophets, should be omitted, if they had been such, how
improbable is it?

3. One great end of extraordinary prophesying is denied to this prophesying;
it was a great end of future events, (which is the proper act of extraordinary
Prophets) to be a sign: for, our Brethren give this as one evidence of an
immediate Call to Jus Divinum Minist. page 116.
the Ministry, The having the gift of supernatural prediction, or foretelling
things to come. They use these words, -- We say, That an immediate Call is
always joined either with the gift of Miracles, or the gift of Tongues, or
some other extraordinary thing, by which men are enabled undoubtedly to
demonstrate to others their immediate Call: thus the prophets were all of them
endued with the gift of foretelling things to come: and John Baptist was
enabled to make proof of his immediate Call, by showing the prophesies both of
Isaiah and Malachy, that were concerning him; which prophesies were applied to
him by the Angel, Luke 1. 15, 16, 17. before he was born, appropriated by
himself, Joh. 1. 23. and confirmed by Christ's Testimony of him, Mat. 11. 9, 10,
11. etc.

By all which it appears, even from their own mouths, that as Miracles and
the gift of Tongues were for a sign, so also was the extraordinary gift of
prophecy, or foretelling things to come, for a sign, to evidence that they
were no Impostors or Sadduces.

Now, the prophesying spoken of 1 Cor. 14. was not for a sign, verse. 22.
wherefore strange Tongues are for a Sign, not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not; but prophesying serves not for them that believe not,
but for them which believe.

The Antithesis or opposition between the gift of tongues and prophesying,
intimated in the particle [but,] does evidence that the thing which is
predicated of tongues, viz. that they are for a sign, cannot be predicated of
the prophesying there spoken of, that it is for a sign also. Were this
prophesying for a sign, then it should serve for those that believe not, as
the gift of tongues does; which the Apostle expressly denies; and therefore the
prophesying spoken of, cannot be the extraordinary gift of foretelling things
to come, which was a sign; and so it is an ordinary gift of prophecy.

4. Women Prophetesses are forbidden this prophesying in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.
v. 34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted
unto them to speak: but they are commanded to be under obedience: as also says
the Law. But women Prophetesses might have prophesied publicly, if they had
received the extraordinary gifts of prophecy. Luke 2. v. 36. And there was one
Anna a Prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel -- v. 38. And she coming in at that
instant, gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all them that
looked for redemption in Jerusalem. Here a woman Prophetess did with Divine
allowance speak publicly [to all -- ] and therefore in Gospel-days it was
permitred to women who had an extraordinary gift of prophecy, to speak
publicly.

That public prophesying which was not permitted unto women by the Word of
God, was ordinary; for extraordinary prophesying was permitted unto women, Luke
2. 36, 38. But the public prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. was not permitted unto women
by the Word of God, v. 34. Ergo, The public prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. was
ordinary; Ergo, it is still continuing.

Neither can it be said that before they had this liberty, but now the Apostle
takes it a way; for, he urges their silence upon such grounds as would before
the promulgation of the Gospel have made it unlawful for extraordinary
prophetesses to have taught publicly, as much as now. 1 Cor. 14. v. 34. -- but
to be under obedience, as also says the Law; intimating, that they should
transgress the Law, if they did not keep silence in the Churches; therefore it
was no new, but an ancient prohibition fetched from the Law; and from nature
there is another Argument against it, v. 35. For it is [a shame] for women to
speak in the Church. All laid together, will speak it to be an ordinary gift of
prophesying, and so still continuing.

Obj. 2. It is evident by the series of this Chapter, that the Prophets her
spoken of, and their prophesying was extraordinary, v. 26. When Jus Divinum
Minist. page 97.
you are come together, every one of you has a psalm, has a tongue, has a
revelation, has an interpretation: tongues, interpretation, revelation, are
joined together. v. 30. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by,
let the first hold his peace: by which it appears, that the prophets here
spoken of, were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and that this gift of prophecy was
an extraordinary Dispensation of God, given to the primitive Church, but now
ceased. --

Answ. 1. The series of the Chapter, (as has been shown) speaks the prophets
and their prophesying to be ordinary: as for v. 26. if our Brethren would have
recited all the words, it wonld have been evident enough that an ordinary gift
may be intended; the words run thus, [ -- Every one of you has a psalm, has a
doctrine, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. -- ] our
Brethren have left out those words, [hath a doctrine] and then it seems as if
none but extraordinary gifts were mentioned. Such as have but ordinary gifts,
have [a doctrine] as well as persons extraordinarily gifted. Ordinary Elders
labor in the word [and doctrine,] 1 Timothy 5. 17. And ought to be able by sound
[doctrine,] both to exhort and convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9. And
therefore the joining together of tongues, interpretation, and revelation, does
not at all evidence, that prophesying is an extra ordinary gift or Office: for
doctrine is joined with them, which is ordinary.

Their Argument must run thus:

That which is joined with, or reckoned up amongst extraordinary gifts, is
extraordinary. But prophesying is so, v. 26. Ergo. And then the Major is easily
denied: for it is a common thing, to join and reckon up extraordinary and
ordinary gifts together. And a like Argument we might use against them: that
which is joined with, or reckoned up amongst ordinary gifts, is ordinary. But
prophesying is so, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. Ergo, prophesying is
ordinary. Yea, prophesying (if mentioned at all, 1 Cor. 14. 26.) is joined
with, or expressed by what is ordinary, viz. doctrine.

2. It is hard to determine that by revelation is meant prophesying, v. 26. for
revelation is distinguished from prophesying, v. 6. -- except I shall speak to
you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine.
Here, revelation and prophesying seem not to be the same; and how will it be
proved, that by revelation is meant prophesying, v. 26? if not, their Argument
falls: for it may be replied, Prophesying is neither of those three gifts
which are joined together, v. 26. If prophesying be spoken of, it is
questionable whether it be expressed by [doctrine,] which is ordinary; or by
revelation, which is supposed to be extraordinary.

3. There is ordinary revelation, as well as extra ordinary: if by revelation
be meant prophesying, v. 26. yet there is no necessity that it should be
understood of immediate revelation; and if not, then it is not extraordinary.
As there is an immediate revelation by the Spirit, so there is a mediate
revelation by the written Word. The Spirit uses the Word, as a means whereby
it gives forth discoveries of the Will of God, Ephesians. 1. v. 16, 17, 18. --
making mention of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and [revelation] in
the knowledge of him: the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye
may know what is the hope of his calling, etc.

He speaks here of such revelations as are common to the Saints. When by the
Gospel they reach unto a knowledge of Christ, and the hope of his Calling, then
they enjoy revelations. Phil. 3. 15. -- If in any thing ye be otherwise minded,
God [shall reveal] even this unto you. He does not speak of new revelations,
but of a revelation of those doctrines of the Gospel, which he before had
preached. Whence it is evident, that there are ordinary revelations, still
continuing. And this may answer the great Objection which some raise from ver.
30. Say they, These prophets spoke by extraordinary revelation. Ergo, They were
extraordinary Officers.

We deny that they spoke by extraordinary revelation: the Text does not enforce
it. There was a disorder in the Church at Corinth, viz. Diverse of the prophets
did speak together or at once in the assembly; and so edification was hindered:
to rectify this, says the Apostle, v. 39. Let the Prophets speak two or
three, and let the other judge. He would have two or three speak, and the rest
hear, and be silent. But lest two or three should speak at once, or lest one
should spin out all the time, and others who came prepared to speak, should
want opportunity to exercise their gifts, he directs further, ver. 30. If any
thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace: i.
e. Let not many speak together; before another begins, let the first be
silent: let one speak a convenient time, and then hold his peace, and give way
or place to others, that the gifts of others may be exercised as well as his:
and a reason is added, v. 31. For ye may all prophecy one by one: i. e. one
after another, not many at once. Lest they should think that by this means the
gifts of some would be cooped up, and their liberty for the exercise of them
infringed; he tells them, no, they might [all] prophecy: i. e. all who were
prophets: yet it must be orderly, one after another: but this does not evidence
the Apostles intent to be, that upon a subitaneous impulse which another has,
the first must abruptly break off, and hold his peace.

The requiring the first to hold his peace, does not necessarily either forbid
his proceeding so far as he intended, or command a sudden silence in the midst
of a discourse, upon another having a sudden revelation, to give way to that;
but it forbids the speaking of diverse together in the same assembly, and
commands so to contract a man's discourse, as there may be opportunity for
others who come prepared to speak, or exercise their gifts also.

Neither can it be concluded, that they prophesied by immediate inspiration,
without any previous preparations, because what they spoke is said to be
[revealed] to them; For, Gospel Truths are revealed, by study, industry, and
the use of ordinary means, as well as by immediate inspiration, as we proved
before; and therefore no ground can be fetched from ver. 30. that can argue
these Prophets to be extraordinaty Officers. Indeed the immediate Revelations
and real motions of the Divine Spirit do not use to interfere with, interrupt
and justle out one another, as according to such an interpretation they should
do. If the first did speak by immediate revelation, and must suddenly hold his
peace before he has finished his discourse, or fully declared his Revelations,
that another might discover his; then the motions of the same Spirit should
clash each with other, and the Spirit should interrupt it self; which it were
an impeachment to the wisdom of the Spirit for any to affirm.

Object. 2. Prophets are mentioned with a note of singularity. 1 Cor. 12. 29,
30. Are all Prophets? Ergo, Prophecy was a miraculous extraordinary gift. --

Answ. 1. A note of singularity is proper to them, because all had not the gift
of prophecy. Some Churchmembers were not prophets.

2. It does not follow, That therefore prophecy was a miraculous extraordinary
gift; For, the ordinary gift of Teaching is expressed with a note of
singularity also in the very same verse, 1 Cor. 12. 29. Are all Apostles? are
all Prophets? [Are all Teachers?]

Object. 3. Prophets in all the Old and New Testament, signify some in Office
peculiarly called and sent. 1 Samuel 3. 20. 1 Samuel 22. 5. Act. 13. 1. Act. 21.
10, 11. Act. 11. 27, 28. The word Prophesying is used generally in the New
Testament for that which is extraordinary and by Revelation. Matthew. 26. 68.
Rev. 1. 3. Act. 21. 9. Luke 1. 67. Rev. 22. 10, 19. Rev. 10. 11. Mark 7. 6. 1
Pet. 1. 10. Jud. 14. Luke 1. 76. and 7. 28. Matthew. 21. 26, 14, 5. Mat 13. 57.
Matthew. 7. 22. Act. 19. 6, etc. Joh. 11. 51. 1 Timothy 1. 18.

Answ. 1. We have given many reasons to evidence that the prophets, 1 Cor 14.
are neither Officers, nor persons extraordinarily gifted: and prophecy being
the chief subject of that Chapter* hence the acceptance of the word prophecy
in that place, is more likely to be found in that Chapter, then to be fetched
from other places which do not purposely treat of that subject. And if the word
were used there in a different sense from what it bears in all other places,
yet there may be enough there to clear that to be the sense of it.

2. It is questionable, Whether the word prophesying be used in diverse of
those places mentioned, either for Officers or persons extraordinarily gifted:
as Act. 13. 1. Rev. 10. 11. Matthew. 7. 22. It is one thing for the persons who
are prophets to have extraordinary gifts, and another thing for them to have
the extra ordinary gift of prophecy. Those Prophets mentioned Matthew. 7. 22.
might have power to work miracles, to cast out Devils, yet their prophesying
might be an ordinary gift, as Stephen had extraordinary gifts. Act. 6. 8.
Stephen full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the
people. And yet he had the ordinary Office of a Deacon upon him for all that,
ver. 6, 7. It may as well be argued, that the Office of a Deacon is
extraordinary, because Stephen, a Deacon, wrought miracles, as that the
prophets, Matthew. 7. 22, etc. were extraordinary, because they wrought miracles.
--

3. It appears to us, as a certain truth, that prophesying is used in the New
Testament for that which is neither an extraordinary Office, nor an
extraordinary gift. Matthew. 13. ver. 57. -- But Jesus said unto them, A Prophet
is not without honor, save in his own Country, and in his own house. Here the
person speaking was indeed an extraordinary prophet; but the rule he lays
down is general, and cannot be restrained unto him only, or to extraordinary
prophets: for, can any imagine that the sense should only be this, He that
foretells things to come, is not without honor, save in his own Country?
Surely it extends to all faithful Teachers or publishers of
Gospel-Mysteries, for they are subject to be despised in their own country and
house, as well as they which foretell things to come; as Luke 4. 24. No prophet
is accepted in his own Country. So Mat. 10. 41. He that receives a prophet, in
the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophets reward. Will any say, that this
promise runs only to such as receive extraordinary prophets? Surely the
meaning is, He that so receives any Gospel-preacher, he shall have a reward:
ordinary Interpreters of the Word, are here called prophets three times in one
verse.

So Act. 15. 32. And Judas and Silas being prophets also themselves, exhorted
the brethren with many words, and confirmed them: Exhorting is the work of
prophets. Here prophesying and exhorting are mentioned as one and the same
thing; for their exhorting is said to be because they were prophets. Take the
words of Calvin on this place; says he, They were prophets: whereas the word
has diverse significations: it is not taken in this place for those prophets to
whom it was granted to foretell things to come, because this title should come
in out of season when he entreats of another matter: but Luke his meaning is,
that Judas and Silas were endued with excellent knowledge and understanding of
the mysteries of God, that they might be good Interpreters of God: as Paul in
the fourteenth of the first to the Corinthians, when he entreats of the
prophecy, and prefers it before all other gifts, speaks not of
foretelling things to come, but he commends it for this fruit, because it
does edify the Church by doctrine, exhortation and consolation. After this
manner does Luke assign exhortation to the prophets, as being the principal
point of their Office.

By all this it appears, that although he counted prophets to be Officers;
yet he did not account the prophecy mentioned here, nor 1 Cor. 14. to be the
extraordinary gift of foretelling things to come. Rev. 11. v. 3. the witnesses
are said to prophecy a thousand two hundred and three score days -- It is
doubtful what this prophesying of the witnesses is, neither is that material to
the business in hand; but this is certain, that either the extraordinary gift
of prophesying did not cease in the primitive times, because the prophesying of
the witnesses is one thousand two hundred sixty days, and therefore did
undoubtedly continue many hundred years since; or else it must be granted, that
there is an ordinary prophesying owned in the Gospel; and so the word
prophesying, is not generally used in the New Testament for that which is
extraordinary and by revelation. And so the Objection is answered. Some are
called in Scripture-sence prophets, by way of resemblance, who do not foretell
things to come. As the Scripture in general, and the Gospel in special, is
called a word of prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. We have also a more sure
[word of prophecy. -- ] v. 30. -- [No prophesying] of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation: yet a great part of the Scripture does not contain
predictions of future events. So, those that have a gift of
Scripture-interpretation or exposition, may be called prophets by way of
resemblance, although they have no gift to foretell things to come.

Obj. 4. Prophecy is reckoned as one of the rarest gifts the Apostles had, 1
Cor. 13. 2. 1 Cor. 14. 16. preferred before the gift of tongues, 1 Cor. 14. 1,
2. Paul compares himself with these prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 37. Ergo, the gift is
extraordinary.

Answ. 1. The Apostle prefers prophecy before the gift of tongues, and
speaks of its excellency, not for any thing in it extraordinary, that yet we
find; but, for its usefulness beyond other gifts, for the ordinary end of
edification, as appears by his own words, 1 Cor. 14. v. 2. He that speaks
in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God: for no man
understands him: howbeit in the spirit he speaks mysteries. v. 3. But he
that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, etc. The Apostle grants
that he who had the gift of tongues did speak mysteries, as well as he that
prophesied: but the rarity and excellency of prophecy he places in its
tendency and conducibleness to edification, beyond the gift of tongues which
men understood not, v. 2. for no man understands him. --

And hence verss. 4. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, edifieth himself;
there is a particular good: but he that prophesies, edifieth the Church; there
is a more general good: and in that respect, prophecy is better then tongues.
verse. 5. I would that ye all spoke with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied:
for greater is he that prophesies, then he that speaks with tongues, except
he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying. Which implies, that if he
does interpret, that so the Church may understand and be edified, then he that
prophesies, may not be greater then he that speaks with tongues. So verse. 6.
It is in respect of the end, viz. edification, that prophecy is preferred
before other gifts.

What the Apostle speaks about prophecy, may aptly be spoken concerning the
ordinary gifts of Pastors or Teachers: Greater is he that teaches, then he
that speaks with tongues, except he interpret, that the Church may receive
edifying.

The ordinary gift of a Pastor or Teacher is better as to edification, then
speaking with tongues, which no man understands; and therefore the preferring
of prophecy before the gift of tongues for such an end, does not evidence an
extraordinary gift of prophecy to be intended.

2. Paul's comparing himself with the prophets, proves nothing extraordinary;
for such was his humility, as he compared himself with ordinary Christians;
yea, seems to prefer them before himself, Epes. 3. 8. Unto me who am less
then the least of all Saints, etc. But how he compares himself with the
prophets, or equalizeth them with himself, we find not in the place alleged,
1 Cor. 14. 37. because prophets are required to acknowledge the doctrines of
the Apostles to be the Commandments of the Lord: for any to say therefore
prophets are compared to the Apostles in a way of equality; it is a far-fetched
conclusion.

Obj. 5. The formal effect of public edifying, comforting, convincing,
converting souls, are ascribed to these prophets, 1 Cor. 14. v. 1, 3, 4, 5, 12,
24, 25, 31.

Answ. This proves not that they are extraordinary gifts or Offices which are
mentioned: for, the ordinary gifts of Pastors and Teachers are useful to such
ends.

Indeed we know not wherefore gifted men should prophecy, if there were no
hope of such effects of their exercising their gifts.

Obj. 6. The Apostle plainly distinguished this prophesying from the word of
knowledge, and the word of wisdom, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Answ. 1. It does not follow, that therefore it is an extraordinary gift, or
any Office at all. Ordinary gifts may be distinguished from the gifts of
Pastors and Teachers, because of the different way and manner of laying them
out, although the gifts themselves be alike. Prophecy is distinguished from
exhortation, Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. and yet it was the proper work of prophets to
exhort, Act. 15. 32. 1 Cor. 14. v. 3. But he that prophesies, speaks unto
men to edification, [exhortation,] and comfort.

2. It is often difficult to determine what is the special reason of the
Apostles distinguishing those things from each other, which in themselves seem
alike. It will be hard for our Brethren to show the difference between speaking
by revelation, by knowledge, by prophesying, and by doctrine; and yet these are
distinguished each from other, 1 Cor. 14. 6.

3. If because prophesying is distingushed from the word of knowledge, and the
word of wisdom; they will conclude, that by prophesying must be understood a
gift of foretelling things to come, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. Then seeing the main
work of those prophets, as prophets, 1 Cor. 14. is to exhort, thereby to
convince and convert, as v. 3, 4, 24, 25. Hence it must be concluded, that
there are two sorts of prophets, or that the prophets mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. are
not the same with those, 1 Cor. 14. for the proper distinctive act of the
former prophets is to foretell future events; and of the latter, to exhort for
conviction, comfort, etc. and this will make much for us, and against our
Brethren.

Obj. 7. But it is said, 1 Cor. 13. 8. Whether there be prophesies, they shall
fail. Ergo, prophesying is ceased.

Answ. Read on, ver. 9, 10. and thence you may observe:

1. That the time of the ceasing of prophecy, is not until that which is
perfect comes. 1 Cor. 13. v. 9, 10. For we know in part, and we prophecy in
part: but when that which is perfect is come, [then] that which is in part
shall be done away. It is the coming of that which is perfect, that is
concluded to be the cause of the cessation of prophecy, which is but in part.
And therefore this is a strong Argument to prove that prophesying is still
continuing, because that which is perfect is not yet come; and until then,
prophecy does not cease.

2. That the time of the ceasing of prophecy is not until the ceasing of
knowledge in part: for, both are taken away by the coming of that which is
perfect, v. 9, 10. We [know] in part, and prophecy in part: but when that
which is perfect is come, etc. And also it is intimated, that so long as
knowledge is but in part, that which is perfect is not come; for, when perfect
knowledge is come, then that which is in part, i. e. imperfection in knowledge,
shall be done away, v. 9, 10. Imperfect knowledge and prophecy cease both at
the same time, and by one and the same means, viz. by the coming of that which
is perfect. And it is observable, that when the Apostle speaks in general of
the ceasing of gifts, then he mentions the gift of tongues also, ver. 8. --
Whether there be prophesies, they shall fail; whether there be prophesies, they
shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. But when he
mentions the coming of that which is perfect, as expressing the time and
means in and by which some gifts do cease, then he reckons up only knowledge
and prophecy; verse. 9. 10. He does not say, that tongues cease by the coming
of that which is perfect; they may be ceased long ago, and yet prophecy be
still continuing. We argue thus:

That which does not cease so long as we know but in part; nor until that which
is perfect is come, that is still continuing: For yet we know but in part, and
as yet that which is perfect is not come. But prophesying does not cease so
long as we know but in part, nor until that which is perfect is come, verse. 9,
10. Ergo, prophesying is still continuing. Ergo, prophesying is either but an
ordinary gift, and no Office: or else it must be asserted, that an
extraordinary gift, or a preaching Office, distinct from Pastors and Teachers,
is still continuing.

Obj. 8. But this prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. was in the Church, and is said, Not
to serve for those that believe not, but for them which believe, verse. 22. How
can this warrant the preaching of gifted men out of the Church, to the world?

Answ. 1. If it warranteth the preaching of gifted men in public
Church Assemblies, that is the great thing denied by our Brethren. They grant
them a liberty in some cases to preach where no Churches are settled.

2. The Apostles intent seems to be, to deny that prophecy is appointed for
a sign to confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel to unbelievers, as tongues were,
verse. 22. Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not: and by way of Antithesis, or Opposition to this, he
adds, but prophesying serves not for them that believe not, (i. e. not to be
a sign to them as tongues are) but for them which believe, i. e. to edify
them, verse. 3, 5. his intent cannot be to deny, that prophecy is useful to
unbelivers; for he asserteth it to be a means of their conversion, verse. 24,
25. But if all prophecy, and there come in one that believeeh not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all: and thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest, etc.

Prophecy then serves for the conviction and conversion of those that believe
not: this does warrant the preaching of gifted men to unbelievers, for their
conversion. And thus we have given our Arguments for the preaching of gifted
Brethren: the last, which is taken from the Rules about prophesying: we
formerly did not account so cogent as some other, but now (until we have
further light) we account it at least a probable Argument, which joined with
others, has great force in it.

CHAP. VII.
Answering the first Argument brought against the Preaching of men un-ordained
to Office.

IN this Chapter we shall give answers to their first Argument against the
preaching of men out of Office.

Our Brethren in their Jus Divinum Minist. page 67. etc. lay down two positions
which their Arguments are reduced to:

These. 1. That none may assume the Office of the Ministry, unless he be
solemnly set apart thereunto.

2. That none may undertake the work of the Ministry, except he be a Minister.

As to the first, it is questionable what they mean by [assuming the Office of
the Ministry;] if they intended only this, that none may take upon them such a
relation to a Church without Ordination; or rather thus, That all who assume
the Office of a Pastor or Teacher, ought to be ordained: we might grant all
their Arguments which they produce, to shore up this position; and yet gifted
Brethren might still have a full liberty to preach in public assemblies,
though not ordained: For it is not preaching ex Officio, but ex dono, that we
plead for. But by several expressions, they have given us cause to think that
they have a further reach, viz. to deny the lawfulness of any man's preaching,
or doing such work of the Ministry without Ordination, and so both propositions
make but one; for they say, page 67. It is manifest that there be some who
constantly supply the room of preachers, and arrogate to themselves the
reverence and maintenance due to none but Ministers; and yet they themselves
were never ordained to this Office. -- And in reference to this, their first
Thesis seems to be put in. And again, page 76. they use these words: Having
in the precedent Chapter asserted the necessity of Ordination, to [the work of
the Ministry] against the presumptuous usurpation of such as run and are not
sent: we shall by the grace of God, in this Chapter, vindicate the work of the
Ministry, unto those whom God has set as Officers in his Church.

By which words, we gather that their design in the first position, is to deny
that any may do [the work of the Ministry] without Ordination. And how they can
distinguish or difference it from the second position, when they take it in
that sense, we find not. We shall reply to such Arguments, as under either do
seem to speak against the preaching of gifted men without Ordination.

Argum. 1. From Romans 10. 15. And how shall they preach, except they be sent? --
the form of the expression makes it morally impossible to Jus Divin. Minist.
page 68, 69.
preach without mission. -- As no man to the end of the world can call upon him
in whom he believes not, or believe in him of whom he hears not, or hear
without a preacher; so it is and will be true to the end of the world, that no
man can preach except he be sent. From all they gather,

1. That mission is essential to the constitution of a Minister. The Apostle
does not say, How shall they preach, except they be gifted, (though this be
true) but, how shall they preach, except they be sent? implying that gifting
without sending does not constitute a Minister.

2. That this mission is not only of extraordinary, but of ordinary Teachers,
because faith is as much annexed to their teaching, as teaching to their
mission. --

3. That there is a necessity of a constant and perpetual, as well as of an
ordinary mission. If faith depends upon hearing, hearing upon preaching,
preaching upon mission; then if faith be necessary in all ages of the world,
mission is also necessary; yea, ordinary mission, because extraordinary is
ceased.

Mr. Collings puts the Argument into this form. Mr. Collings. Vind. page 42.


What none may ordinarily do but those that are sent, that private gifted
persons may not do ordinarily. But none may preach, but those that are sent,
Romans 10. 15.

The Major he endeavors to prove thus:

What none can ordinarily do, but those that are sent, that those cannot do,
that are not sent. But private persons, though gifted, and desired, are not
sent. This he would prove from the sending there meant, which he concludes
cannot be only a sending from God immediately, but must necessarily be meant
of a mediate mission from God, and that must be either by the civil power which
none will say, or by the Church, not by the whole Church in choosing. -- And
therefore by the Presbytery, there must concur a commissionating of the person
to the work, by such persons as have authority from Christ to do it. This is
the sum of what is expressed in many more words.

Answ. It may be granted:

1. That mission is not only of extraordinary, but of ordinary Teachers.

2. That mission continues in all ages of the world. But we deny that mission
is essential to the constitution of a Minister; neither does the Text conclude
any such thing: for it may properly be said, How shall they preach, except they
be sent? and yet sending not be essential unto the constituting of a man a
preacher. We do not say, that gifts without a Divine command, do constitute a
preacher, but yet the words of that Text do not deny it.

The Apostle there, neither denies gifts, nor affirms sending to be
constitutive of a Minister: for,

1. Mission may be necessary unto preaching, and yet not be necessary unto the
constitution of a preacher: the Text does not necessarily enforce sending to be
requisite unto the making of a preacher, but rather unto the act of preaching,
[How shall they preach: -- ], for all those words might be aptly used about the
Apostles or others, who were before constituted Ministers. We may say, How
shall a people hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they
enjoy some measure of health, strength, liberty, under a great sickness, or
bodily weakness, or imprisonment where none come at them to hear? they that are
Officers cannot preach, and yet health, strength and liberty are not essential
to the constitution of a preacher, for then under such sickness, weakness, or
imprisonment, a man should cease to be one, because he should lose what is
essentially constitutive of a preacher. It may be said, how shall a man preach
as an Officer to a Church, without the peoples election? Yet, our Brethren will
not say, that the peoples election is essential to the constitution of an
Officer.

Therefore the interrogation does not imply, that sending is essential to the
constitution of a Minister, but only that it is necessary unto some
ministrations. It does not imply, that mission does make a preacher, but that
it is requisite unto acts of preaching, [How shall they preach? -- ]

2. It may be both naturally and morally impossible to preach without mission,
and yet mission may not be essential to the constitution of a Minister, or
Preacher: It may aptly be said, How shall an Officer preach, except he be where
there are some to hear? he cannot preach in a wilderness or a prison, where
none are to hear; yet his being where some are to hear, is not essential to the
constituting of him a Minister: for then so often as he were alone, so often he
should cease to be a Minister, because he should lose what is essential to the
constitution of a Minister.

How can they preach warrantably, lawfully and orderly, without all those
circumstances which by Gospelrules are requisite unto a preacher and preaching?
yet who will say that all those circumstances are essential to the constitution
of a preacher? He may sin in being without those, and yet may have whatever is
essential to constitute him a Minister, else there are but few Ministers
constituted in the world; for who has all those things which are required to
be in preachers? Therefore the form of the expression does not enforce mission
to be essential to the constitution of a Minister.

3. Their argument, if granted, does not prove what they produce it for. If it
be morally impossible to preach without mission, yet it does not follow thence,
that none may assume the Office of the Ministry, unless he be solemnly set
apart thereunto; which was the position they undertook to prove. Their argument
supposes the solemn setting apart called Ordination, to be all one with
mission; which is a thing we deny, and they have not proved. If we should grant
that mission is essential to the constitution of a Minister, yet we might deny
a solemn setting apart, to be essential thereunto, unless they can prove that
Ordination and mission are the same.

As to the argument as urged by Mr. Collings, if that (...), Romans 10. 15. be
means of Officers only, then we (...) hi^ Minor to be universally true.
Preaching is either ex officio, or ex dono; we grant that none may preach
Office-wise, but those that are sent; and according to that interpretation, no
more is intended by the Apostle. And then some may preach by gift who are not
sent, without crossing this Text.

We deny the Major of his first, and Minor of his second Syllogism; and we
assert, That persons gifted (which he calls private persons, because nor
ordained, though their work be public) and desired, are sent.

For the clearing of this, we shall endeavor to declare what mission or sending
it is: And because this is so much insisted upon, we shall show, 1. Negatively,
What the sending cannot be. 2. Affirmatively, What sending (according to the
acceptance of the word in other Scriptures) it may be.

Quest. 1. What is not Mission, or sending?

Answ. 1. Mission or sending is not a call to Office, or any act which does
constitute a man an Officer or preacher: it is not suitable to our Brethrens own
principles, nor to ours, to assert it:

1. Because some that were Officers and had a call to preach before, yet had
mission afterward; the Apostles were Officers, had a call and did preach before
the death or resurrection of Christ, yet they had mission after it. Mat. 28.
19. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations. -- For Christ to say [Go. -- ] is
for him to send those that are spoken to. They were Officers, preachers before,
and therefore could not be constituted such by this act, which was subsequent
to it. A call to Office, and sending, may differ as prius and posterius, and
therefore they cannot be the same.

2. Because mission may be iterated and repeated without losing Office; but
(according to our Brethrens principles) so cannot the call to Office, or that
which constituteth a man a preacher: they judge that there ought to be no
iteration of that, once an Officer and always so, unless deposed. But mission
was iterated. Matthew. 10. ver. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded
them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles. -- ver. 6. But go rather to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. ver. 7. And as you go, Preach. -- Here
is mission or sending to preach, and they were the twelve Apostles that were
sent, who are named, ver. 2, 3, 4. and yet the same persons had mission again.
Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach. -- and v. 16. it was the eleven
Disciples which he spoke to. And hence also our Brethren must either grant,
that Ordination may be iterated, or else that mission and Ordination are not
the same, because mission is repeated.

3. Because some had mission to preach, who were not Officers that we can
find, viz. the seventy Disciples: Luke 10. ver. 1. After these things the Lord
appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two. -- Let them prove that
these were Officers, who will assert it; here is sending, and yet we find not
that any Officers were constituted thereby, and therefore sending is not a
constitutive Office-making act.

4. Because, then all that are instrumental to others conversion would thereby
be proved and evidenced to be Officers, and all that are undoubtedly no
Officers would be left hopeless that their instructions should ever take place
to the conversion of others: for, it is made as impossible for any to believe
without a preacher sent, as it is for any to preach without being sent: the
interrogation runs through all. Romans 10. v. 14. How shall they believe in
him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
and how shall they preach except they be sent?

Therefore if some do hear the word and believe, there is a preacher sent, or
else the interrogation has not the force of a negation, and then their whole
argument against the preaching of gifted men falls. That gifted men
unordained may be instrumental to bring others to believing, Scripture and
experience has witnessed; and this evinceth that they are preachers sent, and
Officers, according to their own arguing.

2. Mission or sending is not Ordination: sending and ordaining are different
things.

1. Because no Scripture (that yet we can find) does make mission and
Ordination one and the same thing.

2. Because if sending be ordaining, then Deacons are sent, for they are
ordained, Act. 6. 6. But we read not of their mission.

3. Because mission may be iterated, Matthew. 10. ver. 5. Matthew. 28. 19. But
(according to our Brethrens principles) Ordination may not be iterated or
repeated.

4. Because the nature of the act (if men be the senders) forbids it: for,
if a Church has a Presbytery within it self, then undenyably that presbytery
may ordain other officers for that Church, and then they send to themselves, if
ordaining be sending: for, they ordain them Officers to themselves; else, in
case any of the ordainers should deserve censuring, the ordained cannot (as
Officers) censure them. And our Brethren say, (Jus Divin. Minist. page 69.) The
same person cannot be the person sending, and the persons sent unto. And
sending necessarily implies distance between the party sent, and those to whom
he is sent, if the usual acceptance of the word sending be followed in a
proper sense. Now, if a Church has a presbytery, and that ordains Officers,
the Church being present (as it was when they ordained Deacons, Act. 6. 6.) how
can it be said, that the presbytery does by the act of ordaining, send them
unto that Church which is present at the same time?

3. Barely the gifting men for the work of preaching is not sending: Matthew. 10.
ver. 1. He gave them power against unclean Spirits, to cast them out, and to
heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease. Here the twelve were
gifted, yea, had authority given them for the performing of such acts: for it
is said, (...), He gave them authority, or right, or a lawful power to do these
works; the word is not (...), but (...). and yet as a distinct act afterward,
ver. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into
the way of the Gentiles. -- ver. 6, 7. But go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and as ye go preach. -- Here was their mission, and it is
distinguished from, and subsequent to their being gifted, and receiving a
lawful power to exercise those gifts: and therefore sending can neither be a
gifting, nor an authorizing men to preach; but presupposes them to be gifted
and authorized.

Sending does not make them preachers, but supposes them to be preachers
before: and hence, Mar. 3. 14. He ordained twelve, that they should be with
him, and that he might send them forth to preach. It is made the end of his
ordaining, constituting, and making the twelve, that he might send them forth
to preach; and therefore their sending was consequential to their being
ordained or constituted. For the end is last in execution, though it be first
in intention. The means is first and in order, before the production of the
end. And if constituting and sending were the same things, then those words
should sound thus: He sent twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach. And because it is grossly improper, to say he
sent them, that he might send them; therefore the constituting or making of the
twelve, and their sending forth were different things: So Luke 9, 1, 2. The
giving them power and a lawful right to act, is distinguished from sending.
First, he gave them power and authority, ver. 1. there is both (...), which
(says Mr Ferreby) is collatio donorum, and (...), which (says he) is collatio
Mr. Ferreby Lawful preacher. page 15.
potestatis; and yet sending is distinct from and after both. ver. 2. And he
sent them to preach. Therefore sending is neither gifting nor authorizing of
men to preach. Thus negatively, what is not mission or sending.

Quest. 2. What is [sending] in Scripture-sense?

Answ. 1. It is either Christ's commanding by his word, or assigning preachers,
to go and publish the Gospel unto such persons or such a people. 2. Or sending
is a providential disposing of preachers, to such persons or such a people, as
Christ has commanded or assigned the Gospel to be published unto.

1. Sending is Christ's commanding by his word, or assigning preachers, to go
and publish the Gospel unto such persons or such a people. In this, description
of mission, there is declared:

1. Who is the person sending, [Christ;] neither a Church nor a presbytery, but
Christ only can command or assign the Gospel to be preached to such persons or
such a people; either a Church or presbyters may exhort and desire preachers to
go unto such persons, as Christ has commanded or assigned the Gospel to be
preached to; but it is Christ alone that has the power to command and assign
it to be published to such or such: and hence, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. -- All power
is given unto me in Heaven and Earth, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations. --
[Therefore] because [all power] is given to Christ, therefore he gives forth
this command, which is a mission to all lawful preachers; [Go -- and teach]
neither shall they need question, whether this or that people may by Christ's
mission be preached to, seeing he is not now with them to give forth immediate
commands whither they should go, as in the time of his being on earth; for
Christ's mission extends to all sorts of persons, in all places and ages, to
the end of the world. [Go, -- Teach all Nations, etc.] But still it is Christ
that says [Go.] Matthew. 10. ver. 6, 7. Luke 9. 2. And [he] i. e. Christ, sent
them to preach. -- And the Lord complains, Jerem. 14. 14. [I] sent them not. It
is the work of God and Christ only to send, let it be proved where ever a
Presbytery was empowered to send.

3. Who are the persons sent, [Preachers, or gifted men empowered to preach.] We
proved before, that mission does not make a man a Preacher, but presupposes
him to be one. The eleven Apostles were preachers before, and yet had a mission
after Christ's resurrection, Matthew. 28. 19. Go. -- Hence, if such as are not
gifted or empowered undertake to preach, they are not sent.

3. To whom they are sent, viz. [to such persons or such a people, as by
Christ's command are to have the Gospel published to them.] Mission does not
make it lawful for such a person to preach, but for a preacher to publish the
will of Christ to such a people. Sending necessarily implies that some or
other are sent to; now if a man could go and publish truths of Christ to such
persons as Christ had not commanded them to be revealed to, he might be said
[not to be sent] though he were a lawful preacher who did it. As for example,
The twelve Apostles were authorized by Christ to preach, and sent by him to the
Jews, Matthew. 10. ver. 6, 7. Go, -- to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
and as ye go, Preach, -- Here is mission: yet if the Apostles had gone with
this message to the Gentiles at this time, they had run without being sent,
though they were lawful preachsrs; for Christ says, ver. 5. [Go not] into the
way of the Gentiles. That which made the Apostles mission to the Jews, ver. 6.
[Go,] that is expressly denied as to the Gentiles [Go not.] And therefore
mission is not the impowring of men to preach, but the impowring of preachers
to do such a message to such persons or such a people. If any were excluded
out of Christ's mission, it were to run without being sent to preach to them;
but Christ's mission is general. Matthew. 28. 19. Go teach all Nations. Not that
every individual preacher is required to go into all nations, and teach in
them; but every Gospel-preacher in whatever nation his lot it cast, or wherever
in a nation he is fixed, yet he does share in this mission, Christ says to
him, Go teach, because no people in any nation are excepted from teaching. Yet
Gospel-rules are to be observed, that a man preaches not in this or that
place, without the due requisites thereunto; and these being found, he may
safely conclude, that Christ says to him, Go, teach this people.

4. What is the message which is sent: they are to [publish the Gospel;] not
that thereby we exclude any part of the will or counsel of God, but their great
errand is, to tell them of the glad tidings of the Gospel; as Mark. 16. ver.
15. [Go ye into all the world,] there is their mission, [and preach the Gospel.
-- ] there is their message. So Romans 10. 15. How shall they preach except they
be sent? as it is written, how beautiful are the feet of them that [preach the
Gospel] of peace. -- and hence Jerem. 14. ver. 14. [The Prophets prophecy lies
in my name] in stead of declaring the truths of God, they vented lies; and then
says the Lord, [I sent them not. -- ] they prophecy unto you a false vision,
and divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart. and ver.
15. Jerem. 23. ver. 13. They caused the people to err. ver. 16. They speak a
vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord: and then the
Lord says, ver. 21. I have not sent these Prophets. We do not find that
these are blamed for prophesying being no Prophets; but being Prophets, they
are upbraided for not prophesying right things, for not carrying a right
message unto this people. Sending is not made the call unto the Office of
Prophets; it appears not but that they had this, but they carried such news
as God sent them not with. They had allowance to prophecy the truth, as is
plain, Jerem. 23. ver. 21, 22. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I
have not spoken to them, yet they Prophesied. ver. 22. But if they had stood in
my Counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have
turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings. By
[Counsel] may be understood Doctrine, as Act. 20. 27. I have not shunned to
declare unto you all [the Counsel] i. e. the Doctrine of God. And then it
runs thus: If they had stood in my Doctrines, etc. if they had prophesied
pure Doctrines of Gods word, then they should have profited the people; but
because they prophesied false dreams, therefore he declares that he sent them
not. By all this it is evident, that these were Prophets rightly called by the
Lord: for would the Lord entayl his blessing upon the labors of false Prophets,
as it was upon theirs, if they had declared his words, ver. 22? Surely they
that might have such an assurance of success in preaching, might lawfully
preach the word of God. And therefore how impertinently is this place alleged
against the preaching of gifted men? these Prophets (by Gods own testimony) had
allowance to preach Gods word; they are not blamed for prophesying without a
call, but for venting false Doctrine: and when those who are rightly ordained
to Office-work, do speak the vision of their own hearts, this is as applicable
to them as it was to these Prophets. If Pastors or Teachers rightly called do,
in these days preach lies, in stead of truth to the people, the Lord says the
same to them' they ran, and I sent them not: i. e. sent them not with that
message. The Lord does send them to preach the Gospel: when they swerve from
that; they are not sent, though the same persons before and after, may properly
be said to be sent, when they preach the Gospel.

5. What is the work offending: viz. [commanding, or assigning to go.] Isai. 6.
8. Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? then I said, here am I, send me.
And how does he send him? see ver. 9. And he said, Go and tell this people. --
So that for God to send, is for him to command to do such a work. So Jerem. 14.
ver. 14, 15. [I sent them not.] What is that? [neither have I commanded them.]
Jerem. 23. v. 21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not
spoken to them. -- Matthew. 10. v. 5. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and
commanded them, saying, Go not. -- v. 6. But go. -- So that undeniable, sending
of Preachers, is Christ's commanding of them to go, and preach to such a people.
And they are not sent, who are not warranted by some command of Christ, to
publish the Gospel unto such persons. Indeed they that have not a command or
warrant from the Gospel of Christ to preach, they may be said to run without
being sent; yet not as if mission or sending were that which did authorize to
Preach, or made it lawful for a man to preach, who else might not lawfully do
it; but because that man cannot have a command from Christ to preach to such or
such persons, (which is the work of sending, or that wherein the essence of
mission does consist) without he has a command or warrant to preach. Christ
never says to any man, Go preach to such persons, until he has first
commanded him to preach. He that is not commanded to do the work of preaching,
cannot rationally be supposed to be commanded to preach to such persons, and so
he may be said to be unsent, because he wants the prerequisites unto sending.

And whereas some object from Jerem. 14. That he is a false Prophet, not only
that teaches lies, but who is not sent; The Prophet tells them plainly, v.
14, 15. That his not commanding them to prophecy to that people what they did,
was his not sending of them. The same things might have been prophesied to
another people at Gods command, and might have been no lies, but truths. Had
they prophesied what God commanded, they had been sent.

6. How, or by what means Christ does command to go and preach; viz. [by his
word.] Not by a presbytery, but by the written word. It is not an immediate
mission, but mediate, by the word. As Gods command in his word would be a
mediate call to hear the word preached, to pray, to be baptized, to receive the
Lords Supper, and to perform other Religious services, though no Presbyters
should exhort to these duties; so Christ's command in the Gospel, to go and
Preach, -- is a mediate mission to all lawful Preachers, though no presbyters
should urge it upon them. And how a Presbytery can send, but by exhorting to
follow this command of Christ, we know not. And in such a Doctrinal way, for
ought we see, a private Christian may exhort to go and teach; yea, any Minister
of Christ may say to another Minister, long after his being constituted an
Officer, especially in case of sloth and negligence, Go and teach that people
committed to thy charge.

We find Gospel-commands directed by Christ unto Preachers, which have the
nature and form of a mission in them; as Matthew. 28. 19. Go Disciple all
Nations, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 10, etc.

That such a mission belongs to a Presbytery, let them prove that can; we can
find no syllable of Scripture Proof for it. And thus we have cleared the parts
of this Description of mission.

And, if mission be taken in this sense, Romans 10. v. 15 viz. For Christ's
commanding preachers to publish the Gospel to such persons, and such a people:
Then a moral impossibility is intended by the interrogation; and it amounts
to thus much, How shall they groundedly, warrantably, or orderly preach, except
they have a command from Christ to go? The Jews would have engrossed this
privilege; they laid claim to preaching as peculiar to them, and denied that
the Gentiles were commanded to be preached to. In answer possibly unto them,
the Apostle may speak thus: It is promised that in Gospel-days the Gentiles
should believe; and they cannot believe without hearing, nor hear without
preaching; nor can any warrantably preach to them, or so as to justify their
act, or expect a blessing from God, except they be sent: i. e. except the Lord
does command to go and preach to them. If they must be preached to, it must be
concluded that some are commanded to go to them with the Gospel.

And if the words be taken in this sense, the dint of many Objections is
avoided, which are levelled against a bare providential sending. We say,
Providence alone do not express the nature of mission; but there is a command
of Christ also, to go and preach, wherein especially this sending does consist.

Obj. 1. This sending is not barely providential, but a ministerial sending, as
appears by the next words: [As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of
them that preach the Gospel -- ] which words are taken out of Isai. 52. and the
Ministers he speaks of, are called Watchmen, verse. 8. And the prophet himself
is mentioned as one of them, Romans 10. 10.

Answ. 1 The prophet declares what acceptance such should have amongst the
people, who brought good tidings, who published peace and salvation; but what
mission they had, whether ministerial, or providential, the prophet does not
there determine. To use their own similitude: If a private person should report
a pardon to a condemned malefactor, how beautiful would his feet be, though the
same applied under the broad-Seal, by a person delegated from the Supreme
Magistrate, differs from that.

If persons had only a providential sending, yet all this might be said, How
beautiful are their feet, when they bring good tidings of peace and salvation!
But we assert that the King of Saints has commanded persons gifted, to go and
publish these good tidings; and this may make the news double welcome.

2. It is promised, that their Watchmen shall lift up their voice and sing,
verse. 8. But that all, who are said to bring the good tidings, verse. 7. are
called Watchmen, verse. 8. is not proved. Some think that by Watchmen there, are
understood only Apostles, and those that were eyewitnesses of what Christ
did, and suffered for the redemption of sinners; because it is said, [For they
shall see eye to eye. -- ] which is like that, 1 John 1. v. 1. -- Which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes. -- and then there are more preachers
spoken of ver. 7. then there are ver. 8.

3. If all of them be called Watchmen, it is a figurative term, taken from
those that stand in Watch-Towers, who foreseeing dangers, forewarn of them; and
foreseeing approaching-mercies, give notice of them. And why gifted men may not
do this, we know not, though Officers are put in trust in an especial manner to
do it; in which respect (though all preachers of the Gospel be Watchmen, yet)
the term may be appropriated to Officers, in a special sense.

Ojb. 2. If providential sending were sufficient, then women-preachers are as
much sent of God -- yea, a tyrant, robber, or murderer may justify himself in
his wickedness, as being sent by God providentially. --

Answ. 1. For women we have answered the Objection often.

2. More then a providential sending is asserted, viz. a command of Christ.

3. The consequence is feeble, to say, If a providential sending be enough to
allow a man to preach, then it may justify men in stealing, murdering. -- for
preaching is a lawful work, but robbing and murdering -- are acts in
themselves sinful. When by an ordering hand of providence, Christians do meet
together, they may exhort one another, and pray one with another, Mal. 3. 16.
Hebr. 3. 13. But it will not follow, that they may rob and murder one another.

Obj. 3. They are called preachers, or heralds: the participle in the Original,
Romans 10. 14. noti^ the Office, as Romans 12. 7, 8. and 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13.
17, etc. and the people are blamed for not hearing them, Romans 10. 16, 21. but
the not hearing of such as are not sent, is no fault, but a virtue, Joh. 10. v.
5, 8. and by this they would prove it to be an Authoritative mission, not
providential.

Answ. 1. The words in the Original in those places, Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 These. 5.
12. Heb. 13. 17. are not the same with that, Romans 10. 14. which we note, lest
the unlearned Reader should think those places a proof, that the word used Romans
10. 14. should necessarily connote Office; whereas other words are used there;
and therefore they prove nothing to the case in hand.

2. For the participle in the Original, Romans 10. 10. (...); that does not
denote Office necessarily for (...) is used, Mar. 1. 45. He went out, and began
to [publish it.] (...); and yet he was no Officer, nor had mission to preach,
or publish this; for Christ forbad him publishing of it, verse. 44. See thou say
nothing to any man. So Mark. 7. 36. Luke 8. 39. Which shows that nothing can
be concluded from the Original word, to prove them to be Officers, because it
is applied to such as were no Officers.

3. They may be called Heralds, who preach the Gospel, because they usually do
publish it openly, as Heralds do their messages. Similitudes must not be
stretched beyond the scope, nor be made to agree in all things. Let it be
proved, that preachers are called Heralds, to connote their being authorized to
publish the Gospel.

4. We apprehend that people are to be blamed for not hearing gifted men, as
Romans 10. v. 16, 21. If it be their duty to preach, then it is a peoples sin,
not to hear. As for Joh. 10. v. 5, 8. Christ asserts himself to be the true
Shepherd, and the door by which men enter into life, and attain salvation.
verse. 9. I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. -- And if
he intends there to assert himself to be the door by which men must enter
into the work of preaching, or any Office in the Church, gifted men enter in,
by the door of his command. Christ says, verse. 5. And a stranger will they not
follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers. Such
as preach false doctrine, or have wicked lives, are not of Christ's flock, but
are strangers; and it is a virtue not to hear such. And Christ says, verse. 7,
8. I am the door of the sheep; all that ever came before me, are thieves, and
robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. All that in their teaching deny
Christ to be the door, or who show any other door to life and salvation besides
Christ, they are not to be heard. Ante Christum venire, non est tempore
Christum praecedere, sed aliam Ferus.
quam Christi Doctrinam docere. It may be expounded of those which teach false
Doctrine, and not of those which enter without sending.

Here is mention made of mission, or of a Presbytery to give mission; and
therefore it does not prove, that it is a virtue not to hear such as are not
sent by a presbytery. Men might be blamed if it were but a providential
sending, as men are often for not hearing Gods voice in other providence. Amos
4. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And thus they may be called Heralds, because they
publish the Gospel openly; and people may be blamed for not hearing, and yet no
authoritative mission from a presbytery may be intended.

Object. 4. All that have gifts are not sent of God; there are many gifted
blasphemers and heretics. --

Answ. 1. Some men ordained may, and do prove such; and so if Ordination were
mission, they might be such, and yet be sent: this will fall as heavy upon such
a sending, as upon the other.

2. By turning such, I suppose it will b^^^^id, ordained men lose their
commission: and so do gifted men forfeit their power and mission: Matthew. 7. 15,
to 21. Christ bids them beware of false Prophets, and gives rules whereby
they may know them, which will speak blasphemers, -- to be such, as they are to
beware of.

And thus much concerning mission in the first acceptance of the word.

2. Mission is a providential disposing of Preachers, to such persons or such a
people, as Christ has commanded or assigned the Gospel to be published unto;
or, sending is a permitting them to go, a dismissing them, that they may go:
Mar. 8. 26. when Christ had restored the blind man to sight, he [sent] him away
to his house. Mar. 6. ver. 36, 45, 46. He [sent] away the people. -- Act. 17.
14. The Brethren [sent] away Paul. -- Here sending does not denote the
conferring of any power upon those that are sent, but only a dismissing of them
from the work they were about, to go to some other place. Sending is there
little more then going, or the permitting men to go. Genes. 45. 7. God [sent]
me before you, to preserve you a posterity. -- The Lord ordering by his
providence Joseph's going into Egypt, is called his [sending] of him, here is a
providential sending. And though other Scriptures speak of sending in that
sense we before spoke of, yet we do not see that but sending may be taken in
this latter sense, in Romans 10. 15. viz. for such a providential sending; and
then the meaning is but this, How shall they preach to the Gentiles, if they do
not go, or be not permitted, and by providence ordered to go where they are?

And the scope of the place inclines us to these thoughts; for the Apostle is
concluding, that there is no difference of nations in Gospel-dayes. Romans 10. v.
11, 12. There is no difference between the Jew and the Greek. -- ver. 13. For
whosoever (i. e. whether he be Jew or Gentile) shall call upon the name of the
Lord, shall be saved. Here he asserteth the calling of the Gentiles; and from
thence he infers that Preachers of the Gospel must be sent unto them,
because as ver. 14, 15. They cannot call on the Lord without believing, nor
cannot believe without hearing: they cannot hear without a Preacher; they
cannot preach (i. e, to the Gentiles, for they are such as had not heard of
Christ, ver. 14.) except they be sent, i. e. except by providence they be
ordered to go amongst them. The Jews grumbled at the going to preach unto the
Gentiles: the Apostle proves that they must be called, and therefore some must
go preach to them. How shall they come by the glad tidings of the Gospel, if
none go to them therewith? Alas they have no preachers amongst themselves, and
how shall they hear, if none preach; and how shall they preach, if they do not
go where they are to hear? now shall Paul preach to the nations of the
Gentiles, if he be detained at, or does not go from Jerusalem?

And all other interrogations, ver. 14. are to be understood of a natural
impossibility; it is naturally impossible for a man to call on him, that he
has not believed on; and to believe on him, of whom he has not heard; and to
hear without a preacher, i. e. without one or other to publish what is to be
heard: and that this only should be understood of a moral impossibility, [how
shall they preach except they be sent?] it is hard to conclude.

[Sending] in this sense denotes the ordering of a preacher for his bodily
presence, what place it shall be in, for preaching. This sending may be
iterated and repeated often. Thus God sends, when by his providence he
orders or disposes of things so, as there is a going to such a place to
preach. Thus Magistrates may send preachers to places that are destitute of the
means of Grace; thus they sent some Ministers into Scotland, others into
Ireland. -- Thus a Church may send. Acts 11. ver. 22. Then tidings of these
things came unto the ears of [the Church] which was at Jerusalem, and they
[sent forth] Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch, Here the Church
sent out a Preacher. Thus Presbyters may send men to preach. Act. 8. 14. When
the Apostles which were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had received the word
of God, they sent unto them Peter and John. Those that were sent, were
preachers before, had no authority to preach conferred upon them by their
mission; and if they had, then a Church may give authoritative mission; for the
Church sent Barnabas, Act. 8. 14. And what is there more in this sending, then
a desiring of him to go, or a dismissing of him?

And thus gifted men are capable of being sent, as well as others, seeing there
is no act of power about it And where there is no distance, there needs not
this mission by men: but how should they preach to the Gentiles, who were at a
distance, except they were sent by those Churches where now they preached? and
if no more be intended, Romans 10. 15. it may easily be judged, what a poor
argument that is, which many bring from that place, against the preaching of
gifted men.

And thus much in answer to their first argument: we shall be brief in
answering the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
Answering diverse Arguments brought against the preaching of men un-ordained
to Office.

Argum. 2.

FRom Hebr. 5. 4, 5. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
Jus Divinum Minist. page 71.
called of God, as Aaron. -- No man ought to take the ministerial honor upon
him, unless called by God.

This proposition (say they) is not limited, but illustrated.

1. By Aaron, who undertook not this Office, till called thereunto. Exodus 28.
1. No more did any other of the Priests in the old Testament. 2 Chronicles. 29. 11.
and 16. 16. If the Priests and Prophets of the Old Testament could not take
this honor upon them till called and appointed, who can show any just reason,
why any under the New Testament should do otherwise? especially, if we consider
that the Gospel Ministry is more weighty and glorious then the legal was.

2. By Christ, who though he be God blessed for ever, coequal and coeternal
with the Father, yet he glorified not himself, to be made an High Priest, but
was sealed and inaugurated by his Father into this great Office. Joh. 8. 54. --
and thence they say, it cannot but be great presumption for any man to glorify
himself, and make himself a Minister, before he be lawfully ordained thereunto.
--

Answ. 1. Here they run quite from the Question they undertook to prove, [That
none may assume the Office of the Ministry, unless he be solemnly set apart
there unto.]

And their conclusion from Hebr. 5. 4, 5. is but only this, that no man ought
to take it, unless called by God.

If their argument be granted, yet their position is not proved by it. Gifted
men may have a call of God to preach, and yet not be solemnly set apart. Hebr.
5. ver. 4, 5. Aaron and Christ were both called of God, yet they were not
solemnly set apart by imposition of hands with fasting and prayer; which is the
setting apart they intend, as themselves expressly declare.

They are blaming gifted men in these words, [Such intruders, as will neither
Jus Divinum Ministerii, page 67.
be solemnly set apart for the Ministry by imposition of hands, with fasting
and prayer, nor give way to them that would.] If to be called of God, and to be
thus solemnly set apart, be all one, then neither Aaron nor Christ were called
of God, because they were not thus set apart. If to be called of God, and to be
so set apart, be different things, then their argument is no proof of their
position, which they would establish by it. Here they take for granted what is
denied by us, viz. that such a setting apart, is the only call of God in
Gospel-dayes. Whereas Officers and gifted men, are called of God, i. e. allowed
by him to preach; but neither of their calls does consist in such a setting
apart, though we grant a setting apart by fasting and prayer, to be necessary
after a call to Office.

2. We deny their general proposition to have any footing in this Text. For,
the [Honor] spoken of, and the universal note [no man] must necessarily be
limited, according to the subject or matter insisted on. It is the rule they
give us about the note of universality [all.]

This universal all is to be restrained and limited, according to the subject
or matter Jus Divinum Ministerii. page 95.
treated of. Now the subject spoken of, Hebr. 5. is not the Ministry in
general; but only one order of Ministers, it is not a Gospel Ministry that is
treated of, but a legal; it is not the whole Ministry of the Law, but one order
of that Ministry, viz. Priests; it is not all under that order, but the
highest, the chiefest under it; not Priests in general, but the High Priest
only, as appears, ver. 1. [every High-priest] taken from among men. -- Aaron,
ver. 4. and 5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made [an High Priest.
-- ] Neither is this Highpriest considered as performing a work which is common
to him with Ministers of the Gospel; he is not considered as preaching the
word, but as offering sacrifices for sin. ver. 1. That he may offer both gifts
and sacrifices for sins. And ver. 3. -- To offer for sins: and immediately it
follows, ver. 4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, etc. Thus far it
is general, that no man takes, or ought to take the honor to be a High priest
to offer for sins, but he that is called of God as was Aaron the High Priest.

But because the Apostle says, none may take the honor of the Highest Office
under the Law, to be a High Priest, nor do the highest work of that Office,
viz. offer for sin; for any to say hence, that the Apostle makes this general
proposition, No man ought to take the ministerial honor upon him unless called
of God, is to conclude beyond the premises. For, there was that required unto
the highest order of Officers, which is not requisite unto Officers of an
inferior species or order. It were presumption for any to undertake to be a
high priest to offer for sins as Christ did without a call, The design of the
Apostle, is to assert Christ to be the only high priest, and that the ancient
priesthood must cease, to give place unto him. To prove him to be a
high priest, he compares him with the highpriests of the Law, and declares
that he was called of God, as well as they. ver. 4, 5. And therefore remission
of sin and salvation were to be expected by him. ver. 6, 9. but this comes far
short of proving, that al Ministers of the Gospel are to be called of God, as
was Aaron; seeing they do not prefigure Christ as Aaron did, are not of such a
high order as highpriests were, nor do not expiate sin as Christ did.

3. As to their argument as drawn not from Heb. 5. 4, 5. but from the priests
and prophets in general of the Old Testament, it proves not (if granted) a
solemn setting apart by fasting and prayer and imposition of hands, but only a
call to be necessary: and then the question between us, is only this, What that
call in Gospel days is? We conclude that Christ's command or allowance, is a
sufficient call; and if gifted men had not this, we grant they ought not to
preach.

Argum. 3. The third Argument is, from the titles that are given to the
Ministers of the Gospel: they are called Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Stewards,
Tit. 1. 7. Men of God, Tim. 6. 11. compared with 2 King. 5. 8. watchmen, Ezekiel.
3. 7. Angels, Rev. 2. 1. which are all names of Office, and require a special
designation from God. -- And these titles are applied not only to
extraordinary, but to ordinary Ministers. Other titles they mention: Ministers
are called Gods mouth. -- Good Soldiers of Jesus Christ -- Gods servants and
Ministers. --

Answ. 1. Some of these titles cannot groundedly be restrained to preachers.
For all Christians are Soldiers of Jesus Christ, have spiritual armor, and
are commanded to use it, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11. Finally my brethren be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might; put on the whole armor of God. -- 1 These.
5. 8. Let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the brestplate of faith.
-- All believers, all who are of the day, are commanded to be good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, and so are commanded to be preachers, (if that title be peculiar
to preachers) which is more then we assert. All believers are Gods servants;
Peter exhorts them to be, as the servants of God, 1 Pet. 2. 16. and they are
believers in general he speaks to, v. 7. v. 9. v. 10. Romans 6. 22. -- Being
made free from sin, and become servants to God. -- All who enjoy freedom from
sin, are Gods servants. Those that are allowed by the Lord to declare his will
to others, are Gods mouth, though it be but in a way of private admonition.

To be men of God, is to be his servants. And in a general sense, gifted men
are Ambassadors and Angels; which signify, Messengers, or men sent. We have
proved before, that gifted men are sent. They have a command and allowance from
Christ to go and preach, and are providentially sent also.

2. If those titles must be taken in a special sense, and be applied to
Officers only, yet still it does not prove their position, that they must be
set apart by fasting and prayer, and imposition of hands. Their designation may
be by other acts.

Neither do they deny that men may preach by gift, without such a special
designation.

3. If they be taken in that special sense, then those titles necessarily
import a special relation between the persons to whom those titles are given,
and some Church of Christ: as, they are Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1. 20.
Rev. 2. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. -- ver. 8, 12, 18. and 3,
1, 7, 14.

So, they are Stewards; which do not only denote their having a warrant to
Officiate, but also their being over the household, Luke 12. 42, Who then is
that faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over his
household? They have some house or Church of God, which they are Stewards over.

Watchmen, Ambassadors, Bishops, have some Churches or other committed to their
charge, to forewarn of dangers, and to do their message to, and oversee: so as
they should break their truths, if they should not forewarn those Churches, or
not do their message to those Churches, or not oversee those flocks, as well as
if they did neglect these works altogether. As a Father should break the trust
of that relation, if he should not teach, govern, and provide for his own
Children, though he should keep a School, and there teach and govern many other
Children.

And such a relation, such a trust or charge gifted men assume not; and
therefore this Argument strikes not at them, if the titles be taken in such a
sense: and if in a larger sense, then gifted Brethren are as capable of those
titles as others. Ambassadors are not only betrusted with a message, but
limited by their commission, what Princes or foreign States to treat with; and
if they go to other Princes or States, they cannot treat with them as
Ambassadors, though they may report their Masters willingness to hold a good
correspondency with them also.

But if they should not go to those they are by their commission sent unto,
they should break their trust: and so for Stewards, etc.

Argum. 4. Our Brethren argue, from the constant distinction that is made in
Scripture, between gifts and calling: we read, (say they) Joh. 20. v. 21, 22.
First Christ gives his Apostles their commission, As my Father has sent me,
even so send I you: then he gives them their gifts, Receive the holy Ghost.
Thus Isa. 6. 6, 7, 9. God touched his lips with a coal from the Alter, and
gifted him; and afterward he gives him his commission. Thus also it was with
the prophet, Jer. 1. 5, 9. God sends him, and then puts forth his hand,
touches his mouth, and fits him. Even as it is in all civil governments, gifts
make not any man a Judge, or a Lord Mayor, etc.

So it is in Church Affairs; it is not gifts, but calling, that constitutes a
Minister; therefore that distinction of a Minister by gifts, and a Minister by
calling, has no footing in the word of truth. -- Then women might preach as
well as men, for they may have as eminent gifts. -- If he (i. e. a person
gifted) take the Office upon him unsent, he is an usurper, and may fear to
perish in the gainsaying of Corah, notwitstanding his gifts.

Answ. 1. This Argument is like the former; it does not prove their position,
if it be granted: for, though gifts and calling and sending be distinguished,
yet it does not follow, that none may assume Office of the Ministry, unless he
be solemnly set apart thereunto: for calling and sending are not the same with
setting apart; which still they suppose as granted.

2. The Scriptures alleged, speak of sending, not of setting apart, as
distinguished from gifting; and of the sending of such as were Officers before,
not of any sending, that made or constituted them Officers: for, Joh. 20. v.
21. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you: i. e. as my Father has sent
me to make peace for some in all Nations, so (Mat. 28. 19.) send I you into all
Nations to publish and declare this peace which is made: this was spoken to the
Apostles after Christ's resurrection, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24. and
therefore this sending which is distinguished from gifting of them, did not
make them preachers or Officers; for they were constituted preachers long
before, Mat. 10. v. 5, 6, 7. They had preaching gifts before; but here was a
communication of the Spirit in a fuller measure.

So Isaiah was a prophet before; and therefore this mission, verse. 6, 7, 9. did
not make him a prophet, but put him upon the work of prophesying, which he was
called to before.

So Jeremiah is first ordained to be a prophet, Jer. 1. v. 5. Before thou
came forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet
unto the Nations. Jeremiah excuses himself, v. 6. I am a child. The Lord
silenceth him in his excuses, v. 7. -- Say-not, I am a child, for thou shall go
to all that I shall send thee. --

He was sanctified and destinated to be a prophet before his excuses, yet not
sent till afterward; it is said, To all that I [shall] send thee to. And verse.
9. He touches his mouth, and fits him. And it is like his mission is
expressed, verse. 10. However it does not appear, that his sending, did
constitute him a prophet.

So that these Scriptures alleged, speak not against assuming an Office,
without being called and ordained; but against Officers going to a people which
they are not sent as yet by the Lord unto. Men lawfully called and ordained
unto Office-work, may err this way, as well as gifted men.

3. Their instances from civil Governments, might have been spared: as gifts
makes not any man a Judge, a Lord Mayor, Sheriff, -- so we grant in
Church Affairs, that gifts alone do not make a man a Church Officer, for then
there were no preaching ex dono at all. We have proved, that gifted men have a
Call to exercise their gifts; and therefore preaching ex Officio and ex dono,
has footing in the word. It is not so proper to say, A Minister by Gift, and a
Minister by Calling: Gifts do not give being to the Call, it is the written
word does that: yet because gifts are a sign to judge by, an evidence who have
a Divine allowance to preach, therefore we distinguish between preaching by
Office, and by Gift. Such visible believers, as are really gifted (if they have
not forfeited their liberty by a corrupt life or doctrine, which Officers may
do as well as others) by the word of God they have allowance to preach.

Corahs assuming the Office of the High Priest, which did belong to Aaron; and
that without a Call, Number. 16. v. 3, 10. speaks nothing against the preaching
of gifted men, who assume not Office, and have a Call to preach.

Argum. 5. They argue from the Rules laid down in Scripture, for the Calling of
men to the Office of the Ministry: The word of God (say they) does exactly tell
us the qualifications of the person that is to be called, Tim. 3. 2, 3, etc.
The Scripture also directs for the manner of his calling to the work, who are
to ordain, how he is to be ordained, 1 Timothy 4. 14, etc. Now either these
directions are superfluous and unnecessary, or else it is a truth, that no man
ought to take this Office upon him without such a Call. Nor were these
directions given for that age only, but for all the ages of the Church to the
end of the world; as appears evidently from 1 Timothy 6. 14. compared with 1 Timothy
5. 7, 21. In the first place, he is charged to keep those commands without
spot, to the appearance of Jesus Christ: In the second place, there is a solemn
charge -- and one main ground why Paul charge Timothy to be so careful --
was, that thereby false doctrine might be prevented, 1 Timothy 1. 3, 4. -- The
same charge upon the same ground is laid upon Titus, Chap. 1. 5, 9, 10. --
which (soil. directions) are all ain and unuseful, if any may enter upon the
Ministry without Ordination.

Answ. 1. This Argument does only prove, that all who assume the Office of a
Bishop, or Elder, they ought to be ordained. Those that the Apostle speaks
of, are such, 1 Timothy 3. 1. -- If a man desires [the Office of a Bishop -- 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let [the Elders] that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor. -- Tit. 1. ver. 5. Ordain Elders, etc. Ver. 7. For a Bishop, i. e. an
Overseer, must be blameless, etc. These directions were superfluous, if none
were so to be ordained.

2. We grant it is a choice means for the preventing and suppressing of false
doctrines, to look that those Gospel-qualifications which are required to be in
Officers, be found in men before they be admitted into Office: for if the
Pastors be not sound in the faith, they will be like to lead the flock into
error, and will not seek to convince others who are gainsayers.

3 But yet we do not find that the Rules laid down in those Scriptures about
Ordination, have the prevention of false doctrines as their main ground: as for
1 Timothy 1. v. 3, 4. The Apostle besought Timothy to abide at Ephesus, that he
might charge some [that they teach no other doctrine.] He does not bid him
charge them not to preach at all, nor charge them not to preach without
Ordination; but not to preach any doctrines contrary to the Gospel. And in
Titus 1. he charge; that he that be taken into the Office of an Elder, should
hold fast the faithful word, verse. 9. That he may be able by sound doctrine,
both to exhort and convince the gainsayers. For there are many unruly and vain
talkers. -- Verse. 11. Whose mouths must be stopped, etc.

He would have Elders able and sound in the faith, that by sound doctrine they
may silence gainsayers; but Election is a means unto this, not Ordination
only. The Church ought to be careful that such be chosen into Office, as are
able and faithful.

4. Neither do we find in any of the places alleged, that Ordination is made
the Call to the work of preaching, nor yet the Call to Office: Our Brethren
still suppose that Ordination is the Call to both; which we deny.

This Argument speaks not against the preaching of gifted Brethren without
Ordination; for they lay no claim to the Office of an Elder, or Overseer; and
such only are required there to be ordained.

Argum. 6. They argue from that confusion which would come into the Church, if
every man that presumes himself gifted, should intrude Jus Divin.
himself into the Office of the Ministry, without a regular Call: -- the reason
(they say) is apparent; the prostituting of this sacred and weighty Office to
the wills of men, opens a door to all disorders, and the introducing of all
heresies and errors: how much did the Church of Antioch suffer from such as
came from the Apostles, and had no commission! Act. 15. Gal. 2. 5. Besides that
contempt and scrone which it exposes the ministry unto: admit the same in the
Commonwealth, or in an Army; might he that would make himself a Mayor, Judge,
Constable, a Colonel, Chaptain, etc. What an Iliad of miseries would thence
ensue, is easier to be imagined, then expressed.

Answ. 1. This is quite besides the Question; for, we do not assert that every
man that presumes himself gifted, may assume the Office of the Ministry, nor
that he may preach; much less do we say, That he may do either without a
regular Call: but we say, That such believers as are really gifted, (not barely
who presume themselves so to be) they have a regular Call to preach; and this
does not prostitute either the Office or the work unto the wills of men, nor
open a door to disorders -- it being the declared will of Christ, that such
should preach.

2. We grant, that to a man's exercise of his gifts in this or that place, there
is prerequired a Call from the people or the Magistrate, etc. And such a Call
is sufficient to prevent all those miseries that they suppose would ensue upon
such a practice in a Commonwealth.

3. The instances are about Officers; as, to be a Mayor, Judge, Constable, etc.
is to be an Officer: we plead only for exercise of gifts.

4. It is not said, That the Church of Antioch suffered by the preaching of men
without a commission, nor without Ordination; but by their preaching false
doctrine, Act. 15. v. 24. Certain which went out from us, have troubled you
with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the
Law: to whom we gave no such commandment.

They had no commission to preach, that they must be circumcised -- but it is
not said, They had no commission to preach the Gospel.

So Gal. 2. 5. Paul would not circumcise Titus to gratify the false Brethren,
in yiedling the least subjection to them, that the doctrine of the Gospel might
be preserved pure, without legal mixtures amongst the Galations; for they would
have made an ill use of it, thereupon to press such ceremonies upon them, as of
necessity to Salvation, or to persecute those that used them not, -- and so
Christian-liberty had been betrayed, if Titus had been circumcised; but how
this speaks against the preaching of true Brethren who are gifted, we know
not. Though false Brethren have no commission to preach false doctrines, yet
true Nathaneels, who are gifted, may preach the pure doctrines of the Gospel,
and nothing here spoken, will reflect upon them therein. These are not here
blamed for preaching without a commission, but for preaching false doctrines.

5. That confusion they speak of, will not be at all avoided by making
Ordination the only door into the Ministry: for such as presume themselves so
qualified, that they ought to be ordained, if they be denied Ordination, yet
they will count it their duty to preach without it, when they cannot have it:
and so the door is opened as wide to all disorders, and the introducing of all
heresies and errors in the way of Ordination, as in the way of the preaching of
gifted Brethren; and how will our Brethren shut this door, or hinder these
evils? either it must be by Church Censures, or by the civil Magistrate, that
the mouths of unordained men must be stopped, if Ordination only gives power
to preach; and both these ways are as open to stop the mouths of ungifted men,
(where the case justly deserves such proceedings) if it be asserted that
gifted men are empowred to preach.

And thus we have answered their Arguments, to prove their first Position.

CHAP. IX.
Answering such Arguments as are brought to prove, that none may do the work of
the Ministry, without Ordination.

THere are several distinctions which our Brethren premise before they come to
their arguments, and these we have spoken to before. They say (Jus Div. Min. p.
78.) [It is Authoritative teaching only which we deny.] If by authoritative
they mean the preaching Office-wise, or such preaching wherein Office-power is
put forth, we might grant all their Arguments, and yet nothing is gained
against the preaching of gifted men.

But because their position and some of their Arguments seem to reach further,
and to deny all ordinary preaching without Ordination; therefore we shall give
a reply to such arguments as seem to have the greatest strength in them: their
position is this.

Position. That none may do the work of the Ministry, without Ordination. Jus
Divin. Minist. page 78. That none may undertake the work of the Ministry, but
he that is solemnly set apart thereunto. Jus Divin. Min. page 80.

Their Arguments to prove this, are eight in number.

Argum. 1. That work for the doing of which God has designed special Officers
of his own, neither ought nor may be performed by any that are not designed
unto that Office. But God has designed special Officers of his own, for the
preaching of his word. Therefore none ought or may preach the word, but such as
are designed unto this Office.

Answ. Their Minor we grant, if they intend no more in it, then they intimate
in the explication of it. We acknowledge that preaching of the word is one work
assigned unto Officers. It is not their only work, yet it is one special work
which they are appointed to perform.

But their Major we deny: and we say, That a work for the doing of which God
has designed special Officers of his own, may be performed by some that are
not designed unto that Office. As for example, Act. 6. 4. But we will give our
selves continually to prayer, and to the Ministry of the word. Here prayer is
declared to be a special work of Officers, as well as the Ministry of the
word; the Apostles would have Deacons appointed, that they might be freed from
worldly encumbrances, and might give themselves continually, not only to
preaching, but also to prayer; and therefore prayer is a work for the doing of
which God has designed special Officers of his own. So Act. 20. 36. Yet prayer
may be performed by such as are not designed unto Office. It is the duty of
every Christian to be exercised in the work of prayer. 1 These. 5. 17. Pray
without ceasing: and this is enjoined the Saints in general, ver. 14. We exhort
you brethren. Jam. 5. 13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.

Also to distribute worldly goods is one work, for the doing of which God has
designed special Officers of own, viz. Deacons. Act. 4. 34, 35. compared with
Act. 6. ver. 1, 2. etc. and yet it is the duty of such as are not designed unto
that Office, to distribute to the necessities of others. Romans 12. 13.
Distributing to the necessity of the Saints. -- and this is put in the midst of
Christian duties: ver. 12. Such as are to rejoice in hope, and be patient in
tribulation, and continue instant in prayer, are also to distribute. -- and
therefore it cannot be restrained to Officers. 2 Cor. 9. 1, 2, 13.

Also exhorting, and reproving or rebuking, are works for the doing of which,
God has designed special Officers of his own. The Apostle lays down the
qualifications of a Bishop or Elder, Tit. 1. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and one work
of his is, to exhort and convince gainsayers, ver. 9. and Tit. 2. 15. These
things speak and exhort, and-rebuke with all authority. Yet these works may
warrantably be performed by some that are not designed unto that Office. Heb.
3. 13. Exhort one another daily. -- and 10. 25. Matthew. 18. 15.

Object. 1. But though private Christians may do those works in the matter of
them, which God has designed Officers to, as privately pray, distribute,
exhort, rebuke; -- yet they may not do these in the sameway and manner, that
Officers are to perform them in; not publicly, or with all authority.

The fuller answer to this objection is given before; yet we will add thus much:

Answ. If an Officer exhorts or rebukes such as he is over in the Lord in
private, will not this be deemed another manner of act, then if a brother does
it, who is no Officer? If so, then the publickness of an act, is not necessary
to make it an act of Office.

2. If it be the different way and manner of acting, that makes any act to be
an act of Office; then our Brethrens argument halteth: for that is drawn from
the work it self, not from the manner of working. Let them put their argument
into that form, and then it must run thus:

That work for the doing of which God has designed special Officers of his
own, neither ought nor may be performed in that same way and manner which
Officers act in, by any that are not designed to that Office. But God has
designed special Officers of his own for the preaching of the word. Therefore
none ought or may preach the word in the same way and manner that Officers do,
but such as are designed unto this Office.

And if they will put the argument into this form, we may grant the whole, and
yet gifted men may preach the word without crossing of it; for they do it in
another way and manner, not under such a relation to those they preach to, as
Officers are.

And although this Answer might be sufficient to the Argument, yet we shall
take away their grounds for their Major.

Object. 2. God has severely punished such as have done the work appointed by
him to special Officers, though they had no intent to invade the Office unto
which that work was by God designed: -- Saul, 1 Samuel 13. 8, 9, etc. he lost his
Kingdom for offering sacrifice, though but once, and that in a great straight.
-- Uzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10. who put his hand to the Ark, and that out of a
good intention to keep it from falling, when the oxen shook it; and yet the
anger of the Lord was kindled against him, and he smote him that he died. --
Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 16. 16, 17, 18. -- went into the Temple of the Lord to burn
incense upon the Altar of Incense. -- and though he was a King, yet the Lord
smote him immediately with the plague of Leprosy, of which he was not healed
till his death.

Answ. 1. This Objection concludes as much, or is equally strong against the
preaching of any who are not Officers, be the necessity never so great, and the
case never so extraordinary; and so is against themselves as much as against
us: for they grant (Jus Div. Minist. page 80.) that in cases of necessity, men
out of Office may preach; and instance in Aedesius and Frumentius two private
men, by whose means the Indians were converted to the Christian faith, etc.

Now the case of Saul was extraordinary, the Philistims were ready to assault
him, he had not made his peace with God, Samuel delayed his coming, the people
began to scatter from him; whereupon he constrained himself, and offered a
sacrifice: all these things our Brethren reckon up, (Jus Divin. Minist. page
81.) and then call it a necessitated act.

So in the case of Uzza, what greater necessity could there be then this, when
the Ark was in danger, 2 Samuel 6. 6. The oxen shook it. 1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10. The
oxen stumbled. If the Ark had fallen or had been broken, how exceedingly Israel
had suffered by it, the use of it will evidence, and that doleful complaint, 1 Samuel 4. 17. The Ark of the Lord is taken. and ver. 22. -- The glory is departed
from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken.

Either our Brethren must say, That none may preach in a case of necessity
without Ordination, or being designed to Office, and so cross themselves; and
that none must preach as probationers, (for that is designation to Office) but
they must ordain men before they hear them preach, and so before they know
their fitness to preach; or else they must grant, that these examples of Saul
and Uzza, are impertinent, and no proofs of the Argument. Let them prove that
these acts might be performed (so much as once) by any before they were
actually in such Offices as the works did belong to, upon any account whatever.

2. These acts were expressly forbidden, and some of them threatened with death
to any person that did them, besides the Officers designed for the doing of
them; as Numb. 4. ver 15. The Sons of Kohath shall come to bear it, bu^ they
shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. -- They are forbidden so much as
touching of any of the holy things, upon pain of death; Uzzah breaking such a
command, he suffered the penalty, was punished with death. So Numb. 16. ver,
40. That no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer
incense before the Lord, that he be not as Korah and his company, etc. All
Israelites or Levites (save Aarons sons only) are counted strangets in this
case of Priesthood. None might Offer incense Ainsw.
but they, lest they be as Korah, in sin and punishment. Numb. 1. 51. Numb. 18.
22, 23. Neither must the Children of Israel henceforth come nigh the
Taberbernacle of the Congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.

Let any show where the preaching of gifted Brethren is thus forbidden, else
these examples are nothing to their purpose. And besides, the matter of these
works, as well as the manner of performing them, was not allowed to any but
those Officers; whereas the matter of this work of preaching is allowed
undenyably to such as are no Officers: they may exhort and reprove privately,
by our Brethrens own grant; but might not privately burn incense, or offer
sacrifice: -- which shows a further difference between those acts.

Object. 3. This practice does make void, or at best unnecessary and
insufficient, those Officers which God has appointed. What needs a peculiar
Officer to be set apart to a common work?

Answ. 1. It is common but to such as are gifted, not to all Christians, as
they suggest.

2. It is not performed in the same manner by gifted men, or under such a
relation, as in case of Office it is: Officers preach to their Churches, as to
those that they are over in the Lord, and that are committed to their charge
for such ends; but gifted men stand not under any such relation to those they
preach unto. Some Churches have no Officers; and those that have, yet need the
gifts of other Members. In some places there are no Churches to be Officers to,
the people having never had the Gospel preached to them. It will hardly be
proved, that Officers must leave their Churches, to preach to these; and if
not, they must either find some Officers who have no Churches, which is to
find a shepherd without a flock, a relate without a correlate; or else they
must say, that none must preach for the conversion of such, or else that men
not in Office may preach: and this does not make Officers either void,
unnecessary or insufficient. Officers are necessary and sufficient to the end
that Christ has appointed them unto, to be over, and take charge of his
Churches under him; but they are not sufficient to undertake the whole work of
preaching in all places and to all persons.

3. This Objection lies as strongly against Officers being designed to
admonish, exhort, or reprove, at least in private; for what need a peculiar
Officer to be set apart (say they) to a common work? other Christians may
exhort and reprove; and will our Brethren say, therefore there is no need, that
Officers should be designed to this work?

Obj. 4. This practice does confound and disturb that order which God has set
in his Church, therefore it must needs be sinful: God is the God of order, and
not of confusion, 1 Cor. 14. and has commanded that every one should do his
own work, 1 These. 4. Romans 12. And abide in his own calling, 1 Cor. 7. he has
condemned those that walk disorderly, 2 These. 3. and are busybodies: he has
placed in his Church different orders, some shepherds, some sheep; some
Teachers of the word, some to be taught: as their places, so their works are
distinct. -- This takes away the distinction between shepherds and flock,
Pastor and people, etc.

Ans. 1. We have proved that the preaching of gifted Brethren is a part of that
order which Christ has appointed, and therefore does neither confound nor
disturb that order which God has set in his Church. If Christ has allowed
their preaching, then it is their work, and in doing of it, they walk orderly.
We have shown before, that it does belong to their place and calling to preach:
and thither we refer the Reader.

2. The preaching of persons not designed to Office, does not take away the
distinction between shepherds, and flock; Teachers, and some Taught: -- because
they do not act under such a relation toward them as Officers do.

A Father may reach and instruct his children as a Father, another man may
instruct and teach the same children as a Schoolmaster; yet these relations
are not destroyed or confounded hereby, though both do the same work. Here are
Fatherly teachings, and yet the distinction between the Master and Scolar is
not taken away: and the same may be said, if a friend Teaches them, who stands
in no such relation to them. It is a common practice in Schools for some youths
of ripe wits and well learned, by the appointment of the Schoolmaster to be
often set to teach fellow-scholars; and yet the distinction between
Schoolmaster and Scholars, is not taken away hereby, he remains
Schoolmaster still to those youths who teach others in the School. So gifted
men are by Christ's appointment to teach others, and yet the distinction between
Shepherd and flock, Pastor and people, -- is not taken away hereby; the Officer
of such a Church, where such gifted men are, does remain a shepherd, a pastor,
or Teacher still, even to those gifted men who teach others.

3. If you will take pastor, shepherd or teacher, not for the relation, or such
as take charge of a flock, a people, a Church, for feeding and teaching, but
for any that do feed or instruct others; yet in that sense will not the
distinction between shepherd and flock, etc. be taken away; for there are many
in a Church, that are not gifted to teach others; and they and the women are
fed, are taught. Yea, those who themselves are teachers, yet in that general
sense are properly said to be taught, when they hear others preach: 1 Cor. 14.
31. Ye may all prophecy one by one, that [all] may [learn] and [all] may be
[comforted.] All the prophets when they hear, they are Learners.

And thus we have answered their first argument. No Religious service may be
performed Argum. 2. Jus Divin. Min. p. 85.
unto God by any other sort of persons then such as are appointed or otherwise
warranted thereunto. The preaching of the word is a religious service unto
which persons gifted, not ordained, are neither appointed nor warranted.
Therefore the preaching of the word may not be performed by gifted persons
un-ordained.

Answ. We deny their minor, and we assert, That persons gifted, not ordained,
are appointed or warranted to preach the word.

Object. 1. They are not appointed; for then every gifted man that preaches
not, is guilty of the sin of omission.

Answ. 1. So he is guilty of the sin of omission, if an opportunity has been
offered, and he will not preach. If no door be regularly opened for men gifted
or Ordained, to exercise their gifts, then it is no sin of omission.

2. He is guilty of the sin of omission, if he does not preach at all, if scuh
an opportunity be offered; but he may not be guilty of the sin of omission for
not preaching at this place or that time: as the want of a call from others to
exercise his gifts, may free it from being a sin of omission; so there may be
something that may justly hinder the person gifted from accepting of a call to
preach in such a place, or at such a time; as sickness may disable, and other
natural causes: so upon moral accounts, either men gifted or ordained may
lawfully refuse to preach, to some people at some times.

Obj. 2. Then preaching must be looked upon as a common duty, enjoined unto all
believers, as such: and every one should study Divinity in order to preaching;
and woe to him that preaches not, though he could preach but one Sermon only,
and does not.

Answ. 1. If they intend this of being immediately under an injunction to
preach; there is no shadow of reason for the consequence. To say, if all gifted
persons are to preach, then all believers are to preach, as such, we deny it;
for, many believers are not gifted: it is enjoined only to gifted believers.

2. If they intend it of a mediate injunction, that believers, as such, are
enjoined to seek for such gifts as they may be able to teach others, we see no
inconvenience in that: for the Apostle exhorts the Brethren in general of the
Church of Corinth, to covet to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. v. 1, 5, 39. And the
Apostle blames the Hebrews in general, thus: Heb. 5 v. 12. When for the time
ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you. --

3. The Apostle was undoubtedly ad Officer, and says it of himself, 1 Cor. 9.
16. Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel. And therefore this concludes no
further then Officers; or if it does reach further, it is only as we have
expressed under the former Objection about its being a sin of Omission not to
preach.

4. We deny that such a man is gifted who is able to make but one Sermon in his
lifetime. We ask our Brethren, whether they would deem a man gifted to preach,
and so durst ordain him, if he could make but one Sermon?

To prove their Minor further, that gifted persons are not warranted to preach,
they tell us that the Ministry of the word is founded in institution, and
therefore must be regulated according to it: and tell us, That for the public
exercise of gifts by those who are no Ministers, they find no institution, and
refer to their answers to Objections.

And in answer to this, we refer the Reader to our foregoing reasons, which
prove an institution for it.

If no man may do the work of the Magistrate in the Civil, or of a Deacon in
the Ecclesisiassical Argum. 3. Jus Div. Min. p. 86
state, but he that is called to the Office of a Magistrate, or of a Deacon;
then much less may any man preach the word (which is the work of a Minister)
but he that is called to the Office of the ministry. But no man may do the work
of a magistrate in the Civil, or a Deacon in the Ecclesiastical state, but he
that is called to the Office of a magistrate, or of a Deacon: therefore.

Answ. 1. This argument holds as strongly against the preaching of any as
probationers, as it does against other gifted men. Our Brethren hold forth this
as their own principle and practice, that men may preach for trial several
times, before they be ordained; and indeed how could it be known that they were
apt to teach, if they never made trial? no man may do so much as one
particular act that belongs to a magistrate, unless he be called to the
Office of a magistrate: it was but one particular act that was desired. Luke
12. ver. 13. If this argument therefore be valid, they must not preach so much
as one sermon as probationers, before they be ordained to Office.

2. Both propositions may be denied.

1. The Major or consequence will not hold good. Though no man might do the
work of a magistrate, or of a Decon, but he that is called to such Offices; yet
a man may preach the word (which is one work of a Minister) who is not called
to the Office of the ministry.

Because the work of a magistrate is peculiar to, and does necessarily imply
and presuppose the Office of a magistrate; but preaching the word does not
necessarily presuppose or imply the Office of the ministry. Preaching is one
work which ministers in Office do perform; but it is not so peculiar to Office,
as the work of a Magistrate is. As for example, Prayer is one work of a
Minister. Act. 6. ver. 4. But we will give our selves continually [to prayer]
and to the ministry of the word. Their argument is as forcible against gifted
men's praying, or giving themselves to prayer, as against their preaching; thus:
if no man may do the work of a Magistrate in the civil, or of a Deacon in the
Ecclesiastical state, but he that is called to the Office of a Magistrate, or
of a Deacon; then much less may any man give himself to prayer (which is a work
of a Minister) but he that is called to the Office of the Ministry.

But will our Brethren say, that no man may pray, or give himself to prayer,
but he that is in Office? yet prayer is a work that Officers perform as well as
preaching. If they say, that prayer is not peculiar to Office; we say, no more
is preaching.

Object. The reason of the connection is evident; for by how much the work of
the ministry is of greater consequence, difficulty, and danger then either of
these, by so much the greater care and circumspection is to be taken, that it
be not performed promiscuously. --

Answ. This does not make the consequence evident.

1. Because this care and circumspection may be taken, and yet men who are
allowed to preach, may not be called to Office: a man may have approbation, and
yet not have Ordination. If we should grant that none might preach until they
be approved, and upon trial be found to have those qualifications, which by
Gospelrules preachers ought to have; yet how will it follow none may preach,
unless they be called and to Office

2. Because men may warrantably perform some works of greater consequence,
difficulty and danger, who yet may not perform works of less consequence and
importance: as for example, every Christian may believe, and exercise himself
to meditation of the word; which are works of higher consequence, because the
salvation of the soul is so nearly concerned in them; and yet every Christian
may not do the work of Magistrates or Deacons, which are of an inferior
nature, relating more to the good of the Body. Neither will it help to say,
that mediatating and believing are not acts of Office, unless they can prove,
that preaching is an incommunicable act of Office: the example is brought only
to show, that God does not allow some works of an inferior nature to be done by
men unappointed to Office, and yet does approve of their adventuring on works
of higher consequence, difficulty and danger, without their being called to
Office.

If the Lord has warranted by his word, and allowed gifted men to preach
without a call to Office, then they may do it, though it be a work of higher
consequence then the work of a Magistrate, which they may not do without a call
to the Office of a Magistrate. We know not any that plead for preaching without
a Commission; but we say, a written word is Commission enough to preach without
ordination to Office. The Lord can limit a lesser work to Office, and not so
limit a greater work; and what is man, that he should gainsay it?

2. The Minor may be denied in part; For, some men may do the work which a
Deacon does, who is not called to the Office of a Deacon: distributing to the
necessities of the Saints is a work of a Deacon, Act. 6. and yet (as we showed
in the answer to their first argument) men out of Office may distribute for the
same end, Romans 12. 13. We do not think, but that if a man has ability, he may
lawfully distribute of his own goods, to all those Church Members that are in
want, though he be no Deacon by Office; yea, he may distribute to the same
persons, the same quantity, being as yet no Deacon, that afterward he does
being a Deacon, and yet may not be blameworthy; and why may not a man as
lawfully preach, and that to all those persons, being as yet no Officer to
them, which afterward he preaches as an Officer to?

Therefore, if by doing the work of Magistrates, or Deacons, they mean barely a
doing the same work that they do, and do not intend it of acts peculiar to
their offices; then their Minor is denied: some men may lawfully do such works,
who are not called to be Magistrates or Deacons. But if by doing the work of a
Magistrate, they mean, a work peculiar to a Magistrate; and by the work of a
Deacon, a doing of it as under such a relation to the Church, or in such a
manner as Deacons by their office are to do it; then we grant their Minor: none
may do works peculiar to a Magistrate, or take the oversight of the Churches
treasure, or call for, receive and dispose of the Churches goods, as one that
is a trustee, and has such a charge committed to him for the good of that
Church, unless he be called to the office of a Deacon. These things partly
express what the office of a Deacon is, and what it is for Deacons to put forth
acts of their office. Act. 6.

And then we deny their Major: If none may do such works (without a call to
those offices) in such a manner as is peculiar to those offices, to say, then
much less may any man preach the word, but he that is called to the office of
the Ministry; this consequence is feeble: for preaching is not an act peculiar
to office, in it self; but when performed by persons under a special relation
to those that are preached to. Because a man may not perform an act of office
without a call to that Office, therefore he may not exercise a gift, in doing
that which is no act peculiar to Office, this does not follow.

If none may administer the Sacrament, but he that is lawfully called and
ordained Argune. 4 Jus Divin. Min. p. 87.
thereunto; then neither may any preach, but he that is lawfully called and
ordained. But none may administer the Sacraments, but he that is lawfully
called and ordained thereunto. Therefore.

Answ. We deny the consequence of the Major: it does not follow, that if none
may administer the Sacrament but he that is lawfully called and ordained
thereunto, then neither may any preach, but he that is lawfully called and
ordained.

By being lawfully called and ordained, they must understand, a being called
and ordained to office, as elsewhere they express it; otherwise we may grant
their whole argument, and yet gifted Brethren may preach: for the conclusion
will be no more but this; therefore none may preach, but he that is lawfully
called and ordained.

We have proved that gifted men are called and ordained, or appointed by God in
his word to preach; and therefore in this sense it concludes nothing against
their preaching.

Yet neither way is the consequence good: though it be true, that none may
preach without a lawful call, yet it does not follow, that if gifted men may
not administer the Sacraments, then they may not preach; for the administration
of the Sacraments may be peculiar to Office, and preaching not be so.

But let us hear their proof of it.

Object. The connection is clear, because that these two works are jointly in
the same Jus Divin. Min. p. 8 8.
Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. and of the two, the preaching of the word is
the greater work: this the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not
to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. The negative partiticle is here (as in
many other places) taken for the comparative; he was sent rather to preach,
then to baptize: and by this manner of expression it appears, that to preach
was his more proper and especial work. --

Answ. 1. This argument is as strong against themselves as against us; for,
they allow and frequently put men upon preaching as probationers, who are not
ordained, yet they will not allow them a power to baptize, or administer the
Lords Supper so much as once, until they have taken Orders (as they call it) or
have received Ordination. By which it is evident, that themselves do separate
between the power of preaching and of baptizing. If they give liberty to preach
but one Sermon before Ordination, yet if they will not give liberty to baptize
one person, or to administer the Lords supper once, then they separate those
works which are joined together in the same commission, as well as we; and when
they answer the argument for themselves, they do it for us also. By the same
argument and their practice, we may prove that their Minor is false, and may
justify men out of Office in their administering the Sacraments: for that we may
argue thus:

All that may preach, may baptize, for there is the same commission for
preaching and for baptizing, Mat. 28, 19, 20. and preaching is the great, if
not the greatest work of a Minister. 1 Cor. 1. 17. But according to our
brethrens principles and practices, some men un-ordained may preach as
probationers, which is the greater work. Ergo, some men un-ordained (according
to our brethrens principles and practices) may baptize, which is the lesser
work.

2. It is judged by some, that Matthew. 28. 19, 20. is a commission given to the
Apostles as officers, and so belongs only to those that succed them in
Officepower; and that gifted men preach not by virtue of that, but another
commission, as 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 14. etc. And if it be taken this way,
then their Argument runs thus:

If none may administer the Sacrament but he that is lawfully called and
ordained thereunto, then neither may any preach Office-wise, or by Officepower,
but he that is lawfully called and ordained.

And this we may grant, and yet may assert that some may preach by gift, and by
virtue of another commission, who may have no allowance to administer the
Sacraments. As the seventy Disciples had power to preach, Luke 10. Yet we do
not read that they had power to baptize; and yet the twelve Apostles did
baptize, as well as preach, John 4. v. 1, 2. -- Jesus made and baptized more
Disciples then John; though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples. So
that it is no new thing, for some as Officers to preach and baptize, and for
others (by another commission) to preach only, and not baptize.

3. The Argument is built upon this mistake, viz. That the commission whereby
men are authorized and empowred to preach, is holden forth, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

Whereas this (as we conceive) is no Office-making commission, but an
enlargement of the commission of Officers. It is not that which authorizeth
either to preach or baptize, but it is that which empowereth preachers and
baptizers to put forth such acts toward such persons. It was not that which
made them preachers, or baptizers, who were spoken to, but that which made the
Nations the Gentiles capable of being preached to, and baptized. For, the
Apostles were long before this made Officers, and were authorized both to
preach and baptize: See Mark 10. verse. 5, 6, 7. These twelve Jesus sent forth,
-- verse. 7. -- Preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And Jesus
baptized by these Disciples, John 4. verse. 1, 2. And therefore they could not
again be constituted Officers, or empowered to preach or baptize; they could
not in propriety of speech be said to be made Officers by any new act, who were
Officers of the same kind before that act; they could not be twice constituted,
unless the former constitution were lost before they received the later. The
Apostles received as much power by this commission, or command of Christ, as
any of their Successors can receive by it: for it is directed to them expressly,
Matthew. 28. verse. 16. Then the eleven Disciples went away into Galilee. -- verse.
18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
Heaven and earth. Verse 19. Go ye therefore and disciple all Nations, baptizing
them -- Yet, the Apostles could not receive power to preach or baptize, or
become Officers by it; for they had such power, and were Officers before; and
therefore the intent of Christ herein, is this, That he having obtained all
power to give salvation, not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles; now
he would have the Nations of the Gentiles preached to; and upon believing; be
baptized. Whereas formerly he said to them, Go not into the way of the
Gentiles. -- Mat. 10. verse. 5. now he commands them to go into the way of the
Gentiles. This mission does not make men lawful preachers or baptizers, (as we
showed formerly) who had not such a power before; but it warranteth lawful
preachers and baptizers, in their preaching to, and baptizing of Gentiles. It
did then, and does now make Gentiles capable Objects of preaching, and capable
Subjects of baptism when they are made Disciples. As for example: Suppose the
Lord should have said to preachers or Officers in New England, Go not to the
Indians; but go to the English and preach and baptize; and after some years
should have said to the same preachers or Officers, Now go to the Indians, and
preach and baptize them; this latter mission to the Indians could not
rationally be deemed an Office-making act, nor that which gave them power to
preach or baptize, because they were Officers, and had such a power before:
neither could it be argued, that all who might preach to the Indians, might
also baptize, because both works are in the same commission; but only it might
be concluded, that such as had power to preach, might now lawfully preach to
the Indians; and such as had power to baptize, might now lawfully baptize
Indians when converted: and so is the case alleged, as may be seen, by
comparing Mat. 10. v 5, 6, 7. and Mat. 28. v. 19, 20. together.

Suppose a man were an Officer to a Church in New England, and many hundreds of
the Indians should be converted and added to this Church; the addition of
members makes him an Officer to more then he was before, but does not make him
more an Officer then he was.

That place is not intended to show who have power to preach and baptize, but
to show who may be preached to and baptized by those that have power: and
therefore we deny, that the joining those two works together in the same
commission, does conclude, that all they which may do the one work, may also do
the other.

4. It is denied by some, that preaching of the word is a greater work then
baptizing.

Says Dr. Homes, The sealing of a Deed is a greater Act then the writing,
reading, Dr. Homes Church-cases cleared, page 47.
or publishing of a Deed. Every Clerk may write out a Deed, but only the
conveyancer or owner may seal a Deed. Preaching is to all, even to Infidels, 1
Cor. 14.

Baptism belongs only to those that are reckoned to to be within the Covenant.
-- And he adds -- 1 Cor. 1. 17. does not intimate, that preaching is greater
then baptising -- for the Apostle Ib. page 48.
asks, Were ye baptized into the name of Paul? (so the Greek, (...);
intimating, that men in baptism were baptized into the Name of Christ (as Mat.
28. 20.) but not in one Sermon of many is a man in any degree brought unto
Christ. -- To justify himself, that he had baptized but few; he repeats his
commission, (not the prelation of preaching above baptizing) viz. that he had
his commission, in Act. 9. 15. etc. -- the command Ib. page 49.
of his commission did not so run to that, as to preaching, etc.

5. Suppose that preaching the word be a greater work then baptizing; yet it
does not follow, that those who may preach, may also baptize: a work less
weighty in it self, may by a Divine institution be limited to Officers; and a
work more weighty, not be so limited. Gifted men may do what Gods word warrants
them in doing, though it be a greater work then some acts of Office.

Argum. 5. To usurp authority over the Church, is a sin. But to preach without
Calling and Ordination to the work, is to usurp authority Jus Divin. Minist.
page 88.
over the Church. Therefore.

Answ. We deny, that to preach without Ordination to the work, is to usurp
authority over the Church. Gifted men do not preach without Calling, though
they have not Ordination, which our Brethren assert to be essential to a Call.

1. We suppose our Brethren understand here by Ordination, (as they do
elsewhere) a solemn setting apart by fasting and prayer, and imposition of
hands.

2. Their Argument necessarily supposes that there is such an Ordination to
[the work] of preaching: and yet we can find no Arguments either here or
elsewhere produced by them, to prove that such Ordination to the work of
preaching is necessary by Christ's appointment.

Yet their position which all these Arguments are produced to prove, is this,
[That (page 80.) none may undertake the work of the Ministry, but he that is
solemnly set apart thereunto: or, That (page 76.) none may do the work of the
Ministry without Ordination.] And therefore, if it be not proved, [That
Ordination is by Gospel-Rules to the work,] the position is not confirmed at
all: yet for ought we see, this they leave all along unproved. Their third
Argument speaks of an Officer, a Deacon being so ordained: but the utmost
that this can conclude, is, That none may undertake an Office, or do a work
Office-wise without Ordination; but this is far from p^o^ing, that none may do
that work at all, without such Ordination. None may distribute as an Officer,
as a Deacon, but he that is ordained to the work. Ergo, None may distribute at
all, but he that is ordained to the work, None may exhort or rebuke as an
Officer, without he be ordained to the works: Ergo, None may exhort or rebuke
at all, without he be ordained to the works. What shadow of a consequence is
here? Yet no better do we find in the case in hand: their position is general,
That none may do the work of the Ministry without Ordination. Their proofs are
particular, because none may do the work as Officers without Ordination.

It remains therefore necessary, for the confirming their main Position, and
this Argument, that they prove,

1. That Ordination, or a solemn setting apart by fasting, prayer, and
imposition of hands, is necessary not only to the Office, but to the work of
preaching: Or that none may do that work without such Ordination. As yet we can
see no proof for this; if we could, we would exhort gifted men to take up such
Ordination to the work of preaching: but if this could be proved, we should
question whether they were Officers or no by this Ordination; for though they
were ordained to that work, yet it is possible they might not be ordained to
the Office, of which that is but one part, when a man is in Office. Therefore
it is further to be proved,

2. That none may do the work of preaching, but one in Office: or that none may
be ordained to that work, without being ordained to Office: Or, that preaching
the word is a work peculiar to men in Office. Else some gifted men out of
Office may perform it; for what is not peculiar to Office, may be performed by
some who are no Officers.

3. That to preach without Ordination to the work, is to usurp authority over
the Church. If it were granted, that none might preach the Word but such as are
ordained to that work; yet such as preached without Ordination, might not usurp
authority over the Church:

1. Because preaching in it self is not (that we can find) an act of authority.

2. Because such unordained men might preach to Heathens, or Indians, where no
Church is planted; and how the preaching could be usurping authority over the
Church, when no Church were preached to, we see not. It might be a sin against
Christ, but yet no usurping authority over the Church.

But they endeavor to prove their Minor, by asserting preaching to be an act
of Authority: if that were granted, yet but one part of their Minor is proved;
they should also have proved, that none have that authority, without
Ordination: otherwise we might say, Preaching is an act of authority, but yet
men may preach without Ordination to the work; for there are other ways to
invest men with authority to perform such an act, besides and without
Ordination; yet they have given us no proof that Ordination is that only which
authorizeth to perform such a work.

To prove that preaching is an act of authority, they say,

Obj. 1. -- The Apostle, 1 These. 5. 12. gives this charge, Know them that are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you; where to admonish, is to be over.

Answ. That Text does plainly difference and distinguish the [being over,] from
the [admonishing them;] and yet our Brethren produce this place, to prove that
they are the same.

The [being over them] denotes their place, the [admonishing of them] denotes
but one work performed by those that are in such a place. Officers are there
spoken of, and they admonish those they stand in that relation to, as being
over them: and if it be an act of authority when performed under such a
relation; yet it does not follow, that it is so, by whomsoever it be performed.

Obj. 2. Heb. 7. Without controversy the lesser is blessed of the greater.

Answ. The Apostle asserteth Christ to be an Highpriest after the Order of
Melchisedec, Heb. 6. ver. 20. and gives a reason of it, Heb. 7. 1. and in the
excellency and greatness of Melchisedec, he sets forth the excellency of
Christ, who is after has order. ver. 2, 3, etc. he proves the greatness of
Melchisedec, and so of Christ, because he blessed Abraham, ver. 6. and so must
be greater then Abraham, who received the blessing, ver. 7. without all
contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater. But what is all this to
prove that preaching is an act of authority? Do preachers succeed Melchisedec,
or Christ? Can they bless with a Highpriests blessing? Are they greater then
Abraham, as he that gave this blessing was? There is a blessing of reverence
and worship, so men bless God, Psalm. 68. 19. Blessed be the Lord, who daily
Dickson.
londeth us with his benefits. -- There is a blessing of Charity, so men bless
one another by mutual prayer. -- Romans 12. 14. Bless them which persecute you,
bless and curse not. It is required as a duty, not of preachers only, but of
all Christians thus to bless; yet neither of these kinds of blessing do imply
superiority, or authority, or that he is greater who blesses, then he that is
blessed. He that blesses by an Original inherent power as Christ does, he is
greater then he that is blessed; and of such blessing the Text speaks: but he
that blesses Ministerially and instrumentally, is not always greater then he
that is blessed, nor is the blessing always an act of authority.

Object. 3. The Apostle suffers not women to preach, because they may not usurp
authority over the man, 1 Timothy 2. but is commanded to be in subjection; upon
which place, Oecum. -- The very act of teaching is to usurp authority over the
man.

Answ. There is a plain distinction and difference made in the very text
alleged, between [teaching] and [usurping authority,] for the words are these:
[But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to
be in silence. 1 Timothy 2. 12.] That particle [nor] does plainly intimate, that
two things are forbidden. 1. Teaching. 2. Usurping authority.

And a woman's usurping authority over her husband. seems to be the thing
directly forbidden by the Apostle, rather then the usurping of authority over
the Church; and hence the words are, nor usurp authority over [the man:] and
the reasons enforcing it, from the man's being first created. ver. 13. and from
the woman's being first deceived. ver. 14. speak it to be an usurping authority
over her husband, rather then over the Church, that is forbidden.

However, there is no such thing found in the Text, as that the act of teaching
is to usurp authority over the man.

Object. 4. The public work of the Ministry of the word, is an authoritative
administration, like unto that of Cryers, Heralds and Ambassadors, to be
performed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and therefore may not be performed by
any but such as are authorized, and immediately or mediately deputed by him, 2
Cor. 5. 19, 20. appears, because in preaching, the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven
is used. --

Answ. 1. These titles we spoke to in another place, and thither we refer the
Reader.

2. A warrant from the written word to preach, is authority enough: and this we
have shown gifted men have.

If men who are not authorized by Christ to preach, will do it; and if this be
an usurping of authority; yet what is all this to prove, either,

1. That it is to usurp authority over the Church? Or,

2. That to preach without Ordination to the work, is to usurp such authority
over the Church? These are the things which not being proved, their Argument
falls.

3. That there is a Key of Knowledge, we grant, Luke 11. v. 52. which
Christians who are not in Office, may use, 1 Cor. 12. ver. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 14. 1
Pet. 4. 10, 11. And in Discipline, the power of

1. Excommunication is the binding Key, that which shuts the Kingdom of
Heaven, the Church, against offenders.

2. Readmission is the loosing Key, or that which opens the Kingdom of
Heaven, the Church, to such as repent: Matthew. 18 verse. 17, 18. If he neglects
to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a publican.
Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Here, the binding Key, and the loosing Key, are used about Church Censures;
and if both these were given to the Officers only (which we deny) yet, gifted
men might preach; neither can they gain any thing from the Keys to prove that
preaching is an Act of Authority, much less to prove their Proposition.

Argum. 6. That which the Scripture reproves, may no man practice. But the
Scripture reproves uncalled men for preaching. Therefore.

The Minor (say they) appears, in that the false prophets are reproved, Jerem.
Jus Divin. Minist. p. 89.
23. 21, 32. not only for their false doctrine, -- but also for running when
they were not sent. I am against them, says the Lord: a fearful commination;
if God be against them, who shall be with them? The false prophets themselves
accuse Jeremiah, Jerem. 29. 27. for making himself a prophet; which though it
was a most unjust and false impuration, yet it holds forth this truth: That no
man ought to make himself a prophet, the false prophets themselves being
witnesses. -- The Apostles in the Synod of Jerusalem, speak of certain men that
went out from them. -- They went out: they were not sent out, but they went
out, of their own accord; and this is spoken of them by way of reproof. And
then it follows, They troubled you with words, subverting your souls. He that
preaches unsent, is -- not a builder, but a subverter of souls.

Answ. 1. We deny that the Scripture reproves the preaching of gifted men, who
are unordianed to Office.

This Argument, if it were wholly granted, yet it proves not at all what it is
produced for. Their proposition is, That none may do the work of the Ministry
without Ordination, or being solemnly set apart thereunto.

Their Argument to prove this, is, The Scripture reproves uncalled men for
preaching, therefore uncalled men may not preach. We may grant that uncalled
men may not preach; and yet may assert that unordained men (if gifted) may
preach. For, gifted men are called to preach, though they be not ordained.

Let them prove that Ordination is the only Call to preach; if it were granted
that Ordination is the Call to Office, (as elsewhere they endeavor to prove)
yet it would not follow, that there is no Call to preach without that; unless
it can be proved, that there is no preaching, but by Office.

2. The places alleged fall short of proving their Argument: as for Jerem. 23.
21, 32. We spoke to that, when we insisted upon their Argument about mission.
It is plain, that if they had not prophesied lies, they had not been reproved.
For, if they had declared Gods Counsel, Gods Word to the people, then he would
have followed their labors with his blessing; and therefore they (verse 22.)
are not reproved for prophesying without a Call to be prophers, but being
called to be prophets, they are reproved for not preaching the Word of God to
that people.

As for Jerem. 29. 27. It is a weak and slender proof, that no man ought to
make himself a prophet, because the false prophets said so; For false witnesses
will tell lies, Prove. 14. 5. how shall this be credited upon their testimony,
more then other things? they are said to prophecy lies; and this might be
suspected to be one, if only they did witness it to be a truth.

But we say, that some unordained men are made prophets by the Lord, in his
affording them the gift of prophecy, and warranting them by his Word to
exercise that gift; and so they do not make themselves prophets.

As for Act. 15. We cannot see any ground to conclude that they are reproved
because they went forth from them, but because they troubled the brethren, and
subverted their souls, -- v. 24. For as much as we have heard, that certain
which next out from us, have troubled you with words, subverting your souls. --
] Suppose some members of a classical Presbytery, who have taken up Ordination
in that way, should go to a Church at a distance, and broach false doctrine;
might not the Classis write in the same manner to such a Church, [ -- We have
heard that certain which went out from us, have troubled you? -- ] Surely this
would be proper enough, because really they went from them, and possibly
without their knowledge or consent; yet this could not be understood to be a
reproof for their preaching without Ordination; for, they were ordained long
before they went out; and therefore if it should cast blame upon them for
preaching without mission, it must be meant of a mission which is not
Ordination, for that they were not without; and of such a mission as
presupposes a Call to preach, for (according to our Brethrens principles) they
had a Call to preach before, by being ordianed; and therefore this does not
evidence that the Scripture reproves uncalled or unordained men for preaching.

Argum. 7. We argue from the practice of the Ministers of Christ: if they have
been as careful Jus Divin. Minist. page 90.
to make proof of their mission, as of their doctrine, then is mission required
in him that will preach the word. But they have been thus careful. Therefore.
If any gifted man may preach without a Call, why does the Apostle so often make
mention of his Call? Romans 1. 1. Gal. 1. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 1. 1. When the Disciples
of John murmured against Christ for baptizing, John 3. 27, 28. John answers, A
man can receive nothing unless it be given him from heaven: ye your selves bear
witness of me, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him.
Here Christ's undertaking to baptize, is justified by his mission. --

Answ. 1. This Argument labors with the same disease that the former did: if
it be wholly granted, yet the preaching of gifted men unordained, is not
disproved. Still they confound a Call to preach, Mission and Ordination, which
are different things.

We grant, that none may preach without a Call; but we deny that Ordination is
that Call, without which none may preach. We know not of any that plead for
preaching without a Call; the question here is, what that Call is?

2. The reason why the Apostle so often makes mention of his Call, as we
conceive, was either,

1. To vindicate himself from the reproaches of the false Teachers, who called
in question his Apostleship: and all this gifted men unordained do, when they
defend their Call to preach, against those that question it.

2. Or to vindicate the doctrine which he preached, and to add a confirmation
thereof: the false Teachers called his doctrine into question; and to prove the
truth of that, he asserteth himself not only to have a Call, (for he might
have had a mediate Call, and yet his doctrine might have been false, and so
that could not have evinced it to be true) but an immediate Call; and this does
help to prove the Divineness of his doctrine.

Hence, Gal. 1. v. 11, 12. But I certify you Brethren, that the Gospel which
was preached of me, is not after man; for I neither received it of man, neither
was I taught it but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. verse. 20. -- I lie not.
He evidenceth his Doctrine not to be humane, but divine, from his receiving it
not by the ordinary Ministry of man, but by extraordinary and immediate
Revelation from Christ.

Because Paul and others made proof of their immediate call, therefore mission
or a call, is required in him that will preach the word; or therefore none may
preach without a call, it is no good consequence. Though we deny not the
conclusion itself, yet we do not see how it can necessarily be inferred from
such a premise. For it was necessary that Paul and others should make proof of
their immediate call, that thereby they might evidence the divineness of the
Doctrines of the Gospel, which they preached; but there is no such reason which
makes it necessary to make proof of a mediate call; and if it be done, yet that
end cannot be attained there. Suppose Ordination were the only mediate call, a
man could not prove his Doctrine to be divine, because he has that call; for
men rightly ordained may preach false Doctrine.

Object. 1. Whereas they allege Joh. 3. 27, 28.

Answ. 1. First, Christ did not in his own person baptize, as is plain, Joh. 4.
verse. 1, 2. -- Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples. And therefore our
Brethren do ungroundedly assert, that Christ's undertaking to baptize is
justified by his mission; for Christ himself did not then undertake to be an
Administrator of Baptism; and therefore could not be justified by mission or
any thing else in baptizing.

There is not a syllabe in the Text about the disciples mission, yet they were
the Administrators of the Baptism there spoken of; and so it must be their
mission (if any) not Christ's, that must justify the administration. If Christ's
mission would justify the disciples baptizing, why may it not as well justify
gifted men's preaching? but how would this at all prove that Ministers made
proof of their mission, or that mission is required in him that will preach the
word? Because the disciples baptizing was justified by Christ's mission,
therefore other men's preaching or baptizing must be justified by their own
mission; or they were justified by another, by Christ's mission, therefore
mission is required in him that will preach the word, himself must have
mission; what shadow of a consequence is here? Yet if Christ's mission does
justify any, it must be his disciples baptizing; for Christ himself baptized
not.

Christ commanded the disciples to baptize, (though that be not here mentioned)
and they baptized into Christ's Name; and thence it may be said that Christ
baptized, though in his own person he baptized not; and suppose Christ's mission
did here justify this, yet how would this prove that mission is required in
him that will be an Administrator of such an Ordinance, because it was required
in Christ, who was the Institutor of, and Appointer to, such Administrations?

2. Secondly, we cannot find Christ's mission mentioned at all in that place,
much less is it alleged to justify his baptizing, or undertaking to baptize,
Joh. 3. 27, 28 John answered and said, A man can receive nothing except it be
given him from heaven; ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not
the Christ, but that I am sent before him. Here John's mission is mentioned, but
not a word of Christ's. Says John, [I am sent before him,] i. e. before Christ.
But if John's mission justified Christ's Disciples in undertaking to baptize,
still this would prove, that one man's mission may justify other men in
baptizing; and so it is far from proving, that mission is required to the
person himself that will baptize; it rather proves that another mission may
serve the turn, without one of his own.

If they would fetch it from those words, [A man can receive nothing unless it
be given him. -- ] These words may refer to John, as well as to Christ; John's
Disciples murmur, because Christ's Disciples baptized so many, v. 26. John
answers, v. 27. A man can, etc. as if he had said, I have nothing but by Gods
gift, and therefore have cause to be thankful for what I have, rather then to
be ambitious of more honor, or envious against Christ, because more is given to
him then to me: It is not given to me (says John) to be the Messiah, as verse.
28. Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, [I am not to Christ:] It is
not given to me to increase, as it is to Christ, ver. 30. Or if it does refer
to Christ, then it may found thus: It is given to Christ to be a Sovereign,
else he could not by his Disciples baptize so many into his Name.

But take it either of these ways, yet it speaks nothing about mission, or
its being required in him that will administer such Ordinances; for, in the
former sense there is no shadow of it: admit it be taken in the latter sense,
yet he does not speak here (whatever may be said in other places) of any
Office, which was given to the Disciples, who were the baptizers; but of what
was given to Christ, into whose Name they baptized.

Object. 2. When the chief Priests and Scribes, with the Elders, asked Christ,
Luke 20. 2. Tell us by what authority do thou these things? or who gave thee
this authority? Christ makes answer by demanding another question: The baptism
of John, was it from Heaven, or of men? which teaches us -- that none ought to
preach, without being authorized and sent. --

Answ. 1. How so general a conclusion can be enforced thence, we see not;
neither have they made it out. If one should ask a Colonel or a Captain of an
Army, by what authority he fights, and he should allege another testimony
who is credible, to evidence that he has authority; will it hence follow, that
no common Soldier may fight without being authorized and sent? Surely no.

2. If they speak of a being authorized, and sent by men, there is not any
thing in the Text to favor it; for, Christ was not sent or authorized by man.
John's baptism did not authorize Christ to preach. Because Christ alleges
John's baptism, to show that he had authority from God to preach; therefore none
ought to preach without being authorized and sent by men, this follows not.

3. If by authority and mission to preach, they intend only this, A lawful
right or warrant to preach; then we have proved that gifted men have that,
though they be not ordained. Christ has warranted them by his Word thereunto,
without men's sending. Gifted men may allege the Word of Christ to defend their
preaching, as Christ did John's baptism to justify his preaching.

Argum. 8. We argue thus: That work may not be performed by any, which cannot
Jus Divin. Min. p. 91.
by him be performed in faith: but preaching by a brother gifted, but not
called or ordained, cannot be done in faith. Therefore a gifted unordained
brother may not preach.

Answ. We deny their Minor; and we affirm that preaching by a Brother gifted,
but not ordained, may be done in faith. As for the word called, it is not in
their position; and if we should gtant, that such as are not called cannot
preach in faith, yet we may say, gifted men not ordained, may do it in faith,
for they are called.

Object. 1. The truth of the Minor (they say) appears, in that there is no
warrant in Scripture (which is the ground of faith) for such a practice.

Answ. We refer the Reader to our Arguments before urged, for the preaching of
gifted men, which do -- evidence that they have warrant in Scripture (which is
the ground of faith) for such a practice; and may serve as a full answer to
this Argument: we proved there, that gifted men have Scripture-precepts,
promise, and example -- to warrant their preaching; and therefore they may in
faith do it.

Object. 2. -- If there were a precept, it was then a necessary duty that every
gifted person ought to perform; it was a sin if any gifted person should not
preach, etc.

Answ. So it is a duty, and a sin to neglect it; but in some cases, a not
preaching is no sinful neglect. This Objection we had before; and the Reader
may find the full answer to it, in our reply to their second Argument.

Object. 3. There is no precept that any should hear them, or obey them in the
Lord, or maintain them: these duties of the people are appropriated to those
that are preachers by Office, Mal. 2. 7. -- Luke 10. 16. The hearing of them,
is the hearing of Christ. -- It is not so said of any that preach without
mission; but contrarily there is a strict charge not to hearken to such, Jer.
17. 14. and a complaint of them that heap to themselves teachers, 2 Timothy 4.
Thus the Apostle, Heb. 13. 7, 17. -- So 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule
well be accounted worthy of double honor, etc. Nothing of this is spoken of
gifted Brethren; yet if they may lawfully preach, all this may they challenge,
and all that hear and plead for them, are bound in conscience to yield, because
all this is due for the works sake, 1 These. 5. 12.

Answ. 1. The Lord has warranted gifted men to preach (as we have proved) and
that does necessarily imply a precept to hear, and obey the word of the Lord,
which is declared by them.

2. Some of the places may speak of a more especial obligation between
Officers, and those they are Officers to, then between others; but do not deny
that others may be heard, or that the word is to be obeyed when such as are no
Officers speak it: because the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, will any
say, that others lips who are no Officers, are not to preserve knowledge, or
that people are not to enquire or seek the Law at the lips of any other? are
not the Saints to exhort one another? Heb. 3. 13. and Heb. 10. 25. and is no
this a means to increase knowledge? and are they not to be heard when they do
exhort? and seeing Christ commands them to give exhortation, do not they hear
Christ that hear them, when they declare the will of Christ, at his command?
Those places, Heb. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. do affirm that such as are
Officers, and do labor constantly amongst a people, and make it their work to
feed them, are especially to be obeyed, and highly esteemed by those they are
over in the Lord, and that for their works sake; but this does not deny that
others may share, in some good degree, in that honor and esteem; nor that they
are to be obeyed who do the work but occasionally amongst them, and are not
Officers to them or over them in the Lord: as if a Stranger who lives a
hundred miles off, and is over a flock there, comes and preaches several
Sermons to a Church at such a distance, upon request, he is not an Officer to
this Church, or over it, because he cannot (without asserting a height of
Episcopacy) be said to be an Officer to two Churches a hundred miles distant;
and he may be an Officer to ten or twenty Churches, by the same Rule (for ought
we know) that he may be to two; yet preaching thus occasionally to a Church
which he is not over, he is to be obeyed (if he preaches sound Doctrine) and
to be esteemed for his works sake, as we suppose will not be denied: and why
may there not as well be liberty for the preaching of gifted men, without
crossing those Scriptures?

There is a strict charge not to hearken to those Prophets, Jer. 27. 14. (we
suppose that place they intend, though it be printed Jer. 17. 14.) because they
preached false Doctrine, for it is said, verse. 14. Therefore hearken not unto
the words of the Prophets that speak unto you saying, ye shall not serve the
King of Babylon. [for] they prophecy [a lie] unto you. Such as prophecy a lie
unto men, are not to be hearkened unto, though they be Ordained; this is as
much against hearing Ordained men as gifted men.

As for 2 Timothy 4. the words are these, verse. 3. For the time will come, when
they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap
to themselves teachers. --

It is a matter indeed of complaint, when men heap up to themselves such
Teachers as are according to their own lusts and corruptions; and when
aversness to sound Doctrine puts them upon this; for it is not like they will
be preachers of sound Doctrine, who in such a case are heaped up: but this
speaks nothing against the heaping up Teachers out of a desire to hear sound
Doctrine, and to have grace promoted. --

Object. 4. There is no promise in Scripture made unto any that preach, and are
not thereunto lawfully Ordained; we say, no promise, either of 1. Assistance,
-- 2. Protection, -- 3. Success. --

Answ. We have proved that there is a promise made unto gifted men, who preach
though they be not ordained.

Mat. 25. verse. 29. For unto every one that has, shall be given; and he shall
have abundance. -- i. e. if he uses, exercises, and improveth his talents, he
shall increase them.

Act. 18. verse. 28. He (i. e. Apollo, a gifted man) mightily convinced the
Jews. --

Act. 11. verse. 19, 20, 21. They that were scattered, went about preaching: and
though (as we have proved) these were many of them not ordained; yet verse. 21.
The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to
the Lord.

Here was great success in their preaching; and therefore such as follow their
example in preaching, may expect success as they had. There is a promise
included in such presidents. --

Malach. 3. verse. 16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another. -- Here are Christian-meetings for mutual Exhortation; and the issue
is, 1. The Lord hearkened and heard it: i. e. took special notice of it with
approbation. 2. A book of remembrance was written: i. e. he kept it, as it were
upon record. 3. He promises, verse. 17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord
of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels: God will own them as his,
challenge an interest and propriety in them, when others are rejected: [And I
will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him: The Lord will
overlook that in them, which he will not in others. Therefore gifted men have
sweet promises for their encouragement in the exercise of their gifts, for the
edification one of another.

And thus we have finished our answer to the Arguments produced in the Book
called Jus Divin. Min. against the preaching of gifted men.

CHAP. X.
Answering Several Arguments brought by Master Collings to prove gifted persons
may not ordinarily Preach, without a solemn setting apart to Office.

Argum. 1. MAster Collings his first Argument rises to this.

Gospel precepts require, and Gospel presidents hold forth, that those that are
to Preach the Gospel, should not only have inward gifts, and graces, and an
outward call and Election; but also that they should be solemnly set apart for
that work. Therefore inward Graces and gifts, and the election and call of the
people, are not all the Gospel requires.

Answ. If his proposition be not understood to be universal; it may be granted,
and yet nothing is concluded by it against the Preaching of gifted brethren, we
may grant that such a setting apart, by Gospel precepts is required, and by
Gospel Presidents is holden forth, as necessary for [some] of those that are to
Preach the Gospel, viz. for Officers, and yet may fairly deny it to be
necessary for all that Preach. Other Gospel Precepts and Presidents may allow
gifted men to Preach without such a setting apart.

Because some who are to admonish and exhort others, and convince gainsayers,
ought to be set apart. Ergo, all must or none may admonish, or exhort others,
or convince gainsayers but such as are set apart. Surely himself will not judge
this a necessary consequence. We suppose therefore he would have the
proposition understood Universally, and then none of the Scriptures he
alleges, do prove it. We deny, That Gospel Precepts require, or that Gospel
Presidents hold forth (...) [all] those that are to Preach the Gospel should be
solemnly set apart for that work.

We shall briefly view the precepts and presidents which he brings.

Precept. 1. Tit. 1 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should
set in Order those things which are wanting, and Ordain elders in every City as
I had appointed thee.

Answ. This Text speaks of none but elders, [Ordain elders,] Because ^lders
ought to be ordained, therefore [all] those that Preach the Gospel ought to be
ordained. This does not follow. The question is whither gifted brethren may
Preach without setting apart, and he would prove they may not, because elders
were to be ordained.

Pre. 2. 1 Timothy 5 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. This he interprets thus,
set none apart by Ordination for Officers in the Church. And that which he
infers is this, That there is a precept concerning such as were to be
elders, and labor in the word and doctrine, that they should have hands laid
upon them by Timothy; that is, be solemnly set apart by Timothy, etc. to the
work of the Ministry.

Answ. That by laying on of hands is meant Ordination, is not clearly proved:
it being used in dispensing the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Act. 8. 18. 19 and the
Apostles being cautious about the dispensing out of those gifts, as appears
in the case of Simon in the same verses, hence it was not needless to give
Timothy such a warning. And diverse cautions are given about the using of those
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, as the gift of tongues, 1 Cor. 14. ver. 23.
26. and why not as well about the dispensing ou^ of those gifts. And Timothy
was an Evangelist. 2 Timothy 4. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist; and in those
days Evangelists, yea a Deacon wrought miracles. Acts 6 ver. 8. Stephen full
of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people; and this
was quickly after his being made a Deacon, verse. 5. 6. and so Philip, Acts 8.
ver. 6. 13. And Paul received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of Ananias hands.
Acts 9. ver. 17. And Ananias went h^s way, and entered into the house, and
putting his hands on him, said Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me that thou
might receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost: yet it does not
appear that Ananias was either Apostle or Evangelist, which Timothy was, and
therefore it is not out of doubt that by laying on of hands is meant Ordination.

2. But suppose it be, yet himself grants that they were elders on whom hands
were to be laid, and so it does not follow, that because elders were to be
ordained, therefore all those that Preach are to be Ordained. We say some may
P^each who are not elders. His own inference falls far short of his position.
This precept does not require that all those that are to Preach the Gospel
should have hands laid on them, but only forbids rashness or suddenness in
laying hands on any upon whom they were to be imposed.

Precept. 3. Act. 13. 3.

Ans. Paul and Barnabas were Officers and Preached before, without this
Ordination or setting apart, and therefore this is far from proving that all
those who are to Preach the Gospel must be so set apart.

And the same answers serve for the Scripture presidents which he brings.
Acts 13. 3, 4, 5. Acts 14. 23. They were elders who were Ordained. As for Acts
6. They were not Ordained to Preach, but their office was to take off
encumbrances from Preachers, as appears, verse. 3. 4. and Mat. 28. 19. speaks
nothing of setting men apart to the work of Preaching; we have spoken to that
place under the Argument concerning mission.

Argum. 2. For any to take upon them acts of office, being no officers is
sinful and unlawful. But for private persons how Master Collings Vindication.
Page 33.
well gifted and qualified soever, and though elected and called (i. e.
desired) to take upon them to Preach, interpret and apply Scriptures, is for
them that are no officers to take upon them acts of office. Ergo, It is sinful
and unlawful.

Answ. If by Acts of office he intends Acts peculiar to Officers as Officers,
acts both materially and formally flowing from office, then we grant the major,
The places cited to prove it, do hardly evince it. One that is no servant may
lawfully do the same acts that a servant does, at least occasionly, when it is
desired, yet 1 Cor. 7. 20. is as much against this as against gifted men's doing
such acts as Officers do, for servants are instanced in ver. 21. 1 Cor. 12 14.
Romans 12. 4. do not deny (that yet we see) the lawfulness of members using such
gifts as they have, or of performing such acts as their gifts do enable them
to, but denies all members to be gifted, or to be furnished with the same
gifts, or the same measure of gifts. verse. 29. Are all Apostles; etc? The
Apostles intent there seems to be, rather to deny that all are gifted, then
to forbid any that are gifted the exercise of their gifts which really they
have till they be in Office.

But yet if by acts of Office he intends acts that are materially and
formally such, then, we shall deny only his Minor; viz. That for persons
gifted to take upon them to Preach, is for them that are no Officers to take
upon them acts of Office. We deny that all ordinary Preaching, interpreting and
applying Scriptures, are acts of Office. i. e. acts peculiar to Office. That he
endeavors to prove by diverse Arguments.

Object. The proper acts of elders, Bishops, Stewards of the mysteries of God,
Heralds, Ambassadors of God, watchmen, extraordinary Deacons, Prophets,
Pastors, Teachers are acts of Officers, and acts of Office. This (he says) is
plain enough, for these are all names of Office in Scripture phrase. But
ordinary Preaching, interpreting and applying Scriptures are acts, and proper
acts of elders and Bishops, 1 Timothy 5. 17. of Stewards, Tit. 1. 7. 9. 1 Cor. 4.
1. Of Heralds. 1 Timothy 2. 7. 2 Timothy 1. 11. And for Teachers none can deny it,
except they can tell what the Office of a Teacher else is, and deny the very
significancie of the name which carries the duty in it.

Answ. If by [proper Acts] he means, such as are [not Common] to them with
others, but [peculiar] to them, then we deny the Minor. None of the Scriptures
alleged do prove, that Ordinary Preaching, interpreting and applying
Scriptures are acts peculiar to elders, Bishops, Pastors or Teachers. They
prove them to be acts which officers are to perform, but do not limit and
restrain them unto Officers, or assert them to be acts which they only may
perform; Elders are to feed their flocks, Ergo none else may. Elders are to
labor in word and Doctrine, and to convince gain sayers, Ergo none else
(though able) may do it, or, Ergo these are acts peculiar to their Office. This
does not follow.

As for the name [Teacher] that is given, to distinguish his gift from the gift
of exhorting, Romans 12. 7, 8. He that teaches, on teaching, or he that
exhorts on exhortation. This name Teacher is not given to distinguish him
that has it from ^on-Preachers, but from such as are Preachers whose gifts lie
in exhortation. He is called a Teacher, not as if Teaching or Preaching were
peculiar to, and a distinctive act of his office, for the Pastor may teach, and
the Teacher may exhort and baptize; but to difference this gift of his from the
gift of exhorting. If shows that every one is to give most attendance to that
work which his gift lies most toward whether it be teaching or exhorting.
This does as much deny that Pastors may Teach as that gifted brethren may: or
this denies it to be an act of the Pastors office to Teach, as much as it
asserteth it to be an act peculiar to the Teacher.

If by [proper acts] he does not mean [acts peculiar] to Elders, Bishops,
Pastors, Teachers: then we deny his major. There are some proper acts of
Elders, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers, which are not acts of office.

For the clearing of the whole business, let these things be considered.

First, That some are proper acts to a Relation, as [proper] is opposed to
[improper] which yet are not proper to that relation as proper is opposed to
[common.]

We grant it is not improper for Elders, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers to
preach, in this sense it is proper to them. Preaching is a great part of the
work. But we deny that Preaching is their proper act, as proper is opposed to
common. We say it is common to them with others to preach. Some acts belong to
all in such a Relation, but not only to those within that Relation, Competunt
omni, sed non soli. To hear and see are proper acts of a man; it may properly
be predicated of a man, that he sees or hears; yet other creatures, many
beasts do see and hear also. It is even naturally proper to every man to have
two feet, yet other creatures as birds have two feet also. So it is proper (in
the first sense) for Elders, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers to Preach, but it is
proper for gifted men to preach also.

2. That some are proper acts (materially) of a Relation which are not proper
acts formally of that Relation: Distribution is materially an act of a Deacons
Office, and yet it is not formally an act of his Office, for others may
distribute who are no Deacons, If we should argue thus about others acts, the
fallacy would be easily seen. The proper acts of Deacons are acts of Office;
but receiving and distributing of worldly goods are proper acts of Deacons.
Ergo, Receiving and distributing of worldly goods are acts of Office.

This arguing is like that which Mr. Collings uses: but it may easily be
answered that Receiving and Distributing are but materially proper acts of
Deacons, and therefore others who are no Deacons may perform those acts; they
are not formally acts of a Deacon, unless performed in such a manner, under
such a Relation, etc. So Preaching, interpreting and applying scriptures are
the proper matter of those acts which Elders, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers put
forth, but they are not formally acts of Elders etc. i. e. they are no acts of
Elders as Elders, or of Bishops as Bishops, etc. unless performed in such a
manner, as under such a Relation to those they are performed to. None of the
Scriptures alleged prove, that they are such proper acts as belong to them
and none else.

Obj. 2. If Baptizing be an act of Office; which an Officer only can do, then
Preaching is. The reason is plain, for Christ in the same Commission
authorizeth those to baptize whom he authorizeth to preach, Matthew. 28 19, 20
But baptizing is an act of Office, etc. Ergo, Mr. Collings wondereth that any
are thy at baptizing, and yet dare venture to preach.

Ans. This argument is answered before, it being the forth Argument used by the
London Ministers in their Jus Divinum Minister. page 87. we refer the Reader to
our answers to them.

1. Our Brethren will admit un-officed men to Preach as Probationers, and yet
will not admit them to baptize: and so the Argument is as well against
themselves as against us.

2. That place Matthew. 28. 19, 20. is not the Commission which authorizeth men
to preach or baptize, but authorizeth the Nations or Gentiles to be preached to
and baptized, by those that have power to perform such acts.

3. There is a limitation in the very Text alleged, Matthew. 28. 19. They are
to preach to the Nations, the Gentiles, but they could not be Officers to them
because they were no members either of a universal, or any particular Church,
before they were preached to, and therefore the preaching to them could be then
no act of Office, because Church and Officers are Relatives, and here they
preached to such as were no Church. But the Text requires that they should be
made disciples before they were baptized, verse 19. Disciple ye all Nations
baptizing them. Now a disciple is one in the school of Christ his Church, and
therefore it is more probable that Church Officers were only to baptize, then
that they only might preach, because Church Membership is pre-required unto
baptism, not so to being preached to.

4. We find that men out of Office are allowed to perform the same acts which
have the denomination of preaching, and that for the same end: Men out of
office may admonish, Mat. 18. 15. and exhort, Heb. 3. 13. Heb. 10 25. They are
to perform these acts for this end to prevent sin, and to build up in grace,
which are ends of Preaching even by Office.

Where does the Gospel allow men out of Office to perform that act which is
called baptising, and that for the proper end which that Ordinance of baptism
is instituted for? if he cannot show this, he may cease wondering why gifted men
are shy of baptizing, and yet venture to preach.

Argument 3. Mr. Collings page 36. This tenent, That any gifted person, if
elected, and desired by the people, may ordinarily preach, open, interpret, and
apply Scripture, does necessarily tend to make this great Ordinance of the
Ministerial Function frustraneous, and of no use as to its chief act.

Answ. We deny that it does necessarily tend to make this great Ordinance of
the Ministerial Function (i e. Office) frustraneous, or of no use as to its
chief act.

To prove this Proposition, he endeavors to prove, 1. That ordinary preaching
is the chief act of the Ministerial Function. 2. That it is useless as to this
act, if every gifted person may do it.

To evince the first, That ordinary preachiug, opening and applying scripture
is the chief act of the Ministerial Function, he lays down two or three
things.

Obj. It is the first act in the Ministerial Commission, Matthew. 28 19. First
Preach, then baptize.

Answ. 1. What Ministerial Commission is there intended, we have shown before.

2. If it were an office-making Commission, yet that does not prove that
preaching is the chief act of the Ministerial function, because it is the first
act. Order of words is an unsafe ground to build an argument upon, and here
more then in other scriptures, because preaching was to be in order of time
first, or before baptizing of the Gentiles, they were by preaching to be fitted
for baptism, and therefore preaching might be first mentioned, though baptizing
were the chief act.

Dr. Homes, In his Church Cases cleared, page 49. says, Preaching is but a
preparation to baptism, and therefore cannot be a greater thing then baptism.
And if order of words were a forcible argument, we might prove baptizing to be
the chief act, for that is put before preaching, Mark 1. verse 4. John did
[baptize] in the wilderness, and preach. Here is first baptizing mentioned,
and then preaching.

Obj. 2. 1. Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the Gospel.
Intimating that, he looked upon that as the chief act of his Ministry.

Answ. 1. Some (as we showed before) judge, that this does not intimate
preaching to be the greater work.

2. If preaching in some respects be greater then baptizing, yet baptizing may
be more limited to office then preaching, seeing they must be first discipled
before they may be baptized, Matthew. 28. 19. not before they may be preached to;
and baptism being more limited to Church membership, hence its more like to be
the act of a Church Officer.

Obj. 3. If preaching the Gospel be not the chief act of a Minister, he has no
act proper to him, but administering ^he ^acraments, for the Elders (say we) the
members ((...) brethren) have as much to do in the Government of the Church as
he, etc.

Answ. 1. What a^^^^ity will follow, if we say, that he has (...) proper to
him, but administering the Sacraments? Mr. Callings gives us nothing to
evidence that such an assertion would be either against Scripture or Reason.

2. We have proved that gifted persons may preach; and if we find a Scripture
allowance for their preaching, and cannot find that they have a Scripture
allowance to administer Sacraments, there needs no more to evidence that the
administering of Sacraments is more the peculiar act of the Minister then
preaching but only that, It is enough to say, one is written, the other is not.

3. Himself, aff^cteth, that the main work Paul had to do, was to Preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 17. and yet he also uses these words in the very same page
[It is plain that it was not the distinctive act of his Apostleship, for so his
universal governing and ordering the Churches, was his chief and distinctive
work.] Whence we gather that a lesser work may (according to his principles) be
the chief distinctive act of a man's Office, and yet a greater work, be the main
work he has to do. And so, administering of Sacraments, though a lesser work,
yet may be the distinctive act of Pastors and Teachers Office, and yet
Preaching be their main work: for there is no necessity that the distinctive
act should be the main work.

4. Whatever others judge, (according to our present light) Preaching is the
chief, and main work of an Officer. We do ingenously confess, that place, 1
Cor. 1. 17. does intimate to us, that it is a greater work, (especially being
performed office-wise) then baptizing; Yet, we do not find any Scripture Rule
to evidence, that Preaching in it self, is either an act of Office, or peculiar
to the distinctive act of Office; to make it so there is required a being over
them in the Lord who are Preached to, 1 These. 5. 12. And the Preaching as under
such a special Relation to them that are Preached to, as having them committed
to his charge for that end, as his flock; this we conceive, does make Preaching
an Act of office; and it is peculiar to office thus to Preach; and thus some
Preaching is a distinctive act of Office.

This we desire may be well observed, for many are exceedingly troubled and
perplexed under such thoughts as these; if gifted men may Preach, and the
Church may put forth acts of government toward particular members, then there
remain no Acts peculiar to Officers but only administering the Sacraments, and
these are lesser acts then Preaching and governing, and so, Officers are of
very little use in the Church, and next unto Ciphers, because they can do very
little more then other members may do, etc. Such workings (we believe) are in
the breasts of many Saints. Whereas, if there were no acts performed by
Officers, which in themselves were incommunicable or peculiar to them; if all
acts which Officers put forth, might be performed by members who are no
Officers; yet there would remain a very vast difference between officers and
other members, enough to speak Officers to be very necessary, and of great use
in the Church. For

1. Although Officers and other members put forth the same acts, toward the
same persons, yet not under the same Relation to the persons which such acts
are put forth toward: they act under different Relations, and this speaks a
vast difference between their actings. As for example; A man provideth for his
children under the relation of a father, the obligation he stands under (by
that relation) binds to provide for them; but he provideth for the poor under
another notion: here, the acts are the same for the matter of them, yet vastly
different in the manner. The relation is not the same between the workers and
the porlons who are the objects of the works. So, a Christian friend or
neighbonr may and ought to give gracious and wholesome instructions upon
occasion, to the children of his acquaintance, and the parent of the same
children ought to give them such instructions also; but, there is a vast
difference between these acts, the one is under a standing obligation by the
parental relation to perform such acts, the other not. So, in some
corporations, the power of determination of matters which concern the whole,
resideth in the Bayliffes and Freemen of the Corporation, the Bayliffes act
under a different relation to the Corporation, from that which the Freemen act
under, yet they share in the power as well as the Bayliffes, and the major part
may carry matters without and against the Bayliffes, when the Bayliffes would
run cross to their Charter.

So, in Church affairs, the Officers Preach to the flock committed to their
charge to be fed by them with the word and Doctrine, as under the special
relation of Pastors to the flock; and gifted men Preach also, to the same
flock, but not as under such a Relation to it. So, Church Officers put forth
acts of Government, the flock is committed to them for oversight, Acts 20. 28.
the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, etc. They are
over it in the Lord. 1 These. 5. 12. and are to be obeyed as over it, Heb. 13.
ver. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves etc. and
therefore a ministerial power of Government is granted to them by Jesus Christ,
and in respect of this their place they are set in, not under but over the
flock, the Church is in relation to its officers a Governed body, and they are
styled Governors, because a special charge of oversight and Government is
committed to them as a work and business which they are to give a special
attendance to. Yet all the members of the Church are to have an oversight each
of other, and of the Officers themselves, Col. 4. 17. Say to Archippus, take
heed to the Ministry, which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill
it: the Colossians are exhorted to admonish their Officer Archippus, and so
were to Oversee his conversation, else how could they know what to admonish him
for? and if any brother offend, the offended (though no Officer) is to
admonish; and if he does not hear him, or one or two; not the Officers only,
but the Church, is to admonish, Mat. 18. verse. 15. 16, 17. tell it unto the
Church, but if he neglect to ^ear the Church, etc. therefore the Church is to
admonish, else how can he hear it? and this admonition is a part of Government,
for, if the Church be not heard, Communion with him is to be avoided, [let him
be unto thee as a heathen man and a Publican.]

And therefore the sole power of Government is not in the officers, the Church
has a power to put forth some acts of it. The officers, are in a special sense
Governors, as being and or a more especial designation to take cognizance of,
and go before the Church in the ordering its affairs, then any other particular
members. No other members can rightly challenge it as their place to be over
the Church, as they may. But yet, a power of Government, is granted to the
Church over its particular members, though its actings therein be not under the
Relation of office. Under the Relation of a whole it puts forth acts toward
its parts, as a boly it acts sometimes to the cutting off particular members
for the preservation of the body.

If a Church has Officers, they by their place are to go before the Church in
directing and executing determinations according to the will of Christ, but the
power (under Christ) of determination, admonition, and excommunication resideth
in the Church, Mat. 18. 17. the acts are, not of the Officers only, but of the,
Church. If a Church censureth an offender when it has officers; the officer
acts toward that offender as one set over him in the Lord, and who has taken
a soecial charge and oversight of his so^^, and urges duty upon him, because
else he shall sinfully break the Law of that Relation which is between them, in
crossing still the will of Christ; but the Church urges duty upon the same
offender, because he shall else not only sin against Christ, but break the Law
of his Relation to the body, which as a member he ought to keep.

If a Church has no officers, it censureth offenders as a free people, or
spiritual corporation invested by Christ with such a power, under the general
Relation; as a body it is to seek the preservation of it self, and if possible
the healing of its diseased members. For it is a Church st^^^, though it
wants officers, and so the Rule of Christ runs to it, Mat. 18. 17. No
Church of Christ can be exemped from that Rule; Communion is to be avoided with
such persons as will not hear any Church of Christ when it does admonish for
such a cause as deserves admonition.

Office-power where it is afforded, is but the superaddition of another
Relation to add more chains to the offender, if he proves obstinate, and to
prevail the more with him toward submission; but the power of the censure is
in the Church, not in the officers only. The officers are useful for the
better management of censures, but have not the sole power of censuring. They
are to Govern in censuring, but the Church has a power to censure. Yet the
Church does not act under such a Relation in cen^uring, as an office does; as
in acts of Government in a Corporation the Bayliffes by their place and office
are over the whole Corporation, yet the Freemen may have power for Admission
or ejection of members, into or out of the freedom of the place, and many by
vote carry it without or against the Bayliffes, but when they concur, they act
under one Relation, and the Freemen under another; and this different Relation
makes a vast difference between the Bayliffes and the Freemen in their actings,
though the matter of the acts be the same.

2. No distinctive Acts are necessary (by our brethrens principles) for some
officers: They assert-Ruling elders to be of Divine institution, and yet these
have no distinctive acts which they only may perform, the main argument that
Ruling is that which is accounted their most proper work, and yet that is not
accounted incommunicable; for, they grant a Ruling power to the Preaching
elders as well as to them. If a ruling power may be communicable, without
making the Ruling elders function frustraneous as to its main Act, why should
the Preaching of gifted men, render the Preaching elders office frustraneous,
though Preaching be his chief Act. And indeed this is it which we deny in
Master Collings Argument. viz. That the ministrial function or office, is
useless as to this Act of Preaching of every gifted person may do it. And now
we expected some Scripture proof of this, the Argument being of no force if
this be not proved, and all that we can find he says to it, is this.

Object. What need any particuliar persons be by the Ordinance of God
appointed, to do that which all may do?

Answ. 1. We do not say, that all may do it, but only that those who are
really gifted may do it: all Christians are not gifted.

2. If there be Scripture warrant for the Preaching of gifted men, then it is
needful, whether our reason can see it so to be or not; for, none of Christ's
institutions are needless.

3. The granting liberty unto gifted men to Preach, does not render it
needless for particular persons to be by the Ordinance of God appointed to do
it: in the Primitive times the Preaching of Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets
did not render it needless for Pastors and Teachers to be by an Ordinance of
God appointed to do it, nor did the appointing of Pastors and Teachers render
Apostles, etc. un-necessary. It helps not to say, they were all officers who
by divine appointment were to do the work, for we say, gifted brethren are also
by divine appointment to preach; and besides, the argument is built upon this
principle, That what others may do, there is no need that any particular
persons should be appointed by God to do, and so it will strike at those as
well as others.

If every Churchmember of ability may distribute to the poor, will it follow
thence, that there is no need that any particular persons should be by God
appointed as Deacons to do it? If the inhabitants in a Town may give to the
poor, yet it is not reckoned needless for Overseers to be appointed to the
work. If some friends or Relations may provide for an Orphanous child, will it
follow that therefore there is no need that any should be put in trust, as
Guardian for it? Surely this does not follow.

So, neither does it follow, that if gifted men may Preach, then it is
un-needful, or un-necessary that any should be put in trust with, or have the
charge of the flock committed to them, to feed it with the Word and doctrine.

Arg. 4. The truths of the Gospel are such, as according to Scripture warrant,
are only to be communicated to others, by such as being faithful and able to
teach others, and have those things committed to them by Timothies; and private
persons are not such, to whom such things are committed. Ergo, It is unlawful
for such to communicate them in that manner. He endeavors to prove the
proposition by that place, 2 Timothy 2. 2. And the things that thou have heard of
me amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be
able to teach others.

Hence he takes notice of several things.

Obj. 1. According to Gospel Order, in Gospel-Churches, there should be some to
teach, and others to be taught, so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 29 A^e all
Teachers? now according to this principle it is possible that all may be
Teachers in a Church, it all be gifted.

Ans. 1. It is as possible that all in a Church may be Officers; for it they be
faithful and able, by what rule can any Presbytery refuse to ordain them? this
is as much against himself as against us.

2. If all were Teachers, yet whilst one Teaches, the rest that hear, are
taught, 1 Cor. 14. 29, 31.

3. If all the Church should be Teachers, yet others who are unconverted would
need to be taught, though the Church did not; and the Text only says [who
shall be able to teach others] whether in or of the Church.

Obj. 2. It is plain from that place, that those that teach others, must be
able to teach, and faithful, not unlearned and unstable men.

Ans. That none but those who are faithful and able to teach others, are to
preach we grant; and if by unlearned he means men un-instructed in Gospel
mysteries, we grant they are to be learned, and no other learning does this
Text require unto preaching; for the things to be committed to them that they
might be able to preach, were the doctrines of the Gospel, which he had heard
of Paul [the things thou have heard of me. etc.]

Obj 3. These able and faithful men, before they teach others, must have a
Timothy or Timothies commit the Gospel to them, it is not enough that they are
gifted, faithful, etc. The word for commit (he says) signifies,

1. Sometimes merely to propound a thing to others, and set it before them,
thus often, Mat. 13. 24. v. 31. Mark 8. 6, 7. Luke 9. 16. 10. chapter 8. Luke 11.
6. Acts 16. 34. Acts 17. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 27.

2. Sometimes to commit a thing as in trust, when a thing is committed to some
and not to others, so Luke 12. 48. Luke 23. 46. and so Acts 14. 23. Acts 20.
32. So Paul committed the charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 18 so 1 Pet. 4. 19, etc.
Either Timothy was to lay open doctrines, such things as be had heard from
Paul, viz. the truths of the Gospel of Christ, or else he was to commit them to
some that is to appoint some to whom he might entrust those truths with as
public Treasurers, to dispense them out.

Ans. 1. We conceive that a committing the truths of the Gospel which he had
heard from Paul doctrinally, is intended in this place.

1. The word is often used only for a committing things doctrinally to others,
as Mr. Collings grants; and seeing it will bear this sense, there must be
some special reason in the Text to restain it unto the other sense, else an
argument from the word taken in the other sense, cannot be cogent.

2. That the word is in this place to be taken only for a committing Gospel
truths to them doctrinally appears.

1. Because the end of this committing Gospel truths to them is, to make them
[able] to teach others: suppose there were any such act to be performed in
ordination as a committing the Gospel by the Ordainers to the ordained, yet
this committing of it to them could not make them able to teach others, unless
they will say that the gifts of the Holy Ghost are conferred in ordination,
which cannot be proved. Nay, they cannot warrantably ordain any, but such as
before were able to teach others, and therefore the ability is not conferred by
ordination.

But this committing is to make men able to teach others, as the words do
plainly show, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The same commit thou to faithful men, who [shall be
able] to teach others. He does not say commit them to men that [are able] at
present to teach others, as if the ability were to be antecedent to this
committing the things to them; but who [shall be able] in future time, or for
the time to come; so that this committing is to make them able. Many that are
faithful, are not sufficiently instructed to teach others, and therefore he
bids Timothy teach them the way of God more perfectly, as they did Apollo, Act.
18. 26. that they may be able to teach others. And so this proves an argument
against him. Those that are faithful, and so well instructed in Gospel truths,
that they are able to teach others, may and ought to lay forth their abilities
that way. But many un-ordained men are such, Ergo,

2 Because it does not appear from other Scriptures, that any such committing
of Gospel truths (as he speaks of) by men, is required unto a call, no not to
a call to office: Election and Ordination are both complete without it. We read
not a word of it, Act. 6. Act. 13. and 14. The Lord does commit the Gospel to
Officers, and make them Trustees thereof, for such a Church as a man by his
last Will and Testament does commit his child, and an Estate to maintain it
with, to some faithful friend: but we find nothing in the Scripture of man's
committing the Gospel to man, but doctrinally Paul in a doctrinal way committed
that charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 18. for Timothy was a Minister before, and
therefore this committing it to him, could not authorize him to preach.

Obj. If Timothy were only to commit them to some, that is, to declare them to
some, and set them before their eyes, what means the resurrection of faithful
men, and men able to teach others: Surely Timothy was to preach those truths,
not only to such as were faithful, but to such as were unfaithful, that they
might learn to be faithful, not only to such as were able to teach others, but
to such as were to be taught; therefore it must follow, that it is the other
committing that is meant.

Ans. 1. It is not said, commit them to such as [are able], but who [shall be
able]; it is the committing these Gospel truths to them that makes them able,
and therefore it is in a doctrinal way only.

2. That Restriction is necessary, as well to show that unfaithful and
unconverted ones are not fit to be Preachers, as also to show that more then
faithfulness is necessary to fit a man to teach others, viz. gifts or
abilities, as the following words show, they must be [able] as well as
faithful. Many faithful men are not able to teach others, and so though they be
faithful, yet they need to have Gospel truths committed to them in a doctrinal
way, to render them able for that work; and therefore this does not make it
follow that the other committing is meant.

Ans. 2. Suppose the other committing be meant, then it may be understood of
Preachers by Office, and it is not exclusive (as Mr. Shepherd observes) but
private men gifted may do it; other Scriptures allow them that liberty.

Though the Apostle speaks de re [teach others] and not expressly, de modo,
of the manner of performance, authoritatively, office-wise, etc. yet the manner
must necessarily be understood, else it will not help him at all. For some
teaching of others, he cannot deny to be allowed to ordinary believers, to whom
the Gospel is not committed in that sense he pleads for. He will grant that a
private Christian may privately teach others; it is the teaching publicly by
persons gifted unordained, which he opposes. And the Text speaks no more of
that, then of preaching office-wise; we may as safely read it thus, Who shall
be able to teach others [office-wise]; as he may read it thus, Who shall be
able to teach others [publikely.]

Arg. 5. Whosoever may lawfully preach the Gospel, and interpret Scriptures,
may warrantably require a maintenance competent for them, of the Church to
which they so preach, 1 Timothy 5. 18. Mat. 10. 10. All Gospel laborers are
worthy of their hire; but they are Gospel laborers, Ergo, Gal. 6. 6. But all
those members in a Church that are gifted, cannot require a competent
maintenance of the Church in which they are, according to Scripture rules;
Therefore they cannot lawfully preach the Gospel ordinarily.

Ans. The Scriptures alleged, speak of a constant preaching, so as to make it
a man's work, or calling to preach, Mat. 10. 10. the Apostles were to make it
their employment, and 1 Timothy 5. 18. he speaks of Officers, whose work and
calling it was, v. 17. The elders, etc. Gal 6. 6. he that is constantly taught,
is to communicate to such as do constantly teach him, and if by ordinarily he
intends thus much, then we grant his Major, That whosoever may lawfully make
it their work and calling, constantly to preach the Gospel to a Church, may
warrantably require a maintenance of the Church to which they so preach.

But his Minor is very faulty both in the matter and form. There is in it,
Fallacia tertii argumenti, the third argument is changed, it is not assumed in
the Assumption as it is in the Proposition, but there is a change not only in
the sense, but even in the terms. His Major says, they may require a
maintenance of the Church [to which they so pre^ch]; and his Minor says, they
cannot require it, of the Church [in which they are] We say, they may
warrantably (by Scriptures he alleges) require a maintenance of the Church to
which they so preach, i. e. to which they constantly preach, making it their
work and calling so to do, and this is all that his Minor can deny from that
Major, and in that sense we deny his Minor. None of the places quoted do prove
that they may require a maintenance of the Church [in which they are]; but they
may prove that they may require it of the Church [to which they so preach]. But
then,

1. It concludes not, that they may require a maintenance when they preach but
occasionally and not constantly; which is often the cause where many gifted men
are in a Church. They cannot all constantly preach to the Church in which they
[are] as members; there cannot be time or opportunity for them all to speak, or
for others to hear constantly. There were many brethren gifted in the primitive
Churches, as Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. yet it will hardly be proved that they might
all require a maintenance of that Church.

2. If a Church has many gifted men, and they be desired to preach constantly
to other Churches, or to the world, they may require a maintenance of those
that are constantly taught by them, though they cannot require it of the Church
in which they are, as members. And thus it does not tie ungifted brethren to
maintain all those that are gifted, but only such as constantly preach to
them, which is a duty they may be able to perform. If men preach occasionally
at Lectures, may they require a maintenance competent for this? or might those
Disciples, Act. 15. 32, 33. require a maintenance for their occasional
preaching. Where there are many gifted men in a Church, they cannot all
exercise constantly, but only occasionally to that Church, and so cannot
require a maintenance.

His sixth Argument about Mission we answered before.

His seventh Argument, That the Churches of Christ in all ages have rejected
this opinion and practice, we deny. But we are to follow Churches no further
then they follow Christ, and the primitive Churches we have shown practiced
what we have pleaded for.

Thus we have answered objections against the preaching of gifted men
un-ordained.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning Election, as belonging to a particular Church.

HAving showed, That Office is a Relation to a particular Church, and that some
men who are not ordained Officers, may preach; we shall now proceed to speak
something concerning the requisites to an Officer, about which the opinions of
men are various, some place the essence of the call to Office, in Election,
others in Ordination. We shall pass over what our brethren in their Jus Divinum
Minist. Evang. lay down, concerning an immediate call to the Ministry, and
shall reply only to what they say, about a mediate call. Many Arguments here
they level against the Congregational way, which we cannot but account a way of
Christ, and this has been a great provocation to us, to this undertaking. The
main thing they drive at, is to prove,

1. That the essence of a call to office, does not consist in Election, but in
Ordination.

2. That it belongs to a Presbytery to Ordain.

We shall proceed to their Propositions concerning Election.

Proposit. 1. That the Election of a Minister does not by Divine right belong
wholly and solely to the Major part of every Jus Divin. Minist. page 127.
particular Congregation.

To prove this, they undertake to examine the Texts brought for Election, and
to show what mischiefs will (they say) inevitably follow from the Assertion.

1. The first Text for the peoples Election is, Act. 1. 23. from the choice of
Mathias into the office of an Apostle, by the 120 Disciples there present.
Against this they have several Objections.

Object. 1. Those words, and they appointed two, do in all probability relate
to the Apostles, and not to the disciples; it is said, verse 17. he was numbered
with us, that is with the Apostles, not with the disciples, and so verse. 21.
and verse. 5. 22. with us Apostles, and then follows, And they appointed, that
is, the Apostles, and not the 120. Disciples.

Answ. 1. It was the 120. Disciples that the exhortation was given to, by Peter
about choosing an Apostle, Ergo, It was the 120. Disciples that did choose.

That Peter's Sermon, purposely to put upon a choice, as the scope, end, drift
and design of it, should be directed to 120. and that but eleven of that
number, should be intended to be the chusers; when no Characters are given in
the Sermon, to limit it under the 11. scundeth very harsh. The exhortation is
not given to the 11. more then to the rest of the 120. as appears ver. 15. In
those days Peter standing up in the midst of the Disciples, said (and the
number of names together were about an hundred and twenty, etc) The persons
spoken to were [the Disciples] and the number of the Disciples is said to be
[about an hundred and twenty.] And that the Holy Ghost would not pass over the
history without mentioning the number (though in a parenthesis) is very
remarkable to notify that the 120. were to act in the choice; because, choosing
was but the yielding obedience to Peter's admonition; and if all spoken to, had
not been to act therein, the notification of the number had been needness, and
why was the speech directed to any more then the eleven? It cannot he gathered
from the speech that only the eleven were to choose, it does not signify or
give a knowledge that some should choose and some not, and therefore all the
120. were to concur in it.

2. It is no way improper that [with us, ver. 17. 21, 22] should be understood
of the Apostles only, and yet the twelve Disciples to be intended verse. 23.
when it is said [they appointed two] For, the former verses hold out the words
of Peter, the person speaking, but the latter holds out the practice of the
persons spoken to upon the exhortation verse 23. they appointed two, now the
persons spoken to, were the 120. ver. 15. if the question be asked, who
appointed two? the answer is. verse. 23. [They] i. e. They that Peter Preached
to and exhorted to the work, and that was the 120. [They] i. e. the Disciples,
[they] i. e. the 120. for they were spoken to ver. 15. about choosing, and
therefore [they] appointed two.

3. The same persons by whose common consent Mathias was numbered among the
eleven Apostles, were they that appointed or chose them: for, it is as improper
that ver. 26. should relate to the 120. as v. 17. 21, 22. Now, themselves
interpret ver. 26. of the 120. they say the word (...) here must necessarily be
taken for the general consent and approbation of the whole company; and
therefore ver. 23. refers to the whole company also.

Object. 2. The whole and sole power of choosing was not in the people, for they
were guided and directed in their choice by the eleven Apostles, verse. 21, 22.
of those men which have companied with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus
went in and out among us, etc.

Answ. 1. The direction was given before the Election, and therefore the
Election might be wholly and solely in the particular Congregation not
withstanding that direction: if a Minister Preaching before the choosing of
Parliament men shall tell the people that they ought to Elect men searing God,
etc. or if the Magistrate tells the Electors that the Elected must be so
qualified, will any say, therefore the Election does not belong wholly and
solely to the major part of the people? So, Peter's giving a word of direction
before the choice, verse. 21, 22. does not hinder the Election from the
appertaining wholly and solely to the major part of the 120. Disciples; For the
Election was in order of time after that direction.

2. This would evidence rather that it was the 120. Disciples, and not the 11.
Apostle only, that were the Electers; For, will any say that Peter had a
Superiority or power over the other Apostles to limit and direct them in their
choice? did not the other Apostles know as well as Peter, that one was to be
chosen out of that company? it were too Popish an assertion to say that Peter
had such a power over the other Apostles as to guide, direct, limit and
determine them in their actings; which must be in this case, if the guidance
and direction were such as hindered the persons guided and directed from having
the whole and sole power of choosing. For, it is Peter that is the person
speaking (not the eleven Apostles as they suggest.) verse. 15. Peter stood up
and said and if the Apostles had been the only Electors (and not the 120.
Disciples) then Peter had such a power over them; for it is certain, that to
whom it did belong to choose, them Peter directed, verse. 21, 22. how to choose;
whom should he direct else? And if the direction were such as hindered their
having the whole and sole power of choosing who were guided and directed, then
Peter was over them; nay, this will deny the other Apostles to be the Electors
as well as the 120. Disciples, and then they contradict their first objection,
from verse. 17. 21. 22. 23. that says, they appointed, that is, the Apostles;
now it must not be the Apostles neither. But, because it was the rest of the
120. rather then the Apostles that needed direction about choosing; therefore
they were the Electors.

Ob. 3. The people cannot (in any good construction) be said to have chosen
Mathias any more then Barsabas, for they appointed two, the truth is, Mathias
was chosen by God himself, and by God only, ver. 24.

Answ. It is certain that the Disciples had a stroke in this matter, and went
as far as any humane suffrages could go, where the office was extraordinary,
ver. 23. They i. e. the Disciples appointed two. The Election of two, was given
to the Disciples, one of which was certainly determined should be the Apostle.
But the Election of the one, or final determination which of those two should
be the Apostle, this did belong to God only, and thence choosing is attributed
to God. verse. 24. Show whether of these thou have chosen.

And if God only had not thus chosen him, he should have wanted an Immediate
call of God, and so had not been an Apostle. But the Disciples did choose, and
then God chose also.

And if the Lord would grant thus much to men in the case of an extraordinary
Officer, let men beware, of abridging the people of this liberty, in the case
of ordinary Officers, or of making such a light matter as they do of the
peoples Election.

2. The second Text alleged for the peoples Election is, Acts 6. 3. concerning
the choice of Deacons, where the whole and sole power of choosing is put into
the hands of the people; and therefore the choice of a Minister belongs by
Divine right wholly and solely unto the people. Against this they have two
objections.

Object. 1. The people had not the whole and the sole choice of the Deacons,
but were herein guided, directed and limited by the holy Apostles, they were
limited to the number of seven, and to the company out of which those seven
were to be chosen, and to certain qualifications which must be in these seven
as we are confident that if the brethren had failed in any of these
particulars, the Apostles would have refused to have laid their hands upon them.

Ans. 1. It is plain that the Apostles referred the Election wholly and solely
here to the people; Ast. 6. v. 2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the
Disciples unto them, and said v. 3. Look [ye] out among you seven men, v. 5.
And the saying pleased the whole multitude, and (they) chose Stephen. What can
be more evident? [the whole multitude] are said to [chuse.]

2. The Apostles guiding, directing and limiting the choice does not hinder the
peoples having the whole and sole power of choosing the Deacons.

1. Because those directions and limitations were antecedaneous to the
Election, even in order of time before it, and therefore had no ingrediency
into the Election, as any part thereof: a Judge of Assize and a Jury have the
whole and sole power of determining cases, and yet there were Laws and Rules
prescribed beforehand, by which they are to walk, and which they are to
observe in their determinations.

A Corporation has the whole and sole power to choose its Officers. Mayor,
Bailiffs, etc. and yet there are certain rules and Laws to direct and limit
them therein.

2. Because the same Rules, directions, and limitations, are left in holy Writ
to be observed in all Elections to whomsoever the power of choosing does
appertain; and therefore if the Apostles guiding, directing, and limiting the
choice of Deacons did hinder the peoples having it, then also it does deny any
on Earth to have the whole and sole power of Election; for any that are
Electors, are under the same obligation to walk by those rules in all
substantials, as much as the people then were, only they received the
directions immediately from the mouth of the Apostles, others in ages since,
receive them mediately, or by the written Word.

And the people may have recourse to that word for them now. If they will grant
that all other requisites to Election, belong to the major part of a particular
Church, besides the prescribing of Rules, and limiting to qualifications, in
the choice, it is as much as any that we know of, plead for; Christ who is the
only Law giver has prescribed these in his word already, to whom alone it
belongs; it is a whole and sole power of Election according to those Rules of
Christ that is contended for. And it is observable that when the Apostle
writes to Timothy and Titus he gives such directions, and limiteth to certain
qualifications in the constituting of either Elders or Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. ver.
2, 3 etc. A bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober,
etc. ver. 8. Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not double tongued, not given
to much wine, etc. so Titus 1. verse. 6, 7, etc.

And therefore if these things were written to Timothy and Titus as Church
officers (as our brethren would have it) then, the whole and sole power of
Election belongs to no body, neither to the people nor the Presbyters, if a
being guided, directed and limited can hinder it* for, as the people were
guided and limited, 1 Act. 6. So then were the Presbyters. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
Yea, if those Epistles were written unto Timothy and Titus with the reference
unto Ordination, then this objection will prove, that the whole and sole power
of Ordination does not belong to Presbyters as much as that the power of
Election does not belong to the major part of the Church; for, then Timothy and
Titus were guided and limited about Ordination as well as the people were, Acts
6. about Election.

3. If the Apostles would have refused to have laid their hands upon them, if
the brethren had failed in any of those particulars; yet at the utmost that can
prove no more but this, that they should have wanted Ordination, it does not at
all deny that the whole and the sole power of Election belongs to the people:
Election is antecedent to, and complete without Ordination, and hence it is
distinguished from it, Act. 6. v. 5. they chose Stephen; there is election, v.
6. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them; there is Ordination,
and it is distinct from, and in order of time consequential to Election; and
therefore if the Apostles had refused to ordain them, that could not have
denied the people to have the whole and sole power to Elect them.

But in such a case it is supposable, that by the persuasion of the Apostles,
the people would have revoked their first, and have made a second choice, when
they were convinced that they had failed in the former, and so may Churches do
now, by the persuasion of others. And in case the people had refused to make a
new choice, and the Apostles had refused to ordain those that were chosen, what
the event would have been, as that Text does not, so it is not appertaining to
the present question to determine; and how such a refusal to ordain those that
were not qualified according to the word, does deny the people to have the
whole and sole power to Elect such as are qualified according to the Word, we
see not.

And where such a failing is, if the Election be rendered frustraneous, it
seems to be the want of a due observation of Gospel rules in choosing, rather
then the want of Ordination, that does make it void. Besides, whether such an
Election be not void without Ordination, and whether Ordination be not
frustrate without a precedent Election (seeing Election is pre-required, Act.
6.) are things equally difficult to determine.

Obj. 2. But suppose that the people had the whole and sole choice of the
Deacons, yet it will not follow, that therefore they should have the whole and
sole choice of their Ministers, for it is a certain rule, Argumentum a minori
ad majus non valet Affirmative. It is no good way of arguing to say, that
because a man is able to do the lesser, therefore he is able to do the greater.
Now the office of a Deacon is inferior to the office of a Presbyter, etc.

Answ. 1. Our brethren use the same Argument from the lesser to the greater
Affirmatively, and take it from this very instance of Deacons. Surely they
might take such Coin, as they pay to others.

To Prove Ordination of Ministers to be an Ordinance of Christ, in Jus Divin.
Minist. p. 1. page 158.
this very book they use this Argument.

[In the very choice of Deacons which was but an inferior office; and serving
only for the distribution of the temporal estates of people, the Apostle
requires, that they should not only be Elected by the people, but also ordained
to this Office, much more ought this to be done in the choice of persons who
are called to the work of Preaching and dispensing Sacramental mysteries, a
service of all others of greatest weight and worth.]

These are their own words, in which the Reader may see that they argue not
only from the lesser to the greater, but even to the greatest, and that
Affirmatively.

The Argument is the same, and as forcible if we apply it to Election; and say
thus,

In the very choice of their Deacons, which was but an inferior Office, the
people had the power of Election; much more ought they to have the choice of
their Pastors, who are to be exercised in the work of Preaching and dispensing
Sacramental mysteries, which are services of all others of greatest weight and
worth.

2. An Argument from that which is both lesser in it self, and also in
probability, to that which is greater, may not be valid Affirmatively: we grant
it is no good way of arguing to say, because a man is able to do the lesser,
therefore he is able to do the greater.

Our brethren are mistaken, if they think that we argue thus, the people are
able to choose Deacons, Ergo, they are able to choose Pastors. That the people
have ability to choose their Pastors, is not the immediate conclusion of our
Argument from Act. 6. but, that Christ has granted the people a liberty or
power to elect their Pastors, this is it which we strictly conclude thence, and
in the second place we may argue; That because Christ has granted them liberty
or power to choose their Pastors, therefore he has given them ability to do it.

These are two distinct questions. 1. whether the people have ability to choose
their Pastors? 2. whether Christ has granted the people, or a particular
Church liberty and power to choose them; It is the latter of the two, which we
determine Affirmatively from Act. 6. If their ability to choose their Pastors
be questioned, we have many other Mediums to prove that by, as John 10. v. 4.
The sheep follow him (i. e. Christ) for they know his voice, v. 5. And a
stranger they will not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the
voice of strangers and v. 14. 27. Whence it is evident that not only
Church Officers, as Pastors and Teachers, but the sheep of Christ who are to be
fed or Taught, even they have ability to discern whether it be Christ's voice,
or the voice of strangers which they hear, whether they be such Teachers as
they are to follow, or such as they are to flee from, and what can be required
more to give ability for Election, but a knowledge what Teachers they are to
own, and who are to be avoided? our Brethren at other times will grant, that
the peoples choice makes a man their Minister, their Pastor, and how could
this be, if they had not ability to choose? and why is it that they here argue
against their having the whole and sole power of Election? if Officers lay
claim not only to Ordination, but also to part of Election, it will be next
unto nothing that they will leave to the people.

3. An Argument from the Less to the Greater, in probability or in the causes
of it, though the thing also be greater in it self, yet is valid affirmatively
in Divine things: from that which is less credible, less likely, has less
apparent grounds and causes for it, to that which is more credible, more
likely, has more apparent grounds and causes for it, is a good way of arguing,
and that affirmatively; and therefore it is not a certain rule which our
Brethren give, that Argumentum a minori ad majus non valet Affirmative.

The Scripture is frequent in such arguings, as Mat. 6. v. 26. Behold the fowls
of the Air, your heavenly father feeds them, are ye not much better then
they? v. 30. If God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is, and and
to morrow is cast into the oven; shall be not much more cloth you, O ye of
little faith? Luke 12. v. 6, 7. Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings,
and not one of them is forgotten before God, but even the very hairs of your
head are all numbered, fear not therefore, ye are of more value then many
sparrows, Luke 11. v. 13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children, much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit
to them that ask him.

The Argument from the Less to the Greater affirmatively, is urged in all these
instances; from the Lords taking care of the Lillies of the field, and the
fowls of the air, which are of less value, he argues that he will take care of
his own people, who are of Greater value, or far better then they. From earthly
Fathers providing for their children, he affirms with a much more, that our
heavenly Father will provide for his children, things far Greater in
themselves. And the same is our Argument, from Act. 6. If the Lord would have
the people have the whole and sole choice of their Deacons, who were to take
care of their bodies and worldly goods, much more would the Lord have the
people have the whole and sole choice of their Pastors and Teachers, who are to
take care of their souls; as Dr. Ames says, There are more and more weighty
causes requiring the consent of the Church, in appointing Pastors, then in
appointing Deacons.

Indeed the spiritual welfare of souls is promoted or hindered, according to the
sutableness, or unsutableness of the Teachers; as the comfort of the natural
life would many times be lost, if a man should be forced to take a woman to be
his wife without choosing her, or a woman were forced to have a man for her
husband that she did not choose; yea, though the parties might be gracious that
were so taken unchosen: So, the comfort of the spiritual life would often be
lost, if such Pastors were obtruded upon Churches as they did not choose, and
many temptations they might be exposed to in the case of unsuitable Pastors,
more then in the case of unsuitable Deacons; and therefore the whole and sole
power of choosing Pastors, appertains to the Church.

But you may take it thus; If the Apostles would not have so much as Deacons
made without Election by the Church, much less would they have Pastors obtruded
upon them without their Election, or then they would not make them Pastors
without their having the whole and sole power of choosing them; and then it is
Argumentum a minori ad majus Negative.

3. The third Text alleged by us, for the peoples Election is, Act. 14. 23,
When they had created them by suffrages Elders in every City. Against this they
allege several things.

Object. 1. Though the word (...) signifies primarily and properly, to choose,
by listing up of the hands, as (...) signifies to choose by stones or counters,
yet also it oftentimes signifies simply to choose, or to appoint, or to ordain,
without the use of the ceremony of lifting up of bands; thus it must
necessarily be taken, Act. 10. 41.

Ans. 1. It being granted by themselves, that (...) signifies primarily and
properly, [to choose by lifting up of the hands]; ^^ence we are to stick to
that, unless some special reason forbids it. As Dr. Ames says in answer to
Bellarmine; We are not to recede from the native signification of any word, in
interpreting Scriptures, unless it be manifestly repugnant to the sense of the
context; let our Brethren show a reason why, in this place, it must not be
taken properly.

2. As the said Dr. Ames observes, No example can be given from the
Metaphorical sense, but Act. 10: 41. where by Analogy it is transferred from
men to God; and as he goes on, Quid autem in hominum usu significet vox
aliqua, non debemus aut possumus ex eo sensu statuere quem habet Deo tributa:
sed contra, quiae primo creaturis imposita fuerunt hujusmodi nomina, and postea
adres divinas imperfecte notandas applicata. Other answers they may find to
this objection, given by Dr. Ames in the same place.

3. As for Act. 10. 41. unto witnesses [chosen before] of God, as the word must
be taken for a choosing without the use of the ceremony of lifting up of hands;
so also it must necessarily be taken there for a choosing without laying on of
hands; for, as God properly has no hands to lift up, so neither to lay on; and
therefore if (...), must be taken Act. 14 23. in the same sense that it is Act.
10. 41. then it cannot be meant of Ordination by laying on of hands.

4. If it does signify simply to choose, appoint or constitute; still it
proves, that the whole and sole power of choosing Elders belongs to the
people whether it were with or without the lifting up of hands.

5. If the word (...) be understood of Ordination by imposition of hands, then
it must be granted that there is express Rule and example in the New Testament
for the peoples ordaining by laying on of hands; for not only here, is it
given to the people, or Church (...) but also, 2 Cor. 8. 19. who was also
[chosen] of the Churches to travel with us (...). It is not said he was chosen
of the Elders or Officers, but of the Churches; and therefore if it signifies
an ordaining by imposition of hands, then the Churches may so Ordain.

Object. 2. Whatsoever is meant by (...), yet certain we are that the persons
that did (...), were Paul and Barnabas, and not the people; for it is said
expressly, And when they had ordained them Elders, This they must needs be
Paul and Barnabas; it is six times used of them in five verses, verse. 21: 22.
when they had Preached, etc. they returned to Lystra confirming the souls of
the Disciples, and ver. 5. 23. when they had ordained, etc. and had prayed they
commended them to the Lord, and verse. 14. After they had passed throughout
Pisidia, they came, etc. and they Preached, by all which it appears that the
persons that did ordain were Paul and Barnabas, etc.

Ans. 1. As Paul and Barnabas are spoken of and notified by [they] in some
verses, so the disciples are also spoken of in others, v. 20. [The Disciples]
stood round about him, etc. yea in the verse foregoing that alleged, the
Disciples are mentioned twice. verse. 22. Confirming the souls of [the
Disciples] and exhorting [them] to continue in the faith, etc. verse. 23. And
choosing them elders by suffrages in every Church, or when [they] had chosen
them elders by suffrages in every Church, etc. [They] may have reference to
[the disciples] as well as to Paul and Barnabas, for the Disciples were spoken
of in the very verse before, when [they] i. e. the Disciples, they that were
confirmed, when they had chosen them elders, etc.

2. Says Doctor Ames, we do not deny that Paul and Barnabas did give Bell.
Enerv. F. 2 l. 3. c. 2.
their suffrages, but that [they onely] gave them. If this [they] must needs
refer to Paul and Barnabas, yet it may include the Disciples also, and
therefore it is too hasty a conclusion, that the persons that did (...) were
Paul and Barnabas, and [not the people] where elders are in Churches, they may
give their suffrages with the people, though they do it not as officers, but as
members. And then it runs thus, where [they] ie. Paul and Barnabas with the rest
of the Disciples, had chosen them elders by suffrages in evary Church, etc.

3. They i. e. Paul and Barnabas may be said (...) because they went before the
Disciples in the Election, and yet the whole and sole power of choosing might be
in the people: it might be the voice of the major part of the Church, that was
the determining Rule who should be chosen, yet the officers might be said to
choose, because they regulated and directed in the choice; as in a Parliament
and other Assembles the Chairman moderateth and orders proceedings, and yet
the major vote carries it, and possibly against him. It is observed, that it
is very frequent, when things are done by a Ainsworth. on numb. 21. 21.
multitude where one is chief, that the on is ascribed either to the multitude,
or to him that is chief indifferently, as they made peace with [David] and
served him, 1 Chr. 19. 19. or they made peace with [Israel] and served them, as
another Prophet records it, 2 Samuel 10. 19. So [Jehoiadia he] brought forth
the Kings son, and [he] put the crown upon him, 2 Kin. 11. 12. Or [they]
brought forth the Kings son, and [they] put upon him the crown, 2 Chr. 23. 11.
and [they] offered burnt-offerings. 1 Chr. 16. 1. or [David] offered
burnt-offerings, 2 Samuel 6. 17. So Deuteronomy. 2. 26. Moses says, [I] sent messengers
unto Sihon King, and Number. 21. 21. And [Israel] sent messengers unto Sihon King
of the Amorites etc. So it may be ascribed to Paul and Barnabas that they chose
elders, Act. 14. 23. and yet the power of choosing might belong to the people:
And therefore if this [they] must needs be Paul and Barnabas, yet I cannot deny
the people to be the chusers, or it will not follow thence, that the people did
not choose, any more then in the forementioned places making peace with Israel
will deny making peace with David; or that the peoples being the [they] 2 Chapter
23. 11. 1 C. 16. 1. will make it follow that Jehoiada and David acted not, or
had not a power of acting therein, whereas the actions are ascribed to them 2
Ki. 11, 12., 2 Samuel 6. 17.

4. It cannot be meant of a choosing or ordaining only by Paul and Barnabas, as
may appear.

1. Because the word (...), is never used in all the Scripture for Ordination
or imposition of hands; and therefore (without a special reason) it cannot
admit of such a sense in this place.

Nay, we cannot find that any Authors before Lukes time, did ever use the word,
for such ordaining; and what reason can there be to take it in this place, in a
different sense from its constant usage both in Scripture and all writers?

2. Because there are other words used in Scripture for Ordination and
imposition of hands as (...), that aptly express the action, which this word
does not. And who can conceive that Luke would use the word here, in such a
sense as was unheard of before, when other words are not wanting by which the
thing might better be signified?

3. Because the proper and native signification of the word forbideth that Paul
and Barnabas should be the only persons that did (...) for, the word
signifies to choose or create by suffrages, and they being but two, there could
be no place for suffrages.

That a choice should be said to be made by most voices, or the lifting up of
the hand in token of choosing, and yet but two to give their voices, is not
imaginable. And that the choice should be made amongst a multitude, or in the
presence of an Assemly, as here it was [in every Church,] and yet but two to be
the persons choosing, is still more unconceivable. Says Dr. Ames. Nullum
exemplum dari potest Bell. Ener. F. 2. p. 97.
ubi (...) significat in coetu eligere, it a ut suffragium unius, aut duorum
tantum expecietur.

4. Because the thing intended by (...) in this place must be Antecedent to and
distinct from, ordaining by prayer with fasting, for the words run thus, Act.
14. 23. And when they had chosen them elders by fuffrages in every Church, and
had prayed with fasting, etc. the Apostle plainly distinguishes these actions
1. They choose elders 2. prayed with fasting. He mentions two acts, and
choosing is the first, or before the fasting and praying, and therefore the
choosing (whether it be with, or as our brethren would have it, without lifting
up of hands) cannot be Ordination, which consists in prayer with fasting
which are here said to be consequential thereunto. (...) here, cannot express
the whole of Ordination, for then there were a Tautologie in the Text; our
Brethrens Third assertion is, That Ordination of Ministers Jus Divin. Min. p.
170.
ought to be by prayer* fasting, and imposition of hands; and if (...)
comprehends all these, then the words ^ound thus, [And when they had prayed,
fasted, and laid their hands on Elders in every Church, and had prayed with
fasting] As such vain repetitions are not found in holy Writ, so they are
unpleasant to the very ear; And, seeing the supply of Churches with new
Officers, is the thing undoubtedly spoken of, hence the praying and fasting,
expressly mentioned in this Text, cannot rationally be deemed to be any other
then that which was usual in such cases of ordaining Officers; and if so, then
(...) does not express the whole of Ordination, for prayer is the chiefest
part, if not the whole of it, and that is mentioned by it self after. Neither
can it denote only imposition of hands; for, generally in the new Testament,
laying on of hands with Ordination, is set after prayer and fasting, as Act. 6.
6. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them; so Act. 13 3. and only
in this Text should that order of words and actions be inverted, which is the
more unlikely, because it is such a sense as the Scripture never uses it in,
nay, it is against the very importance of the word; for it denotes a lifting
up of hands, not a laying down, or on, of hands.

It remains that the word (...), must be taken for a choosing by suffrages, or
simply for choosing, and either way it could not be Paul and Barnabas only that
did (...), as appears.

5. Because the power of Election or choosing of Officers is never (that we can
find) given to the Officers, but is given to the people, Act. 6. We desire
Scripture, that Election or choosing of Officers, does belong to Officers only,
else Paul and Barnabas could not be the only persons that did (...). None can
show any Scripture for obtruding an Officer upon a Church, without its choosing
of him, and therefote it cannot be restrained to them, as if they were the only
chusers, but we must interpret it by other Scripture phrases, where actions
seem to be limited to a few persons or to one single person, and more concurred
or were Co-acters, if not the sole instruments therein: several instances we
gave before, we shall add one or two more, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the gift of
God which is in thee, by the putting on of [my hands]; Here [my] has as clear
a reference, and does as much limit the action to Paul, as in the other place
[they] can limit or restrain the choosing to Paul and Barnabas; and yet others,
a Presbytery, concurred with Paul, for he says, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the
gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery; so Joh. 3. 26. and 4. v. 1, 2. Jesus made and
baptized more disciples then John, though Jesus himself baptized not, but his
disciples. Because it was by the command and direction of Jesus Christ, that
his Disciples did baptize, therefore Jesus is said to baptize, when the
Disciples only were the Administrators of baptism. So, Paul and Barnabas may
be the [they] who are said (...), to choose by suffrages, because by their
command or direction, Elders were chosen, although possibly Paul and Barnabas
did not vote at all, or concur in the least in the act of choosing, but left
that wholly to the Churches. And taking it thus, many inconveniences that
attend other interpretations will be avoided, and the requisites to those new
Officers, are clearly found in the Text. Here is,

1. Election in its proper place, before Ordination, as it was, Act. 6. v. 5,
6. The Deacons were first chosen, And after that they prayed and laid on hands.
So here by the direction of Paul and Barnabas, the people first chose Elders in
every Church by suffrages, or lifting up of hands; and thus the native
signification of that word is retained, and the peoples privilege preserved,
to whom the choosing power does belong; for by their own grant, they could not
be their Ministers, their Pastors, their Shepherds, without their choosing of
them, and these were to be made their Pastors, their Elders, for such are said
to be created in every Church; therefore here was an appropriating of these
Elders to those Churches, by their choosing of them, and (...), so aptly
expressing, so undeniable a requisite to such a matter as the Apostle is
treating of, we wonder that any should offer to vex and trouble the Text, by
forcing a sense upon the word, which the Scripture knows nothing of.

2. Ordination, which is holden forth by those words [And had prayed with
fasting]. And thus we have removed the objections against the Scriptures
alleged for the peoples having the whole and sole power of Election.

Their second Argument to prove, that the power of Election of Ministers, does
not by Divine right belong wholly and solely to the Major part of every
particular congregation, is drawn from the mischief that (they say) will
inevitably flow from this assertion. And four mischiefs they speak of.

Obj. 1. It is certain that every one that is to be made a Minister, is first
of all to be tried and proved, whether he be fit for so great an office, 1 Timothy
3. 10. Let these also be proved, etc. these also, that is, the Deacons as well
as the Bishops: the Bishop therefore is to be tried and examined, whether he be
apt to teach, whether he be able to convince gainsayers. Now there are many
Congregations, wherein the Major part are very unfit to judge of Ministerial
abilities, and if the whole and sole power were in them, they would set up
Idol-Shepher ds instead of able Shepherds.

Ans. 1. That persons ought first to be proved whether they be fit for such an
Office, before it be conferred upon them, we grant: i. e. A knowledge or good
experience, that they are furnished with such qualifications, as the Gospel
requires such Officers should have, ought to be attained before Election unto
the office. If they intend by it, a formal examination implying the superiority
of the examiners, and the subjection of the examined, the Text does not witness
that such a probation is required. If a Church by observation of a man's
conversation, by hearing his doctrine, by its own familiar converses with him,
and others report of him, has gained a knowledge or experience of his fitness
for the work; this is all the proving that can necessarily be enforced hence.

2. It was referred to the Church to judge of the qualifications of Deacons,
Act. 6. v. 3. Look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the
Holy Ghost, and wisdom. This implies, that they were able to discern whether
they were so qualified or not, else it had been in vain to put them upon
looking out such. And it is as easy to judge of most of those qualifications
required to be in an Elder, 1 Timothy 3. as it was of those required in a Deacon,
Act. 6. The people are able to discern whether a man be blameless, the husband
of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, v. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. and therefore only their ability to try whether they be apt to
teach, and able to convince gainsayers, can be questioned; and we have clear
proof of a Churches proving Deacons, let our Brethren show as clear proof for a
Presbyteries proving Elders.

3. We desire Scripture grounds to evidence that any true Churches of Christ,
consist of such members, as the Major part are unfit to judge of Ministerial
abilities: this we deny, and they give us their bare word for the proof of it.
This being unproved no such mischief as they suppose, does ensue upon the
peoples having the whole and sole power of choosing.

4. The Sheep of Christ are said to know his voice, Joh. 10. v. 4. and v. 5. A
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him; and this imports their
having ability and liberty to judge what Teachers they are to Elect, and what
Teachers they are to reject, and the sheep of Christ who are hearers, are thus
to judge of Teachers. Surely this implies their fitness to prove them, both
whether they be apt to teach, and able to convince gainsayers.

Obj. 2. There are some Congregations wherein the Major part are wicked, and if
left to themselves wholly, would choose none but such as are like themselves.

Ans. 1. This will as well deny it to belong to the Eldership, as to the Major
part of a Church; for, there are many wicked men who are ordained, and so are
(according to our brethrens principles) made Elders, and if they associate, are
a wicked Eldership, and if left to themselves, would choose and ordain none but
such as are like themselves. Surely our Brethren cannot deny the Election of
Pastors to a wicked Congregation, and yet grant it to a wicked Eldership. And
if they say itbelongeth only to a good Eldership to act therein, we may as
well say, it belongs only to such a Congregation, the Major part whereof is
good.

2. We do not say the power of Election of Pastors does belong to such a
Congregation, the Major part whereof is wicked, but to such a Church, the Major
part whereof is visibly godly: if the Major part of a Congregation be wicked,
we suppose then it is no true Church. If once it were a Church, yet now it
cease to be so, or is unchurched, or else the Minor and better part is to be
deemed the Church, By Congregations, surely they mean Parishes and our brethren
know that though some pleaders for the peoples power of Election, have granted
that there are true Churches in some Parishes, yet they never said (that we can
find) that Parishes taken collectively, are true Churches. Because the major
part of many parishes are wicked, therefore we deny that they are Churches of
Christ, or that the power of Election of Officers does appertain to the Major
part of the Parishioners. We cannot find that they are in a capacity to have
Officers over them, until they be a Church, and so are incapable of Elecing.

They suppose a Church or Congregation suitable to Presbyterian Principles, and
then deny the Election which is according to Congregational principles, to
belong to it.

Obj. 3. There are some, wherein the Major part posbly may be heretical, and
will never consent to the Election of an Orthodox and sound Minister.

Ans. 1. The answers to the former objection will serve here also. Possibly a
Presbytery may be heretical, and so the Presbytery will not consent to the
Election of an Orthodox and sound Minister; they will not deny that an Orthodox
Eldership may act in an Election, because an heretical one may not; and why
should they deny a Church, sound in the faith, a power of Election, because an
heretical one has it not.

2. Let them prove that the Gospel owneth any Congregation as a true Church of
Christ, capable of having Officers set over it by a Presbytery, if the Major
part be heretical.

Are not men to be cast out of the Church for heresy? did our brethren ever
read of a true Church of Christ, the Major part of which consisted of
Heretics? if not, why do they put the case?

3. By the same Argument we may prove, that the power of Ordination does not
belong wholly and solely to a Presbytery, for the Major part of that, possibly
may be heretical. Because an heretical Presbytery may not ordain, they will not
infer that therefore the whole and sole power of Ordination does not belong to
an Orthodox Presbytery: and because an heretical Congregation may not Elect
Pastors, why would they infer, that therefore the whole and sole power of
Election does not belong to the Major part of a Congregation which is sound in
the faith?

Obj. 4. Sometimes there have been great dissentions and tumults in popular
Elections, even to the effusion of blood, as we read in Ecclesiastical story;
sometimes Congregations are destitute of Ministers for many years, by reason of
the divisions and disagreements thereof.

Ans. 1. In cases of want of Pastors, who can show any Scripture rule to
warrant their obtruding Pastors upon a Church without Election? if dissentions
in Churches be sinful, a Presbyteries obtrusion of Pastors upon Churches, would
be sinful also.

2. We say with Dr. Ames, We never read that dissentions and tumults did arise
among those that were Orthodox, in the choosing of Pastors qualified according
to Christ's appointment.

3. If dissentions and tumults, even to the effusion of blood, have attended
some popular Elections, yet they were but accidental to them; the giving the
whole and sole power of Election to a Church, does not necessarily cause, but
only occasion such evils; and so this is no argument against popular Elections,
Romans 7. 8. Sin took occasion by the Commandment; yet this does not speak
against urging the Commandment. Christ is a stone of stumbling to some, and the
Gospel an occasion of tumults, when it was preached by the Apostles, Asts 14.
19. the people stoned Paul for preaching the Gospel. But this will not prove
that the Apostles had not power to preach Christ and the Gospel. Says Dr.
Ames, Instituta Dei non sunt mutanda propter incommoda Ames Beller. Enerv. F.
2. l. 3. c. 2.
quibus sunt obnoxia; sed illa incommoda sunt cavenda and curanda propter
instituta, quae observare tenemur. So much for the first Proposition.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning Election, as Essential to a call to Office.

THeir second Proposition is, Proposit. 2. That the whole essence of the
Ministerial call does not consist in Election without Ordination.

Before we proceed to any Arguments, we shall premise three things.

Premise 1. That if we should grant that the essence of a call to Office does
consist in Ordination, and not in Election. Yet,

1. This would not overthrow the Congregational way. it would not deny
Congregational Churches to be true Churches, for they must be true Churches
before Officers can regularly be set over them, whether by Election or
Ordination.

Nor would it deny Officers in those Churches, to be true Officers of Christ,
or to be rightly constituted; for, Ordination as well as Election is used in
the Congregational way, and so the Essence of the call is not wanting there,
whether it consists in the one or the other.

Indeed, if it could be proved to consist in Ordination, then one principle of
most Congregational men would fall, but the way would stand still. It is not
such an inseparable principle, as the Congregational way stands or falls
with it.

2. This would not deny the lawfulness of gifted men's preaching without
Ordination: for, though the Essence of the call to Office did consist in
Ordination, yet something else might give the Essence to a call to preach. The
written word may warrant gifted men in their preaching (though unordained) as
well as it does in their hearing, praying, private exhorting, etc.

If Ordination does constitute an Officer that does not speak against the
preaching of gifted men, who do not assume the Office of the Ministry. Unless
they can prove all preaching to be an incommunicable work, or act of Office;
this (if granted) will not forbid their preaching. They are without the Essence
of a call to Office, yet have what is essential to a call to preach.

Premise 2. By [Ministerial call] in their Proposition, we understand [a call
to Office] and we suppose so they take it, because they restrain the very work
of preaching to Officers.

Premise 3. That though we deny Ordination to be of the Essence of the call to
Office, yet we assert it to be a necessary adjunct of such a call; Officers
ought not to be wholly, or altogether without Ordination, yet the Essence of a
call to Office is complete without Ordination. These things being premised, we
shall give some grounds to evidence, that the whole Essence of a call to Office
does consist in Election, i. e. with acceptance; and then answer the Arguments
used against it. Our Proposition is this.

Propos. That the whole Essence of a call to Office, does consist in Election
without Ordination.

Arg. 1. If Election makes a man an Elder that was not one before, then it
gives the whole Essence of the call to Office without Ordination. But Election
makes a man an Elder that was not one before. Ergo, Election gives the whole
Essence of the call to Office, without Ordination.

The Major they cannot deny, it being clear in it self, and also because they
use such a Medium to prove that Ordination gives the Essence of the Ministerial
Office, because (they say) it makes a man a Minister that was not one before.
Jus Divinum Minist. p. 164.

The Minor, That Election makes a man an Elder that was not one before, we
prove from Act. 14. 23. And when they had chosen, or created them Elders by
suffrages in every Church, etc. Whence we observe,

1. That Election or choosing here mentioned, made them Elders who were none
before: (...) signifies to choose by lifting up of hands, and it is not said,
when they had chosen men afterward to be made Elders, but [when they had chosen
them Elders]; which plainlysheweth, that it was this choosing that made them
Elders. And our Brethren say that the word sigfieth to choose, or to appoint, or
to ordain; and they tell us, they could cite multitudes Jus Divin. Min. page
129, 130.
of Authors, where the Greek word (...) is used for discerning, appointing,
constituting, and that without lifting up of hands. Whether it was with or
without lifting up of hands, is not material in this Argument; that the
appointing, constituting act is expressed by that word, themselves clearly
grant.

Junius and Trem* renders it thus, Et constituerunt eis in omni caetu Seniores:
Some thus, Quumque ipsis per suffragia creassent per singulas Ecclesias
Presbyteros. When they had created them by suffrages, Elders in every Church.
From all which we gather, that they which did (...) they did create, make,
constitute, or appoint those Elders.

2. That not Paul and Barnabas only, but the people did (...) this we proved
before. The word cannot be denied to signify Electing or choosing, so it is
taken, Act. 10. 41. unto witnesses [chosen before] of God, etc. 2 Cor 8. 19.
[chosen] of the Churches, etc. it denotes such a choosing, as is a
constituting, creating act; and let our brethren show any Scripture that will
prove, that Paul and Barnabas, or any of the Apostles, did or might warrantably
assume the power of Election or choosing ordinary Officers for any Gospel
Churches; without this can be evinced, what shadow of reason is there to limit
Election or choosing to Paul and Barnabas in this place, if our former reasons
be considered?

Especially seeing the words of the Text do not necessarily restrain it to
them, but rather give it to the several Churches; for if the question be asked,
[who were the persons that did (...)] the Text does plainly answer, [they in
every Church.] It runs thus, without any wresting of the sense, [In every
Church they chose or created Elders by suffrages]. And the phrase is frequent
in our ordinary speech? we usually say, They choose them Majors, Bailiffs,
Burgesses, by voices in every Corporation; or they choose them Parliament men by
suffrages in every County or Shire; and yet we understand by such expressions,
that the people or Freemen themselves in the Corporations, and the people
themselves in the Counties or Shires are the chusers, and not others for them.
The people in the Corporations, Counties or Shires, are the [they] that answer
to the question. So every Church does aptly answer to the question in this
place. So that the Text seems to us to determine every Church to be the they
that did (...) and not Paul and Barnabas only.

There is no need that (...) should be trassanted[according to the Church] to
further this interpretation; the present translation [in every Church] will
serve as well and better to this sense. Neither will its being (...) not (...)
speak against this, for (...) signifies himself, as John 4. 2. Jesus himself
baptized not, etc. (...) Ephesians. 2. 14. Luke 24. 39. and therefore in the plural
number, it is aptly rendered themselves, and therefore it is not improper to
read it thus, And they chose, or created to themselves Elders by suffrages in
every Church. And so Election by a Church, i. e. being completed by the
parties acceptance who is chosen, is that which makes a man an Elder who was
none before, and therefore gives the whole Essence of the call to Office,
without Ordination.

Arg. 2. If Ordination does not give the essentials of the Ministerial Office,
then Election does: for our brethren say, it is agreed on all sides, that the
outward call of a Minister does consist only in his Election or Ordination.
See Jus Divin. Minist. page 164. But Ordination does not give the essentials of
the Ministerial Office, Ergo, Election does.

That Ordination does not give the essentials of the Ministerial Office, we
shall prove by three Arguments.

Arg. 1. That which does not set a man over a Church of Christ, or commit it to
his charge, that does not give the essentials of the Ministerial office, or of
the outward call to Office. But ordination does not set a man over a church of
Christ, nor commit it to his charge, Ergo, Ordination does not give the
essentials of the ministerial Office, or of the outward call to office.

The Major is evident.

1. Because committing of a Church to ones charge or setting him over it, is
the formal cause of office, and so the relation of office cannot have a being
without it; for, forma dat esse.

He that is not set over some Church of Christ is no officer of Christ; this is
the specificating distinguishing character of Offiers, which differenceth them
from such as are no Officers, 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 12. We beseech you, brethren, to
know them which labor among you, and [are over you] in the Lord, etc. 1 Timothy
3. v. 5. If a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he [take care
of] the Church of God? In these places, [being over, and taking care of the
Church of God] express the nature of Office.

2. Because, If Ordination does not set a man over a Church, or commit it to
his charge, then it does not lay him under obligation to the work of Office,
neither are any people under obligations to duty toward him by ordination as
they are toward an Officer; for a being over them, is that which puts under
such mutual obligations, Acts 20* 28. They are commanded to take heed to the
flock or Church over which they are made overseers, Heb. 13. v 7. Remember them
that have the rule over you, etc. v. 17. obey them that have the rule over you,
and submit your selves, etc. No flock or Church may groundedly challenge such
ordinary and constant feedings, from any other, but those that are over it; and
only those that are over the flock can groundedly challenge this obedience and
submission from it; for, the mutual duties are required expressesly under that
notion. All in it that are not over it, are required to obey those that are
over it, and therefore if Election sets over, and gives the charge of a
Church, then election lays the person elected under obligations to act as an
officer, and lays the Church electing under obligations to the performance of
duties toward him as toward an officer. All which may fully demonstrate, that
if ordination does not set over a Church, then it does not give the essentials
of the ministerial office or of the outward call to office. The Lord would not
command duty toward those that are over a Church as toward officers, if they
might be over it and yet be no officers, or not have the essentials of an
outward call to office upon them, which they might, if election sets over,
because that may, yea accoring to gospel order ought to precede or go before
ordination, Act 6. verse. 5, first, The Church did choose, and then, verse. 6.
They were ordained.

Jus Divinum, Our brethren say, That it is agreaable to the word of God, and
very convenient that they that are to be ordained, be designed to some
particular Church or Ministerial employment. And a little after they add, we
ordain none without a title.

So that according to their principles and practices, election may and ought to
be Antecedaneous to ordination. And therefore if election does set a man over,
and give him the charge of a Church, then it will follow either that a man may
be actually an Officer before and without ordination, and then ordination does
not make a man an officer, or the essence of the call to office does not
consist in ordination, but in election. Or else, a man may actually be set over
and have the charge of a particular flock or Church committed unto him, and yet
he actually be no officer, (which is contrary to, 1 These. 5. 12. Hebr. 13. 7.
17.) For, election, and so the setting over the Church, may be before
ordination.

The Minor, That ordination does not set a man over a Church of Christ, nor
commit it to his charge, we prove thus.

1. Because without Election, a man cannot be over any flock, though he has
submitted formerly to Ordination: if no Church of Christ has chosen him, then
he cannot truly say of any Church, that he is over it. We ask which is he over?
and why over one more then another when he want Election from all? A man that
formerly took up Ordination, if by a Patrons unjust usurpation of a power, or
by the peoples withdrawing subjection, he be dispossessed of the flock he was
supposed to be over, or by his own voluntary act he leaves that people, before
any other has called him, possibly he may be a month, or a year before a new
Election; we ask what Church is he over by his Ordination in this Interval,
betwixt his departure from one flock and his coming to the other? If he be over
or has the charge of any Church, then he ought to feed and take the oversight
of it, and that ought to obey him. Heb. 13. ver. 7. 17. of what Church will he
require this obedience? and why of this more then of another? he may challenge
a power for the exercise of his Office in that Church he is over, and let him
but try to put forth a such power in any Church in such a case, and he will
quickly find by experience that he is over none.

If he be over no Church and yet was formerly ordained, then it is plain that
Ordination does not set a man over a Church, or else that Ordination in such a
case is lost; for so long as that which sets a man over or gives him the
charge of a Church has its continuation, so long he must needs remain Actually
over it.

2. Because if Ordination does set a man over a Church, then there is a
necessity of a frequent repetition and iteration of Ordination: For, a man by
his Ordination can be set over only one particular Church at once, and so if
he removes to ten several places in his life, he must so often have a new
Ordination.

Our brethren strongly assert the lawfulness of an Officers removing in three
Jus Div-Min. page 154.
cases, when he cannot have his health where he is, if he be denied competent
maintenance, and if the glory of God may be in an eminent manner advanced.

Some of these cases may fall out to one Officer. 4. 6. 8. or 10. times in his
life, and if he removes so often, either he was set over, and had the charge
of all these Churches (which he removes to) committed to him, by his
Ordination, or not. If not, then Ordination is not that which sets a man
over or gives him the charge of them; for, he is ordained and yet is not over
some of them. There may be Ordination and yet that be wanting which sets
over them. If Ordination did it, then so soon as ever he was Ordained he must
needs be over them, and have the charge of them. If the cause actually
existeth, the effect must needs exist also, and then he cease not be over
that Church which he is removed from; Surely he is as much over that, as he is
over the rest which he shall afterward remove to.

If they will say, he is over and has the charge of so many Churches, let them
prove it. It does not sound like Gospel order, that one officer should be set
over many Churches, one Pastor have the charge of many flocks at one and the
same time, and this by Ordination but once used: their own Arguments in their
Jus Divin. Minist. against Episcopacy will forbid this.

Object. If they should say that Ordination sets him over the universal
Church, or makes him a habitual officer to any or all particular Churches, and
the peoples Election makes him actually an officer to, or sets him actually
over them as their Pastor, their Minister.

Answ. This (as we conceive) cannot be.

1. Because we cannot find one Text of Scripture to prove, that any ordinary
officer is set over or has the charge of a Universal Church; or that he is
over any but a particular Church.

2. Because it is not proved that the Gospel knows any such habitual
officers: and how in propriety of speech we can mention an habitual setting
over, we see not. Either a man must be actually over a Church, or else not be
over it at all. Either he must actually have the charge of it, else not have
the charge of it at all. And how a man can be an officer to such a Universal
Church as they assert, and yet be no Officer to any particular Church would be
considered; a man after his Ordination may lose his relation to, or may cease
to be over any particular Church, either by the peoples rejection or otherwise,
and in such a case, it will be hard to him to be an Officer. He is actually
over no particular Church, and so must be an habitual Officer only, no actual
officer at all; and if Ordination does not make a man an actual officer, surely
it makes not an officer at all, for to be no actual Officer, and to be no
officer, seems to us to be the same.

3. Because all that he is over he must feed and give an account for, Act. 20
28 Heb. 13. 17 He cannot ordinarily feed, nor watch for the souls of the
Universal Church (without neglecting his particular Church) and therefore that
cannot be deemed the flock or Church he is set over: therefore the setting him
over so many Churches must not be by Ordination, or else must be by a frequent
repetition and iteration of it (which we grant though we deny the Essence of
the Call to consist in it) but this will not agree with our brethrens
principles.

For, if such a repetition and iteration of Ordination be admitted of, then
either a man is an Officer only to a particular Church, and as often as he
removes, so often he cease to be an officer, and is made an officer again as
often as he receives a new Ordination; or else Ordination is not an
office-making act, for there can be no making of him an officer by iterating
ordination, who is made an officer already and has not lost that relation; and
if the Essence of the Ministerial call does not consist in Ordination, we have
what we contend for.

We may conclude with this,

Every man that is actually set over, or has the charge of a particular flock
or Church committed to him, he has the Essentials of the Ministerial office.
But every man who is Elected by a Church of Christ, and has accepted of the
choice (though as yet unordained) is actually set over or has the charge of a
particular flock or Church committed to him; for Election with acceptance
sets over, Ergo, every man who is electd by a Church of Christ and has
accepted of the choice (though as yet unordained) has the Essentials of the
Ministerial office.

And this is our first Argument to prove that Ordination does not give the
Essentials of the call to office.

Argum. 2. That which by the will of Christ, is to be consequential unto a man's
having the whole Essence of the call to office, that cannot be intended by
Christ for the giving the essence of that call, or that cannot give the
Essentials of the call to office. But Ordination, by the will of Christ, is to
be consequential unto a man's having the whole Essence of the call to office.
Ergo, Ordination cannot be intended by Christ for the giving the Essence of
that call, or cannot give the Essentials of the call to office.

The major is evident, for doubtless Ordination is to be used according to the
will of Christ; it is Christ that instituted it, and so his will is the
determining Rule about the way and order that it is to be used in, and none can
cross his will therein without sin; and therefore, if by his will, Ordination
be to come after a man's having the whole Essence of the call, then it cannot
give the Essence to that call; for that which is consequential or after in its
own production, that cannot give a being to that which is before it. Unless
ordination it self has a being, it cannot give a being to such a call. If the
call to office has it is essence, before ordination has any being upon a
particular person, then there is something else that gives the essence unto
the call, and so ordination cannot give it.

The Minor we prove from Act. 13. v. 2. 3. The Holy Ghost said, separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them; and when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. Whence we
observe.

1. That Ordination was here used, in all the Acts of it, and requisites to it
in those days; here was, 1. Fasting. 2. Prayer. 3. Imposition of hands. No
other acts are found to be belonging unto Ordination when any mention is made
of it, Act. 6. ver. 6. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them,
Act. 14. 23. And had prayed with fasting, etc. So that no Acts were omitted in
this that usally appertained unto Ordination.

2. That the ordaining of these persons was consequential unto their having the
whole Essence of the call to office; this appears,

1. Because Paul and Barnabas were the persons here ordained who were
immediately called to office by God, Gal 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men,
neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, etc. He had been an
Apostle by men, if this his Ordination had given the Essence to his call to
office.

As Master Hooker observes it implies a contradiction to be mediately and
immediately called.

2. The Text expressly declares that they were before called to that they
were now ordained unto, Act. 13. verse. 2. whereunto [I have called them] Their
call was Antecedaneous to this their Ordination, and so received not its
Essence from it.

3. That by the will of Christ, Ordination is still to be consequential unto a
man's having the whole essence of the call to office; this follows upon the
two forementioned particulars; For, here is a plain example of Ordination as
coming after the whole Essence of the call to office. Now, if this example be a
binding Rule to us still, then it is undeniable that by the will of Christ,
Ordination is still to be consequential, unto a man's having the whole Essence
of the call to office. And that this example is a binding Rule to us still; we
prove thus.

1. Because the ordainers act herein as ordinary; it is the Rule our brethren
give us. Jus Divin. Mini. page 161.
If we should not follow the examples of the Apostles in those things in which
they acted as ordinary elders, we should be left at uncertainties, and every
man might do what seemed good in his own eyes, which would tend to confusion,
and the dissolution of the Church; these are their own words. Now in this
example, Acts 13. 2, 3. If they were ordinary Elders, that were the persons
ordaining, then they must needs act as ordinary elders, or else not as Elders
at all, for if they were not extraordinary elders, their actings could not flow
from a relation which they had not. If they were extraordinary Teachers as
Barnahas and Saul (the persons ordained) were, (who are also reckoned up, and
called Prophets or Teachers. v. 1.) The Act was ordinary, viz. Ordaining. 2.
The main work was ordinary to which they were ordained, viz. Preaching of the
Gospel. 3. There is nothing in the Text that does evidence the order to be
extraordinary, any more then the act it self. Its no more said, that the coming
of Ordination after the call to office-work is extraordinary, then that the
Ordination it self is extraordinary.

4. This order of Ordination after the call to office, does not (that yet we
can find) cross any other Text of Scripture, and therefore it cannot in faith
be concluded that this order is extraordinary. Enough is said to prove that
their acting was Ordinary in this Ordination, and therefore if any will assert
that this particular, viz. the order of the act was extraordinary, let them
prove it.

2. Because in this example, Ordination had the same uses and ends, as it had
when ordinary Officers were Ordained: Jus Divinum Minist. page 160. Our
Brethren say, That Apostolical examples in things necessary for the good of the
Church, and which have a perpetual reason and equity in them, have the force of
a Rule. And surely so far as Gospel examples are ordinary, so far they have a
perpetual reason and equity in them, and if the uses and ends of this
Ordination were ordinary, then this example thereof, has the force of a Rule.
And what extraordinary ends imaginable could it serve to, Paul and Barnabas
being the persons Ordained? Nay, separation for the work whereunto they were
called was the use and end of this Ordination, as appears, v. 2, 3.

If it be enquired what work they were called to. we may see, 1 Cor. 1. v. 17.
Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel. Paul tells us that
it was the preaching of the Gospel he was called to, and therefore it was this
work that he was Ordained to. His Commission was larger and extended further in
respect of the persons who were the objects of it, then ordinary Officers
Commissions now, but that is not material in this case, his Ordination was to
the same work (viz. preaching the Gospel Office-wise) which ordinary Officers
are still to be ordained to. And v. 3. They sent them away, i. e. freely let
them go, though they would gladly have enjoyed their labors still, yet they
consented to their departing. We suppose none will think that this sending a
way, does imply any such Mission to preach as they usually plead for from Romans
10. 15. the word will not enforce any such sending, it is used, Mat. 27. 21.
Whether of the twain will ye that I Release unto you? Acts 26. 32. Luke 2. 29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart. So that according to the ordinary
usage of the word, it may be rendered thus [They Released them, or let them
depart] and therefore nothing can be gathered hence for the belonging of
Mission to Ordination.

That fasting and prayer here served to any extraordinary ends which in
ordinary Ordinations they availed not to, cannot be proved, and surely the
praying was not in vain, it was not a bare act of obedience to the will of God,
but they might expect a return of these prayers as well as in any other
Ordinations. As for Imposition of hands, that it served to any other uses or
ends, then in Ordaining of Deacons, Acts 6. 6. will hardly be proved.

Object. But if this Ordination had ordinary uses and ends, and so this example
may be a binding rule as to Ordination it self, yet how does it prove it to
have the force of a Rule in its being consequential to the call to Office.

Ans. 1. When so many things are ordinary about an Act, there must be some
special reason to render it probable that other things are extraordinary.

2. It proves that the ordinary uses and ends of Ordination have their
attainment after the call to office, and therefore Ordination has its place
and order after the call to office also, If separation to the work of Office,
appears by this Text to be the proximate end of those Acts which are called
Ordination, until a man be an officer he cannot orderly be separated to the
work of office; and because the separation must be consequential to the call to
office, therefore the Ordination by which a person is supposed to be separated
to that work, must needs be consequential also, and so it is, an ordinary
order, and therefore the example is a binding rule to us in the order as well
as in the act of Ordination.

Ordination here was complete in its acts, and in its uses and ends; and
therefore the giving the essence to the call to office is not the proper use,
or ordinary end of Ordination. The outward call to office and Ordination are
separable one from the other, for Ordination can attain its end, when such a
call to office is before it. And if this will be granted, we have what we
contend for in this question.

Object. 2. This Ordination might be used not for the proper end whereto it
served, when ordinary Officers were ordained, but for an example, to show the
necessity of Ordination, and it is not said, separate me Paul and Barnabas for
the Office, but for the work whereunto I have called them, Acts 13. 2, 3.

Ans. 1. Some end there must be of this ordination, and that it served here
only for an example, or for any other end then usually it served to, is not
proved.

2. It cannot be an example of the necessity of Ordination for the giving the
Essence to the call to Office, (which is the thing here contended about)
because, that was not given by this Ordination; If the main use of Ordination
were to give the Essence to the Ministerial call, then this example failed in
the chief thing wherein it should have been exemplary. How could the Church of
Antioch take this as a pattern to show the necessity of Ordination unto the
giving the Essence to a call to Office, when it was not used for any such end
in the pattern? it could not be an example of that which was not done by it. If
we grant it to be an example of Ordination to the work of office, yet that will
not prove that Ordination is essential to the call to office, but rather that
it is to come after that call.

3. It is true, it is not said, separate them for the office but for the work,
let any prove from scripture that ordination does separate to the office of the
Ministry, as Office is distinguished from the work. What work was it that Paul
and Barnabas were separated for? Surely if it were to any, it was to the work
of their office, and yet they had the whole Essence of their call to office
before; and therefore we may grant Ordination to the work of office, and yet
deny Ordination to office, or deny it as essential to a call to office. This
may be an example of the one, and not of the other.

4. It is not like that the Church at Antioch was unacquainted with Ordination,
so as to need this for a first example thereof; And who can think that Paul and
Barnabas should be with the Church at Antioch a whole year before this, as Act.
11. v. 25. 26 and 12. v. 27. and 13. v. 1, 2, 3. and yet they be strangers to
Ordination?

5. May not we conclude more safely, that it is an example binding to the use
of Ordination after the declared call to office, and only to the work of the
Ministry, then they can conclude it to be an example of Ordination to office,
seeing no call to office was here given by it?

Object. 3. But Paul and Barnabas were extraordinary Officers, and so could not
have an ordinary or mediate call to office by their Ordination, and that may be
a special reason, why it had not the same use to them as it has to ordinary
Officers: and besides this Ordination was by the immediate appointment of the
Holy Ghost, Acts 13. 2. 4. it was an extraordinary thing, and therefore not
sufficient to ground an ordinary practice upon.

Ans. 1. We cannot yet see it proved that ordination served to any other uses
and ends when ordinary officers were ordained, then now it served to, when
these extraordinary Officers were ordained: if it attained here all the
ordinary ends, that it was intended by Christ for, then giving the essence to
the call to office is none of the ordinary ends of Ordination, for that was not
attained here; and so, neither the extraordinary office of the persons
ordained, nor the extraordinary call which they had, who were the persons
ordaining, can in the least hinder its serving to the purpose we allege it
for. Let them prove that Ordination attained any other ends (then it did here)
when ordinary Officers were ordained.

2. The extraordinariness or the immediateness of the call to ordain them, does
prove neither the order of Ordination after the call to office to be
extraordinary, nor its falling short of attaining any of the ordinary ends
which it serves to. The Apostles had an extraordinary call to their office,
and yet in the ordaining of Deacons, Act. 6. 6. Our brethren (we suppose) will
not say that either the end of Ordination, or the order of it was
extraordinary. So upon this immediate call they fasted, prayed, and laid on
their hands, Act. 13. 2, 3. yet if the acts were not ordinary, then Ordination
it self in the acts of it, must be concluded to be extraordinary and so to be
ceased, and as well may the order, uses and ends of it be ordinary, as the acts.

The Apostles had an immediate call to preach the Gospel, and yet that work is
ordinary, and to be performed for the same ends and purposes, by those who have
no such immediate call thereunto, as they had.

And this is our second Argument to prove, that Ordination does not give the
essential of the call to office.

Arg. 3. From the nature of Ordination.

Take this description of it.

Ordination is the solemnization of an officers call, or the Solemn separation
of an officer by prayer and fasting to the work whereunto he is called.

1. For its general nature, it is [solemm Separation.] 1. Not such as was of
the Temple, vessels, garment in the time of the Law, from common use, which
would render civil employment unlawful to officers, not only as hindering
their resign ation to the word and prayer, but also in it self by virtue of
that Separation, Acts 6. ver. 2. 4. Paul was an officer and did Preach, Act.
11. ver 25, 26. and yet was ordained after, Acts 13. ver. 2, 3. and so he was
separated as much from worldly employments, before, as after his Ordination. 2.
Nor such as is mentioned, Romans 1. 1. viz. A selecting or determining a person
to office, for this is done in Election with acceptance. But as is the
Sanctification of creatures, viz. meats and drinks unto not only a lawful and
common use, but holy, 1 Timothy 4. 5. such is the separation of an Officer (but
more solemnly performed) to his special work, in Ordination.

2. For its Act, it is prayer; this we take to be the Essential act of
Ordination, or that which gives the Essence to it, as Augustine says,
Ordinare, quid est aliud nisi orare?

There are but three things, which ordination can be imagined with any shadow
of Scripture evidence to consist of, viz. 1. Fasting. 2. Prayer. 3. Imposition
of hands: the places alleged for Ordination, mention no more but these three,
Act. 6. 6. Act. 13. 3. Heb. 6. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 14.

1. As for fasting; that is no act of worship, but is dispositive to prayer
which is an act of worship, and therefore fasting though it be a necessary
requisite to some ordinations, viz. of elders, Act. 13. 2. Act. 14. v. 23. yet
it cannot be deemed Essential, nor necessary to all ordinations; we do not read
of any fasting at the ordaining of Deacons, it is said, Act. 6. ver. 6. And
when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. Here was a complete
ordination, without any mention of fasting. We suppose none will assert fasting
to be an Essential part of ordination, if they will, let them prove it.

2. As for imposition of hands, it is questionable whether it be still
continuing or not. Many think its use was extraordinary, and now ceased: and it
is certain that it was used in those days for the collation of extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost, Act. 8. ver. 17. Then laid they their hands on them,
and they received the Holy Ghost; the giving of the Holy Ghost was through the
laying on of hands, as is more plainly intimated, ver. 18. Also it was used in
blessing others, Mat. 19. ver. 15. Christ laid his bands on the little
children, Mark 10. ver. 16. And he took them up in his arms, and put his hands
upon them and blessed them. It was used with ordination of officers in those
days, but the end of it might be, the collation or giving of the Holy Ghost,
or some greater measure of its gifts, unto those officers, and so it might have
only a temporary reason for its use; neither does that precept, 1 Timothy 5. ver.
22. lay hands suddenly on no man, prohibit this acceptance of the phrase; for
many that were no officers had extraordinary gifts conferred upon them, Act. 6.
ver. 14. 17. and 10. ver. 44. 45, 46, 47. much more might officers receive such
gifts; and Stephen and Philip the Deacons who had hands laid on them, Acts 6.
6. did great wonders and miracles quickly after, Acts 8. 6, 7. ver. 8. However
if imposition of hands had not such an extraordinary use, when officers were
ordained, yet,

1. We deny that imposition of hands was a right or ceremony by which the
office was conveyed, Act. 13. ver. 3. Paul and Barnabas had hands laid on them,
and yet (as we proved before) no office was conveyed thereby, for they were
officers before, and ver. 1. They are called Prophets or Teachers. By this it
is plain that its use in those days when officers were ordained was not to put
the office upon them. Indeed if this were the use thereof, then such as want
imposition of hands, are no officers, and this would deny many Preachers in
Scotland to be officers, because it is frequently omitted there.

2. We deny that imposition of hands was any Essential or integral part of
Ordination in the Apostles days. Our brethren, when they undertake to prove,
that Ordination ought to be with imposition of hands, yet promise that it is
not their purpose to enquire whether it be an Jus Divin. Mini. p. 173.
Essential part of Ordination without which it is null and void, or an integral
part, without which it is deficient and imperfect, or only an inseparable
adjunct. We deny that it was any more then an adjunct, or a consequential
circumstance, and hence, Acts 6. verse. 6. And when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on them. Not before, nor in the time of praying, but after it, they
laid their hands on them, this was the last. Also Acts 13. 3. Prayer, was
before it; and therefore this did not come in, until the Essential part of
Ordination was over; seeing themselves durst not assert it to be an Essential
part of it, either that praying which is Antecedaneous to it, must be the only
Essential act, or else Ordination has no Essential act at all.

Our brethren say that it is a Rite and Ceremony borrowed from the old
Testament, and the place they allege to prove its use in Ordaining or
appointing unto office in old Testament days, is Number. 27. 18. 23. Moses did so
ordain Joshua, but its said, Deuteronomy. 34. ver. 9. Joshua the son of Nun was full
of the spirit of wisdom, [for] Moses had laid his hands upon him, etc. which
intimates that there was a collation of the gifts of the Spirit by Moses
laying on of his hands; and therefore if they will borrow it thence, we must
not impose hands until we can confer gifts as Moses did.

And seeing imposition of hands was no Essential part of Ordination, hence (if
it were not of that extraordinary use, to confer gifts) then it was only a
sign or circumstance, to declare who the party was, that was solemnly ordained
by the foregoing Prayer. Let them prove, that it was assigned by the Lord to
any other end, when it was used upon the occasion of Ordination. If it were
only a Declarative sign, then it is a matter indifferent, not necessary, nor
the omission of it sinful, any more then the omission of other circumstances;
then, it is as sinful to omit lifting up of hands in choosing officers, because,
Acts 14. 23. (...) implies that rite, as well as (...) does the other, and it
is probable that imposition of hands, was omitted at the Ordaining of those
Elders, Acts 14. 23. for there is mentioned only fasting and prayer besides
the peoples choosing by lifting up of hands. If Gospel examples in things which
have a perpetual reason and equity in them, have the force of a Rule, as to the
Substantials of them, yet not as to all circumstantials, for then Deacons must
not be chosen under the number of seven, because seven were chosen and
Ordained, Act 6. ver. 3.

And if we had many Gospel examples of choosing officers by lifting up of hands,
yet we should think that it were no sin to omit that, and use some other rite
to signify a choice, for the Lord has not bound us up to such circumstances;
and so it is a thing indifferent whether we use or not use imposition of hands.

3. As for prayer, that is the Act which gives the Essence to Ordination:
seeing it is neither fasting, nor imposition of hands, that give the Essentials
to it, hence it must needs be prayer, Acts 6. verse 6. when they had [prayed,]
Acts 13. verse. 3. When they had fasted and [prayed] etc. And they that will
deny prayer to be Essential to Ordination, let them prove what it is when they
can:

Neither is it the end of the praying on this occasion, to obtain direction
from the Lord whom to choose or call into office, as if it were dubious and
questionable whether any of the persons should be officers or not; this could
not be the intendment of it, for they were chosen, before this praying, Act. 6.
verse. 5. They chose, etc. verse. 6. whom they set before the Apostles, and when
they had prayed, etc. Acts 13. 2, 3. They had their call first, and prayer was
made for them afterward. So that the determination that they should be
officers, did precede the praying, yea they were officers before it; And
therefore the ends of the praying must needs be such as these, viz. That the
Lord would give his approbation of the choice, and own the persons chosen as
his officers, granting them all necessary qualifications, that may fit them
for, and all his promised blessings of assistance, protection and success in
the work whereunto they are called. A Solemn praying unto God, for these ends,
on the behalf of a person chosen into office, before his entering upon the work
which his office obliges him to, is all the Ordination that the Gospel owneth.

And this being Ordination after a long Digression, we shall now show, how the
nature of Ordination does forbid its giving the Essence of the outward call to
office. And two Arguments will arise hence.

Argu. 1. If Ordination consists in action which is performed to God only,
then it cannot give the Essence of an external call to office, from men. But
Ordination consists in action performed to God only. Ergo, Ordination cannot
give the Essence of an external call to office, from men.

The major is plain, There must be some external act put forth by some men,
toward or upon others, else it is impossible that the being of an outward call
should be brought in, by them, upon these. It were apparently false, to say, we
gave such a person his external call to office, when no act passed from us,
upon the person himself; our acting toward another, on his behalf will not do
it; as for example, if a man should Petition the Supreme Magistrate, for his
yielding approbation to a persons acting in a work he is chosen to, and for his
extending such favors to him, as he uses to afford unto persons in such
places or offices; it would be concluded that this Petitioning could not give
him his call to his office, being no act put forth upon him, but to another for
him; either he was an officer before, and only a confirmation is desired, or
else the call to the office is still wanting, and is to be given, not by the
Petitioner, but by the Supreme Magistrate, who is Petitioned.

So, if Ordination consists in such an action as is not put forth, upon the
person himself, but toward God only for him, then it cannot with any reason,
be conceived, that it does bring in the being of an outward call upon him;
especially if Ordination consists of such an action as has no color of a
causual virtue in it, to leave the impression of an office-right upon him, viz.
Prayer: In prayer we refer all to God, in a petitionary way, and nothing is
done in or upon a person prayed for, unless God does it; our praying for him
can make no alteration of state or relation, if any thing be done that way, it
is God who is prayed to, that does it; and therefore when Prayer is made in a
way of Ordination, it must be said either, that the person was before called by
men to office, and then Ordination being frequent, cannot give the call, or
else that the call from men is to come after prayer, and then let them show
what act sequent to, and distinct from prayer, does give the call. Or else it
must be said that the call to office is given by prayer, and then it is God
that gives the outward call, for prayer is directed to him only, and so we
come to Minor; That Ordination consists in action performed to God only;
this is evident, because it consists of prayer as its Essential act (as we
proved before) and prayer being a part of worship, cannot without Idolatry be
performed to any, but God only.

And it imposition of hands (the only act about Ordination put forth upon the
person chosen to office) did give the Essence to the call to office, then, not
Ordination it self, but an adjunct of it should give the outward call, yea then
the want of laying on of hands would speak the Ordination a Nullity.

Argnm. 2. That Action which cannot be performed in faith, before an outward
call to office has passed upon a man, that cannot give that man his outward
call to officer. For, if the call to office be passed upon him before, then
that Action which follows after, cannot be said to give it; and no action is
to be performed until it can or may be performed in faith, for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14. 23.

But Ordination is such an action, as cannot be performed in faith, before an
outward call to office has passed upon a man; for, how can one pray in faith,
or what warrant has he from the Word (which is the Rule of faith) to justify
his praying to God for his approbation of, and blessing upon a person in a work
of Office, before he can conclude that he is so much as outwardly called into
that Office, to do that work? if one can groundedly conclude that he is called
outwardly thereunto, then he was called before the praying, and so before
Ordination, which consists in prayer. Ergo, Ordination cannot give that man
his outward call to office.

3. In the description of Ordination, we have also the Object, and that is [an
Officer, or one that is already called outwardly unto Office]

1. Not such as are only gifted men, we see no warrant for the ordaining all
Preachers to Office-work. The work of Preaching may be performed by gifted men,
but they are not so to be ordained, until they undertake an Office.

2. Not persons to be made Officers, but such as are already Officers, they are
the objects of Ordination. We find no rule for ordaining men, thereby to make
them Officers in respect of their outward call, but they that are actually
Officers, are called to Office, before they are to be ordained, Act. 13. v. 2,
3. They were first called, and then ordained, Ergo, they did not receive their
call from or by Ordination.

4. In the description we have, the end for which Ordination is performed, and
that is the Officers doing the work whereunto he is called; so Act. 13. 2, 3.
their solemn admission or induction into the work of preaching, as Officers to
the Gentiles was by Ordination; the obtaining Gods approbation and benediction,
are the chief ends of prayer.

And thus we have finished our description of Ordination, and our Arguments to
prove, that Ordinatidoth not give the Essentials to the Ministerial office; and
therefore that Election with acceptance does.

CHAP. XIII.
Wherein many Arguments are answered, which are brought against Election, as
giving the Essence to the call to Office.

OUr brethren in their Jus Divin. Minist. produce seven Arguments, whereby they
endeavor to prove,

That the whole Essence of the Ministerial call, does not consist in Election
without Ordination. We crave leave to reply briefly to their Arguments.

Arg. 1. Because our brethren do not bring any one Text of Scripture to prove
this their assertion (as we can find) nor do we think Jus Divin. Min. p. 134.
that any can be brought.

Answ. 1. Many weighty Arguments grounded upon Scripture, they may find in Mr.
Hookers Survey, Part 2. c. 2. p. 66, etc.

2. We refer them to our foregoing arguments, where we have brought one express
Scriptute to prove it, viz. Act. 14. 23. and other reasons, which by
Consequence from Scripture do evince it.

Arg. 2. Because that those very Texts forementioned, which are the chief (if
not the only) Texts that are brought for popular Jus Divin. Min. p. 134.
Election, do seem to us to hold forth the quite contrary to this assertion.
When Mathias was made an Apostle, it was not the Election of the people that
did constitute him an Apostle. All that the 120 did (if they did that) was to
set two before the Lord, but it was God that did constitute and appoint Mathias
to be the Astle. In the choice of Deacons, the people nominated seven persons
to be Deacons, but it was the Apostles Ordination, not the peoples Election,
that did constitute and make them Deacons; so says the Text expressly, Act.
6. 3. (...) Look ye out among you seven men, whom we may appoint, or constitute
over this business. The essence and substance of the Deacons call, is placed
not in the peoples nomination, but in the Apostles Ordination. As for Acts 14.
23. they that did (...) were the Apostles and not the Churches; it rather
proves, that the Apostles Ordination was that which did constitute Elders in
every Church.

Answ. 1. We have produced Arguments from other Scriptures besides these, to
prove that the whole essence of the Ministerial call is in the peoples
Election, to which we refer the Reader.

2. As for the instance of Mathias, Acts 1.

1. It holds forth as much against Ordination giving the essence to the call
to office, as against Election: for seeing (as they say) it was God that did
constitute and appoint Mathias to be the Apostle, hence, it was not Ordination
by a Presbytery that did it. And here was an half Election, Act. 1. v. 23. They
appointed two, but not a syllable about Ordination, or imposition of hands, and
therefore this is as contrary to their assertion, that the call consists in
Ordination, as to ours, that it consists in Election, if contrary to either.

2. If Mathias his not being constituted an Apostle by the peoples Election be
contrary to our assertion, that Election gives the whole essence of the
Ministerial call, then Paul's not being constituted an Apostle by Ordination,
Act. 13. v. 2, 3. must needs be contrary to their assertion, that Ordination
gives the Essence of the Ministerial call. There is the same reason for the
one, as for the other; for as Mathias was Elected, and yet not constituted an
Officer thereby, so was Paul ordained, and yet not constituted an Officer
thereby; and the latter must needs be as much against them, as the former can
be against us.

3. This was but half an Election, and that is the reason why it did not
constitute Mathias an Apostle, as appears, because the choosing of the one
(which was by God) was the constitutive act, Act. 1. v. 24. Show whether of
these two thou have chosen, v. 26. therefore if the people had chosen but one,
but Mathias only, that had been a constitutive act, but that could not be, for
then the call should have been mediate, and so he had not been an Apostle; but
the Lord shows how highly he would have Election esteemed, in that he would
have the people choose two, one of which he would constitute an Apostle, when
the call was to be immediate. And indeed, the people might have chosen but one,
and yet the call might have been immediate, if Election had not been the
constitutive act, but in that the Election of the one made him an Officer, it
strongly evidenceth that Election is that which gives the essence of the call
to Office.

There was a complete Ordination in all the acts of it, Acts 13. 2, 3. and yet
that was not constitutive, and that speaks more against Ordination giving the
essence to the call to office, then this can against its consisting in Election.

3. As for Act. 6. there is granted to the people a power to choose, v. 5. And
the saying pleased the whole multitude, and [they chose] Stephen, etc. here was
not a bare nomination, but an Election [they chose] which is far more then to
snominate, and frequently expresses the constitutive act of an Officer in
Scripture, as John 6. v. 70. Jesus answered them, have not I chosen you twelve,
Luke 6. v. 13. He called unto him his Disciples, and of them he chose twelve,
whom also he named Apostles, Act. 1. v. 2, 24. So that the being chosen, made,
or gave the essence to the immediate call of Officers, and surely this is
expressed, alluding to that which makes the mediate call. Christ's choosing did
constitute Apostles, and therefore choosing is that which constituteth other
Officers. Will any say, that Christ did but nominate the twelve to be Officers?
Surely he constituted them Officers, by his choosing of them. But we shall speak
more fully to the objection from Acts 6. and show how we are to understand
those words, v. 3. whom we may appoint; when we answer their arguments about
Ordination.

As for Acts 14. 23. we have sufficiently proved before, that they that did
(...), were the Churches, and that this holds out, that the essence of the
call is in Election; we refer the Reader to our former answers to that
objection.

Arg. 3. All those Texts which we shall hereafter bring for the asserting of
the Divine right of Ordination, do prove that Jus Divin. Min. p. 135.
the essence of the Ministerial call does consist in Ordination, and not in
Election: there are more and more clear Texts for Ordination then for Election,
and Texts that make it not to be an adjunct, but an essential constituent of
the Ministerial call.

Ans. 1. If they intend, all those Texts which they allege to prove their
first assertion, viz. That Ordination of Ministers is an Ordinance of Christ,
p. 157. they are much mistaken, in saying, that all those Texts do prove the
essence of the ministerial call to corsit in Ordin. Act. 13. 1, 2. 3, 4. is one
Text insisted upon there, and that proves that Ordination does not give the
essence to the call, for there it did not Other Texts they all eadge to prove
that assertion speaks of laying on of hands, as 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Heb. 6. 1, 2. but that this Imposition of hands gives the essence to the call
to office, they prove not, neither do our brethren assert it, when they come to
their third assertion, which is about laying on of hands.

If by [all those Texts] they mean, all the Texts alleged for their second
assertion, page 164. we shall speak to them in their place.

2. They are (as we apprehend) as clear Scriptures for Election as for
Ordination. What can be more plain then, Act. 6. v. 5? The saying pleased the
whole multitude, and [they chose] and in regard the Apostles there did give
Rules to the multitude to regulate their choice, and mentioned diverse
qualifications that ought to be found in the persons chosen, v. 3. Look ye out
among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, etc.
Hence we conclude, that all those places which largely set forth the
qualifications of Officers, have respect to Election. As for Deacons, when the
Apostles here laid down their qualifications, they directed their speech
expressly to the Church or multitude of the Disciples, and that purposely to
enable them to make a due Election; and therefore when Paul writes to Timothy
about the qualifications of Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. it cannot
with found reason be concluded, that his end was to translate the use of his
directions to Timothy or Officers only, when the Apostles end in laying down
like Rules, upon a like occasion, was, to help and regulate the people in their
choice of the very same Officers: if this were his inrent, which example should
we follow? the Rules and qualifications about other Officers, viz. Bishops or
Elders are not limited in their use, more to Timothy and succeeding Officers,
then these about Deacons, which are undoubtedly extended to the people, Act. 6.
v. 3. And therefore we conclude, that these directions were given to Timothy,
not chiefly to order his own practice by, about Ordination, but that he might
(as the Apostles did) give them forth in a doctrinal way to the people, to
order their practices by, about Elections either of Elders or Deacons. And
seeing the Apostles do so much insist upon, and are so copious in the laying
forth these Rules, the great use of which, are to regulate Elections (which are
before Ordination) hence, there are as clear Texts for Election as for
Ordination.

Arg. 4. We argue from the nature of popular Election; Election by the people,
properly is nothing else but their designation of a person that is to be made
their Minister, or that is already a Minister to his particular charge: it is
not simply a making of him a Minister, but the making of him a Minister of such
a place; this appears in the Election of Deacons; all that the people did by
Election, was only to design the persons, and to set them before the Apostles,
but it was the Apostles praying and laying on of their hands that made them
Deacons. This likewise appears from Deuteronomy. 1. 13. the peoples taking of men, did
not give them the essentials of their Office; they nominated the persons, but
it was Moses that made them Rulers. If the people have no Office-power
belonging to them, how can they by Election make an Officer, etc? Nihil dat
quod non habet nec formaliter nec eminenter. Why then did the Apostles take so
much pains to return to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, to ordain them Elders in
every Church? Act. 14. 21, 23. and why did Paul leave Titus in Crete, to ordain
Elders in every City? Tit. 1. 5. why did they not spare their journey, and send
to the people to make their own Ministers by Election? can we imagine that they
took such pains only to add an Adjunct to the Ministerial call, etc?

Answ. 1. Election is more then a designation to a particular charge or place;
for Election with acceptance, brings in such a special relation as the
person chosen is over, and has the charge of the chusers committed to him
thereby: and it must needs be an Office-making designation which sets a man
over those which he was not over before.

A man may nominate a woman to another to be his wife, and no relation may
arise thereupon; but that act which sets a man over a woman as her husband,
is that which gives being to a relation, which had no foundation before. So
Election sets over a people a Church, and so makes a man an Officer, as
well as their Officer.

2. They conclude beyond their proof, when they say, all that the people did by
Election of Deacons, was to design the persons to their particular charge, and
set them before the Apostles, Act. 6. 6. it is said, they chose them, Acts 6.
5. and we showed before, that choosing denotes a constitutive act. Neither does
that Text say, that, the Apostles praying and laying on their hands, was it
that made them Deacons. They were (as we suppose) made Deacons by Election, and
the appointing at the utmost was but to the work, not to the office of Deacons.

3. As for Deuteronomy. 1. 13. we might make a question whether the peoples Election
of Church Officers be not a further act, then here was granted them about their
civil Officers; for, the designation of the persons to their particular charge
(which our brethren in this objection grant is Election) was not till after
this nomination, nay, was performed by Moses, v. 15. Or we might tell them what
learned Ainsworth says on the place, Here the people gave them, and after in
ver. 15. Moses gave, that is, made them heads: for when things are done by many
under the government of one principal they are said to be done by them or by
him, as 1 Chro. 19. 19. compared with 2 Samuel 10. 19. So 2 Kin. 11. verse. 12.
with 2 Chronicles. 23. 11. and 1 Chronicles. 16. 1. with 2 Samuel 6. 17.

But we rather answer thus, The cases do not run parallel, for Moses was the
Supreme Magistrate and so might reserve such a power to himself in the
constituting of civil officers, as neither a Presbytery nor a Church can claim
about the constitution of Ecclesiastical officers: whether it belongs to the
Church by Election, or to Presbytery by Ordination to give the call, yet it is
but an outward call that they give to Church officers; a far greater power is
put forth in the creating or constituting civil officers. Neither Ordination by
a Presbytery nor election by a Church, do answer Moses act; only Christ's acts
in making Churches officers, do answer Moses acts in making civil officers,
because only Christ is King of his Church, as Moses was the Supreme Magistrate
over Israel. So that we may say it is not Election nor Ordination, but Christ's
act only, which in the sense of, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. does make Church officers, and
therefore this place will not serve at all to their purpose.

4. Is is usual in civil Corporations, for the Freemen (who are no officers) by
their Election, to make their own officers.

It is very usual for them to Communicate an office power, and to give the
Essentials of a call, to their Bayliffes and other officers, when yet the
Freemen cannot act or exercise an office-power, but are in subjection unto
those officers which by their election they give both place and power to; and
why then should this be such a riddle to any? Either the Freemen in such cases
have office-power vertually or else they that have it not either formally (for
so the Freemen have if not) nor virtually, yet may communicate office-power. If
they will say they have that power vertually, then so has a Church, and by
election may give the Essentials of a Ministerial call, as well as the Freemen
can by election make civil officers to rule over themselves.

5. It is well observed by some learned men, that if the people have not
office-power either formally or vertually, yet they may by election Communicate
officepower Ministerially: they may Ministerially give what they never had,
viz. As Ministering to him who has power and virtue of deriving it; as a man
not having a penny of his own may give an 100l. if the King make him his
Almoner. Thus the Church deriveth office-power as taking the person whom Christ
describes, and out of power will have placed in this or that office in his
Church.

It is very ordinary, for those that are lesser or inferior, to communicate a
power that renders the receiver, greater in place, power, and dignity then the
giver of it; thus Freeholders and o hers by choosing do make Parliament men and
Burgesses, though they be far inferior to the persons chosen, etc. and
therefore that rule, nihil dat quod non habet nec formaliter nec eminenter, is
not universally true.

6. It does not appear, that the main or chief end of Paul and Barnabas in
their journey to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, was, to ordain elders: it is
said, Act. 14. ver. 21, 22. They returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium and
Antioch, Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the faith; and that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of God. So that the Confirmation and establishment of those Saints in the
faith, and the encouraging them to patience and perseverance seem to be the
principal ends of their undertaking this journey, and therefore it is a vain
question, [why did they not spare their journey and send to the people to make
their own Ministers by election?] Though there had not been one Minister to be
ordained, yet their journey could not well be spared, for then the souls of the
disciples would have wanted Confirmation, and it is easy to imagine that they
would have taken more pains then they did in this return, only to have
confirmed their souls; and their concurrence in Ordination is mentioned as one
of the last things they did, ver. 23. and that may be but an Adjunct to the
Ministerial call for all that is yet said against it. And it is not made the
sole end of Paul's leaving Titus in Crete, that he should ordain elders, for it
is said, Tit. 1. ver. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders, etc. If
there had been no elders to have been ordained, yet it had been needful that
Titus should be left in Crete to set in order other things that were wanting,
and still Ordination may be but an Adjunct, of the ministerial call.

We do highly esteem of Ordination, as an appointment of Jesus Christ, yet we
would not give it a higher place, then Christ has set it in, we cannot find
that Christ has made it of that use to give the Essence to the call to office,
and we cannot but fear that many do too much magnify and even Idolize that
Ordinance of Christ.

Arg. 5. If election gives the Essentials to a Minister, then may a Minister
elected administer the Sacraments without Ordination. For as Master Hooker well
says in another case, He that has complete power of an office, and stands an
officer without exception, he cannot justly be hindered from doing all acts of
that office: for to be an officer complete without an office, or being complete
in his office, yet according to rule to be hindered from doing any thing
belonging to his office, implies a contradiction; for its all one to say a man
is implies a contradiction; for its all one to say a man is bound to a rule,
and yet by a rule he should not do it.

Forma dat operari, effects depend upon the form, not upon extrinsecal
circumstances.

Ans. We deny the consequence. Although election gives the Essentials to a
Minister, yet it will not follow that a Minister elected may administer the
Sacraments without Ordination; for Christ's will is to be our Law; if Christ
has required the adding but of an Adjunct before the doing some special works,
without sin, no man can do those works without that Adjunct. If Christ has
pre-required Ordination before the administration of the Sacraments, what is
man that he should say, one may administer them without Ordination, though that
be but an Adjunct to the call unto office.

That which Master Hooker speaks is only this, that [he cannot justly] be
hindered from doing all acts of office, if he has the Essentials of office upon
him; and this may be granted, for, if Christ requires Ordination as
Antecedaneous to the administering of the Sacraments, then, he is [unjustly]
hindered who either refuses or is denied Ordination, He is not according to
rule hindered from doing what belongs to his office, but by breaking that
Rule, which requires his submitting to Ordination. The reason serves to
Master Hookers purpose, but not to our brethrens, in this Argument.

And upon second thoughts, we suppose they will not say, that one may act in
administrations without such Adjuncts as Christ has pre-required unto acting
in them, especially seeing themselves durst not assert imposition of hands to
be more then an Adjunct to Ordination, and yet urge it as a duty to receive it,
and endeavor to prove it a sin to refuse or omit it.

Argu. 6. If the whole Essence of the Ministerial call consists in election,
Jus Divin. Mini. p. 137.
then it will follow that a Minister is only a Minister to that particular
charge to which he is called, and that he cannot act as a Minister in any other
place. That this consequence is necessary they endeavor to prove, by its being
confessed by Master Hooker, and the new England Ministers in some of their
books.

Answ. If the whole Essence of the Ministerial call consists in Ordination
(as our brethren judge) will it follow, that a Minister is only a Minister to
the Universal Church to which he is (as they suppose) Ordained, and that he
cannot act as a Minister to any other? If so, how can he preach to Pagans and
Indians, who are no members of any Church, when Preaching is a Pastoral act in
their sense? why may not we extend Pastoral acts to them that concur not in
Election, as well as they may extend them to such as concur not in Ordination?
But they proceed to the proof of their Minor, and give many reasons against
that.

That a Minister can perform no Pastoral act out of his own Congregation, (they
say) is an Assertion.

Unheard of in the Church of Christ before these late Jus Divin. Min. p. 138.
years.

Answ. If the Gospel holds forth so much, surely then it is an Assertion
heard of many hundred years ago; and if it were taken for granted and not
qu^stioned in the Primitive times, and through the overspreading of Popery the
truth were hidden since, it is a mercy that within these late years, it or any
other truth is come to light. As many Authors may be cited, who many hundred
years ago asserted errors, and yet this will not prove that we are to receive
them as Gospel truths; so if no ancient Authors could be cited for this, yet
that will not prove it to be an error, neither would the citation of many for
it, prove it to be a truth, and therefore we must to the Law and to the
Testimony for the clearing of it.

2. Contrary to the practice of the brethren themselves with whom we Jus Divin.
Min. p. 138.
dispute; it is acknowledged by all of them, that the administration of the
Sacrament is a Ministerial act, and cannot be done but by a Pastor or Teacher;
and yet it is ordinary, both in Old England and in New England, for members of
one Congregation, to receive in another Congregation. If we may argue from our
Brethrens practice, we may safely conclude, That a Minister may act as a
Minister out of his own Congregation.

Answ. 1. This is an Argument rather against our practice, then against the
assertion it is levelled at: If we practice against our own principles, that
does not prove that our principles are unsound.

2. But we answer further, Ministerial or Pastoral acts have for their Objects
some things that are common, some things that are special and proper. Some
things are common to men as men, as the Word and Prayer, which all men may join
or have communion in, unless in some particular case disinabled. Some things
are common to Church Members as such, namely, admission to the Lords Supper,
Romans 16. 1. Church-councel and care to be acted toward such, by a more
especial obligation then toward other men, seeing every new relation is a
foundation to further Communion. If the right of a man as a man, be sufficient
to claim the privilege of hearing with a Church, not considering whether he be
of this or that place or Church, then also, may not the claim of a consederate
with a particular Church, be sufficient to a privilege in breaking of bread,
not considering whether of this or another Church, for his right is as
confederate, not as a member of this or that Church?

Some things are special and proper, wherein the liberty and jurisdiction of
the Church does consist, as admission of members, excommunication, Election of
Officers, etc. Acts of power which issue necessarily from the gift or
resignation of every one to another, and to the whole, whereby it is, that
common privileges are by them enjoyed after a special manner, who have
interest not only in the good dispensed, but in the power dispensing; not in
the objects of a Ministerial act only, but in the Ministry. As, suppose a
Father at set times gives instruction to his children, who also is a Master,
and teaches his Servants, at which times the children and servants of the
neighborhood attend upon him, and receive instruction, this man performs
the duty of a Father, and of a Master to his own children and servants, who
have interest in him as so related, the other partake in the good which is
given forth, yet not under those relations which are the grounds of those
ministrations; for, the same man is under special obligations, to give
instructions to his children, and to his servants, by the Law of the relation
of a Father and a Master, and is to give instruction to his neighbors also, by
the Law of love or charity; but his omitting or neglecting to give such
instructions to children, is no breach of the Law of his relation as a Master,
but of his relation as a Father, and his neglecting to give instruction unto
neighbors, is no breaking the Law of his relation as a Father or a Master, but
of the common Law of love or charity; and when he gives these instructions to
his children, he does not put forth any act of the relation of a Master
therein, or if he gives them to his servants, he does not put forth any act of
the relation of a Father therein, etc.

So, if Pastors and Teachers do preach and administer the Sacraments to their
own flocks which they are over, they act as Pastors, as Teachers, as Officers
to them therein, because the Law of their relation binds to such duties
toward them, and the failing of them were to break the Law of Office-relation;
but if they perform these acts to any, not of their own Congregations, they do
not act as Pastors, as Officers to them therein; for they stand in no such
relation to them, and if they refuse to perform such acts to those not of their
own Congregations, they do not break the Law of their relation as Pastors or
Officers, but they sin against the Law of the general office of charity, which
binds to seek the promoting of our neighbors good to the utmost of our
ability and capacity. And as it is frequently found that O^ficers, as in
Corporations, etc. may extend some privileges and immunities to some which
they are no Officers to, which none but such as are Officers have power to
afford, so in this case.

3. It is an assertion contrary to Scripture, for the Scripture tells us. 1.
That Jus Divin. Min. p. 138.
there is a Church general visible. 2. That Ministers are primarily seated in
the Church general visible, and but secondarily in this or that particular
Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

3. That every Minister has a double relation, one to his particular Church,
another to the Church general visible; he has a vertual and habitual power to
preach as a Minister in any place where he shall be lawfully called. Therefore
Ministers are spoken of in Scripture, under a general notion, to show the
indefiniteness of their office. They are called Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6. 4.
Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1. but never Ministers of the people.

Ans. 1. If by Church should be meant, a general visible Church, yet it would
not follow, that those Officers might act in any part of that Church, but only
where they are fixed, as we shall show afterward.

2. If they be never called Ministers of the people, to be sure they are never
called Ministers of the Presbytery.

3. They are called [Elders of the Church] Act. 20. v. 17. which is as much as
to say, Elders of the people.

4. The speaking of Officers under a general notion, does not prove the
indefiniteness of their Office, or the extent of it beyond a particular
congregation; for, if they might not preach or administer the Sacraments to any
out of their own congregations, yet it were proper to call them Ministers, of
God, of Christ, of the New Testament, of the Gospel, Ministers in the Lord, and
Ambassadors for Christ.

4. This assertion, that a Minister can perform no Pastoral act out of his Jus
Divin. Min. p. 140.
own congregation, is contrary to found reason.

They mention seven consequences hereof.

Object. 1. Hence it will follow, That when a Minister preaches in his own
Congregation, to members of another Congregation, he does not preach to them,
nor they hear him preach as a Minister but as a gifted brother. And that at the
same time he preaches as a Minister by virtue of his office to those of his
own Congregation, and to others of anther Congregation then present, only as a
gifted brother, ex officio charitatis generali, cut of the general office of
charity, which to us is very irrational.

Answ. If by [as a Minister] they mean [as an Officer] then, we see no
absurdity in it, to say that he preaches to some as an Officer, as under a
special relation to them, as over them in the Lord, and at the same time
preaches to others not as an Officer, or not as over them, or in any such
relation to them. A man at the same time may give instruction to some as a
Father, to others as a Master, to others as a friend and neighbor, as we
showed before. So that a man may act under one relation to some, and not under
that, but another relation to others, in the very same act, without any
absurdity.

Obj. 2. Hence it will follow, that when a Minister preaches out of his own
Congregation, Jus Divin. Min. p. 140.
he preaches only as a private Christian, and not as an Ambassador of Christ,
and when he acts in a Synod, his actings are the actings of a private
Christian; and when he preaches a Lecture out of his own Congregation (though
it be in a constant way) yet he preaches only as a gifted Brother. Now what a
wide door this will open to private men, to preach publicly and constantly in
our Congregations, we leave it to any indifferent man to judge.

Ans. 1. We deny that in any of the cases mentioned, a man facteth as an
Officer; his Office-power is not drawn out in his preaching out of his own
Congregation, or when he acts in a Synod, or preaches a Lecture constantly
in another Congregation. Our brethren have given us nothing to prove, that he
acts as an Officer in any of them.

2. Yet we deny, that it does necessarily follow, he must act as a private
Christian therein: if he acts in a Synod, he may act as a public Messenger,
and yet not act as an Officer; for such as are no Officers may be sent to act
in such a meeting, as the Presbyterians themselves grant; and though comparing
them with Officers whose actings are constantly in public, they may be called
private Christians, i. e. comparatively, they are not persons so public in
their actings as Officers are, yet they being chosen by a Church (which is a
public assembly) to act in a Synod, in a public work, hence they may not act
barely as private Christians in such works. If the brethren in a Church, act in
a Synod (as they did generally at Jerusalem, Act. 15. v. 22, 23.) we suppose
they will not say, that the brethren generally are Officers, or act as
officers, yet either they must grant it, or else assert that men may act in a
Synod not as Officers. And then either they act as private Christians, or else
as public persons in those occasional public employments.

So when a Minister preaches out of his own Congregation, and when he
preaches a Lecture constantly, he may be said to act as a public person,
because his work is public; and so he acts, not barely as a private
Christian, yet not as an Officer, for then he might be actually an Officer to
three or four flocks or Churches, because he may lawfully keep up so many
Lectures constantly, and without asserting Episcopacy, he cannot be said to be
actually an Officer to so many flocks at once. As, to the preaching of private
men, we have spoken to that before.

Object. 3. Hence it will follow, That when a Minister baptizeth a child, he
baptizeth him only into his own Congregation. For if he be not an Officer of
the Catholic Church, he cannot baptize into the Catholic Church, which is
directly contrary to 1 Cor. 12. 13.

Answ. 1. If by baptizing [into a Church] they mean, a making one a member of a
Church by baptism, we deny that a Minister baptizeth (in that sense) either
into his own Congregation, or into a Catholic Church; for if baptism gives
admission either into a particular or a Catholic Church, then while baptism
remains valid, the party remains a member of that Church, for so long as he
has that upon him which gives membership, he must needs be a member, as Mr.
Hooker says, where the form is, the formatum must needs be. And then either
Excommunication does make baptism a nullity, and render the person who is
excommunicate, unbaptized; or else Excommunication does not eject a person out
of the Church, because it does nullify baptism, which (they say) gives
membership.

And this may answer their Argument, to prove that a Minister is a Minister of
the Church Catholic visible. Jus Divin. Min. p. 139. They say, He that can
Ministerially admit or eject a member into, or out of the Church-Catholick
visible, is a Minister and officer of the Church-Catholick visible. But every
Minister, by baptism or excommunication, admits or ejecteth members into, or
out of the Church-Catholick visible. Therefore, etc. We deny the Minor; If we
grant such a Catholic visible Church, yet we cannot grant that a Minister by
baptism admits into that Church; for then, if Heathens be converted at a
great distance from any Church or Officer, whatever glorious profession they
make, yet they are not to be deemed members of that Catholic visible Church,
until they be baptized, which sounds very harsh, if those belong to Satan's
visible kingdom, who are without that Church, as they intimate in their next
objection. And also then it will follow, either that Excommunication does not
eject a man out of the Catholic visible Church, and then the other part of
their Minor is false, or else that Excommunication makes baptism a nullity, and
then re-baptizing must be asserted, because there may be a readmission after
excommunication upon repentance, witness the incestuous person, 2 Cor. 2. v. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Or else a man may have that upon him, which makes one a member of
the Catholic visible Church (viz. baptism) and yet be no member thereof: he
may have that which admits and gives the formal being of membership, and
yet be no member, which is a contradiction.

If an excommunicate person be no member of the Catholic visible Church, then
he must be rebaptized if ever he be admitted a member thereof, if admission
into it be by baptism.

Also we deny, that a Minister by Excommunication ejecteth out of the Catholic
visible Church; the person may eject himself out of it (if there be such a
Church) by renouncing or contradicting his former profession, which (if any
thing) made him a member thereof, before Excommunication, and so may lose his
membership in the Catholic Church, before he loses membership in a particular
Church; or however, he may be ejected with, and not by Excommunication. And how
a man's being ejected out of a particular Church, by Excommunication, should
make him no member of the Catholic visible Church, if being ejected out of
Office in a particular Church, does not make a man, no Officer to the Catholic
visible Church, we find not.

2. We may assert, that a Minister baptizeth only [in] a particular Church, i.
e. only such as are members [in] some particular Church or other, and yet not
assert, that he baptizeth only [into] a particular Church, much less, only
[into his own congregation]. This baptizing [into his own congregation onely]
may seem to intimate.] that if he loses his relation to that particular
Church, then he must also lose his baptism (which it is supposed) was only
into that. But if that be driven at, it falls as heavy upon themselves, if
such a baptizing into a Church were granted; for, then, if a man be baptized
into the Catholic visible Church, if he be ejected out of that (which they say
he may be by excommunication) then he must as much lose his baptism there also.

3. As for 1 Cor. 12. v. 13. It speaks of the baptism of the Spirit into the
mystical body of Christ, not of water baptism into any visible Church at all;
for the words are these, [For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body.]

Object. 4. Hence it will follow, That a Christian, who by reason of the
unfixedness of his civil habitation, is not admitted into a particular
Congregation, has no way left him to have his children baptized, but they must
all be left without the Church, in Satan's visible Kingdom.

Answ. 1. We deny (as before) that baptism admits into Christ's Kingdom, or
delivers out of Satan's visible Kingdom. By virtue of the Covenant they are
Co-members with their parents of the visible Church before baptism.

2. Some will grant, that Offiers may baptize in such cases, by virtue of
membership in the Catholic Church, as well as they may baptize members of
other particular Churches, because baptizing is an act purely Ministerial in it
self, and does not necessarily imply his being over, or being an officer to
those it is performed toward.

3. We rather answer thus, that a Christian, notwithstanding the unfixedness of
his habitation, yet ought to join as a member with some particular Congregation
or other, and so the difficulty vanished: those that joined to the Church at
Jerusalem, Act. 2. v. 41. 47. yet were many of them men of other Countries, as
appears, verse. 5. 9. 10, 11. and though they had no fixed habitations there,
yet they listed themselves as members and were baptized at Jerusalem, verse. 41.
when they cannot (by reason of the unfixedness of their habitations) enjoy such
constant Communion with a Church, as they would, yet they are to join with some
Church, and hold as much communion with it as they can, else a wide door is
open to multitudes to keep from under discipline altogether: for, if they
offend, what Church can call them to an account, or pass a censure upon them
in case of obstinacy?

Object. 5. According to this assertion, there is no way left us by Christ for
the Jus Divin. Min. p. 141.
baptizing of Heathens, when it shall please God to convert them to the
Christian faith. We will suppose an hundred heathens converted we demand, by
whom shall these be baptized? not by a private Chrictian. To baptize is an act
of office. Not by a Minister, for a Minister (say they) cannot perform any
Pastoral act (such as this is) out of his own Congregation. Neither can these
hundred converts choose a Minister, and thereby give him power to baptive them;
for they must first be a Church before they have power to choose officers, and a
Church they cannot be till baptized: neither can they join as members to any
other Church and thereby be made capable of Baptism by that Minister into
whose Church they are admitted. For in the way of Christ a man must first be
baptized before he be capable of being outwardly and solemnly admitted as a
member of a particular Church. The three thousand were not first added to the
Church and then baptized, but first baptized and thereby added to the Church,
Ast. 2. 41.

Answ. 1. The difficulty of such a case (if there be any in it) will be found
in their way as well as in ours; for, if an hundred heathens be converted, we
may ask, by whom shall these be baptized? not by an officer, for a Minister or
officer is set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. not in the world; suppose it be
the Catholic visible Church that is there intended, yet still the Church is
the boundary of Office, it reaches no further then that, and the hundred
converted heathens are no members as yet of the Catholic visible Church,
because (say they) persons are admitted into that Church by Baptism; and these
are not yet baptized. What have officers who are set in the Church, to do to
perform an act of office, to such as are no members of any Church? if they have
an habitual power to Act as Ministers in any place of the world, yet that power
extends no further then the Church, for then they must have a threefold
relation, one to the Church Catholic, another to a particular Church, and a
third to the world, and all as officers.

2. Christ has left these ways for the Baptizing such as are converted from
heathenisme to the Christian faith, either they may join as members to some
Church, and so be made capable of baptism by the Minister of that Church into
which they are admitted, Or they may join together as a Church, and so call an
officer who may baptize them.

We see no inconvenience in asserting that they may be a Church, before they be
Baptized, the only place alleged against it, does not say that they were
first Baptized and thereby added to the Church, but the words are these, Act.
2. 41. Then they that gladly received his word, were Baptized, and the same day
there were added about three thousand souls. They might be added to the Church,
either before, or after baptism, and yet all this might be said, and therefore
it cannot prove that they were added by baptism. Their being Baptized was
rather a sign of being added, then that by which they were added. Christ's way
is expressed, Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and Disciple all nations, baptizing
them, etc. they are to be first discipled, and then baptized; and a disciple
properly is one in Christ's School, his Church, Act. 8. ver 3. compared with
Act. 9. v. 1. and lest any should say that the discipling of them was by
baptizing them, those two are plainly distinguished, John 4. ver. 1. Jesus made
and baptized more Disciples then John. Here is a difference put between making
a Disciple and baptizing him. And therefore such converts may orderly become a
Church or Church Members, before they be baptized, we have proved that they are
not admitted by baptism, and themselves will grant that they are
Church Members immediately after it, and therefore surely their admission is to
be before their baptism.

Object. 6. Hence it will follow, That a Minister Preaching out of his own
Congregation, cannot Lawfully and warrantably prononnce the blessing after his
Sermon; for, to bless the people from God is an act of Office, and to be done
only by an officer, Nu. 6. 23, 24, 25, 26 compared with Revel 14. 5. Deuteronomy. 10.
8. 2 Cor. 13. 14. Ephesians. 1. 2.

Answ. 1. We do not judge, that the Levites did bless as types any more then
they did pray or exhort as so; nor that blessing should cease now Christ is
come to bless, any more then other acts in which Christ is chief, but they
were appointed to bless as they did minister, Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 1 Chronicles. 23. 13.

2. Blessing is an act of office (we grant) and to be performed by an officer,
but not only: to exhort is an act of office, yet some not in office may exhort
as we have proved, and might do so under the Old Testament without offense to
the Levite, Act. 13, ver. 14, 15. we have read that the Jews had in their
Synagogues a Pew or Seat on purpose for brethren to speak out of, where they
that had any thing to offer, did place themselves, and set, until the rulers
therein did give liberty of speech; in which Seat Paul was noted by them, and
not as an Apostle but as a brother among them, and they sent unto him that sat
viz. in the Speakers place. In like manner blessing is an act of office, it was
performed by the Levites but not only, David did bless, and he was no Levite,
2 Samuel 6. 18.

3. Though blessing were to be performed by office only, yet being an act of a
common nature, which all have right in who are blessed of Christ, it may be put
forth by virtue of communion, which case has been already spoken to by us.

Argu. 7. If the whole Essence of the ministerial call consists in Election
Jus Divin. Min. p. 144.
without Ordination, then it will necessarily follow, that when a Minister
leaves or is put from that particular charge to which he is called, that then
he cease to be a Minister and becomes a private person, and that when he is
elected to another place, he needs a new Ordination, and so toties quoties, as
often as he is elected so often is he to be ordained.

Ans. If by [Minister] they mean [an officer] we grant the consequence thus
far, that if he leaves or be justly put from that particular charge to which
he is called, then he cease to be an officer, and when he is elected to
another place, he needs a new Ordination; we can see no inconvenience in
granting this consequence, If by Minister they do not mean an officer, then
they speak nothing to the question in hand, which is only about a call to
office; we deny that either election or Ordination gives the call to gifted
men to Preach. But we suppose they speak of the call to office, and then
although we deny that an officer leaving, or being unjustly put from his
particular charge becomes a private person (for by Christ's allowance he may
still act in the public work of preaching, which may denominate him a public
person) yet we grant he cease to be an officer when the relation to the
particular Church cease. But this seems to them a very great absurdity, and
contrary to sound Doctrine, which they endeavor to prove diverse ways.

Object. 1. Because every Minister has a double relation, one to the Church
Jus Divin. Min. p. 145.
Catholic indefinitely, another to that particular Congregation over which he
is set. Ordination is to the Essence of the Ministerial office, and not only
in reference to a particular place or charge. The Reverend Assembly say that
the Ministry was given by Jesus Christ to the general Church visible which
they prove from 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. compared with ver. 10, 11, 12, 13,
15, 16. of the same Chapter. Now if Ministers be seated by Christ in the Church
Catholic as well as in their particular Churches, then it follows, That they
have a Relation as Ministers to the Church Catholic, and though their relation
to their particular Church cease, yet their Ministerial relation cease not,
because they were officers of the Church Catholic, and there does still remain
in them a power in Actu primo to dispense all the Ordinances of Christ, though
their call ad actum secundum, five exercitium pro hic and nunc (as Master
Hudson phraseth it) cease. Even as every private Christian has also a double
relation, one to the Church general, and another to the particular place
whereof he is a member; and when he removes from his Congregation he does not
cease to be a member of the visible Church (for then his baptism should cease,
for every baptized person is a member of the Church) but only of that
particular Church: a Minister of the Gospel; when he leaves his particular
Congregation, he continues still to be a Minister, though not their Minister,
and needs no more to be ordained a new, then a private Christian to be baptized
a new; because neither Ordination nor baptism do stand in relation to the
particular Congregation, but to the Church Catholic.

Answ. 1 Part of this makes the question, the proof of the question, for, their
proposition is, That the the whole Essence of the ministerial call does not
consist in Election without Ordination; and part of the proof is, because
Ordination is to the essence of the ministerial office.

2. Their illustration (for a proof it is not) does run them unavoidably into
Anabaptisme, which themselves cry out so much against: for, they plainly assert
these two things. 1. That if a man cease to be a member of the visible
Church, then his baptism cease. 2. That every baptized person is a member of
the Church.

From these we conclude, That every person justly excommunicate is an
unbaptized person; for, he is ceased to be a member of the visible Church; and
(say they) when a man cease to be a member of the visible Church, then his
baptism cease; and it follows from the second also, for we argue thus,

Every baptized person, is a member of the Church; No excommunicate person, is
a member of the Church; for, they say every Minister by excommunication
ejecteth out of the Church Catholic visible. Jus Divin. Min. p. 139. Ergo, No
excommunicate person is a baptized person.

If no excommunicate person be a baptized person, then if upon repentance one
be readmitted into the the Church, he must also be Rebaptized, or else be in
the Church unbaptized. And readmission, upon repentence is commanded, 2 Corinthians. 2. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. ye ought rather to forgive him and comfort
him, etc.

This mistake of theirs, we suppose arises from their asserting that Baptism
does admit or make to stand in relation to a Church; whereas baptizing is not
into a Church neither into a particular nor into a general Church, as if that
gave a being to a relation unto either; but Baptizing is, to or into the Name
of Christ; baptism is a solemn sign of a persons taking the Name Christ upon
him, or of his being engaged under, and to make profession of, and own that
Name in all ways, and for all uses and ends that it serves to, Mat. 28. 19.
baptizing them to or into the Name of the Father, and of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 16. 1 Cor. 1. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15.

And hence, although a person be baptized in a Church, yet when he leaves that
Church or cease to be a member of it, yet his baptism cease not. If by
excommunication he be ejected out of the Church, yea if he cease to be a
member of the Catholic visible Church (if there be such a one) yet he does not
lose his baptism, that remains as a testimony against him, as a solemn sign
of his engagement for the Name of Christ, which now he denies: as if a man
has Covenanted under his hand and seal to pay an Annuitie, etc. to such a
person; if afterward he refuses to make payment thereof, yet his hand and seal
will evidence against him; so will baptism against those that cast off the
profession of Christ's Name; and upon this account if a Christian leaves one
Congregation and joyneth with another, yet he need not be baptized again;
because he did not receive baptism as a sign only of his being engaged for
the Name of Christ whilst he walked with that Congregation, but for ever: the
case is not alike for Ordination for if a man after he be ordained proves
wicked, scandalous, or heretical, he may be excommunicated and deposed, and
losing his office, he loses his Ordination especially if Ordination did give
the Essence to the call to Office, surely he has not that upon him still, for
then he might be an Officer of Christ, when he is no member of any Church of
Christ, but he does not lose his baptism. And besides, it is not proved, that
his Office reaches beyond a particular congretion, whereas his baptism does.

3. We deny that an Officer has a double relation, one to the
Church-catholick, and another to his particular congregation: the places cited,
do not prove that he has a relation as a Minister to a Church-catholick; as
for 1 Cor. 12. 28. If a Church-general visible were intended there, yet it
would not follow, that any man's relation as an Officer does extend so much as
habitually, or in actu primo, to the utmost bounds of that Church; for, it may
properly be said, There are set in the Commonwealth, Justices, Constables,
etc. Yet will any conclude hence, that Justices sustain a double relation, one
to the Counties wherein they live, and another to the whole Commonwealth? or
that Constables have a double relation as Constables, one to the parish where
they live, another to the Commonwealth, or that they have a power in actu
primo, to do the Office of Constables in all places of the Commonwealth? So an
Officer may be said to be set in the Catholic visible Church, because that
particular Church to which he is an Officer, may belong to that
Catholick-Church, and yet his office may extend no further then his particular
congregation, he may have no relation, so much as in actu primo, to any other
Church.

He cannot be denied to be set in the Commonwealth, who is set in any one place
or Parish which is in it; and so an Officer may be said to be set in the
Church-catholick, who is set in any particular Church which appertains to
that universal, and yet the office may be bounded by that particular Church,
may reach no further, and therefore the being set in the Churchcatholick,
cannot enforce a relation as an Officer to to that Church, without which no
double relation.

As for Ephesians. 4. The Apostle speaks either

1. Of the mystical body, one in spirit and faith, over which never any were
set as Officers in the whole, part of it being in heaven when the Apostles were
on earth; nor in part, if so, then with or without its own act; not without,
for, as office and authority is Christ's gift as our fountain, so the Churches
call is the means thereof; answer of the Assembly to the reasons against the
instance of the Church of Jerusalem, p. 12. not with its own act, for they that
never met, nor can meet unto a Church act, put forth none. Ergo, though
Officers be given [for] the mystical Church, yet they have not relation [to]
it, as Officers over it in the Lord. Or,

2. Of the integral body, which is one by consent and agreement; as the body of
Antioch is one, and the body of Ephesus is one, the unity of the Spirit to be
kept there, etc. We see no absurdity to say, God has given to or set in the
Church, viz. this and that Church, Apostles, Evangelists, for the edifying of
the body, sc. this and that body. And whatever we have in notion, we can find
no Church in existence or action, but must be a particular Church; as, it is
proper to say, Satan persecutes man, though there be no Catholic man to
persecute, because he persecutes this and that man; so to say, God cares to
edify the Church, the body, though no Catholic body or Church, but this and
that particular.

Object. 2. If a Minister, when he removes, or is removed from his particular
Congregation, cease to be a Minister, then it will follow,

1. That if the Church that called him prove heretical, and wickedly separate
from him, that then the sin of the people should nullify the office of the
Minister; Or

2. If the Church refuse to give him competent maintenance, and starve him out
from them, or if the major part unjustly combine together to vete him out, that
then the covetousness and injustice of the people should make void the
Function of their Minister. Or

3. By this Doctrine there will be a door opened for the people of a City or a
Nation to un-minister all their Ministers, which things are very great
absurdities and contrary to sound Doctrine.

Ans. 1. As to the two former particulars, though such Churches do hainously
sin against the Lord, and commit wickedness at a great height, and must expect
that the Lord will reward them according to their works, for separating from
and nullifying of the office of such, as Christ has set over them, upon such
accounts; yet we know not but that in such cases, the sin of the people may
nullify the office of the Minister, it does debar him from the exercise of his
office, and why may it not make void the office? Suppose upon taking up some
wicked principles, they cruelly murder or take away the life of their officer,
surely he cease then to be an officer, and if their sin can nullify his
office in such a way, why not by an unjust separation from or rejection of him?

2. If a peoples sinful rejection of their officer does not nullify his
office, we suppose the reason is not because his office-power extends beyond
that particular Congregation, but because he is, de jure and of right, still
over that Church as its officer, though he be hindered by their sinful actings
from the exercise of his office amongst them: as a lawful Prince may by an
unjust invasion be disabled for the exercise of Government in his Kingdom,
though he yet be the Supreme Governor, and may recover his right when he can.
But if a Minister voluntarily removes, or be rejected by the people, when
either of these are upon just grounds, then surely the relation between them
cease, and so he cease to be an officer.

3. As to the third thing, they grant that a peoples rejection of a Minister,
makes him cease from being their Minister; and this opens as wide a door for
the people of a City or Nation to un-minister themselves, or to leave
themselves without any Ministers, as the other assertion does to un-minister
their Ministers; and if the people of a City or Nation will be so wickedly
disposed, as to withdraw subjection from, or reject all from being their
Ministers, what advantage can there be in their having the name of office upon
them, when they cannot exercise their office there? and if they be unjustly
rejected, and lose their office thereby, they may become Officers again in
other places, as well as if they be but put out from being their Ministers.

Object. 3. Because there is no Scripture to warrant the iteration of
Ordination Jus Divin. Min p. 147.
in case of removal. The Apostles went about ordaining Elders in every Church,
and Titus was left in Crete to ordain Elders, etc. but there is no mention made
of any command for reiterated Ordination, neither indeed can it be; for
Ordination being a setting a man apart to the Office of the Ministry (as we
shall hereafter prove) and not only to the exercise of it in such a place,
though the local exercise should cease, yet his office still remains, and
therefore needs not be reiterated.

Answ. 1. There is no Scripture (that we can find) to evidence that a man is an
Officer to any more then a particular congregation, and if his office extends
no further, then in case of removal he cease to be an officer, or becomes no
officer; And here;

2. All those Scriptures that warrant the Ordination of any Officers, do
warrant the iteration of Ordination, in case a man becomes an Officer again to
any other Church. As in a corporation, if Bailiffs or other Officers having
served their whole time, do become no Officers, and afterward the same persons
come into the same Offices again, the same Law that required such ceremonies to
be used in the investment of all such Officers, does require the iteration of
such ceremonies upon a new entrance into those Offices, though the Law does not
require it under the notion of an iteration. So all those Scriptures that
warrant the ordaining of all Church Officers, must needs warrant the
re-ordaining of such, as after a becoming no Officers, do take up office a new
again, though the Scriptures do not mention it under the notion of an iteration
of Ordination, but under the notion of ordaining Officers at their first
entrance into office. Take it thus,

Major. All that assume office in the Church, ought to be ordained. All the
Scriptures that prove Ordination of Officers to be necessary, do prove this;
and our brethren cannot deny this Proposition, unless they will give up the
whole case, and say that some may assume office in the Church without
Ordination, and surely then gifted brethren may preach without it.

Minor. But those that remove to take the charge of a new Church, they assume
office in the Church. For, upon a removal they became no Officers, because
their office extended no further then their particular Church, and now they
become Officers again, in taking a new charge.

Conclusion. Ergo, Those that remove to take the charge of a new Church, ought
to be ordained.

When the person ceased to be an Officer, his Ordination (which was an adjunct
of his office) ceased also, and then he was considered as without Ordination,
and he taking up office again, is ordained again, because else he assumeth
office without Ordination as really as if he had never been ordained.

3. If any example could be shown of an ordinary Officers removal from one
Church, to become an Officer to another Church, we do suppose, it would give an
example of the iteration of Ordination.

4. Ordination is not a setting apart to the office of the Ministry, but of
such as are already Officers, to the work of their office. We do not say that
Ordination is a setting apart to the exercise of office in such a place, but to
such persons, or to such a Church; that Church may remove to another place, or
meet at a great distance from the place where now it is seated, yet he acts
as an Officer toward it there.

5. As for Act. 13. 2, 3. thus much may be concluded from it, viz. That when
Officers are called by the Lord to the work of office amongst a people, not
before committed to them, or when they take a new charge upon them, they are to
be ordained.

If this example has not the force of a Rule in the grounds and ends of it,
what use is it of to us for our direction or imitation? if it does not oblidge,
us to use Ordination upon an occasion of like nature, it is binding (as an
example) in nothing: for what may be alleged against its being exemplary in
this, will as well deny it to be exemplary in other things, and then why do our
brethren allege it at all for Ordination? If Ordination were needful for Paul
and Barnabas, upon their taking a new charge for officework, when yet they
ceased not to be Officers upon the coming of this new call, but only had their
Commission enlarged by it, then much more is Ordination needful for ordinary
officers, upon their taking a new charge, seeing they do cease to be Officers
upon such removals. If this Ordination of Paul and Barnabas, were (as they say)
by the immediate appointment of the Holy Ghost, that may speak, that in these
days we are not to expect such an extraordinary immediate call to ordain
Officers, but it does not deny it to be a a binding example to us, in all that
was ordinary in it. Now it is ordinary for Officers to have a call to a new
charge, as Paul and Barnabas had here; and the ends of this praying for them
were ordinary, viz. that the Lord would afford his special presence to, and
blessing upon them in office-work in their new charge, and therefore it does
warrant the iteration of Ordination, in case there be a removal to a new charge.

Object. 4. If the whole essence of the Ministerial call consists in popular
Election, then will two other great absurdities follow. 1. That Ordination can
in no case precede such Election. 2. That there must be Churches before there
be Ministers.

Answ. We know no absurdity in asserting these, but let us hear how they would
prove them to be absurdities.

We conceive many cases may be put, in which Ordination may lawfully go before
Election, we shall only give two instances.

1. When an ordained Minister removes upon warrantable grounds, from one charge
to another, the people to whom he removes, choose him not as one that is to be
made a Minister, but as one already made, and now to be made their Minister,
etc.

2. When there is a necessity of sending men (as there is now in New England,
for the conversion of Heathen people) we think it very agreeable unto Scripture
rules, that these men should be first ordained before they be Elected by the
Heathen to whom they are sent. And the reason is, because that the conversion
of souls is the proper work of the Ministry. When Christ went up into heaven,
he left not only Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, but also Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And the office of ordinary
Ministers is to be Ambassadors for Christ, and in Christ's name or in Christ's
stead, to beseech people to be reconciled unto God.

Where it may be had, there we conceive it is most agreeable to the Word, that
men should be first ordained before sent; hereby they shall go with more
authority, and shall have power to baptize those whom they do convert, which
otherwise they cannot lawfully do, etc.

They grant liberty to preach, as Probationers before Ordination, yet here they
say men cannot lawfully baptize, without he be ordained; whence we infer,

1. That according to their own principles, baptizing is more limited to
Officers, then preaching.

2. That men may act as Ambassadors of Christ, though they be not ordained: for
if they preach but once as Probationers, either they act as Ambassadors of
Christ, and then Ordination does not make them such, or else there is some
preaching warranted by Christ, not as his Ambassadors, and then gifted men,
though no Officers, and without power to baptize, and though they be not
Ambassadors for Christ, yet may preach.

2. They assert a Mission here, which is no part of Ordination, for they say
[it is most agreeable to the Word, that men should be first ordained before
sent]. There is a sending then, which is distinct from, and may be subsequent
to Ordination; and why then do our brethren so often assert sending and
ordaining to be all one? or how will it appear, that any other sending is
intended, Romans 10. 15. then this which themselves grant, Ordination may be
before?

3. When an Ordained Minister removes upon warrantable grounds from one charge
to another, he is to have a new Ordination, but a new Election is to precede
this new Ordination. The Gospel knows no difference between making a man a
Minister, and making him their Minister, if by Minister they intend an Officer.

4. When there is a necessity of sending men for the conversion of Heathens, we
deny that they are sent forth as Officers, or that they ought to be ordained to
make them Officers, before they be sent. If such as are Officers, and have been
ordained, do take a journey and preach unto Heathen people, it is not in the
capacity of Officers, for those Heathens are of no Church; but they act as
persons gifted, and warranted by Christ to lay out their gifts in such public
works, for such ends. The conversion of souls is the work of the Ministry, not
the proper work, so as the Lord uses none but Ministers therein; Parents, and
Masters, and Neighbors, may be converting instruments as well as they.
Ministers are lights, not by virtue of Ordination or Office, but illumination
and gifts; if men in darkness be ordained, yet they are in darkness still:
Officers are not made lights when made Officers; they were lights before,
therefore to shine in the exercise and improvement of their gifts, and might
have been Ambassadors to the world, though they had not been Officers to a
Church.

Gifted men are Ambassadors in a general sense, for Christ, and in Christ's name
and stead are to beseech people to be reconciled unto God, for (as we have
proved) they are warranted and commanded by Christ to preach.

We desire some Scripture Proof, That Ordination may in any case precede
Election to Office.

Object. 2. It will also follow, That there must be Churches before there be
Ministers, which is against Scripture and sound reason: we do not deny but that
there must be a Church before their Minister; but not before a Minister: the
Church Entitative is before a Church Ministerial, but yet a Minister must needs
be before a Church; for every Church must consist of persons baptized,
(unbaptized persons cannot make a Church) and therefore there must be a
Minister to baptize them, before they can be made capable to enter into
Church Fellowship. Our Savior Christ chose his Apostles for the gathering of
Churches, there were first Apostles before Churches, and afterward the
Apostles ordained Elders in these gathered Churches, and one great work of
these Elders, was to convert the neighboring Heathen, and when converted, to
baptize them and gather them into Churches; and therefore Elders as well as
Apostles were before Churches: And whosoever with us holds, That none but a
Minister in office can baptize, must needs hold, that there must be ordinary
Ministers before Churches, and that therefore the whole essence of the
Ministerial call, does not consist in the Election of the Church.

Answ. 1. That a Church must needs be before a Minister or Officer is evident,
because if one be made a Minister, an Officer, it is to a Church; that is
necessarily presupposed, before one can be made an Officer to it.

2. If Apostles were before Churches, yet seeing their call was extraordinary
and Immediate from God, that does not prove, that ordinary Officers (who are
called by men) are before Churches, and the contrary is evident, Act. 14. 23.
When they had chosen them Elders by suffrages in every Church, etc. the
Churches must needs be before the choosing Elders in every Church. Neither can
it be proved, that these were Elders before they were their Elders, or that
ever any ordinary officers were before Churches. Suppose unbaptized persons
could not make a Church, yet the utmost it could amount to, would be but this,
that there must be a Minister before this or that Church, it would not follow
thence, that there must be Ministers before Churches in general, or before any
Churches: for, look upon any Church, and if it be said, there was a Minister
before this or that Church, to baptize the persons which it consists of, we
may say, then there was a Church before that Minister, for he could not be an
officer unless it were to some Church, because Officer and Church are
Relatives: if it be said there was some Minister before that Church, else the
persons therein could not have been baptized, we may answer, to there must be
some Church before that Minister, etc. and still Churches are before Ministers,
until we come to the Apostles days, if the line of succession holds so far,
and if that line breaks before we ascend so high, then where the stop was
made, either the person baptizing was no Minister, and that cutteth the throat
of the objection, for then they being baptized by one that was no Minister,
after their baptism they might become a Church before any Minister; or else the
person baptizing was a Minister, and then it must be said, he was a baptized
person and yet no Churchmember, or else a Minister, and yet an unbaptized
person; a Church Officer, and yet no Churchmember; for if he were a
Churchmember, then Church was still before the Minister: and how could he
become a Minister, if a Church were not before?

If the line of succession holds to the Apostles days, their call was
extraordinary, and they being the only Officers that were before Gospel
Churches, it speaks nothing at all against Election of the Church, as giving
the whole essence of the call to ordinary Officers, and it is the call of
ordinary Officers only, that this question is about, whether that consists
in Election or not.

3. That a great work of ordinary Elders was to convert the neighboring
Heathens we grant, but that they acted as Elders in their conversion, we deny:
that ordinary Elders did baptize then when converted, before their being
gathered into Churches, is a thing which they have not given us any
Scripture Proof for. A Church is not to suffer persons in it to continue
unbaptized, but we conceive unbaptized persons may make a Church, and then
either by Communion with other Churches, or by choosing and ordaining an Officer
for it self, persons in it may be baptized; and thus we may hold, that none but
a Minister in office can baptize, and yet need not hold that there must be
ordinary Ministers before Churches, which to be sure, the Gospel speaks as
little of, as of unbaptized persons making a Church. And so we have answered
their arguments against Election as essential to the call to office.

Two Arguments of Mr. Hookers they undertake to answer, by asserting that
Officers as such, do sustain a relation to a universal Church, and by
distinguishing between the persons which give being to a Minister as to be
their Minister; and those which give being to him as to be a Minister, but
because neither the assertion nor the distinction, are proved to have any
sooting in Scripture, therefore we pass them over.

CHAP. XIIII.
Wherein is shown that the Essence of the Ministerial Call does not consist in
Ordination.

OOur Brethren in their book called Jus Divin. Mini. page 140. etc. endeavor
to prove that Ordination of Ministers is an Ordinance of Christ. If Ordination
be taken in a right sense, and by [Ministers] be nnderstood [officer] we can
own the Assertion, and therefore we shall not here excep against their
Arguments which they produce for the proof of it; but we proceed to their
second assertion. viz

Assertion. That the Essence of the ministerial call does properly consist Jus
Divin. Min. p. 164.
in Ordination.

This they strive to make out by diverse Arguments.

Argu. 1. If Election does not give the Essentials of the Ministeral office,
Jus Divin. Minist.
then Ordination does; for the outward call of a Minister (as it is agreed on
all sides) does consist only in his election or Ordination. But election does
not, etc. as we have formerly showed by diverse Arguments, Ergo, Ordination
does.

Answ. Election does give the Essentials of the outward call of a Minister, (as
we have formerly showed by diverse Arguments, to which we refer the Reader)
Ergo, Ordination does not.

Argu. 2. If Ordination makes a man a Minister that was not one before, then
Jus Divin. Mini. page 164. etc.
it gives the Essence of the Ministerial office But Ordination makes a man a
Minister that was not one before.

Ergo, etc.

That this is so appears,

1. From the Ordination of Deacons, Act. 6. 3. look ye out seven men, etc. whom
we may appoint over this business, (...) is to put a man into an office which
he had not before. Thus it is said of Joseph, Acts 7. 10. And he made him
Governor over Egypt, etc. (...) etc. This act of Pharaohs did not confirm him
in that office which he had before, but conferred upon him an office he never
had. The like we read, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. etc. Thus Exodus 18. 21. Thou shall provide
able men, and place such over them to be Rulers of thousands, etc. It was Moses
his placing that did give them the formalitie of Rulers. The Hebrew word in
Exodus and Deuteronomy. is (...) which answers the Greek word (...) 1 Timothy 1. 12.
where it is said (...) and it was the Apostles appointing Deacons that did make
them Deacons: all that the people did was to set seven men before the Apostles
whom they by Ordination made Deacons.

2. This appears also from Tit. 15. For this cause left I thee in Crete that
thou should Ordain elders in every City, is (...) and constituas; and ordain
or appoint: Titus was not left only to add an Adjunct to the Ministerial call,
or to establish and confirm those in their places that had right to them
before, but he was left (...) which is all one as in a civil sense, (...) or
(...) as one says, or (...) constituere and preficere rectores and judices, to
constitute and make rulers and Judges; thus it is said Luke 12. 42 who then is
that faithful steward whom his Lord shall make Ruler etc. (...) This Act of the
Lord of the house is that which gives the formal being of a Ruler unto this
Steward. And it is Ordination that does (...) and is essentiale constituens of
the Ministerial office.

Ans. 1. Election is undoubtedly given, the people, Act. 6. ver. 3. 5. And the
saying pleased the whole, and [they chose.] And, electing or choosing in
Scripture sense does express the putting a man into an office which he had not
before, as certainly as it can be supposed that this appointing can do it. As
Luke 6. 13. He called unto him his disciples, and of them he [chose] Twelve
whom also he named, Apostles etc. So, John 6. 70. Acts 1. ver. 2. 24. Christ
did not barely no minate and design the Twelve by choosing them, but conferred
upon them an office they never had before, did give them the formality of
officers, did constitute and make them officers by choosing of them; and from
these examples we may as safely conclude that the peoples choosing Deacons was
that which made them Deacons, and conferred their office upon them; as they may
conclude either from the word (...) or from Acts 7. 10. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Exodus 18.
21. Luke 12. 42. Tit. 1. 5. that Ordination does it. For, if they say that
appointing does in these places express the office-making act, so may we say
does choosing in the other places, express as fully the office-making act also.

If they say that (...) etc. is to constitute and make Rulers and Judges, we
may as well say, To choose is to constitute and make Apostles, and therefore to
choose Elders or Deacous is to constitute and make them such, there is as good
reason for the one as for the other.

2. But two Scriptures our brethren insist upon to prove that Ordination makes
a man a Minister that was none before.

The first Scripture is Act. 6. v. 3. which they strengthen with others, as
Acts 7. 10. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Exodus 18. 21. which speak of appointing unto
Government. But they know that the appointing, Acts 6. 3. was not unto
Government or Jurisdiction over the Church. Deacons were helps, not
Governments, serving tables; officers in the Church, not over it, as widows
also.

And can they indeed think that Ordination made them Deacons and Election made
them Deacons of that Church, or that they were made Catholic Deacons and such
as at Antioch, Ephesus etc. might have challenged the oversight of, or power to
provide for the poor as thereunto appointed, or officers therein, vel in actu
primo?

The second Scripture is, Tit. 1. 5. That thou might Ordain; but they will
not say that Titus might Ordain alone, but with a causal concurrence of the
Eldership, we crave leave to add, and of the brethren of the whole Church, for
they fasted and prayed working together in every thing except imposition of
hands, which is not an Act, but a sign of Ordination, not necessary but left
free, so Assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland, part. 1. cap.
14.

To appoint therefore is not pro imperio determinare, or by virtue of pretended
power and authority to impose one to be a Ruler in or over the Church. Supreme
Magistrates may appoint Judges, Justices, etc. whose Commission is Essentiale
constituens, to their office the people willing or nilling the same, Ministers
are forbidden doing so, 1 Pet. 5. ver 3.

But to appoint in those Scriptures, (if it does denote only fasting, prayer
or imposition of hands after Election) is, to Solemnize a call to office, or
Solenniter approbare; a Kings Coronation or a Magistrates ritual investment may
be called the Ordination of a Magistrate. The Solemnization of a Matrimonial
contract between man and woman the Ordination of a husband and of a wife,
although the Essentiale constituens, of the relation lie in the contract, not
in the solemnization. So in this cause, the act which has but the nature of an
adjunct, having the name of the principal act. Yet is not an officer bound to
approve of whatsoever shall be ordered by the Church, 1 Timothy 5. 22. If the
Church sin in Election, let not Timothy sin in ordination, approbation, etc. It
is also considerable that Act. 6. 3. speaks not of an appointment to office,
but to the work of the office.

Arg. 3. If ordination be the sending of a man forth with power and authority
Jus Divin. Min. p. 166.
to preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, then it is that which
gives the essence of the Ministerial office. But ordination is so, Ergo, The
Minor (they say) is proved from Romans 10. 15. And how shall they preach except
they be sent? this sending is an authoritative Mission to preach the Word as
Cryers and Heralds (for so the word (...) signifies) and also as Ambassadors
are sent forth by their Prince with their letters missive and credentials,
which appears by the words immediately following; as it is written, How
beautiful, etc. it must be understood of such an authoritative sending, which
was to continue to the end of the world, for the Apostle in that Climax of his,
makes it as necessary and perpetual, as calling upon the name of the Lord, as
believing and hearing the Word.

Answ. We deny their Minor, neither does all that they have said, prove, That
Ordination is a sending of a man forth with power and authority to preach the
Gospel, and administer the Sacraments.

1. We deny that Ordination and Mission are the same things: that Text
alleged, Romans 10. 15. speaks of Mission or sending, but not one word about
Ordination, and therefore it is far from proving that Ordination is a sending a
man forth with power and authority to preach, etc. unless they can prove, that
they are all one, (which we conceive they can never do) if an authoritative
Mission were intended, such as Cryers, Heralds and Ambassadors have, yet that
would not evidence that Ordination gives power and authority to preach and
administer the Sacraments.

2. We deny that the power and authority to preach and administer the
Sacraments, is received by mission or sending. the act of the person sending,
does not complete mission, without the objects to whom he sends. The end of
Mission is not to give a call to, or justify the lawfulness of a man's
preaching or administering the Sacraments; but that a Preacher may justify the
lawfulness of his preaching to such a people, i. e. such specifically
considered, not numerically. As, if a Jew should deny it to be lawful for any
to preach the Word unto Gentiles, we may prove it lawful to preach unto the
Gentiles, by or from mission, because Christ has said, Mat. 28. 19. Go ye and
teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. This Mission will prove it lawful for
any particular persons in any Nation, in any Church, in any place, to be
preached to, but mission will not warrant any particular Preacher in publishing
the Gospel unto such particular persons, in this or that place. We deny that
mission gives a man his Commission or authority to preach; and if the Apostles
Climax did make it as necessary and perpetual as calling upon the name of the
Lord, as believing and hearing the Word, yet that would not prove it. The
utmost that is said by the Apostle is, they cannot (i. e. not orderly, not
warrantably) preach, except they be sent, and it may as well be said, they
cannot orderly or warrantably preach and administer Sacraments, except they be
gifted, except they have those qualifications which are required unto Officers,
1 Timothy 3. v. 1, 2, 3, etc. yet we suppose they will not say, that those gifts
and qualifications do give power and authority to preach and administer the
Sacraments; if that will be granted, then they give up the case wholly, for a
man may have those gifts and qualifications before, and so without Ordination,
and so (by that rule) may have power and authority to do those acts although
unordained. Such gifts and qualifications are necessarily and perpetually
required unto Offiers, as well as mission, and so, by the same medium that they
prove mission to give authority to perform such acts, may we as strongly prove
such gifts and qualifications to give authority thereunto.

3. We deny that the giving of that mission spoken of Romans 10. 15. belongs to
any man whatever, unless it be meant of the providential sending. It belongs
to Christ only to send, it was he that said, Mat. 28. 19. Go, etc.

We desire some Scripture Proof, that it appertains to a Presbytery, or any
man to give Mission, if that cannot be produced, then sending is far from being
that which gives the power and authority to preach, or the outward call to
office, which must be given by man.

Arg. 4. If Ordination be that which gives the Ministerial office, then the Jus
Divin. Min. p. 167.
essence of the Ministerial call consists in Ordination. But Ordination is
that which gives the Ministerial office.

That this so appears, from 2. Tim. 1. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance,
that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my
hands; and by, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. By
laying on of the hands, is meant, the whole work of Ordination, and by gift is
meant, docendi officium (as most interpreters say) office of the Ministry, and
the power and authority conferred thereby upon him. The Greek word (...) is
often taken not only for the grace by which we are fitted for an office, but
for an office unto which men are through grace fitted. Thus it is taken, Ephesians.
4. 8. Romans 12. 6.

And thus it is here to be taken, Paul by Ordination, did not only declare
Timothy to be an Officer, and confirm him in that office which he had before
collated upon him, by the choice of the people, but he together with the
Presbytery, gave him the gift, or office of the Ministry.

Answ. We deny the Minor, The Texts alleged do not prove, that Ordination is
that which gives the Ministerial office.

There are three things that need proof, and if any one of them want it, their
Argument comes to nothing. 1. That by laying on of hands is meant Ordination.
2. That by Gift is meant Office. 3. That this gift is given by Ordination.

1. It is questionable whether by laying on of hands here be meant Ordination;
for that ceremony was used upon other occasions as well as in Ordination.
Laying on of hands was used in the Collation or conveyance of gifts, frequently
when there was no Ordination, as Act. 8. 17, 18. Then laid they their hands on
them, and they received the Holy Ghost, Act. 19. 6. Timothy might have gifts
conferred upon him, although there were no Ordination, and if there were no
Ordination, it is far from proving that the Ministerial office is given thereby.

2. It is to us clear, that by Gift is not meant Office; several reasons are
given by Mr. Hooker to evidence this, that by gift is meant those spiritual
abilities by which he was fitted and furnished for his office.

1. The word (...) does most commonly signify such gifts and graces as the
Lord bestows upon us, and not office: and without special reason we may not
recede or depart from the common signification of a word. They have given us no
reason to evince that it must be taken here for office, and not in its usual
signification, and therefore it is a feeble argument, which has no better
proof.

2. The nature of the Expressions forbid, that by gift should be meant office;
for (as Mr. Hooker observes) a man is not said to stir up his office that is
in him, but to stir up the grace that is in him, being put into office. We
are not wont to speak thus, Forget not the ^ffice that is in you; a man is not
only more properly, but more truly said to be in his office; nay, the very
nature and reality of the thing requires this also; An Office is a relation
adjoined to a man, not inherent in him, etc.

3. The person exhorted to stir up the gift, 2 Timothy 1. 6. and not to neglect
the gift, 1 Timothy 4. 14. was Timothy, who was an extraordinary Officer, an
Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. v. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist, etc. and therefore
his office could not be collated upon him, either by the people, or by the
Presbytery; let it be proved that an extraordinary office could be conveyed by
an ordinary Ordination, if not, then by Gift cannot be meant Office; and
therefore their Argument is altogether without proof, for, the Ministerial
office is not there said to be given by Ordination; And themselves interpret
one of the Texts of extraordinary gifts, using these words; [If Timothy had any
extraordinary gift that was given by the imposition of the Apostles hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the gift that is in thee, by the laying on of my hands; as
it was in those times usual for extraordinary gifts to be conveyed] Why in one
place of the same book, they should understand by Gift, extraordinary gifts,
and in another place, Office, in interpreting the same Text, we know not. And
whereas they say there, That imposition of hands now, confers as much as the
imposition of hands by the Presbytery did to Timothy, viz. the office of a
Presbytery. It is not proved that an office was conferred upon Timothy by
laying on of hands, and if any were, it must be the Office of an Evangelist,
for that was Timothies office, and surely our brethren will not say, that the
extraordinary office of an Evangelist is conferred now by Ordination, which
must be, if by the Gift were meant Office, and that were conferred by
imposition of hands, and as much were conferred now; for surely that which made
him an Evangelist, made him a Presbyter.

3. If by Gift were meant Office, yet it is only said to be given [with] the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: it is seldom that (...) signifies
[by]; and however, it cannot be restrained to that signification, and therefore
no Argument can safely or forcibly be fetched thence, for most properly it is
rendered [with], and that does not intimate any causal virtue, but only a
connection or concurrence, such as a concomitantial adjunct may have. If laying
on of hands denotes Ordination, and be but a mere adjunct to the conferring of
the gift, yet it may properly be said to be given, (...), 1 Timothy 4. 14. with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; and therefore it does not prove
that Ordination gives the Ministerial office.

Their first Argument to prove, that the essence of the Ministerial call does
consist in ordination, is divided into three parts.

Ob. 1. The persons that are said in Scriture to Ordain, are either Apostles,
Prophets, Jus Divin. Min. p. 169.
Evangelists, or Presbyters. And this is a sufficient argument to us to prove,
that it is Ordination that constitutes the Minister, and not Election. For it
is not likely, that Christ would appoint his Apostles, and his Apostles appoint
extraordinary and ordinary Elders to convey only an adjunct of the Ministerial
call, and leave the great work of conveying the office-power unto the common
people.

Answ. 1. Whether it belongs so to Officers to ordain, as none else may do
it, we shall show afterward.

2. If only Officers might ordain, yet that were no proof to us, that
Ordination constitutes the Minister; for, the office-relation which is
introduced by the call, or by that which constitutes a Minister, is a relation
to the people or to a Church, and therefore the people or a Church must needs
convey the office-power; for one relate gives being, and the essential
constituting causes to another. Relata mutuo se ponunt and tellunt tam in
essendo, quam cognoscendo. They are not made Officers over, or to the Ministers
that do ordain them, the relation is not between Officers and Officers, but
between Officers and a Church, Act. 20. 28. and therefore if Ministers only
may ordain, yet they do not constitute the Minister thereby; for then Relate
should not give being to each other.

And although Ordination be but an Adjunct to the outward call, yet that
adjunct consisting chiefly, if not only, in prayer, and the blessing and
success of the Officer in his work, depending wholly upon the Lord, who in
Ordination is prayed to for it; hence it is not unlikely that Christ would
employ Elders in adding such an adjunct, and yet leave the great work of
conveying the office-power as to the outward call unto the people.

Object. 2 The solemnity used in Ordination is, prayer, fasting. and imposition
Jus Divin. Min. p. 169.
of hands: we do not read the like Solemnity expressed in Scripture in
Election, and therefore it is against reason to think, that Election should
constitute the Minister, and give him all his Essentials, and Ordination only
give him a ceremonial complement.

Ans. 1 Ordination (so far as man acted in it) did consist in such Solemnity;
and reason will rather give it, that the call should consist in something else,
and that Ordination should be but the Solemnization of a call, and not the call
it self; for it is improper to assert that a call consists only in
Solemnities, and that any other acts concurred in Ordination in those days,
besides those which they mention, cannot be proved.

2. Prayer is the chief, if not the only act wherein Ordination does consist,
and reason tells us, that a call must go before praying for the blessing of God
upon a man in a work, which is the fruit and effect only of the call.

Object. 3. The blame laid upon Timothy if he should lay hands suddenly upon
any Minister, is very great. For hereby he makes himself impure, and becomes
accessory to the sins of those whom he makes Ministers. Now we may thus reason,
where the greatest blame lies for unworthy men coming into the Ministry. Surely
there must lie the greatest power of admitting men into the Ministry, else the
blame is not just.

But the greatest blame is laid upon the Ministers. Ergo. If the constituting
cause of the Ministerial call did lie in Election, The ministers may well
excuse themselves and say, we do but ordain, we do but give an Adjunct, etc.

Ans. 1. That blame is laid upon Timothy, if he should lay hands suddenly upon
any man, we freely grant; but that the greatest blame is laid there, for
unworthy men coming into the Ministry, they have not proved, neither can we
find a syllable that way in the Text they allege, 1 Timothy 5. 22. The Apostle
is not there comparing the acts of Ministers in undue Ordinations, comparing
the acts of the people in undue Elections, and then casting the greatest blame
upon the Ministers, and therefore their argument is altogether without proof.
Timothy is enjoined to lay hands suddenly on no man, and therefore he should
have sinned if he had done it; and so Act. 6. 3. the people are enjoined to
Elect or choose men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, and
therefore they should have sinned also, if they had chosen men that were not so
qualified, and the blame laid upon the people in case they chose persons
without such qualifications, was very great also, Mat. 7. 15. The people are
warned to beware of false Prophets, and a great danger is intimated, in case
they did not take heed of them, they would make a prey upon them like ravening
wolves; and surely there is a like danger in electing such to be Prophets as in
receiving such when they are gotten into the place of Prophets, and therefore a
great blame laid upon the people, in case they elect such, so John. 10. v. 5,
8. and how does it appear then, from what they have said, that the greatest
blame is laid upon the Ministers?

2. Where Officers are, they are to guide and direct in and about Elections,
and if the people err in choosing for the want of their guidance, to help them
to make a better choice, or if they by laying on of hands do testify their
approbation of a bad choice, the greatest blame may be laid upon the Ministers,
for unworthy men coming into the Ministry, yet that will not prove that they
have the greatest power of admitting men into the Ministry: it may prove, that
in such cases Ministers are in the greatest fault, because they do not by
counsels, directions, and persuasions, seek to prevent such undue Elections, or
because they did not wash their hands of such guilt, by refusing to ordain
them; but as they may be justly and greatly blamed upon such accounts for bad
Elections, and yet the chief power of Election does not reside in them, so they
may be more blamed for yielding approbation to such undue Elections by
ordaining, or laying hands on them (whereby they involve themselves in their
guilt, and make themselves accessory to their sin, as really as if the whole
power of Election resided in them) and yet the chiefest power of admitting men
into the Ministry may not lie in the Ministers, but in the people: and
therefore in undue Ordinations the Ministers cannot (as they would intimate)
well excuse themselves, and say, that they do but give an adjunct, for by
adding such an adjunct, they espouse the peoples sinful act in making a corrupt
choice, and so become as guilty, if not more guilty them the people. They have
power to suspend their own acting in Ordination, though they have not power
(but by counsel and persuasion) to hinder the peoples acting in an irregular
Election.

Thus much in answer to the Arguments alleged for the proving that the
essence of the Ministerial call consists in Ordination.

If any would place the essence of the call partly in Election, and partly in
Ordination, they must hold as we do, That a man is an Officer to a particular
Church or Congregation only: For, so often as a man removes from a particular
Congregation, so often he loses Election, which (that assertion says) is part
of the essence of the call to office, and therefore must needs wholly cease to
be an Officer, toties quoties; for, take away any part of the essence of a
thing, and that thing can no longer subsist. That is denied to be of the
Essence or being of a thing, which it can subsist or have a being without. It
is a contradiction to say that Election is part of the Essence of the call to
office, and yet a man's call to office can subsist without Election. It is as
much as to say, Election is of the being of a call to office, and yet is not of
the being of it, for that call can have a being without it. Therefore if
Election gives part of the Essence of a call to office, then so often as a man
removes and so loses his Election, so often he cease to be an officer, and
so often as Election is iterated so often he is made an officer, again, and
then there must be an iteration of Ordination also.

If any should say, That Ordination gives the Essence of the call to be a
Minister, and Election gives the Essence of the call to be their Minister; we
desire they would prove their distinction to be Scriptural; and then it would
follow, That a man may be their Minister, before he be a Minister, for he may
have Election before Ordination, Act. 6. ver. 5, 6. and also, then a man may be
a Minister, an officer, and yet not be their Minister, or have none that he can
warrantably challenge a power over as an officer, or require obedience from,
toward him as an officer; for he may lose his relation to the particular
Congregation he was over, and all Congregations, either because they have
Pastors of their own, or upon other accounts, may deny him leave or liberty to
put forth acts of office amongst them. It is contrary not only to those rules
that require duty from them as officers, Act. 20. 28. but also contrary to the
very nature of office, which consists in a being over some or other; in such
a case there must be overseers and yet none to be overseen, etc. we conclude
therefore that the Essence of the call to office does consist in election and
not in Ordination.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein is proved that Ordination does not so belong to a Presbytery, but that
a Church or the people may in some cases lawfully act in it.

Our Brethren proceed to a Third Assertion, viz. That Ordination Jus Divin.
Min. p. 170.
of Ministers ought to be by prayer, fasting and imposition of hands, And their
chief drift in this, is to prove, that Ordination ought to be with imposition
of hands.

And because we have spoken briefly to that already, and showed that it is like
laying on of hands was, of extraordinary use, for the conveyance of gifts, or
only an indifferent significant Ceremony to declare who the party was, that
was solemnly ordained, and so may without sin be omitted, or the end of it may
be attained without its use; by some other sign it may be declared who the
person is; also because themselves do not assert it to be any more then an
inseparable Adjunct to Ordination, therefore we shall not spend time about
this, only take a Rule, which may serve as part of an answer to most, if not
all their Arguments for imposition of hands. viz. That it is usual in Scripture
to express things, by that which is neither necessary nor of constant use
about them, So [Chain] is put for bondage and suffering, Act. 28. 20. I am
bound with this chain, Jud. ver. 6. [Key] is put for power, authority,
Government, Isai. 22 ver. 21, 22. [Rod] is put for correction, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
Prove. 13. 24. [The crosse] is put for suffering and persecution, Mat. 16. 24. A
chain is not necessarily or constantly used in bondage; nor a key, in the
exercise of power or Government, nor a rod in correction, nor a cross in
persecution, yet because sometimes such instruments were used in such cases,
therefore the Holy Ghost expresses those things by them: So, though imposition
of hands be neither of necessary, nor of constant use about Ordination, yet the
whole of Ordination may be expressed by it, hence, Paul's forbidding Timothy to
lay hands suddenly, does not imply that it was his duty to lay on hands, or
that he must necessarily and constantly use that ceremony, but that it was duty
to ordain men, which they assert to be the thing notified by laying n of hands,
which answers their second Argument; so the whole work of Ordination may be
comprehended under the ceremony of imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and yet
it may not be of necessary and constant use about it, any more then in the
former instances, the putting a chain for bondage, and key for the whole of
Government, and rod for all correction, and cross for all afflictions, etc.
will imply that they necessarily and constantly belong to them, which answers
their third and fourth Arguments. It is sufficient that imposition of hands was
sometimes used about Ordination to render the whole of it expressed thereby;
but it does not prove the constant use of the ceremony to be necessary, but
only of Ordination, which is the thing signified by that ceremony.

We proceed to their fourth Assertion. viz.

That Ordination of Ministers ought to be by the laying on of the hands of Jus
Divin. Min. p. 181.
the Presbytery.

After a brief explication of the word Presbytery, etc. they come to that which
(as they tell us) they especially aim at in this fourth Assertion, and they
give it under this following Proposition.

Propos. That Ordination of Ministers does belong to Church officers, and not
to a Church without officers. And that Ordination by people without Ministers
is a perverting of the Ordinance, and of no more force then baptism by a
midwife, or consecration of the Lords Supper by a person out of the office.

We shall give some Arguments to prove the lawfulness and validity of the
peoples Ordination, and then answer their arguments against it.

Our Proposition is this,

Pro. That in a Church which has no officer or officers in it, some believers
may lawfully or warrantably ordain, without officers. We say [in a Church that
has no officers] for if a Church has officers in it, they may go before the
Church in Ordination, as well as in Praying on other occasions and Preaching,
etc. that only officers must act in it in such a case is not clear to us, as
suppose a Church has but two officers in it, we do not see any necessity that
the whole work of the day must lie upon them only, but [some believers] i. e.
such as have most of the spirit of Prayer, being desired, may lend assistance;
but whether that may be or not, it is sufficient to our present purpose, and to
any case that necessarily falls out, in the congregational way, if it can be
proved, that when a Church has no officers of its own then some believers
being deputed or chosen thereunto by the Church may ordain, without the
necessary concurrence of any officers.

And we say some believers [may] ordain without officers, not [must] for we do
not reckon Ordination an act of Government, and therefore Churches may (for
ought we yet see) hold communion each with other in it, as well as in solemn
prayer upon upon any other occasion, and so officers of other Churches may act
in it, yet not qua officers, but qua gifted, and men gifted may without any
officers, ordain; for it is a matter wherein the Church has its liberty who it
will depute thereunto, when it wants officers, and it is not necessarily
confined to officers, as if none else might act in it, If a Church has
officers, the Law of their relation to the Church puts them under
obligations to go before the Church in Ordination, as well as in other duties
as Preaching, administering of the Sacraments, etc. and therefore where officers
are in a Church, they act as officers in Ordination as well as they do in
prayer upon other solemn occasions, wherein undoubtedly other Christians
eminently gisted may act in Prayer, yet do it not as officers.

This is our sense of the question, yet because our brethren do account
Ordination to be an act of Government, yea an eminent act of jurisdiction,
therefore if in some of our Arguments may seem to speak of Ordination as an act
of Government, and of officers as officers, yet we do not grant it, but rather
prove our sense of it, by denying it in that sense which they plead for it in.

This being premised we proceed to our Arguments.

Argu. 1. Whatsoever would necessarily and unavoidably infer Ordination to be
unattainable, that is contrary to sound doctrine, and is not to be asserted.
But that some believers may not lawfully or warrantably ordain without officers
in a Church that has no officers in it, that would necessarily and unavoidably
infer Ordination to be unattainable. Ergo, That some believers may not lawfully
or warrantably ordain without officers, in a Church that has no officers in
it, is contrary to sound Doctrine, and is not to be asserted.

The major none can deny who plead for Ordination as an ordinance of Christ
still continuing; for if it be of Christ's appointment doubtless he has
provided a way wherein it is attainable.

The Minor we prove thus;

Because there are no officers on earth authorized or appointed by Christ to
ordain (in case a Church has no officers in it) any more then believers
without officers, and therefore if believers without officers may not ordain,
then no more may any officers (for one is as much warranted as the other) and
so Ordination is unattainable.

That no officers on earth are authorized or appointed by Christ to ordain in
such a case, any more then believers without officers we prove, because such
officers must be authorized or appointed by Christ to ordain either by general
Gospel rules which speak nothing of Ordination it self, but only of such acts
as it consists of, and who may perform these, and those general rules will
warrant believers and authorize them to ordain as much as officers, for
believers may use Prayer upon special occasions without officers, and are as
well allowed to exercise themselves thereunto as any officers. Or else such
officers must be warranted to ordain in such cases by the special Rules and
examples which are left in the Gospel about Ordination, and these do not limit
Ordination to officers (in case a Church has no officers in it) nor warrant
them to ordain any more then believers without officers; For, either they were
extraordinary officers to whom the Rules were given about Ordination, and who
acted therein, and so those Churches where they ordained, were not without
officers, for they were officers in all Churches where they came. Or else they
had an extraordinary call to ordain, and so they will not warrant any ordinary
officers without an extraordinary call to ordain, any more then believers
without officers.

There is not one precept for, nor President or example of any ordinary
officers acting in Ordination (out of the particular Church he is over) upon
any ordinary call in any one Text: that Ordination is spoken of, as will be
evident by examining the several places that speak about it.

In Act. 6. 2, 3, 5, 6. Either the twelve Apostles alone (who were
extraordinary Officers) were the persons ordaining; or the Apostles and the
Disciples together, v. 3. whom we may appoint; [we] i. e. as some think you and
we, as [we] does often include the persons spoken to, as well as the person
speaking, as Ephesians. 2. 5. When [we] i. e. you and we were dead in sins, v. 10.
[we] i. e. you and we Apostles, are his workmanship, etc. and then it belongs
to the people to ordain: however the Apostles were Officers in that Church.

In Act. 13. v. 1, 2, 3. The persons ordaining were Prophets and Teachers: if
it be meant of ordinary Prophets, such as 1 Cor. 14. then it proves that such
as are no Officers may act with Officers in Ordination; if they were
extraordinary Prophets, so might the Teachers be also, for Paul and Barnabas
(who were extraordinary Officers) are reckoned up as some of the Prophets or
Teachers that were in the Church of Antioch, v. 1. and seeing it cannot be
proved that any of them were ordinary Teachers, and if they were, yet they were
in the Church at Antioch, v. 1. hence this place does not evidence that it
belongs to ordinary Officers to ordain in a Church that has no Officers of
its own. And our brethren themselves tell us, that this was by the immediate
appointment of the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost said, separate me, etc. and v. 4.
and they add further, this was an extraordinary thing, and therefore not
sufficient to ground an ordinary practice upon. So that from their own words we
conclude, that the call was extraordinary, and therefore it will not warrant
such persons to ordain, who have no such extraordinary call thereunto.

In Act. 14. 23. Our brethren say, the persons that did ordain were Paul and
Barnabas, who were extraordinary Officers.

As for 1 Timothy 5. 22. The person spoken to was Timothy, who was an
extraordinary officer, an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5.

As for 2 Timothy 1. 6. Paul was an Apostle. As for Tit. 1. 5. he was an
Evangelist also, (as our brethren grant) because he was sent from place to
place, 2 Cor. 8. 6. 16, 23. 2 Timothy 4. 10. and was to ordain as Paul appointed
him. As for 1 Timothy 4. 14. we see nothing from the word to convince us that any
one in that Presbytery, was an ordinary officer, and though it be usually taken
for granted that it was an ordinary Presbytery, yet we much question it, and
whereas it is often urged to show a necessity of an ordinary Presbytery in
these days for the mannaging of Churchaffairs, and some are ready to say that
an ordinance of Christ is wanting in many Churches because there is but one
Presbyter, no Presbytery; to all such plea's we say, it is a mercy the Lord
has afforded a Presbytery or diverse Presbyters to some Churches; but suppose
a Church, as Corinth, Ephesus, etc. had fix or eight Presbyters, these it will
easily be granted did make a sufficient Presbytery to act in Church Affairs,
but if the Lord added six or eight Presbyters more to the former number, it was
a mercy, yet no ordinance of Christ was wanting when they were but six or eight
in all; nor no new power was given by such an addition as made the number
twelve or sixteen, but only more persons were afforded for assistance in the
use of that power which before fewer had. So if there be put one elder in a
Church, the Presbyterial power resideth in him, and so no ordinance of Christ
is wanting then, and if the Lord adds more Presbyters that there be a
Presbytery in a Church, no new power is given by such an addition, for if these
act in a united way as a Presbytery, they are but Presbyterial acts which are
put forth, and so they are if a single Presbyter puts forth the same acts,
and therefore here is the only difference that we can find; where there is a
Presbytery, more persons use that power which one alone may use; And as one
that laid hands on Timothy (and so joined with other Presbyters in the very
same act that this Presbytery is said to perform,) was an extraordinary
officer, viz. Paul, 2* Tim. 1. 6. So might all the rest in the Presbytery be,
as well as one. It might consist only of extraordinary officers and yet aptly
be called a Presbytery, for they were Presbyters. If the Apostles only
ordained Deacons, Act. 6. yet they might be called a Presbytery or else that
will evidence that it does not belong to a Presbytery only to ordain: and why
may not that be called a Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. though it consisted only of
extraordinary officers, as well as that company, Act. 6. And the word
Presbytery being no where else found but in this place in the new Testament
where it can be supposed to intend any Ecclesiastical Assembly of Christ's
appointment, and fairly admitting of such an interpretation in this place,
hence our brethren are wholly at a loss for a Rule for their Presbyteries.

However our brethren say, that those words by prophecy, do signify the Jus
Divin. Min. p. 167.
moving cause and that which encouraged Paul with the Presbytery to lay hands
on Timothy; and if so, then whether the Presbyters were ordinary or not, the
call to lay on hands (being by prophecy) was extraordinary, and theresore not
sufficient to ground an ordinary practice upon.

And thus it may be seen that none of the special rules laid down in Scripture
about Ordination do either limit and restrain it unto ordinary officers (when a
Church wants officers) or warrant them to be the persons that ought then to
ordain, any more then believers who are no officers. Indeed, although those
special rules do prove that Ordination is an ordinance of Christ still
continuing, and therefore that some persons are to ordain, yet we cannot find
that they hold out at all who ought to be the persons ordaining, for in these
days there are no such extraordinary officers, none that have such an
extraordinary call to ordain, as these had, and therefore unless we look to
general rules (which will warrant believers doing it as well as officers) there
are none on earth that can claim a power to ordain, and so Ordination will be
altogether unattainable.

Object. But they might act as ordinary officers although they were
extraordinary officers, all their acts did not partake of the
extraordinarinesse of their call, and so their acting may warrant ordinary
officers in Ordaining.

Ans. 1. That the act of Ordination was ordinary we grant, but that the
persons, in ordaining acted as ordinary officers only, this we deny: their
acting about Ordination was in part extraordinary as the immediateness of the
call and the nature of the directions, do evidence, 2 Timothy 4. ver. 5. Do the
work of an Evangelist, Tit. 1. 5. and ordain elders in every City as I have
appointed thee. In obeying such exhortations they cannot be deemed to act as
ordinary officers, for to do the work of an Evangelist, and to ordain in every
city, and by the appointment of an Apostle, is that which belongs not to
ordinary officers: they are not Evangelists, and are fixed in their particular
Congregations, and therefore cannot be required to do the work of such an
office as they have not, or to travel from place to place as Titus was; which
makes it evident that there was something extraordinary in their acting in
Ordination.

2. If they acted as ordinary officers, yet that will not warrant officers
ordaining, in case a Church has no Officers, as will appear by our second
Argument.

Arg. 2. In a Church which has no Officer or Officers in it, either some
believers may lawfully and warrantably ordain without Officers, or else some
believers and Officers of other Churches or else Officers of other Churches
only, without other believers, must be the persons appointed by Christ to
ordain, or else in such a case, there is no way laid out by Christ for the
attaining of Ordination.

The last we suppose none that plead for Ordination will assert, nor any that
argue against believers ordaining, for, if Christ has laid out no way in such
a case to attain Ordination, then either such Churches as are without Officers,
must for ever be without them, or else some persons must ordain, who are not
appointed by Christ to do it, and then surely believers may do it as well as
any other.

If some Officers of other Churches, and some believers be appointed by Christ
to ordain, then it does not belong only to a Presbytery to ordain; for,
believers who are no Officers (according to this grant) may act in it; then it
belongs to believers, and is not peculiar to Church Officers to ordain; and
then why are the people cried out against so much for ordaining? or why may not
Officers be blamed as well for ordaining without the people, as the people for
ordaining without Officers? But we suppose they will assert the other, viz.
That Officers of other Churches only, without believers, must be the persons
appointed by Christ to ordain, and let them prove it.

When we say [without believers] we mean without their concurrence in a way of
acting, for our brethren will grant their concurrence by way of presence; they
will give liberty to believers to be present when they ordain, but not to act
in Ordination.

Our Brethren who say, Ordination by people without Ministers, is a perverting
of the Ordinance, etc. let them prove, that it belongs to Officers of other
Churches to ordain, or that Christ has appointed Officers to ordain who are
without that Church, to which a person is ordained an Officer, or else their
Ordination by a Presbytery of Officers of other Churches, is as much a
perverting of the Ordinance, and of no more force (to use their own words) then
baptism by a Midwife, etc. for what can hinder the peoples Ordination from
being lawful, and of validity, but their wanting a Commission from Christ, or a
Gospel Rule to warrant their acting in Ordination? And the Officers of other
Churches are as much without a Commission from Christ, or a Gospel rule to
warrant their becoming a Presbytery, and acting as a Presbytery in ordaining
Officers to Churches that have no Officers, as the people can be.

We have under the former Argument found, that all the Texts which speak about
Ordination, they intimate either the officers that acted in it, or the call to
be extraordinary. Neither is there any one instance, that does certainly prove
any ordinary Officers acting in Ordination in all the New Testament, much less
is there any color for either one precept or president, to warrant a
Presbytery of officers of diverse Churches to be of Christ's Institution, or to
have any allowance from him to act in Ordination. We cannot but wonder that
some should go about to assert, that acts ought to be performed by a
Presbytery, without giving proof that such a Presbytery consisting of the
Officers of diverse Churches is of a Gospel stamp. Surely it should be proved to
be an Ordinance of Christ, before it be asserted what it ought to do.

As for Act. 6. Act. 13. Act. 14. Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 5. either they acted as
Apostles and Evangelists, whose Commission reached to all Churches, or as
Officers in those Churches where they ordained men, and their general
Commission made them Officers in and to all Churches where they became, and
therefore whatever Churches they acted in, they acted not barely as Officers,
as Ministers, but as their Officers, as their Ministers, for Paul says, that
he had the care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. and therefore these
examples will not warrant Officers of diverse Churches to ordain Officers unto
Churches that have no officers.

Because the Apostles and Evangelists ordained in Churches they were officers
to, Ergo, ordinary officers may ordain in Churches which they are no officers
to, surely the inconsequence will be evident.

As for 1 Timothy 4. 14. It is probable it was a Presbytery of extraordinary
officers, however that it was a Presbytery which consisted of ordinary officers
of diverse congregations, there is not a syllable in the Text that way.

1. The Scriptures hold forth neither precept nor president for the necessary
subordination of any Church of Christ, to any society of men without it self,
for any acts of Church Government, as this is by our brethren supposed to be;
it is ordinary for Churches to be without any officers, either by the death or
removal, etc. of those that were seated in them, and if they cannot attain
officers without some officers of other Churches put forth acts of Government
and jurisdiction to make officers for them, that will imply a necessary
subordination of Churches to other societies without them, which is no where
warranted by the Word.

2. There is no Gospel Rule to warrant any ordinary officers in putting forth
any acts of Government, or any Presbyterial acts properly so called, toward
any persons without those particular congregations where they are fixed as
officers: let our brethren produce any such Gospel rule to justify their
acting (both for matter and manner) as Presbyters, as officers toward any
beyond their particular Churches, over which they are made overseers.

They are officers wherever they act, but they do not act as Presbyters to any
out of their particular congregation. If 40. or 100. Mayors, Bailiffs or
Constables meet together, they may be called Mayors, Bailiffs, or Constables,
but cannot act unitedly in any acts of such offices; though they be officers,
and have a lawful authority to act singly, every one within his own precincts,
yet they have no power to act together as such officers; all the Mayors have
not power to act together as Mayors to any one Corporation, all those
Constables have not power to act together as Constables; so Ministers have a
power from Christ to act as officers, as Presbyters in their own congregations,
but if a hundred of them meet, they have not power to act together as
Presbyters, as Officers, to any one congregation. It is not not enough that
they are all Officers of Christ to warrant their acting togethers as Officers,
but they must be commissionated by Christ to act in combination, and together,
as a Presbytery, or else they cannot justify their actings.

There is no Scripture warrant for any other Presbytery, but that only which
is within a particular congregation, and there is no rule to justify a
Presbytery of a particular congregation, in putting forth any acts as a
Presbytery, toward any but the members of that particular congregation where
they are fixed; and therefore some believers may as lawfully ordain, as any
Presbyters in the world, for their power as Presbyters, extends no further
then their particular Congregations, and if they do not act as Elders in
ordaining, then why may not believers ordain without Officers? Diverse of Mr.
Collings Arguments against hearing of men not ordained, we may use here, and
they will conclude much more strongly against calling in Officers of several
Churches, and their acting in combination, or together as a Presbytery in
ordaining Officers for a Church which is without Officers. Such a company of
Officers have no promise made to them in acting as a Presbytery, nor the people
in calling them in for that end, and therefore they cannot pray in faith for a
blessing upon them therein, according to his third Argument. Ordaining Officers
is instituted worship, and Officers of diverse Churches are are not warranted
either by Scripture precept or president, to become a Presbytery, and as a
Presbytery to ordain, and therefore by his fourth Argument, it is sinful.

It is to run out of Gods blessing, for there is no promise made by God to it,
and it is a running upon temptation, because a Presbytery of Officers of diverse
Churches, is no ordinary means of Gods appointment, and therefore to practice
that way, is sinful and unlawful, by his sixth Argument. It is to partake of
other men's sins, for such a Presbytery is encouraged in ordaining, and so in
sinning (they having no warrant as a Presbytery to ordain) by men's coming to be
ordained, and therefore it is sinful by his seventh Argument. And thus it may
be seen what inconveniences the asserting Ordination to be an act of a
Presbytery as such, draws along with it. But if Ordination be no act of
Government, no act peculiar to a Presbytery as such, (which as we conceive it
is not) then a Presbytery may ordain where a Church has one, and either some
believers without Officers may ordain, or the Officers of other Churches may be
called in to ordain, (not as a Presbytery, but as persons meet and able to do
such acts as Ordination consists of) in case a Church has no Officers.

Arg. 3. If some believers who are no Officers may publicly preach, then in a
Church that has no officers, they may lawfully or warranably ordain, without
officers. For there is no Scripture Light to evidence that ordination is so
great a work as preaching, or that it is more limited or restrained to officers
then preaching is. But some believers (i. e. such as are gifted) who are no
officers may publicly preach, as we have largely proved. Ergo, some believers,
in a Church that has no officers, may lawfully and warrantably ordain, without
officers.

Arg. 4. If some believers may (with Christ's allowance) act in other special,
public, Church-works, then also in a Church that has no officers, they may
ordain, unless some special reason can be given against their ordaining, more
then against their doing those works; for the Scripture does not limit and
particularize all the services they may act in. But some believers may (with
Christ's allowance) act in other special, public, Church-works, and there can
be no special reason given against their ordaining, more then against their
doing those other works. Ergo, in a Church that has no officers they may
ordain.

The Minor we prove from Act. 15. 2. They determined that Paul and Barnabas,
and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and
Elders about this question. A Church then has power to choose, call, and
depute, not only officers, but others of their members to act in special,
public services, as occasion is offered, and necessity requires; and this
deputation was to act in a public Assembly, as the chapter shows; and will
our brethren say, that those may act in a Synod, who may not act in ordination?
Nay, the brethren acted in that Synod, v. 22. Then it pleased the Apostles and
Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company to
Antioch, etc. by which it is evident, that a Church of Christ has power by an
occasional choice to authorize some believers to act in special, public
businesses, appertaining to the Church; yea, the brethren acted in making the
very decree it self, v. 23. The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send
greeting, etc. The decree runs in the Brethrens name, as well as in the
Officers name, as the Title shows; and therefore, either our Brethren must
say, that some believers may ordain, or else that men may act in making decrees
in a Synod, who may not ordain, then they will make a Synod inferior to a
classical Presbytery. Neither is it material, that Officers acted in this Synod
as well as Brethren, for Apostles acted in it also, and we may assert, that the
Brethren of Churches may act in a Synodical way, without Elders, when they want
Elders, as well as our brethren may say, that Elders in these days may act in
a Synodical way, without Apostles.

Our Argument therefore may run thus.

Those that may act (as our brethren phrase it) in making decrees in a Synod,
they may ordain. But some believers (who are no Officers) may act in making
decrees in a Synod. Ergo, some believers (who are no Officers) may ordain.

That a Church may design fit persons to perform some special services, we
might evidence, also from 2 Cor. 8. v. 18, 19. Who was also chosen of the
Churches, v. 23. They are the Messengers of the Churches, etc. Let any show any
special reason, why the Churches may not choose and depute fit persons to
ordain, as well as to perform other special and public services, when occasion
is offered.

Arg. 5. Those that give the essence of the call to office, may also give the
adjunct. But some believers without Officers, do give the essence of the call
to Office; Ergo, some believers may give the Adjunct.

The Major our brethren grant, these are their own words; If Election give the
essence to a Minister, and Ordination only Jus Divin. Min. p. 188.
an Adjunct, we see no reason why they that give the essence, should not also
give the Adjunct. It is in the Lords power to limit an Adjunct, more then that
which is essential; but let any prove that in this case any such limitation is
given; if not, then they that may do the greater act, may do the lesser, when
it is about the same matter, and for the same general end; otherwise the
disability to do the lesser, might render the greater act in a great measure
frustraneous as to its end.

The Minor we have proved before, in showing that Election is that which gives
the essence to the outward call to office, and that Election belongs to a
Church: and if Election gives the essence, then Ordination must needs be but
an Adjunct to that call.

Obj. As to what is objected, that if this Argument be valid, it would follow,
that people might ordain their own Ministers, not only when they want Elders,
but when they have Elders.

Ans. 1. This does not deny the Argument, but strengthen it; if our brethren
will grant that, it is more then we ask of them; if the Argument will infer
more then we produce it for, that does not hinder the validity of it, unless it
can be proved that it crosses some Gospel Rule therein.

2. We deny that such a consequence is necessary; for, such a duty is to be
performed by the meetest and ablest persons in a Church, because that tends
most to edification, and it is supposed, that where a Church has Officers,
they are meetest and ablest to go before the Church in prayer, and therefore
they cannot be excused, though we know not, but if that they want help, they
may be assisted by the ablest members. Also, where a Church has officers, they
are chosen purposely to take the charge of the weighty concernments of the
Church, and to be chiefly active therein for the good of the Church, and
therefore by their place, they are obliged to go before it in all its affairs,
which are not by some special word of institution limited unto others.

And even in family-relation, a woman being without a husband, or in his
absence, may go before the household in prayer and other family duties, which
having a husband, it belongs to his place to perform, when she has his
presence.

Arg. 6. If Ordination consists in, or be made up of such acts only, as
believers may undoubtedly perform, and these acts be not limited in their use
upon this occasion, to officers only, then in a Church which has no Officers,
some believers may lawfully or warrantably ordain, without Officers. But
Ordination consists in, or is made up of such acts only, as believers may
undoubtedly perform, and these acts are not limited in their use upon this
occasion to officers only. Ergo, In a Church which has no Officers, some
believers may lawfully or warrantably ordain, without Officers.

The Major is undeniable, if believers may perform all the acts that are used
about Ordination upon other occasions, none can with any shadow of reason
confine those acts here only to Officers, unless they be limited to them on
this occasion, as they are not upon other occasions.

The first part of the Minor we shall prove, by considering all the requisites
unto Ordination. There are but three things on the part of the person ordaining
that can be proved to have been belonging to it. 1. Fasting. 2. Prayer. 3.
Imposition of hands. And we suppose the second, viz. Prayer, is that which it
does consist in, and is made up of, so far as any man does act in it, yet we
shall speak to all.

1. That some believers may fast upon solemn occasions, cannot be denied, Mat.
6. v. 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 7. 5. Nay that they may fast upon this very occasion
of Ordaining officers, will (we suppose) readily be granted, and may probably
be gathered from, Act. 14. 23. Fasting then belongs to believers and not to
officers only.

2. That prayer is a duty which believers may yea ought daily to perform, is
undeniable also; Mat. 6. ver. 6. 9. Jam. 5. 13. 1 These. 5. 17. And that they
may and ought to pray for officers is evident also, 1 These. 5. ver. 25.
Brethren pray for us. The Apostles called upon the believing These alonians to
pray for them, pray [for us;] 2 These. 3 ver. 1. Finally brethren pray for us,
etc. This Epistle is directed to the Church, Chapter 1. 1. and here the brethren
are called upon to pray for officers, yea for extraordinary officers, pray [for
us;] and what should be the end of their Praying? or what should they pray for?
[that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified. Surely this
is the main the chief thing prayed for, in the Ordination of Preaching
officers, that the Lord would make them very prosperous in the work they are
called to, that the word dispensed by them may have free passage. Let any prove
any greater end of prayer in Ordination then this is. And if believers may pray
for the same end that men do in ordaining officers, what substantial difference
is there between this and acting in Ordination? indeed this is a daily work,
and that a solemn set day for the same work; that ushereth them into the work
of their office; this is constantly to be performed whilst they are in their
work; but why believers may not act in prayer for their officers upon a solomn
set day, as well as they may every day pray for them, for the very same ends
that such a set day is intended for, we find not.

And by this we see cause to think that the Apostles had no such low esteem or
account of the prayers of the people, as some have, Heb. 13. ver. 18. Pray for
us; hence one well observes that the greatest Apostle has need of the prayers
of the meanest Christian, and may be helped thereby, Act. 12. ver. 5. Peter
therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the
Church, unto God for him, ver. 12. many were gathered together praying. Not the
officers only, but the Church prayed; and not distributively, but
collectively, many prayed together; here is public prayer by the Church for an
officer under persecution, and why may not believers as well pray together for
an officer at his Admission into his work? By this it appears that the people
may perform the substantial act of Ordination. viz. Prayer, and that for the
very same end that it serves to in Ordination.

3. That imposition of hands (if still continuing) may be used by believers; we
might wave this, because it is so questionable whether by the will of Christ it
be still to continue or not? but if it be of use about Ordination, then
believers may lay on hands also. This appears

1. Because imposition of hands at the utmost can be but an Adjunct to
Ordination; our brethren in their Arguments for it, yet do not assert it to be
any more then an Adjunct, neither is there any Scripture evidence that it was
any more, in the Primitive times. And therefore, the people may lay on hands,
for our brethren tell us, that they see no reason, why they that give the
Essence, should not also give the Adjunct. The people (as we have proved) may
give the Essence of Ordination, viz. Prayer, Ergo, They may give the Adjunct,
viz. Imposition of hands.

2. Because the people did with Gods allowance lay on hands in old Testament
days, Number 8. ver. 10. And thou shall bring the Levites, before the Lord, and
the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites.

This Argument will be of the more weight because, as our brethren assert,
imposition of hands is not a proper Gospel duty, never used but in the new
Testament, but is a Rite and ceremony borrowed from the old Testament, etc.
from hence we infer, that we have more reason in this then in other matters to
look to the old Testament for a warrant about the use of it, especially in a
case where the new Testament does not clearly direct us, (as must needs be the
case when a Church wants officers) because it was borrowed from the old
Testament; neither can a National Church or other old Testament orders be
inferred from our using this Argument, because it cannot be proved that
National Churches, etc. are by Christ made Gospel institutions, as imposition
of hands is, if it be continuing. Says Master M^^ther, An example in the old
Testament of a Mr. Mather of the power of Synods, p. 95.
practice not abolished in the new as Ceremonial, typical, or of some peculiar
reason specially concerning those time, and (...), but of moral equity and
reason* such an example we think a sufficient warrant unto us for the like
practice upon the like occasion in these days, etc.

And they that were appointed to say hands on the Levites were the children of
Israel, as the Text expressly says, And as Master Mather also observes this
term is used in the ninth verse immediately preceding; and in the eleventh
verse immediately following, and fifteen or sixteen several times in this
Chapter, Number 8. and yet of all these not so much as one, where it can be
understood of the elders and officers as such, but is used to signify all the
Congregation as he rightly thinks. The people might lay hands on officers in
old Testament days, from whence the Rite is borrowed, Ergo, The people may lay
hands on officers in new Testament days (if the Rite be still of use) in case
a Church has no officers in it.

Our Brethren object several things against this, which we shall briefly answer.

Objeb. 1. Here Aaron and his sons were present, and if it proves any thing, it
proves that the people may Ordain, where there are elders.

Answ. If it will prove that the people may impose hands when elders are
present, then much more when they are wanting. This is not against our
assertion, but more for it, and much against our brethrens principles.

Object. 2. The children of Israel were commanded by God immediately to lay on
hands upon the Levites. But in the new Testament we meet with no such command
laid upon the people. We read that Timothy and Titus and the Presbytery are to
lay on bands, but not a word of command for the people.

Answ. 1. The command was immediate to Moses, but not immediate to the children
of Israel, Number. 8. ver. 5, 6. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, take the
Levites, etc. verse. 10. And thou shall bring the Levites before the Lord, and
the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites.

The command was mediate to the children of Israel i. e. by Moses. Thus
whosoever the persons be, whether officers or the people, that in new Testament
days are to ordain and lay on hands, they are commanded by God to do it, as
immediately as the children of Israel were here to lay on hands upon the
Levites, for the Lord gave forth those commands immediately to the Apostles as
he did this to Moses; and therefore this objection will as much deny that
officers may ordain or impose hands on officers, as that the people may do it.

2. If the children of Israel had been commanded by God immediately to lay on
hands upon the Levites, yet seeing this was the first institution of the
Levites office, it would not deny it to be a pattern: For, the institution of a
new office must be given forth by the Lord immedediately to some persons or
other.

3. If imposition of hands was used in old Testament days by the people, and in
new Testament days, there can be shown no repeal of that Rule by which they
did it, then they may still use it. Let any show a repeal in the new Testament,
if they can. We read that Timothy and Titus and the Presbytery laid on hands,
but at the utmost that can only prove an enlargement of the power, or that
more persons may do it, it does not prove that the persons who formerly did it,
now may not do it. It can only show that some officers may lay on hands, it
does not show, that the people (who formerly might) now may not lay on hands.

Object. 3. When it is said that the children of Israel laid on hands, it is
not imaginable that all the Israelites did put on hands, but it was done by
some chief of them in the name of rest, etc.

Answ. That is sufficient to our purpose, for so some of the chief men, in a
Church; some of the most eminent believers may lay hands on. Officers in the
name of the rest; we do not say that every member in a Church must lay on hands.

Obj. 4. The Levites were taken by God in stead of the firstborn, as appears,
Numb. 8. 16, 17. and hence it was that the children of Israel, that is, the
first born of Israel, were to lay on hands upon them, for the Levites gave an
atonement for them, and were offered up to the Lord in their stead, and as the
Rabbis say, every first born laid on hands on the Levite that was for him;
which if it be so, will afford us two other answers to this Text.

1. The children of Israel had not only a special command, but a special
reason also for what they did. And wherefore this example cannot be made a
pattern for New Testament practice.

2. That this laying on of hands upon the Levites, was not for them to set them
apart for the service of the Lord, but rather a setting them apart for a
sacrifice unto the Lord. It was the command of God that the children of Israel
must put their hands upon the sacrifices they did offer unto the Lord, etc.

Answ. 1. That the firstborn only, did lay hands on the Levites, is not
proved. It is true, they were taken instead of the firstborn, but it was the
Lords command that warranted the persons to lay hands on the Levites, Numb. 8.
10. and that runs in general to the children of Israel, and therefore did not
authorize the firstborn, more then any other persons to do it. Hence,

2. If the firstborn did lay hands on the Levites, it was not by virtue of any
office, but in the name, and by the appointment of the children of Israel, for
the command did run to them in general.

3. If the children of Israel had laid their hands upon the Levites, upon the
account of that command of God, which required their putting hands upon the
sacrifices they did offer, then every man of them must have laid hands on them,
for so that command injoyneth, Levit. 1. v. 2. When any man of you shall offer,
etc.

V. 4. [He] shall lay his hand upon the head of the burntoffering, etc. Not a
substitute, not another for him, but [he] every one to whom the offering
belonged, ought to impose hands upon it himself: and this would overthrow their
third objection, which says, It is not imaginable that all the Israelites did
put on hands, etc. and also this denies that it was only the firstborn that
did impose hands, and so destroys a great part of this fourth objection.

4. It is not proved that this laying on of hands upon the Levites was a
setting them apart for a sacrifice unto the Lord, and therefore the objection
is altogether groundless: we do not read that hands were to be imposed on all
sacrifices or offerings, no not on the firstborn, in whose stead the L^vites
were taken; neither do we remember that the people were to impose hands on any
but the burnt-offering, Levit. 1. v. 4. He shall put his hand upon the head of
[the burnt offering] and it shall be accepted for him, to make atonement for
him; other Sacrifices Aaron and his Sons, or the Elders, etc. imposed hands
on, when that ceremony was used about them at all. And that the Levites were
not such a sacrifice, the very name [burnt offering] will truly evidence.

Nay, it is plain, that the end of their offering before the Lord was, that
they might execute their office, Numb. 8. v. 11. And Aaron shall offer the
Levites before the Lord, for an offering (not of the firstborn only, as our
brethren would have it, but) of the children of Israel, (not as their
propitiation and atonement, or as a sacrifice, but) that they may execute the
service of the Lord; so v. 15, 16. They were indeed to make atonement for the
children of Israel, but not by offering sacrifices for the peoples sins (for
that was done by the Priests only), nor by being a sacrifice to make atonement
for them, (because no such end of Aarons offering them up is proved, and
another end is mentioned, v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 21.) but by their other service in
the Text, and this the words following do confirm, [That there be no plague
among the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the
Sanctuary]. Their making atonement was after they were offered, not by being
offered for an offering unto the Lord; And by many verses it is plain, that
their setting apart was for the service of the Lord, v. 11, 15, 19, 21, 22. and
therefore the objection vanishes.

Our brethren observe, That notwithstanding this imposition of hands, the
Levites were not thereupon invested into their office, it was Aarons waving of
the Levites, and separating them from among the children of Israel, that did
constitute and make them Church Officers.

If this be fully granted, nothing is gained against us, for we are far from
thinking that Ordination does constitute or make Church officers, much less do
we imagine that imposition of hands does it. But from hence we gather thus
much, That it was not the intendment of imposition of hands, in Old Testament
days to confer an office; and therefore seeing the ceremony was borrowed
thence, it is very unlikely that in New Testament days it should be intended
for such an end.

And thus we have proved the first part of the Minor of our sixth Argument,
viz. That believers may undoubtedly perform all the acts which Ordination (so
far as any man acts in it) does confist in, or is made up of.

The second part of the Minor, viz. That these acts are not limited in their
use upon the occasion of Ordination, to Officers only; we prove thus, because
none of the Texts which speak of Ordination do limit it to Officers only, let
our brethren prove any such limitation, and unless they can do that (which we
suppose they never can) it will necessarily follow, That in a Church which has
no Officers, some believers may lawfully or warrantably ordain, without
Officers. If they may perform the same acts upon other occasions, and they be
not limited and confined to Officers upon this occasion, then they may perform
them here also. And for the clearing of this, that there is no such limitation,
we shall examine briefly our brethrens Arguments against Ordination by the
people, without Ministers.

They tell us, That they might argue from what is recorded by Jewish Jus Divin.
Min. p. 184.
Writers, concerning the custom of creating men members of their great Council
or Sanhedrin; and they tell us, That when a Successor was to be provided for
Moses, God commands him to take Joshua, and lay his hands upon him, etc. and
accordingly it was done, Numb. 27. 18. And so for those seventy Elders, it is
certain from the Jewish Writers, that the succession of these was continued
through all ages, by their creating others in the place of those that died, by
this ceremony of imposition of hands, etc.

To all which we answer,

1. That these things (except that of Moses) are not recorded in Scripture (as
themselves confess) and therefore are no cogent Arguments to evince the
necessity of such a succession.

2. The use and end of Imposition of hands by Moses on Joshua, was, the
conferring of gifts, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. And Joshua the S^n of Nun, was full of the
Spirit of wisdom, [for] Moses had laid his hands upon him, etc.

3. We may far better argue for the peoples imposing hands on Officers, from
their laying hands on the Levites, then they can for Officers doing it, from
Jewish Writers.

4. If such a line of succession be necessary, how can any in these days prove
their own standing to be legitimate, for we are persuaded they cannot evidence
that this line of succession has holden all along from the Apostles days,
until themselves were ordained; and if it were ever broken, they are as ill as
ordained by the people, for then some unordained persons did ordain those that
derived Ordination to them. But they wave this way of arguing, and would fetch
four Arguments from Scripture against the peoples ordaining, without officers.

Obj. 1. From the constant practice of the Church of Christ, as it is set down
in Jus Divin. Min. p. 185.
the Apostolical Writings. We challenge any man to show any one Text in all the
New Testament for the justification of popular Ordination. We read of
Ordination by Apostles, Act. 6. Act. 14. and by Prophets and Teachers, Act. 13.
and by Evangelists, Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 22. and by a Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
but for Ordination by the people, we meet not at all with it; may we not say to
such Churches that usurp upon this work, as it is said, Mat. 21. 23. By what
authority do you these things? and who gave you this authority?

Answ. 1. There is not one example amongst all these alleged, which proves
that ordinary Officers ordained ordinary Officers; If Apostles ordained, Act.
6. Act. 14. and Evangelists, Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 22 these were extraordinary
Officers; and so were some of those Teachers, Act. 13. 1. as Barnabas and Saul,
and so might all the rest be; however the persons ordained, and the call to
ordain, was extraordinary, v 2 the Presbytery is not proved to consist of
ordinary Officers, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and however it was an Evangelist that hands
were imposed upon, and the call to it extraordinary (as we have showed); so
that our breathren cannot find an example of ordinary Officers ordaining
ordinary O^ficers, amongst any of these instances; and therefore they are at as
great a loss for an example of their practice, as the people are for an example
of theirs in ordaining.

2. None of these examples do speak of Ordination in a Church that is without
Officers: we may grant that where a Church has Officers, they may ordain, but
the question is, whether the people may not ordain without Officers, in a
Church that has no Officers in it? Not one of the Texts alleged do give us
an example of Ordination in a Church that had no Officers, no Presbytery in it.
The Apostles were Officers in all Churches where they acted in Ordination, and
so Evangelists, and so the persons ordained by them, received Ordination from
such as were Officers in the same Churches where they were ordained; and it
cannot be proved that the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14. consisted of ordinary
Officers of diverse Churches.

We may turn our brethrens own words upon themselves; We challange any man to
show any one Text in all the New Testament, for the justification of Ordination
by a Presbytery consisting of ordinary Officers of any other Churches; besides
that, where the person ordained is an Officer. And may we not say to such a
Presbytery that usurpeth upon this work, as it is said, Mat. 21. 23. By what
authority do you these things? and who gave you this authority? so that still
our brethren are at as great a loss to warrant their practice out of the Word,
as the people can be.

3. We have given diverse Scriptural Arguments to prove, that in such a case the
people may ordain without Officers, and so we have answered the challenge.

4. None of these Texts do limit Ordination to Officers only, and therefore
they speak not against the peoples ordaining, without Officers: If ten or
twenty examples could be given of Apostles and Evangelists, yea, and ordinary
Officers ordaining, yet these could but conclude Affirmatively, that officers
may ordain, they would not conclude Negatively, that none but Officers must
ordain: as, there are many examples in the New Testament, which show, that
professing believers and repenters were baptized, Mat. 3. 6. Acts 2. 41. Acts
8. 12, 37, 38. Act. 18. 3. but they are far from concluding, that none else
may, for then no Infants might be baptized: So here, because Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Teachers, and a Presbytery did ordain; to say, Ergo,
none else may ordain, or therefore believers may not ordain without Officers,
the consequence is seeble.

If Apostolical practice be of the nature of a Gospel injunction to us in
ordinary actings, yet it must be affirmatively only, that some persons may in
such cases act in the same duties, but it does not hold negatively, that no
other person may in other cases act therein. We may argue as strongly from the
Texts against ordinary officers ordaining in a Church that has no officers in
it, as they can against believers ordaining without officers, it they will
conclude negatively from them as thus, we read of Ordination by Apostles, by
Prophets and Teachers, by Evangelists, by a Presbytery, upon an extraordinary
call, and in the Churches where they were officers; but for Ordination by
ordinary officers we do not certainly read of that, and for Ordination by
ordinary officers upon an ordinary call, or in Churches that had no offic^rs in
them, we meet not at all with it; and therefore as well may we conclude hence
that ordinary officers may not ordain in such cases, as they may that believers
may not, without officers; for there is as little spoken of the one as of the
other in those Texts, and therefore they can gain nothing by this Argument.

Obj. 2. Ordination by the people is not only not written in Scripture, but it
is against the Scripture. For to what end and purpose should Jesus Christ
appoint officers extraordinary and ordinary, for the doing of that work, which
the people themselves may do? to what purpose did Paul and Barnabas go from
place to place to ordain elders? why was Titus left in Crete to appoint elders
in every city? might not the people say, what need Paul leave Titus to do that
which we can do our selves? Frustra fit per plura, etc.

Answ. 1. In this time of the first plantation of Gospel Churches,
extraordinary helps were necessary for the giving a knowledge of that Gospel
order which Christ would have observed in his Churches; and as Physical rules
may be known in the Theoretical part, and yet it is needful to have direction
in and about the practical part; so when the Apostles had converted people to
the faith, it was needful that they or Evangelists, etc. should give them a
knowledge of Church order, what Officers they should have, and also direct them
how to put in practice such Gospel Rules as are left about the attaining of
Gospel Officers, and although Paul, and Barnabas, and Titus, had not acted at
all in the Ordination, yet their going from place to place had not been
unnecessary, because their guidance and direction was advantageous in coming up
to Gospel order.

2. We might as well say, to what end and purpose should the people ordain in
those days, when there were Apostles and Evangelists, who might (by their
office) go from place to place, and ordain? many works that men lawfully may
do, yet if others be put in trust to do such things, they say to what purpose
should we act in them, when they need no help, we will not take the works out
of their hands; yet this hinders not acting in them, when help is wanting,
which is the case when a Church is without Officers.

3. It is not proved, that the principal or chief end, of Christ's appointing
Officers, either extraordinary or ordinary, or of Paul and Barnabas in going
from place to place, or of Titus in staying at Crete, was to ordain Elders;
that was but a little parcel of their work, whereas our brethren speak of it as
if it were the chief intendment of their journeyings too and fro. And unless it
were their main business (which cannot be proved) what color of reason is
there in it against the peoples ordaining? because Paul and Barnabas went about
confirming the souls of Saints, etc. Act. 14. 22, 23. and ordained Elders in
some Churches in their journeyings, and because Titus was left at Crete to set
in order things wanting, Tit. 1. 5. and where they were without officers, did
ordain elders, therefore it was to no end and purpose that they went from place
to place, or that Titus stayed at Crete, if the people themselves might ordain.
Who will not discern the weakness of such an Argument? it may easily be
answered, that if they had not ordained one elder, or if the people had
ordained all in their presence, yet there were other necessary ends and
purposes that they were sent from place to place about, viz. to Preach the
Gospel and confirm the Saints, etc.

4. Christ has appointed officers to do some works, which others may do who
are no officers, and yet it was not in vain, or to no end and purpose that
officers were appointed to do them: officers are appointed to visit sick, the
Jam. 5. 14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the Church,
etc. and yet will any say, to what end and purpose are elders appointed to
visit the sick, if others may be called for, and may visit them? will our
brethren say here, frustra fit per plura, etc. There might be some officers its
like in some of those Churches where they ordained elders, and Paul and
Barnabas Preached where they went, but will any say, to what purpose did they
Preach, if the officers that were before in those Churches did Preach? frustra
fit per plura, etc. This Argument would be as strong against Apostles and
Evangelists Preaching, where officers were who might Preach, as against the
peoples ordaining without officers.

The Apostles and other officers might be appointed to do it, and yet the
people might have liberty to ordain in a Church without officers, and we can
find no Scripure that this will be against.

Object. 3. All that is written in the Jus Divin. Min page 186.
Epistles concerning the Ordainers, and the qualification of the ordained, etc.
is all written in the Epistles unto Timothy and Titus, who were
Church Officers. In the other Epistles which were written unto the Churches,
there is no mention made of these things, which does abundantly prove unto us,
that the work of Ordination is a work belonging to Ministers and not to the
people.

Ans. 1. It is usual to direct charges unto officers, when yet the duties
required are to be performed by the people, at least when their concurrence
with the offices is called for in coming up to the duties; so Rev. 2. the
Epistles are dedicated to the Angels of those Churches, and yet our brethren
grant that they are to be understood as meant of the whole Churches, as
appears, Revel. 1. 11. Revel. 2 ver. 7. 11, 17. So, although those charges be
directed to Timothy and Titus, yet as Master Hooker observes, It never was
intended they should act them alone, etc.

Either these things were to be acted by Timothy and Titus with company, and
then, why not by the people as well as by officers? there is as little mention
made of the concurrence of officers as of the people; and if we fetch the Rule
for it from other Scriptures, then the qualifications of officers, being laid
down in those Epistles, as they were before the people to regulate their
Election, Acts 6. ver. 3. hence we may safely conclude, that the people are
intended, and are to be acters in following these charges as well as officers.

If Timothy and Titus were to act them alone, then they are written to them as
Evangelists, or else it must be granted that it belongs not to a Presbytery
only to ordain; one Presbyter may do it, and if to them as Evangelists, then
they are no Presidents unto us.

2. All may aptly be written to Timothy and Titus, although they acted not at
all in the Ordinations, because they were to give directions unto others how to
act in them. They might be directed to them, because they were to see the
things done, although many of them were to be done, not by themselves, but by
others hands, as Titus 1. 5. Surely Titus himself was not alone, nor with
officers, to set in order all things that were wanting. If Deacons were
wanting, was Titus and other officers only to act herein? surely, the people
were to choose them, according to Acts 6. ver. 3, 5. and therefore the things
written about, were not to be acted only by Church Officers, but some of them
by the people, with the guidance and direction of these officers which they
had. So 1 Timothy 2. ver. 1, 2. I exhort, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for Kings
and for all that are in authority, etc. will any say, that only Church
officers are to pray for Magistrates and those in Authority? surely such
Subjects as are no Church Officers may pray for their Governors, as well as
for other men, and yet this charge is given to Timothy, as well as that about
Ordination, 1 Timothy 2 ver. 9. 11. In like manner also, that women adorn
themselves in modest apparel; let the women learn in silence with all
subjection. This charge is given to Timothy also, as well as that about
Ordination, and yet the things given in charge were to be acted by women, not
by Church officers; but Timothy was to give forth directions unto women to put
them in practice.

By all which it is evident, that the writing to Timothy and Titus (who were
Church Officers) about Ordination, does not prove that the work of Ordination
belongs to Ministers, and not to the people; for in the very same Epistles,
the Apostle writes to Timothy and Titus about other matters, which undoubtedly
were to be acted by the people, and cannot be restrained to Church Officers. It
is also considerable, that it is said, Tit. 3. v. 15. Grace be with you [all]:
and therefore more then Titus or Church Officers, even all the Saints in those
places where Titus was, are written to. And Tit. 2. v. 15. These things speak
and exhort, 1 Timothy 4. v. 6. If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these
things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ. Whence we conclude that
the design of the Apostle in directing these Epistles to Timothy and Titus who
were Church Officers, rather then to Churches, was not to restrain the acting
of those matters contained in the Epistles unto Church Officers, but to excite
Timothy and Titus to an exhorting and putting such in remembrance to whom it
belonged, to do them: and what is written about Ordination, may be acted by the
people, as well as other matters in the Epistles, and the writing of them to
Timothy and Titus, will not forbid the one more then the other. If no other
special reason can be produced out of the Epistles themselves, we must have
recourse unto other Scriptures, to find out to whom it belongs to ordain, and
what is the use of these qualifications which are required to be in Officers,
and we find that they are to regulate the peoples Election as well as
Ordination, Act. 6. 3, 5. Some things are written to them as Evangelists,
others to them either as Christians or as Officers, to give directions about
the acting of them, and are to be acted by Christians who are no Officers; let
it be proved that the rules about Ordination are to be put in practice by
Officers only. They might hold forth, that some Officers might ordain, and yet
be far from holding forth, that the people may not Ordain.

Object. 4. From the nature of Ordition. It is a potestative and authoritative
Jus Divin. Min. p. 186.
Mission. It is an eminent act of jurisdiction, not only confirming a Minister
in that office which he had before by Election, but conveying the very
office-power of preaching and administering the Sacraments. It is that which
gives the essentials of the Ministerial call; and therefore by the rule of the
Gospel it belongs to Officers, and not to private persons. The Scripture does
accurately distinguish between Churchrulers, and private believers, Heb. 13.
17, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Private persons can with no more lawfulness convey
power to another, to administer the Sacraments, then they can themselves
lawfully administer the Sacraments. Church Power is first seated in Christ the
head, and from him committed to the Apostles, and from them to Churchofficers.
And they alone who have received it from the Apostles can derive and transmit
it to the other Ministers, etc.

Ans. 1. We deny that Ordination is a potestative and authoritative mission. We
have shown that there is a vast difference between mission and Ordination.

2. We deny that Ordination is any act of jurisdiction at all; much less is it
an eminent act of jurisdiction: They would prove that the people may not
ordain, because ordination (say they) is an act of jurisdiction, and that it is
such an act, they have not proved, and therefore the Argument falls of it
self.

What they have added, is far from proving it, as appears by what follows.

3. We deny that Ordination conveyeth the Officepower of preaching and
administering the Sacraments, or that it gives the essentials of the
Ministerial call, the grounds of this denial we gave before.

4. If Ordination did convey office-power, or gave the essentials of the
Ministerial call, yet that does not prove into be an act of jurisdiction. It is
an ordinary thing for the Freemen of a Corporation to convey office, power, or
to give the essentials of a call to office, to their Bailiffs and other
Officers, and yet the Freemen are no Officers, nor cannot be said to put forth
an act of jurisdiction herein. And as it is without Scripture Proof, that if
private persons may convey power to others to administer the Sacraments, then
they may administer the Sacraments themselves, so it is against the very rules
observed in civil societies, where it is ordinary for such to have a lawful
power to give the essentials unto the call to office, who have no power to
execute the places of those Officers which they make, but ought to be ruled by
that power so communicated. In civil Corporations the Officers are as clearly
distinguished from the people governed, as in Church Affairs they can be, and
yet the persons governed convey the power to the Governors, and this without
any act of jurisdiction, by voluntary subjection; and so in Church Matters the
people convey office-power, not by an act of jurisdiction, but by voluntary
subjection or promising reverence, submission, and obedience in the Lord to
such persons, in things wherein they act according to the Laws of their places,
and the perscriptions given unto Officers by Jesus Christ.

All Church Power is first seated in Christ the head, and some was from him
committed to the Apostles, and some power also is committed to other
Church Officers, but that the derivation of it, is by Ordination, or by any act
of jurisdiction, is not proved; and therefore the Argument is of no force
against the peoples acting in Ordination. Our brethren tell us of some that
renounce and disclaim all Ordination from Ministers, as unwarrantable and
Antichristian, and take it up from the people as the only way of the Gospel.
Who these are of whom they speak, we know not.

If some have renounced Ordination by Bishops usurping power above ordinary
Elders, and others have asserted that the people may ordain in case a Church
has no Officers in it, yet they do not hereby, either renounce Ordination it
self, or all Ordination by Ministers (one of which they must intend by the
Ordinance of Christ, which they say is renounced) and hence they are far from
running upon the evils which our brethren mention, or plunging themselves into
such an inextricable difficulty as to renounce all the Minister; and Churches
in the Christian world, and turn Seekers; and therefore these objections
concern not us.

And now from all the premises we shall conclude (until we receive further
light) that the Scriptures do witness the essence of a call to office to
consist in Election, and that in some cases the people may ordain their own
Officers, and that such as are furnished with preaching gifts and graces, may
exercise them publicly without Ordination.

FINIS.

