Propositions concerning the Printing of the Bible in the Original and other
Learned Languages.
WHereas the former Editions though less perfect, and not so fit for use, have
been Printed the public Charge of Princes and great Persons, and the Charge of
this Work will exceed the Ability of an ordinary person: Whereupon diverse
Persons of Worth have expressed their readiness to join in the Charge of the
Impression, and it is hoped that others who wish well to Learning and Religion
will assist in a Work so much tending to the public good, and Honor of the
Church and Nation, and so free from Interest of all parties, especially
considering, that as the Edition will be much better then any formerly made, so
the price will be much less.

Therefore for the securing of all such as shall promote so good a Work, either
by free gift, or advancing of Moneys to be repaid by Copies, and for the
encouraging of such as shall solicit and stir up others to contribute, these
Propositions are offered, which shall God willing be performed.

1. That whatsoever Moneys shall be raised, shall be paid into the Hands of
William Humble of London Esquire, Treasurer for this purpose, who will be
accomptable for the Moneys received, and will give receipts to every one that
shall pay in any Moneys, whereby they may be assured that the same shall be
employed no otherwise then for the use intended, and not issued out but by
Warrant of such persons as are hereafter mentioned.

2. The like assurance shall be given for receiving of Copies proportionable to
the sums so paid, which shall be put into the hands of some persons
Interested, residing in London, to be delivered as soon as the Work shall be
finished, or otherwise as the several Volumes shall be printed, according as
shall be advised by counsel on the behalf of the subscribers, and this shall be
drawn up into Articles, before any Moneys shall be paid.

3. The Treasurer shall not issue any Moneys, but by Warrant under the Hands of
the Lord Primate of Armagh, D. William Fuller, D. Brune Rieves, D. Samuel
Baker, M. Richard Drake, B. D. or two of them, whereof the Lord Primate, or D.
Fuller, to be one, and shall give Account every six months to four persons
appointed by those that advance, to receive the Accounts of all Moneys
received, or issued out, which shall be showed to all persons interested who
shall desire the same.

4. Those that by free gift or otherwise shall in any considerable manner
further the Work, beside Copies to be given them, shall be acknowledged Patrons
and Promoters of so noble a Work.

5. Those that shall collect and raise any sum by the free contribution of
Persons well affected, shall for every ten pounds have one Copy: and if any
lesser sum of 40. s. or upwards be so raised by any at present, if the said sum
shall be made up 10. li. by equal payments in four six months next following,
he shall have one perfect Copy, and 10 according to that proportion for any
greater Sum.

6. Those who shall advance any sum out of their own estate, shall for every 10
li. have one Copy, and for 50. li. six Copies, and so for any greater sum, and
the moneys so advanced shall for the Eaese and Security of the Advancers be
paid thus: only a fifth part in hand, and the rest in 4 six months, and at
every six months Payment, Account shall be given of the Moneys formerly paid,
and of the Progress of the Work, and then they may also receive such Volumes as
shall be finished, according to the number of Copies due to them, if they
please, they paying another fifth part toward the printing of the next Volume.
And if 50 li. shall be raised by several persons, the sixth Copy shall be to
him that procures their subscriptions.

7. The persons that will assist in preparing of Copies, correcting the Press,
over seeing and managing the work, or otherwise in furthering the Edition, are
D. Stokes, Mr. Whillock, Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Edward Pococke, Mr. Buckley, Mr.
Graves, Mr. Vicars, Mr. Thomas Smith, together with Dr. Walton, and some other
to assist in Prosecution of Business, etc. and if any of them shall be other
wise hindered, some other shall be nominated, for carrying on the work, wherein
the Advice of the L. Primate, M. Seldom, D. Shelden, D. Sanderson, D. Stern, D.
Hammond, D. Fearne, (...) and other learned Men, who have approved the work
shall be desired as occasion shall require.

8. The work shall not be begun till there be enough paid in to finish the
first Volume. viz. the Pentateuch, viz. 1500. li. nor the other volumes, till a
proportionable sum for each be brought in, viz. about 1200. li.

9. It is desired that the first payment of Moneys to be advanced, may be at or
before the first of May, 1653. and if it shall appear there is enough to print
the First Volume, viz. the Pentateuch the work shall be begun as soon as things
needful can be prepared, which is hoped will be within three Months then next
following, and within three Years after, it is hoped the whole work will be
perfected: (two Presses being kept at work.)

10. Whatsoever shall be further reasonably devised or propounded for the
better managing and carrying on of the Works, and securing of all Persons
interested, shall be willingly assented unto.

Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait Stationer, at the lesser North-gate
of S. Paul's Church, London. 1653.

WE whose Names are subscribed, do hereby promise to pay the several Sums by us
underwritten, upon the Propositions for Printing the Bible in the Original and
other learned Languages, according to a Description, and Specimen there of
Printed. Which Sums shall be paid in one or more Payments, according as is
subscribed. Provided that before payment of the said Moneys, it shall be
certified under the Hand of the Treasurer, that the Subscriptions and
Contributions, will amount to such a Sum as will be sufficient for carrying on
the Work, according to the said Propositions: and that such order be taken for
securing the Copies to the Subscribers, as by advise of Council on their behalf
shall be thought reasonable, and just.


