REMERCIEMENT FAIT AU ROI DE LA PART DE L'EGLISE FRANCOISE ET DE L'EGLISE
FLAMANDE DE LA Ville de LONDRES, POUR Les graces que sa Majeste a accordees aux
Estrangers Protestans qui se retirent dans son Roiaume.
Prononce par DAVID PRIMEROSE, Ministre de l'Eglise Francoise, le 19 Octobre,
1681.
Imprime par le Commandment de sa Majeste.

SIRE,
NOus venons nous jetter aux pieds de votre Majeste de la part des Eglises
Froncoise, and Flamande de votre ville de Londres, pour vous temoigner le
profond tessentiment que nous auons de toutes les graces que vous aues faites
aux Etrangers Protestants qui viennent chercher dans votre Empire un asyle pour
leur conscience. Nous en auons, SIRE, vne reconnoissance si sensible que nous
n'auons peu nous abstenir de la fair eclatter jusques deuant vous. C'est a la
verite une grande hardiesse a des persons comme nous d'approcher de votre
Majeste, mais considerans que ce Dieu infini qui a son trone dans le ciel
daigne accepter les remercimens de ses creatures, nous avons creu que vous ne
dedaigneries pas de receuoir les notres, and que vous agreeries que nous
rendions nos hommages a votre clemence.

Dans cette consideration nous prenous la liberte de venir dire a votre Majeste
ce que nous disons part tout que l'on ne peut asses admirer vos bontes, and que
quoi que ne voiant dans le monde person au dessus de vous, vous soies grand
and digne de nos plus humbles respects, ils vous sont pourtant deusd'vnefacon
toute particulere par ce qu'etant si grand and si eleue vousetes eante-moins si
clement and si debonnaire. C'est la, SIRE, soutenir dignement cet eloge de
Bienfaiteurs que Jesus Christ declare que l'on done aux Maistres des Nations,
and celui de Defenseur de la foi qui est l'vn de vos tiltres, c'est la fair
servir la puissance souueraine a la fin pour laquelle Dieu l'a ordonnee, qui
est de procurer autant qu'il est possible le bonheur de tous les hommes, c'est
la ressembler a ce Dieu tres bon and tres grand don't votre Majeste est le
Lieutenant.

Nous vondrions bien pouuoir exprimer plus fortement nos ressentimens, mais les
terms nous manquent, and d'ailleurs nous n'oserions importuner plus long temps
uotre Majeste, nous concluons donc en la suppliant dans vne humilite profonde
qu'a l'exemple de ce grand Dieu qui aim jusques a la fin ceux qu'il a vne fois
aims elle daigne continuer a nous fauoriser de sa protection, and en
protestant que nous sommes dans la resolution de vous render inuiolablement
tous les respects and toutes les soumissions qui vous sont deues par de fideles
subjets, and de prier continuellement ce Dieu supreme par qui les Rois regnent
qu'il veille combler votre Majeste de toutes sorts de benedictions.

Sa Majeste eut la bonte de repondre, JE promets de vous donner toute la
protection imaginable.

A LONDRES Chez GEORGE WELLS, 1681.

THE THANKS GIVEN TO THE KING On the behalf of the FRENCH and DUTCH CHURCHES In
the City of LONDON, FOR The Favors granted by his Majesty to the Protestant
Strangers Retired into his Kingdom.
Spoken the 19th of October 1681, By David Primerose Minister of the French
Church in London.
Printed by his Majesty's Command.
SIR,
WE are come to cast our selves at your Majesty's Feet, on the behalf of the
French and Dutch Churches in your City of London, to testify the profound
Acknowledgments which we have of all the Favors that you have shown to the
Protestant Strangers who are come to seek for a Sanctuary for their Consciences
within your Majesty's Dominions. Sir, We are so deeply sensible of your Royal
Bounties, that we cannot refrain from declaring it publicly to your Royal
Self. Most certainly it is a very great boldness for such mean Persons as we
are to Approach your Majesty; but considering that that Infinite God who has
his Throne in Heaven vouchsafes to accept the Thanksgiving of his Creatures, it
is our hope that your Mjaesty will not disdain to receive ours; and that you
will be favorably pleased with us, in rendering our Homages to your Clemency.

Upon these Considerations we take the Liberty to come here to tell your
Majesty that which we every where declare, that it is impossible for us
sufficiently to admire your goodness; and tho it were only that we beheld in
the World no Person above you, you are most worthy of our most Humble Respects;
yet they are due to you in a manner altogether particular; for that although so
great and so Elevated, you are nevertheless so Clement and Benign. Thus, Sir,
you worthily maintain that Name of Benefactor, which Jesus Christ declares that
we should give to the Lords of Nations; and that of Defender of the Faith,
which is one of your Titles: This is to make use of your Sovereign Power to
that end for which God has ordained it, which is to procure as much as is
possible, the happiness of all Men. This is to resemble the most great and most
good God, whose Vicegerent your Majesty is.

We would more vehemently farther express our acknowledgments, but we want
Words; and besides we dare not give your Majesty longer trouble. Therefore we
conclude, beseeching your Majesty with a most profound Humility, that according
to the Example of that great God, who to the end loves those whom he has once
loved, that your Majesty would be pleased to continue to us the favor of your
Protection, protesting on our side, that we are firm in our Resolution, to
render you inviolably all those Respects and Homages which are due to your
Majesty from the faithfullest of your Subjects, and continually to pray to that
Supreme God by whom Kings Reign, that he would heap upon your Majesty the
abundance of his Blessings.

His Majesty was pleased Graciously to Answer. I Promise to give you all the
Protection imaginable.

LONDON, Printed for GEORGE WELLS, 1681.


