PROPOSALS to Increase SEAMEN for the Service and Defense of ENGLAND.
IT being an undeniable Truth, That the English Navies heretofore, when they
did not require above 10 or 15 Thousand Men, sufficiently ^o Man Them, and had
able Seamen enough to Complete that Equipage; did not use to be Sickly

It will easily be believed, That the Infirmities that have attended our Fleet
these 3 or 4 last Years, have arose from the Nastiness of the many Landmen that
have been sent out of the several Counties, to be put on Board them. For Remedy
whereof, I know no other Right Expedient but the Breeding more Seamen.

A Worthy Gentleman in a late Treatise, offers at a Project for the Manning the
Navy, by Obliging several Persons, under their several Circumstances, to
provide so many Able Seamen for Their Majesty's Service, or else to be subject
to certain Penalties; and they must provide them upon such Terms as they can
agree with the said Seamen; and still these Seamen, in probability, are but the
same, that either would have gone voluntarily on Board, or might have been
Pressed into Their Majesty's Service, and consequently there will be so many
the fewer to go on Board voluntarily, or to be Pressed, which in effect, is but
hiring so many of the present Seamen.

Whereas, I humbly conceive, nothing but a Project to Breed Seamen, well
Executed, will make this Nation Glorious upon the Sea.

I cannot be of the Opinion, as I perceive some People are, That a Ship Manned
with parts Seamen, and Landmen; most of which cannot forbear Vomiting, nor have
the command of their Legs to go upon the Deck and do it over the Gunnel of the
Ship, but empty themselves every way, either between Decks or in the Hold, to
the great Annoyance of all the rest of the Crew, who are hereby exposed to so
many Diseases, as have appeared in the late Years Expeditions of the Royal
Fleets.

But I humbly conceive, That if they had left all the raw Landmen ashore, and
gone to Sea with only their Seamen, and such as were Masters of Sea-Legs and
Sea-Stomachs, they might probably have escaped the Diseases which were bred on
Board by the Nastiness of the others, and consequently have been much better
Manned; wherefore I will humbly offer two Remedies which, I hope, will seem
Effectual.

First, That all Watermen that now by the Institution of their Corporations
must have but one Apprentice, and that not until they have been 7 Years out of
their Time, may take two at least, and take them as soon as they please, after
they are out of their Time; and this, I hope, will be no hardship upon any
Body, because the present Freemen will have the immediate Benefit thereby, and
Widows, who have but one Servant each, and that Servant Pressed into the Fleet,
and consequently are left destitute of Maintenance, until the Ship comes to be
paid off, may take another Apprentice in the mean time to work for her
Livelihood.

And though it is true, that the Apprentices which shall be now taken, will not
be big enough to go on Board the Men of War under 3 or 4 Years, yet these will
serve to Row upon the Thames, whilst a gteat many others, who are now kept at
home, may be spared to go aboard.

Secondly, That all Ships using the Coal-Trade, either to England or Wales,
Coastwaies, shall carry one Landman for Their Majesty's Service, for every
Score of chaldren of Coals that they shall take on Board; these Landmen to be
supplied, either by Pressing, or such as shall voluntarily go on Board to learn
to be Seamen; and after Six Months being on Board, or sooner, if it shall be
thought fit (when they have got Sea-Legs and Sea-Stomachs) to be removed into
Their Majesty's Ships of War for Gromets, to receive 18 s. per Month for their
Pay, at first, until they can do a Seamans Labor, and then to have the Pay of
Able Seamen.

In the mean time to be allowed 4 d. per Diem to find themselves Clothes, and
other 4 d. per Diem to be allowed the Master of the Collier, toward each Man's
Victuals* And (...) Master another 4 d. per Diem, it is presumed that he will be
no loser thereby, because he will carry so many Seamen the less, as will more
than countervail that Charge.

As for Example, It Is a general Custom amongst the Colliers (as I am Informed)
to carry a Seaman to every Score of Coals of the Ships Burden; now a Ship of
16 Score, that uses to carry 16 Seamen at 6 or 7 l. a Man for each Voyage,
which is usually made in 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10 Weeks, having 16 Landmen on Board,
will abate at least 4 of his Seamen, which at 6 l. per Voyage, stands him in 24
l. Whereas 4 d. per Diem toward the Victuals of 16 Men for 10 Weeks, will
amount to but 18 l. 13 s. 4 d. So that if the Voyage prove 10 Weeks long, yet
the Master will be a Gainer, by having the Landmen on Board, 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. and
proportionably more, according to the shortness of the Voyage. Besides, they
will have the Convenience of Defending their Ships against private Men of War,
if they furnish themselves well with small Arms.

Now for the Raising the Money for defraying the Charges of 4 d. per Diem to
each Man for Clothes, and the 4 d. per Diem, which Their Majesty's are to pay
for Victuals.

For as much as the Colliers will have some Advantage by the breeding these
Seamen, as well as their share of the general Benefit that will acrue, by
bringing down the present extravagant Wages of Seamen, when their number
increases Yearly; and that a small Tax upon Coals, is as insensible, as upon
any other Commodity whatsoever.

It is humbly Proposed, That there should be 1 s. per chaldron, London-Measure,
laid upon all Coals shipped off in all the Ports of England and Wales, which
being 420000 chaldren, or thereabouts, per Annum; according to a late
Computation, will raise 21000 l. per Annum, and 1500 Men to be always
Maintained at Sea at 8 d. per Diem, will cost 18249 l. 3 s. 4 d. so there may
be 2750 l. 16 s. 8 d. per Annum, toward the Charges of Management, which I
conceive sufficient, because the Collectors of the Customs, will probably be
contented to receive and pay the Money to the Men, for a Penny in the Pound;
and this Service will require no great Officers; good Boatswains, Mates, and
such kind of Robustick Persons, will be the fittest Agents for this Affair, and
such will think themselves well paid with 40 or 50 l. per Annum, besides their
Charges, which will not be very much over and above the Charges of the
Constables, and such as shall by Warrant of the Justice of the Peace, Impress
and bring down Men to the Ports; where each Agent must have a Boat and Boatmen
allowed at such constant Sallaries as shall be thought convenient by 2 or 3
proper Persons that shall be Constituted, to Direct the Affair; of which
number, the Author of this Proposition desires not to be one, he having already
as much of Their Majesty's Business, under his Care and Management, as he can
possibly Dispatch.

These Two Expedients, being well Executed, in 2 or 3 Years time, there will be
no want of Seamen, either for Their Majesty's Ships, or for Merchantmen; the
last only Supplying Annually 3000 Men, by removing 1500, half Yearly, while the
Young Watermen are growing up: And by this means will be prevented the vast
Charge, at which the Roval Navy lies in Port, every Spring, for want of Sailers
to Man Their Majesty's Ships: Besides, the Cities and Countries will be eased
of a great many Idle Fellows; nor will Lazy, Saucy, Debauched Servants be so
plenty, as now they are. For all which Reasons, if it shall not be thought
convenient to Raise the Money for Breeding up Seamen upon the Coal-Trade, then
it may be worth Consideration, by what other way to raise so small a Sum to
supply a Matter so much for the Nations Safeguard and Advantage.

Neverthel^ss, humbly Submitting to better Judgments.

Note, That Notwithstandi^g, in the foregoing Proposal, the Calculation is
made for the Colliers, to carry after the rate of One Landman for every Score
chaldren of Coals; yet upon Practice it will appear, That they need not carry
above One Landman for every Two Score chaldren, for the Breeding up of but 1500
Men every Six Months.


