A short ANSWER To a book set forth by seven PRIESTS, who call themselves
MINISTERS of the Gospel of Christ; but are plainly discovered to be liars, and
slanderers, and envious of them who are the true Ministers of Christ, who abide
in his doctrine.

With A word to the Reader, To read with understanding, and let the light of
Jesus Christ within judge; for to that in the conscience it is spoken.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the blackspread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. 1654.

A Reply to a book set forth by some Priests about Beverley, whose names I do
find subscribed to it, who says, The light in man before faith is not pure.

Answ. The law is just, holy and good; and what is holy, is pure; what is just,
is pure; what is good, is pure; what is perfect, is pure: which Law is the
Schoolmaster until faith, and after faith is come we are no longer under a
Schoolmaster, and this is witnessed amongst as. And this you Priests about
Beverley, say is not pure. Jos. Bellet, Joh. Pomrey, Paul Glisson, Christoph.
Feake, Jo. Simpsom, Geo. Cockin, Law. wise, I charge you and command you give
over deceiving the people, you seven, who are perfect in iniquity without the
Law of God. And Moses saw Christ, and wrote of him: that which saw him was
pure, and is pure. And here you have showed forth your ignorance and blind
judgment, and not knowing neither Law nor Faith: for the truths sake have I
replied to your book of errors, who is in the light of Christ, which lets me
see the Law, and the Schoolmaster both. And you which say you were not sent
immediately, as the Apostles were, with the immediate which sent them, are you
all judged, Joseph Kellet, John Pomrey, Paul Glisson, Christopher Feake, Jo.
Simpson, George Cockin, Law. Wise, which is seven, perfection, perfect in the
mystery of iniquity, acting against the mystery of godliness, you are the beast
which stands upon the sea with your seven heads, and upon your heads the names
of blasphemy, who are out of the Apostles doctrine and life, that say the light
before faith is not pure, whose mouths are opened with blasphemy against God,
and his Name, and his Tabernacle, which is with men, the light which discovers
sin and evil, you are seen, that such as you might be more manifest with it,
which are manifest now to all the children of light, and the children of the
day; praises, praises be to the Lord God for ever: for that which shows sin, is
eternal, and is pure, and that which is before Faith, is perfect, just, holy,
good and pure, and it is written, The Law is the Schoolmaster till Faith, and
that we own in its place, which is just, holy, good and spiritual: and you
which owns not God, owns not Faith nor the Law to be pure, for the Law has
dominion over a man as long as he lives, which you Joseph Kellet, John Pomrey,
Paul Glisson, Christopher Feake, Jo. Simpson, Geo. Cockin, Law. Wise, have
cleared your selves to be without Law, and Faith, and both, and so you are not
fit to teach others: so it is you that have slandered the innocent to have laid
waste the Scriptures, when you are they that have laid waste the Scriptures
your selves, Christ, the Church, Faith, and Hope, and the Law, which stumbles
at the light: so the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth does return a
righteous judgment upon you unrighteous judges: so in righteousness does he
set the innocent free. To you all, this is the word of God.

This is the word of the Lord to you that have subscribed your names to the
book, whose folly in it (out of you) has appeared, and to be viewed, with the
children of light it is seen, and your nakedness, and where you are who does
conclude the Light before Faith is not pure, and who does say, God does not
send Teachers and Pastors, and Elders immediately forth now, as he did the
Apostles. And here you are concluded to be without the immediate life, as the
Apostles were in, who were sent immediately from God. See the miserable estate
and condition you are in: and with the immediate life you are judged, who have
professed your selves to be teachers to others, and guides to others, which
has gone on in such strains, and presumptuously judges the innocent; but God
who is immediate sees you all, and from him you all have your reward, and your
judgment which is eternal, to that light in your consciences I speak, which
shall be your condemnation eternally which hate it, and stumble at it, and it
will witness me, when the book of conscience is opened, and it you have
condemned.

And to all people that have a love to Christ, which love this light that those
before mentioned do stumble at; it is it that will lead up to witness Faith; it
is it that will lead you up to witness the Anointing; it is it that will lead
you to witness Hope; it is it will lead you to witness Christ the Head* and to
know all the Saints which have unity in the light, and so not to stumble at the
words that proceeds from the light; but with the light waiting upon God the
Father of light, with the light the Scriptures will be opened to you, there is
your teacher, The light, if you walk in it, you will not stumble, but have the
light of life; and if you hate it, it shall be your condemnation eternally. You
shall witness what I speak, for to that in every man's conscience I speak, which
if you love the light that Christ has enlightened you withal, it will guide
your hearts together, to hold the Head; which if you hate this light, you hold
not the Head, and all that ever you act or speak, is in the invention of your
own work: so you are condemned with the light. To the light in every ones
conscience I speak, which shall witness me when the book of conscience is
opened, and all things judged with it and out of it. This is to all them that
the Priests calls brethren, to take heed to the light within them, which Christ
has enlightened them withal, that with it they may see all them, that stumble
at it, and hate it, which are to be condemned with it. To you, this is the word
of the Lord.

Priest. Something in reply to that which you do conclude, as first, to awaken
your souls that are apt to slumber, to take heed of the evil of the times,
pride, covetousness, formality, which these clamor against, which you call
Quakers.

Reply. Here you own their doctrine you call Quakers, and with it you see your
selves, and what state you live in; and yet in Page 52. you say, Go not after
them: has their doctrine stirred you up, and let you see your pride,
formality, and oppression, and slumber? and that which declaims against these,
you say go not after.

Priest. Another false slander that you Joseph Kellet, John Pomrey, Paul
Glisson, and the rest charge upon them you call Quakers, that they bring an
odium upon the glorious affairs of Christ's kingdom.

Reply. This shall stand for your selves, who live in experiences, which the
Minister of Christ taught to forget the things past, and to press forward; and
there you do show that you are raced out from the life of the Apostle, and
lays waste his words.

Priest. Another of your lying slanders is, that you say, They lay waste
Churches, Graces, Scriptures, Principles.

Reply. And in these I charge you, Joseph Kellet, John Pomrey, Paul Glisson to
be liars; for the Churches of the Saints, Graces, Scriptures, Principles we
own; but you slander us, because we deny the Steeplehouse to be the Church; and
the Grace of God we own, which teaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and so it is in the first lesson, That they do come to see with the
light of Christ to deny your Church, your Principle, your Experiences, and so
are not to taste of their doctrine which perish with the using of it; for you
have been the proud and coveto us, that have led silly women captive, which
have been ever learning, but never able to know the truth of you. And some are
moved to come and cry against you, therefore slander them not.

Priest. Another lying slander you bring, saying, They hinder the progress of
the Gospel, by weakening the hands of faithful teachers.

Reply. These are more of your lies, for the progress of the Gospel we own, and
the faithful teachers we own; but such as you Priests, who say you are not sent
immediately, as the Apostles were, we deny.

Priest. You are making a Pharisees confession, you Priests, and are learning
your lesson, how you are apt to slumber, and how you should be stirred up, and
does confess that your people are in deadness of their hearts, occasioned by
formal duties.

Reply. Here you have uttered where you are, which makes people forsake you,
and where one does, ten shall, and see your prayers empty without the Spirit,
and this is to your Pharisees confession of your selves and the people; and
many does see that the Lord is gone out of your public assemblies, and that
Ministry he does not own; for you are such as the Lord cried woe against, as
stood praying in the Synagogues, etc. Mat. 23. and there you are all openly
showed to be none of Christ's sending, neither your Church none of his Body; for
when the Lord has moved some to come to speak after the order of the Saints
Churches and the Scriptures. Some have been stocked, some stoned, and beat, and
prisoned. And how can you say, This is a Church of God, but blaspheme God? but
it is as the Scripture says, Become a cage of unclean birds. And, as touching
the Saints conditions Hope and Faith, I charge you let them alone, and meddle
not with them, for them you know nothing of; for your Faith is vain, and your
Hope shall perish: and to you this is the word of God, who stumbles at the
light.

Priest. And again you say, Take heed of judging Ordinances, as unnecessary or
indifferent things.

Reply. And here I charge you to keep people in blindness, who put no
difference between the Ordinances of Christ, and the Ordinances of Men.

Priest. And again you cavil, because they say, Mind the light in you, which
is Christ, and is pure, and that it discovers every evil: and your Answer to
this is, Whether makes not this the Scripture unncessary, and casts off all
outward teachings.

Reply. O you blind guides! this light which is to be minded, which is Christ,
stablisheth the Scriptures, and it does bring to deny all outward teachers
which is made by man: for, What is the chaff to the wheat?

Priest. And again you Query, Whether this brings not down the glorious mystery
of the Scriptures, and from every rule of duty.

Reply. Here you have declared you know nothing of the mystery of the
Scriptures, but are in your own duties; for the light within, which shows him
sin, and every evil, it does teach him how to pray and watch, and oponeth to
him every mystery of the Scripture, and without it you are all blind, and know
nothing of the mystery, as you make it appear: and you slanderers, do not
incense the people, that we deny the Scriptures; for the Scriptures is ours.

Priest. And in your p. 2. whereof you are tormented, and says, We sit inthe
chair of judgment. I answer,

Reply. God has given us an understanding and judgment, that we are able to
distinguish, praises to his name. We were in your state and kingdom; but the
Lord has brought us out of it: therefore we are able to judge it and you, who
has no judgment but what is false.

Priest. And you are querying, Whether leaving you to be guided by the
conscience, and to have no standing rule whithout you, you say, Whether this be
not to establish Heathens and Philosophy, and you conclude, that the Light is
not pure before Faith.

Rep. Here you have declared, that you neither know Faith nor Light, and are
afraid that that in your consciences should give you that standing rule which
all the Prophets and Apostles had, we have. Christ Jesus says, I am the light
of the world, and enlightneth every one that comes into the word; and you
conclude this light is not pure. And Christ says, He does enlighten every one
that comes into the world; and one he loves the light, brings his d eds to the
light, and does not stumble; and the ohe hates the light, and stumbles at noon,
as you do, which stumbles so much at the light of Christ, which enlightens
every one that comes into the world. But it is that you might appear that you
are them that hate the light, and so hates Christ, and that you might be judged
with all the children of light; and you that stumble at this light, you neither
know God, nor Christ, nor Faith, nor Hope, and cannot preach the Gospel, nor
the Gifts, nor the Words; but only death hears a fame, as Job said, and
destruction; for ^n your p 4. you leave it to the spiritual to judge, and here
you conclude you are not spiritual; and here you are concluded to be judged by
the authority that gave forth the Scriptures; for the spiritual man judges all
things, and the Saints shall judge the world: and you that deny this light,
denies the Father of lights, and the Apostles exercise, who exercised his
conscience toward God and man, and you deny the Scriptures and growth, and the
watching and waiting upon God; for you question Christ's words, do you, who
stumble at the light wherewith Christ has enlightened.

Priest. For you say, If every one that comes into the world has a light
sufficient to salvation, that makes the Scripture the Testimony of God
unnecessary, a revelation of his mind and love, which are nowhere to be found
but there.

Reply. And here I charge you again, to set up the Scriptures before Christ,
who is the love of God to lost sinners; who says, It is nowhere found, but in
the Scriptures. And here you show you are in the state of the Jews, which would
have had life in the Scriptures, and would not come to Christ, but persecuted
him, as you do now them where the life is made manifest, this I say, This light
wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened, it will show the greatest sin, yea,
unbelief, and waiting in this light, which Christ has enlightened, their
salvation is made manifest; but all you that hate this light, you are
enlightened with it, and it shall eternally condemn you: and you give it the
term of a natural light and a moral, which there is no Scripture for, that
speaks of moral, as p. 5. but this light which you stumble at so much, and give
it these terms, with it you shall be condemned: you may as well say, Christ is
moral, which there is no Scripture for: and there the plagues is added to you
for adding your own inventions to that which was given forth from the eternal
Spirit of God.

And whereas you say, But we conceive not how Christ is preached out, but by
them who brings the word of God, whose feet are beautiful.

Here you have showed forth you have no infallible judgment, not the Spirit
that gave forth the Scripture, which judged them that did conceive where you
are, living in your conceivings and terms, the light to be as a moral law, as
you call it; and so with the same eternal Spirit you are judged, for which
there is no Scripture for moral; and so establishes Paganism, and heathenish
Philosophy, and abundance of such stuff you have in your book. And we do
witness the same Christ, as ever was made manifest; and there is no other name
under heaven by which we can be saved. And we see you in the same generation
that crucified him: you who are stumbling at the light, that enlightneth every
one that comes into the world; but it is because your deeds are evil, who
shall be condemned with it, which gave forth the Scriptures.

You say in p. 6. It is by Scripture Light of the Prophets and Apostles, which
once was read or heard, or else how could they know it?

Here you show, that you are in the state of the Scribes and Pharisees, which
read Moses and the Prophets which prophesied of him, and wrote of him, and they
persecuted him, the light which enlightneth every one that comes into the
world. And so do you which hates the light.

And you are speaking of the Spirit that brings to God, and of Faith in Christ.

And you that stumble at the light that Christ, has enlightened every one
withal that comes into the world, You stumble at the Spirit and Faith both,
and hears not the Gospel, but stumbles at the first Principle: and you have
nothing to do to talk of Saints, Ministers, nor of the second Adam, but are of
the first Adam. To that in your consciences I speak, be but honest, and that
will let you see it; and here is a difference between you and the Saints; for
the Saints to whom the Epistles was written, that walked in the light, we make a
difference between you that hate the light, and them that walk in it; for you
that hate the light, take the Saints words, which was declared from the light,
and make a profession of their words; but with the light you shall be condemned
from among the Saints: and to you this is the word of God, and Christ which was
the Light, cried woe against such Pharisees and hypocrites, as you are which
stumbled at the light.

You boasters say, You know no man after the flesh: no, not Christ.

And yet you stumble at the light which enlighteneth every one that comes into
the world.

And you that stumble at this light, stumbles at the foundation Christ, the
Prophets, and Apostles, for this light was in them that gave forth these words,
and so it is the light within that opens them again; and he that walks in the
light, as says our Lord and master Christ, he shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life; and he that owns the light, owns the word, and
does not weaken the authority, as in your p. 4. you say, and this we witness.

And you Priests slander us with a foolish jealousy.

But you that stumble at the light, stumble at Christ the Authority of all the
Scriptures; and you that stumble at the mystery between the Jews and the
Gentiles, which Christ comes to put an end to, the outward oracles of the Jews
to bring in the Gentiles, so the state of Jew and Gentile within you know not,
who stumble at the light. This brings in, and this condemns out.

Priest. And you are talking of mount Sinai, in matters of moral righteousness.

Reply. O ye shameless men, where does the Scripture speak of moral
righteousness? and as touching mount Sinai, silence, for you are not come out
of Egypt, and this is in your p. 5.

Whereas you say, Natural man runs to mount Sinai for righteousness in his
personal obedience, which you say these men put them upon,

Here I charge you, That you know not what you speak; for this lght of Christ
judges down your immediate personal obedience, and selfrighteousness, and
natural-estate, whom the wrath of God abides upon, and the plagues of God, for
that is your due; for mount Sinai you are not come to, and there exhorting
people to the light, is, to bring them to Christ and mount Sion, in the life of
the Scriptures which it speaks of.

Priest. Your speaking of the body of Christ once offered to God at Jerusalem
for an atonement for all.

Reply. This Christ we own, and know him no more after the flesh; and you that
stumble at his light, stumble at Christ, and know him not according to the
flesh; but are in the generation of your fathers that persecuted him.

But you say, If any one destroy your Faith, and make slight the person of
your glorified Savior.

O you hypocrites, what have you to do to talk of a glorified Savior, that
stumble at the light? and what talk you of Faith who stumble at the light? your
Faith is vain, and will fade away; but Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ we own;
and so it is you that trample upon the blood of the new covenant, as in p. 9.

And whereas you say, You do confess God the Father of Lights natural and
spiritual, and that the eternal word lightens every man's candle, whereby man
sees the eternal power and Godhead of God, but nothing of the mystery of the
Father, and of Christ as a Mediator, is seen but only by the children of God.

What a confession and doctrine is this by you? for you confess that man may
see the eternal power and Godhead of God and the Father, and know nothing of
the mystery of the Father and of Christ as a Mediator; and he that knows the
Father knows the Son, and he that knows the Son knows the Fathers, and he has
the one has the other also. And here I charge you in the presence of the
living God to be liars, and know nothing, and see not the Father nor the God
head; can a man see the eternal power and Godhead of God, and know nothing of
the mystery of the Father, and of Christ as a Mediator? but here you show you
know nothing of the eternal power of God* nor the Godhead of God, nor the
mystery of the Father, nor of Christ as a Mediator, who stumble at the light;
but these things we see with the light, which Christ has enlightened us withal,
an witness you to be without; for the Apostle which witnessed the Godhead,
knew the mystery of the Father which the heathens knew not.

And in your p. 10. you say, That the Quakers say, that this light before
mentioned is pure, which Christ has enlightened w thal, and you conclude, that
this light in the conscience is not pure, and says, How does vain man justify
that which God condemns? and would persuade us that nature is not corrupt.

Here again I charge you in the presence of the living God to be liars and
blasphemers: nature is corrupt; but the divine nature is not. And you that
declare and say, That the light of Christ wherewith he has enl ghtned is a
corrupt nature, Here I charge you in the presence of the living Lord to be
liars, and the lie spoke out of the false Prophets mouths, and conclude you all
to be blasphemers, who says, the light of Christ wherewith he has enlightened
every one that comes into the world is corrupt nature and not pure, and says,
God condemns this light of Christ, which is pure, and that is your own
condemnation, the light, and says, Vain man justifies that which God
condemns. Here I charge you again to be liars, for the light of Christ does
condemn vain man, and it is according to the judgment of God, this light, and
this light wherewith Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the
world, shall be your eternal condemnation.

And you are as high blasphemers as ever your Fathers were, who concludes that
the light which he has enlightened withal is not pure, and call it corrupt
nature; but this light, as I said before, condemns corrupt nature, and that
which is not pure, and that you shall eternally witness; for to that which
Christ has enlightened you withal I speak, which shall eternally condemn you,
and witness me, when the book of conscience is opened; you that hate it, whose
deeds are evil, and stumble at it; but to all you that love it and walk in it
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have that light of life, as I said before.

And you say, Moreover they say, the Quakers, That this light discovers every
evil as it arises in the heart.

And your Answer is, That this light does not discover the greatest evil, which
is unbelief.

Here you show your selves to be blind guides indeed, which says, That the
light of Christ does not discover to man the greatest sin, unbelief. And here
we witness you to be liars; for we witness, it shows man all his weakness and
wants; and we witness waiting, in this light of Christ we see more light and
strength renewed from God, and the Gospel enjoyed, and self-denial in following
Jesus in the light which he has given us, which teaches to take up the cross,
and deny the world, in which world we see you to live in void of the knowledge
of God, and stumbling at the light.

And again, you are speaking of a moral law.

Reply. But that is without, and there it shall stand as you are in the first
nature: and abundance of such stuff out of it you have vented, which is not
worth mentioning.

And again you are speaking of the Spirit of truth to covince the world of sin,
and you hope it will convince some of these deluded ones, because they believe
not.

Part of this shall stand for your selves, you deluded ones; but the Spirit of
truth you know not, that part is ours, and with it we see you to be without God
in the world, stumbling at the light, whose hope shall perish, which when the
book of conscience is opened, shall witness me eternally, and condemn you, and
all people everywhere that hate it.

You say, Some may dare tosay their hands are clean; but who can say their
heart is clean? (I can) and see all your hearts unclean, who stumble at the
light: the pure in heart sees God, and see your hearts, which are deceitful
above all things, you which knows it not.

Here you show you hate the light indeed, who knows not your own hearts, and
here you have showed you are not fit fellows to preaches Gospel, nor speak to
others whose hearts are not clean. Here you have made manifest you never saw
God, for the pure in heart sees God, and you see not your own hearts; and how
can you pray? you cannot pray lifting up holy hands to the Lord, whose hearts
are not clean. There I charge you in the presence of the living God, your
prayers to be hypocritical, and your hands to be full of blood.

And again, whereas you are talking of showing to man how impossible it is to
enter into paradise.

O ye blind guides, what have ye to do talk of paradise, that knows not your
own hearts, or showing man the way? The Lord has given me a pure heart and
clean hands, by which all your deceits are discovered: and paradise we witness,
which no such corrupt hearts shall enter, who disobey the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whom the plagues of God is due to: and to you that hate the
light, murderers, Cains, who are so wrangling about the light, and says, The
light in the conscience discovers not secret things. Here you are out of the
obedience of the light, and contrary to Christ's words, who says, That the
light that he has enlightened withal, shows man his evil deeds, and he will not
bring his deeds to it, because he knows they are evil, and therefore he
stumbles, and this is his condemnation, and there you are to be condemned with
the light of Christ, who are querying, who knows his heart, and there you are
manifest to be in the first nature, and judges the light of Christ to be
corrupt nature, like your selves, which you and your nature are to be condemned
with the light of Christ, which is pure and eternal, which is the condemnation
of you, and all the world that hate it.

Wherein you say, That we conclude that power accompanies that light to destroy
every evil as it appears to them that yield up themselves to it.

It appears by your stumbling at this light of Christ in man, that you are
ignorant of the Scriptures, who says, Ye are sanctified by the obedience of
the Spirit, And as many as receives him, to them he gives power to become the
sons of God. And the Son makes free, and he was manifest to destroy the works
of the devil, and his servants ye are to whom ye obey; and this light must be
owned before he be owned.

Wherein ye cry out, Ye cannot hold your peace, for the deceit we seem to lay
upon Christ and his Spirit, which is but the light of nature, not the light of
Christ as a mediator.

Ye blasphemers, who calls the light of Christ, the light of nature, which
Jesus Christ is the light that enlightneth every man, and is the Mediator,
wherein ye are found to be them that draw back to perdition, and not to the
saving the Soul, in drawing from the obedience of the light, which is the light
of Christ in man, which shows him his natural condition; which the Apostle
exhorts to take heed unto, until the day dawned and the day star did arise,
and such experienced ones as you are, lives in jealousies which are as strong
as death, who stumbles at the light of Christ, and calls it natural; O high
blasphemers!

You show along that you are them that hates the light, and hate them that walk
in it, who are troubled at them you call Quakes, who says, That the light of
Christ does discover their thoughts, and sin, and yielding to it, power is
given from God to stand against thoughts and sin. And this you call free will.

And as it is written, They that waited upon the Lord, their strength was
renewed; and here let all the children of light which be in the light contrary
to their own wills, and contrary to the will of man, you judge; and therefore
it makes you stumble at it; and here in this you have denied all the waiting
upon God in the light, and watchings with the light, which has declared, that
all your watchings and waitings is without the light, an imitation which is to
be condemned with the light: and many derisions and reproaches have you given
forth in your book; but these we wave, because they do not touch us.

And whereas you say, While you change the Name, and call the light Christ.

Here you have declared you are not Ministers of the letter: Christ says, He
is the light of the world, so say we, so it is you cannot own his name, but
stumbles at the light, stumbles at the Mediator, so if the babes of Christ
should be silent, the stones in the walls would cry out against you.

And whereas you say, Reformation reaches not the work of regeneration.

O ye blind Hypocrites and corrupt Judges, does not the same that reforms,
regenerate? but you are without both.

And whereas you say, By his disobedience not obeying the light, he may fall
from that eternal salvation which began to work in him by the power of light.

And this is your implies, and so you interpret our words as you do the
Scriptures, you that oppose the light you oppose your eternal salvation; and as
touching eternal salvation, you that stumble at the light are for eternal
destruction and condemnation with the light, which you stumble at; and who
turns from the light, turns from the salvation, and draws back into perdition.

And whereas you say, There is no mention made in any of your papers of eternal
salvation from the wrath to come, or condemnation of hell by any atonement, or
price of blood, or sacrifice from the dominion of evil by Jesus Christ.

Eternal salvation from the wrath to come, and condemnation of hell, I witness,
by the price of blood of Jesus Christ, which is without you, and from the
dominion of evil by Jesus Christ, which your fathers crucified, and you their
children seek to crucify him where he is made manifest, which stumbles at the
light, and thou ands do begin to confess, That they are made free from the
wrath to come, the dominion of evil by Jesus Christ, who is the same yesterday,
to day and for ever, which witness the price of blood by which they are
redeemed, which makes them clean from your generation, which hate the light.

Priest. And now you come to declare your own belief you speak of the promise
of the power of the Father, and the Gospel, and the lost sheep, and Faith.

But to you I answer which stumble at the light, you stumble at the promise, at
the power of the Father, at the Gospel, and at the Spirit, as you plainly make
it appear, which scorns them you call Quakers, which in the Scripture there is
a cloud of witnesses against you.

And whereas you say, If they can tell how the bones grow in the womb of her
that is with child, they may come near to trace out this work of God.

We who are in the second birth, know the first, and how things genders and
works, and so with it we discern where you are.

And whereas you say, You are children born not of blood, nor of the will of
man, nor after the will of the flesh; but of his own will has he begotten us
by the word of truth.

O ye thieves and robbers, I charge in the presence of the living God to be so;
for these are John's and James's words, who speaks of being born, not of blood,
nor of the will of man, but of his own will has he begotten us, what have you
to do with these things that stumble at the light? so you stumble at the truth;
and how can you glorify God the Maker, who stumbles at the light? and so it is
you that deny the resurrection; for we do witness the worst sort of men turned
to God with his light, so we witness the Scriptures fulfilled, Publicans and
Harlots enter in before you.

Priest. 2. You are speaking of waiting on Christ, for renewing of strength
morning by morning.

Ye enemies of God, how can ye wait upon Christ, who stumble at the light, and
writes against it? for if you waited upon Christ according to the Scriptures,
you would own the light, and there would be unity in the light; but this light
which ye stumble at, shall condemn you to be no waiters upon the Father nor
Christ.

And whereas you are speaking of the Saints assemblies.

Reply. You that stumble at this light, stumbles at the Saints assemblies, as
you make it appear in this book, and the Sons of God, and the children of
Faith: and as you say, You are tied to all means, so you would tie all to your
means, and the Lord is tied to none. Here you show you are not of the Lord; for
who are of the Lord, are freed from ties, and from the Ordinances of men and
outward means, which you find your spirit is tied to, contrary to the Spirit
of God; for where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty.

And whereas you say, The children of God all their lifetime, are found
groaning under the burden of sin.

Here your Spirit and experiences are tried again to be contrary to the
Scriptures, and all the Saints, for the children of God, born of God, does not
commit sin, and he that is born of God overcomes the world, and as he is, so
are we in this present world; and rejoice evermore, and they sung Hallelujah,
and the kingdom of God stands in righteousness, joy and peace in the Holy
Ghost. Here I charge you in the Spirit of the living God to be liars.

And you say, That the children of God are found groaning, all their life long,
under the burden of sin.

Now I take all the children of the light to judge you, and may see the
Scripture to witness against you, and see that your experience is contrary to
the Saints in Scripture; and as touching the second coming of Christ as you
speak, silence flesh, who stumbles at his light; for you that stumbles at his
light, stumbles at him. But blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has given us an understanding with his light which you stumble at. You
Priests have been looked on to be the props and pillars of the truth; but now
the truth has discovered you to be the props of Antichrists kingdom, having
the form, as the Pharisees had.

And again you are speaking of the Apostles faith, and the seed, and the
promises, and of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

All these are our witnesses, who witness the promise of God to the seed; but
as for you that stumble at the light, you have but the form as the Pharisees
had, who says, you are found all your life time groaning under the burden of
sin. Here you show your selves to be them that lead silly women captive, led
away with diverse lusts, ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth, that the Apostle spoke of; but lies groaning under your sins, who
said, They ha^ put off the body of sin, and was made free from sin. Here your
experiences are tried again, to be contrary to the Scriptures and the Saints
lives; so we have weighed you to be contrary to the Scriptures and the
Apostles, you that say you lay groaning under the burden of sin, bound under
the temptations and snares of the devil, who are without God in the world.

And whereas you say, That whosoever bids man take heed to the light within,
which the eternal Word has enlightened, which enlightens him, which enlightneth
every one that comes into the world; in attendance thereto, puts man besides
the way of life, and says, This assertion puts men quite besides the way of
salvation to attend upon that light which comes from the eternal word.

If this put men aside from the way of life, and put men quite beside the way
of salvation, to wait upon the light which comes from the eternal Word, Here
again I take all the children of light to record how you are confused, and are
beside the way of life and salvation; for none knows the way of salvation,
life, peace and righteousness, but who owns this eternal light which is in the
eternal Word: and so here all may see it is you that bring men quite besides
the way of life and eternal salvation, and terms the light of Christ to be the
light of nature, and not pure. And so there you blasphemers are discovered to
be the foxes that spoil the vineyards.

And you say, What shall we think of Paul, who found the law in his members
warring?

Here you show you are stangers to Paul's condition, when you have learned it
you shall know it; but them that stumbles at the light, stumbles at his
condition; and here your experiences are tried again to be contrary to the
Scriptures.

You say, You grant to walk up to the law or light of nature, shall have the
light of Grace or Gospel revealed to him; and yet you say, You never knew the
Gospel bestowed upon any such person; and say, You more then doubt whether ever
they stood before the throne of glory.

Here you are confused, let the Reader take notice, was not the light of Moses
the light of the Gospel, who wrote of Christ? shall they receive Light, Grace,
Gospel, and not stand before the throne of glory? you grant they may receive
it; then here they may fall from the throne of glory, which you was accusing
them of you call Quakers before; they that fall from the light, fall from the
eternal salvation. And so, O man, thus thy condemnation arises of thy self.

Whereas you say, Men taking heed to the light which Christ has enlightened
them withal, takes away the ministration of the Gospel, and shuts the kingdom
of God from men.

Here you have manifested your selves to be in the generation of the Pharisees
who has the letter to talk of as they had; but the light wherewith Christ has
enlightened, shuts not the kingdom of heaven from men; but you that denies the
light shuts the kingdom of God from men, and so denies the Gospel; and them
that hate this light, preaches not the Gospel, but their own inventions, and
takes away the authority of the Scriptures, who are in the same nature of your
fathers that murdered the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and you the
children of them: now where the life and power is made manifest among the
Quakers, you act the same part of your fathers which all the righteous blood
was shed by.

Whereas you say, Your chief contention is, for the Gospel administered by man.

Here you contend for that the Apostle denied, not by man had he received it,
neither was he made an Apostle by man. And here your Spirit is tried to be
contrary to the Apostles and the Scripture.

Whereas you say, You know not how any should believe, unless they hear the
testimony of the Apostles or their words.

Here you show you to be in the generation of them who hoards the Apostles
words, as your fathers read the Prophets and Apostles words, but persecuted
Christ.

Blessed is he that believes and sees not. And you say, You cannot tell how men
should believe, unless they saw the Apostles conditions.

Here you show your selves to be in the Jews doting condition, who are
Ministers of the letter, and your faith is theirs, and both is dead; he that
believes is born of God, without Scripture, and yet witnessed in Scripture.

And whereas you slander, and say, Them you call Quakers aims to beguile you
of Scripture themselves, they say this Light or Gospel within you, it is the
sure word of prophecy.

Here let all see you to be liars, whether we do not set the Scriptures in the
heart of every one; for every one having the light within which shows his evil
deeds, which light is his condemnation that hates it: this is Scripture within.
Here we do not take it from them; but that every one might possess it within as
it was given forth from within, from the life; and that they might take heed to
the sure word of prophecy, till the day star arise in their hearts, as the
Apostles exhorts the Saints, and that was within. And so here again we do not
take Scripture from you, but it is that you might be seen to be liars, who seek
to draw people from the light within, from the Gospel and from the Day Star. So
it is you that takes Scripture away from people, and lays it waste, and makes
it of no effect.

And again you are inquiring, whether there be a prophetical light in every one.

Here you have given Christ a new name contrary to Scripture, who says he is
the light, and enlightens every one; but here you show out of what land you are
come, who calls the light prophetical.

And you are inquiring what this light in man prophesies of.

Here you show your selves to be strangers again from it, and hates it, the
light wherewith Christ has enlightened, who are inquiring, What is the
day star? when you love the light you shall know what it prophesies of, and
what the day star is; but with this light you shall be condemned, and you are
under that saying of Christ, Light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not. And here you preach forth your selves to be blind
guides, who are strangers from the day star.

And you say, The Scripture was written for you learning, and to make you wise
to salvation through says in Christ Jesus.

These were the Apostles words to the Saints, which show your selves to be them
which have the words of the Apostles and Christ, as your fathers which had the
writings of the Prophers, but was not wise unto salvation; but persecuted
Christ as you do, where he was made manifest.

And whereas you say, The Scriptures they lay aside as waste. This is another
of your lies, they are not true to you if they be not in your hearts, as they
were in them that spoke them forth.

O ye thieves, which are making thieves, where are they that are stealing the
word from his neighbor, and uses their tougues? but ye are the thieves which
have not the Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures; it was written for our
learning, who are come into the life of them that gave it forth, as it was
spoken to the Saints; but the seed of evil doers is condemned with the life
that gave it forth, for it is against them, and it is for the perfecting of the
man of sin

And whereas you are slandering in your p. 20. By their doctrine (you say) the
Scriptures are ^urned into allegories.

This shall stand for your selves, the Scriptures we own without any private
interpretation, for no prophecy of them came by the will of man.

And whereas you say, Some dare not quite lay aside the Scripture.

You are the busy minds that are spoken of; for the Scriptures are not laid
afide, but witnessed every Scripture in its place, for sname give over your
lies, and you that denies the light of Christ, and says, It is not pure,
denies all the openings of all the Scriptures, and the Spirit of prophecy, and
the testimony of Jesus, and the instruction of all children of God in
Scriptures. As for your stories and false applications, those applications
shall turn upon your selves; for they are not worth mentioning, and you that
deny this light, you neither read right nor understand the Scripture right.

And you say, It Is more sure, then a voice from the excellent glory concerning
the word of prophecy, which is to be tended upon, more then one risen from the
dead.

This word of prophecy you know nothing of, which denies the light which
Christ has enlightened withal, your prophecy is the letter, which is death,
and nothing of the excellency of the glory you know, who stumble at the light.

Whereas you say, They say this light is the anointing from the Father, and
that they need not teach one another.

I answer, In this light waiting the anointing is known, which is received from
the Father; but your darkness cannot comprehend this light. So you know not the
anointing, which stumbles at the light, which keeps you out of the garden, of
which you talk of breaking down the walls; it is but your walls that are broken
down, that stumbles at the light, and with it you are condemned out of the
garden, and all the Saints favors.

And for saying they need no man teach them but the Lord, this is witnessed
among thousands; and they need not say, Know the Lord, who are come into the
new covenant, this is witnessed. And you say, This destroys Pastors, Elders,
Bishops, and plucks the seven stars out of the hand of Christ.

You enemies of God, is not Christ the covenant which was promised* and who are
in him need not say, Know the Lord, and is not he the end of the seven Stars,
and Bishops, and Pastors, and Elders? and are not all these in their places, to
bring up to the stature and fullness of Christ? and those we witness in their
places, but you are such who stumbles at the light.

Whereas you slander and say, It cuts off all instructions.

All yours it does who stumbles at the light, but who dwells in the light are
moved of the Lord daily to instruct, and that which does instruct, the same
does convince, and that is eternal; and the word of God is the fame now, which
shall hew you down to the fire, and the dung, and hammer you down to the dust,
and all your twisting twining inventions, which here is much of in this book,
which is not worth mentioning, vented forth; but with the light you are
comprehended, which you stumble at.

And again you say, The teaching of man is employed, and not excluded.

Here again you are contrary to the Scripture, and are excluded from the
Apostles doctrine, which preach glad tidings, which was not made by the will of
man.

And whereas yon speak of believing Christ in them, and that they perish for
want of believing Christ made manifest in their flesh.

Here you have proved your selves to be reprobates, and if he be not made
manifest in you, the works of the devil are standing, and not destroyed. And
the Apostle spoke of a dying with Christ, and a rising with Christ; and they
were to take heed to the sure word of prophecy, as to a light shining in a
dark place: but this Christ is without you, and not made manifest in you as the
Apostle speaks, which Christ was in them except they were reprobates. Here your
life is contrary to theirs, and with the life, which is the life of all the
Saints, you are judged out of the life of the Scriptures, and to be reprobates:
you speak of Christ without you, and the Apostles spoke of Christ in you,
except you be reprobates. And Christ in you the hope of glory, Christ the same
yesterday, to day, and sor ever, we witness him made manifest amongst us, and
raigns as King, the same which ever was made manifest among the Saints; but you
and your fathers, in your generation persecuted him; for he is without you, as
he was without your fathers, as you may read in Matthew, which be of the seed
of your fathers the high Priests.

Whereas you say, That them you call Quakers use the words of the Scriptures,
and say, The kingdom of heaven is within you. And this you speak to the world.

Here you have showed your selves to be as the Pharisees, which looked for the
kingdom of God to come by observations. Christ said, Behold the kingdom of God
is within you, to the Pharisees, and they were of the world, and if those words
be spoken to your generations, they are not believed with you, as they were not
with your fathers. And as touching John's baptism and the Gospel, silence
flesh; for you are far off that who stumbles at the light, and you are sons of
formality.

You say, You hold a visible order of the Church in the body, and is not of the
substance of the kingdom, that cannot be shaken, and yet in the Church.

We that ye call Quakers do believe ye, and tread that ye call a visible
Regiment and Church under our feet as natural, for natural is visible, and your
Church is a Steeplehouse, and for denying it, we suffer persecution, as Stephen
did, for denying the temple, who saw the substance, so do we, with that which
cannot be shaken, which is the substance, and therefore deny your Steeplehouse,
which can be shaken, and your Sacrament, and your standing forms, and your
sprinkling Infants: there is not a word in the Scripture that speaks of a
Sacrament and sprinkling, Ye heathens that live altogether in formality.

And as touching Pastors, and Elders, and the Saints practice, you know nothing
of, who stumble at the light, who are in your elementary things, Elders and
Members Pharisee-like, who sets themselves against Christ, this is to
comprehend you all under what form soever, which stumbles at the light, which
shall condemn you all. To that in your conscience I speak.

And whereas you say, You do abominate Babylons confusion.

Then you must abominate your Mother, which has been, and is your Nurse, for
in Babylon you are, and all your prayers abomination, and out of the doctrine
of Christ, who denies the light and calls it natural, and not pure, who are in
the state of Popery and Episcopacie, and you are Familists, which you have
mentioned in your book, which turns upon your selves; for in the nature of all
those things you are, who are in the sects, with the light which Christ has
enlightened are you judged to be not in the unity, for the society is visible,
and that joins not to the body of Christ; for what joins to the body of
Christ is invisible, and in the light we have unity, in which all the Saints
had, and see you to be in the whole body and bulk of iniquity, which is raised
from Christ.

You say, You must not expect them, your Ministers, Deacons, and Elders, to be
sent forth as the Apostles were immediately.

It Is manifest they are not. Here you have raced your selves from all the
Prophets, and Apostles, from all the Elders and Deacons, and all the Teachers,
and Ministers of the Gospel, and the effect of all your Ministry has showed
you to be the body of all the sects, Heresies, Schisms, and Errors, and to be
the doctrine of devils; for you say, you are not sent forth immediately as the
Apostles were; then let all take notice who sent you. And here you show forth,
God never sent you; for whom he sends, he sends forth immediately; and this you
deny, to be sent forth immediately as the Apostles were. And here I charge you
in the presence of the living God, to be them he never sent. 2. To use your
tongues. 3. Such as Christ cried woe against, which have the chiefest place in
the assemblies, and such as make a prey upon the people, which the Lord sent
Ezekiel to cry against, and Jeremiah, and the rest of the Prophets, and to be
such as Jude speaks of, which went in the way of Cain, after the error of
Balaam, which perished in the gainsaying of Core, which the woe is to: and what
you know, you know naturally as brute beasts, in these things you corrupt your
selves, speaking high things in hypocrisy, having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage, which Peter spoke of, and Jude, who says you are not
sent forth immediately as the Apostles were. And here you declare you were
never sent of God, and your Spirit contrary to the Apostles, and in the
doctrine of men; for in Babylon you are, who says you are not sent forth
immediately as the Apostles were; for the Apostles said, The holy Ghost has
made them overseers, and that is immediate and invisible. And you say, Your
society is visible. We know it is so, and so is your Communion too, in outward
elementary things, and your bread and wine, in your Steeplehouse-Church, and
your Sacrament, sprinkling Infants; so all this is visible and mediate, and
imitation, out of the doctrine of the Apostles: and the doctrine of Christ we
own every tittle of it, in the same Spirit that gave it forth: and so all your
casting out in your assemblies, and your taking in, which you say is not
immediate, is contrary to the doctrine of the Apostles; for with the power and
life they cast forth, and with the power and life they took in, which was
immediate. And you which say, You are not sent forth immediately as the
Apostles were, have cleared your selves from the Church of Christ the pillar
and ground of Truth, which is immediate; and so all your overseeing is natural
and carnal, and the natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God.
And here you have cleared your selves openly to all the children of light, to
be the spirit of error, the beast, the false Prophet, which is not sent forth
from God immediately as the Apostles were, as ye confess; so you are them which
the Apostle and John in the Revelation spoke of, which was sent forth
immediately from God to cry against such as you which was not sent forth
immediately from God, which Spirit is made manifest now, which sees you now, as
they saw them then, whom God sends forth immediately to cry against you now, as
they did then, who are in the state of Paganism, who stumble at the light, and
confess you are not sent forth immediately, with the immediate you are judged.

Whereas you say, Them you call Quakers, bids you speak no more then you can
experience and live in.

And such you call for their pains, painted Sepulchers, which those words shall
stand for your selves; for Christ gave them to your fathers, who had the
Prophets words, as you have the Apostles, who spoke that they did not live in,
as you do, as Mat. 23. but them that spoke forth the Scriptures and spoke what
they lived in, which you have declared your selves from, who has got the
outside of the letter, and makes a scorn and derision of them who would have
you to live in what you speak, as they did that gave forth the Scriptures, and
there you have showed again what spirit you are of, that would not live in what
you speak, and have cleared your selves from the Faith; for Abraham possessed,
and you have manifested your selves to be of them the Apostle speaks of, that
would be some body in conference, but not in possession, and has got the form,
which the Apostle bids turn away from; for immediate you have denied, and so
you are to be denied with the power; and as touching Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and Paradise, and the Prophets, and the holy men of God, silence flesh, for
immediate you deny, and all these things who knows them, are immediately sent
of God, for all Scripture being given forth immediately by the Spirit, and is
of no private interpretation; but holy men of God spoke as they were moved of
the holy Ghost. And here you are manifest to be no Ministers of the Spirit, but
following your own inventions, who says you are not sent forth immediately as
the Apostles were; and here you may well enough stumble at the light, who
denies that you are sent forth immediately as the Apostles were. And here all
the children of light may see you to be formalists, Joseph Kellet, John Pomrey,
Paul Glisson, and the rest, who says you are not sent forth immediately, I
command you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to give over deceiving the
people, and be silent you murderers of their souls, who says you are not sent
forth immediately as the Apostles were, and make a scorn and derision of them
that would have you live in what you speak; but go on, for destruction is your
portion; in the vain and blasphemous philosophy you are, and your conclusion
shall stand for your selves, who are in the rottenness of your hearts, and body
of iniquity; and you are not as the Apostles were; and so you have denied the
life that gave forth the Scriptures, for all Scripture being given forth
immediately, and they that gave them forth were sent of God: and you that go
forth to preach, which says you are not sent forth immediately, are in the
state of them that erred not knowing the Scripture, for they are not known but
with that Spirit which gave them forth, which was immediate. And here with all
the children of light you are judged, not to be of God, nor sent of God, out of
your own mouths.

Whereas you say, That them you call Quakers do admonish you to wait in silence
till God open your mouths, and they would not have any to read, pray and teach,
but when the Spirit of the Lord leads them.

We cannot close with this. Here all the holy men of God shall witness against
you; I take them all to record, and you to be contrary to them, and your
prayers to be abomination, and your teachings not of the Spirit, and contrary
to the Apostle, who said, He would pray with the Spirit. And here you are
contrary to his doctrine, and contrary to the Scripture, and the Apostle said,
The holy men of God spoke as they were moved of the holy Ghost, and they speak
as the Spirit gave them utterance: and Christ says, The Spirit of the Father
speaks in you. And here again you are contrary to Christ's doctrine, and the
Apostles, who cannot close with the Spirits praying, and the Spirts teaching.
And there you show you are Babylon again, and in the error erred from the life
and doctrine of the Apostles. And here I leave you to be judged by all the
children of light, and to walk out of the footsteps of Christ and his flock,
who say you are not sent immediately as the Apostles were; but praying in
families, and reading, and instructing of children, and bringing up in the fear
of the Lord, and teaching according to the Apostles doctrine, we own, who was a
Minister of the Spirit, but not of the letter. And this we seek to bring all
people to, into the life which gave forth the Scriptures; and all your
experiences and teachings are to be trampled upon, who cannot close with the
praying of the Spirit, and the Spirits leading to pray and teach. Here out of
the Apostles doctrine you are seen clearly to be, with all the children of God.

Now you say, To the best of your understanding, That them you call Quakers
gives equal liberty for men and women in assemblies to pray.

Here you do show your selves to be them that would limit the Spirit of God,
for God says, He will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and his sons and
daughters shall prophecy; and the Apostle says, They may all prophecy one by
one. And here you show again you are contrary to the Apostles doctrine, and
your understanding to be brutish: and as touching the assemblies of the
Saints, silence flesh, or their prayers either; for either male or female, with
the Spirit of the Lord they may teach or pray; but you that deny the Spirit,
and cannot close with his praying or teaching either, you have got a popish law
of Queen Mary's, that when some has been moved to come into your Synagogues,
some has been beat, some stoned, some stocked and haled before Magistrates,
and imprisoned, as many in these northern parts may witness.

Whereas you say, They speak after their trembling with an extent voice, as the
Oracles of God, and them you call Quakers do not leave you time to try their
sayings, as the Apostle did to the Bereans.

O ye liars, does not the whole Scripture witness trembling? and the Saints
gave forth the Scriptures, and such had the Oracles of God, and we witness the
same Spirit now: the Saints in light you cannot deceive; but the blind you may
lead into the ditch for a while.

And whereas you speak of magnifying papers equal to the holy Scriptures.

The same Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, which gives forth now, is as
true as the Scriptures, and not contrary to the Scriptures, He that has an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit says.

Whereas you are tormented at those that forsake pride in apparel, and
receiving honor of man, and giving honor to man, is it not according to
Scripture, and the doctrine of Christ, who says, How can ye believe which
seeks honor one of another? And there you show your selves to be out of the
belief and the doctrine of Christ, which cross the Saints does pass through to
eternal life, which cross is to the world, which cross you live without who are
puffed up.

And whereas you are speaking for your schools and learning.

There you show where you are in the first nature, not in that as the Apostles
were in, who counted all loss and dung, and denied all his bringing up, and
learning in the first birth, for the excellency of Christ, when he knew the
excellency of him.

Whereas you speak of buying and selling.

Now you show where your minds are yet, lawfulness, justice and equity we own,
for this is of God, righteousness in man, yea and nay in all communication we
own, and all filthy merchandise we trample upon, where we see you to be, your
minds in the earth, your God is your belly, you glory in your shame, and to be
the evil beasts the Apostle spoke of, and them as Christ spoke of coming in
sheeps skins, but now you are made manifest to be the wolves, with the light
which you stumble at as your fathers ever did.

Whereas you say, The righteousness by faith or power of Christ in you, is not
to be rested in.

Nay, from this you are excluded, the power of Christ in you, and the Faith and
Righteousness, who stumbles at his light, who says, you are not sent
immediately as the Apostles were; but the just lives by his Faith.

And whereas you say, The externals of the Gospel are to be used with the power
of godliness, and transacted to the glory of Christ.

Here all may see your confused muckie stuff, who would mix your externals,
with the everlasting Gospel, power of Godliness, and glory of Christ.

And your external religion not abolished to the new creature, things that be
external and worldly.

Here you show your selves to be enemies to the cross of Christ, and your
external Religion is carnal, which the new creature feeds not upon; and the
pure Religion you are cleared from, which is to be kept unspotted of the world,
and this is eternal, and all old Ceremonies, and your external Religion comes
here to be trampled upon with the new creature, where all things are become
new; but from this you are cleared and kept without, who stumbles at the light.

Something to that you call your confession of apparel and faith, this is your
doctrine, if you see a man boast in apparel, be not troubled; it may be all his
portion in the world.

Here you show you are holders up of the world, and whom ye are friends to, and
Lot's righteous soul was grieved at their filthy conversation, and holders up
of boasters you are, which the Apostles doctrine denies both, and said it was
excluded, and gives way to that the Apostles declared against; and though you
say the Scripture declares against pride and wantonness in apparel, yet you
would not have it declared against, and says, If thou see a man boast in
apparel, be not troubled. And here you show again what Spirit you are on, the
world loves its own, contrary to the righteous soul.

Whereas you say, Apparel grew in use for distinction of sexes and qualities of
persons, modesty, and custom of the country, and members of societies, and
greater matters.

Was it the apparel that grew in use for distinction of all these? there you
are who knows one another outwardly with your apparel, who are in the customs
of the country, without, in the fashions of the world, without the doctrine of
Christ, and not in the kingdom of Christ, and we know all creatures were
created to be used in their places as servants to us, and whatsoever we do and
use, it must be to the glory of God. So all your pride amongst you rich and
proud ones must down; the sword of the Lord is drawn out of the sheath, and
fitted for the slaughter; take warning all you proud and lofty ones that are
numbered for the sword, and all your bags of honor, as you call it, must be
trampled upon; for that which is in esteem with you in your generation, is
abominrble to the Lord; but all men in the Lord we honor.

In the lusts of ignorance you are, and you would make people believe, it was
their apparel which kept off the brutish sort of men.

In the lusts and in your ignorance you are, in the wanton world ignorant of
the true God, who confessed you was not sent before as the Apostles were, and
so you have not learned Christ, and know not his coming, and all this dirty
stuff is not worth mentioning.

You say, You declare against those who has cast off the denying of respecting
of men, and you call this abominable pride.

Here you manifest your selves, who make no distinction among men, for all men
in the Lord we honor, but all men out of the Lord are not to be honored, for
ungodly, such as you are, are for condemnation, and the beast is not to be
worshipped who hates the light, as says Jude.

As for your speaking of the fine linen of Saints, and the new name, silence
flesh and vain bablers, who are without in the world; but thieves who have got
the Saints words, but in the generation and nature of them you are that put the
Saints to death, who says, The persecution is much taken off in England.

One of your Mothers which two servants of the Lord were moved to go to,
Cambridge, were whipped and scourged till their bodies were torn, and many in
your Synagogues in the North, some stocked, stoned, beat, and many imprisoned,
as in Carlisle, Kendal, York, Chester, Lancaster, Newcastle, which these Goales
now does witness it, the fruits of your Ministeries, and now it self does show
it is Babylon and Core, and not sent immediately, as you confess it, as the
Apostles were, and God is bringing down your pride, your honor, renown and
glory; the sword of the Lord is drawn against you, take warning, and against
all your gluttony and drunkenness which you are speaking of in your book, which
is not worth mentioning, which shows where your minds are; but I shall let it
stand for your selves. And sometimes you seem to be against these things, and
then you turn to your God again, and so denies the living God.

Something you do write and oppose the law of community, as you call it.

Here you are against the Spirit of life, for they that did believe were of one
heart, and they that do believe are born of God, and amongst such there was was
no oppressor, no taskmaster, and it is said all things were common, no man
said, This is my own; but with the Spirit of the living God which sanctifies,
all such brutish, sensual, lustful, devilish and worldly covetous taskmasters,
oppressors, and whoremongers, thieves, liars and cursed speakers as you are,
who live in all unrighteousness, and in pride, and loftiness has no part in
this communion, for no unrighteousness shall inherit the kingdom of God, but
your law and community is without, and we deny it, and you to have any part in
this communion, but in the lake that burns, who stumbles at the light, in
which there is unity, and says it is not pure, and that you are not sent as
the Apostles were immediately, who act sin and unrighteousness, and stumbles at
the light, so all the ungodly you think are let loose, but here is no bait for
them, but are kept out you and them both, with that in which is your communion,
but all the conditions of the Saints passages, travels and progresses we own in
their places, and who acted under figures and shadows we own, but you who are
not come to Christ's doctrine, who is not come to give your coat yet who has
two, you we deny.

And as you say giving a coat of two to him that has none.

This torments you, you stumble at this as at the light, you enemies of God and
murderers, with the lusts you show where your hearts is, without pity or
compassion, who wilt not cover thy own flesh; but it is that you may be made
manifest: and you have showed that you are out of the doctrine of Christ: you
have been pleading for your interest in the earth, there is your God, and with
the doctrine of Christ you are judged: and your community we abhor; but the
communion of the Saints we own; and servants in their places diligent serving
the Lord; and children obeying their Parents in the Lord, and forsaking all for
the Lord, and he that does not, is not worthy of him. This we witness.

Whereas you are slandering and saying, We are breaking marriage*bonds and
wedlock, because we question what Scripture the Priests have to marry people
and take money for it.

O ye enemies of God, where do you read in all the Scriptures, that the Priests
are to take money for marrying of people? such trades we deny, if you call that
wedlock. Marriage is honorable in all things where the the bed is undefiled,
and that we own; but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, and such we
deny, and all the Priests practices which they have no Scripture for, and
therefore we question them with authority, and deny them both.

Whereas you are speaking of some that are not free to be Tenants.

Is the Lord drawing his people from under you taskmasters, as from under
Pharaoh, which are proud and oppressors, which you Priests have been examples
of, and taught the people? And this torments you now you Priests, because you
are against it, who have been the oppressors of the creation, and are, but the
Lord is gathering his people from under you now, as he did from under Pharaoh:
and does proud Pharaoh begin to rage? if this torment you, you shall see more
come with everlasting songs upon their heads, singing over Pharaoh and his
host. The song of Moses and Lamb is begun to be heard in our land: and the
children of Israel which had their landmarks, What Is that to you Egyptians,
proud and covetous, who are for destruction, as your father Pharaoh was, who
was an oppressor, proud, and a taskmaster? Therefore woe to you bloody Cains,
which are compast under the woe, you are of the stock of them that build Babel,
who are Babylon, harlotted from the living God, and your Mother has sit as a
Queen decked with her colors; but now the time of her widowhood is come, and
loss of children, and she has lost many children, and that, many Kings and
Merchants of the earth laments, crying, Alas, alas.

Whereas you are speaking of tumults and attempts, put this not far from you,
for this may be seen in some of your generation, this shall stand for your
selves, as it is made manifest what tumults are in your congregations.

And your boasting, as giving up your bodies and estates. But let these words
return upon your selves again, and see where your bodies are, where your lives
and estates are; for many lies in prison, because they will not pay Priests
Tithes, which is contrary to the Lord Jesus Christ and his doctrine, which the
Apostles ever lived in, for he never sent you; for you confess you are not sent
immediately as the Apostles were.

You say, There is not a prophecy in all the Scriptures, that takes away all
outward teachers.

Here I am full of the Spirit and power of the Lord to declare against you, for
in John, he says, Ye need not any man teach you. There is man's teaching
outwardly denied, and in Heb. 8. he says, Ye shall not teach every man his
neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know him. All who are in the
new Covenant, witnesses this; and who witness the new Covenant, witness the
Son of man: and Jeremiah prophesied, That they shall no more teach every man
his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord. And here you enemies of the God, are
raced out of the Covenant, and are ignorant of the Lord.

And Ezekiel says, Thus says the Lord, I will deliver my sheep from their
mouths that has devoured them, such as you that have sought for the fleece
and for the wool, and I will search out my sheep, and find them out, and feed
them upon the top of the mountains, says the Lord of hosts; he that has an
ear to hear, let him; for he feeds upon the top of the mountains of Israel. And
Isaiah says, All the children of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord, and
much peace shall they have, and in righteousness shall they be established. And
here let this prophecy judge you to be out of the new Covenant, and contrary
to the Prophets and Apostles, which say, You are not sent immediately as the
Apostles were; so how can you witness their conditions? so here you have
brought your selves under the chain. And Jeremiah says, The Lord speaks in
him, Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant,
not according to the covenant I made with their fathers; but this is the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, After those days, says
the Lord, I will put my laws in their inward parts, and in their hearts will I
write them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And all these
Scriptures I charge you all, ye Priests of England, to have laid waste, and
have brought none into the new Covenant, neither are you there your selves, who
stumble at the light, and denies the first principle. They that need no man to
teach them, such you write against, and speak against, and so deny the new
Covenant, and bring the conditions of those that were not come to the Covenant,
to oppose the new Covenant and them that are in it. And for quoting many
Scriptures of the Epistles, and bringing the conditions of the Saints written
in the Epistles, and not knowing what condition they were written to, let the
readers of the book examine the Scriptures which you bring in your book, and
then they will see how you wrest the Scriptures to oppose the truth, and how
ignorant you are of the Scriptures.

You are bringing the Apostles, which said, If we minister unto you spiritual
things, it is least if you minister unto us carnal things. This was spoken to
them that denied the Priests, the Saints, and would not hold up such Priests,
as you Priests of England, which seek for your gain from your quarter, and have
Balaams wages, which is a horrible filthy thing, and which the woe is upon, and
seeks for the fleece, and makes a prey upon the people, and if they will not
give it, you sue men at the law: did ever the Apostles so? Here O England, let
thy teachers, who are in their whoredom from the life, be witnessed against by
all the Prophets and Apostles life, and let all thy whoredoms testify against
thee in thy face, for with the eternal life of them all, thou art judged
eternally.

You are speaking of Christ's sending forth his, and say, Their message required
haste, two coats would cumber; to salute any by the way, might occasion
derision or delay, and they were to go without money to encourage them, he
intended to send them into the nations afar off.

Here I charge all the Priests in England, how you go about in your own
country, without bag, without two coats, without money, without saluting any by
the way. So here in your own words you are judged, who makes a derision of them
that does not salute by the way; for that, some are beat, whom the Lord sends
without two coats, and does not salute by the way; so you are the oppressors of
your own nation, who go in two coats, and money in your purses, salute men by
the way, sue men at the law, and imprison them that will not give it you, and
out of the doctrine of Christ you are, for you confess you are not sent forth
immediately as the Apostles were.

You are speaking something, for justifying of your particular great houses.

Stephen for witnessing against the temple was stoned to death, who saw the
substance: and Paul witnessed against the Jews outward temple, and was haled
out of the Synagogues, and was persecuted. And for the maintaining of the
Pulpit in your great Steeple Houses, you bring* Ezra, who had a Pulpit to read
the Law, who read the Law to a particular people; and the Gospel, which is
preached by the messengers of Christ, is to every creature, and the Gospel,
where it is received they may all speak one by one, which is the end of the
Law. Here you are raced out, and Ezra and his Pulpit is ended, and the Gospel
is preached, which you are cleared from, who would have Ezra's Pulpit under the
law.

And you dreamers says, Your great idol-houses are clean to you, where you
meet with your great mixed multitudes, and your Pulpit, and you that are up,
which are called of men, Masters.

Let, Mat. 23. Christ's words there judge you, and all your practices, who
cries woe against such as you are; and the Apostles words, who said, They sinned
against their brethren and against Christ, who sit in the Idols temple; and
there you are judged to be, out of the Apostles doctrine and Christ's.

And whereas you would justify your method and your study, first you say, The
Evangelist exhorted to you such means as are here blamed.

And these you bring to maintain your study and method. You enemies of God, was
Timothy to study for the word, or to divide it? was he to study for the gift,
or to give it forth?

You bring Solomon, who set in order many parables, and teaching the people.

And this you bring for your study and method, who speaks a definition of their
own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord* who confess you were not
immediately sent as the Apostles were; therefore all is but a definition of
their own brain.

And whereas you are speaking of the Apostles opening the Scriptures, and Ezra
the law

Their conditions shall judge you, for that which opened in them, was
immediate, which you confess you are not sent forth immediately; therefore you
cannot open Scripture as they did, so all your method is to be trodden under
feet, who speak a definition of your own brain.

Whereas you say, Learning is to the understanding of the letter of the
Scriptures, and to help to significant words.

Here I charge you in the presence of the living God, to be them that deny the
word that gave forth all words; learning is natural, and the Scriptures were
given forth by the Spirit; and can that which is natural open that which the
eternal Spirit gave forth? Here let all try your spirit, and judge your
understanding to be brutish.

And as touching Magistrates and your outward teaching, the Lord has opened
many of their eyes to see your outward teaching to be vanity, who witness the
law of God in their hearts; and so God is coming, and is come to redeem his
people from among you, which witness new Jerusalem come, and coming down from
heaven, so all you corrupt teachers must be trodden under feet, which are not
sent as the Apostles were, they were sent immediately, and that you deny to be
sent as they were.

Whereas you are speaking of the deceiveableness of the mystery of iniquity,
lying Prophets and profaneness.

Lying Prophets and profaneness, is found amongst you, it shall stand for your
selves; for before you are proved to be out of the doctrine of Christ.

And as you are speaking of voices, and being deluded and bewitched with the
spirit of lies.

This shall stand for your selves again; for there you are made manifest to all
the children of light, who has long reigned this dark time; and where Christ
is made manifest the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, There him you call
false Christ; but in the mystery of iniquity you are, which are cursed from
Christ, who has answered line for line among the simple ones, who ensnare the
simple ones; but now you are taken in your craft, and caught in your guile,
bound with a chain, and the Lord God of might and power is sending forth his
sons and daughters, and they are amongst you, some cutting the branches, and
some at the roots, and amongst you in the wood, and drive you foxes out of your
holes, and shake you fowls out of your nests, that are set so high, who has
been saying, Lo here, and lo there; but now Christ is within made manifest,
and all you are seen; but you are without who stumble at the light; and them
that are sent forth without stick, or money, or two coats, such you deride,
that walk according to the rule that gave forth the Scripture, and are brought
into Christ's doctrine: and against such you inform people they are as Satan,
transformed into an Angel of light; but this shall stand for your selves, for
there you are in the dark eternally we judge you, who are not sent forth as the
Apostles were immediately, as you confess it. And what have you to talk of the
authority of the Scripture, which is immediate? and what have you to talk of
the Ordinances of God, which are spiritual? or Communion, which is immediate?
or, what have you to do to speak of Faith, or Resurrection, or of God, who are
not sent forth immediately as the Apostles were?

Therefore you, I say, Lead the people from the authority of the Scriptures,
and from the Ordinances of Christ, and from the Communion. Therefore you that
are not sent forth as the Apostles, immediately, your doctrine and Gospel is
not as theirs was; but are doctrines of devils; so we are not as little
children now, to be tossed with your cunning sleights, and windy doctrine, you
are for ever judged, we see your footsteps, and know in what path you walk, and
some of us have learned your language, as Moses did the Egyptians.

And whereas you are speaking of Germany.

In the same nature you are, which ever murdered the righteous seed, where it
was made manifest; but you are made manifest what generation you are of; the
day is come that declares it.

You say, Why may not Satan help on mortification, for such an end as to take
away the death of Christ without you?

For Christ is without you, we witness; but your mortification that the devil
helps on, we deny; and the plain Scriptures without any private interpretation
we own; and all your senses, meanings, interpretations and disputes we deny;
and you to be in Babylon in the state of the Pharisees, Sorcerers, and among
dogs and swine, some in the lust, and some in the mire, are not some drunk, and
some as proud as they can go? let you conversation witness it, and all your
arguments, and consequences we do deny, for you say, You are not sent
immediately as the Apostles were; therefore ye are to be declared against, that
leads people with the mediate into the earth, the lust and mire, envious, proud
and covetous, like your selves, and the plagues of God is to come upon you all,
who live not in the doctrine of Christ.

Priest. And whereas you slander and say, That many writings of the the Papists
are applauded and used by them of this way.

Reply. Your writings and theirs we abhor, which are contrary to the doctrine
of Christ. And whereas you were speaking of Jesuits books, we put you all
together Jesuits and Priests, for you Priests have had their Law to maintain
your Ministry, and guard your Pulpit; for with one Law of men, have, and are
you Priests of England and Jesuits upheld, so we that cry against Popery, does
and must against you all, and with the Spirit of the living God; for it was
before her Law was; for where some have spoken in their time, have been
imprisoned, and many lies in prison now; so he that sits in heaven laugheth at
you, the Lord has you in derision: and them that dwell in the light, and are
on the watch, have seen what your books have brought forth, (your folly) and
that the truth is exalted above all your lies and slanders. And they are at the
battering of error, who are in the commandment of the everlasting God, who
witness the everlasting Gospel, the revelation of Jesus, and the life of the
Prophets, and are in the obedience of the Faith, who does warn all to take heed
of all seducing Spirits, which draws from the light within, which enlightens
every one which comes into the world, there is every one of your teachers in
particular, there is every one of your condemnation that hates it, whose deeds
are evil.

Priest. Whereas you slander and say, That some of them you call Quakers do
expose themselves to be persecuted, to sufferings.

Reply. O ye persecuters and slanderers, would you justify your selves in
destroying the innocent? and make this your cloak, and say, They expose
themselves to it, when many are almost murdered in your steeplehouses? but God
is the strength of his people.

Priest. And whereas you say, That they put no difference between the Papists
and the Protestants.

Reply. Are they not both in a nature, which are not in the power of God? and
who has one law of Queen Mary's for your protection; for you have had that
Popish Law of Queen Mary's to defend you; and does not the Scripture say, Every
one that comes into the world is enlightened with Christ? which light is your
condemnation that hate it, which light searches the secrets of every man's heart.

Priest. You say, God who commanded light to shine out of darkness.

Reply. This is not your condition, it has not shined forth of you which
stumble at the light, which has enlightened every one that comes into the world.

Priest. While you have been in your sinful silence, you say, Some privily have
brought in damnable heresies denying the Lord that bought them.

Relpy. This shall stand for your selves, who says, You are found all your
life time groaning under the burden of sin. Here I take all people in the
light to record, by whom I see you deny the Lord Jesus, who came to save his
people from their sins, and to destroy the works of the devil, which you say,
They must all their life time groan under, and the Apostles said, They were
made free from sin; and here your doctrine is contrary to theirs, as in p. 15.
and I take all people to record, and let them read, 2 Pet. 2. if you be not
those Peter spoke of, Which denies the Lord Jesus that bought them, and has
brought upon your selves swift destruction, and many does follow your
pernicious ways, by whom the way of truth is evil spoken of, and through
covetousness and fained words, you have made merchandise of the people, who
have gone in the way of Cain, after the error of Balaam, as you now have made
it appear to the children of light, who beguiles unstable souls, eyes full of
adultery, sporting your selves in the day time, evil beasts made to be
destroyed, speaking great swelling words of vanity through the lusts of the
flesh, promising your selves liberty, but the mean while, your selves are the
servants of corruption, and they that are escaped from you through the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and comes to be entangled again among you,
their latter end is worse then the first, and they had better never have known
the way of truth; but it is happened to such, as the old proverb is, The dog to
vomit, and the sow to the wallowing in the mire. Therefore a warning to all you
brethren, that are in the light and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you may be kept unspotted from the world, and to reign over all such who
are in the lusts of the flesh, and out of the doctrine of Christ, that serves
not the Lord Jesus Christ but your own bellies.

Queries.
1. And whether the Gospel you speak of, be the four books* Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John, and if those be the Gospel, then every one that has these books,
has the power of God to salvation; and then that Gospel is preached and
printed, and that Gospel may be carried under their arms or in their pockets;
the Gospel we know, and are established in it, and we do not ask you this
question, because we would know it* for your knowledge we deny; but answer it
to them you call your brethren.

2. Whether that light that gave forth the Scriptures, which enlightens every
one that comes into the world, shall be every ones condemnation that hates it;
or the words of the Scriptures declared from it, or this light which Christ
has enlightened withal, when Christ says, This is the condemnation, the light.
And whether there is any condemnation but this?

3. And whether ye do own and believe in that one offering, which has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified?

4. And whether they are not in unbelief, and not believe in this offering,
which say, Men shall never be free from sin while they are upon earth, and say,
They shall never come to perfection upon earth?

5. And whether they that say so, be not in the state of the Pharisees, which
brought no fruit to perfection? though these professed a Christ to come, yet
they would not own this offering.

6. And whether they that say, Man shall not be sanctified throughout, and
shall not be made clean from sin, while he is upon earth, be not them that
trample the blood of the new Covenant under foot, and make the blood of Christ
of none effect, and denies Jesus Christ that bought them.

7. And whether Christ Jesus does not save his people from all their sins, and
set them free to reign as Kings upon the earth; all these things we know and
witness; but to you Priests about Beverley, and thou Priest Feak, and the rest
that subscribe to this book, that says, They must lie groaning all their life
long under it, These queries are for you to answer that gave forth this book;
so here it is manifest, that this everlasting offering, that perfects for ever
them that aresanctified, is not owned amongst you Priests; but only to talk
on, as the Pharisees did of Christ.

From them whom the world scornfully calls Quakers, who is in the power of God,
which shall make all the world to quake and tremble.

FINIS.

