THE PRISONERS REMONSTRANCE OR, The Desires and Proposals of such Prisoners as
are willing to pay their JUST DEBTS.

ALSO, A Copy of their Petition to the Lord Protector: Together with His
Gracious Answer and Reference to th Council.

Also an Ordinance thereupon, for the Suspending the Act for Relief of
Creditors and poor Prisoners, (...) the 2^th of this instant APRIL.

With diverse other Remarkable Passages fit for all men's view, especially for
Creditors or Debtors, or such who are upon their interest concerned.

Perv^rtit anchorae jectum Deus
Dei auxilium est ^^adv^sis praesentissimum.
Impiorum Cons^tia non succedunt.
For if it had not been the Lord who was on your side, when your enemies rose
up against you, then they had swallowed you up quick, and those proud waters
had (...) whelmed and gone over your souls. Psalm. 1.9. ver. 1, 2. London:
Printed by R. Wood, 1654.

THE Desires and Proposals of such prisoners as a^ willing to pay their just
Debts.
THe Prisoners of this Nation conceiving themselves exceedingly agrieved and
concerned in an Act of the late Parliament, which made them all Bankrupts, in
case they should not pay their debts before the first of April instant, which
as things stood with them was impossible for them to do, they (besides the
general want and scarcity of money in these times) being disabled to dispose
of their own estates, by setting, letting or selling the same, or any part
thereof, or receiving their just Debts or Rents toward payment of their debts;
and being also kept in prison the while, for no other end that they can
understand, but merely to prevent and disable them to pay their debts, to the
end their creditors might have their Estates at their own rates. Thought it
high time to present a Petition to His Highness the Lo^d Protector and His
Honorable Council, which petition was presented about the second of March to
Mr Lisle Long one of the Masters of Requ^sts, by Capt. Roger Pritchard, who was
Agent for the prisoners, who seriously taking the same into consideration,
promised faithfully to present the same to His Highness at the first audience
and seasonable opportunity he could obtain, which as it fell out happened not
to be till the 22 of March, at which time he faithfully performed the same, by
presenting the said petition to His Highness the Lord protector, which petition
was in these words.

To His Highness, OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and His Honorable Council.
The Humble Petition of all such Prisoners within this Nation, as are willing
to pay their just Debts.
SHOWS,
THat your petitioners by a late Act of Parliament in that case made, are
enjoined to pay their Debts by the first of April next, else your p^^ioners
consist^ng of very many of the Nobility, K^i^hts and G^ntry of this Natio, are
to be repu^ed and p^^^^eded against as Bankrupts, from the time of their first
(...), and their estates real and personal to be sold, and con^^quently they
and their posterity not only ruined, but made infamous.

That notwithstanding they are so i^joined, yet their estates are in vested and
certain Judges nominated in the said Act, so that your Petitioners are rendered
unable not only to dispose of their estates by setting, letting, ^r selling of
all or any part of the same, nor receiving their just debts and rents toward
payment of their deb^s, and relieving their necessities, which by that means
they are utterly disabled to do, but are also kept in prison, where they are
like miserably to perish, unless better provided for.

Now seeing the Lord has raised you to be Protector of these Nations, and for
that you have sworn to govern them according to the Laws, Statutes and Custom
seeking their peace and causing Justice to be equally administered, we do not
doubt but you will accordingly do Justice, and right those that suffer wrong,
relieve the oppressed, deliver the needy, take off the heavy burden, and what
ever shall be grievous to the spirits of Christians, or to the free born people
of this Commonwealth. An^ therefore we shall not fear that you will add
thereto, nor lay it more heavy, nor oppress the afflicted in the gate, by
helping forward the affliction, by delivering us and the remnant of our
fortunes, as a prey to the teeth of our cruel and me^^ilesse creditors, who for
the most part are biting Usurers and great Oppressors, who grind our faces, eat
us like bread, much less suffer impossibilities to be laid upon us, and that
Egyptian task of making brick without straw, which we are constrained to in
case this Act be neither absolutely annulled nor regulated: But on the contrary
we hope that your Highness and your honorable council, will remember those in
bonds, as if you were bound with them, in a christian simpathy, fellow feeling,
and compassionate bearing one of another burdens, as becomes christians, show
your selves merciful as your heavenly father is merciful, who is afflicted in
all the afflictions of his people, and doing to us a^ your selves in the same
condition would be done by, having some compassion and regard to us as
brethren, or at least as free born English men who have an equal right to the
same immunities, privileges and liberties as others have, though these various
times and sad events thereof, have fallen heavy upon us; which in holy Job's
since, does rather require pity then cruelty, else the hands of wickedness is
strengthened, iniquity is established by a Law, even ^o pluck our skins from off
us, that is the remainder of our fortunes, and consequently our livelihood,
which is little loss then our blood, for which inquisition will in due time be
made by the righteous judge of heaven and earth, who is higher then the
highest, and who regards these things, and despises not the sighing of the
prisoners, of which number there are not a few, who have been instrumental in
the worst of times for the Commonwealth, though now not regarded nor req^^^ed,
and who knows but that your Highness and religious Council, be come to rule
the stern for such a time and purpose.

We therefore most humbly pray your Highness, and your honorable Council, by
the experience you, and every of you have had of Gods goodness, mercy, and
deliverances in the words of the Apostle, that if there be any consolation in
Christ, any comfort of love, any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion
and mercy, show mercy, or at least justice to your Petitioners in these
particulars following.

1. That in case the said Act be thought fit to be continued, which we hope
will not be, being so much against Law and the custom of the Nation, as to make
so many noble Knights and Gentlemen Bankrupts, a thing never yet done, your
Petitioners may by an Act by you to be made, by way of addition, or explanation
of the former, enjoy their liberty not only till April now at hand, but for 6
months longer, and may have time till then to pay their debt, being the time is
so far relapsed, and your Petitioners still kept in prison, though they
Petitioned Salters-Hall for their liberty till April, so shall they not be
surprised, and their estates sold at half the value, which otherwise cannot be
avoided to the utter ruin of them and theirs.

2. That your Petitioners may have the same relief and remedy against such who
ow them moneys, as their Creditors have against them, in case they pay not
within six months, else how can your Petitioners pay their Debts?

3. That your Petitioners may not be so wholly deprived of their Estates, but
that they may receive such a pittance there out, that they and their wives and
children perish not in the mean time, and that when their estates be sold, some
regard may be had to reserve the chief house, and 4th. or 5th. part of the
estate for the relief of wife and children, for that was allowed to such who
were accounted Traitors.

4. That the Judges in the said Act mentioned or some others may have power
when they have truly stated all debts, to force the Creditor (...) take Lands
for their moneys, either at 20 years purchase, being moneys is at 6 per Centum,
or at so many years purchase as is usual in that Country, where the Lands lie,
at least to take so much by way of Mortgage where the Debtor and Trustees, or
such who have interest in the same, shall consent to pass it, as will per
annum amount to the interest of his money for some time for the security, as
the said Judges, or other persons to be so entrusted shall think fit and order,
upon hearing both sides. And in case the Debtor pay not by that time, that the
Creditor giving him 20 l. more in every 100 l. shall have a full and absolute
Estate for him and his heirs for ever; and that the said Judges may have power
to proceed as a Bankrupt against such as shall refuse to stand to one of these,
in case you will have it so; and also to qualify interest during the War, as
the Lords Commissioners are enabled to do.

5. That they may have power also where they find any Prisoner grievously
oppressed or kept wrongfully in prison, either for a presatisfied Debt, or by
Judgments surreptitiously obtained by the fraud and knavery of Attorneys, or
otherwise, to give the party injured good Damages, either from the Prosecutor
or Attorney, as cause shall require, as well as not for Declaring.

6. That whereas the said Act makes all such ipso facto to be Bankrupts, that
pay not their Debts before the first of April; that your Highness and your
Hononorable Council will declare, what Debts is thereby intended, whither all
the Debts they owe (which if so, all are Bankrupts; neither is all their Debts
yet due, nor demanded) or only such for which they he charged in Execution,
before the twentieth of October, which they conceive to the the true meaning of
the Act, and not have the same arbitrarily to the Judges, who are of different
judgment therein, lest the Prisoner be thereby ensn^r^^ a^^ ruined.

7. That for the better Execution and performance of the premises, an Oath may
be given to the said Judge that they shall execute the power to them given,
^^cording to the best of their skill and judgment, uprightly and truly, without
resp^ct of persons, partiallity, or any sinister respect whatsoever, which is
no more then all the Judges and Justices of England ^^e sworn to do; and that
so much the rather, for that the said Judges are accountable to none but a
Parlam^nt, which is not to be ^^il September, so that we may in the mean time
be d stroyed: But by this means the Creditors are sure to have the^ just Debts
and Inter^st in a (...) time and our P^titioners, Wives, Ch^ldren, and
posterities preserved from utter ruin.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

This Petition w^ (...) sooner presented to his Highness^, but was graciously
answered with a most plenary reference of l^, and of the Act complained
against, to the Counsel, in the^^ words.

HIs Highness pleasure is to refer the consideration of this eti^^ to the
Council, to re^ew ^he Act for the Relief of Crea^ors and poor P^^^on, to ^epe^
^^^^er, and change the the same, or any Clause the ^^em a^ they shall find
cause.

LISLE LONG.

An Ordinance for suspending the proceedings of the Judges named in the Act,
entitled, An Act for the Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners.
WHereas upon perusal and serious consideration had of one Act of Parliament,
entitled, An Act for the Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners; many doubts
and difficulties do appear, which must necessarily occasion an Explanation of
the said Act for the better inabling the Judges in the said Act named and
authorized for Sale of such Estates as are to be sold by the said Act for
satisfaction of Creditors which cannot in short time be effected; and without
such explanation and further direction to be given to the several and
respective Judges, authorized in and by the said Act several inconveniences and
mischiefs would grow, not only to the said Creditors and prisoners, but to
diverse other persons, not meant or intended to be included within the said Act,
and will occasion many troubles and suits in Law, and Equity; for the
prevention whereof, due care is likewise to be had: and whereas many of the
said prisoners have offered really to endeavor the satisfaction of the said
Creditors, if some further time may be given for that purpose; Be it therefore
ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the advice and consent
of his Council, That the said several and respective Judges mentioned in the
said Act, or any of them, shall not proceed to the sale or disposition of any
the Estates Real or Personal, of any of the said prisoners, or of any other
person or persons whatsoever mentioned or intended in or by the said Act; nor
shall otherwise intermeddle in the execution of the said Act or of any the
powers or authorities given by the same until the 20 of April. next. And be it
further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all acts or things to be done
by the said several and respective Judges, or any of them by virtue color, or
pretense of the said Act from henceforth and before the said 20^h day of April.
shall be utterly void null and of none effect; saving only that it shall and
may be lawful for the said several and respective Judges that have veiled or
let out any prisoners upon Sureties or otherwise, out of prison (which
prisoners are to appear again at a certain day before the said Judges, and are
not absolutely discharged by any Order of the said Judges) to sit only for the
remanding and recommitting of the said Prisoners into their form^r Prisons and
Goals, where they formerly were detained in prison, there to ^emain in safe
custody and to continue and be in the same condition as formerly they were at
the time of their Bailing or letting out as aforesaid.

Friday the 31 March 1654. ORdered by his Highness the Lord Protector and his
Council, that this Ordinance be fotthwith Printed and Published.

HEN. SCOBEL Clerk of the Council.



Upon this reference the Honorable Council took the said Petition, as also the
Act, entitled, An Act for the relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners, being
the Act in the said Petition complained against, into their serious and speedy
consideration; and upon Friday, being the last of March, it pleased God, who
works all things in the hearts of the sons of men, according to the Counsel
and good pleasure of his Will; so to dispose of things for the good of his poor
afflicted and distressed servants, by the careful solicitation of the said
Gentleman, that an Ordinance came out in Print, being the very last night that
Prisoners could call any thing their own (so that men may still see the Lord is
faithful, and appears in the Mount) by which it was provided and Ordained,
That all the Judges in the said Act mentioned, should surcease to put the said
Act in execution, till the 20th of this Month, which time His Highness, and
Honorable Council took to consider how to explain the said Act so complained
against, and how to qualify and regulate the same, that men might speedily
recover their just debts, and yet the Prisoners not utterly destroyed in their
Reputations, Fortunes, and Families, which would have inevitably befallen them,
had not the Lord Protector and his Council taken their sad condition into their
serious, pious, and charitable consideration: All which is here mentioned, that
none concerned therein might be unmindfull nor unthankful for so great a
mercy, and so seasonable a deliverance, neither to Almighty God the Author, nor
to such men who were instrumental for so great a Good. For the next day being
Saturday, being the first of April, the Judges at Salters-Hall and elsewhere
were to b^gin their Tragedy, to the ransack, if not utter ruin of the Estates
of some thousands of the Nobility, Knights and Centry of this Nation, they
having already appointed and constituted their own Sons, and other Agents, who
had provided horses for their journey to go into the several Counties of
England and Wales, to view and survey what ever Estate they had real and
personal, and to seize and secure the same, as belonging to Bankrupts, not
only what they had for the relief of their Families at home, and in the hands
or custody of any other; but also what they had in the very Prisons: All which
things they were resolved to sell at their own rates; but what those rates
were, thanks be to God is not yet known, but too much cause there is to fear,
it would have been no gre^^ rate, if we consider what penniworths have been
usually sold by Commissioners for Bankrupts, and especially when some of the
Commissioners were resolved to turn Purchasers: from these things Good Lord
deliver us, and grant us that happiness as by other men's harms to beware, and
not to fall into their hands; Feliciter sapit qui alieno periculo sapit,
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
Vos ego nunc moneo felix quicunque delore,
Alterius disces posse carere tuo.


For by the woeful experience of such who have to do with them at Salters-Hall,
we find their Mercy was Cruelty to all such Prisoners as had any fortunes, who
were as sure to be remanded back to Prison, as ever they came out, let their
causes be never so just or honest, their grand Maxim being, That all Prisoners
that had any Estates must be left in prison till April, whereas had they done
many of them that Justice they might and ought to have done, they had long
since been out of prison, and had paid their debts, and so have been out of the
dangers of being Bankrupts at April, Occidit hominem qui non succurrit cum
potest; and so might have preserved their Fortunes and credits, in case that
Act had stood in force. But it seems it would not answer their ends and
expectations, which was to make all Prisoners that had any Estates, Bankrupts,
that so they might sell their Estates, they knowing it is good fishing in such
troubled waters; neither did they at all fear the sequ^l being not sworn. Now
if any would know the reason of such their proceedings, it is conceived, i^ was
because some of the most eminent of them were Goalers sons, Orator improbus
leges subveriit: And that such had too great an influence upon the rest of the
Judges; else it is thought they would before this regulate the abuses and
extortive fees of Prisons; also they were accountable by the said Act to none
but a Parliament; and withal, they were to have so much a pound out of all such
Prisoners Estates as they sold, and on the contrary were to have no thing from
others: By which the world may see what they aimed at, and how these men played
their Games.

Lucrum sine damno alterius fieri non potest,
Damnum apellandum est cum mala fama lucrum,
Ex damno alterius commoda nulla putas.
And being a Lion may be known by the Paw, as well as by the whole body; let
all such as are or were like to be concerned, praise God for delivering them
out of the Paw of the Lion and the Bear, for they were very near destruction,
he that is wise will remember these things and consider the loving kindness of
the Lord, but a fool regards them not; and in the next place, let all
prisoners by way of thankfullness use all means possible to give all just and
fitting satisfaction to Creditors, for though they have escaped in all
probability this danger of being Bancrupts (which rightly valued, is a great
mercy that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness) yet they must
think a way will be found to force all men to pay their just debts, if they
have wherewith, and not to make a Prison a Sanctuary to preserve and protect
men there from, which as on the one side is no wise intended, so on the other
side all honest Creditors are desired not to be over rigid and severe with
their prisoners, but rather take lands for their moneys from such as shall
offer the same, or other satisfactory security unto them, either by absolute
Purchase, or at least by way of Mortgage for some time, as by the aforesaid
Petition is desired, not holding their prisoners to advantages not
impossibilities, by working upon their necessities, but rather to show Mercy
and Compassion every one to his neighbor, that so there may be no oppression
nor leading to captivity, nor just complaints in our streets, else what do they
do but grapple with heaven, to pull down more vengeance upon a sinful Nation,
for the Lord has a controversy with us, because there is no truth, nor mercy,
nor knowledge of God amongst us. Hosea the 4 and the 1. Therefore as
Christians, take into your consideration the great losses men have sustained in
these times, and how hard and difficult it is now to procure moneys especially
to them who are cracked in their credits and fortunes, insomuch that every one
cannot nor will not deal with them, nor will they give them half the value of
their lands for fear of encumbrances especially while they are in prison, which
in the way before proposed, may be avoided being sold by the owners, and
Trustees and the Judges as by the aforesaid Petititon is proposed, which being
once so sold will be soon bought out of the purchasers hands if he pleased by
some in each County, who durst not deal with the prisoner for the reasons
aforesaid, as also for fear of angring some great men who had a desire thereto,
or had the same in Mortgage; now you that are willing to buy the prisoners
lands from the Judges, we hoped may better venture on the same, when it shall be
sold by them with the consent of the owner, and such as have interest therein,
though you should pay 3 or 4 years purchase more for it, for it is more
honorable safe and honest before God and man, and if you will go otherwise to
work with any that shall really proffer this either by laboring to keep them
still in prison, there, as your common but most unchristian like Phrase is to
make dice of their bones or shall improve your power and interest in the Judges
nominated, or to be nominated, and their Agents for that end and purpose to
sell such part of the prisoners estate to you: or others to your use as you
please, or at such rate as you think fit, know ye that you do hereby little
less, than covet Naboths Vineyard and that if you could bring your designs to
pass you would be no gainers thereby, nor long enjoy your purchase male part a
male dilabuntur, for what should you get if you could gain the whole world, and
lose your own souls; therefore trust not in wrong and robbery, but rather
strive to do justly to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God, else see your
reward in Matthew the 18 and 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, verse. but besides this know
that we prisoners have hopes that the same God that inclined the heart of our
noble Protector, and his wise Council, so graciously to answer our Petition,
and to grant us the first fruits thereof by this late so seasonable an
Ordinance will also give them wise, and understanding hearts to the end, and
will not suffer them to bear the sword in vain, but graciously assist and
direct them to do those things, that may most conduce to his glory and our
good, and not deliver us and the remnant of our fortunes, as a prey to your
teeth, but rather take the prey out of your teeth, and with holy Job search the
cause they know not, and also make such a candid and christian like explanation
of the said Act, in case it do continue, as that you may have your just debts,
and that we and our fortunes and families may be preserved, from utter ruin by
such unreasonable men which the Lord knows, and we know and your own
Consciences know ma^y of you are; for would you have accepted of your dues from
many of us, though we are in for other men's debts, you might have had the same
long since, and we might have been at home with our families, and might have
been serviceable to the Commonwealth in our several stations, but your cruelty
and oppression in seeking our houses over our heads, and our whole fortunes,
makes many men resolute and desperate; Oppression in the sense of wise Solomon,
being that which makes wise men mad, and us so mad as to choose a prison,
rather then our fortunes and posterities should be ruined by such men;
therefore being you take upon you the name of Christians, either act
accordingly or abandon the same appara quod es aut esto quod appares; for it
had been better for you never to have known the way of truth then to sin
wilfully against it, in the light of your own Consciences, in destroying your
brother, for whom Christ died by your merciless cruelty: Again, we hoped that
you your selves, we mean the rich Citizens of London, will not be thought
competent Judges in your own and friends Causes, if you be, we may say farewell
to prisoners and their fortunes, for we have already seen what we must trust
to, and what unsavory salt is sold in Salters Hall, by some whose Consciences
are so nice and tender, that they will not be satisfied with the Oaths of 5 or
6 witnesses, though they concur to prove a general, known, and granted truth,
which was never questioned nor gain said, saving by themselves, especially when
the cause concerns lome of your rich Citizens; therefore we hope that
whosoever shall be, to have them bounded with an Oath at least, and lome other
boundaries and explanations, which may serve for a bridle, or rather, for so it
had need, be a hedge of Thorns to keep them in, in case they act no better than
you did; as by a taste of your salt, which has exceedingly lost his savor, as
the world may see, may appear. And therefore it may be you may take your ease
as well as your Masters did before you; or at least in case you be continued,
and shall through Ignorance, or wilfulness, or both, destroy any man in his
Fortune or Liberty, as they were like to do to many at this time, had not that
divine hand which disposes all things prevented you; that they may be made
subject to Law by an Action of the Case as well as others: Else they may do
what they please, and we see it pleases them to do what they will, even very
strange things; Stet pro ratione voluntas; so that their Wills have been our
Law, when they could give no other reason for it, having acted in some men's
cases quite contrary to what they did in others.

So that we are constrained to publish these our just desires, to the end that
if any man have any thing to say against the Justness and Equity thereof, he
may declare himself, and show us our mistake; if not, let the mouth of Iniquity
be stopped, and let these things be reformed, to Gods glory, ours and the
Nations good; for in our sense, every man is bound to do by us, that are
willing to pay their just debts, as themselves would be done by, were they in
our conditions; Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris: And as for others,
we have no more to say, but Qui vult decepi decipiatur: For no man's Mountain is
so strong, but by one means or other it may be shaken, and he brought to it
before he be aware.

Tu quoque fac timeas and quae tibi leta vidantur,
Dum loqueris fieri tristia posse puta,
Ab alio expectes alteri quod feceris,
Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus,
Et certum presens vix habet hora finem,
And were he sure to be exempt from the same, the Obligation is the greater, as
may appear by the 18th of Matthew, before quoted; therefore we wish we might
all learn this Lesson, Not to oppress one and other, but especially not the
afflicted; for our God will punish all those that oppress them, and will be
their refuge; and assuredly, he that does it does but consult shame to his own
house by destroying many people, and has sinned against his own soul, see
Habakkuk 2.10, 11. For he that oppresses the poor to increase his riches shall
come to want Prove. 22.16. So leaving this to their Christian consideration,
wishing the Lord to give them understanding in all things, we rest nameless,
not because we dare not own what we have said, but because in your esteem we
are dead, and not worthy to be named amongst the living.

FINIS.

