PRINCE CHARLES HIS DECLARATION, Commended to the Public, for the
satisfaction of all His Majesty's Loyal Subjects.

WITH His LETTER to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Thomas Glemham, relating
thereunto.

Together with Their Letter for the Printing thereof.

ANNO, 1648.

PRINCE CHARELS.
To all the Faithful and Loyal Subjects of ENGLAND.
AS sinister ends are the subversion of true peace, so nothing but Justice
executed can establish it; to recapitulate the one, may rather hurt then heal,
rather prove a Corasive then a Cordial; to point a way unto the other, (being
the only present object of popular gaze) may doubtless whet your endeavors
to attain it; wherein all bythoughts post-posed, our highest aims unfeignedly
contend for your preservation.

To pretermit the unparalled injuries and reproaches wherewith our innocence,
with the innocence of our Royal Parents has been aspersed by such, whose
Ambition is to measure Government by will, out of a perverse antipathy, rather
then any necessary enforcement thereunto; whom we Cordially forgive, as we
expect forgiveness from the Highest, or a blessing on our endeavors for the
recovery of our Fathers and our unjustly detained Rights: Yet we cannot but
with deepest sense apprehend, and with sorrow of Spirit publish to the world,
the bold affronts and intolerable sufferings committed against, and pressed
upon the Person and Honor of our dearest Father, together with His Subjects
servitude, who are individually espoused to Him both by Law and Nature; the
only causes that engage us to re-arme, and make our way to Equity by the Sword.
For though it has been too apparently suggested into the opinion of the
Vulgar, (by those who disguise their Actions with the specious color of
pretense) that our Fathers entering into a warlike posture (merely defensive)
was the sole destructive to the Kingdoms Peace (the glory of a King being
utterly inconsistent with the ruin of His People.) We doubt not on the
contrary, but that now palpable experience proves them figments, (though (for a
while) of prevalency to work upon strong Natures, even to the captivating the
Judicious) its influence having dissolved those Catarhs (which policy had bred
in the eye of their understanding) that now with ease they can discern their
error.

And now it is high time, and we resolve (seeing the sense of your accumulated
miseries has revived your courage to an unanimous and general vindication of
your Lives, your Laws and Liberties out of the iron first of Tyranny) to give
you our assistance both by Sea and Land; and make your Cause our own in equal
interest. For it were too black a guilt upon our Honor to stand by, and see
the Crown plucked from our Fathers Head, and the Scepter wrested out of His
Hand, and not betake us to a rescue, especially when God presents us with so
fair an opportunity; the tie of Nature, the deep distresses of our King and
Father, the relief of an enthralled people, (lost by love, and made miserable
by their Loyalty) each being of force to awaken our just revenge, and whet our
Sword to your deliverance.

And whosoever shall assist us either with Money, Horse or Arms, or any
appointed (in Commission) by us, we do engage our Honor so soon as it shall
please God to reinvest our Royal Father in His Throne, to see them fully
satisfied with interest; and all those Gentlemen of what rank or quality
soever, who through misguided zeal or otherwise, engaged against our Father in
the former War, if they shall come in unto us, and engage with us, We do
faithfully promise in the word of a Prince, not only to receive them into
favor, but to advance them unto honor with a respect answerable to their
merits; and what arreares are, or shall be due unto them either for their past
or future service, we promise to see them fully (at the least contentedly)
discharged.

And furthermore we declare unto all His Majesty's Liege people and faithful
Subjects, that we shall make it our greatest care to preserve them from
violence and oppression, either of our own Armies, or our Fathers enemies; and
whosoever shall chance to suffer in this expedition (bearing allegiance to His
Majesty) when God shall please to crown our resolutions with prosperity, we
shall endeavor a recompense to their losses, and give them satisfaction.

And now we call heaven to witness our integrity, and the justness of our
Cause, which we intend to prosecute, though with the loss of our dearest
blood; beseeching no further a blessing on our ways, then we resolve them to
the Almighties Glory; and begging the prayers of all good people for the
preservation of our Armies, the deliverance, safety, and glory of His Majesty,
the recovery of our Laws and Freedoms, the establishing of true Religion, and
the final dissolution of War and discord, in the joyful acclamations of a
welcome Peace.

A Letter from the Prince, unto Sir Marm: Langdale, and Sir Tho: Glemham.
TRusty and well-beloved, I greet you well, requiring you to communicate the
enclosed to the public; I rejoice your affairs prosper, I hasten to be with
you: engage not too far before I come; yet make the best advantage of
opportunity. Use the Country with all civility; refuse none that come in upon
submission: Keep the Soldiers from committing violence, and God prosper your
proceedings.

S. Jermans, Jun. 18. 1648. C. P.


Sir,
IN the behalf of his Highness the Prince of Wales we recommend unto your
care the publishing of what is here enclosed, giving you hearty thanks for your
constancy and fidelity to his Highness, not doubting, but ere long you will
have the happiness to kiss his hand. Our affairs go on prosperously here,
God grant the like to you. As we were writing unto you, a Messenger came to us
from his Highness, who is ready at Callis to take shipping for Holland, so
that within this week we expect his presence here. We have nothing of
consequence to impart at present unto you, but that we are, Sir,

Your humble Servants, M. L. T. G.



FINIS.

