A CALL OUT OF EGYPT, (Where Death and darkness is) INTO THE Glorious Light and
Liberty of the Sons OF GOD, (Where Life and Peace is.) The Lord fulfilling his
PROMISES Declared by his Holy PROPHETS and APOSTLES, In these later Days.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

A CALL OUT OF EGYPT, Where Death and darkness is, into the glorious Light and
Liberty of the Sons of God where life and peace is, etc.
GIve ear O ye heavens and I will speak: and hear O earth the words of my
mouth: I will declare unto you the wonders of God: I will publish the name of
the Lord, and the mighty operation of his power: he is the Rock and the sure
Foundation: his work is perfect: all his ways are judgment and righteousness;
he is a God of Truth, and without iniquity; just and righteous is he, and all
his ways are just and equal: he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; his
way is pure, and his Worship is likewise pure and spiritual, and he sits in his
Throne of Righteousness, Justice, and Judgment, and the wicked cannot stand
before him; they are and shall be like the chafe which the wind drives away,
and cannot stand in the Judgment, nor the Sinners in the Congregation of the
Righteous: Holy and Righteous is the Lord God of Hosts, and delights in purity;
Holiness becomes his house for ever: The Temple of God is holy, where he
dwells and inhabits, and where he is worshipped; and he dwells not in Temples
made with hands, as it is written in the Prophets, The heaven is my Throne, and
the earth is my Footstool; where is the house that ye build unto me? and where
is the place of my rest? for all those things has mine hand made, and all
those things have been says the Lord: But to this man will I look, even to him
that is of a meek and a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my word. This is God,
the living God, which the Prophets and Apostles, and all the Holy Men did bear
witness unto, and declared of, even what they had seen and heard, and tasted of
the Word of Life, which was in the beginning with God, and the Word was God,
and shall endure for ever: The same God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has given for a Covenant of
Light, to lead his people out of death and darkness into righteousness and
peace, to have fellowship with the Son, and to be Heirs, Joint-Heirs with the
Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the world,
and all that is therein, the Sun, the Moon the Stars and the Fowls of the air,
the Earth and all the Beasts of the Field, and the creeping things upon the
Earth, the Sea and all that is therein; who being the brightness of his Glory,
and the express Image of his substance, upholding all things by the Word of
his Power; which power is now manifested, which makes the earth to shake, and
the Inhabitants thereof to tremble at the wonderful work of our God which is
began in this Nation of England. The dreadful God of Host is risen in his
majesty and great power, and is bringing to pass his strange work, which makes
the heathen rage, and bite and gnaw their tongues, and stand astonished at the
strange work of the Lord: Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish; for I
work a work in your days, which you shall in no wise believe though a man
declare it unto you; and this is fulfilled upon this Generation, who will not
believe the work of the Lord though it be declared unto them; but do set
themselves in opposition against the work of God both Rulers and Magistrates,
Priests and People, all join themselves together in battle against the Lamb,
but they shall not prevail, all is vain, the Lamb shall get the Victory, and
has gotten the victory; our eyes have seen and beheld it; praises to his Name
for evermore, who has fulfilled, and is daily fulfilling his promise more and
more; gathering his scattered sheep together, where they have been scattered
abroad in this cloudy dark day, many years the Lords people have been made a
prey upon, but the true shepherd Christ Jesus is risen, and is bringing
deliverance to his people; gathering them from the mouths of the false
Shepherds, and bringing them into the fold of rest and peace, where they shall
eat and be satisfied with living Refreshments in the bosom of the Fathers
love, and there shall be one sheepfold and one Shepherd: Praises to the Lord
the day is come, the happy day, the day of glad tidings which we long looked
and waited for; the day of our God which is a day of glad tidings to weary and
imprisoned Souls, and a day of vengeance and recompense of the Adversaries of
God, as it is declared in the Prophets, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he
has sent me to bind up the broken hearted; to proclaim liberty to the
CAPTIVES, and the opening of the PRISON to them that are bound; to proclaim the
acceptable YEAR of the LORD, and the DAY of VENGEANCE of our God; to comfort
all that mourn, to appoint unto them that mourn in ZION, to give unto them
Beauty for Ashes; the oil of joy for mourning; the Garment of Praise for the
Spirit of Heaviness; that they might be called Trees of Righteousness, the
Planting of the LORD.

And this is the Lord fulfilling in our days, he is planting a garden of
pleasant Plants, and watering and dressing them, that they may be fruitful, and
is plucking up all the wild and fruitless plants, and casting them into the
fire of his wrath there to be burned, that so his people may be a holy and a
peculiar people, that he may be glorified; for he is come (who is pure) to
look for FRUITS, and all fruitless TREES must be cut down, and cast into the
fire; For the LORD has looked down from Heaven, and behold the Land is
corrupted; The Garden of the Lord is overspread with weeds; briars and thorns
does the earth bring forth: and the faithful City is become an harlot, as
faith the Prophet, It was full of judgment: righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers: thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water: thy Princes
are rebellious, and companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards.

See if it be not so now: They judge not the fatherless, neither does the Cause
of the Widow come before them: therefore says the Lord the God of hosts, the
mighty One of Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of
mine ehimies, and I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy
dross, and take away all thy tin, and I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shall be called
The City of righteousness, the faithful City, Sion shall be redeemed with
judgment, and her Converts with righteousness: And now is this day come that
the righteous God is pleading his Cause with his Enemies, and purging them with
the spirit of judgment and of burning.

And Judgment is begun, according as the Apostle foretold: for the time is that
Judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what
shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? Woe and misery will
be their portion, and the destruction of the Transgressors and of the Sinners
shall be together: and they that forsake the Lord, shall be consumed: for he
will be glorified in this his day of Righteousness and just Judgment, which
is now set up in the earth, which makes the Inhabitants thereof to learn
righteousness, according to the saying of the Prophet Isaiah, The way of the
just is uprightness, thou most upright do weigh the path of the just; yea in
the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee: the desire of our
soul is to to thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee: With my Soul have I I
desired thee; in he might; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early; for when thy judgments are in the earth, the Inhabitants of the world
will learn righteousness: Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not
learn righteousness, in the Land of Uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will
not behold the Majesty of the Lord, though he stretches forth his Hand and
calls to come forth of the Land of Darkness, and waits to be gracious; yet
all this will not move him, nor break his heart, but goes on carelessly to
destruction; and because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
evil.

But now the day of just Judgment is come, and woe unto the wicked, it shall
go ill with them, they shall not prolong their Days, because they fear not
before the Lord, the righteous God of Heaven and Earth who loves
Righteousness, and no unrighteous one can have union and fellowship with him.

And this is he, the living, pure, holy, righteous God, which the holy men of
God did bear Testimony of, and the same pure holy God do I bear Testimony of,
which is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; who created man, and made
him in his own Image, and gave him Dominion over all other creatures: But all
have gone astray, and turned aside from the holy Command of God, and so have
fallen from the pure living God, and lost his Image, and are become aliens and
strangers to Him, their Maker; the God of the world having blinded their minds,
and stolen away their hearts from the love of the Creator, into the Creature,
and so their love is in the Creature, and worships and serves that more then
the Creator, and their Bodies, which was the Temples of God, and in which was
his image and likeness, the same is become a habitation for the Devil and all
unclean lusts; and so the image and likeness of the Devil, who has gotten
possession, and sits as ruler and king in the heart, and leads the Creature
captive at his will, to do his work which is unrighteousness: And here is the
first man's state, which is from below of the Earth earthly, and minds Earthly
things, careing for the things of this life, what to eat, what to drink, and
what to put on, laboring and striving by all ways and means to get great
possessions, and to become great in the Earth, and to have the honor of the
World which is below and lies in wickedness: and in this state men and women
are striving to come again unto the Tree of life, and by their Earthly wisdom
which is sensual and divelish, goes about to comprehend the things of God, but
never can: it is a mystery hid and sealed from this wisdom, and never can be
known there: for the World by wisdom knows not God.

But good and full of love is the Lord the righteous God, and by his wisdom
has found out a way contrary to the wit, will and wisdom of man, and that is
of himself: for he has given his son, his only begotten son, who is the son of
his love: him has he freely given for a Covenant of light to bring back again
fallen man, which is driven from God into the Earth: and to reconcile him to
his Maker, and renew that Image of God again, which by his disobedience he has
lost: and there is no way but by the Son: none knows the Father but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal him: And this is he which the Prophets
prophesied of, and which the Apostles witnessed to be the Light of the world,
as John testifies, who came for a Witness to bear witness of the Light, and
says he, that was the true Light which lightneth every man that comes into
the world: and the same do I bear testimony unto, he who is the life and light
of men, which lightneth every one that comes into the world: and this light is
true and pure, and stands a witness for the true and pure God, against all sin
and unrighteousness, and all the deeds done in the body, though never so
closely acted or intended: this true light does not consent, but reproves in
secret for the secret evils that are conceived in the evil heart against God:
And when this witness does arise in the conscience, and trouble man for his
sin, and brings him to some sense and feeling of his miserable condition, that
he lies under the Curse and wrath of Almighty God, and gives him some wound for
his sin, and: and so man comes to see his nakedness with the light of the Sun:
then fearing the wrath of God, does fly from his presence, to actsomething to
pacify the wrath of God: and so Adam-like, makes garments of fig-leavs to cover
his nakedness: And here is the ground of all the forms and professions of
godliness, that stands not in the Light, but are turned from the Light and fled
the judgment, and run to the Scriptures without them, and so reads and gets a
notion of words, decking and painting themselves with the sheeps clothing, and
so read, and pray, and sing, and go to hear Sermons, and cover themselves with
a Covering like the Spirit; but is not the Spirit, and so Woe is their Portion
who are covered and not with the Spirit of the Lord: All this will not hide
them nor cover their nakedness in the day of the Lord; all this does not
cleanse the heart, nor reform the inside; all this which the world calls
Worship and Service of God, as Reading, Praying, Singing and Preaching (as it
is called) or whatever is done in that state, it is no more but a Garment of
Fig-Leafs, or patching a piece of new cloth in an old Garment; it is a false
cover which will not stand in the Fiery day; and this was the state of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who had the Scriptures, Moses and the Prophets words,
and were painted over with good words, but had not the Word of God abiding in
them; so they were strangers to the Life and Power of God, and they did not
believe in the Light Jesus Christ, who was the sum of all that which they
upheld, which were but types and shadows and figures of him who was the
Substance; and therefore Christ the Light cried woe unto them, calling them
Hypocrites, whited Walls, painted Sepulchers, Serpents, Generation of Vipers
who shut up the kingdom of heaven against men neither going in themselves nor
suffers others: And these were of the great men of the world, and learned men,
Doctors and chief Priests, and the learned Rabbis; yet for all this their
learning they knew not Christ, but called him a blasphemer, and those that did
believe on him were called a cursed people that knew not the Law.

Thus in all Ages profession was blind, who were not guided by the Light of
Christ; and as it was then, it is now; all the world, Professors, Priests and
People who deny the Light of Christ, and are not guided by it, all their
Prayers and Sacrifices is abomination, and stincks in the Nostrils of the pure
God, iniquity being found within and regarded in their hearts; this will be the
Sentence from the Righteous God, Go ye Cursed Workers of Iniquity, depart from
me into everlasting Fore pre^a^ed for the Devil and his Angels. And here lies
the world in wickedness; and though many have long been seeking after God, yet
have not found him, because they have been seeking the living among the dead;
and though many have long been talking of the name of God and of Christ, yet
few there be that walk in the living way, and live the pure life of Christ; but
Iniquity does daily abound in the Nation amongst those that profess God: and
that Pride, and Envy, and Wrath, Strife and Debate, Covetousness, Cruelty,
Tyranny and Oppression Drunkenness, Lying, foolish Jesting, vain Sporting and
Pleasures, that the Lands mourns, and the whole Creation groans with the
Bondage of Corruption; and the Name of the Lord is daily dishonored by this
wicked and untoward Generation of Professors, both Priests and People, all are
out of the pure Path in the hypocrisy making a show of Godliness, and drawing
near to God with their lips and with their mouths, but their hearts are far
from him; and their Sacrifices and Prayers are as Cains Sacrifice who murdered
his Brother.

So these who live in Envy and Wrath, and false Accusing, Backbiting,
Slandering, and Persecuting and Reproaching the Innocent harmless Lambs of
Christ, and so are found in the same nature with Cain, for says the Apostle,
He that hates his Brother is a Murderer, and no Murderer has Eternal Life
abiding in him.

And here all who are not wilfully blind may see the National and
Parish-Teachers in the nature of Cain, in envy, and so not accepted of God: and
all that uphold them they are seen in the Light of the Lord Jesus to be blind
and are led by the blind, and both are going into the Ditch, who have turned
from the measure of God, the Light that did and does convince and reprove for
sin and evil; and are soared up in the air climbing up another way: But if ever
you know God or true peace to your souls, back you must come to that which does
reprove and trouble for sin, that must speak peace if ever you know peace; and
that will not speak peace to any who lives in sin; but he that fears God and
departs from Iniquity, and waits upon God shall find Peace and Rest to his
Soul.

Therefore all people whatsoever who read these Lines, seriously consider your
ways, and no longer follow the Parish Priests who preach for hire and seek
gain from their quarter, and through feigned words and covetousness make
merchandise of your souls; they were never sent of God, and therefore they
shall not profit you: Cease from them all, and wait on the Lord in the Light of
his Son Jesus, and learn of him who is meek and low in Spirit, and you shall
find rest to your souls: But while you live in your sins there is no rest, as
says the Prophet, There is no peace to the wicked; but they that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength, for the Lord is come in power and great glory;
and is fulfilling his promise made of old, pouring forth his spirit upon his
Sons and Daughters, and they shall be all taught of God, and in righteousness
shall they be established, and shall be far from Opprrssion, and no worker of
Iniquity, nor any unclean thing can enter into the Covenant of God for this is
the Covenant of the Lord, I will write my Law in their hearts, and put my
spirit in their inward parts, and they shall no more teach every man his
Neighbor, nor every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know
me from the least to the greatest, and I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more
says the Lord: And this is our God fulfilling in these our days his own
Glory; to whom be everlasting Honor and Dominion for evermore.

Witnessed by a Servant of the Lord who is come out of Egypt and through the
Red Sea and the Wilderness, and arrived at the Land of Rest, whose Name is
after the flesh called, ALEX. PARKER.

The Minister of Christ, his plea for PURITY against the Ministers of
Antichrist, and all their Train who plead for sin.
ALL you that plead for sin, whether Priests or People, of what sort soever,
who make a profession of the name of God and of Christ, and yet live in sin and
plead for sin, and says none can be free from sin, or perfect from sin while
they live upon the earth; all your talking and outside customary worship is in
vain, and is no more but your own self-righteousnesse which is filthy and
abominable, and it will never bring peace to your souls, nor you can never be
reconciled to God as long as you live in sin; that is the cause of separation
from God, your sins; your sins have separated between you and me says the
Lord; and as long as sin stands, the Partition wall stands, for it stands
betwixt you and the Lord; and there is no Union nor Fellowship with God nor
with his Son as long as you live in sin, but aliens you are, and strangers from
the pure God and the life of his Son Jesus: And you that plead so strongly for
sin, you plead for the Devil whose servants you are as long you live in sin;
and you are the Antichrists that are against Christ and oppose him and you are
against the end of his coming and being manifested in flesh; for he came to
take awaysin, and so he is called the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of
the world; for, for this purpose was the Son of God made manifest, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil, and to dispossess and cast out the
strong man, and so to purify the heart, and purge the conscience from dead
works, and make it a fit Temple for himself to dwell in and he has promised to
dwell in his people and where he dwells purity dwells, and sin cannot dwell
with him, for it defiles and pollutes his Temple and if any man defile the
Temple of God him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is holy, which
Temple ye are (speaking to the Saints:) Now this I say, That all sin defiles,
as Envy, Wrath, Malice, Pride, Lust, Covetousness, and the like; if these
evils lodge in your hearts, it is evident and plainly manifest that the Devil
the strong man lodges and is axalted above all that is called God in your
hearts, and keeps possession there; for all these evils and abominations that
are acted and done in the world, the Devil is the Author and Father of them,
who has begotten them into his Image and likeness to do his will and works,
which are works of darkness; and so all you that live in sin, as pride,
hatred, variance, debate, drunkenness, swearing, lying, false accusing,
cozening and cheating in your buyings and sellings, using false weights and
measures, and saying and unsaying, boasting of your Wares to be so, and so,
when many times you know to the contrary; and so lie one to another to get
dishonest gain, and make a prey of the simple, who have not so much of the
subtle Serpents wisdom as your selves. All these are the works of the Devil,
and as long as you live in these practices the Devil leads you, and so you
become his Servants, for his Servants you are, to whom you yield your selves
servants to obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness, for the wages of sin is death: and all who go in their sin,
satisfying and fulfilling the lusts and desires of the flesh, and going from
God in the broad way that leads to destruction. But the Serpent is grown very
subtle, and the better to hide and cover himself, he brings Scripture to uphold
his Kingdom all that he can gather up as he conceives makes for his purpose,
that he brings, and his Servants make use of to oppose the pure Doctrine of the
Son of God, and his faithful and true Ministers, who are sent of God to open
the blind eyes, to turn them from darkness unto Light, and from Satant power
unto God, and to present them perfect in Christ Jesus: But says the Serpent
and the Ministers of Antichrist, It is not possible that ever any one should be
free from sin while they live; did not David sin, and Peter sin? and did not
Paul cry out of a body of sin? and are you better then the Apostles? Thus the
carnal professors of our time plead for their Kingdom, being blinded by the God
of the World, that the Light of the Glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST which makes
free from sin, this they know not.

Now all people consider, and see what you do uphold and what you do plead for;
will this Plea stand at the great and dreadful Day when the Lord calls you to
an Account, to say that others were sinners, and bring that as a cloak to cover
you? No, this will not cover you in that dreadful Day of Account; for though
David did sin yet he repented, and had no peace till the Lord had pardoned his
sin: He wept until his eyes grew dim and his flesh did fail of fatness; he
watered his Couch with his tears. Is it so with you? Are you brought down as
David was? and though David left these things upon Record, it was not to
encourage others to go on in sin, but that all might take example not to do the
like, lest the terror and wrath of God come upon them for their rebellion
against so good a God: but you sti^l go on in your vile courses, and instead of
being humbled by the example of others that have sinned, you bring it to uphold
you in your sins; and so goes on daily, treasuring up to your selves wrath
against the day of Wrath, which none of them did that you bring the failings
of; where did David sin again? or Pe^er? or Paul? but were made instrumental to
turn many from their sins: So you being ignorant of the conditions of the
Saints mentioned in Scripture, brings one condition to oppose another; for
there was a time when they were dead in sins and trespasses, and were aliens
and strangers from the Covenant of Promise; and there was a time when they were
dead unto sin, and alive unto God; being reconciled unto God, havnig put off
the body of the sin of the flesh, and had put on Christ, and were alive in him,
and created in him unto good Works; and by the Son of God, the Covenant of the
Father, they were made free from sin, and had passed from death unto life, and
Christ lived in them, who had given them the Victory over their sin, and
defaced and blotted out the image of the devil, and renewed his own Image in
them: and though Paul do speak of a warfare that was in his growth, and through
patient waiting in the Cross of Christ, he witnessed a victory and praised God
who had given him the Victory; so he speaks of several times and conditions, as
a time without the Law, I was alive without the Law once, and he speaks of a
time under the Law, and a time of being made free from the Law, which things
you must all know and witness manifested and fulfilled in you if ever you know
the truth in its purity; for through the same door that all the holy men of God
did pass, must you pass, or else you cannot come to the same rest: And this
door and this way is straight; you cannot enter in with your old Garments, you
must be stripped of all, end become as a little child, or else you cannot
enter; you must know the work of God within you, and the operation of his
Power, and his Righteous Law set up within you to kill sin in its rise and
conception in your hearts, then will you know the war between the Beast and the
Lamb, and the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, that ye cannot do the things that ye would; and this was Pau^s time of
crying out; for says he When we were in the flesh the motions of sin that were
by the Law, did work in our ^e^bers to bring forth fruit unto death; but now we
are delivered from the Law, that being dead unto which, we were hold that we
should serve in newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter;
for I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin
revived and I died: When Paul came to know the Law of the new Covenant written
in his heart, he then saw the body of sin, and the Law in his Members warring
against the Law of his mind, which led him into captivity into the Law of sin
and death, and made him wretched; but the Law was good, as the Apostle
confesses, It is holy, just and good; the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under sin; for the good I would do, I do not; and the evil I would not do,
that do I: Now all the carnal Professors would own Paul here, and bring these
words to hide and cover them in their sins, and so are at ease in their sins,
alive without the Law; but Paul had not peace in this condition, but groaned
and traveled under the burden of sin; but through Christ he thanked God who
had given him the Victory; and even at that time when he writ that Epistle to
the Roman he was made free from sin, though he declares of such a condition,
speaking to them that know the Law, for to them; that were under the Law he
became as under the Law; For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin that
were by the Law did work in our member, etc but now we are delivered, now there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of (...) in Christ Jesus
has made me free from the Law of sin and death; (mark it well, has mad me
free; not will or shall, but he was then made free) for what the Law could not
do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and by a Sacrifice for sin condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousnest of the Law might be fulfilled in us (mind you
here, The righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us) who walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit: So here you may see he speaks of a time without the
Law, and a time under the Law, where the Law was fulfilled in him; and so
passing through the Law, he became dead unto the Law, as he declares in another
place, For I through the Law am dead unto the Law, that I might live unto God:
I am crucified with Christ; yet nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ
lives in me: Come now and try your selves all you formal and carnal Professors,
can you own Paul in this condition? are you crucified with Christ? or are you
alive in your sins? are you crucified to the world and the world unto you?
Answer, Paul was so: But are not you wallowing in your sins, living in the
pleasures of the world, and no separation made from the world, but even with
all your strength griping after the world, loving it, and seeking the honor and
glory of the world, which Paul was crucified unto, though once he cried out of
the body of sin; and so patiently waiting in the cross of Christ, he witnessed
a Victory.

And so as the eyes of your understandings comes to be opened, these things
will be clear, and you will see the times, that Paul declares and is left upon
Record in the Scriptures of Truth; a time without the Law, and a time under the
Law, and a time when he witnessed Christ Jesus the end of the Law: and whereas
he says in one place, I am carnal; he says in another place, I am crucified;
and this is plain to those who have experience of the workings of God; for that
I which was carnal by the Law which was Spiritual, was crucified, and then no
more I, but (...). And this was the mystery that Paul preached, which was hid
from Ages and generations but now is made manifest in his Saints, which Mystery
is Christ in you the hope of glory, whom we preach, teaching and exhorting
every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
Now this I say, where Christ is manifested sin and iniquity is done away, and
the body of sin destroyed and dead; for if Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin; and if any be in Christ he is a new Creature, Old things are
passed away, and behold all things are become new: and if all things are become
new, then where is there room for sin, for that is of the old things which
passes away, and does defile and enters not into the Kingdom of God which
stands in righteousness; and this is your cry, Where were there any that was
without sin? I Answer, They that were in Christ and did abide in him were
without sin, and werenew creatures; and if you say that none were or are in
Christ, then I shall bring the Scripture-Testimony against you, where they bear
Testimony of the Son, For we know that the Son of God is come, and has given
us an understanding to him that is true, and we are in him; [mark well, they
were in him] that is true, even in his Son Christ Jesus: and here the Scripture
declares that some were in Christ, and if any be in Christ he is a new
creature; and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts; and if the affections and lusts be crucified, then where
is the sin or the cause of sin, for lust is the ground of all sin; for as the
Apostle says, There is no man tempted of God, but every man when he is
tempted, he is drawn away of his lust, for the lust goes forth, and sin is
conceived in the heart, and after it is cenceived it brings forth sin, and sin
being finished brings forth death: So the rise of sin is from the lust, which
is conceived in the deceitful and deceived heart; but where the life and power
of Christ is manifested, and the devils works destroyed, and the creature
redeemed from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, and is become Christ's, bought and redeemed by him, and has crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts, then where is sin you so much plead
for, which is a plant of your Father the Devil whose children and servants ye
are as long as you are doing his work, and pleading to uphold that which Christ
comes to destroy? but surely you are deceived by him, for none such Plants
shall grow in my Fathers Garden; but they must all be plucked up and cast into
the fire.

And again, the Enemies of pure Truth who are bent and set to oppose Christ,
they bring another place of Scripture, and thinks they are strongly fenced
here, where it is said, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us: This place is strongly pleaded by all sorts of people
and Professors, who are not in the pure life of Christ; but praised for
evermore be the righteous God, who has hid these things from the wise and
prudent and revealed them to Babes: Now for the simple ones sake I shall speak
and declare, that their minds may be informed, and that they may not be kept in
blindness by the God of the world: The Apostle John was come to high
seize, and saw through the vail; he saw the first man's state where all
are dead in sin; and he saw the second man's state which was born of God and
could not sin: Now the natural man by all his wit and wisdom cannot comprehend
these things; for as it is written, The natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
for they are spiritually discerned: So it is the Spirit that reveals the deep
and hidden things of God; and by the Spirit of God it is seen that the Apostle
speaks to a condition before confession of sin; and whereas he says we, many
times they say we when they are passed from such con^itions; as sames says,
speaking of the tongue, herewith bless we God, and therewith curse we men: but
was fames a curser? But read the following Verse, where John says, But if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to foroive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness; and if you say that John had not confessed
his sin, I bear testimony, and the Scripture likewise testify the same, that
he had both confessed and forsaken his sins, for his fellowship was with the
Father and the Son; and you may see in the beginning of the Chapter, Tru^y
says he] our followship is with the Father and the Son: Now if John had been
in the unregenerate state, and had not confessed his sin, then could he not
have had Union and Fellowship with the Father; for God is Light, and in him is
no darkness a all, if we say ^e have fellowship with God and walk in darkness
we lie, and do not the truth; but if we walk in the Light as he is in the
Light, we have union and fellowship one with another; and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, (mark well, he does not say from part
of your sins, but from all sin) and this is that testimony that we bear of
Christ, That his blood cleanses from all sin, and he saves to the utmost all
that come unto God by him; so if the Son make you free, then are you free
indeed: But we do not speak of any freedom but by the light, life and power of
Jesus; for if any one say he has no sin before he come to witness Repentance,
and the power of Christ not being manifested in him to destroy and take away
his Sin, he does deceive himself, and the witness of God in his own conscience
will testify against him; for if we say we have not sinned, we make him a
liar; but where the life and power of Christ is manifested, and the Devils
works destroyed, and the heart purified, and the body made a temple of God,
shall we deny the work of God? No; far be it from us, but to declare his Name
abroad in the earth, that others may dread and fear before him, and ^^pent of
the evil of their ways; that so they might rejoice with us in the love of our
God, and eat with us on the bread of life in our Fathers house, that they may
be changed and renewed, and witness the birth which is from above, which except
a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Now this birth and this change has long been talked of, but who are they that
are changed and born again? Surely some there are, God has some of his own
begetting; and the Apostle says, He that is born of God sins not, for his Seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God; but this the
world and the children of darkness cannot believe, nor endure to hear tell of;
but ready to tear and rend if any one come to know and witness a change.

And so all you that plead for sin, you may see whom you serve; even the devil
the Prince of Darkness, who leads you and guides you as long as you live in
sin: But blessed be God the happy day is come, and the Lord has many children
who are begotten by the eternal Spirit, and are kept by his power and strength
that the wicked one cannot touch them according as the Apostle testifies, We
know that whosoever is born of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God
keeps himself that the wicked one touches him not; let no man therefore
deceive you with words, for he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he
is righteous; and he that commits sin is of the Devil; hereby are the children
of God manifest and the children of the Devil: So all you that live in Envy and
Wrath, speaking evil of the things you know not, you manifest your selves to be
of the devil who has begotten you into his image and likeness to do his lusts:
and so being after the flesh are found persecutors of them that are born after
the Spirit, as it was in former ages and generations, the children of God were
ever hated and reproached by the world; but it is our joy, accounting it great
riches that we are counted worthy to suffer for his Names sake; knowing this,
that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

A Paper, showing who they are that are blessed, and who they are that are
cursed.
BLessed is the man that fears the Lord, and walks in his way: he shall be
kept in peace when all the world is in trouble. And Misery and no peace unto
them who be out of the fear of God, and out of the way of life, in the broad
way that leads to destruction; following lusts, and pleasures, sporting
themselves in the daytime; you that live after the Course of this wicked
world, not regenerated and born again of the Word of God, but live in your old,
vain, wicked, ungodly and vile courses in the fallen state, bringing forth
cursed fruits from the cursed ground, sowing to the flesh, and satisfying the
lusts of it; living in lying, and swearing; and drunkenness, spending the
creatures of God upon your lusts; drinking one to another, and tempting one
another wit Ale and Beer until you be overcome, and so like Swine wallowing in
the Lusts of Uncleanness; you bear the Image of your Father the Devil, whose
children and servants you are while you continue in your sins and filthiness,
you are of the cursed Generation, and woe and misery is your portion. Woe, woe to
all the Inhabitants of the earth, the Devil is come down amongst you, and he
rages and swells because he has but a short time: The day draws nigh, it
hastes greatly, wherein every one of your works must be tried by fire; and the
Devil together with the false Prophets, and all you who bear his Mark must be
cast into the Lake of Fire, there to be tormented for ever and ever, from the
presence of the Lord and all his holy Angels and Saints; this will be your
Sentence from the righteous God, Depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity.
Consider of this in your life time you that are so full of rage and malice,
scoffing and scorning, and reproaching the Servants and Messengers of the Lord,
who are sent of God to give you warning, and to open your blind eyes, and to
turn you from your sins and from darkness unto Light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that you might receive forgiveness of sins, and an Inheritance
amongst the Saints in Light; and this freely as they are moved of the Lord from
the bowels of tender love to your lost souls, without any self-end, not seeking
for a gift or any reward from any of you; not seeking yours, but you; yet
notwithstanding all their care, labor and travel, see how you do reward them
mocking and scoffing, and envying of them, haling them out of your Synagogues,
and beating them, sending many to the Stocks, and haling others before
Magistrates and so to Prison, and there the innocent suffers under the hands of
cruel men, many being beaten and cruelly used in the PRISONS by the cruel
GOALERS, Witness the JAILER at LANCESTON, where many of the dear Servants of
the LORD have been cast into PRISONS among THIEVES and MURDERERS, and have been
numbered amongst TRANSGRESSORS (as our LORD and MASTER was) and many of them
have been cruelly beaten and most basely abused by the JAILER and his
COMPANIONS. And all this and much more is done against the innocent, whom you
cannot justly accuse of any evil nor wrong done to any man, but freely
declaring against sin in Markets, Cities and Villages, and in your
Idols-temple, where the Worship of the Beast is upheld, to call you from your
false ways and false Worships, into the true and living way, and pure and
Spiritual Worship, to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and to call you from
off all your hireling-Priests and Parish-Teachers, who have long time led you
in blindness and ignorance, and have not profited you, but made a prey upon
your souls for dishonest gain, that so you may all be taught of God in Spirit
according to the Fathers Promise; and all this is done unto you freely, without
seeking any gain or reward from you; and yet notwithstanding all this love and
tender care for your souls, you envy and hate them, and so manifest your selves
to be of Cains Generation, and your Sacrifices are abomination to God, and not
accepted of him; for our God is pure, and there is nothing accepted of him but
that which is offered up from a pure heart, for the pure in heart are blessed
and shall see God, as it is written in the Scripture: but woe is the portion of
the wicked, they are of the cursed Generation, and all your Sacrifices,
reading, singing, praying, preaching and expounding, and whatever you call a
Worship, and all your profession and talking of God and Christ, it is all
abomination while sin and iniquity lodges and is regarded in your hearts, it
is no more but your own self-righteousnesse, acted in your own wills which is
as filthy rags, and as menstruous clothes, and it will not abide the fire; nor
stand in the day of trial: you are but patching a piece of new cloth in the old
Garment, and the Rent will be worse: your gilded outside and fair pretenses,
your talking of the Scriptures and painting your selves over with the Saints
words, it is but sowing of fig-leafs together to cover your nakedness, and it
will not hide you from the wrath of the Lamb, neither will it stand you in any
stead where the life and power of Christ is wanting: you are still out of the
way of God, for though you profess much in words, and draw near unto God with
your lips and mouths, yet it is not saying Lord, Lord that will avail, but he
that does the will of my Father shall enter into the Kingdom, for it is the
heart which he requires, and as long as the devil and sin lodges in your
hearts, in vain is all your talking and going to hear Sermons: It is not your
going one day in seven (or more) to hear a man speak a company of words, and
then all the week after to follow your own lusts and pleasures without yoke and
bridle, no cross nor limit to the carnal mind, but all is at liberty; you can
speak your own words, and think your own thoughts, and do your own works, and
sport your selves in your vanities, your tongues at liberty to speak vain
words; this is not the worship of God, but a false worship, and a vain
Religion, and woe is the end of it, as it was to the Scribes and Pharisee^, who
were high in notion, and professed much in words, yet notwithstanding all their
outside cleansing and Scripture knowledge, they were strangers to the life of
truth and crucified the Son of God; and their profession was but hypocrisy,
and Christ cried woe unto them, calling them Whited wall, painted Sepulchers,
who m^^e c^ea^ the outside of the Cup and Platter, but the inside was not made
clean.

So all you now that talk of the Scriptures, and do not live in that pure life
that they lived in that gave forth the Scriptures, you are hypocrites, and your
profession and outside cleansing is but Pharisaical, and except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Phar^sees, you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Now search and try your selves, and see if your
righteousness go any further then theirs did; (nay, does it go so far? they
made clean the outside, but are not you unclean both within and without? To
that of God in all your Conferenc^ I speak and appeal, that with it you may try
and examine, and see what you can witness of your return unto the Lord your
God whar is cut down in you, or what change is wrought in your hearts, for
there must the work of God be known if ever you know the truth in its purity;
for with the whole heart will the Lord be served, for he calls for it, as it is
written, My Son give me thy heart, and as long as sin lodges in the heart, the
devil lodges, for all sin is of the devil, as it is declared, He that commits
sin is of the devil and as long as the devils works are standing within you,
your profession of Christ without you will not avail, until his life and power
be witnessed within you to destroy the devils works; for for this end and
purpose was the Son of God made manifest, that he might destroy the works of
the Devil; and all sin is a work of the devil: And sin is conceived in the
heart which is deceitful, and there lodges in the heart, and defiles and
pollutes the heart, as Envy, Wrath, Malice, Pride, Lust and Covetousness,
Murders, Theft, evil surmisings, these and such like are works of the Devil,
Plants of his planting, and these do defile a man, and separates him from his
Maker: And as the Devils work is within in the heart, and pollutes the heart,
so must the work of Christ be witnessed in the heart for the purifying and
cleansing, and destroying of the Devils works, and so to make the body a fit
Temple for himself to dwell in.

And this is the work of the Lord, and it is mavelous in our eyes; he is
gathering his people into union and fellowship with himself, breaking the bond
of iniquity, and letting the oppressed go free purifying and purging them with
the Spirit of Judgment and of burning; trying them as gold and silver is tried,
that so his people may be a holy and a peculiar people; a people in whom he
will be glorified by a pure and a godly conversation, who shall bring forth
much fruit to his glory, who has redeemed them from the earth, and from their
vain and ungodly conversation.

We who were gone astray, and wandering as Sheep without a Shepherd, and were by
nature the children of Wrath even as well as others, has the Lord wonderfully
wrought his own work in us, and called us out of death and darkness into
righteousness and peace, to bring forth fruits of the Spirit, love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance,
soberness and virtue, and has shed abroad his love in our hearts, and has
committed unto us the word of reconciliation, to Minister unto others who sit
in the shadow of death, that you all may turn and repent, and come into the way
of life, that your souls may live, in which way the ungodly cannotwalk though
it be a plain way, that fools shall not enter therein, yet the unclean cannot
pass over it; and this is the new and living way that leads to life eternal,
even Jesus Christ the only begotten of the Father, who is given of the Father
freely for a Covenant of Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory
of his people; who is the alone way unto the Father as it is testified of him,
I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, and there is no man can come to the
Father but by me. I am the door, and he that enters not in by the door is a
thief and a Robber.

Now people every where who profess your selves to be Christians, and Christ
to be your way, see if your lives be answerable to your profession, for this I
do declare from the Lord, that no ungodly one can walk in this way: Come and
let us reason together, you will all confess with me that Christ is pure, holy
and righteous, and he is the way to the Father and no other way; then what way
are the ungodly in; who live in pride and covetousness, envy, wrath and
malice? you that live in the lusts of the flesh, and the pleasures and hope of
the world, are you in Christ the way? surely no; you do but deceive your selves
to think that you are in the way to salvation, when you are going on the broad
way to condemnation; for Christ speaks of another way, which all who live in
sin are walking in, They enter not in by the door, but are climbing up another
way, building up Babel, a Tower to reach up to heaven, but the foundation is
sandy and will not stand, who are sayers and not doers, and are in their sins
alive, in their old cross and perverse nature, and so are one of Christ the
way; for if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature, old things are passed
away, and behold all thingt are become new; (Mind this well, all things are
become new) it is not reforming of some things and departing with some of your
sins, but all the old lusts must be denied, all your old ways, and your old
vain heathenish customs; the old man must be wholly put off, and the new man
Christ Jesus put on.

Therefore cease from the evil of your ways, and put away lying, and speak
truth one to another, and leave off your profane Swearing, and let your yea be
yea, and your nay nay; for whatsoever is more is evil, and out of the Doctrine
of Christ; and lay aside all Envy and Malice, and all vain and needless
Discourse which tends not to the Glory of God, nor to edification of one
another; and let your words be few, and in the fear of the Lord, and put off
all your Pride, and lay down your Crowns at the feet of Jesus, and learn
humility and the fear of the Lord, that your feet may be guided out of the
paths of death, and from all unrighteousness and disobedience; where the
Curse of God is, that you may walk in the way of the Lord and in his pure fear,
to stand in awe of him, that so your hearts may be purified, and your
consciences purged from dead works, to serve the Lord in the new life, with a
pure and a perfect heart, that into his Covenant of life and peace where the
blessing is, you may all be led, and eat the Bread of Life at the Table of the
Lord, that your souls may live and praise the Lord for evermore.

Written in love to all Souls, that out of sin they may come, and worship God
in Spirit. By a Servant of Chrict. Alex. Parker.

To all the Beloved Ones, who are of the Royal Seed, whose faces be turned
toward Sion. Greeting,
DEarly beloved Friends, you whom the Lord has Visited in his Love, and has
called you out of darkness and your former vain Conversation, into his
marvelous Light and glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, when many thousands
are left in blindness and hardness of heart, full of envy and rage, and shut
up in darkness, being alienated from the life of God, and strangers from the
Covenant of Promise. Oh prize his love unto you! a Remnant of despised ones,
yet beloved of God, who has called you with an holy Calling, and separated you
from the world of ungodly men, that you may be a holy and a peculiar people
without spot or wrinckle, that you may be presented pure and perfect unto God.

Now my dear friends be valiant for your Freedom, and stand in that Liberty
wherein Christ has set you free, and be not again entangled with the yoke of
bondage, and the weak and beggarly Elements of the world; give not away your
strength unto the Harlot; though Sinners entice you consent not to them; but
stand in the counsel of God, and keep your habitations, dwelling in that which
is pure which ye have received from God, waiting in patience for power from the
Lord to give you a full deliverance over the world and the pollutions and lusts
of it, that over it you may reign and all its fading Treasures, laying up to
your selves Treasures which never sades away, durable riches, where the Rust
and Moth cannot come.

Dwell low in the pure fear of the Lord, for there is safety, that keeps the
heart clean; and so the pure wisdom from above is received into the pure heart;
and bring all your deeds to the Light, that so they may be proved and tried,
whether or no they be wrought in God.

Weigh your words and your Actions in the balance of equity, and be upright
and just in all your dealings amongst men in your buyings and sellings, and
whatsoever things you take in hand; let the Light of Jesus be your guide, that
so your consciences may be exercised toward God and man, that you may be kept
blameless and harmless, as children of God amongst this wicked and untoward
Generation of men, who daily watch with an evil eye for your halting, thereby
to take occasion to blaspheme God and his pure Truth, which ye in a measure are
growing up in; and in a good measure redeemed from the vile and filthy
conversation of the world.

Dear Friends, keep nothing back, but freely give up into the Will of God that
which is for the Sword to the Sword, and that which is for the Famine to the
Famine; and what is for the Fire to the Fire, that you may be thoroughly cleansed
and purified, and tried as Gold and Silver is tried. Whatsoever the Light of
Christ does discover unto you to be evil and an enemy to your souls, cast it
off, hide not the enemies of your peace in your own bosoms; for whatsoever you
keep back will be as thorns in your sides, and as pricks in your eyes:
Therefore cast off every weight and burden, that you may run with cheerfulness
the Race set before you, that through the trials and tribulations you may come,
and so enjoy the promised Land; for through many tribulations and fiery trials
does the children of God pass; for the children of Israel after they were come
forth of Egypt, had many Enemies to war withal before they came to the
promised Land, and many fainted in the way, and through unbelief fell in the
Wilderness; which things are written and left upon Record, that those that
should come after might take warning, and not give way to the Tempter, least
they fall as they did, and so come short of the eternal rest.

Therefore every one of you take warning, and take heed least there be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God: but abide in
the measure of God which is pure and perfect, though but as a grain of
Mustard Seed; yet wait, and you will find the growth of it. When trials come
be content; murmr not, but endure with patience the chastning of the Lord,
for every child whom he loves he rebukes and chastens; for he that is not
corrected and chastised of the Lord, is a Bastard and no Son.

And now is the time come, that Judgment is begun at the house of God; and if
it first begin at us, what will become of the wicked and them that obey not the
Gospel of God? Surely woe will be their portion, and condemnation and misery
will be the end of ungodly men; but blessed are they that suffer tribulation
and persecution for righteousness sake, they shall inherit the Kingdom of
Glory; he that overcomes and endures to the end shall be crowned with Victory,
and shall eat of the hidden Manna, and have right unto the Tree of Life, and
shall have Union and Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and reign with the
Lord God and the Lamb in the holy City for ever and ever.

Therefore though you now be afflicted, be not cast down through unbelief,
though you now weep and mourn, and be reproached and reyiled, yet your sorrow
shall be turned into joy; it is but for a little moment of time, until the
night and the stormy day be over, and then will come a calm; though sorrow and
trouble may endure for a night, yet joy will come in the morning, when the
Day Star does arise, and the glorious day of the Lord does dawn in your hearts,
then shall darkness be expelled, and sorrow and sighing fly away, and the
presence of the Lord in the Light shall be seen, in whose presence there is
gladness and great joy; and you all his faithful ones, who have passed through
many tribulations, and have not loved your lives unto death, shall worship him
in his holy Temple; and thereshall be no need of light, of Sun, Moon or Candle;
but the glory of the Lord shall fill the Temple, and shall be a Light
continually for all his dear children to walk in.

So all my dearly beloved ones, who are in the time of trouble and trial, with
you I do partake, and bear part of your burden, as being a Member of the same
body; and if one Member suffer, all the Members suffers with it; and though you
come to such a condition, trouble within and trouble without, on every side
Enemies, yet do not distrust God, neither look back into the world of darkness
again, there is no help for you there; but as the Children of Israel in former
time were encompassed about, Pharaoh behind and the Red Sea before, and on
either side Mountains, they were even ready to faint and murmr; but Moses the
Servant of the Lord, who was chosen to be their Leader out of Egypt, he
exhorted them to stand still and see the salvation of God: they were not to
stand still in Egypt; but being come forth of Egypt, the Lord showed his
wonderful hand in preservin g of them. So I say unto you dear friends, who are
come forth of the Egyptian darkness, and are delivered from those gross evils
that the world lives in, and have a light born up in your understandings to
lead you, but yet do find many enemies warring against you, even they of your
own house; so that you know not what to do nor which way to go to find peace.
I say unto you, will nothing, neither do you run before your guide, but stand
still in the Light that discovers your Enemies, and there wait in the will of
God, and you will see salvation from the Lord by his living Power, binding and
chaining, and subduing the strong Enemies which wars against your souls; and so
a secret hope will be begotten in you (by the powerful Word of the Lord, which
is night in your hearts) which does purify your hearts; and that which
formerlie you committed, imposlible, by Faith, in the Light which comes from
the Son of God, you see to be possible; and the Lords perfect work being begun
in you, you have a strong hope, and knows assuredly, that he who has begun a
good work in you, he will perfect it to his own glory: And he that has this
hope, purifies himself even as Christ is pure.

And here is the patience and the Faith of Saints, which though never so
little, if it be but as a grain of Mustard Seed, it removes the strong and high
Mountains of Sin, and gives victory over the the world and the lusts of it,
and so purifies the heart.

And this is the true and the living Faith, which the Saints of God were in,
who were of one heart and one soul; and it is the same now as it was then; and
all who are in this Faith, by it their hearts are purified, and so are led into
purity and one-ness of mind and heart, to serve and worship one living and
true God, in one living and pure way, which is in spirit and in truth, where
there is no rent nor division, but pure love and union, written in one another
hearts with the Spirit of the living God.

So in the light which from the Lord Jesus Christ does come, who is the true
Light which lights every one that comes into the world; which Light is but
one in all, though thousand times ten thousands, this Light is pure and but
one; and all who love it and believe in it, are led into oneness and Unity of
Spirit,

In it every one wait and walk, that you may he led out of death and darkness,
and all the untoward ways of the world, into the pure way of Righteousness
and Peace to follow Christ in the narrow Path, which whosoever follows shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. And dwell in love and
union, watching over one another with a pure (...) and be tender over one
another, as Members all of one (...), and if any be overtaken with a fault, you
that are spiritual restore such a one in the Spirit of meekness, that shame
and condemnation may come upon the transgressor, and the innocent may be set
free; and let not the cursed thing lodge among you, but be ye holy in all
manner of conversation, because the Lord our God is holy, and no unclean thing
can dwell with him nor enter into his righteous Kingdom: Therefore be ye
separate from the ungodly world, and touch no unclean thing, and the Lord will
receive you, and will be to you as a Father, and you shall be his Sons and
Daughters. Cast away all filthiness from amongst you, and let no prejudice
lodge nor rest within any of you, but forgive one another as God in Christ has
forgiven you; for if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your
heavenly Father forgive your trespasses; therefore whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, do you likewise unto them, for this is the Doctrine of
Christ, and it is not the sayer, but he that both his Will shall know his
Doctrine.

So the Lord in pure Wisdom keep you and preserve you out of all strife and
contention, that a daily growth there may be amongst you, that you all may be
established in the living truth, no more to be tossed to and fro with men's
Doctrines which be changeable, but all wait upon God in the Light which never
changes, that you may be all taught of God, and every particular may feed upon
your own food, and have sufficient bread in your own houses to feed upon that
there be not a beggar in Israel, nor no Vagabond, but that all of you may have
a habitation in God, and grow up in him, that the Springs of life may be
opened, and your souls may be fully refreshed with the bread of life in my
Fathers house.

And all my beloved Friends keep your habitations, and stand upon your Watch,
that you may hear the voice of your beloved when he calls, and be obedient to
his voice and do his will; and after you have done his will take heed of
exaltation, but wait in patience that you may receive the Promise; for the same
that is unwilling to obey the will of God when the will of God is obeyed, will
get up into presumption; and that which does presume in the time of trial will
despair.

Therefore every one be watchful, and keep the door of the house of the Lord,
that the Enemy enter not to defile and pollute his holy Temple. Turn not to
the right hand nor to the left, but keep in the even and plain way. When joy
and refreshment comes take heed of exaltation: And again, when trouble, and
crosses and afflictions comes, do not fall into desparation; but wait at
Wisdoms Gate that you may be seasoned with Grace, having salt in your selves to
savor withal, that you be not drawn away with the errors of the wicked; but
that all of you may be daily refreshed and grow up in strength until you come
to a perfect man in Christ Jesus; the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you, and establish you in the Truth.

Written in love to your souls, by way of remembrance to stir up your pure
minds; by your dear Brother, who is a laborer in the Lords vineyard, ALEX.
PAREER.

For Friends in the Truth to be read at their meettings when they are met
together in the fear of the Lord.
Corrnwa^l, 31. day of the 5th. Month, 1656.
The Night is far spent, and the Day is at hand, awake, arise from the dead,
that Christ may give you Light: Cease from all the blind Guides, they deceive
you; try them, and by their fruits ye shall know them.
BEware of false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves; ye shall know them by their fruits: Mat. 7.15. to the
21. etc.
Do men gather Grapes of Thorns? or Figs of Thistles? even so every good Tree
brings forth good fruit; but a corrupt Tree brings forth evil Fruit: A good
Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit; neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good
Fruit: Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire; wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Now all people every where who have long been led by blind guides, and have
been deceived by the false Prophets who have got the Sheeps clothing, and
decked and painted themselves with the Saints words; but where is the fruit
that is brought forth? it is their fruits that makes them manifest; the Lord
looks for fruit; but here is nothing but leafs, here is fine Trees with
flourishing leafs, but no fruit appears, much talk and profession of God and of
Christ there has been in this Nation of England; fair outsides, glorious
words, but the life is wanting, there is no fruits, but all manner of
unrighteousness does abound in the Nation: Does not pride abound? and
covetousness, drunkenness, swearing, lying, and all manner of
unrighteousness? the Land is full of fruitless Trees, the boughs even sway
and are ready to break down, they are so full of the evil fruit: pride is come
to such a height that thepeople do scarce know how to walk, nor what to put on;
it would even grieve a sober Spirit to see the vanity of the times, both men
and women painting themselves in their gorgeous attire, fashioning themselves
according to the custom and course of this wicked vain world, the inventing
mind which is estranged from God, inventing new things and new fashions to
please the curious mind, and so one fashion comes up (which is invented in the
fallen wisdom) and the lust runs into it, and gets into that fashion, and after
a certain time grows weary of it and it passes away: And the same venting
mind which is out of the truth invents another new Fashion, and the people of
all sorts (as far as their money will reach) they get into that fashion, and
after a little time it passes away; and so the world passes away and the lusts
of it, and the people spend their time according to the course of the world;
yea, those who profess themselves Ministers and Teachers in the Nation, who
should be examples unto others, even these are as bad and as fantastic as the
rest; they and their Wives go in as great height and pride as any people; nay
do they not exceed many in pride and vanity. The poor laboring man working in
the sweat of his brows to get his living and to maintain his wife and Family,
the Priest or his Agent comes and he must have a part (yea and a great part
too) of what the poor people have labored hard for: and this the Priest and
his Wife and Children spend upon their lusts, their Wives and their Children
going in their Huds and Veils and changeable Suits of Apparel: even the sins of
Sodom and Gomorrah are found amongst them, Pride, fullness and abundance of
idleness; and if any one refuse to give them money, then do they go to Law and
compel them by force, which never any of the Lords true Ministers ever did,
neither Prophets nor Apostles: And let any of the Servants of the Lord come
into their Assemblies and declare against their filthy and covetous practices,
then their rage and envy arises against the Servants of the Lord, and some are
beaten in their Synagogues, and some are haled forth, some stocked, some
stoned, some sent to Prison: and they cry unto the people their Hearers, Beware
of False Prophets: these be the False Prophets in Sheeps clothing, hearken not
to them, take heed of going to them least you be deceived: when poor people are
already deceived, for they are in their sins both Priests and people, and they
who live in sin are deceived.

And this is the cry of the chief Priests and in their high pla^es, Beware and
take heed of False Prophets and such like: but (Friends) let us try them, no
longer take their words, but try them by their Fruits: if the Tree be evil the
Fruit cannot be good: and here by the Scriptures you may try them; proud man or
a covetous man are no Ministers of Christ, I know them by their Fruity: The
Devil is the King of Pride, and covetousness is Idolatrr: and these two sins
are much reigning among the Clergymen (the black Coats) though they may get
the Scriptures (the good words) which is the Sheeps clothing, for Jesus Christ
is compared to a Shepherd, and the Saints and followers of him were compared to
Sheep which were innocent and harmless creatures.) Now I say that a proud man
or an envious man or a covetous man, or such like, they may get the Scriptures
(the Declaration) and be full of them, and painted over with the good words and
so with good words, and fair speeches, through covetousness makes merchandise
of their souls; this is but still the Sheeps clothing, a fair outside, but see
what is within; please them and they willl speak peace; but cross them in any
thing, they are full of envy and rage and persecution; so here by their fruits
they are known. A proud man, or a Drunkard, or a man that is a striker and
given to Wines, or an envious man, these and such like are marks of the false
Prophets, though they may speak the good words, yet not being spoken from the
pure life they do not profit the people, but are deceivers, having a form of
Godliness, but wants the power, and so leads poor people captive, laden with
sin, and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, but never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth: For (do but consider) can a proud man lead out of
pride? Can a proud Priest with his Rings and his Ribans, and gaudie attire, can
he lead out of Pride? he may speak against Pride, but speaking against Pride
and living in it, he is an hypocrite, and his preaching is in vain. Or can a
covetous man lead out of covetousness? or an envious man out of envy? or a
drunken Priest can he lead from drunkenness? or any other what ever they be
that speak against any sin, and they themselves, be guilty of those sins? they
do but condemn themselves, and all their Religion is vain, and their Faith is
vain, for if they had stood in the coursel of the Lord, they should have turned
many from the evil of their ways,: but they run, and the Lord never sent them,
and therefore they shall not profit the people at all. But it may be some may
say, Though they may be proud men, and covetous men (and such like) yet they
are good men in the Pulpit, and speaks many good truths; and we are to do as
they say, and not as they do: And this they speak, because Christ spoke such
words concerning the Scribes and Pharisees, where he says, Do as they say, but
not as they do, for they say and do not. But here you must consider, that the
Scribes and Pharisees had the commands of God, and the Law of God, which were
to be observed and kept, for Christ came not to break the Law, but to fulfill
the Law; but this was a time before Christ was sacrificed up; but when he was
sacrificed up, and risen, those who preached Christ did not go to hear the
Scribes and Pharisees, neither were they to do as they said; but they declared
against those things which the Pharisees upheld, which were but shadows, and
preached Christ the substance, as the Scripture witnesses: And Paul an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, in his Epistle 2 Timothy 3. chap. marks out the false Prophets so
plain, that even he that runs may read; and he does not exhort the people to
follow or hear such, but turn from such as had the form but not the power.

And so all people I do exhort you, as you tender the glory of God and the good
of your own souls, to turn from all the Priests and the false Prophets of what
sort, soever who have not the power of God, who say and do not, for they can
never profit you at all; for it is not every one that faith Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in Heaven. Therefore weigh all things well, and try them, and by their fruit
ye shall know them.

The Day of the Lord is coming upon all the ungodly, which shall burn and
consume the wicked as Fire consumes the Stubble.
THe Lord God is risen in Power, and is making a separation between the
precious and the vile, gathering the Wheat into the Garner, and will burn up
the Chaff with unquenchable Fire: The day is at hand, it hastes greatly, a day
of blackness and darkness, a day of weeping and bitter lamentation to all the
Adversaries of God; a day that shall burn like an Oven, and all the proud and
all that do wickedly shall be as Stubble, and shall be consumed root and
branch. Look upon the Stubble all you that live in your sins, there is your
Figure. Look upon an Oven when it burns, there you may read your figure, the
wicked shall be as stuble, and shall be consumed in the day of the Lords fierce
indignation, which is kindled already, and none shall be able to quench it.
The sharp two edged Sword of the Almighty is drawn forth, it is furbushed ready
for the slaughter; and woe to the wicked and ungodly who cast the Law of God
behind their backs and turns his Grace into wantonness, it will go ill with
them, and they cannot hide themselves from the Wrath of the Lamb.

Drunkard, thou can not hide thy self, the Lord will find thee out, and give
thee thy portion in the Lake. Swearers, Liars Scoffers and Scorners, you cannot
hide your selves, you are the Ungodly that turns the Grace of God into
wantonness, and into condemnation you must come who hate the Light (that shows
you sin and your evil deeds) and loves the darkness better then the Light; the
Light is your condemnation. And all you that live in pride and vain glory
(sporting your selves in the day time, nourishing your hearts as in a day of
Slaughter) the Devil is your Father who has begotten you into his image and
likeness; ye murder and kill the Just, and crucify Christ afresh; and woe is
your portion, woe to the Crown of Pride, for the Devil is the King of Pride: And
all you covetous cruel oppressors, who are heaping together the earthly
treasures, who grind the faces of the poor, weep and howl for the misery that
shall come upon you; your riches are corrupted, your Gold and Silver is
cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you. Woe to you that
live in envy and wrath, you are of Cains Generation and nature who murdered his
Brother, and all your Prayers and Sacrifices are abomination, and stinks in the
nostrils of God. And all you that revi^e, scoff and scorn, backbite, slander,
and falsely accuse the innocent and harmless Lambs of Christ, tearing and
rending, hailing them out of your Synagogues, and so to Prison, you manifest
your selves to be the wolves that devour and make a prey of the Lambs; you are
the fruitless Trees that cumber the ground, and must be hewn down and cast
into the fire: The glory of the Lord is shining, and the day of the Lord is
dawned, and the daystar is risen in the hearts of the Lords people, and you are
discovered and made manifest, and seen to be the wolves, and the Scripture is
fulfilled upon you which Christ spoke forth, Behold, I send you forth as Lambs
in the midst of wolves; is not this so now? See what hailing and imprisoning
and cruel usage is in this Nation of England, of a poor despised harmless
people, hailing them to Courts and Sessions for no other cause but for
declaring of the truth, and witnessing against the deceit in Professors,
Magistrates, Priests and people, and for this are the innocent hated and
reviled, and suffer bonds and imprisonment, and some have been given up to
death; and all this endured with patience, not seeking for revenge, but do
follow our Lord and Master Christ, w^o endured the contradiction of sinners;
and we find his words to be trne, where he says, Ye shall be hated of all m^n
for my names sake: but rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great shall be your
reward, for if ye were of the world the world would love you; but because I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore does the world hate you; but woe to
the world and all wicked malicious persecuting spirits, better a Millstone had
been hanged about their necks, and they cast into the midst of the Sea, then to
offend one of the little ones of Christ Haste, repent and amerd, least sudden
destruction come upon you.

The wages of Sin is death, but the gift of God is life and peace.
ALl you that live in sin and wickedness, as Envy Wrath, Malice, Pride, Lust,
covetousness, Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Slandering, Backbiting, false
Accusing, Scoffing and Scorning, Revilings, Reproachings, Mocking and Jeering,
Oppression, Cruelty, Tyranny, Murders, Theft, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witcheraft, Variance, Emulation,
Seditions, Heresies, Anger, Perverseness, Frowardness, Impatience and Unbelief,
Cozening and Cheating, and defrauding one another in buying and selling, using
false weights and measures, inventers of evil things, plotting mischief upon
your beds, Covenant-breakers, without natural affection; implacable,
unmercisul, living in vain sports and Pleasures, spending the good creatures of
God, and devouring the Creation upon your lusts, sporting your selves in the
day time, foolish-jesting, idle and filthy communication, and laughter, which
is madness: These (and such like) are works of the flesh, and they that act
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; for which things sake comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience; and the curse of God
remains upon such who live in the flesh, fulfilling the lusts and desires of
it, such cannot stand before the righteous God, neither can they enter into his
righteous Kingdom, but must be cast into utter darkness, which is the portion
of all the wicked; for to the wicked there is no peace, but woe and terror shall
pursue them; upon the wicked, God will rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup from the just God, who
is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity.

Therefore all you workers of iniquity, fear and tremble before the Lord, and
deceive not your selves with a vain hope; search these Scriptures, and see your
portion, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Col. 3.5, 6. Ps. 9.17. Ps. 11.6.
Mat. 7.23. and 25.30, 41. Romans 1,29, 30, 31, 32. Rev. 21.8. and 22.15. read
these Scriptures with seriousness, and then (with the light of Christ in your
consciences) try and examine your selves whether you be acting and living in
these sins abovementioned, or any of them; and if upon search you be found
guilty, then what will you plead or answer the Lord? or what promise is there
due unto you as long as you live in sin? truly none, but all the curses,
plagues and woes that are mentioned in the Scriptures, is your due and portion
for your sin and disobedience, and all your applying of the Promises, and
saying Christ dyed for you, and say you believe in Christ; yet all this will
not avail nor speak peace to your souls (as long as you live in sin) but the
witness of God in your own consciences will testify against you, and be your
condemnation; and your faith is vain who are yet in your sins. Therefore repent
and turn from your wickedness, cease to do evil and learn to do well, draw near
unto God and he will draw near unto you; put away lying and swearing and all
profaneness, let no corrupt speeches proceed out of your mouths; and hearken
to the voice of Christ that your souls may live; spend not your money for that
which is not bread, nor your labor for that which does not satisfy. But
hearken with diligence to hear the voice of the beloved Son of God, who says,
Learn of me, I am meek and lowly in Spirit, and you shall find rest to your
souls; and that is it in you all which reproves for sin, and checks you when
you do amiss, when no mortal eye sees you; mind this well, and wait to be
guided by it, and it will lead you out of sin and evil up to God the Father, to
have Unity with him and with his Son, and so to bring forth fruits of the
Spirit, love, joy, peace, gentleness, meekness, soberness, brotherly kindness,
forbearing and forgiving one another: And this will be a present guide unto you
(if you love it and bring your deeds to it to be tried by it) at all times and
in all companies to lead you to God; if sinners entice you, consent not to
them, but fear the Lord and stand in awe and sin not: But if you hate this
Light and live in your sins, and your old vain ungodly conversation, this Light
will be your condemnation. Now while you have time prize it, and work while it
is day, lest the dreadful night of darkness come upon you when none can work:
Awake, awake, and arise from the dead, prepare your selves and make ready, for
the Kingdom of God is at hand.

Come out of Babylon, partake not of her sins, lest ye partake of her plagues,
and wait upon the Lord, that you may eat of the Bread of Life, which satisfies
the Soul.
ALl you that are breathing after God, who are Hungring and Thirsting after
righteousness, which have long been wandering upon the mountains, as sheep
without a shepherd; who have long been seeking after God, but have not sound
him, and have many years been hearers and learners, and have spent much money
and labor, and much precious time, but have sound no satisfaction nor
refreshment to your hungry thirsting souls, but still there is a cry within for
want of a Savior; something in your consciences cries and is not satisfied;
notwithstanding your many years professing and talking of God and Christ, and
your running after this man and that man to hear Sermons (as they are called)
yet still you are in your sins; and your own old vain ungodly conversation, and
crooked and perverse rebellious and disobedient nature, upon which the wrath of
God abides; and so there is no true peace, joy nor rest to your souls: I say
unto all such simple hearts (who have been tossed to and fro many years with
the windy doctrines of men, but have not found peace) return home to your
Fathers house, seed no longer amongst the swine upon the husks; you cannot fill
your belly there, but come into my Fathers house, for there is bread enough:
Seek not the living among the dead, but awake, awake all you that sleep, and
arise from the dead, that Christ may give you light; turn your minds inward,
and seek the last groat in your own house, for the Lord is near; yea doubtless
(Friends) the Lord is very nigh, for in him we live, and move, and have our
being: For it is he that gives to all life and breath, and all things; and out
of his love to fallen mankind, has given his only begotten Son for a
Covenant of Light into the World, who does enlighten every one that comes into
the World, that all men through him might believe: There is that light in every
one of your consciences, which if you love it, will teach you continually, and
lead you out of sin and unrighteousness, into purity and holiness, to worship
the living God in spirit and in truth, and so to be taught of him in spirit
according to his promise; I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and my sons
and my daughters shall Prophecy; and I will make a new Covenant with them, I
will write my law in their hearts, and put my spirit into their into their
inward parts; and they shall no more teach every one his Neighbor and Brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least to the greatest;
and I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember ^o more; and this is the Lord fulfilling in our day,
praises to his Name for evermore; he is gathering his scattered sheep together,
where they have been scat cred abroad in this cloudy dark day, and is bringing
them into the Fold, and there shall be one Sheepsold and one Shepherd? this is
the promise of the Father which he is now bringing to pass, establishing his
own Kingdom in Righteousness, and uniting and joining his people together, that
they may all be of one heart and mind, that they may with one voice and one
consent glorify and praise him in the Covenant of his Son, which he is now
leading his people into, where no sin enters, but is all shut out of the
Kingdom and Covenant of the righteous God.

Therefore all people every where prize this precious time which the Lord does
give unto you, and trifle it not away in vanity and vain delights, but hearken
to that which is pure, which convinces and reproves for sin in your
consciences, and makes manifest the evil of your hearts, that is, The pure
light of Christ, which did never consent unto sin, but stood against you,
witnessing for God against sin, though never so secretly committed.

This is the eye which a long time has been veiled and blinded by the God of
the World, but now is the Lord unvailing, and uncovering, and stripping of all
the stolen garments, which the Serpent has painted and decked himself withal,
and the Devil can no longer hide himself, but by the light of Jesus Christ
shining in the conscience, he is found out in all his Wiles and Temptations,
whereby he goes about to ensnare and deceive the innocent: For as long as the
Devil can keep people from owning this light, he can lodge in the heart, and
work his works in the heart; but when ever they come to own, and walk in the
light, he cannot work, but by the light his works is seen; and by the power and
life of Christ within, the Devils works are destroyed, and the heart purifyed,
and the conscience purged from dead works, and so the body is made a Temple of
God, which Temple is holy; and if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall
God destroy.

Therefore all people who love your souls, come out of your sins (which does
defile you and separate you from God, and breaks your peace with God (and love
and walk in the light of Christ, and bring your deeds to it: For every one that
does truth he loves the light, and brings his deeds to the light, that they
may be proved and tried whether or no they be wrought in God; and in the light
you will have union and fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Christ
will cleanse you from all sin (walking in the light) for this light is pure and
but one, and leads to purity and oneness, out of all Divisions, Strife and
Contention; and from all the changeable Priests and changeable Doctrines, and
changeable Worships, and changeable Laws, that stands in the will of Man in the
fallen Wisdom, and will lead you unto Jesus Christ the unchangeable Priest, the
alone Teacher of his People, who teaches all his freely by his free spirit,
and leads them out of Death and dead Works, into the pure way and path of life,
that they may bring forth fruit unto God; and blessed are all they that fear
the Lord and walk in his way: But the wicked must be turned into Hell, and all
the Nations that forget God, therefore let every one that names the Name of
JESUS CHRIST, depart from iniquity.

From a lover of your Souls, but a witness against all Sin. A. P.

THE END.

