To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND.
The humble Petition and Appeal of Josiah Prymat of London, Leatherseller
Shows,
THat your Petitioner by his under Tenants, George Lilburn, Esquire and George Gray
the younger Gentleman both of the County of Durham, being in the years 1647,
1648. and 1649. in a just and quiet possession of the Collieries, or Seams of
Cole in Harraton in the County aforesaid, called the 5 quarter and 9 quarter
Cole, (and having spent near 2000l. to win the same,) which lay drowned and
lost from 1642. to 1647. Sir Arthur Haslerig in September 1649. procuring Col.
Francis Wren, one of the Committee of that County, and Col. George Fenwick to
join with him, made an Order (against which the rest of the said Committee
present protested) to Sequester the said Collieries, under color of an untrue
suggestion that Sr William Armyn had Sequestered the same in 1644. as belonging
to one Thomas Wray, a Papist Delinquent, and thereupon the said Sir Arthur
violently dispossessed your Petitioners Tenants, and seized their goods, and
Let the said Collieries to Col. Francis Hacker, and several of the Officers of
his own Regiment.

That your Petitioner has Petitioned to the Commissioners for Compounding, for
relief; but by the power and influence of the said Sir Arthur, upon most of the
said Commissioners, your Petitioner has been delayed and denied the ordinary
course of proceedings in all Courts of Justice; and at last coming to hearing,
the said Sir Arthur appeared every day of the hearing, and took upon him, not
only to plead against your Petitioner (which is humbly conceived to be contrary
to Law, he being a Member of the Supreme Authority) but also Authoritatively to
prejudge your Petitioners Case, and to direct the said Commissioners what to
judge therein, and by his power and influence upon the said Commissioners, he
overawed most of them, and after full hearing, judgment being respited from
day to day, the said Sir Arthur kept private correspondence with some of the
said Commissioners, about finding some new color or pretenses to detain your
Petitioners Possession from him, whereupon he produced new pretended Evidence
after full hearing; and thereupon the major part of the said Commissioners, not
daring (as is humbly conceived) to oppose the will and pleasure of the said Sir
Arthur, have contrary to clear Evidence before them for your Petitioner,
refused to relieve him, and have punctually pursued in their Judgment, the
directions publicly given by the said Sir Arthur.

That the said Commissioners being the only persons Authorized by the
Parliament to hear and determine all Cases about Sequestered Estates; your
Petitioner cannot be relieved from the oppression and Tyranny of the said Sir
Arthur, save by the Parliament or their special Order and Directions, and your
Petitioner has been kept from his Possession above two years, and the said Sir
Arthur has declared the said Collieries to be worth at least 5000l. per annum.

May it therefore please the Parliament, in respect to the Public Justice of
the Commonwealth, to cause the truth of the Premises to be speedily examined,
and to provide for your Petitioners relief from the oppression and tyranny of
the said Sir Arthur Haslerig, and for the dispensation of Justice without fear
or favor, as to your Wisdoms shall seem most just.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. Josiah Primatt.


