THE PRIESTS ROUTED IN THEIR FRONT-GUARD OF TITHES. OR An Answer to a Paper
brought in Mr. NALTONS name (Teacher of Leonard Fosterlane) to some of the
Inhabitants of that place. Entitled

The dreadful danger of Sacrilege, the withholding of TITHES, etc. A true
Copy whereof is herewith Printed.

By the SHOOMAKERS of Martins Legrand.

MICAH. 3.5. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people
err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace: and he that puts not into
their mouths, they even prepare war apainst him.

Therefore thus says the Lord, behold against this family do I devise an evil,
from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go haughtily.

Micah 2.3. London, Printed by Hen. Hills and are to be sold at his house in
Fleet-yard, and at William Larnars living at the Black-moore near Fleet-Bridge.
1652.

Considerate Reader.
HOw much mankind is engaged to his maker by those rich manifestations of love
which he has cast forth as strong Cords to draw the Soul unto himself, we
doubt not but thou art in some measure sensible, if thou have but tasted
(though never so little) of the waters of life; And therefore we are confident
thou find in thy self a Spirit strongly moving toward some kind of
reciprocal acknowledgement. And wherein can the love of a servant more appear
then in vindicating the honor of his Master? or wherein is the integrity of a
Saint more discovered then by bearing witness to the truths of his Savior? who
witnessed a good Confession when thereby he wrought our Redemption. In
persuance of this duty, which indeed is the chiefest amongst others, we are
constrained to speak something according to that talent of knowledge which the
God of wisdom has given us, by way of witnessing against those innovations
which covetousness and corruption has introduced and imposed as heavy yokes
upon the sons of men, by which the man of Sin mightily exalts himself where God
should have his throne; neither do we conceive how we should escape the same
guilt that stained and condemned the slothful servant, if we put not forth our
strength and abilities, which God has given us, in this spiritual conflict
against sin and error so much the more evil by how much the more it boasts it
self in claiming its descent and patronage from God. We have told thee what we
are, therefore expect here no learned or flourishing discourse: but if truth
meets and embraces thee, bless God, we shall rejoice. If we come short in
handling the matter as it requires, Remember that we get our living by the
labor of our hands, this being the first shoo we ever made upon this last; but
we have aimed to take measure as exactly as we could. If any of a different
judgment shall think fit to reply to it, we desire he would set down his
opinion and reasons with that perspicuity and modesty as we have endeavored to
use in this Paper: if any shall use railing speeches or unnecessary diversions
from the cause, we may justly construe it to be a strong sign of the weakness
thereof. But we hope the Reader who loves his own salvation, will be a more
indifferent Judge, in things that concern the glory of his Creator.

FAREWELL.
THE PRIESTS ROUTED IN THEIR FRONT-GUARD OF TITHES.
By the Shoomakees of Martins Legrand.
WE wonder what kind of Spirit possessed the Author of this Bamphlet at the
writing of so inconsistent and menacing a piece as the same is: wherein every
sentence speaks him to be of a far different nature from what he would
represent himself to the people in the Pulpit (and we are confident we mistake
him not) whilst he seems with tears to compassionate them; And yet in paper
denounces nothing but destruction against them, in case they will not empty
their purses into his lap, under the notion of tithes: without which (he
affirms) it is as impossible for the Gospel to be propagated amongst men, as it
is for a lamp to burn without oil. Truly if this Paper had not come from his
hands we should scare have believed that any other had been the Author of it
but a Papist, justifying the authority of his Papal Tyranny. But why should he
be so fiery at the first entrance? That the non-payment of Tithes is a
perpetration of theft. Why would he have them put to death that refuse it? If
they are guilty of theft, as he alleges, then are they also guilty of death by
our Law, though the value be far less then the tyths he demands. But we will
take a view of his Paper and answer the same in order as it lies.

First he says, It is a direct breach of the eighth Commandment, which says,
Thou shall not steal.

Sir, Before you had endeavored to fasten on us the infamous sin of theft, you
ought in due manner to have proved your own title to that which you so
confidently affirm to be your due; for sure we are, that no man can be guilty
of this sin but he that takes and retains that which properly and truly belongs
unto another man: but because you know your self altogether unable to prove it,
you are therefore willing to beg the question, and take that for granted which
lies on your part to prove.

For first you should prove your self by the Scriptures to be a Minister of
Christ.

Secondly, that tyths do belong to you as incident to your Ministry.

Both which we deny; for albeit you could prove your self to be a Minister of
Christ (which we believe you never can) yet tyths would never the more appear
to be your due, seeing they did only belong to another dispensation, as we
shall prove anon.

The Scripture you cite is Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their Dues,
Custom to whom Custom: This Scripture is altogether impertinent to the thing
in hand. For,

If the Apostle in this place has no relation to the paying of Tithes, then
whosoever denies payment of tithes can no ways be found a breaker of those
customs the Apostle here speaks of. But evident it is, That the Apostle in
this place has no relation to paying of tithes; therefore whosoever denies
paying of tyths can no way be found breakers of the Customs here spoken of.

The Antecedent all men will grant; The consequent or Assumption is clear from
the express words of the Text, for the Apostle here presses subjection to
civil Magistrates, ver. 1, 2. and in ver. 3. calls them Rulers, For Rulers are
not a terror to good works, but to the evil: and in ver. 4. For he is the
Minister of God to thee for good: and in ver. 5. wherefore ye must needs be
subject: and in ver, 6. For this cause pay them tribute also: For they are Gods
Ministers attending continually upon this very thing, meaning this very thing
of Magistracy: and in the seventh verse exhorts them to pay custom to them.
Now what is all this to your purpose, or what customs belong to you from hence
unless you can prove your self a lawful civil Magistrate? But because you are
not able so to do, therefore it is your great grief that you had so little
influence upon the Magistrates of this Commonwealth flate. So that all things
continue out of frame with you, except the Magistrates will become your
Journey-men to do your Drudgery, by compelling all, bond and free, poor and
rich to embrace your humane inventions and impositions; It Is strange to see,
that whilst you had any hopes of this, Then curse ye Meros, curse ye bitterly,
because they came not out to belp the Lord against the mighty; but these
expectations being frustrated, then common sense (we will not say honesty)
failed in you. For even you that had laid the foundation of the war, and
consequently of the late Kings execution, seeing your selves disappointed of
the ends you aimed at, wheel about, and nothing would serve the man of sin,
clothed with the mantle of Presbytery, but a subversion of our liberties by
the restoration of the young Tyrant, and destruction of our ever honored
Parliament. Thus does pride and filthy lucre cause you to say and and unsay, do
and undo, yea, to become the common observation amongst men, in respect of your
impieties and dissimulations,

Again, you tell us that tithes are due by the laws of the land, and therefore
the Minister has as much right to his tithes, as the Landlord has to his rent.

First, we answer, that as no Landlord can truly claim any title to the rent of
a house, unless he has a property in the house, and reserve such a rent from
the Tenant that holds it; So neither can you claim any interest or right unto
tithes, hefore you can prove that Christ has appointed Magistrates to force
the people to pay tithes to you, as Tenants pay their rent to Landlords: for
though the same may happily be done by the civil Magistrate, as in times of
Papacy and Prelacy, yet the bare doing of a thing will in no wise justify the
thing to be good, unless it be in obedience to some command of God, now in
force: Therefore though there werenever so many civil laws made for payment of
tyths, yet would that no ways avail you: for we hope your pretended Divine
office, must have a Divine maintenance, and a Divine means to support it, else
it will follow, your office is humane; for always he that has power to
appoint the office, will in prudence make provision for the maintenance of that
office, by such means as are suitable to the nature of it; and therefore we
judge the maintenance of the Gospel is not by such hoterogeneal and mischievous
means as you would have it, then which all the ten persecutions, did never so
much hinder and quench the propagation of the Gospel, as this Coloquindita of
tithes has scandalized and disparaged it.

But we know from what sink this water of death had its original, from no other
verily, then the Conclave of Rome, by whose Antichristian power, tithes
(forsooth) were appointed, in imitation of the Jewish law, for the maintaining
Popish Priests, and so has it run along, as blood in the veins, in all the
Limbs of that hierarchy. So that we hope the End, viz. support and maintenance
of Popish Priests being removed, the Means will be also laid aside: the first
whereof, viz. the End, has been so effectually accomplished by our present
Magistrates, in the abolishing and ampulating one great limb of Antichrist, the
Episcopacy, that we have little cause to doubt of the second, viz. the Means,
namely, the total abolition of Tithes. And though for present you are permitted
to have them, yet we cannot believe that the Parliaments intentions therein,
was to heighten your pride, or that you should insult over their friends: but
rather out of indulgency to encourage you to peaceableness.

And whereas you frame an objection, that tithes are Antichristian, and
therefore not to be paid any longer. We answer, herein you speak truer then you
are aware, and so your own tongue is fallen upon your self. But to prove this
objection false, you raise this argument. That which our Savior enjoined, is
not Antichristian. But our Savior enjoined Tithes, Ergo.

As it is the manner of false teachers to couch their words and phrases in dark
and obscure sentences; So here the Major proposition is delievered to us, to
deceive us with doubtfulness of expression: for if by the word [enjoyning] the
Author means an approving of what was not then abolished but in force, and that
then only to the Jews, the proposition is true: but if by [enjoyning] he means
a new institution to continue in force under the Gospel, the same is utterly
false, and consequently the Minor proposition included therein. Again, to make
it more evident that the Major is no pillar to lean upon, as to the matter in
hand: Take an argument arising from the same proposition thus. That which our
Savior enjoined, is not Antichristian. But our Savior en oyned his Disciples
to prepare the Passover, Luke 22.8. Therefore to prepare the Passover is not
Antichristian.

Again, That which our Savior enjoined is not Antichristian. But our Savior
enjoined the Apostles not to go into the way of the Gentiles. Therefore, not to
go into the way of the Gentiles is not Antichristian. Which argument because it
is not so easily apprehended, we will only change the terms, and keep the
sense, and so present it to your consideration.

Whatsoever our Savior enjoined ought to be observed and practiced. But our
Savior enjoined the Apostles not to go into the way of the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5.

Therefore not to go in the way of the Gentiles ought still to be observed and
practiced.

How absurd the Consequences of these two Arguments are we doubt not, the
judicious Reader will quickly perceive: but if the Authors major proposition
should be granted, yet Reader observe, tha^ Christ is not in this place about
to establish a maintenance for his Gospel Ministers, but reproves the
hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, in seeming careful to perform things
of so small account, and leaving undone those things which were of greater
concernment: besides, the Jews being bound up by God under that dispensation,
to pay tithes, it was their great sin to neglect it, and therefore God
accounts it a Robbery done to himself, in case they did neglect it. Mal. 3.8.
but what is this to the purpose, or the thing in hand, seeing it was spoken to
the Jews only as Jews, as appears from the words of the text compared with
Mat. 23.23. where you shall find the word [ye] relates to the Jews only, to
whom then he spoke, ye pay tith, mint and rue, etc. see Mat. 23.23. Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye pay tyth, of mint and annise, and
cummin, and have omitted the waightier matters of the law, see v. the 24. ye
blind guids, for ye make clean the outside of the cup, v. 25. now although
these and many other Scriptures, did require an express performance of the
Jews, of things under that administration, yet is this nothing at all to the
Gentiles, for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, as being under
another dispensation of a far different nature.

And therefore if you have any divine right to tyths, it will necessarily
follow, that you must have it by virtue of the ceremonial law, and consequently
have other things also which were then commanded, as well as tyths, you must
have that kind of sacrifice then in use, Circumcision, a Tabernacle and an
Altar too, or else a Salomons Temple erected, yea you must not be ashamed of
the employment of a Butcher but kill the Bullocks, and Sheep, and Lambs, and
Pigeons, and Tuttle Doves, and in conclusion turn Jew, and deny Christ to be
come in the flesh, and as the Apostle tells the Galatians, if they were
circumcised, Christ would profit them nothing, so may we say to you, if you go
to the Leviticall Priesthood, and would have the maintenance belonging to it,
Christ will profit you nothing.

And that we are now under another dispensation, we think the Author will not
in express words deny; but if he should, the Apostle avouches it and with many
arguments, clearly proves it by comparing Christ and Aaron together, in as much
as there arose another Priest, after the order of Melchisedec, and not called
after the order of Aaron, Heb. 7.11.15. and therefore the Scripture speaks of
him, as one not made after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the
power of an endless life, Heb. 7.16. and that he continues for ever, whose
Priesthood, is unchangeable, v. 24. so the Apostle Heb. 6.20. clearly proves
the change of the Priesthood, in that, even Jesus is made an high priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 7.13, 14, for he of whom these things
are spoken, portaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
altar, for (says he) it is evident our Lord sprang out of Iudaea, of which
Tribe Moses, spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood; whereupon the Apostle
affirms, that the Gospel is established upon better promises: and we may truly
infer that it has a better means to support and propagate it, than money,
exacted from men, under the Notion of Tithes; for proof whereof, may be added
what the Author to the Heb. 7.5. says, And verily, they that are of the Sons
of Levi, who received the office of the Priesthood, have a commandment to take
tithes of the people, according to the Law: clearly implying that tithes were
only for that time, during the Leviticall Priesthood. And now the Priesthood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law, Heb. 7.12.
For further proof whereof, take these Arguments.

1. Argu. That which was enjoined upon the Jews, only for the maintaining of
the Levitical Priesthood, does no ways concern the Gentiles for maintaining
of the Ministers of the Gospel.

But tithes were enjoined upon the Jews, only for the maintaining of the
Levitical Priesthood: Therefore does no way concern the Gentiles.

The Major is granted on all hands.

The Minor is clear from these Scriptures, Heb. 7.5. Number. 18.9, 10. Mal. 3.9.

2. Argu. If Christ has appointed another maintenance for his Ministers
contrary to that of tithes, then must tithes needs dye with that Priesthood,
to which it was annexed.

But Christ has appointed for the Ministers of the Gospel, another maintenance
contrary to that of tithes: Therefore must tithes needs dye with that
Priesthood to which it was annexed.

The Major proposition we presume you will not deny, the Minor is proved by
these Scriptures, Mat. 10.8. Luke 10.4.7. which maintenance under the Gospel,
is nothing else but the free gift of the people, compared with 1 Cor. 9.10, 11.
14.

3. Argu. Whosoever brings in, or imposes a Jewish rite, ceremony or
custom, as an ordinance of God, does therein deny Christ to be come in the
flesh.

But he that brings in tithes for the maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel brings in a Jewish custom, as an Ordinance of God: And consequently,
does therein deny Christ to be come in the flesh.

The Major is clear from Galatians 5.2. The Minor is proved thus.

If the paying of tithes did only appertain to the Jews, then they that bring
in tithes in the time of the Gospel, must needs bring in a Jewish custom. But
the first is true, therefore the second.

4. Argu. Those Ministers that require a maintenance for their preaching of the
Gospel, contrary to that which Christ has appointed in the Gospel, do therein
deny Christ to reign over them. But those Ministers, who require tithes for
their maintenance for preaching the Gospel, require a maintenance contrary to
that which Christ has appointed in the Gospel: Therefore those Ministers that
require tithes for their maintenance for preaching the Gospel, do therein deny
Christ to reign over them.

Your second Objection is, but we do not come to hear him, why then should we
pay him, since we have no benefit by his Ministry.

To this your self answer, they that live in a parish where a godly Minister is
seated, ought to hear him, for he does the work of the Lord.

The Apostle Paul Romans 16.18. takes notice of certain persons who had
insinuated themselves into that Church, and with fair and gilded speeches
seduced the hearts of the simple, having oil in their mouths, but Gall in their
hearts, and therefore the Apostle ver. 17. brands them with two infamous
characters; first, that they are authors of differences, dissentions and
scandals amongst the Saints; secondly, that what ever they say or pretend to
the contrary, they serve not the Lord Jesus but their own bellies.

We could wish the application were not so easy to be made as in truth it is,
for (not to speak of the Author of the Pamphlet in question) The general voice
and clamor of that generation of men (that call themselves Ministers) is for
maintenance, so that like the covetous Merchant that knows no end of his
wealth, adventures through all difficulties and dangers for advancing of his
estate, and yet never satisfied; so are these men utterly deprived of all power
to set any limits or boundaries to their inmeasurable desires, still contriving
how they may increase their Benefices or relinquish them for better. Is not the
whole world filled with observation of their dispositions and actions? so that
men either dispute whether their is a God that these men worship, or else are
much discouraged from making any search after him, to fear him and trust in
him, when those that pretend to be his Ministers do manifest they have so
little confidence in him; what pains do they take! what friends do they make!
what industry do they use to gain an augmentation a benefice, or some other
preferment, if there be but a glimmering probability of it! So that if we
compare these men with the Bishops, we may truly say, the men indeed are
changed, but not the manners, no, for they hold perfect agreement and union in
preying upon the souls and estates of men, and yet style themselves Gods
heritage. We have been the longer in this particular because we find mention of
the word Godly Minister in the answer to the objection, made use of (as we have
too much cause to judge) to work upon the weaknesses of those to whose reading
the Pamphlet might happily come, and so with good words and fair speeches be
deceived. And therefore for Answer to your Answer, we say, That the word Godly
Minister is oftener said then proved, and it is no small arrogance in men of your
profession so frequently to attribute it to your selves, yea generally to
appropriate it; and truly this Answer of yours wherein you would place the force
of an Argument on your behalf, seems to us little less then ridiculous, for
does it follow, because Timothy did the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. and
was able to make full proof of his Ministry, and did do the work of the Lord,
that therefore everyone that assumes the name or title of a Minister does
really do either the one or the other, namely either make full proof of his
Ministry, or do the work of the Lord? Neither of which indeed is he in any
capacity to do, not having the appointment or authority of Jesus Christ
thereunto. And therefore it is no marvel to see with what variety of lusts,
covetous and ambitious affections they are tossed to and fro; even in that
calling wherein (if it were true) would be the greatest comfort and
contentment: when as for gain only they thrust themselves into the Priests
Office, and that gain is the principal mark they aim at, the Pampleteer is not
ashamed to justify and aver, by laying a greater degree of Sinfulness upon him
that comes not with his money or maintenance to the Minister, than upon him
that comes not to God by faith and hearing. Now whether of these two be the
greatest evils, I think needs not the Judgment of any subtle Casuist to
determine. But alas what are these overtures, but the same Man of Sin working
in a Mystery, as was before the dissolution of Monasteries and suppression of
Popish Priests; whose guilt in making a trade of the word of God, and
merchandise of the Souls of men, may be justly extenuated, being compared with
this generation, who have found out a more refined and subtle way of
beguiling. You say It Is a Sin for a man to withdraw his presence, but a greater
to withdraw his Maintenance. You have we perceive pointed out your grief by the
putting on of your finger; is it that which troubles you the withdrawing of
maintenance? Truly we believe it, and if we did but send our purses, it would
be no great matter for our persons. But how contrary the Apostle Paul's mind and
practice was to yours, himself will tell you, who writing to the Corinthians
tells them expressly he sought not theirs but them, 2 Cor. 12.14. Nevertheless
though we so contend against Tyths as being both Jewish and Antichristian, and
no way having the least descent or countenance from the Gospel, yet as we judge
it our duty to glorify God in our bodies, 1 Cor. 6.20. So we also know we ought
to honor him with hur Substance, Pro. 3.9. which we can in no respect do by
paying of Tyths or maintaining an Antichristian Ministry.

Your next objection is, But the Minister will not give us our due in the
Sacrament. This Objection together with the Answer framed by your self
thereunto savours of such defectiveness and impertinency to the matter in hand,
that it does in no respect fall under our consideration; For we claim no due in
your Sacrament, but do absolutely deny both your Ministry and Administration.
And whereas you say, All things must be done decently and in order, we grant
it, but not upon such terms as Papists and Episcoparians formerly, and now last
of all Presbyterians would have it, that is, according to their strained
interpretations, and ridiculous consequences; it is strange to consider how
much the Scripture, from whence these words are taken, has been abused by
these three kinds of men, and by them wrested to the establishing and imposing
of absurd Ceremonies, Jewish Customs, Heathenish observations, and sinful
superstitions on the souls of men; So that it has been a Common Anvill or
Forge out of which they have forged all or a great part of their abominable
inventions; And now the Author of this Pamplet is not ashamed (we know not by
what kind of Alchymy) to transmute this Scripture of the Apostles into a Metal
fit to receive the impression of his Tithes, as though the Saints could not do
things decently, and in order except they turn Jews, by observing their
ceremonies, but we are satisfied, that Paul's order and yours, hold no agreement
one with the other; for yours, if it were introduced, would quickly thrust out,
and subvert the order he requires. But the Pamphleteer being conscious of the
weakness of his proofs and the fallaciousness of his inferences from Scripture,
recommends his Readers to a certain Dagon, or Idol-Treatise set forth by the
Provincial Assembly; what to do? that poor souls may be deceived with some good
words and fair speeches therein, and be made the more willing to power out
golden oblations to these sacrificing Priests; 'Twere happy if these men had
but so much prudence and honesty, as to begin to relinquish and lay aside these
in croaching and oppressing practices of tithes, least the fire of the Lord
being kindled against their elder brethren the Papists and Episcopists, consume
them also with the rest, for being found treading, yea, sporting themselves in
the self same paths.

In the next place you tell us, it is a sin of a high nature, because it
affronts and robs God. We answer, we have granted before, that when the Jews
neglected their duty, in not paying their tithes, God accounted it a robbery
done to himself: but we may say with Job, How forcible are right words, but
what do your arguings reprove? Job 6.25. seeing we are no way concerned in that
dispensation as we have proved before.

Again, you tell us, that the Landlord lets his house the cheaper because the
tithes should be paid.

Is it because your reasons have no more weight in them, and because you want
the sword the Word God for your defense, that you take hold of lies, and run to
them, as to a sanctuary? Surely, the Lord has permitted you to be infatuated,
else such assertions so repugnant to common knowledge, would never have
proceeded from you: but we hope as it is an argument of your sinking stare,
when every rotten stick that lies at hand must be caught hold on to support it,
so the Structure of your carnal Ministry, and consequently your tithes, will
suddenly fall by the power of the same breath that has made so eminent a
breach upon your elder sisters, Papacy and Prelacy.

But we blush to repeat your next assertion, which affirms, that because
tithes are withheld, godly Ministers are discouraged, their hands weakened, and
their spirits broken.

Whose eyes are so dim, ar understanding so weak, as not to discern the
vileness and sensuality of this assertion? what does it more clearly intimate,
then that the main and principal end of your Ministry, is for the belly? when
as no preaching, no praying, no working, no glory to God, or good to men, would
be by you practiced, unless this cursed gain of money, anoint your chariot
wheels; Nay, in your eyes, of so essential concernment, is the offering up of
tithes to your shrine, that without it, the Gospel can have no progress, no
success. What manner of God is this money and profit with you, which the
Scripture every where stigmatizeth with such infamous brands to discourge men
from the love of it? and yet how highly do you advance it, as that the heavenly
Gospel cannot be preached or propagated, without such earthly dross? We bless
God, that has thus unvailed your hypocrisy, unmasked your dissimulation, and
exposed you, now to be seen in your proper shape, fulfilling herein the same
which the Apostle spoke of such kind of men, that their madness should be
manifested to all. But if for want of tithes such dangerous consequents or
effects follow, as the discouragement of godly Ministers, the weakening of their
hands, and the breaking of their spirits. We wonder how the Gospel got such
footing in the world, as it did when no tithes were spoken of: Surely, in the
beginning thereof, there was discouragement enough in this respect to the
Ministers of the Gospel, and yet, where do we find any of the Apostles complain
for want of tithes? nay, we find Paul affirming, that he chused rather to get a
maintenance by the work of his hands, than be burdensome to the Corinthians,
and yet says expressly, woe to me if I preach not the Gospel. But see the
absurdity which follows. If not paying of tithes be a discouragement to the
Ministers of the Gospel, then Christ who never appointed tithes, left out that
which should be a main encouragement to them in their work: if so, then he has
not been faithful in all his house, which the Apostle affirms he was; yea, by
consequence he should be a sinner, and our faith in vain. So that you see how
fruitful a Parent one sin and error is in the production of a numerous
offspring; No, no, the Apostle well knew the vanity and wretchedness of such
Creature-incouragements, and therefore he has a better fountain to drink at,
for his encouragement in the Ministry: (1 Thessalonians. 3.8. 2 Cor. 7.13, 26.) than at
the standing and stinking pool of tithes.

Neither does Hezekiahs example help you at all, seeing the Jews were a
National Church according to Gods institution, and he King of that Nation; yet
did he never require any thing at the hands of strangers to that Church, of
whom they ought not to take any thing, Levit. 22.25.

But if paying of tithes were writ for our example, i. e. to imitate, how comes
it to pass that you circumcise not your children, and perform all other
ceremonies written in the law, but seeing you will be sure to impose nothing
but what serves ambition or to advance profit, what is the reason you cry not
up killing of bullocks, for then you should have the shoulder, the two cheeks
and the Maw? Deuteronomy. 18.3.

In your fifth reason, you say, That those which pay not tithes rob their own
souls of that Benefit they might have by such a man's Ministry; We cannot find
any rationality in this reason, nor can we discover how the Non-payment of
tyths robs a man of any spiritual benefit; yea rather we affirm that such
non-payment of tyths does exceedingly enrich his soul in all heavenly
blessings; for if God has promised his spirit and blessings to his own ways
and appointments only, then he denies the same to all humane devices and
inventions introduced into his worship, whereof this of tithes is an Elder
Sister, and one of the first born, as we have showed before; and therefore
certainly God has denied his spiritual blessings unto tithes, and
consequently the non-payment thereof in obedinece to the mind of God does the
more richly furnish the soul with spiritual enjoyments, by how much the more
conformable a man is found to the Will of the Lord.

In the sixth place you tell us that, Non-payment of tithes causes God to
curse a man in his outward estate, so that they turn Bankrupts, and are ashamed
to show their faces for debt. Two absurd propositions are couched in this
assertion.

1. That all they who become Bankrupts do not pay tyths, and therefore are
cursed. 2. That all that do pay tyths never turn Bankrupts, but are blessed.
Both which are repugnant to common knowledge and experience, and therefore
false and need no other refutation.

Seventhly, you say, It is a sin against the Gospel because it hinders the
progress and success of it, and such men do as much as in them ly to extingish
the light by taking away the oil that feeds it.

Here the Author does not mutter out his words as if he were loath to be heard,
but rounds it aloud in your ear, That tithes is the oil that feeds the light of
the Gospel, In which small room there lies a great mass of absurdity
consisting of these six propositions.

1. That tithes are the essential means or conservant cause of the Gospel. 2.
That whatsoever Ministry or dispensation, that shall be found without this
necessary supporting means of Tyths, is not the Gospel. 3. That whosoever
withholds Tyths does by degrees quench the Gospel. 4. That such a person is an
unbeliever, and consequently in a damnable condition. 5. That tithes being so
effential as aforesaid, and such pure oil, as to make the light of the Gospel
shine resplendently: that whosoever pays tithes, does thereby help forward the
progress of the Gospel, increases the light thereof, is an undoubted believer,
and consequently shall be assuredly saved. 6. That seeing tithes are the oil
that preserves the light of the Gospel, and the Apostles were never made
partakers of that oil, It follows, that the Apostles Gospel was as a lamp
without oil, and consequently preached but a dark Gospel.
To all which, there needs no other answer, but the consideration of the
ridiculousness and absurdity of them, take an example in the second particular,
thus.

Whatsoever dispensation is without tyths, is not the Gospel; but the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, is a dispensation without tyths, yea, whereby tyths are abolished.
Therefore the Gospel of Jesus Christ is not the Gospel.

Though this Argument naturally flowing from the said assertion be very absurd
in it self, yet the Conclusion being favorably interpreted may be true, if we
make it thus.

Therefore the Gospel of Jesus Christ is not the Authors Gospel; that is,
wherein he believes, for if it were, sure he would there find better oil to
fill his lamp, and feed his light, than that of tithes: now that all these six
propositions, are directly deducible from his Assertion, is manifest, for thus
is his similitude.

Like as oil is essential for the conservation of light in the lamp, and the
light is impossible to be preserved without it.

So are tithes essential to the conservation of the light of the Gospel, and
the light thereof is impossible to be preserved without it.

Yea, that you may not seem to want words to express your meaning, you affirm
that the persecutors took away only the Ministers, and their blood was the seed
of the Church, but taking away tithes, took away the Ministry it self, here a
man may see by this doctrine, what manner a thing tyths is; and of what
absolute concernment, as being a foundation whereupon the Gospel is built, so
that if you do but remove it, or take it away, the Gospel it self falls down
and breaks in pieces: could shamelesness it self have broached such a doctrine
as this? No, but a spirit breathing forth blasphemies has avouched it. Did
Julian take away tithes, (as you affirm, though we think you have little ground
for such an assertion) yet he did rather establish the purity and sincerity of
the Gospel (though against his will) then any way weaken or impair it: for if
we consider the state of the Church before Constantine, who seemed the greatest
benefactor in respect of outward things, and compare it with that which
followed after, we may truly say according to that which has been most truly
observed; When there were wooden Chalices, there were golden Priests, but when
there were golden Priests, there were wooden Chalices. So great was the change
arising out of the worldly pomp and munificence that was conferred upon those
that claimed the office of the Ministry, that the Gospel of Christ was laid
aside and buried: But when these large benevolences were wanting, as in
primitive times (which notwithstanding were never called tithes) how sweetly
did the Gospel flourish? and how quietly did the Professors thereof enjoy God
and themselves, willingly suffering the loss of all? as in the ten
persecutions, rather then be found to have an eye to any worldly advancement or
enjoyment: but since tithes got footing, the Gospel has heen no further
esteemed by persons contending for them, then as it has been instrumental to
fill their Coffers.

But alas, what shall we say, covetousness has no limits less light, and if it
be in the chariot, it drives furiously to support worldly self: but we know God
has other oil to preserve the light of his Gospel withal, then tithes, the
refuse of that dark and legal administration. Neither know we any other light
of the Gospel then Jesus Christ, who is the true and only light, enlightening
every one that comes into the world, John 1.9. who we are sure is not
surpported by tithes.

8. You affirm, It is a sin that will not be pordoned upon repentance, without
restitution, according to that of Augustine, whose words (as you say) are, Non
remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum; surely you thought the
Shoo-makers of Martins Legrand did not understand Latin, or else that they
could not procure the interpretation of it, otherwise you would never have
wrested Augustins words as you do the Scriptures, to a sense never thought of
by him, at least not mentioned or recited in your own Pamphlet, for Augustine
by the word ablatum, does not signify your tithes, as you would vainly
enforce, for they were never taken away from you, neither had you ever any
right to them, as we have proved before; but his meaning is, to show that there
can be no true repentance, where that which is by violence and unjustly gotten,
is willingly and knowingly detained: we thought an University-man had been
better read in fathers.

However, if your quotation of Augustine had been real, and not fained, as it
appears to be, for the blearing of the eyes of the simple, we should have laid
him aside, as to the business in hand, with as much ease and more reason than
you did cite him: but you are fain to make use of patches, for want of whole
cloth, if your Scriptures had been strong and eresistible, why should Angustine
be brought in to take up the quarrel? but he is little beholding to you, and
the more ungrateful are you to him, when you wrong him being dead.

9. You tell us, It is a sin that will cry for vengeance, when the sinner on
his death bed is craving for mercy, as appears from James 5.3, 4. Your gold and
your silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you,
and shall eat your flesh, as it were with fire; ye have heaped treasure
together for the last days, behold the hire of the Laborers which hove reaped
down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud.

Here are two things observable.

1. The manifest perverting of the word of truth (a thing every where usual
with the Avthor of the Pamphlet) to such a sense as common sense, may perceive
to be inconfistent with the Apostles words. 2. The Contradiction it contains to
the former assertion, where the Author affirms, suth as refuse to pay tithes,
turn Bankrupts, and dare not show their faces for debt, but here brings in the
tyth-refusers, as having heaps of gold and treasure, so that the very rust
thereof, shall cry for vengeance: But no marvel we meet with so many
contradictions when the Proverb says, It behooves a liar to be a mindful; for
certain it is, those that abound with gold and silver, cannot in any kind of
probability turn Bankrupts.
However, let us take the application as it is made by the Author, and consider
the inward parts of it, whether they will not cast some savor into his
nostrils.

1. That the Apostle intends this for a reproof to all such as pay not tithes.
2. That the non-payment of tithes is a damnable sin, and the persons go to
hell. 3. That the Ministers or Priests claiming these tithes, are mere
hirelings, and that for money as laborers are. 4. That if this hire be not
paid them, they will relinquish and abandon their Masters service, as laborers
do. 5. That these hirelings are not sowers of seed, but reapers down of the
corn, that is, use all the means they can to quench, cut down, and depress the
flourishing graces of God in his Saints, by setting and using rolling stones of
restraint and violence upon them. 6. That there is no other consideration
inducing them to undertake their service but wages and hire as it is with
laborers.
But if this Diana of tithes, a Diana only to her Priests, but a Hydra or a
seven-headed monster to the people, we say if it were a thing of such deep
concernment, of such necessary consequence as you would in force upon it,
whence is it that it had not the honor to have a name no not so much as to be
mentioned in all the Epistles of the Apostles, except it be by way of
Abolition, as in Heb. 7.5. no not in those places where the Apostle Paul has
occasion to exhort the Saints to part with their carnal things to them which
minister spiritual things; either the Apostles had supinely forgot it, or else
had no Commission either to commend it or command it: the first is not like to
be true, no, we believe the Author will not affirm it; therefore the second is
true.

Having now finished our answer to your Jewish Tenet, set forth with a
thundering title, and proclaimed as with the roaring of a Lion, supposing
thereby to amaze and a fright the lambs of Jesus feeding peaceably in the
pleasant pastures of his word and ordinances. We pray that the Lord may so give
us understanding in all things, as to keep our feet steadfast in the ways of
truth, without sliding and falling upon the slippy Ice of humane inventions and
superstitions, and that the same Lord will so open the eyes of the blind, and
turn the hearts of the obstinate, that they may not lift up their hearts or
voices against the appointments of the most high, and that none may be afraid,
either of the power of the flesh on the one hand, or the roaring and
threatenings of Satan in a spiritual disguise on the other hand.

FINIS.
There is likewise to be sold, An answer to this paper here following, at
William Larnars, or at Henry Hills, living at Fleet-bridge, and Fleet-yard,
Entitled An Answer to an Outrageous Outcry for Tithes.

The dreadful danger of Sacralidge held forth in this one Proposition, namely,
The withholding of Tyths from a Minister that labors in the Word and Doctrine,
or denying those accustomed rates upon houses, which have been paid to the
Minicters successively, time out of mind, is a great and grievous sin, highly
displeasing to Almighty God, as appears by these Reasons.
1. Reas. BECAUSE it is a direct breach of the Eighth commandment, which
says, That thou shall not steal; and directly contrary to the Rule of the
Apostle, Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, Custom to whom
Custom, etc

Yea Tyths are due to the Minister by the Law of the Land, and the Minister
has as legal a right to the Rates set upon houses, as the Landlord has to
his Rent; Therefore to deprive the Minister of them is a breach, not only of
Gods Law, but also of man's Law, and who so breaks this hedge, a Serpent shall
bite him, Eccless. 10.8.

1. Object. But tyths are antichristian, and therefore not to be paid any
longer.

Answ. This is a false opinion, as appears by this Argument; That which our
Savior enjoined, is not Antichristian. But our Savior enjoined Tyths, Luke
11.42. Ye tyth Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, and pass over Judgment
and the Love of God, These ought ye to have done; that is, ye ought to pay
Tyths, Therefore they are not Antichristian.

2. Obj. But we do not come to hear him, why then should we pay him, since we
have no benefit by his Ministry?

Answ. If thou live in a Parish where a godly Minister is seated, thou art
bound to hear him, for he works the work of the Lord, as well as those of
greater parts, See 1 Cor. 16.10. If thou do not hear him, nor pay him, thou
addest sin to sin; for first it is a sin to withdraw thy presence, and then it
is another, yea a greater sin to withdraw his maintenance.

3. Object. But the Minister will not give us our Due in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, therefore we may justly deny him his due.

Answ. First, The Sacrament is not due to all, but only to those that come in a
regular way, according to the order of the Gospel; for all things must be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 13.40. Now the order of the Gospel is this, that
the power of examining those that are admitted to the Lords Supper belongs not
to the Minister alone, nor to the Minister with the whole congregation, but to
the Minister and ruling Elders, as is undeniably proved by that singular
Treatise set forth by the Provincial assembly, called The Vindication of the
Presbyterion Government, page 70, 71. Secondly, the Sacrament is not due to
those that live in any scandalous sin; but theft, or robbing of God is a
scandalous sin.

2. Reas. It is a sin of a high nature, because it affronts God himself, Mal.
3.8. Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we
roobed thee? in Tyths and Offerings. To rob a man by the high way, does deserve
death; to rob a King of his Plate and Jewels, deserves a tormenting death; but
to rob the King of Glory, deserves the fire of hell.

3. Reas. It is a complicated sin, wherein fraud or cheating is added to theft:
for the Landlord lets his house to the Tenant at a lower rate, upon this
account, namely that he shall pay the duties to the Minister; as for example,
if the house be worth 21 l: per annum, The Landlord lets it for 20 l. per
annum, on purpose that the Tenant may (perhaps) pay twenty shillings a year to
the Minister. The Tenant notwithstanding paies nothing, but keeps it back from
the Minister by fraud, and puts the Landlords money in his pocket. Here is
fraud with a witness.

4. Reas. It is a sin, whereby godly Ministers are discouraged in their work,
their hands weakened, and their spirits broken, so that they cannot go on in
their Ministry with joy, but with grief; This is directly contrary to the
practice of that godly King Hezekiah, (whose example is written for our
learning, Romans 15.4.) for it is testified of him, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. That he
commanded the People that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the
Priests and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

5. Reas. It is a sin wherein and whereby the Defrauder robs his own Soul of that
spiritual benefit and advantage which he might get by such a man's Ministry;
for it is just with God to say to such a man, thou withdrawest maintenance from
my servant, and I will withdraw my blessing from my own ordinance, so that the
word preached (by whomsoever it be dispensed) shall do thee no good at all, but
rather it shall be a savor of death, to thy own condemnation. Thy soul shall
never thrive or prosper by any Sermon that thou hear.

6. Reas. It is a sin that provokes God to curse a man in his outward estate
and trading, as appears by that forenamed place, Mal. 3.9. Ye are cursed with a
curse, for ye have robbed me; it is usual with God to pay sinners with their
own coin; they rob God in tyths, and God robs them of their trade and
livelihood; they grudge the Ministers a maintenance, and God grudgeth them even
bread for their Families, so that they usually turn bankrupts, or are so much
in debt, that they are ashamed to show their faces.

7. Reas. It is a sin against the (...), because it hinders the progress and
success of it, for such (...) much as in them lies to extinquish the light, by
taking away the oil that feeds it, it is observed in that excellent book
Vindic. Presb. Gov. page 81, that Julian the Apostate, that cursed enemy of
Christ and his Gospel, did by taking away tyths do more mischief to the Church
of God, than all the persecuting Emperors that were before him: for the
Persecutors took away only the Ministers (and their blood was the seed of the
Church) but taking away tyths took away the Ministry it self.

8. Reas. It is a sin will not be pardoned upon repentance, unless there be a
restitution as well as repentance, accordiog to that of Augustine,
Nonremittitur peccatum, uisi restituatur ablatum, Thy sin shall not be
pardoned, unless that which thou witholdest unjustly, be restored.

9. Reas. It is a sin that will cry for vengeance, when the sinner on his
deathbed is crying for mercy; as appears by that remarkable Scripture, Jam.
5.3, 4. Your gold and silver is cankered. and the rust of them shall be a
witness against, and shall eat your flesh as it were with fire; Ye have heaped
Treasure (that is of wrath) together for the last days. Behold the hire of the
Laborers which have reaped down your fields which is of you kept back by fraud
cries; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the years of
the Lord of Sabbath. Now if the hire of the Laborers in men's Vineyard, kept
back by fraud cries; how dreadful will the cry be of the hire of Gods Laborers
in Gods Vineyard, kept back by robbers and defrauders? I tremble to think of it.

Consider what has been presented unto you in this paper, and the Lord give ye
understanding in all things.

FINIS.

