The Proper and most Effectual CURE of POPERY, Both Real and Mistaken, In this
Nation.
IT is certain and apparent to all considering People, that the greatest
Troubles with which this Nation, and indeed most part of Europe, have been
afflicted for more than 150 Years last past, have proceeded from, or been
promoted by, the Controversies concerning such Matters of Religion as are
commonly called Popery. And it is an certain and apparent, that all those
Controversies arose from, or were occasioned by the Usurpations, Corruptions,
and Scandals of the Papacy and Papal Faction; of which many of the most learned
and truly religious Persons in all Nations complained long before. So that it
cannot be denied that there was great need of a Reformation, when what is now
so called was begun. And it is also certain, that though a Free General Council
was earnestly desired, both by Princes and People, by Laity and Clergy, for an
orderly Reformation, it was more than 20 Years delayed before any Session could
be had; and then was continued and kept on foot for 18 Years more before it was
concluded, and so managed the while, that instead of reforming or composing
Differences, much of the Matters complained of were established, and the
Differences made irreconcilable, while the Authority of that Council is
maintained; a Council, which consisted but of 270 Prelates in all, in all that
time; and of them, 187 Italians, most very ignorant, and but 83, not a third
part, of all other Nations; and some only Titular, and mere Agents for the
Papacy; diverse indigent Pensioners to the Pope; and but part, and no great part
of those at most Sessions. Such was this Free General Council.

But it is as certain and apparent again on the other side, that that necessary
Work of Reformation was so disorderly managed, that it remains a very imperfect
Work, and not without much Deformation, in all Parts, where it has been
promoted, to this day. And though the Fault of this may in great measure be
justly chargeable upon the Perverseness and Obstinacy of the Papal Faction; yet
so it is, and is apparently so, even by the Differences and Contentions which
are continued, or rather, daily increased among all the Pretenders to
Reformation; though all are ready to join against the Papists, as their Common
Enemy. So that these two Parties are like two Mastiffs worrying one another,
and neither can get the Victory, because equally matched by reason of Faults on
both sides, and something of Truth on each side, which supports them. And
neither will be persuaded to see, or if they do see, to reform what is amiss on
their side, that Truth alone might prevail.

The Faults are, on the one side, Papal Corruptions and Innovations maintained
as Catholic Truth, which is Real Popery distinct from what is truly Catholic:
on the other Catholic 'Truth opposed as Popery, which is Mistaken Popery: and
the irresistible Truth between them both, what is truly Catholic. This neither
can withstand; and therefore so far as it is retained, is the Strength of that
Party against the other: and where it is entirely retained without Mixture,
though by never so small a Party, cannot be resisted with any Evidence of Truth
or sound Reason, or opposed with any thing but Force and Violence, or Falsehood,
Lies and Calumnies.

Of this I my self, by the Grace and secret Conduct of God, have had
considerable Experience, and given a sensible Experiment, and such a
Manifestation of his Truth, against the Corruptions on each side, as neither
have been able to gainsay or resist. The one side have not been able to resist
the Power of Truth, but with most shameful Lies and Calumnies, one of the
greatest Evidences of a powerful Conviction; nor the other to maintain or
defend their own Cause, by true Catholic Principles, or other than false and
sophistical Arguments, as I have already in part made appear in my True
Account, etc. and shall more fully to undeniable Conviction, if I may have that
Encouragement which is but reasonable and necessary.

It is true, violent Prejudice against Mistaken Popery has brought forth no
less Mischief, Scandal, Shame and Confusion in these Nations, than real Popery
has in other parts of Europe. But it is Real Popery continued amongst us,
which has been the Original and is the continued Incentive of that Prejudice
and Jealousy, which has produced these violent Proceedings. And therefore
though a just and complete Cure of this Prejudice against Mistaken Popery would
of it self be the most effectual Cure of the Real, not only in these Nations,
but in our Neighbors, even France it self; yet since that is hard to be
removed, while the other remains, there is a Necessity that the Application be
more effectually to that, of Real Popery, and that completely effected, will of
it self allay the Prejudice, and facilitate the Cure of the other also.

This Necessity is brought upon us by the Craft and Policy of the Papal Faction
and their Agents, who know very well that if those Faults on our side were
healed, they should have nothing against us, nor be able to withstand so
complete and prevalent a Testimony against them. And this is the true reason
why diverse Zealotes for the Roman Faction, who were sensible of this Secret,
looked upon King Charles I. and Archbishop Laud, and others, as their greatest
Enemies; because they were sensible of the Mistake, and desired and
endeavored, as far as the Madness of the People would permit, to have it
rectified; which these Zealotes well know would have greatly endangered their
Cause, by leaving them nothing solid and defensible on their side to support
it. And this was not the least part of the Project of the Representer, my
Visitant, in his pretended Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church
of England, in order to a Union, who endeavored thereby not only to gratify
his own Private Revenge, by representing the learned Divine of the Church of
England, who had detected and answered his stolen Wares, as a Papist in
Disguise, but to promote the public Service of the Faction, by reviving and
exciting the old Jealousy and Prejudice, which had before been so serviceable
to it. And for the same reason it was that diverse of them have treated me, not
as a Friend, but a most dangerous Person to them. And this Consideration ought
to move all serious Antipapists to beware of this Prejudice, lest they
inconsiderately promote their Designs, while they think to oppose them, as Mr.
Baxter has rightly observed they often do.

The true Reason, Why all the Means hitherto used have been no more effectual,
is, because they have been too violent and unnatural; and not so skilfully
applied as they ought to haven been. Their Nobility and Gentry, and the rest of
the Laity, are Persons of as much Sense and Reason, and Honor and Virtue, as
others: And if there was but opened a fair Retreat to them; and then the
Deceitfulness of their Principles sufficiently explained, we should then find
them as willing to be eased of the Burdens, as the Nation of the Trouble of
the Emissaries. And two things very reasonable and easy to be granted, would
enable any Person well qualified to do this Work effectually; of which an
Account will be ready to be given to whom it is proper, of desired.


