The Professor hereof being a Mathematitian is ready to perform these things
following.
IF any have a desire to have their nativities calculated, whereby they may
know their best times of advancement, or other things that may prove obnoxious
in their estate of life according to the influence of the celestial bodies and
course of nature.

Also if any Merchants or Seamen, or any others that intend any voyage by Sea
or Land; and desire to know whether it may be prosperous or not, may be
resolved and have good directions of fit times for the better accomplishing of
their intentions.

Also if any desire to know for any absent, if they be living or dead, and what
condition they may be in if they repair to the Professor hereof, She will be
ready to give them good satisfaction therein.

Also if any man shall be a suitor to any woman: or if any woman have any
suitors, if they be desirous to know whether they shall obtain their loves or
not, they may receive good satisfaction about it.

Likewise if any have lost any goods, or mislaid them accidentally; or any have
cattle strayed, or lost, they may have directions concerning the same.

As also if any body shall have any fugitives or run-awayes gone away, they may
know which way they are gone, and whither they be still near, or about the
town, or far remote off; by good directions of this Professor for the Better
discovery and finding them out.

ALL these things, with many other of consequence, which are here omitted,
shall be performed by the lawful Acts of the Mathematics, which are not
repugnant against the Divine Word, or the Laws of the Kingdom; If any man
shall make any doubt of the lawfulness thereof, or shall be inclined to think
that these things above said, are performed by unlawful means: If they
please, for their better satisfaction therein, they may read the Quadripartit
of Ptolomy, and the Comment of Dr. Carden thereupon, Dr. Melanston his preface
in the works of Schomer, Dr. Fran. Junc^inus. Cyprian, Leovitius, Lucas,
Gauricus, Pontinus Haly, Guido, Bonatus, and D. Lucius, Belantius, in which is
given full satisfaction, so that by these Authors, any man may be more fully
satisfied in the Premises.

Inquire for the Professor hereof over against St. Georges Church in
Southwark, at the Sign of the Flower-Deluce, a Cooks Shop, and there you may
here of her.


