THE PROTESTATION Of the Freeholders of Yorkshire, May 13. 1642.
Whereas His Majesty has been pleased to give Summons to the Gentry of this
County to attend him at his Court at York the twelfth of May instant, to
advise with him in some particulars concerning the honor and safety of his
Majesty's person, and the wel-being and peace of this our County, and in the
said Summons was pleased to omit the Freeholders of this County, out of a
tender respect of putting them to any extraordinary charge, yet we conscious of
our sincere loyalty to his Majesty our gracious Sovereign, and concerning our
selves according to the proportions of our estates, equally interested in the
common good of the County, did take boldness to come in person to York, and
were ready to attend his Majesty's pleasure there. And whereas his Majesty was
pleased then to propound several things to the purpose aforesaid, at the
meeting of the Country, to consider a fit answer to return to his Majesty
thereupon, the doors of the meeting house were shut against us, we utterly
excluded, and in our absence a Referree of Knights and Gentlemen chosen without
our knowledge or consent to draw up the said answer: We the Freeholders who
petitioned his Majesty the day above said, concerning our selves abundantly
injured in the election (not knowing any warrant by writ or otherwise for the
same of the said Referree, and that we ought not however to be concluded by any
resolution of theirs without our assent in their election; do absolutely
protest and declare against the said election; and as far as concerns us
disavow whatsoever shall be the result of their consultation thereupon, and do
desire a new and fair election o^ a Referree may be made, we admitted to our
free Votes in the same, and some one or more to be nominated by us, allowed to
deliver our sense for us at anot^er meeting: And that we shall not make good in
the least r^sp^ct any thing whatsoever which shall otherwise be concluded upon.

By the King.
Whereas upon Summons from Us diverse Gentlemen of this our County of York did
attend upon Thursday the 12. of this instant, when We declared our resolution
for the reasons then delivered by Us, to have a Guard to secure and defend our
person, and desired therein the concurrence and assistance of the Gentry of
this County. And whereas diverse Gentlemen of this County for many reasons and
occasions could not then appear to receive Our pleasure in that behalf,
whereunto diverse have subscribed, We have therefore thought good hereby to give
notice as well to those Gentlemen who were not then present, as to those which
did then attend Us, That our Command is, that as well those Gentlemen who are
charged with horse, as others, appear at York upon Friday the 20. of this
month, in such manner and equipage as will be convenient for the guard of Our
Person. And We require and command that in the intrim no other Warrants, Order,
or Command whatsoever shall distract or hinder this Our service. And we further
will and command, that this our Order be forthwith published by the Sheriff of
this Our County, for which this shall be sufficient Warrant*

Given at Our Court at York the 14. day of May, in the eighteenth year of Our
reign. Vivat Rex. 1642.
Printed at London for T. Bates. 1642.


