A Brief JUSTIFICATION of the XI. Accused Members, from a scandalous Libel,
styled A Particular Charge and Impeachment, in the name of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and the Army under him: newly Printed and published to defame them.

Wherein the apparent Falsehood and Malice of some of the most material
Charges, is demonstrated to the world, for the present; till the rest be fully
cleared in time by themselves, to the Eternal Infamy of the False Accusers, not
any of them as yet daring to own and make good the General or particular
Charge, in their own names under their hands, as by Law they ought.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. This know also, that in the last days, perilous times
shall come: For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unnatural, unholy, without natural
affection, TRVCE-BREAKERS, FALSE-ACCVSERS, Incontinent, Fierce, TRAITORS,
Heady, High-minded; Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof:
from such turn away. LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1647.

A brief Justification of some of the XI accused Members, from a scandalous
Lible styled: A particular Charge and Impeachment in the name of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the Army under him; newly printed and published to defame them.
THe accused Members former faithfulness, activity and sufferings for the
Liberty and Rights of the general and particular Charge, against which they
have severally protested their known Innocence by word of mouth in the House,
till their more particular legal Answer (to such an illegal Charge, if resolved
answerable in point of Law or Justice, before any sufficient particular
Accusers subscribe and aver it, able to give the Members and House (therein
deepest charged) sufficient reparation, if not made good) shall be returned to
it in writing by the advice of Council. But lest their Innocence should in the
mean time overmuch suffer in the opinion of the deluded Vulgar; it will be a
point of Justice both to these calumniated Members and the House, to vindicate
them from the malicious false accusations, most unconscionably and injuriously
(against all truth and equity) raked up against them, to blast their
reputations; by a libellous unlicensed Charge in print, without the Houses
Order, of which take this summary Account.

The principal Charge among all the Particulars, is that concerning Mr Denzel
Holles, placed in the front in the two first Charges; of which he was in this
very month of July was two years, after full examination and debate in the
House TOTALLY and FINALLY acquitted; as appears by these ensuing Votes; to
which some of his very Accusers assented, and yet are so malicious and unjust,
as to asperse him with the reviving of the self-same Accusation now, for want
of other matter; the very extremity of malice and perverseness.

19 July 1645.
ACcording to former Order, the House proceeded to the Judgment upon the Report
made by Mr Samuel Brown concerning M. Holles and M. Whitlock, and debated that
part of it, which concerned my Lord Savils saying; That he was advertised, that
M. Holles had held intelligence with the Lord Digby.

Upon consideration whereof it is resolved, etc. That it does not appear upon
proof, that Mr Holles has held any correspondency with the Lord Digby.

The House fell next into debate concerning the business of M. Holles his
receiving a Note from the Lord Savile, written in white ink; and said by the
messenger that brought it, to be sent from the Earl of Lindsey, but not
appearing so by any proof.

Resolved, etc. That the receiving this Note by Mr Holles in the manner as he
did, is no holding Intelligence with the Enemy.

21. Julii 1645.
THe House proceeded to debate that part of the Report, which concerned the
passages of a discourse held at a meeting at the Earl of Lindseys Chamber at
Oxford, where M. Holles and M. Whitlock were present, when they were employed
as two of the Commissioners to present the Propositions of Peace from both
Kingdoms, and concerning a Paper delivered at the same time to the Earl of
Lindsey.

Resolved, etc. That for as much as it does not appear to this House that M.
Holles and M. Whitlock had any ill intention in their proceedings at Oxford;
Therefore this House is of opinion, That the matter of this Report, as
concerning M. Holles and M. Whitlock, be TOTALLY and FINALLY LAID ASIDE.

Resolved, etc. That notwithstanding this Vote, the House does declare, that M.
Holles and M. Whitlock may prosecute the Lord Savile for reparation, if they
see cause.

Henry Elsynge, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Since then the House has so long since totally and finally acquitted him of
these two Charges, it is the very extremity of insolency, malice, and calumny
to revive them now.

The 3. Charge will be proved as false and frivolous as the former: that clause
in it, That (these Members) having a great power in the Treasure of the
Kingdom, have thereby maintained and encouraged by pensions and otherwise the
Queens party in France, etc. being an apparent falsehood (the Armies party and
friends having the greatest power over the Kingdoms Treasure and the accused
Members none at all) discovering all the rest depending on it to be a figment:
and how much the Army has outdone them for the King, is now apparent, by
their own last Letters, and will be daily more and more; till both Kingdom and
Parliament repent of it, when too late.

The 4. is an evident calumny, reflecting wholly upon the Army, who send out
their Agitators into all Countries to excite them against the Parliament, and
daily entertain and list new recruits of Anabaptists, Sectaries, and draw all
other Parliament forces what they may to join in Rebellion with them: and
openly force and offer violence to the House by their minatory Letters,
Declarations, and most unreasonable demands.

The 5. head will be justified by orders of the House and the insolency of the
Petitioners, who assaulted and menaced the Members and Committee in a most
daring mutinous way, and deserved a commitment by Law, and more.

The 6, 7, 8, and 9. Charges are already justified and cleared by the Houses
Votes, being Acts of the whole House; and that the informatious against those
Officers of the Army were true, will be made appear to their shame in due time;
and their Sedition and Rebellion since in an higher degree, proclaims their
accusations then, to be true to all the world.

To the 10. it will be proved, that the Army and their Confederates have been
the greatest and only obstructers of Irelands relief, and the accused Members
the greatest advancers of it; and that the House has been most abused by the
Members and Council of War now in the Army, (protesting their obedience) of
which we have no further use at all, unless they appear more dutiful and loyal
to the Parliament and Kingdom then now.

The 11. will prove a calumny, and done upon just reasons, by sufficient
warrant.

The 12, 13, and 14. will prove mere forgeries and surmises: For the sums
pretended that Sir John Clotworthy has defrauded the State of, some are false,
the rest expressed in his Account; That the Lord Lisle has spent more money
the last year then would have reduced Ireland; and has been a greater
obstructer of Irelands present relief, then any of the Accused Members (to gain
a new Commission) is known to many; and that one of his friends in the House
has really held correspondency with the Lord ORMOND, will appear by Letters
under his own hand.

The 15. and 16. will be found mere Calumnies upon examination: and the 17.
likewise; in the beginning whereof Sir William Lewis is thus most falsely and
maliciously Charged. That he being heretofore Govenour of Portsmouth (a Garrison
for the Parliament) in which time he has received much of the public
Treasure, For WHICH HE HAS NOT YET GIVEN AN ACCOUNT etc. Whereas the contrary
appears by an unanswerable Certificate of the Committee for taking the Accounts
of the whole Kingdom, presented by them to the House of Commons, 3. Aprilis,
1645. with this approbation, That they found it a very fair and frugal Account:
upon which Certificate (newly printed) the House of Commons the selfsame day,
passed this Vote and Order touching his said Account.

Resolved, that this House does concur with the Committee of Accounts in
allowing the demands of Sir William Lewis upon his Accounts, and in approving
of his Accounts* And thereupon; Ordered: that the Committee of the Revenue do
with their soonest and best convenience, pay unto Sir William Lewis the sum of
415. l. 16. s, 8. d. part of what remains due unto him upon his Accounts, as
appears by a Certificate from the Committee of Accounts of the date of March,
27. 1645. presented to the House April, 3, and allowed by this House.

By this most notorious falsehood (disproved by the very records of Parliament,
of which his chief Accusers could not be ignorant) touching his not Accounting,
the world may judge the verity of the residue of his Charge, about his intended
delivery up of that Garrison to the King: of which, upon full examination, he
was clearly acquitted, by Order of the Committee of Lords and Commons for
safety, (among which was the Lord Say, and sundry other of the Armies best
friends) as will be manifested by the Original under their hands. So as this
Charge can be nothing else but a most malicious information, void of truth, for
which the whole Army ought to give Sir William reparation, and crave him
public pardon.

The 18. particular is a most impudent slander; the hundred pounds paid to Mr.
Glyn by the Drovers being no reward for Mr. Glyns service in procuring them
3000. l. in satisfaction of their losses, as is maliciously suggested; but a
mere repayment of an hundred pounds which he freely lent them (besides other
moneys which he gave them out of his purse) in their necessities, when no man
else would relieve them: as will be proved by the Drovers themselves and other
substantial witnesses. So as chariit self is now become a crime with these
uncharitable Accusers.

The 19. is a notorious untruth, and notable slander to both Houses Militia,
the Common Council of London, and Commissioners of the great Seal; who will al
averr it to be and resent it as an apparent untruth, and ought to receive
reparation from the Army for the scandal.

The 20. is a palpable falsehood; disclaimed by the Honorable Lord therein
mentioned under his hand: As for Sir William Lewis, he was not present at that
time, and if he were; how he could be charged to agree to any discourse by his
mere presence and gesture, without speaking one syllable, the Accusers can
never demonstrate without a special Revelation: no evidence in Law.

The 21. concerning Mr Nichols, is very absurd, the Vote of a Committee without
the Houses Vote to confirm it, dismembers and disables no man from sitting in
the House; where some of the Armies friends now sit after Votes of Committees
against their Elections: And if the Vote passed above 4. years since, it was a
fault in the Army and their friends in the House (who have made much use of his
service) never to complain of it till now. That by his threats, power,
solicitations, and indirect practices in the West-Country, he has brought in
above 28. Members more out of Cornwall, of purpose to carry on the designs in
the Charge; is an Article fitter to be Charged on Lieutenant General Cromwell,
Mr Peter, and other Officers, and Chaplains in the Army then on him, who have
brought in many Officers and Members by such means, and endeavored to bring in
more, as will be proved; and in those Lords who illegally brought in M.
Lawrence, Major Saloway, with diverse others in the Northern parts where they
never were: to promote the Armies and others designs of which the world shall
have the particulars in due time: who ought rather to be suspended the House
then any of the impeached Members, or pretended Malignants, til their undue
elections be determined, whereas all in Cornwall if not in Wales are without
exceptions. As for his holding of a place in the Tower, notwithstanding the
self-denying Ordinance, if true; it is no more then some Members now in the
Army and chief Promoters of this Charge, or Or M. Speakers son, Mr. Love and
Mr. Smith, all six Clarks in the same Court yet not excepted against.
M. Speaker, and young Sir Henry Vane, are guilty of, who hold far more gainful
places, then his, which amounts not to half the profit of the meanest Captains
place in the Army, who ill requite him for all his journies to and services for
them; for which he never received any recompense from them or the state.

The 22. will prove a mere Calumny when examined, and is in part a charge
against the House it self.

The 23. also is a mere scurrilous defamatory Charge in many particulars;
especially in that of Mr. Longs cowardliness, that he left the field at Edghil
and never Charged; when as diverse Members of the House and other soldiers
there present know, and will attest upon their Oaths, that he Charged
Gallantly, had his horse slain under him, and continued in the field till the
last; when valiant Cromwell (then a new-made Captain who has since gained the
honor of many services, performed by other men's valor) stood all the while
(like a young soldier) under an hedge, and never came to Charge, when all the
other Troops of the Regiment were engaged and did gallant service; though many
Gallant Officers (of the Armies friends) fled the field without striking
stroke. His plundring of Essex is a Calumny, he doing nothing then but by an
Ordinance of Parliament jointly with other Gentlemen of the Country: and for
the moneys then received, he printed, and after gave in his Account thereof
above 2 years since upon oath, when diverse great Officers in the Army who are
great Accountants have hitherto given in no Accounts, and profess ingeniously
they cannot do it, and thereupon cavil against the Ordinances and Committee of
Accounts, and slander them in their Declarations, though some of them were very
active and contributed largly in raising of this New-molded-Army, who so ill
requite their kindness, to avoid accounting, which they falsely Charge as a
crime on others who are guiltless of it

The 24. is a Charge and insolent scandal cast upon both Houses, not on M.
Long, who are better able to judge of his fitness to be a Register then an Army
of illiterate Clerks or any Mecannicks, who are neither able to draw a Charge,
nor Chancery Order in due form of Law. Besides, the Place has constantly bin
executed by able Deputies, and is so now; and so no prejudice to the
Commonwealth; no dishonor to the Parliament to confer it upon him, who has
sustained more real losses for his good service in Parliament and 4 years
imprisonment, both before and since these wars, then most of the Colonels now
in the Army were worth before the wars.

The 25. particular is false and scandalous as it is charged: If M. Long has
persuaded any Members to stay in the House, or endeavored to call others into
the House when any great affairs were in agitation, he did but his duty in it,
since all in such causes are bound to attend, and if through ignorance (as many
Novices do) or sloathfulness they neglect their trust and duty herein, they are
rather to be suspended and turned out of the House for this offense alone, then
any of the accused, Members upon this whole Impeachment; however the Armies
friends (if this Charge be a crime) are more guilty of it then M. Long, who
will be sure upon all debates in the House and at Committees to keep their
party together, and send up and down for recruits, if they see themselves
likely to be over-voted. As for the Title of Parliament-driver, which they
scornfully cast upon him, the Accusers have now monopolized it in an higher
degree to themselves, by driving not only these XI, impeached Members but many
others (not into, as he, but) clear out of the House with threats, menaces,
Letters, Remonstrances and marching up toward London; whereby they are really
guilty of what they falsely charge on him and more; even of taking away See
their Answer to the Commissioners P. 14* 15. 19. newly Printed.
the Freedom of the Members from them, and suspending and driving Members quite
from the House; whereby the manner of the Parliaments proceedings are much
scandalized, and many times evil and dangerous designs driven on (and never so
many as now) in a faction, by Votes; to the great prejudice of the
Commonwealth: if not the annulling and vacating all present proceedings in
Parliament, as made under the Tyranny, Power, and Insurrection of the Army, who
are grown to that insolency, as scarce to own their Masters, or vouchsafe to
treat with them, till their Antiparliamentary and unreasonable demands be
granted.

The Army (or rather a seditious factious party in it who usurp that Title)
conclude: That in convenient time, they shall and will be ready to make good by
proof upon Oath, all the matters and things contained in this particular
Charge: Which if they do, they must raise a new Regiment of the Knight of the
Post that ever breathed, and win the whetstone from their Attorney and Agitator
General Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, the grand Incendiary and under fomenter of
these mutinous, tyrannical proceedings against the Members. And their prayer in
the close; Therefore the said Army do still reserve further liberty to add
other Articles against the said Members, or any of them, at, or before their
Trials, as occasion shall serve; after so long a time and pretended readiness to
put in their particulars; is to make the Parliament (as some of them style it)
another High Commission or Spanish Inquisition; to vex, charge, and traduce
these Members in infinitum, by Additionals upon Additionals, contrary to all
Law and Justice, and to make their accusations endless.

These Particulars are said to be signed, By the appointment of his Excellency
Sir Teomas Fairfax, and his Council of War; John Rushworth, Secretary: though
they were neither read nor signed at or in the Council: who for their
scandalous beating out all M. Austins Cushings feathers and garbidg, by
throwing them at one another heads, and beating them about one another ears,
at Wickham, and bespattering one another with wine and spittle, on Thursday
night was sennight (in that Murrin-dance or Boys-play, wherein Mr. Peter's acted
the Buffone, the Usual Pastime of these Grandees) instead of praying upon them,
deserve to be severely censured and cashiered the Army as scandalous persons,
by the grand Council of Agitators; the only free Parliament and present Council
of the Kingdom, who give Laws to all supreme powers at their pleasure, and have
newly seized Major General Pointzes in York with a troop and carried him to the
Army prisoner, and make no conscience either what they charge say or print
against the Houses and their eminentest Members, who have the courage or
conscience to oppose them in their unreasonable demands and treasonable
proceedings, of far more capital consequence then any charged against the
impeached Members in this particular Impeachment, admit it to be as true, as it
is full of falsehood.

The sum of the Charge.
THis Charge, as printed and published is in law a most scandalous seditious
Libel, it impeacheth both Houses jointly in the matters of the Declaration
against the Petition; the grant of M. Longs office, and Militia of London: The
whole House of Commons, the Committee of Darby House, and other Committees, in
most of the Articles; the Commissioners of both Houses sent to the Army; the
City and Common Counsel of London in that of the Militia, and the Commissioners
of the great ^eal in two Articles concerning Justices of Peace, made by them
alone. Neither of which are parties to it; and so ought in justice to be cast
out as impertinent and scandalous to all these who are no parties to, and yet
traduced by it. It Charge the Members in many Articles, with things of which
the House by their Votes has long since totally and finally acquitted them:
And for the rest of the Charge, there is neither one witness nor proof produced
to make it good. By the Law of God* No accusation ought to be received against
(any one) 1 Timothy 5 19.
Elder but under two or three witnesses; and by the Law of the land no
Indictment can be received or found by the Gran-Iury without the Oath of one or
more witnesses to make it good, against the vilest Thief or archest Fellon:
Much less then ought this Charge to be received against so many eminent
Members of Honor, merit and untainted Reputation (who serve in their Countries
rights, nor their own) before some apparent proofs produced to the House to
make good the Charges in it: Else every Felon and arch Rogue, shall be in better
condition then the best-deserving Member. In fine, there is no legal prosecutor
to own the Charge, and the prosecution of it by an Army is against all
president, and an express act of Parliament. 31. H. 6. c. 1. And for the House
to receive it against Law, Justice, Honor, Conscience, only out of fear to
displease the Army, is to fear man rather then God, which has already brought
them into many snares, against their solemn Covenants, Oaths, engagements, and
to confess they are now no free Parliament, and so all their Votes and
proceedings void in Law; and then they sit to no purpose at all, but to comply
with the Army in all their unreasonable demands, and dangerous designs, which
God will blast; and themselves when freemen, will and must repeal with shame,
and detestation.

Job. 15. 34, 35. The Congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate; For they
conceive mischief and bring forth vanity, and their belly has prepared deceit.
FINIS.

