A DECLARATION AND PROTESTATION AGAINST The Illegal, Detestable, Oft-condemned,
New Tax and Extortion of EXCISE In General; AND For HOPS (a Native uncertain
commodity) In Particular.

By William Prynne of Swainswick, Esquire;

Ezekiel. 22. 12, 13, 27, 29, 30. Thou have greedily gained of thy Neighbor by
Extortion, and have forgotten me, says the Lord God: Behold therefore, I have
smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain, and at thy Blood, which has been shed
in the midst of thee. Her Princes in the midst of thee, are like Wolves
ravening the Prey to shed blood, and to destroy Souls, to get DISHONEST GAIN:
The people of the Land have used OPPRESSION, and EXERCISED ROBBERY, and have
VEXED THE POOR and NEEDY; yea, they have OPPRESSED THE STRANGER WRONGFULLY. And
I sought for A MAN among them, that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none:
Therefore have I poured out my indignation upon them, I have consumed them with
the Fire of my Wrath, their own way have I recompensed on their heads, says
the Lord God. Psalm. 12. 5. For the Oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of
the Needy, I will arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that
would ensnare him. 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9. Nay, you do wrong and defraud, and that your
Brethren. Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? LONDON; Printed for the Author, and a^^ to be sold by Edward Thomas in
Green-Arbor, 1654.

A Declaration and Protestation against the Illegal, Detestable, oft-condemned
New Tax and Extortion of EXCISE, in general, and for hopes in particular.
WE read in the 2 Samuel 23. 1, 3. That these were the last words of David, the
man WHO WAS RAISED UP ON HIGH, THE ANOINTED OF THE GOD OF JACOB, and the sweet
Psalmist of Israel; The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, HE
THAT RULES OVER MEN MUST BE JUST, RULING IN THE FEAR OF GOD. What it is for a
Ruler over men to be just, and to rule in the fear of God, we may infallibly
conclude, and learn from three Scripture-Presidents, and three sacred Texts,
which may serve as a Commentary on it.

The first President is that of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 1. to 6. And Samuel said
unto all Israel; Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said
unto me, and have made a King over you: And now behold, I am old and
gray headed, and have walked before, and 1 Samuel 7. 15.
judged you from my Childhood to this day: Behold here I am, witness against me
before the Lord, and before his Anointed; Whose Ox have I taken? Or whose Ass
have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand
have I received any ransom to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore
it to you. And they said, THOU HAVE NOT DEFRAUDED US, NOR OPPRESSED US, NEITHER
HAVE THOU TAKEN OUGHT OF ANY MAN'S HAND: And he said, The Lord is my witness
against you, and his Anointed is witness this day, that you have not found
ought in my hand: And they answered, He is witness. That Governor or Ruler
over men, who can make such a challenge and protestation as this, before God
and all the people, and receive such a testimony from both, of his integrity,
as Samuel here did after he had judged Israel above threescore years, is
certainly a just man, truly fearing God: And what Governor this day ruling,
though but for a few months or years, can make such a challenge, or receive
such a witness as he did from all the people?

The second President is that of King David, a man after Gods own heart, who as
he would by no means lay violent hands on King Saul his Sovereign, who hunted
him like a Partridg, and sought his life, though God gave him twice into his
hands, and was persuaded by his Soldiers and Military Officers to kill him;
nor yet usurp the Royal Throne, or Government of Gods people, though specially
anointed by God long before thereto, without a General Call and Election
thereto by all the Tribes and Elders of the people; 1 Samuel 24. and 26. 2 Samuel
5. 1. to 6. So it is recorded of him, 2 Samuel 8. 15. and 1 Kings 15. 5. And
David reigned over all Israel; and David executed Judgment and Justice unto all
his people; and David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and
turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittire; for which he penned, and
left a Pal. 51.
Penitential Psalm on Record to Posterity, to testify his unfeigned repentance
for that bloody crime. And where can we find such a David now?

The third is Nehemiah, cap. 5. throughout; who when the people cried and
complained to him of their Debts, Engages, Bondage and Oppressions by their
Brethren, and that others had their Lands, Vineyards, yea their Sons and
Daughters for servants, for moneys borrowed of them FOR THE KINGS TRIBUTE; He
grew very angry, and rebuked the Nobles and Rulers for it, and set a great
Assembly against them, and said unto them: We after our ability have redeemed
the Jews our brethren, which were sold unto the Heathen, and will you ever sell
your Brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? I likewise, and my Brethren, and
my servants, might exact of them money and corn. I pray let us leave off this
Usury: restore I pray unto them even this day their Lands, their Vineyards, and
their houses; also the hundredth part of the money, and of the corn, the wine,
and the oil that ye exact of them. Then said they, We will restore them, and
will require nothing of them; so will we do as thou have said. Then Nehemiah
called the Priests, and took an oath of them, that they should do according to
this promise: Also he shook his lap, and said, So God shake out every man from
his house, and from his labor, that performs not this promise, even thus be
he shaken out and emptied; and all the Congregation said, Amen, and praised the
Lord, and the people did according to this promise. After which, he subjoyns
this memorable testimony of himself. Moreover, from the time that I was
appointed to be their Governor in the Land of Judah, from the 20. even to the
32. year of Artaxerxes the King, I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of
the Governor: But the former Governors that had been before me, WERE
CHARGEABLE UNTO THE PEOPLE, AND HAD TAKEN OF THEM BREAD AND WINE, BESIDES FORTY
SHEKELS OF SILVER (what is this to our Contributions, EXCISES, Freequarter,
Sequestrations, Imposts, etc.) Yea, even their servants bear rule over the
people: BUT SO DID NOT I, BECAUSE OF THE FEAR OF GOD. Yet also I continued in
the work of the Wall; NEITHER BOUGHT WE ANY LAND: and all my servants were
gathered thither unto the work. Moreover, there were at my Table an 150. of the
Jews and Rulers, besides those that came unto us from among the Heathen that
are about us, etc. YET FOR ALL THIS REQUIRED I NOT THE BREAD OF THE GOVERNOR,
(that is, his Salary, and ordinary allowance, formerly paid by the people)
BECAUSE OF THE BONDAGE WAS HEAVY UPON THIS PEOPLE. Think upon me my God for
good, according to all that I have done for this people.

When our late and present Governors, and their Underofficers, shall imitate
Samuel, David, but more especially Nehemiah, and the Nobles, Rulers, and
Officers under him, in making full restitution of all their Christian
Brethrens, and the public Lands, Vineyards, Oliveyards, Houses, Goods,
Possessions, Offices, Moneys, Corn, Wine and Oil they have forcibly seized on,
without any legal Right or Title, or gotten by usurious or unrighteous
contracts, Sequestrations, Sales, Donations, Wiles, Disseisins, Oppressions,
Exactions, Excises, Taxes, etc. give a true and just account to our whole
Nation of the many Millions of Treasure in few years extorted from them; and
shall neither impose, nor exact from them any more Moneys, Contributions,
Excises, Corn, Wine, or the bread of the Governor from the people, because of
the fear of God, and because of the Bondage that is heavy upon them; we shall
then pronounce them to be just, ruling in the fear of God. But till then,
neither God nor men will or can pronounce them such. And upon consideration of
these three sacred Texts, to omit others.

The first is, Ezekiel. 18. 5. to 14. But if a man be JUST, and DO THAT WHICH IS
LAWFUL and RIGHT, and HAS NOT OPPRESSED ANY, but has restored to the Debtor
his pledge, HAS SPOILED NONE BY VIOLENCE, has given his bread to the hungry,
and has covered the naked with a garment, has not given forth upon usury,
neither has taken any increase, has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, has
executed true judgment between man and man, has walked in my Statutes, and
has kept my Judgments, TO DEAL TRULY; HE IS JUST; He shall surely live, says
the Lord. If he beget a Son, that is A ROBBER, A SHEDDER OF BLOOD, and that
does the like to any of these things to his brother, and that does not any of
those duties, but has eaten upon the Mountains, and defiled his Neighbors
Wife; HAS OPPRESSED THE POOR AND NEEDY, HAS SPOILED BY VIOLENCE, has not
restored the pledge, etc. has committed abomination, has given forth upon
usury, and taken increase; shall he then live? He shall not live, he has done
all these abominations, he shall surely die, his blood shall be upon him, etc.
Which is again there repeated, for the greater certainty. If the just men and
Rulers of this latter age shall be judged and tried by this Text, I fear we may
take up the words of the Prophet Micah 7. 2. and c. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. The good man
is perished out of the earth, and THERE IS NONE UPRIGHT AMONG MEN: They all lie
in wait for blood, they hunt every man his Brother with a Net, that they may do
evil with both hands earnestly; the Prince asks, and the Judge asks for a
reward, and the great man he utters the mischief of his soul, (by coveting
Fields and Houses, and taking them away by violence, because it is in the power
of his hand, chapter 2. 1, 2.) the best of them is as a Bryar, the most upright is
sharper then a thorn-hedg; they pluck off the flesh of my people from their
bones, they eat their flesh, and flay their skin from off them, and they break
their bones, and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh within the
Caldron.

The second is, Ezekiel. 45. 7. to 10. and chapter 46. 18. A portion shall be for the
Prince, etc. and my Princes shall no more oppress my people, and the rest of
the Land shall they give to the house of Israel, according to their Tribes:
Thus says the Lord God, Let it suffice you, O Princes of Israel! REMOVE
VIOLENCE and SPOIL, and execute Judgment and Justice: TAKE AWAY YOUR EXACTIONS
(or expulsions of others from their rights) from my people, says the Lord God.
Moreover, the Prince SHALL NOT TAKE OF THE PEOPLES INHERITANCE BY OPPRESSION,
TO THRUST THEM OUT OF THEIR POSSESSION. How conscientiously this precept (and
Gods own Tenth Commandment of the Decalogue, Exodus 20. 17. Thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors HOUSE, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors WIFE, nor his
Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his OX, nor his ASS, NOR ANY THING
THAT IS THY NEIGHBORS) has been observed by such who have made and styled
themselves, not only Princes, Rulers, Governors, Officers, but proclaimed
themselves the holiest, justest Saints, and Pillars of Justice and
Righteousness of late years, and all sorts of Swordmen, let the world and their
own consciences judge. I doubt Ovids old Poetical description of the Iron Age
Metamorph. l. 1.
VIVITUR EX RAPTO, etc. will suit better with our times and Saints of this Age,
then these sacred Precepts, become like old Almanacks quite out of date and
practice at least, if not quite out of mind: Terras Astraea reliquit.

The third is Isai. 58. 3. to 13. Behold, in the day of your Fast you find
pleasure, and exact all your griefs: Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and
TO SMITE WITH THE FIST OF WICKEDNESS: Ye shall not Fast as ye do this day, etc.
Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, TO LOOSE THE BONDS OF WICKEDNESS, TO
UNDO THE HEAVY BURDENS (of illegal oppressions, long-continued Taxes, Excises,
etc.) to let the OPPRESSED GO FREE, and that ye break EVERY YOKE? Is it not to
deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out
(of their houses, possessions, offices, estates, by violence and rapine) to thy
house; when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the morning,
and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and THY RIGHTEOUSNESS shall go
before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward, etc. And they
that be of thee shall build the old waste places, raising up the Foundations of
many Generations, and thou shall be called, The repairer of the breach, the
restorer of paths to dwell in. We have had many public Fasts and Mock-fasts
of late years, such as God in this Text professedly reprehends and rejects; but
never yet such a true and real Fast, as he here calls for: and that is one main
reason, we are still pulling down, and rooting up the Foundations of our
Church, Kingdoms, Parliaments, Liberties, Properties, Laws, and changing from
one misshapen form of Government to another, instead of building the old waste
places, raising up the Foundations of many Generations, repairing the breaches,
and restoring paths to dwell in. O that we might never henceforth mock God or
men any more with such hypocritical Fasts as formerly; but that the next
prescribed Fast by those in power, might be only this, which God here requires;
and that it might be so sincerely, really, effectually performed by the
Prescribers of it, that God himself, and all the three Nations, may jointly
attest of them, That they are just, ruling in the fear of God.

On Tuesday the 26 of September last, 1654. there was this Ticket left at my
house at Swainswick directed to no particular person named in it, or indorsed
on it.

You are to appear at the Greyhound in Bath, on Tuesday next by ten of the
Clock in the fore-noon, to make entry of what quantity of HOPS YOU HAD GROWING
THIS PRESENT YEAR, AND TO PAY THE DVTY OF EXCISE FOR THE SAME. 25 September
1654.

Thomas Peers,
Sub-collector.

Hereupon repairing to the Lecture at Bath the next morning, and carrying with
me this Ticket, and such Parliamentary Judgments and Declarations against
Excise, as are hereafter specified, which I drew up in writing as here I
present them to the public, I sent for the Sub-collector to the Inn where the
Ordinary for the Lecture is kept, before the Sermon began; who repairing to me
thither, I showed him the Ticket, in a friendly manner, which he owned; and
then informed him it was erroneous, and void in Law, (because directed to no
particular person by name) in respect of form, which he confessed, saying it
was his man's mistake, who had order to set the parties names to every several
Ticket he delivered at their houses; I acquainted him that this being but a
circumstance, the end why I sent for him, was to be satisfied by him, touching
the substance of his Warrant, and that was, to make entry of what quantity of
Hops I had growing this present year, and to pay the Duty of Excise for them.
For, although I was a Lawyer and knew what Duties were by Law to be paid by my
self and others, yet I neither knew nor understood that EXCISE in general,
much less for Hops in special, was a duty; and seeing I had many Judgments
and Declarations of Parliament against it, as an illegal, execrable
innovation, and damning it for ever as such, I could neither in prudence nor
conscience pay it as a DVTY, till he could make it appear to me by some true
real Act of Parliament to be so: desiring him to show me what Legal or other
Authority he had to claim it as a Duty from me. To which he answered, that he
had nothing else to show for or claim it by, but a late Ordinance of the
Protector and his Counsel at White Hall, continuing the Excise till such a
month in the year 1656. Which he would show me if I pleased. To which I
replied, that I conceived that this would be his answer; which was no
satisfaction at all to me; for I was certain, that by the fundamental Laws and
Statutes of the Realm, and the resolutions of our Parliaments in all Ages, no
King of England, nor his Councel-Table, could ever in any age make binding
Laws, or impose any Tax, Tallage, Impost, Custom, Tunnage, or Poundage, much
less Excise (a stranger to our Ancestors) on the Freemen of England, but only
a true and legal English Parliament, and therefore those who condemned,
suppressed the late King, and his extravagant Councel-Table as Tyrannical and
oppressive to the People, could neither in justice nor prudence arrogate such a
supertranscendent jurisdiction to themselves, as to impose such Taxes as these
on the whole Realm, an inseparable Prerogative of our Parliaments alone, as
has been resolved over and over in all ages by the Seldeni No'ae ad Eadmerum.
P. 190, 191. Exact collection, p. 868, 869.
Laws of King Edward the Confessor, ratified by William the Conqueror himself,
and by all our Kings since, by a special clause in the very Coronation Oaths,
Lex. 55. 56. 58. the great Charters of King John and Henry the third, c. 29.
30. 25. E. 1. c. 5. 6. 34. E. 4. c. 12. De Tallagio, 14. E. 3. Stat. 1. c. 21.
Stat. 2. c. 1. 15. E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 5. 21. E. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 16. 25. E. 3.
Rot. Parl. N. 16. 27. E. 3. Stat. 2. c. 2. 36. E. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 26. 38. E.
3. c. 2. 45. E. 3. Rot. Parl. N. 42. 11. H. 4. Rot. Parl. N. 10. 1. R. 3. c. 2.
22. H 8. The Petition of Right, 3. Car. The Statute against Ship-mony,
Knighthood, Customs, 16. Caroli, and all the statutes concerning Customs,
Tunnage, Poundage, and Purveyors, in all our Kings reigns, all unanimously
resolving, That no Tax, Tallage, Subsidy, Aid, Loan, Custom, Impost, Tunnage,
Poundage, or any other payment or duty whatsoever, can be imposed on, or
leavied from the Subject in times of War or Peace, upon any pretext or
necessity, but only by common grant and consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, and so resolved over and over in the Parliament of 7. 21. Jacobi,
and of 3. 4. and 16. Caroli, by many now in power.

And to satisfy him in point of EXCISE, the thing in question, I would show
him some late Judgments and Declarations of Parliament against it, which I
presumed would satisfactorily convince him, that it was no Duty, but an
intolerable Oppression, and detestable Innovation; whereupon I read unto him
these ensuing Judgments and Declarations against it.

1 I showed him, that Excise was altogether a stranger, and thing utterly
unknown to our Forefathers, the Name and thing being never found in any
Histories, or Records of former Ages in this Island. The first attempt we ever
find upon Record to usher it into, and set it on foot in England, was in the
third year of our beheaded King Charles his reign, who by the advice of the Duke
of Buckingham, and some other evil Counselors See the Lords and Commons
J^^^nals, 3. caroli, Exact collection, p. 885. Mr. St. John's Speech and
Declaration concerning Ship-mony, p. 15, 16.
granted a Commission under the Great Seal of England, dated the last day of
February, 3. Caroli, called, THE COMMISSION OF EXCIZE, issued to thirty three
Lords and other of HIS MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCEL. The Commissioners were thereby
authorized and commanded, to raise Moneys BY IMPOSITIONS, OR OTHERWISE as they
in their wisdoms should find most convenient; the causes wherefore these Moneys
were to be raised were expressed to be these, THE DEFENSE AND SAFETY OF THE
KING, KINGDOM AND PEOPLE, and of the Kings, Friends and Allies beyond the Seas,
which WITHOUT EXTREMEST HAZARD OF THE KING, KINGDOM, AND PEOPLE, and of the
Kings Friends and Allies can admit of no longer delay. INEVITABLE NECESSITY,
wherein form and circumstance must rather be dispensed withal, than the
substance lost; the Commissioners must be diligent in the service, and not fail
therein, as they tender his Majesty's Honor, and THE SAFETY OF THE KING AND
PEOPLE. Here Salus Regni periclibatur, the whole Kingdom was declared to be in
danger, in greater and nearer danger then any now appearing. In the Parliament
of 3. Caroli, the House of Commons having notice given them of this Commission,
sent for it, and upon debate thereof, without any one dissenting voice, Voted
and adjudged it, TO BE AGAINST LAW, and CONTRARY TO THE PETITION OF RIGHT
(though only sealed, and never put in execution) and then desiring a Conference
about it with the Lords in the painted hamber (whereat I my self was present)
Sir Ed^^rk Cook by the Commons appointment, after the Commission read by Mr.
Glanval, manifesting the illegality strangeness and dangerous consequences of
it to the whole Kingdom, in an elegant Speec^ and Argument amongst other
express(...) MONSTRVM HORRENDVM, INFO^ME, N^^NS (descanting upon every one of
the words) ye, blessed be God CVILUMEN ADEMPTUM, whose eyes were pulled out by
the Commons in Parliament (which they hoped their Lordships would second)
before ever it saw the Sun, or was fully brought forth into the world, to
consume and devour the Nation. The Lords hereupon fully, and unanimously
concurred with the Commons, ADJUDGING IT TO BE AGAINST LAW, and THE PETITION OF
RIGHT, and FIT TO BE ETERNALLY DAMNED; and upon the Lords request to the King,
this Commission was cancelled in his Majesty's presence by his command, and
brought cancelled to the Lords House, by the then Lord Keeper, and by them sent
cancelled to the Commons House for their satisfaction; who returned it back to
the Lords with their thanks for their care and concurrence with them herein.
Therefore being thus solemnly damned, and crushed in the shel, by the judgment
and unanimous Votes of the Commons, Lords, and King Charles himself in that
Parliament, as against the Law of the Land, and contrary to the Petition of
Right (then newly passed in that Parliament) it seemed very strange and
monstrous to me, that any Pretenders to publik Liberty, Law, Right, or any new
Governors, and Councel-table at White Hall, should presume to revive, and
actually impose any such illegal, damned Impositions, and monstrous execrable
Excises on the exhausted people now, upon the self-same pretexts of public
safety, and inevitable necessity. The rather, because I informed him.

Secondly. That the last Parliament of King Charles, about 13 years after this
first Judgment had, in four several Printed Declarations, Remonstrances,
Votes (to which most now in power were Parties and Consenters) revived,
approved, ratified and insisted on this primitive sentence of condemnation
against Excise, as most illegal and detestable.

1. In and by the Speech and Declaration of Mr. Oliver St. John, his Majesty's
Solicitor General, delivered at a conference of both Houses of Parliament,
concerning Ship-mony, 14 January 1640 published by the Commons Order, page 13,
15, 16, 19. I am commanded by the House of Commons, (says he) to present to
your Lordships considerations those things which SATISFIED THE COMMONS.

First, The Commissions for the Peace with the instructions.

Secondly, A COMMISSION CALLED THE COMMISSION OF EXCISE etc. This was dated
ultimo Febr. 3. Caroli. It was dated after the Summons to that Parliament. This
Commission issued to 33 Lords, and others of his Majesty's privy Counsel. The
Commissioners are thereby commanded to raise moneys by impositions and
otherwise, as in their judgments they shall find to be most convenient. The
causes wherefore these moneys are to be raised, are expressed to be these, The
defense and safety of the King and people, which without extremest hazard of
the King, Kingdom, and people, and of the Kings friends and Allies beyond
Seas, can admit no longer delay. INEVITABLE NECESSITY, wherein form and
circumstance must rather be dispensed withal then the substance lost. The
Commissioners must be diligent in the service, and not fail therein, as they
tender His Majesty's Honor, and the safety of the Kingdom and people. Here,
salus Regni periclibatur, the whole Kingdom declared to be in danger, in
greater and nearer then in the opinions, the Ship-writs or Judgments in the
Chequer. In the Parliament of 3. Caroli, this Commission was adjudged by the
Commons TO BE AGAINST THE LAWS OF THE REALM, AND CONTRARY TO THE JVDGEMENT
GIVEN IN THE PETION OF RIGHT; and after a conference with your Lordships, your
Lordships desired His Majesty, that it might be CANCELLED: the then Lord
keeper brought it shortly after Cancelled to your Lordships in the House, and
there said, that it was Cancelled in his Majesty's presence. You sent it
Cancelled to the Commons to be reviewed, Who afterward sent it back to your
Lordships. My Lords, we have not cited these Presidents of that Parliament,
out of diffidence that your Lordships have forgot them, but because other have;
or that we distrust your Lordships Justice, if you had forgot them; for before
these were, your Lordships concurred in opinion with your worthy Ancestors,
that first gave them: their Noble blood runs in your veins. It is now TO
CONFIRM YOUR OWN IVDGEMENT AS WELL AS THEIRS in your Lordships breast. There ARE
NOW THE SAME MAGAZINES AND FOVNTAINES OF HONOR AND JUSTICE AS WAS THEN. THESE
IVDGEMENTS AND PROCEEDINGS WERE THE ACTIONS OF BOTH HOUSES: the DANGER by the
violation IS EQVALL.

So he, and the Commons then resolved: with what face or color of Law and
Justice then, can any persons revive, impose, exact, or justify this illegal
Tax and Excise, now, (especially by a mere extrajudiciall White Hall edict,
more illegal then that Commission under the great Seal, by the Kings and the
whole Counsels Order) who thus publicly censured the bare design of imposing
it by the King and his Councell-table then, by Commission under the great Seal
of England, which their paper Edict wants?

2 In a Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, 15 December 1641. (which I
then read to the Excise-man) made, Printed and published by the whole Commons
House of Parliament, and some of our present Grandees, then Members of it,
Exact collection page 3. 4. 6. Wherein relating, the pressing miseries and
calamities, the various distempers and disorders, which had not only assaulted,
but even overwhelmed and extinguished the LIBERTY, peace and prosperity of this
Kingdom, etc. The root of all this mischief, we find (say they) TO BE A
MALIGNANT and PERNICIOVS DESIGN OF SVBVERTING THE FVNDAMENTALL LAWS and
PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT, upon which the Religion and JUSTICE of this Kingdom
are formerly established. The Actors and promoters hereof have been.

1 THE JESVITED PAPISTS, WHO HATE THE LAWS, as the obstacle of THAT CHANGE and
subversion of Religion, which they so much long for* etc. As in all compounded
bodies, the operations are qualified according to the predominant Elements: so
in this mixed party (let our late and new puny Statesmen observe it) THE
JESVITED COVNSELS BEING MOST ACTIVE and PREVAILING, may easily be discovered
to HAVE HAD THE GREATEST SWAY in all their determinations; and IF THEY BE NOT
PREVENTED, are likely to DEVOUR THE REST, and to turn them INTO THEIR OWN
NATURE, etc. The first effect and evidence of their recovery, and STRENGTH was,
the dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford, etc. The precipitate Breach with
France, by taking their ships, etc. The Peace with Spain, etc.

The charging of the Kingdom with billeted Soldiers in all parts of it, and
the concomitant design of And have not English Horse of late years, and still,
been billited in most Counties, for this very end?
German Horse, that the Land might either SUBMIT WITH FEAR, or BE ENFORCED WITH
RIGOVR TO SUCH ARBITRARY CONTRIBUTIONS, AS SHOULD BE REQVIRED OF THEM. The
dissolving the Parliament in the second year of his Majesty's reign, the
exacting the proportion of five Subsidies, after the Parliament dissolved, by
Commission of Loan, and diverse Gentlemen and others imprisoned for not yielding
to pay that Loan. Nota.


AN UNJVST and PERNICIOVS ATTEMPT TO EXTORT GREAT PAIMENTS FROM THE SUBJECTS BY
WAY OF EXCIZE, and A COMMISSION GIVEN UNDER SEAL FOR THAT PURPOSE; (yet damned
before put in execution) The Petition of Right which was granted in full
Parliament blasted, etc. and the Petition made of no use, but to show the bold
and presumptuous injustice of such Monsters, as durst break the Laws, and
SUPPRESS THE LIBERTIES OF THE KINGDOM, after they had been so solemnly and
evidently declared. Another Parliament dissolved, 4. Caroli; the Privileges of
Parliament broken, by imprisoning diverse Members of the House, detaining some
of them close Prisoners for diverse Months together, etc. Upon the dissolution
of both these Parliaments, UNTRVE and SCANDALOUS DECLARATIONS PUBLISHED, TO
ASPERSE THEIR PROCEEDINGS, and SOME OF THEIR MEMBERS, TO MAKE THEM ODIOUS, and
COLOR THE VIOLENCE WHICH WAS USED AGAINST THEM. And are they not so now by a
bare White Hall Order imposing them, till 1658.
Tunnage and Poundage has been received without color or pretense of Law,
many other heavy IMPOSITIONS CONTINVED AGAINST LAW, and some so unreasonable,
that the Sum of the charge exceeded the value of the goods. The Book of Rates
lately inhanced to an high proportion, and such Merchants as would not submit
TO THEIR ILLEGAL AND UNREASONABLE PAYMENTS, were vexed and oppressed above
measure, etc. A new and unheard of Tax of Ship-mony was devised, upon pretext
of guarding the Sea, etc. the exactions of Coat and Conduct money, and diverse
other MILITARY CHARGES; the taking away of the Arms of the Trained Bands of
diverse Counties* the restraint of the Liberties of the Subject in their
habitations, Trades, and other interest; their vexation and oppression by
Salt-peeter-men. Great numbers of the Subjects for refusing those unlawful
Charges, have been vexed with long and expensive Suits, some Fined and Censured,
others committed to long and hard Imprisonments and Confinements, to the loss
of health in many, of life in some, and others have had their Houses broken up,
their Goods seized. Some have been restrained from their lawful Callings,
Judges have been put out of their places, for refusing to do against their
Oaths and Consciences. Others have been so awed, that they durst not do their
duties. Lawyers have been checked for being faithful to their Clients, etc. New
OATHS have been forced upon the Subjects AGAINST LAW, NEW JVDICATORIES ERECTED
WITHOUT LAW. The COUNCEL TABLE HAVE BY THEIR ORDERS OFFERED TO BIND THE
SUBJECTS in their Free-holds, Estates, Suits, and Actions; if all and every of
these, by the resolution of the whole Commons House, and many in late and
present power, were the fruits and effects of the most active and prevailing
Jesuited Counsel then, out of a malignant and pernicious design of subverting
the fundamental Laws and Principles of Government, etc. What are all and every
of these particulars of late years, and still acted over and over again, in a
far higher, open, more avowed degree then ever, by persons in greatest power,
and parties to this Remonstrance, but the very effects and products of the
self-same Jesuitical prevailing Counsels, and those many Jesuits now swaying,
and sitting in Counsel amongst us (as some Grandees have lately averred in
their 4. September. 1654. in the Painted Chamber.
printed Speeches, as well as private Conferences?) And if the very damned
Commission of Excize before ever it was put in execution, was so many years
after thus publicly branded for an unjust and pernicious attempt and result of
Jesuited prevailing Councels, to extert great payments from the Subject; What
is the late and present violent illegal imposition, collection, extortion of,
from the exhausted people, by Excize-men, Forfeitures, Penalties, Fines,
Confiscations, Seisures of Goods, and Arms, Troopers in some eases, and that by
a new erected Councel-Table Ordinance (as they style it) presuming not only to
make binding orders for private men, but See the Government of the Commonwealth
of England, Artic. 30. The Ordinances printed in Folio amounting to near seven
hundred and seven, pages.
MANY and MANIFOLD BINDING LAWS and ORDINANCES for our three whole Kingdoms,
printed in Folio; and TO IMPOSE Monthly Contributions, EXCIZES, CUSTOMS,
TVNNAGE and POVNDAGE ON THEM FOR SUNDRY MONTHS and YEARS YET TO COME, against
the express Letter of the Great Charter, the Petition of Right, all forecited
Statutes, Judgments of Parliament, and to repeal all these Laws, with others
at once, as well as to erect new Judicatories, and impose such new Oaths and
Restraints on their new Modelled Parliaments themselves, and the three whole
Kingdoms, which no English King, nor Council Table ever did in any age? The
Lord give them, and the whole Nation, hearts to consider, repent, reform it, to
prevent those See 21. R. 2. c. 11, 12, 13, 16. 1. H. 4. c. 3 and Rot. Parl. 3.
H. 4. N. 21, 22, 36, 48, 66, 70. 31. H. 6. c. 1. 39. H. 6. c. 1. 17. E. 4. c. 7.
manifold mischiefs and combustions which else may ensue upon it, and the evils
such bad Presidents may produce in after ages, if not crushed, reversed,
suppressed in the shell; being set on foot by those who profess themselves the
greatest Patrons and Protectors of our Fundamental Liberties, Franchises,
Laws, Rights, Parliaments, which they totally subvert, and the grandest enemies
to arbitrary Government, Tyranny, Oppression, and Jesuiticall Practices, of
which they overmuch favor; if this Remonstrance of the whole House of Commons
be Judge, and such of themselves who were Parties to it.

In Exact Collection, p. 638.
A Declaration of the Commons assembled in Parliament, for bringing to condign
punishment those that have raised false and scandalous rumors against the
House, how THAT THEY INTEND to assesse every man's Pewter, and LAY EXCIZE UPON
EVERY COMMODITY. (which I showed and read to the Excize-man.)

Die Sabbati 8 October. 1642.
THe Commons House in Parliament, receiving information, that diverse public
rumors and aspersions, are by Malignant persons cast upon this House, that
THEY INTEND to assess every man's Pewter, and LAY EXCISE UPON THAT and OTHER
COMMODITIES, the said House, for their vindication therein do declare, THAT
THOSE RUMORS ARE FALSE and SCANDALOVS. And for as much as these false rumors
and scandals, are raised by ill-affected persons, and tend much TO THE
DISSERVICE OF THE PARLIAMENT, it is therefore ordered, that the Authors of
these false and scandalous rumors shall be scarched and inquired after* and
apprehended and brought to this House TO RECEIVE THEIR CONDIGN PUNISHMENT.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that this be forthwith Printed and
published (as it was accordingly).

By this Declaration it is most apparent,

1 That the very name and imposition of Excise (condemned so newly and
frequently in Parliament both by the Commons and Lords) was so odious and
detestable to the whole House of Commons now, that they utterly disclaim in
public by this Declaration (after the wars begun) the very thought and
intention of imposing it on Pewter, or any other commodities.

2 That they renounce and brand the very first rumors and reports, that they
intended to lay Excise upon any commodity, as false rumors and scandals raised
by ill-affected persons.

3 That these false reports and rumors tended much to the disservice of the
Parliament.

4 That the Authors of them, should be searched, inquired after, apprehended,
and brought to the House as Delinquents, there to receive condign punishment.
What punishment then do the imposers, exactors, and levyers of it deserve? with
what face, Justice, Honesty, conscience, then can any who were parties to this
Declaration, after this public disclaimer, lay Excise both upon Pewter and
most other commodities, and justify the levying of it by force and violence, as
some of them soon after did, and others have since presumed and continued to
do? verily, as I at first, and ever since this strange imposition, much grieved
at, and protested to sundry of them against it in private, from time to time,
with all earnestness, and some years since penned a public Protestation
against it, with an intent to print it, had it not miscarried; so I observed,
that the laying on of this strange Imposition on the people, against this
Declaration and the other premises, was that which first and most of all
alienated the peoples hearts and affections from the Parliament, gave greatest
scandal to their real Friends, and most advantage to their Enemies; and some
principal promoters of it were soon after blasted in their reputations, and
taken out of the World by death; and what sad and forcible Dissolutions, and
unparalleld Ruptures, the real, and other fictitious Parliaments since have
come to on a sudden (by those they most relied on for protection) which first
imposed, and afterward continued this and other illegal Taxes on the oppressed
people against their own Delcarations, Judgments, and all former Laws, and
what confusions they have brought on our three Nations, instead of Peace, Ease,
Settlement, Liberty, Safety, Tranquillity, we have all of late years beheld
with admiration and astonishment? and let others now beware by their examples,
how they still continue them on the exhausted generally discontented Nation.
Laesa patientia fit furor, Men will not be always mocked, oppressed in this
kind, but will cry out, VIOLENCE and SPOIL, Jer. 20. 8, 9. And the burning
fire shut up in their bones against it, will breakforth into a fury at last, it
will not be stayed or quenched, See Doctor Beards Theater of Gods Judgments,
l. 2. c. 36 to 42.
but with the ruin of the Tax-masters, 1 King. 12. 15. to 20. This imposing of
Excize, and other Taxes against Law, and the forecited Judgments, drew this
just Censure from the late King, and the Lords and Members of the Commons House
at Oxford, against the first Imposers and Exactors of them, in their A
Collection of Ordinances, p. 453.
Letter to the Earl of Essex the General of the Army, Janu. 27. 1643. to which
they subscribed all their names, That it were well, as they still press upon
THE KINGS MAINTENANCE OF THE LAWS, they would also know, that their obligation
to observe the same is reciprocal, and whiles they here resolve to defend the
full power of this Parliament (which in their sense can be no other than the
power they have exercised this Parliament) they would take notice, that they
are therein so far from the observation OF THE LAWS, that THEY DESPERATELY
RESOLVE AN UTTER SUBVERSION OF THEM; for what can tend more to the destruction
of the Laws, than to usurp a power to themselves, without the King, and against
his will, to attribute to their Orders, or pretended Ordinances, THE POWER OF
LAWS and STATVTES, TO ENFORCE CONTRIBUTIONS, LOANS, and TAXES OF ALL SORTS
FROM THE SUBJECT; to imprison without cause showed, and then prohibit Writs of
Habeas Corpus for their enlargement. TO LAY EXCIZES UPON ALL COMMODITIES; to
command and dispose of THE LIVES and ESTATES of the Freeborn Subjects of this
Kingdom at their pleasure, TO IMPOSE TUNNAGE and POUNDAGE, CONTRARY TO THE LAW
DECLARED IN THE LATE ACT FOR TUNNAGE AND POUNDAGE, and all this done and
justified by a LEGISLATIVE POWER founded and inherent in them? All which ARE
MANIFEST BREACHES OF THE PETITION OF RIGHT, and MAGNA CHARTA, THE GREAT
EVIDENCES OF THE LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND; which Charter bounds them by express
words, as us, THOUGH ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, as well as the King; and though
it be not now, as heretofore it has been, taken by solemn Oath on the Peoples
part, as well as on the Kings, nor a Curse, as heretofore pronounced on the
Violators; yet they HAVING TAKEN A PROTESTATION TO MAINTAIN THE LAWS, and
LIBERTIES, and THE PROPERTIES OF THE SUBJECT, and inclusively THAT CHARTER, let
them take heed whilst they make use of this their PRETENDED POWER TO THE
DESTRUCTION OF THE LAW, LEST A CURSE FALL UPON THEM, and UPON THEIR POSTERITY.
What a sudden unexpected curse and blow sell upon some of the principal
Promoters of these illegal Taxes, Excizes, and Innovations first, and upon both
Houses afterward, by the Army raised for their preservation, for whose support
and pay all these Taxes were first invented, and imposed by a new way of
Ordinances (never See my Irenarches Redivinus neor the end, where it is fully
repeated.
heard of, or used in Parliaments in any former age) we all know by sad
experience, and let our present White Hall, and other Grandees, who late did,
and still continued them in an higher degree with far less color of
Parliamental authority, consider the Premises, and their downfall, lest they
incur the same, or a worse Curse and Judgment, for imposing, and continuing
still upon the exhausted people, these illegal, unusual oppressions, by as new
illegal Self-created powers, and pretended necessities, of their own making and
lengthening. And if they allege, It is just so to continue EXCIZES on the
people, till all the Debts secured by them be fully satisfied to such
particular persons who took this new Revenue for their Security.

I Answer, First, it is the Highest injustice to continue an illegal damned
detestable public Tax and oppression on the whole English Nation, (specially
by as illegal ways and powers) to satisfy private men's interests, Debts or
pretended arreares.

Secondly, That those who advanced any moneys upon such an illegal
oft-condemned security, deserve justly to be punished with the loss of their
Debts, because the chief instruments of continuing and supporting this heavy
greivance to the whole Kingdoms injurious oppression.

Thirdly, That those pretended Debts being advanced only for the support and
maintenance of those illegal arbitrary powers which impose and dispose of
these Taxes at their pleasure, not for the public weal, ease and benefit of
the Nation; it is just they only should defray them out of their own private
estates who first made and thus secured these Debts, for their own advantage
rather than the peoples: it being a rule in Law, and common equity, Qui sentit
commodum sentire debet et onus.

Fourthly, The Laws of England will rather suffer a private mischief, than a
general inconvenience: therefore better these pretended Debtors should suffer,
to teach them more wisdom, and love to their own liberties, Laws, Country,
and Country men hereafter, than that the whole Nation should be still oppressed
and robbed by EXCISES and other illegal Taxes; We must not rob Peter to pay
Paul, much less the whole Nation, to pay a few rich Usurers, who have (most of
them) gotten great Estates, by public Brocage, and making the whole Nations
purse and faith their security and morgage, who never really made any contract
with them for any loan of moneys, taken up upon their credit, nor entrusted any
others with such a power to make them their endless. Debtors and pay-masters
til doomes-day.

4 As the whole House of Commons severally, so it and the House of Lords too
jointly, after this, in their second Declaration against Commission of Array,
12 Jan: 1642 Printed and published by it self first, and after in exact
collection page 884, 885. by their special Order, recite, approve, ratify and
insist on the forecited Judgment given against the Commission of Excise 3.
Caroli. Where thus they declare (which I likewise read) We shall further clear
this our seuse of the Petition of RIGHT, that it did intend TO TAKE AWAY ALL
CHARGES OF WHAT NATURE SOEVER TO BE IMPOSED ON THE SUBJECTS BY THE KING
ALTHOUGH FOR DEFENSE OF THE KINGDOM IN TIMES OF DANGER, by Authorities beyond
all exceptions, etc. By the JUDGMENT OF THE KING, THE LORDS and COMMONS, after
the Petition passed. There was a Commission questioned IN PARLIAMENT, called
THE COMMISSION OF EXCISE etc. (reciting the effect, and ground of it in the
words aforementioned, and THE NECESSITY SO INEVITABLE, that form and
circumstance must rather be dispensed with, than substance lost etc.) In that
Parliament of 3 Carolt, this COMMISSION WAS RESOLVED BY THE LORDS and COMMONS
TO BE AGAINST LAW, and CONTRARY TO THE PETITION OF RIGHT; and upon the Lords
desire to his Majesty, the same was Cancelled in his Majesty's presence by his
command, and was brought Cancelled to the House of Lords by the then Lord
keeper, and by them afterward sent to the Commons. By all that has been said,
it appears; THAT TO DEFEND THE KINGDOM IN TIME OF IMMINENT DANGER, IS NO
SVFFICIENT CAUSE TO LAY ANY TAX OR CHARGE UPON THE SUBJECTS WITHOUT THEIR
CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT: which they further prove by the Act then newly passed
against Ship many. How any who were parties to this Declaration (as some in
present power were) or any Patrons or Protectors of the Laws, Liberties,
properties of the Subject, or privileges of Parliament, can since this, or now,
impose or justify the laying of Excise or any other Impost Tax or Tallage
whatsoever, upon the people, out of Parliament, by any White Hall Order, upon
pretext of any Imminent danger or necessity, against this Declaration and
resolution; or any under Officers of theirs exact Excise from me or any other
English freeman by their un-parliamentary papers, transcends my understanding
to conceive.

Thirdly, It is Declared and Enacted by several Printed Acts of Parliament,
made by both Houses, and See Exact Collections p. 789, 790.
assented to by the King himself 16 and 17 Caroli: That no Custom, Impost,
Tunnage, or Poundage is due, or can be imposed on any Goods or Merchandise,
imported or exported, without. AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT; and that all such persons
who shall exact or receive the same, without an Act of Parliament; and grant
and consent both. OF THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT, SHALL INCUR THE
FORFEITURE and PENALTY OF A PRAEMUNIRE. This Impost of Excise on Hops, and
other Merchandise, falls within the general compass of these Acts.

And therefore I advised the Excize-man, with all Customers, and other
Officers, to take heed how they demand or take Excize, or any other Imposts,
Customs, Tunnage or Poundage, by color of a White Hall, or any other
Ordinance, not made by both House of Parliament, and settled by a real Act of
Parliament, lest they incur the penalty of a Praemunire, and smart for it in
conclusion, as some of the late Kings Officers did, if ever Law, Justice, or
true English Parliaments come to take place again in the Nation, as no doubt
they will in Gods due time; when such illegal paper Ordinances, or feigned
spurious Acts of See 21 R. 2. c. 11, 12, 16. 1 H. 4. c. 3. rot. Parl. n. 22,
23, 36, 48, 66, 70. 39 H. 6. c. 1. 17 E. 4, c. 7 worthy perusal.
illegal Parliaments will be no Plea to excuse or extenuate their crimes.

Fourthly, After the late Kings beheading, the Army, Officers, and other
Commoners who continued sitting at Westminster, without the Majority of the
secured and secluded Members, or House of Lords, and arrogated to themselves
(beyond all former Presidents) the Name and Title of the Parliament of England,
in their Declaration of the 17. Martii, 1648. expressing the grounds of their
late proceedings against the King, and settling the present Government in the
way of a Free State, p. 7, etc. (which I read to the Excize-man) charged the
King, as out-going all his Predecessors in cvil, in that after the Loans and
other Oppressions, which produced that MOST EXCELLENT LAW OF THE PETITION OF
RIGHT, most of them were again acted presently after the Law made against them,
which was palpably broken by him, almost in every part of it, very soon after
his solemn consent given unto it, BY HIS IMPRISONING and PROSECUTION OF MEMBERS
OF PARLIAMENT for opposing his unlawful will, and of diverse worthy Merchants
FOR REFUSING TO PAY TUNNAGE and POVNDAGE BECAUSE NOT GRANTED BY PARLIAMENT, yet
EXACTED BY HIM EXPRESSLY AGAINST LAW, and punishment of many good Patriots, for
not submitting to what soever he pleased to demand, though NEVER SO MUCH IN
BREACH OF THE KNOWN LAW. His design to bring in the German Horse TO AWE US INTO
SLAVERY, and his hopes of completing his Grand Project of Now revived and
imposed, amounting to forty thousand pound a Month.
SHIP-MONY, TO SUBJECT EVERY MAN'S ESTATE TO WHATSOEVER PROPORTION HE PLEASED TO
IMPOSE UPON THEM.

BUT ABOVE ALL THE ENGLISH Was it not a thing of more strange impiety and
unnaturalness in the General and Officers of the Parliaments own Army, raised,
paved, Commissioned, Sworn, and every way engaged for the defense of the
Parliament of England, actually to engage and bring up the Army again and
again, to Impeach, Secure, Seclude, and Dissolve both the real and pretended
Parliament of England before and since this Declaration?
ARMY was labored by the King TO BE ENGAGED AGAINST THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT; a
thing of THAT STRANGE IMPIETY and UNNATURALNES for THE KING OF ENGLAND, that
nothing can answer it but his own being a Foreiner, neither could it easily
have purchased belief, but by his succeeding visible actions in full pursuance
of the same. As the The Officers and Armies coming in person to seize forty
three Members at once, seclude above two hundred more, and the whole House of
Lords was certainly a far greater Offense, especially after the branding of
the Kings Act, and his repentance for, and disclaimer of it.
Kings coming in Person to the House of Commons to seize the five Members,
whither he was followed with But the Army Officers, with some Thousands of the
Army, better armed and provided.
some hundreds of unworthy debauched persons, armed with Swords and Pistols,
and other Arms, and they attending at the door of the House, ready to execute
whatsoever the Leader should command them (but yet secured, secluded, or
offered violence to none, nor ever entered the House, as the Soldiers did both
before and since.)

Upon all these and many other unparralleld Offenses, upon his breach of Faith,
Oaths, and Protestations, and let all the world of indifferent men judge,
whether the Parliament (so they term themselves) HAD NOT SUFFICIENT CAUSE TO
BRING THE KING TO JUSTICE.

It seems strange to me, that any of those who thus remonstrated against the
late King, and justify the bringing of him to Justice for all and every of
those particulars, should before and since imitate or exceed him in all and
every of those particulars; and more especially in the EXCISE; so diametrically
contrary to the excellent Law of the Petition of Right, as the premises
resolve; which EXCISE he never exacted or put in execution, after the damning
of the foresaid Commission. And let all the world of indifferent men judge,
whether the Parliament and people of England, have not as just, as sufficient
cause to bring them to Justice for it; as ever they had, or pretended to have,
to bring the King to Justice for the same: if Romans 2 1, 2, 3. be either good
Law or Gospel: the rather, because they resolve in that Declaration, an
unaccomptable Officer (as the King pretended himself) to be a STRANGE MONSTER
IN NATNRE and no ways to be suffered in any State or Government.

5 Whereas the Excise man, pretended Excise for Hops, to be a duty by virtue of
a White Hall late Ordinance, as he termed it: I thereupon read unto him the 36
articles of the Government of the Commonwealth of England, etc. viz; That the
Laws shall not be altered, ^uspended, abregated or repealed; nor ANY NEW LAW
MADE, NOR ANY TAX, CHARGE OR IMPOSITION LAID UPON THE PEOPLE, BUT BY COMMON
CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT; Save only as is expressed in the thirtieth Article,
viz. That the raising of money for defraying the charge of present extraodinary
Forces, both by Land and Sea, in respect of the present Wars, SHALL BE BY
CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT, and NOT OTHERWISE: Save only that the Lord Protector,
with the consent of the Major part of his Council, for preventing the
disorders and dangers which may otherwise fall out both by Sea and Land, shall
have power UNTIL THE MEETING OF THE NEXT PARLIAMENT, to raise Money for the
purposes aforesaid, as also to MAKE LAWS and ORDINANCES for the peace and
welfare of these Nations, where it shall be necessary, which SHALL BE BINDING
and IN FORCE, until order shall be taken in Parliament concerning the same.
And this clause in the oath, p. 46. I do swear and promise in the presence of
God: that I will not violate or infringe the matters and things contained
therein, but to my power observe the same, and cause them to be observed. And
shall in all other things, to the best of my understanding GOVERN THESE NATIONS
ACCORDING TO THE LAWS, STATUTES and CUSTOMS. Now admit this Instrument and
Saving to be valid and legal; yet it limiting the Whitehall power of raising
moneys (and that only for the Forces by Land and sea in respect of the Wars,
which are ended) till the meeting of their first Parliament (and no longer)
which was past in their account 23 days before this demand of Excise for Hops,
as a duty; those very articles of the Government discharged me and all others
from it; by virtue of any Whitehall Power or Ordinance. But this saving being
contrary to the body of the Articles; to all the forementioned Statutes, Great
Charter, Petition of Right, Judgments and resolutions of Parliament, and
destructive to the Privileges and Rights of Parliaments themselves, in whom
the Legislative and Tax imposing authority wholly, solely and incommunicably
resides, as all our Parliaments Statutes, Law Books, Records, Histories in all
ages have resolved, and the body of these two Articles confess, it must needs
be void and nugatory to all intents and purposes in all Lawyers, and judicious
men's Judgments, and can give them no legal or real authority to make binding
laws, Ordinances, or impose any Taxes, imposts, or Excises by color thereof.

If the Parliament it self by special Act of Parliament, should give any
special Committee of Lords and Commons Authority or Power to make binding
Statutes, Acts, Ordinances, or to impose Taxes on the people, or repeal or
alter any former Laws and Statutes with the Kings Royal assent, as the
Parliament of 21 R. 2. c. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. did; yet all such Acts,
Ordinances, Laws, Taxes, alterations, repeals of Laws, would be null and void,
though ratified by the Kings consent, and ought wholly to be revoked, reversed,
voided and undone, repealed and adnulled for ever; as being IN DEROGATION OF
THE STATE OF THE PARLIAMENT, TO THE GREAT INCOMODITY OF THE WHOLE REALM, and OF
PERNICIOUS EXAMPLE; and NEVER TO BE DRAWN INTO EXAMPLE IN ANY FUTURE TIME, as
is declared, resolved in the Printed Statute of 1. H. 4 c. 3. and more fully in
the Parliament Rolls of 1. H. 4. number. 26. 48. 66. 70. worthy perusal. Much
more then must the powers granted to any Person or Persons by this Instrument
(made out of Parliament, by persons yet unknown for the most part) to impose
any Taxes, or make binding Laws and Ordinance, be null and void to all intents,
to oblige our whole three Kingdoms, or any one English F^een an, or alter,
repeal any former Laws or Statutes of the Realm by which the people are only
to be governed at all times. The Statutes of 31 H. 8. c. 8. and 34 H 8 c. 23
authorized the King for the time being with the advice of his Council or the
major part of them, to set forth Proclamations, (in some cases only) under
such pains and penalties, as to him and them should seem necessary; which shall
be observed AS THOUGH THEY WERE MADE BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT. Provided always
that this should not be prejudicial to any Persons Inheritances, OFFICES
LIBERTIES, GOODS, CASTLES OR LIFE; In the passing of which Acts, many liberal
words were spoken (against Proclamations) and a plain Promise, (as well as
proviso) made, that by authority of the Act for Proclamations, NOTHING SHOULD
BE MADE CONTRARY TO ANY ACT OF PARLIAMENT OR THE COMMON LAW; as Fox Acts and
Monuments in the oldest Edition, p. 7. 41 See A New Discovery of the Prelates
Tyranny, p. 210, 211, 212
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, records and writes in his Letter to THE
LORD PROTECTOVR in Edward the sixth his Reign, yet this power was held so
dangerous, that it was repealed by the Statute of 1 E. 6. c. 12. But never did
any Parliament grant any King of England, and his Council the least power to
make binding Laws, and Ordinances, or impose Taxes, Customs, Imposts or
Excises in any age, nor to act any thing against any statute or the Common Law;
much less against the Great Charter and Petition of Right. And therefore this
power granted by this new illegal Instrument, to all or any at Whitehall, to
make binding laws and Ordinances, and impose any Taxes, Customs, Imposts, or
Excises, whatsoever is merely void, null in Law to all intents; and all
Ordinances, Laws, Taxes, Excises, made and imposed by pretext thereof, wholly
illegal, null and ineffectuall to all intents, and fit to be so declared by
the whole Nation and their Trustees, to prevent the dangerous President and
consequences of it in future times) and the monthly Contributions, Excises,
Imposts, Customs imposed by them for sundry Months, and years yet to come,
against the very Letter of thirtieth Article, as well as of the forecited Acts,
Declarations, and Letter of the Oath therein contained (so soon after the
taking of it) must needs be esteemed and declared void, and no ways to be
owned or submitted to as binding, valid, legal, by my self or any others who
have taken the Solemn Protestation, League, Vow, and Covenant to maintain and
defend the laws and liberties of the Realm, and Rights and Privileges of our
English Parliaments in our several places, and callings, with constancy,
faithfulness, and sincerity according to our power, And this was that I then
alleged against Excise in general.

As to the Excise for Hops in special, and that is to be paid by the owner and
grower before any sale, I protested against it, as most unjust, and
unreasonable for three Reasons.

1. Because men were enforced to pay full Monthly Contributions (though
illegally imposed) all the year long to the value of the Ground and Land
whereon the Hops do grow, which yields no other Crop or benefit, but Hops; out
of which both the rent to the Landlord, and likewise Contribution must be
raised: And to enforce men to pay Excise out of that for which they pay full
Contribution, without any deduction for the Excise: is a double Tax, and
oppression for the self same thing, and they may as well exact Excise for any
sort of Corn, and Hay, as for Hops, without defalcation for the Contribution
out of the Land whereon they grow, there being the self same reason for both.

2. Because Hops are a great certain Charge, and most uncertain Commodity and
Gain. The last year before this, there was such a blight, that I and others,
had not the sixth part of the ready money disbursed out of purse for the
dressing and polling of them; and this year the crop of Hops was so small, that
it would hardly quit the cost bestowed in dressing, polling, tying, gathering.
And to enforce men to pay not only monthly Contributions, but excise
likewise, for that domestic native Commodity, for which they are out of purse,
and so great losers without any gain, is to add Oppression to affliction; and
against all Rules of Justice and Conscience.

3. Because by the Common Laws of England no Toll is due for any native
vendible Commodity till it be sold by the Owner, as is resolved, 9. H. 6. 45.
Brook Toll 2. and if a man buy Hops or any other Commodities, for his own
private use and family, no Toll by the Common Law 28. Ass. 53. 9. H. 6. 25
Brook Toll 1. 7. Therefore to exact Excise for Hops, before their sale; before
we know when, or to whom, or at what rate to sell them, or if sold to any for
the use of their particular families was both illegal and unreasonable.

Upon all these grounds and Reasons, I declared and protested to the Exciseman;
that I was resolved upon no terms whatsoever to pay any Excise at all for Hops;
but to question and oppose it to my power according to my Protestation, Vow,
Solemn League and Covenant, for my own and the whole Nations future case from
this oppressing illegal grievance and Dutch-Devill, as most styled it; which I
conceived all Patrons of public Liberty would now cordially and unanimously
join together throughout the Nation, to conjure down to Hell again, from whence
it was first raised by those, who formerly condemned and sent it packing
thither. The Excise-man hereupon answered with much Civility and respect; That
he would not have suffered any other, so to dispute the business with him as I
had done: but his respects toward me were such, having been an eminent
sufferer heretofore for Religion and Public liberty, for which he well knew I
had sustained very great losses in my estate, and being a Gentleman whom be
truly honored, that he would by no means bring my name in question; and and
herefore my Crop of Hops being so mean (which he wished far greater) he would
demand nothing from me for them And so the Minister calling on me, to go to the
Sermon; he departed very friendly and fairly to his June, and I unto the Church
to the Lecture.

Since which being informed, that other Excise-men in Gloucester shire have most
strictly exacted Excise for Hops from others of my friends by color of this
Whitehall Ordinance; and that the buyer will be forced to pay Excise for my
Hops, though nothing be demanded from me; which will be deducted out of the
price: although the value considered in it self will be very small, yet since
the consequence of it, is and will be very great to the whole Nation, as well
as prejudicial to my self and friends, both for the present and future; I held
it my duty to make this my private Declaration and Protestation, public, for
the present and future benefit of the whole English Nation, to whose
Judgments, Consciences, Censures, I humbly submit it, at this season. The
rather because it pleased God the very next morning after this my Declaration
and Protestation made to the Excise-man, to take out of this vale of Misery, my
dearly-beloved Christian Brother, and fellow sufferer, for Religion and
liberties, Doctor John Bastwick: And therefore seeing I know not how many days
or hours I may survive him, or whether I shall have any more time, or so
seasonable an opportunity to publish any thing of this subject, or to do any
further service in these last and perilous times, for the Church and people of
God, or my native Country, by completing those larger works, intended by me
for posterity, if God shall prolong my life, health and Liberty, I thought
meet, whilst I had life and opportunity, to do what good I could, Prove 3. 27.
whiles it was in the power of my hand to do it; and whiles I had this by me.
It was our Saviors own Speech and practice, John 9. 4. I must work the works
of him that sent me, whiles it is day; the night comes when no man can work.
And it is Gods own advice and precept, Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go: And therefore lest
this small useful Piece, (as I conceive it) should die and perish with me; I
have endeavored to make it public, Psalm. 39. 13.
before I go hence and be no more: and if it please almighty God to infuse such
a vigorous spirit into it, and bestow such a transcending blessing on it, as to
make it isntrumental by his Omnipotency, to give a mortal wound to all those
illegal Excises, Taxes, Imposts, etc. under which our impoverished Nation has
so long groaned and languished (in these times of cheapnesse of all Corn, and
Country Commodities, and scarcity of Coin, is no way able any longer to pay or
bear) or to bring them to, or bury them in the grave of perpetual obscurity,
so as never to rise up again, before I die: I shall then with old Simeon
joyfully sing a Nunc dimittis: And if it stand with Gods blessed pleasure) say
with the triumphant Prisoner and martyr of Jesus Christ, Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4.
6, 7, 8. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand:
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which God the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, in heaven; after all my Bonds,
Imprisonments, Persecutions, Sufferings, ingrate requital of my faithful
services for my God and Country here on earth.

FINIS.

