A DECLARATION of the Officers and Armies, Illegal, injurious, proceedings and
practices against the XI. impeached MEMBERS: (Not to be paralleled in any age)
and tending to the utter subversion of free PARLIAMENTS, Rights, Privileges,
Freedom, and all Common Justice. And to Introduce a mere Arbitrary Power in
the very Highest Court of Justice.

LUKE 11. 17. A house divided against a house, falls. LONDON, Printed in the
Year, 1647.

A Declaration of the Officers and Armies illegal, injurious proceedings and
practices against the XI. impeached Members, (not to be paralel'd in any age)
tending to the utter subvertion of Parliaments Rights, and all Common Justice,
etc.
IT is related by many of our Hall, Hollinshead, Stow Speed, Anno 32 H. 8. Dr
Saunders, Sir Edward Cook 4 Instit. p. 37, 38, 39.
Historians, That Thomas CROMWELL ( newly created Earl of Essex) suffered death
and lost his head, being attainted of High Treason in Parliament, and never
called legally to his Answer, by a Law which he himself had procured; to
suspend from and attaint others in Parliament, upon mere general accusations,
without particular proofs and before any answer given; which illegal arbitrary
new invention of his (to prejudice other Members,) proved another Perillus Bull
to himself, he being the first man that suffered by it, upon a mere general
Charge of Heresy and Treason: This perilous president as it should admonish
some of his name, and all other Officers, Members in the Army or Houses, to
beware how they give the least way to any such arbitrary unjust general
Charges, Suspensions, Proceedings against any man, especially persons or
Members of eminency and power; it being a memorable Maxim of a most learned
Sir Edw. Cook 4 Instit. p, 37.
Judge and experienced Parliament Man in his Treatise concerning The High Court
of Parliament, (lately printed by the Houses special Order) That the more high
and absolute the Jurisdiction of this Court is, the more just and honorable it
ought to be in the proceeding, and to give example of Justice to inferior
Courts; (uttered upon the occasion of the Lord Cromwels attainder, and the
irregular proceedings therein, which he desired to be buried in perpetual
oblivion:) So it may serve as a most apt Parallel to demonstrate to all the
world the illegallity and arbitrariness of the Officers and Armies present
Charge and Proceedings against the XI. accused Members, wherein Lieutenant
General Cromwell (as is evident by sundry printed Papers and Letters) has none
of the least (and some say the grea^est) hand; whom this president should
specially dis-engage from such a prosecution, the unjustness whereof will
appear to all men by these particulars.

1. By the generallity and incertainty of the Accusers; the Charge against them
being presented in the name of the whole Army, without the hands of any
particular persons to it, who will undertake at their perils to make it good, or
else to give the accused Members and House due reparations if they fail to do
it: contrary to the Ashes Tables Title Appeals and Approver Rastal, Tit.
Accusation, 23. E. 1. c, 13.
Common and Statute Law of the Land.

2. By the 1 Cor. 14. 8. 25. H 8 c. 14. 25. E. 3. Stat. 3 c 9. Co. 4. rep. 40.
uncertainty and generallity of the Charge it self, in mere general and
ambiguous terms; to which the parties accused can give no answer, nor make any
defense: and thereupon voted insufficient by the House 25. Junii: to charge or
suspend them by the Law of the Land.

3. By the multitude and quality of the parties impeached; no less then XI.
Members at once, all men of approved integrity, fidelity and abilities, who
have acted and suffered much for the Parliaments and peoples liberties: Mr
Denzel Holles, the first of them, was long imprisoned in the Tower by the King
for his faithfulness and activity in the Parliament, 3. Caroli: for which good
service, some of his Accusers and the whole House of Commons lately voted him,
a large recompense, (against those who wronged him) as a person of eminent
desert: Besides, he was one of the fiv^ ^^mbers impeached, demanded by the
King, and justified by the whole House, for his faithful service to his
Country, soon after the beginning of this Parliament; yea, his and his
Regiments valor and gaslantry were the principal instruments under God (of all
the Foot) that gained the field at Edg-hil battle; and after that made good
Brainford, against the Kings whole Army, and thereby preserved the Artillery,
Magazine and City it self (at that time) from surprizal: Since which he has
been employed in Committees, Treaties and affairs of greatest trust, which he
has managed with great fidelity and applause: and yet now must be blasted with
a The main Particulars now charged against him have bin fully examined and he
cleared of them by the House long since.
scandalous and illegal general Charge. Sir Philip Stapletons gallantry in the
field in all the Battles fought by the Earl of Essex, with his good services in
the House, in Scotland, at the Committees of safety, and both Kingdoms, are
sufficiently known to all men: yet now they must be rewarded with a malicious
Impeachment. Sir William Wallers gallant exploits in Sussex, Wales, and the
Western parts with an inconsiderable force, for which he was highly honored,
and his diligence in the House and highest Committees, to do his Country
service, must now be all ecclipsed with an uncertain defamatory Impeachment,
because he would not be hired to turn Independent: It is very well known to all
the Kingdom, that Major General Masseys valorous defense of Gloucester against
the Kings whole Army, after the cowardly surrender of Bristol to Prince Rupert
by an Independent, was the principal means of saving the Parliament, City,
Kingdom from utter ruin and conquest by the Cavaliers: yet he must be now
impeached and suspended the House by the power of an Army, when the Independent
condemned to lose his head for high Treason against the Realm in surrendering
Bristol (to the lofs of all the West and Kingdoms hazard) must be continued in
the House, as an untainted Member fit to be these Members Judge. Mr Walter
Long's Imprisonment and sufferings for the privileges of Parliament in 3o
Caroll, for which he was lately voted reparations, and his diligence in the
House, are known to most. Sir Who has long since given a most exact Account
for Portsmouth certified by the Committee of Accounts and allowed by the House
and yet is charged for not accounting.
William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy's, and Mr Nichols respective abilities and
services in the field, House, Army, Ireland: Mr Recorders activity in the House
and City for the public safety: and Colonel Edward Harley's service in this
very Army, and under Sir William Waller, plead stronger for their Innocence,
then the Armies Charge for their Guilt: and yet they must now be aspersed and
suspended the House, before particular proofs of any guilt, and Mr Nichols
election (above 6. years since] ordered to be reported for want of other
matter, to turn him out of the House. And Sir John Maynard, only for opposing
the Fenne project wherein L. G. O. C. is so deeply engaged, must be added to
the number and suspended. These XI. must be all impeached, suspended without
cause, at once, only to This is confessed in diverse late printed Papers to be
the Plot and real cause of their accusation.
weaken the Presbyterian party, that so the Independents might over-vote them
(as they have done since at pleasure) when as the King himself was so modest as
to impeach but five Commoners at once, to strengthen his party, or else the
Army will not be satisfied but march up hither.

4. By their violence to have them suspended the House before any real
particular Charge or proofs produced against them; threatening by their
Remonstrance of June 23. in case the House would not suspend them (against all
Law and Justice upon their illegal impeachment) that they should be enforced to
take such courses extraordinary (for their suspention and apprehention, if not
assassination) as God (who certainly will give them no directions in such an
unjust prosecution but only to repent of it) should enable and direct them
unto, wherein they far exceeded the Kings proceedings against the 5. Members;
who in five days after retracted An exact Collection p. 35. to 55.
all his Charge and proceedings against them, and never prosecuted their
suspention from the House, which the Army press and reiterate again and again.

5. By their unjust and unreafonable demands after the House had Voted; June
25. That it did not appear that any thing had been This Vote acquits them from
most of the paticulars in their Cod^ge
done or said by them in the House, touching any matters contained in the Papers
sent from the Army, for which they could in justice suspend them. And that by
the Law of the Land, no judgment could be given for their suspention upon those
Papers, before particulars produced and proofs made: in their Manifesto from
Vxbridg, June 27. wherein they not only slight and tacitly censure these Votes
as unjust, and contrary to presidents; but likewise most injuriously and
unreasonably press: the delaying of the particular Charge and proofs to be
brought in against them; til the greater and more general matters of the
Kingdom proposed by them, be first considered of and settled: and that in the
mean time, these Members (who in modesty only, and to give them some
fatisfaction in their unreasonable demands desired leave from the House to
withdraw themselves for a time) may by the wifedom and justice of the House be
excladed and suspended from entering into it again (in case they forbear not of
their own accord) til the general affairs of the Kingdom be settled (from the
honor whereof they would totally exclude their presence and Votes contrary to
all reason and equity, after their general Charge Voted to be insufficient for
their suspention) and til the matters concerning them be heard and determined,
when the House shall judge it more seasonable and safe then now. A mere
equivocating shift ard New found divice, which all honest, just, conscientious
persons must detest and protest against, and more especially the Countres and
Buroughs for which those worthy Members serve (who ought unanimously to
Petition the House therein, as an oppugaing of the Rights of Parliament, and
great injury to them, by whose choice they were presented to the House, as the
County of An exact Collection p. 50.
Buckingham did the King, in the case of M. Hamp^en) to deprive t e House and
Kingdom of the benefit of their faithful Votes and advise, without and before
any legal Charge or proof produced; and to ^a^s sentence against them as
guilty, before any Charge of evidence, or bringing them to answer. A thing so
un ust, unreasonable, and dishonorable for the Army, or then Officers to
demand, or the Parliament to grant, that impudency and injustice itself would
have blushed to have desired it in private, much more in print: and makes most
men now conclude, that the Armies flourishes against arbitrary power, and
unjust proceedings in the Houses, and for the advancement of public Justice,
are but mere Hypocritical pretenses, actually contradicted by their most
injurious, unreasonable demands, and arbitrary violent proceedings concerning
the accused Members, destructive to the very foundation and freedom of
Parliaments, and common Justice.

6. By their apparent false suggestions wherewith they abuse both the accused
Members and the House, which all just men and real Saints must utterly
abominate: whereof take one instance instead of many. In the Manifesto from Sir
Thomas Fairfax and the Army; June 27. they suggest to the House; and declare to
the world: That they had their particulars and proofs against the Accused
Members, READY to produce and deliver in: whereupon the Members petitioned the
House on Teusday, June 29. to appoint Sr. Thomas Fairfax and the Army a short
and peremptory day to send in these particulars and proofs; that a speedy
proceeding may be had thereupon, when they doubt not to make their innocence
appear: The House upon this Petition ordered them, to bring in the particulars
and proofs peremptorily on Friday following, being the 4. of July: at which
time, neither particulars nor proofs were ready, or produced: but instead of
producing them, they crave longer time to exhibit and make them ready, though
they pretended and printed them to be ready, before the Members petitioned;
promising to bring in both their particulars and proofs on Tuesday next, at
which time (in the afternoon) they brought in some particulars The Council of
War and Agitators in the Army may be charged with more particular and heinous
crimes by the Members, and more dangerous compliances with the King and
Malignant party, with drivi^g and abusing the Parliament, undue Elections etc.
then these Members
below expectation (of the most whereof the House had acquitted them by their
Votes) without any names subscribed thereto, or proofs to make them good as was
desired. Which dilatory and indirect proceedings, not tolerable in the case of
any private person how mean soever, much less in the cause of so many eminent
Members and the whole House of Commons: makes all ingenious and intelligent men
believe, that the General and Army have no particulars of moment nor real
proofs at all against them: and by these suggestions and delays endeavor
causlesly to exclude these Members from returning into the House, til they have
obtained all their unjust demands, and accomplished all their hidden designs. A
practice so destructive to the Liberties, Rights and freedom of Parliament, so
injurious to these eminent, able, wel-deseruing Members, and the Counties,
Buroughs, and whole Kingdom for which they serve: and cries for exemplary
punishment against the chief Contrivers of it, and will render their memories,
persons no^ execrable, and infamous to the present age and all future
generation.

7. Their mercenary Prima pars. de comparatis comparandis; Eight Antiqueries.
The Charge of the Army justified Judge Jinkins Apology, with others.
Pamphleters (as Lilburne, Amon Wilber, Britunicus, and others) in their late
seditious scurrilous Pamphlers, not only impeach and traduce by name many other
Members of both Houses, preferring the Kings proceedings before the
Parliaments, and extolling the Army for enlarging the king from his restraint;
but likewise most grossly traduce the impeached Members, as guilty of most
dangerous crimes and practices, notwithstanding the Houses acquital of them by
their Votes; and the Armies inability to make good their Charge: (in whom Mr
Saltmarsh writes in his printed Letter, There is a mighty Spirit raised up for
Justice and Righteousness: we ADMIRE AT IT) as if it were a matter of
admiration to find a spirit for Justice and Righteousness in any of their late
proceedings.

We shall close up all with this passage concerning the accused Members, in a
Declaration from Sir Tho: Fairfax and the Army, June 14. 1647. p. 7, 8. We
humbly desire for the seiting and securing of our own and the Kingdoms common
Right, Freedom peace, and safety: That the persons who have appeared to have
abused the Army, etc. may be some way disabled from doing the like or worse to
us: and for that purpose may not continue in the same power (especially as Our
and the Kingdoms Judges in the highest trust)
but may be made INCAPABLE THEREOF IN FVTVRE, etc. Nor would our Proposals of
this singly he free FROM THE SCANDAL AND APPEARANCE OF FACTION OR DESIGNS, ONLY
TO WEAKEN ONE PARTY (under the notion of unjust or oppressive) that we may
ADVANCE ANOTHER, which may be imagined MORE OUR OWN: Which their Proceedings
since against these Members demonstrate to be a most real truth and the late
general Votes concerning Members before any particular accusation or
impeachment, (occasioned by their means and over-awing) by which they may cast
out whom they please that shall or dare oppose their arbitrary and unjust
actions; as they have arbitrarily and injuriously displaced many gallant
faithful commissioned Officers in the Army without proof or cause, and put
other seditious turbulent persons of mean quality into their places to
strengthen then faction, who at Amersham and elsewhere turn Churches into
Stables and Stables into Churches, and beray the Lords table itself* to show
what a Restoration they intend.

FINIS.

