A Testimony of God, And his way, and worship against all the false ways and
worships of the World.

Also an answer to some of the false Doctrines held forth, by a professed
Minister, in Wales; showing the unsoundness of his former actions, and is
found to be one, in the nature of the World; which sometime he has spoken
against.

WITH An answer to some Queries; propounded by one, who is called an Anabaptist.

Given forth for no other end, but in love to the truth, as it is in Jesus:

BY ALEX: PARKER.

LONDEN, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the West end of Paul's, 1656.

A Testimony of God, and his way, and worship, against all the false ways and
worship of the world.
GOD is pure and holy, and loves righteousness, and his worship is a pure and a
spiritual worship, not known to the world that lives in wickedness: the world
by all their wisdom and study cannot find out the mind of God, neither do they
worship him in spirit, but are wondering and worshipping the Beast, who have
not found their names written in the book of life, and though they make a
profession of the name of God, yet are aliens and strangers from the pure life
and power of God, and so are climbing up another way and building up Babel, (a
Tower to reach up to Heaven in their Heathenish and Babilonish wisdom) where
there is nothing but confusion and strife, one crying lo here is Christ,
another crying lo there, one crying up his way to be the only way, and counts
all accursed that are not in his way, and so the second cries up his way, and
so all the world lies in confusion and wickedness, strife and debate, and
though many have long been seeking after God, yet have not found him, because
they sought him not in his own way. Which is pure for ever; but by their own
wit and wisdom have gone about to know and find out the mystery of the Kingdom
of God, and so have walked and gone on in the crooked ways, and by paths of
the world, and have despised that little thing within, which is the light of
Jesus that shines in the midst of all this darkness, and reproves them in
secret for their evil deeds, and shows them their confusion, and oftentimes
bring them to a stand, and some sense or feeling of the deadness and emptiness
of all their profession, and of their tottering building which is builded upon
the sand, and cannot stand in the fiery day of the fierce wrath and indignation
of God, and when they daub up themselves with smooth words, crying the
ordinances of Christ, and the Church of Christ, and the righteousness of
Christ, and faith in Christ, and though they be wicked and sinful, and must be
so while they live, yet Christ does not impute their sin unto them, they are
justified in Christ, though they sometime run into sin, and thus would make
Christ a cloak for their sin: yet still the light of Christ testifies against
them, and all their colored and painted outside, and talking of justification,
without holiness of life, will not bring them peace, but still there is a cry
after God for purity, and reproves them for their sin and iniquity, and no
peace there is to the wicked, as long as they act contrary to the measure of
God, all their profession and high notions, and glorious comprehensions and
gilded outsides, is but like unto Adams fig-leafe garment, and will not cover
their nakedness in the dreadful and powerful day of the Lord, the wicked
shall be as the stuble, and shall be consumed root and branch, all their crying
Lord, Lord, will not avail them in that day, all their sermons, reading,
praying, and the like (being found workers of iniquity) will do them no good,
but this dreadful sentence from the Lord will be pronounced against them, Go
cursed workers of iniquity, I know you not, depart from me, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Consider of this all you carnal
and formal Professors, Priests and People, who talk so much of the name of
God, drawing near unto him with your lips and with your mouths, but your hearts
goes after your covetousness and things of this world, which comes to an end
and withers and fades away, and pleads against the power and purity of
Godlyness; saying, none can ever be made free from sin nor perfect in this
world, but must continue in sin or sin in him while he lives, and so have made
a Covenant with hell and with death, and no longer time will serve the devil
your master whole servants you are, as long as you live in sin) but term of
life; What will ye answer the Lord in that day, will then a distinction serve
you, that you have not sinned unto death, or that your sin shall not be imputed
to you? Shall not then the witness of God in your own conscience, which all
along has testified against you, for your ungodly practices and reproved you
for your secret evils? Shall it not stop your mouths and you shall stand
speechless, and shall be made to confess that God is just, and your
condemnation just, who in your life time have rejected his counsel, and cast
his Law behind your backs, and have turned his grace into lasciviousness, know
this assuredly, this will be your portion at the latter day, for God is just
and will render a just reward unto every one, according to their deeds done in
the body whether they be good or whether they be evil; They that have improved
their talents and done well, shall enter into the Lords joy: But those who have
slighted the Lords free love, which is freely tendered and have been careless
and negligent and have not improved, their tallents shall be cast out from his
presence, and shall have their portion in the lake of utter darkness, where
there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth: and this shall be the
condemnation of all the world who hate the light, that Jesus Christ has
enlightened them withal, and love their evil deeds better then the light: For
this is the condemnation of the world, (not because light is not come,) but
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil, and so all the world lies under condemnation who
are in the sin and evil and deny the light, which gives the entrance into the
Kingdoms of Christ, which stands in righteousness, and no unrighteous one can
enter, for no entrance is made but through the death of sin, and there is no
death nor freedom from sin, but only by the Son of God, there is no way but by
him, no salvation but in him, no separation from sin nor reconciliation to God,
but only by the Son o^ God, who is given of the Father a Covenant of light into
the World, who does enlighten every one that comes into the world, and by this
light is the Devils work seen, and by faith in him who has given the light is
the heart purified and the conscience purged from dead works, and so the devils
works comes to be destroyed, for, for this purpose was the Son of God made
manifest that he might destroy the works of the devil; and the works of the
devil are in the heart; for in the time of the night the devil the enemy of
man, he has wrought his works in the heart of man, and so has wrought and
begotten him into his image, to do his work, and so man becomes a servant to
the devil, bringing forth fruits of unrighteousness, and this is all done in
the heart, the devil having gotten possession, and sits and rules as King in
the heart of man; and there is the ground of all sin, it a rises out of the
heart, which is deceitful and desperately wicked from thence arises pride,
envy, wrath, malice, murders, drunkenness, lying, swearing, adultery,
fornication, covetousness, persecution, tyranny and oppression, and all other
evils whatsoever they have their ground and rise from with in out of the
heart, for there is no man tempted of God, but every man when he is tempted he
is drawn a way of his own lust, for lust is conceived in the heart, and after
it is conceived it brings forth sin, and sin being finished brings forth death,
and the ways of sin is death: and while sin lodges and is regarded in the
heart, it defiles the heart and separates from God, and all the prayers and
sacrifices that are offered up unto God from an impure heart, are abomination
to him; all outward shows and outward cleansing, will not avail nor bring
peace, as long as the ground and root of sin remains within, for it is the
heart which the Lord requires, as it is written my Son give me thy heart; so it
is an inward work that every one must know and witness, if ever you know true
peace, and rest, for as the devils work is within in the heart and defiles the
heart, so must the work of Christ be within likewise, for the destroying of the
devils works, and for the purifying of the heart, for this is the mystery which
has been hid, and is hid from all wisdom of the flesh, and from all vultrous
eyes and venomous beasts, and reveiled to the Babes and Lambs of God, who have
laid down their Crowns at the feet of the Lamb, and have denied themselves and
the pomp and glory of this world, and do bear the daily Cross and despised the
shame, and do love and walk in the light, which the world hates, and thereby
are led out of darkness, and the ungodly practices which the world lives in:
into righteousness and peace to exercise a good conscience toward God and
toward man; and this must every one own, if ever they own the living God, or a
pure conscience where the Mystery of faith is held, they must own this light to
guide them in the exercise of their consciences: for this light is the eye,
whereby a man comes to see himself and the root and ground of sin, and until
man comes to own this light he never comes truly so see himself, and so is far
from denying self, for first a man must see himself before he can deny himself,
and the light it is, that let a man see his sin, and that he is driven from
God, and out of union with God, because of his sin: and it is sin that separate
from God, and breaks the peace with God, for all have sinned and come short of
the glory of God; all have gone astray (we our selves even as others) and have
been wandering as Sheep without a Shepherd, but the Lord of Hosts is risen; and
has sent forth his Son even Jesus Christ the true Shepherd, who is gathering
his Sheep into the fold where they shall lie down in peace, and none shall make
them afraid; and if the Son make you free, then are you free indeed, but no
freedom there is but only by him, whose blood washes and cleanses from all
sin; and whereas it is sai^, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us; This was spoken to a condition before
confession, as is plain to the Children of Light, for says he, if we confess
our sins he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness: he does not say from part but from all, and this they
witnessed who were in the light, and has fellowship with the Father and the
Son, as is written, God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, he that
says he has fellowship with God and walks in darkness, is a liar, and does
not the truth; But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin; and him we witness, even Jesus Christ the everlasting Covenant
of God, who makes free to the utmost all that come unto God by him; and we
testify against all those that oppose the pure doctrine of Christ Jesus, and
says, none can be fully cleansed from sin while they live upon the earth, and
so would make the blood of Christ of none effect, which (whosoever walks and
abides in the light of Christ, his blood) cleanses from all sin, for
whosoever abides in him, sins not, he that sins has not seen him, neither
known him, and this the Scripture declares, and I bear testimony and set to my
seal that it is true, for he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he
is righteous, and he that commits sin is of the devil, for the devil sins
from the beginning: but whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, and in this
are the Children of God made manifest, and the children of the d^vil, 1 John 3.
etc. He that is born of God is the Son of God, and the Son of God does not
commit sin; and except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, for the first man is of the earth earthly, and minds earthly things, his
joy and treasure is there, in things that are below, delighting in the visible
things, his heart is there, his care and labor is for the things of this life,
what to eat, what to drink, what to put on, how to become great in the earth,
and by his earthly wisdom which is from below, (which is sensual and devilish)
he is plotting and contriving to get great possessions, and to compaste the
earth to get himself a name in the earth, but cannot be satisfied, when he has
compassed one piece of ground which he coveted after, presently the lust runs
out again and covets more, but is never satisfied, and in this state man is an
enemy to God, and the thoughts of his heart are evil, and that continually,
and notwithstanding many times a true sense and feeling of his sad and
miserable condition is arising in him, and the witness of God reproving him
and calling him from his abominations and whoredoms, and many times brings him
into some trouble, yet he sleights his love and hates the reproof and goes on
in his rebellious ways, and so treasures up to himself wrath, against the day
of wrath and revellation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render a
just reward unto him according to his deeds, and here lies all the ungodly
world, driven from God, out of his Covenant, out of his peace, out of his
presence, out of his pure love and spiritual worship, and are loving and
delighting in and worshipping the creature more then the Creator: But the Saints
and holy men of God, who came to witness redemption and were in Covenant with
God, and faith of his Son, had passed from death to life, and they had put of
the body of sin, and the old man and his deeds, and were created anew, being
born again of the eternal word, which lives and abides for ever; and their
hearts was purified, and their consciences purged from dead works, and there
bodies made fit Temples holy and pure for the Lord God to dwell in, and there
was his worship, in the spirit, in his holy Temple, where there is no need of
Sun Moon or of Candle, but the glory of the Lord fills the Temple, and this they
witnessed who were redeemed from the earth, and were in Christ Jesus, where
there union, joy, and fellowship was, where there is neither Greek nor Jew,
circumsition, nor uncircumsition Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ
is all and in all; and the same is the Lord our God, now working and bringing
to pass even by his own power and outstretched arm is he getting himself the
victory, what we are, we are of and by him, he alone it is that works in us
both to will and to do, by his own power made manifest in us, and works
mightily in us, whereby we are made willing to do his will and work, and this
is all by his Son, who of God is made wisdom, justification, sanctification and
redemption, he is made unto us all things, and through him we can do all things
even through the Son of God, whom we know is come, and has given us an
understanding to know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even
in his Son Jesus Christ, who is our life, our joy, our stay and strength, by
whom we are freed from sin, and from our vain conversations, which formerly we
lived in; who has broken the bond of iniquity, and set the oppressed free, to
praise and glorify his name, who alone do praise him, the dead cannot praise
him, it is the living, the living that praises him to whom be everlasting
praises and glory, world without end, Amen.

So I say and declare that if any man say he has no sin before he come to
confess his sin, and to witness the power of God cleansing him from his sin,
he does dec^ive himself, and the witness of God in his own conscience will
testify against him and be his condemnation: But where the living power of God
is made manifest to purify and cleanse, and to destroy the works of the devil,
to burn up and consume the old heavens and the old earth, which is cursed and
brings forth cursed fruits: I say where the old is destroyed, and the new
heaven and the new earth witnessed, wherein dwells righteousness. Shall we deny
the work of God? Not far be it from us, but to declare his marvailous works
which he has wrought in our days, to ages and generations to come that they
may dread and fear the name of our God, and to others who sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death, who are wandering astray as sheep without a Shepherd,
and are feeding upon the husk, and spending their money for that which is not
bread, and their labor for that which does not satisfy: freely from the bowels
of tender love to their souls, do we declare what the Lord has done for our
souls, that they might return home into the Fathers house, where there is
bread enough to satisfy the hungry thirsting soul, that every one may eat their
own bread, and sit under their own vine, and have union and feilowship with us
in our fathers love for evermore. So in the name of the Lord I do warn all
people who read these lines, to repent and cease from all their sins and
abominations, which formerly they have lived in, and from all the false and
Idolatrous worships of the world, which a long time ye have followed, and
thereby have been deceived and led captive laden with sin, but have not come to
the true knowledge of God, but are still in their old crooked and perverse
nature, and knows not the Cross of Christ, nor the yoke nor the bridle to the
tongue, but are at ease in the flesh, and can speak their own words, and think
their own thoughts, and do their own works; I say return, return, and hearken
diligently to the voice of the Son of God, which cries for purity and
holiness, without which none can see God, that thereby your souls may live,
and may feed upon the daily bread in the Fathers bosom, which whosoever eats
of this bread shall never hunger, and he that drinks of this cup shall never
thirst; but it shall be a well of living water, springing up unto eternal life:
so every one wayt in the measure of light, which from Christ you have received
for the appearance of Christ in you, that his life may be made manifest in your
mortal bodies: for this is the command of God, This is my beloved Son hear him;
and Christ, the Son calls, and says, Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, I am meek and lowly in
spirit, and you shall find rest to your souls. So all people come freely, his
love is freely tendered to you, slight not the tender profers of his love, but
come forth and separate your selves, and touch no unclean thing and the Lord
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and you shall be his Sons and
Daughters, mind the pure and still voice, that thereby you may be led into the
pure life, and pure union and love of the children of light; for if you neglect
such great salvation, woe will be your portion for ever. There ore while you
have the light believe in the light, and work while it is day, before the
dreadful night of darkness come when none can work.

By one who has seen the deadness and emptiness of all the formal worships and
formal profession that stands in the will of man act d in man's will, who is
returned back into his fathers house, and there dwells in rest and peace, and
has ceased from his own work; written forth in the bowels of love to captive
and weary souls, who have long been tossed to and fro, by following the
changeable doctrine of men, but are not satisfied that they may return home
into the fathers house with me, where they shall find satisfaction and
plenteous redemption, where all the Saints are one, and their food one, and
have a new name written, which none knows nor can read but those that has it:
and there my name is written in the Spiritual book of life, and they that are
there do it read and know. Who am known to the World by the name of ALEX:
PARKER.

An answer to some of the false doctrines, held forth by one Vavasar Powel, who
is called a Master and a Minister, and something further occasioned by some
conference held with the said Vavasar, in the public meeting place at old
Radnor in Wales; showing the unsoundness of his sormation: and to be one in
nature and rage with all the Parish Teachers, which he has so much tried
against written for the sake of the simple ones, that they may be awarned and
fore-armed to keep out of his snare.
GReat has been and is the rage of the world and the professors of truth,
against the life and power of truth wherever it was made manifest in former
generations, as it is now in this generation against the despised people of
God, whom the Lord has owned, and made his power manifest, whom the scorners
that knows not God do call Quakers, especially the Priests, and they who
profess themselves Teachers of the Nations, who in their high places utters
forth their spite and venom, and incensing their hearts against them, as
though they were a people not worthy to live: Amongst whom one who is called
Mr. Vavasar Powel, who is called a Teacher, and much set up and adored by the
blind Professors in Wales and other parts, who is looked upon to be one above
the rest and separated from them, yet in persecution and rage join with them,
and exceeds many of them in railing, backbiting, and casiling many false
aspersions upon the innocent people and harmless Lambs of Christ, in his high
place uttering forth such things as are not fit to be mentioned by any that
professes the name of God, much less by one who professes himself a Minister
of God. And I being in those parts of Wales, and hearing of his railing
accusations against the people of God, in most places where he came, and I
amongst the rest of my brethren was falsely accused and slandered by some of his
hearers, and I being innocent, and the Lords truth clear from all those things
falsely charged upon us was moved of the Lord to go to old Radnor in Wales on
the 5. day of the 3. month called May 1656. to stand a witness for the living
truth of God against Powel and all opposers of the truth, and that day he the
said Powel was found in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees, whom our Lord
Jesus Christ cried woe against, he went up into the high place, and stood
praying in the Sinagogue as the Scribes and Pharisees did, he is called of men
Master, contrary to the command of Christ to his Ministers, who says unto his,
be not ye called of men Master, for ye have but one Master even Christ, and ye
are brethren; but Vavasar Powell is called of men Master, contrary to the
command of Christ, which none of his true Ministers were; and so under the woe.
The true Ministers of God had the Spirit of God, and had salt in themselves to
savor withal, and they knew who were the true Ministers of God, and who were
deceivers even by the Spirit of God that was in them, and they prayed by the
Spirit of God. But Vavasar Powel in this is short of the true Ministers; for he
in his prayer desired that the Lord would discover and show them, who his true
Ministers were, and who were deceivers, and in this thing he is made manifest,
and does plainly appear that he prayed not by the Spirit of God, who cannot
discern the true Ministers from the deceivers, and so has not salt in himself
to savor withal, but has lost his honor and is good for nothing, but to be
cast out and trodden under foot of man, for the Spirit of the Lord does discern
and discover, and put a difference between the precious and the vile, and
betwixt the true Ministers and the deceivers; in this he is found contrary to
the true Ministers of God. He said and held forth, that every natural man had
a fourfold light, but denied that he had any light in him that was pure, to
lead him to Christ. He said that all men were wholly in darkness, and nothing
at all of the spiritual light in them, (or words to that effect) and yet said
that every natural man had a talent which if he did not improve was his
condemnation. Now all whose eyes are in any measure opened may see his
confusion, for if the natural man have a talent, and the talent be natural,
then a natural man that improves his natural talent, may enter into the Lords
joy: as is plain in Scripture, for he that had five talents gained other five,
and he that had two he gained other two; and the Lord calling them to account
pronounces to them well done good and faithful servants enter into your Masters
joy; but the slothful servant who did not improve his talent was cast out, but
the talent was taken from him, and given to him that had improved: And in this
thing I stand a withesse against Mr. Powell so called, and do witness to Jesus
the True Light, the same which John bare testimony of, who lights every one
that comes into the world who is pure and spiritual, in whom is life, and the
life is the light of men, and his life is spiritual, and so is his light, which
the dark world cannot comprehend, for this is the condemnation of the world who
love their evil deeds and hate the light: for every one that does truth, he
loves the light, and brings his deeds to the light, and thereby is led out of
darkness by oaths and crooked ways, and so shall have the light of life: But
he that does evil he hates the light, and will not bring his deeds to the
light, because he knows the light will reprove him, and so the light is his
condemnation, and is the same and one with that, which is the salvation of the
believer: so I say that the light is one in the believer, as in the unbeliever,
according to measure as the talents were one, given to the slothful as well as
the faithful, and the talents were pure, and those who improved them entered
into joy, and he that did not was cast out into utter darkness, but the talent
was not, for it was taken from him, and given to him that had, etc. So this is
the condemnation of the world and all the ungodly ones who live in
ungodliness, they are condemned by the light, for the light is pure, and that
which reproves and makes manifest sin, is light, as the Apostle declares, Ephesians.
5.13. and this light shows sin before the action of it, it shows it in its rise
and conception, before it come to action, if there be but an evil thought, or
an evil motion, or an evil desire, or any evil intent the light discovers it,
and waiting in the light and believing in Christ, who has given the light, the
victory is obtained, for the true faith purifies the heart, and gives victory
over the world, and without faith it is not possible to please God, and Paul
who was a true Minister of God he was sent to open the blind eyes, (not to
bring them eyes) but to open that eye which the God of the world had blinded,
and so to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto
God that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance a among
them that are sanctified by faith in Jesus Christ, and he preached Jesus Christ
which was within the Saints their hope of glory, teaching and exhorting every
man in all wisdom, that they might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus,
Col. 1.27, 28. And when Christ ascended he gave some Apostles and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. this is the pure doctrine of Christ
Jesus, and that which he himself taught, Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect as your
Father which is in Heaven is perfect. But this doctrine Powell, and all the
Parish Teachers do oppose, and so manifest themselves to be Antichrist a
against Christ and his true Ministers, and serve another Master which is the
Devil whose work they are doing, pleading strongly for his Kingdom, which
stands in sin and imperfection, and says none can be perfect while they live
upon the earth, this with them is an impossible thing, but with God all things
are possible, and the true Ministers of God believe it and do earnestly contend
for this faith, and for their Master Christ and his Kingdom, which stands in
righteousness, purity and perfection, and no unrighteous one, nor imperfect
one can enter into it, then woe to them that live in sin while they are upon
earth, their end will be in the lake of endless misery, and this shall Powell
and all the Antixtian Bablers one day witness: And Powell in words this did
preach, that no unrighteous one could enter into the Kingdom of God, and as
long as any one sin was alive in any, though never so little the devil could
keep them by one, as well as by many bringing this comparison, that if a
fisherman had catched hold of a fish, and the fish had broken two of his
hairs, yet by one he might catch him; so says he all sin must be destroyed,
and the house clean swept, and afterward he pleaded for sin and said, none
could be without sin, nor perfect while he lived (see his confusion) by this
doctrine a man must never be without the devil in him, for all sin is of the
devil, and while sin is within; the devil is with in. But the true Ministers
of God who came to witness Christ Jesus and his life and power, made manifest
in them, did witness the devils work destroyed, and consumed by his word,
which was as a fire in them, and the Ministers of Christ do witness the same
now, by the same living power by which the devils works comes to be destroyed,
and the Son of God witnessed who makes free from sin, and if the Son make you
free, then are you free indeed; and in this Mr. Powell, so called, is out of
the doctrine of Christ, and contrary to his true Ministers. Further the said
Powell in the presence of many people, did affirm that the Scriptures were the
foundation and ground of Faith; which thing I did deny, and did testify a
against him for blasphemy, and do still affirm the same, that whosoever does say
and teach that the Scripture is the foundation of Faith, is a liar and a
blasphemer, and does lay another foundation contrary to the Apostles, as is
testified of in 1 Cor. 3.11. For no other foundation can any man lay, then that
is laid, which is Jesus Christ, and the same do I witness and no other: and
here Powell must either confess the Scriptures to be Christ, or else he lays
another foundation, contrary to that which all the holy men of God were built
upon, which had faith before the Scriptures were written. Abel had faith before
the Scripture was written, and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and many others
mentioned and spoken of in the Scripture, they had faith and were built upon
the rock, even Jesus Christ, who was before Abraham was, and before the letter
or writing was, who was before the world was, who is the same yesterday to day
and for ever, who is the ground and foundation of faith: And Powell, and all
the Parish Teachers in England and else where, that says the Scriptures are the
foundation, are in the blasphemy and error, and his and their fouudation will
not stand in the day of the Lord, which shall burn up their works as hay and
stuble, and this shall Powell one day witness to be truth to him, and all
others who lay another foundation, which is but sandy, and cannot stand, but
great shall be the fall of it, when the storm and tempest does arise; and in
this the said called Mr. Powel is contrary to the true Ministers of Christ, and
the Scriptures shall be a testimony against him and his blasphemy, who sets the
Scriptures in the place of Christ, which only testify of Christ, but are not
Christ; and the Scriptures declare of the foundation of faith Jesus Christ, but
the Scriptures are not the foundation Christ Jesus, neither did any of the
Ministers of Christ ever call the Scriptures the foundation and ground of
faith; but witnessed and declared Christ to be the Author and the finisher of
their faith, and the rock and foundation which they were built upon, and the
same do I testify of, even Jesus Christ, who was from the beginning, and the
same to day and for ever, who was the rock in former ages, and the ground of
their faith, and the rock of this age, and so the rock of ages, and the ground
and foundation, and the Author, and finisher of our faith, to whom be all
honor and glory of and from all that know him for evermore.

And further as I was speaking of the word of the Lord, and its power and
effect, and that the Holy men of God who came to witness the word of the Lord,
then knew it not by hearsay from others, but by its powerful operation in
them, by which word their hearts was purifyed and cleansed, which word was
within them as a fire to burn up and consume the works of the devil, and as a
hammar to break the hard heart, and this word was not far of, as the Apostle
testifies, say not in thy heart who shall ascend up into Heaven to fetch
Christ from above, or go down into the deep to fetch him from below, but the
word is nigh thee in thy heart and in thy mouth, and this is the word of faith
that we preach, Romans 10.8. and this word was within them, and wrought
powerfully in them, which they witnessed to be quick and powerful sharper then
a two edged sword; and those who know not this living and powerful word within
them puts the letter for the word and calls that the word; and when I spoke
these words, the said Powell said unto me, Is not the Scriptures called the
word of God? And then I said unto him, is it the word of God (for it has long
been called so by ignorants, that knows not God and his word) and he affirmed,
and said it was, and was put to prove it, and he brought two places of
Scriptures, but neither place did say that the Scriptures was the word of God,
but declared of the word: and then Powell said to his hearers, we will leave
them hear, they deny the Scriptures to be the word of God; and some of his
hearers were very ready to receive it, and cried out they deny the Scripture;
whereupon I spoke to them and wished to be moderate and hear with patience, and
do not accuse falsely. That because we cannot call the Scriptures by the name of
Christ, do we therefore deny the Scripture? No, far be it from us, to deny it,
for if I should deny its testimony, I should deny my own life; and I said, I
own it to be a true declaration of that word that was in them that spoke it
forth, and it was the word of the Lord to them and in them that spoke it forth;
but for ungodly and unholy men to talk of their words, and not live in their
life, are thieves that steals the word from their neighbor; and some of the
people said, was it the word of the Lord to them and not to us? And this they
would not hear; and then I instanced some Scriptures to them, how that the word
of the Lord came to the true Prophets, and they spoke the word of the Lord as
they had received it from the mouth of the Lord; and after it was spoken forth,
the false Prophets stole the true Prophets words, and they said, thus says the
Lord, when the Lord never spoke to them, and so run when the Lord never sent
them, and therefore they did not profit the people at all. And this further I
say, that as it was then even so it is now in these our days prond men, and
covetous men, heady and high minded men, and men that follows pleasures and
are lovers thereof, more then lovers of God, and envyous men, and men of strife
and railers, back-biters, slanderers and false accusers, and such like ungodly
and unholy men, have gotten the Scriptures, the good words which the holy men
of God spoke forth from the holy and pure word of God, which was within them,
which was (and is) spiritual and invisible, and endures for ever, such ungodly
men aforementioned, have gotten the declaration, and are talking of the fame of
God, but are strangers to the living life and power of God, and they fay this
says the Lord, or hearken to the word of the Lord as you shall find it written
in such a chapter and such a verse; and so use their tongues and say, the Lord
says (as the false Prophets did) when the Lord never spoke to them, and so
have gotten a form of godliness, but want the life and power, and leads silly
(men and) women captive, laden with sin and led away with diverse lusts ever
learning, but never able to come to the true knowledge of God: so I say that
many may have the Scriptures (which were given forth from them who knew the
voice and word of God) and know not neither have heard the voice of God nor his
word, but only the sound or frame of it: for the Jews who had the Scriptures,
Moses writings, and the Prophets, and could speak much of them, and often
heard them read, and yet Christ tells them plainly, they had neither heard his
voice at any time, nor seen his shape, for they had not the word of God abiding
in them for whom the Father had sent they did not believe, and there Christ
himself calls them Scriptures which testify of him, but he does not call them
the Word of God; for if they had been the Word of God, then the Jews had heard
the word of God, but Christ tells them they had not at any time heard the voice
of God, neither was the word of God abiding in them: as it is written, Ioh.
5.37, 38, 39. etc.

And now a few words concerning the word of God, from Scripture testimony which
the Holy men of God spoke forth, and so witnesses to the same eternal word,
which I bear testimony of, which was in the beginning before all time, by which
the Heavens and the earth were made, and are upheld by the word of his power,
as it is written, Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 33.6. Heb. 1.3. And the word of the
Lord is spiritual and endures for ever, it is as a fire and as a hammer that
breaks the rocks in pieces. The word of God is quick and powerful, sharper then
any two edged sword, and pearces even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, 1 Pet. 1.23.25. Ier. 23.29. Hebr. 4.12. But the
Scriptures or writings were nor in the beginning before all time: but were
since the beginning in time, neither were the Heavens made by the Scriptures,
not are all things upheld by the Scripture, neither do they endure for ever;
but they are visible and in times passed away, but the word of the Lord which
the Scriptures declare of, is spiritual, and shall endure for ever: The
Scriptures or writings are not as a fire, but with fire may be burnt, as
Jeremiah his roll was burnt, but the word of the Lord cannot be burnt, for by
the living word another Roll was written: The Scriptures or writings are not as
a hammar, but with a hammar may be beaten to pieces, neither is the Scriptures
quick, nor sharper then a two edged sword; but they are dead, and with a two
edged sword may be cut to pieces, behold your ignorance you carnal Professors,
whose understandings are so dark, and your eyes so blind that you stumble at
noon day, and so cannot put a difference between the precious and the vile, nor
between the living word and the dead letter, but sets the letter in the place
of Christ, as Vavasar Powel does, who calls the Scriptures the Foundation of
Faith, and the Word of God: when plain Scripture does testify against him, and
witnesses Christ to be the Foundation and the Author and finisher of Faith,
whose name is called the Word, of God, Heb. 12.2. Rev. 19, 13. Many other
Scriptures I might bring that witnesses of the Word of God, for all the whole
Scriptures being given forth from the word, declare of the word, and so they
are called by the Ministers of the word, Luke the first.

But it has been a common thing amongst the Professors of our time, because
we do not, nay dare not set the Scriptures in the place of Christ, nor call
them by his name, to accuse us for denying of the Scriptures, but their
accusation we do deny, and let our lives and conversations which we live in
Christ Jesus, be witnesses for the Lord and for us herein, and I appeal to the
conscience of all the honest hearted in the nation to judge, whether those who
talk so much of Scripture, and calls it the Word of God and their Rule to walk
by: and they themselves live in pride and covetousness, strife and envy,
wrath, malice, stubbornness and crosnesse, backbiting and speaking evil one of
another behind their backs, foolish jesting, idle communication, vain sports
and pleasures, and in the customs and fashions of the world, little or nor at
all differing from them in any thing but in words, which things the Scripture
testifies against or those who live in the fear of God in meekness and
humility, and cannot fashion themselves according to the world, nor use the
vain customs and traditions of men, who cannot bow to the rich, nor respect
the persons of those who were the gay clothing and the gold Ring, no more then
the poor man in the vile Raiment, which of these does deny the Scriptures,
those who talk of them, and live not in the life of them: or those whose lives
and conversations are according to them, let the wise in heart Judge.

A. P.

An answer to some Queries given to my hands, which were propounded by one who
goes under the name of an Anabaptist, living in Shrewsbury.
SOme Queries I have received from one who subscribes his name Richard
Stephens, wherein he says the intent of his writing is to be better informed
in things wherein he is not satisfied. But in the Light of Jesus he is
comprehended, and seen to be of that Generation, who cried up the Commands and
the Ordinances of God, as Temple, Sabbath, Circumcision, Priests, Sacrifices,
Scriptures and the like, and said they were of Abraham, and God was their
Father, and they builded the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the sepulcher
of the righteous, and condemned their forefathers, saving, if we had lived in
their days, we would not have killed the Prophets, and yet these crucified the
Son of God, and they did not believe in him, who was the light, the Covenant of
the Father, the sum and substance of those things which they upheld, which were
but figures, tipes and shadows, yet in their time Commands of God, and were to
be observed and kept, yet those who had these outward Commands, did not
believe in the Light, but were by (Christ) the Light cried woe against, and
those who believed in the Light and followed Christ, denied those outward
Commands, and had no Scripture for it, but the testimony of the light within
them; which was a hard thing in those times to deny the Commands in the
letters; for the Jews and Chief Priests had Scripture to uphold them; and
counted the Apostles deceivers, and a cursed people that knew not the Law: But
by the mighty power of God they were carried on and witnessed against the
outward Commands, and cried against them that upheld them: and witnessed the
Commands of God, and the worship of God in the spirit; and their bodies wa^
Temples of the Holy Ghost, and God dwelt in them; so the new Covenant they
witnessed the Law of God written in their hearts, and the spirit put in the
inward parts, which was their guide in the spiritual worship, and these denied
those things which once were Commands of God, which were outward and typical,
and it was no breach of the Commands of God to them, but obedience to the
commands of the Spirit of God in them, by which they witnessed against the
shadows, and witnessed the substance: And a generation there is now (of which
this man that gave forth these Queries is one) who has gotten the good words
(the Scriptures) and painted themselves over with a covering, like the spirit,
but is not the spirit; and these cry up the Church of Christ, and the
ordinances of Christ, and condemns the Jews their forefathers for crucifying
of Christ, and yet they are found in the same nature, who deny the light and
counts them deceivers and a cursed generation who are in the light, who (with
the light) deny their imitated Churches, and taken on commands, which it no
more but a will worship, and a self righteousness which stands in the will of
man, which is as filthy rags and as menstruous clothes; seen they are and
comprehended in the light of Christ to be under the woe out of the Covenant of
our God; and here is the ground of all the sects and opinions and the many
Religions: Man living in his will, and professing the Scriptures which came not
by the will of man, but contrary to man's will, here man in his will is giving
his pr^vate meanings and interpretations, and one he gives one meaning to the
Scriptures, and sets up a Religion and a worship of God, according to his
meaning, and conceiving from the letter of the Scripture in his will; Another
he gives another meaning, and sets up another worship and a Religion, according
to his meaning and conceiving from the Scriptures: and so a third gives his
meaning, and so are divided into many sects and opinions; and these are the
Babel builders, one building up a wall, and another daubing with untempered
mortar, and these are out of the faith and union of the Saints who walk in the
light, and have union and fellowship in the spirit of love, written in one
another heart, and so are all of one heart: But the other who stands in their
wills, and imitates and takes on commands in their own wills, as their
imaginations thoughts and conceivings leads them, are not all of one heart, but
are divided, and some sprinkle water on the face of a child, and calls that
Baptizme; and others deny that, and are dipped over head and ears in water, and
calls that Baptizme, and then they call themselves Believers and Saints, and so
run to the letter of the Scripture, and reading with a wrong eye, are still in
confusion, and more and more divisions there is a among them, some are called
freewillers, or that hold general redemption (that Christ died for all) and
some are called particulars, that hold that some are ordained to salvation, and
some to condemnation before they have done good or evil, and these deny one
another and hold one another accursed, yet all are dipped in the water: some
are divided about that which they call the Lords supper, and about breaking of
the bread, some will break it themselves, and some will eat it as a supper;
some will sup before they eat it, some will have it in an upper chamber, some
are for laying on of hands, and some will not: and many other things there are
which breaks their union, and thus they are divided in Babylons Kingdom,
tearing and rending one another like dogs and swine, falling out about the
husks. But the Saints who are led by the light of the Son of God (out of
Babylon) into the fold, do feed upon the bread of life in the Fathers house,
where there is no want, but fullness where the presence of the Lord is enjoyed,
and the holy and innocent ones who are washed and cleansed in the blood of the
Lamb, rejoice in his presence who are Baptized into Christ and have put on
Christ, whose hearts are purified and conscience purged from dead works, these
are Christians: But to sprinkle water on the face of a child does not make it a
Christian, or to be dipped over head and ears in water does not wash and
cleanse from sin; for he is not a Christian which is one outward which has
the name only, neither is that the Baptizme which is outward with the water:
But he is a Christian which is in Christ a new Creature, and Baptizme is that
of the spirit, having the heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the
body washed with pure water, and this Baptizme I own and witness unto, and
deny all imitatour who have not a command from God, as they had that gave forth
the Scriptures. Yet this I say, if any one now have a command from Christ to go
and Baptize with water: or if any out of tenderness of Conscience do such a
thing, I do not deny it, nor judge them for it: But I was not sent to Baptize
but to preach the Gospel, and it is no breach of Christ's command, nor denying
his ordinances in not Baptizing, not being commissioned by him to Baptize, for
it is neither dipping nor sprinkling, or not dipping that availes any thing but
a new Creature, so to deny that which was a command of Christ to some, being
but outward, it not being a command by Christ unto us, is no breach of Christ's
command, no more then it was in the Apostles in denying the outward commands,
as Temple, Sabbath, Circumsition, and the like, which were commands in their
time and place, and we own them, and all the commands of God mentioned in the
Scriptures by the same spirit which gave them forth: which spirit was the
Saints Rule before the Scriptures were written, and their Rule who gave forth
the Scripture, and the Saints Rule now according to the Scripture, owning all
things in their time and place as the Scripture declares of, and though we be
counted as deceivers, yet true, it is no more but what the Ministers of Christ
undergone from that generation, who were high in knowledge as doctors, chief
Priests and learned Rabbis, yet by all their learning and Scripture knowledge
they knew not the mystery, but counted the Cross of Christ foolishness; as it
is now by this generation of Scripture learned ones and university men, by all
their learning and study the mystery of Godliness they know not, but counts
them an ignorant people to whom the Lord has made known himself in measure,
and reveiled his secrets unto, and counts them as a people not worthy to live;
I say amongst that generation that cries up the commands of Christ in words I
find this man querying without. But for the simple ones sake who desire to be
satisfied, I have written this in answer to his queries, that their minds may
be informed, and from the darkness they may be turned to the true light of
lesus, which opens the dark understanding and leads out of darkness to follow
Christ in the pure path of life, which whosoever follows shall not abide in
darkness, but shall have the light of life.

Query the I. Whether you do own the New Testament with the Epistles of the
Apostles unto the Churches, to be a true testimony of the spirit of the Lord,
yea or nay: And if they be whether were they not given forth as a Rule unto the
Churches to walk by, and if they were not given forth as a Rule, then wherefore
were they given forth, and what use were they of unto the Churches?

Answ. The New Testament we do own and witness, which is the Law of God
written in our hearts, and the spirit put in the inward parts, whereby we are
gathered together into the fold, and are fed with living refreshments in the
bosom of our Fathers love, which spirit was and is a Rule and guide unto the
Saints, and thereby are taught of God in spirit, and do worship him in spirit,
according to his promise, which promise is now fulfilled and fulfilling to his
praise and glory, to whom all glory belongs for evermore: And the Epistles of
the Apostles to the Churches we own to be a true testimony given forth from the
spirit of the Lord, and was the word of the Lord in them and to them, to whom
they were written for the edifying and building them up in their most holy
faith, which faith was within them, a mystery held in a pure conscience; and
their Rule and guide was within them, and all that was written or declared by
the holy men of God, it was to bring them to the pure worship of God within, in
the spirit.

Qu. II. Whether the Scriptures be of any use unto any people now in this
generation; and if they are then whether the Ordinances therein contained, be
to be practiced by such a people as believe in the Lord Jesus with all their
hearts, yea or nay? And if they are not to be practiced then when and where
were they abolished.

Ans. The Scriptures are not of any private interpretation, neither (came by)
man's will, but holy men of God spoke them forth as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, and they are of use, for they were given forth to be read to be believed
on to be practiced and fulfilled, but not to make a trade on, nor for ungodly
men with their vain and proud minds to talk on, but let every one that names
the name of Christ depart from iniquity, and as iniquity is departed from, and
the fear of God placed in the heart, it keeps the heart clear, and so the
pure wisdom from above, is received into the pure heart, and the pure in heart
are blessed and shall see God who is light, and the Ordinances of God are seen
in the light and led into by the light, but the darkness cannot comprehend the
light, nor all the wisdom of the world, and such puts darkness for light, and
light for darkness, and calls the ordinances and traditions of men the
ordinances of Christ, and so would make the word of God of none effect by their
traditions; for they are the Sons of God who are led and guided by the Spirit
of God, and such denies the shadows who witness the substance, for if ye be
dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the
world are ye subject to ordinances: God is a Spirit, and his ordinances are
spiritual in the Gospel Administration.

Qu. III. Whether or no they are not blessed that do observe to do all the
Ordinances and the Commands of the Lord Christ therein contained, yea or nay,
and if they are then whether are not they a cursed generation of men, that do
not observe to do them, but to teach men to break them.

Answ. They are blessed that do observe all the Commandments of the Lord
Christ, that they may have right unto the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gate into the City: But to that in thy conscience do I speak, art
thou one that do observe all the Commandments of the Lord Christ, art thou
brought to yea and nay in thy communication, art thou brought to do to all men
as thou would have them to do unto thee? Does not something in thy conscience
testify against thee, and let thee see the contrary? If any one sue thee at the
Law and take away the Coat, let him have thy Cloak also, do thou obey this
command, or do thou not rather go quite contrary, instead of letting him have
thy Cloak with thy Coat, would not thou go to Law with him before he should
have thy Coat? To that in thy conscience do I speak; if one smite thee on one
cheek, do thou turn the other, or would not something in thee arise to smite
again? Search and examine, and if upon search thou be found a transgressour,
then art not thou one of the cursed generation that do not observe to do all
the commands of the Lord Christ; which those whom thou art smiting and warring
against through the operation of God working in them, are able and brought to
observe, and are of the blessed generation, to whom all the promises of God are
due.

Qu. IV. Whether there be any other Gospel then that which was declared and
testified of unto the world, by Christ and his Disciples, which is left upon
record unto us in this our generation in the Scriptures of Truth, yea or nay?
And whether this that you declare be the same that Christ and his Apostles did
declare unto the Saints in their generation both for matter and manner?

Answ. There is no other Gospel but that which was declared and testified of by
Christ and his Disciples; and the same Gospel do we preach and no other, which
is a mystery not known to the world, which cannot be contained in a book nor
written in letters, for that which is written by Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
is but a declaration, and that may be bought and sold for money: But the Gospel
cannot be bought and sold for money, for it is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believes, and those that witnessed the Gospel were freed from
sin, and had remission of their sins: But many have the Scriptures, but have
not the power of God, but are alive unto sin; and here thou have much
manifested thy folly and weakness, who would have the Gospel contained in a
book, which all the books in the world cannot conteyn; which Gospel and glad
tidings is now witnessed by the Children of Light, free pardon of sin by Jesus
Christ, who is come to take away sin; Glory and honor and everlasting praises
to his Holy and dreadful name for ever.

Qu. V. Whether the Apostles of Christ which wrote the Epistles unto the
Churches, and the Saints in that generation had not as much of the light of
Christ within them as any have now in this generation, yea or nay? And
wherefore were the Epistles written, or did the Apostles write needless
things, or thy did they not only call upon them to mind the light which was
within them?

Ans. Concerning the Apostles and the Saints, having as much of the light of
Christ within them, as any have, now it little concerns thee or any one else,
I leave it to him from whence all light comes, who is the same now as ever, and
changes not, Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, and gives
to every one light, according as it pleases him, which light the Prophets, and
Apostles, and Holy men of God, did witness in them; from which they write, and
did not write needless things, but exhorted to take heed to the light which
was within them, which was and is a mystery: we have also a more sure word of
Prophecy, unto which ye do well to take heed as unto a light shining in a dark
place until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; The word is
light, and the word was within them, nigh in their hearts; the Law is light,
and the Law was within written in their hearts; the spirit is light, and it was
within them to whom the Epistles were written; and the Kingdom of Heaven is
light, and it was within though not comprehended in the earthly and dark
wisdom of man; and Christ Jesus is the light, and this was the mystery which
was hid from ages and generations, which was within the Saints, their hope of
glory: and thou and all the world that denies the light of Christ within, and
stumbles at the light, are strangers to the Covenant of promise, and art
without God in the world in the sin and disobedience upon whom the wrath of God
abides: and thou cannot escape the judgments of God, nor ever come from under
the curse until the light thou do own to guide and lead thee in the way which
is pure, out of the Kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God.

Qu. VI. Whether such men who walk up according to the testimony of the
Scriptures in the life and power of them, according to the measure of light
they have received; and yet through the weakness of the flesh do commit some
sin, though not wilfully, whether you can pronounce such men children of the
devil yea or nay?

Ans. Those who walk up according to the Scriptures in the life and power
according to the measure of light they have received, are kept from the sin
abiding in the light, for he that abides in the light sins not; he that sins
has not seen him neither knows him: he that does righteousness is of God, and
he that commit sin is of the devil, as the Scripture declares.

Qu. 7. Whether all men and women that have forsaken the rule of the
Scriptures, and have betaken themselves to walk by the light within them, are
made presently perfect from sin upon their owning of the light within; and so
cannot sin any more while they live in this flesh.

Ans. The Scriptures are not forsaken by those who own the light, but with the
light the words are owned: and all those denied, who talk of the good words and
profess the Scriptures to be their rule, but live not in the pure life, but
walk contrary to the Scriptures; and as there is a waiting in the light, there
is a growth up from strength to strength, and from glory to glory until the
perfect day: But those who live in the flesh cannot prease God, whose faith is
not perfect, but is reprobate concerning the faith of Christ, and such cannot
believe that ever they shall be made perfect or free from sin while they live
upon the earth; and without faith it is impossible to please God.

Qu. VIII. Whether or no the first Resurrection spoken of Revel. 20.6. be in
this life yea or nay? And if it be whether has all that walk by the light
within them part in the first resurrection so soon as they own that light; and
if they have then whether or no is it not possible that they may forsake the
light, and walk in darkness, and so come to cast of the second death, which
they that come to partake of the first resurrection shall never cast of; or is
not the testimony of that place of Scripture true?

Answ. Concerning the first resurrection spoken of Rev. 20.6. it is not in that
life that thou lives in, which gave forth these queries: But those who dwelt in
the light, and were in the faith had passed from death to life, and in the new
life it is known which is in Christ Jesus, who is the resurrection and the
life, on such the second death has no power, and such has part in the first
resurrection, and are blessed: But thou have wronged the Scripture, and so it
shall be a witness against thee, which testimony is true witnessed by the same
spirit that gave forth the Scripture.

Qu. IX. Whether or no that body of flesh of Christ that suffered at Jerusalem
upon the Cross, which Joseph of Arithmathea begged of Pilate, and buried in his
own sepulcher, rose again the 3. day after it was buried, whether the same body
of flesh be now glorified in Heaven with the Father.

These few Queries I have written unto you who are called by the name of
Quakers, I have not written them to any particular person of you, but to
whomsoever of you shall be free to give me an answer of them in particular in
truth, according to your understanding in them, I have not written them in any
intent, but only to be better informed in things wherein I am not informed in
things wherein I am not satisfied from him who wishes good to all and hurt to
none Richard Stephens.

Answ. In this query thou art disputing and querying about the body of Jesus,
as the devil disputed about the body of Moses: But it is a mystery hid from all
dark understandings who hate the light that comes from Jesus, which is the eye
that sees him who is invisible, which all who love their evil deeds and hate
the light, never shall know nor see, but are shut out and with the light
condemned: Thou must first own the light that shows thee the body of sin, and
so pass through the death of the cross whereby the body of sin is put of and
crucified: then shall thou know with what body Christ is glorified in Heaven
with the Father. Godliness is a great mystery not known to the world nor to the
earthly wisdom, but the secrets of God are with them that fear him; the spirit
searches all things, yea the deep and hidden things of God: So in the fear of
God I do exhort thee to return unto God, and mind that principle of God in
thee, that reproves thee in secret for thy evil deeds, there is thy Teacher if
thou love it, to guide thee to God, but if thou hate it, and live according to
the course of this world, it will be thy comdemnation: Prize thy time while
thou have it.

Written by one who is a lover of all those that love the truth in simplicity
and sincerity of heart, who is known to the world by the name of Alexander
Parker, but has a new name which the world knows not; written in the Book of
Life.

FINIS.

