THE CASE Of the old Secured, Secluded, and now EXCLUDED MEMBERS, Briefly and
truly Stated; For their own Vindication, and their Electors and the Kingdoms
Satisfaction.
By William Prynne of Lincolns Inn Esquire one of those Members.
JVly 28. 1648. upon the earnest Petitions of the Aldermen, Common Council, and
City of London, and most Counties of England, miserably oppressed,
impoverished, distracted, and well nigh ruined, by above 6. years intestine
Wars, between the late King and Parliament; the Houfe of Commons (when full and
free) voted, That a Treaty should be had in the Isle of Wight, with the King in
Person, by a Committee appointed by both Houses, upon the Propositions formerly
agreed on, and presented to him at Hampton Court; which the Lords House
unanimously assented to: Whereupon Commissioners were nominated, and sent
accordingly, to treat upon these Propositions with the King; and a special
Order, made and published by the Commons House, September 5. for the respective
Sheriffs of each County of England and Wales, personally to summon all absent
Members, to meet in the House September. 26. under the penalty of 20. l. for not
appearing, in regard of the great importance of this Treaty, for quieting the
distempers, and settling the distracted minds of the people; and because in the
multitude of Counselors there is safety. Hereupon all the Members repaired to
discharge their duty in the House; After a long deliberate Treaty for sundry
weeks (wherein the King assented to all the Propositions in terminis; except 3.
See Mr. Prynnes Speech Dec. 4. 1648. and a Vindication of the secured and
secluded Members.
wherein he so far complied with the desires of both Houses, that the
differences therein seemed not very considerable) The Treaty being fully
concluded, was reported to the House of Commons, December. 1. upon which the
House presently entered into the debate of the Kings Concessions: Those who were
against them, desiring no Peace nor Healing of the Kingdoms Breaches, made this
the Question; Whether the Kings answer to the Propositions, were satisfactory,
or not satisfactory? but those who desired Peace and settlement, made this the
only state of the Question; Whether the Answers of the King to the Propositions
of both Houses, were a ground for the House to proceed upon, for the settlement
of the Peace of the Kingdom? After four days and one whole nights serious
debate, the Question being put as last stated, December. 5. it was carried in the
Affirmative, without any Division of the Hou^e; when there were 244. Members in
it, besides 60 more declaring themselves for it, who through age, cold, and
infirmity (being unable to fit up all night) departed before the Question put,
the Dissenters being not the third part of the Members then present. The Army
contrary to both Houses Orders were drawn up to Westminster. and removed the ordinary
Gards of the House out of their quarters during this debate, giving out menaces
against all who should vote for the Concessions, on purpose to interrupt and
prevent this Vote, and that by Confederacy with some of the Dissenting Members.
Yet such was the courage, constancy, and sincerity of the faithful Members,
that maugre all Oppositions and Difficulties, they put and carried the Vote
upon such grounds of Reason, Truth, Justice, Honesty and public Interest, as
all their Opposites were unable to contradict or refute.

The Vote being passed, the House appointed Mr. Pierpoint, and six other
Members to repair that Afternoon to the head quarters, to confer with the
General and his Officers, to keep a right understanding and good correspondency
between the House, and the General and Army; and then adjourned till the next
morning. The Commissioners repairing to the head quarters that Afternoon were
so rudely treated, that one or two of them were secured by some Army Officers,
and the rest put off and slighted without any conferrence. December. 6. the
Army Officers sent sundry Regiments of horse and foot early in the morning to
Westminster in a warlike manner, who placed themselves in the Pallace-yards,
the Court of Requests, Hall, Court of Wards, stairs, Lobby of the House, and
all approaches to it, to secure and seclude those Members who assented to this
Vote; Colonel Pride and other Officers who commanded the gard^ having a List
in their hands of the Members names to be secured and secluded, given them, as
was reported by Cornelius Holland, and other dissenting Members, That morning
they forcibly secluded above 100. Members, keeping them out of the House
perforce as they came to the Lobby, and seized 41. Members in the Stairs and
Lobby, pulling two more out of the House it self into which they got before the
Officers espied them: These 43. Members they secured all day in the Queens
Court, refusing to obey the Orders of those then sitting in the House, who
being acquainted with their seizure, sent the Sergeant twice to command their
attendance in the House, without any obedience or success: At night all the
secured Members but 4, instead of being carried to Wallingford House to treat
with the General and Officers, as was promised, were unexpectedly thrust into a
place called Hell in Westminster: and there kept Prisoners on the bare boards all the
night, though extreme cold. The next morning 3. more Members were seized, and
many others secluded, affronted coming to the House. Those in Hell about 9. of
the clock were carried fasting to Whitehall, to confer with the General and
Army Officers, who imperiously made them dance attendance on them in a very
cold room without fire (for sundry hours) or meat or drink (but some burnt Wine
and Biskets they sent for thither) til 7 a clock at night, not vouchsafing so
much as to see or confer with any of them, as they promised; and then sent them
Prisoners to the Kings Head and Swan, through the snow and dirt, guarded with 3
Musketeers apiece and Gards of Horse besides, like the vilest Rogues and
Traitors; and there detained most of them Prisoners sundry weeks, sending some
of them close Prisoners to St. James, and afterward to Windsor Castle diverse
months space, without the least particular accusation, impeachment, hearing or
trial. The only cause of this their Imprisonment and Seclusion, as the Officers
confess in their Answer to the House, touching the grounds of our securing,
Jan. 3. was our Vote of December. 5. which the General and General Council of
Officers thus particularly expressed the very next day, December. 6. 1648. (the
day they secured and secluded us) in their Proposals and desires to the Commons
in Parliament: wherein they desire, that some Members by name may be secured,
and brought to justice. And that those Members that were guilty in the Votes
for the Treaty, July 28. and December. 5. declaring the Kings past Concessions to
be a ground ^or the House to proceed upon, for the settlement of the peace of
the Kingdom; have deserted, ^etrayed, and justly forfeited their Trusts for the
Public And therefore most earnestly desired, That all such faithful M^mbers
who were innocent therein, would immediately by Protestation and public
Declaration) acquit themselves from any guilt or concurrence in those Votes, as
corrupt and destructive: That so the Kingdom may know who they are that have
kept their Trust, and distinguish them from the rest, that have falsified the
same; and that all such as cannot, or shall not acquit themselves Particularly,
may be immediately excluded or suspended the House, and not readmitted, until
they have given clear satisfaction therein to the Judgment of those who now so
acquit themselves and the grounds of such satisfaction be published to the
Kingdom In obedience to these imperious desires of the General Army-Council
(the Supreme Legislators, overruling both the House and General Council of the
Kingdom) about 45 or 50 Members (whereof some were Army Officers, Authors of
those Proposals,) sitting under the visible over-awing Gards of the
Army Officers, from December 6. till after all Votes and Orders passed, that
can be produced for our suspension or seclusion, Dec. 12, and 13. rerepealed
the Votes of July. 28. for the Treaty, and December. 5. touching the Kings
concessions, according to the Army Officers Proposals, as highly dishonorable
to the Parliament, and destructive to the peace of the Kingdom, and tending to
the breach of the public faith of the Kingdoms: publishing. A Declaration Jan.
15. expressing their Reasons for annulling and repealing these Votes. And Dec.
18. and 20. passed 2. Orders, that none should sit or act as Members, till they
had made and subscribed their particular Protestation against this Vote. In
pursuit whereof December. 20. 34 Members (whereof 15. are now sitting, the rest
dead or absent) entered their dissents and protests against this Vote. December.
21. 3. more, now sitting, entered theirs: December. 25. 6. more (5. now sitting)
entered their dissents, yet they sat as an House 4. days, before 40 of them had
entered their protests, and afterward admitted others to sit, without entering
any Protestation, contrary to their Order. By color of which Orders alone, and
of their Vote, Jan. 11. upon the Army Officers Answer, That the House does
approve of the substance of the Answer of the General Council of the Officers
of the Army to the demands of this House touching the securing and secluding of
some Members thereof: And does appoint a Committee (of 24) to consider what is
further to be done upon the said Answer, etc. And of another Order in pursuit
of these February 2. (three days after the Kings beheading) they have without
any particular accusation, cause, summons or hearing at all, by their without
any Declaration at all to the Kingdom, Counties Cities, Boroughs, for which we
served, or us, of the reasons, justice, grounds of this their new and former
Votes which was expected and will be demanded. from them.
Vote of Jan. 5. 1659. adjudged and declared; That the Members who stand
discharged (in manner aforesaid) from voting or sitting as Members of this
House, in the years 1648. and 1649. do stand duly discharged by Judgment of
Parliament, from sitting as Members of this Parliament, during this Parliament:
(without so much as naming any one of them particularly in this, or any of
their former Votes or Orders by which they exclude them) And it is ordered;
That Writs do issue forth for electing N^w Members in their places.

This being the true State of the secured, secluded, and excluded Members case,
in 1648. and 1649. to which the Vote of Jan. 5. and their forcible seclusion by
their own Order, both out of the House and Lobby December. 27. 1659. relates: the
Questions in Law arising thereupon, are briefly these.

1. Whether 3. parts of 4. and above 200 Members of the Commons House, only for
passing the premised Vote Dec. 5. 1648. in order to the public peace and
setlement of the kingdom, without any sinister respect, after 4 days and a
whole nights debate, according to their Judgments, Consciences, Trusts,
Duties, Oaths, Protestation, Vow, Covenant, the general Petitions, Desires of
their Electors, and our 3. distracted kingdoms; contrary to the sense of the
Minor part of the House, and General Council of Army Officers, (who were but
their Servants, obliged to obey their just Votes, and Commands, and no Members,
Judges, to control them) may be justly or legally secured secluded, and thus
^nworthily Treated by the ArmyOfficers, by mere armed power; and whiles thus
secured and secluded the House, be ejected, dismembered, by the Votes of 40. or
50. of their fellow Members, only upon the Army Officers imperious desires,
whiles sitting under their horrid visible force; which by their own and Both
Houses Declaration August 20. 1647. (in case of a contemptible force in respect
of this, when no Members at all were secluded) nulls all their Votes, Orders
and Ordinances, at and from the very time they are made and passed? and that
without any impeachment, hearing, or trial whatsoever, contrary to all Magna
Charta, c. 29. 5 E. 3 c. 9. 25 E. 3. c. 4. 28 E. 3. c. 3 42 E. 3. c. 3.
Petition of Right, 3 Caroli.
Laws, Rules of Justice, Presidents and Proceedings in Parliaments, or other
Courts, in former times.

2. Whether every Member of Parliament by the Custom and Usage of Parliaments,
be not obliged, according to his mind and conscience, freely to give his Ay,
and No, to every Question propounded in the House whiles he is present, and
finable if he refuse to do it, without the least blame, censure, or pretense of
breach of trust? And whether the Freedom of the Members debates and Votes in
the House in matters there propounded, be not the very principal, essential,
fundamental Privilege of Parliament, demanded by every Speaker, and granted by
every King to the Members at the beginning of every Parliament, and
denominating Parliaments themselves (derived from Cooks 4. Instit. chapter 1.
parler le meant) which if once denied, or made criminal (as now) and that to
the major part, will utterly subvert the very name, essence, and being of all
future Parliaments?

3. Whether the Army Officers and Council out of the House, being Servants
only, commissioned and paid to guard the Members Privileges, and obey the
Orders of the House; and neither Electors, nor impowrers of the Members
secluded; be sit Judges of the Majority of the Members Votes and Debates in the
House, which they never heard of, nor were present at, but by misreports or
relations from others? And if so, (as these Secluders then and now admit them:)
Whether this will not subject those now sitting, and secluding us, with all
Members of subsequent Parliaments, and all their Votes, to the Judicature of
their Gards, or any other number of Factious people without doors? yea justify
their own forcible Exclusions and dissolutions by Cromwell, Apr. 20. 1653. and
since by Lambert and Hewson, October. 13. 1659. for Votes and Proceedings more
unjust and unreasonable than ours of Dec. 5. 1648. is supposed to be, and
subvert all the Rights, Privileges, Power, Authority and Honor of English
Parliaments for ever?

4. Whether it be not a far greater breach of Privilege, Treason, and levying
War against the Parliament, in the Army Officers, and sitting Members at their
request, thus forcibly to secure, seclude and eject above 200 Members, 3. or 4.
times one after another, only for voting freely according to their minds,
consciences; and refusing to retract and protest against their own and
Majorities Votes; than for Cromwell, Lambert, and others, to exclude but 50. 60.
or 70. of them, sitting as an House and Parliament, being encouraged and
justified by their own votes, presidents and Commands to seclude and exclude
the Majority of their fellow Members, for voting contrary to the Army Officers
desires and designs, who excluded them upon the same account?

4. Whether it be Parliamental, Rational, Just Equitable (admitting the Common,
House have power in themselves alone, to vote out any Member for misdemeanors
or breach of Trust, without the Lords, which some deny, upon very good See my
Plea for the Lords, and Registers of Parliamentary Writs.
Presidents and grounds) that the far lesser part of the Commons House, may
forcibly seclude and vote out the greatest part of their fellow Members, only
for over-voting, and dissenting from them in their Judgments? And not more
just and reasonable, that the Major part, being the House it self in Law and
Conscience, should judge and vote out this Minor part, for their
Antiparliamentary Protestation, and such an unjust forcible seclusion and
ejection, as ours by the premises now appears to be to themselves, and all the
Kingdom; being the highest breach both of their Trust, the Privileges and
Rights of Parl. and Peoples Liberties that ever any Members were guilty of
since Parliaments began?

5. Whether their secluding, and These secluders think their Votes omnipotent,
who can blow up the Majority of their fellow Members and whole House of Lords
with the breath of their mouths, like chaff, without any reason expressed, when
as the old Gunpowder Traitors could not blow them up, but with almost as many
barrels of Gunpowder, as they were then and now Members.
voting out all the secluded Members, in the gross 1648. 1649. and Jan. 5.
1659. without impeachment, summonning, hearing, or nominating any one of them
in particular in their Votes or O^ders, be not a most unjust, unpresidented,
unparliamentary Judgment and Proceeding, contrary to all rules of Justice in
all other cases and Judicatures whatsoever, and in this and former Parliaments;
yea merely null and void to all intents for its Generality and Incertainty; it
being the Privilege of every Member, to be first, accused; 2ly. summoned to
answer his accusation if absent; 3ly. re-summoned upon default of appearance;
4ly. To hear his charge, and make his defense, before he be secluded or
suspended; 5ly. To sit and vote in the House till suspended or secluded, by
special order and Judgment of the House, wherein he is to be Cooks 3 Instit ^
101. 4 Instit. p. ^5. to 25, 38, 39,
particularly named; All which circumstances, were punctually observed by
themselves, in Sir Henry Vanes case Jan. 9. 1659. before they ejected him,
since their vote against the secluded Members; which deserved as much right and
Justice as he, if not far more, who joynd with those mutinous Army Officers who
excluded them; 6ly. If many be jointly or severally accused, by name, they are
to make their joint or several answers and defenses, and to receive their
particular joint or several censures, pronounced by the Speaker in their
hearing at the Bar; as in Sr. H. Vanes late case; All which particulars
fai^ing, in this general vote against them all; the meanest of their Electors,
and of those for whom they serve (more injured by this vote then themselves)
and all Judges, Lawyers now sitting with them, will pronounce their Vote most
absurd and void to all intents, unworthy the Wisdom, Justice and Gravity of
those, who style themselves, The Parliament?

6. Whether the Ordinance published Dec. 15. 1648. in the name of the Lords and
Commons, against A Protestation Dec. 11. 1648. printed in the Name of all the
secluded and secured Members, (though not subscribed nor owned publicly by
them, nor proved to be published by their order or privity) disabling all the
secured and secluded Members to sit any mo^e, during this Parl. (which some
pretend the chief ground of their ejection now, though never mentioned nor
insisted on before) without naming, hearing, or disabling any of those Members
in particular, or adjudging them, the Authors of that Protestation, be not
merely void and null to all intents, being so general and indefinite, made only
by 3. or 4. Lords, and 50. Commoners at most, fitting under that very force,
which then secluded, imprisoned the major part both of the Lords and Commons
House, and so declared null and void by the Speakers Letter, July 29. and the
Ordinance of both Houses, August 20. 1647? Whether the major part of the
Commons and Lords House then forcibly secluded, might not by virtue of this
Ordinance, as well as their Speaker Lenthal by his Letter, and both Houses by
that Ordinance, declare all Proceedings, Votes and Ordinances in the respective
Houses, whereof they were Members, void and null to all intents, during their
forcible seclusion, and the force then put upon the Houses, without any offense
or crime at all deserving seclusion; and were not bound by their Protestation,
League and Covenant, to do it, to preserve their own, and the Houses
privileges, being the far greater number of Members, 5. times more than those
who voted them out? It differing much from the Protestation of some of the
Bishops, committed to the Power for their Protestation, Dec. 1641. 1. Because
they were not forcibly secluded, as we. 2ly. Not the majority of the Bishops,
much less of the Lords House, as we. 3ly. They protested against all
Proceedings whatsoever in both Houses of Parliament during their absence (not
seclusion) from the House, as void and null, til their restitution, not in the
Lords House alone, which was the chief, if not only exception against their
Protestat. though there was then no force upon the Lords or Commons; But the
Protest. in the secluded Members names protested only against the proceedings
in the Com. House, during their forcible securing and secluding, and the force
upon those that sat. 4ly. They were heard in the Lords House concerning it,
before they were committed: but none of the secluded Members were ever yet
heard before their seclusion or securing. 5ly. They were only imprisoned for
their Protestation during the Lords House pleasure, not excluded and voted out
of the House during the Parliament. Upon all which Considerations, the
Proceedings of the major part of the Lords House against them, do no way
warrant the Declaration of the minority of the Com: House and Lords, against
the majority of the Commons House, then under a force and secluded, and the
majority of the Lords House, together with them. All which the secluded Members
presume will fully satisfy those for whom they serve, and the whole English
Nation, World, and their ^ecluders too, of the Injustice of their former and
late forcible Seclusions, and Ejections by their premised Orders, Votes, and
vindicate the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, til they can meet together
in safety, to draw up a larger Decl: of their Case and unjust antiparliamentary
exclusion, without the danger of a new securing, being all ordered to be seized
on at Mr. Ansleys House in Drury Lane the 9th. of this January by a party of
40. Musquitiers, and Captain commanding them, accompanied with one of the
Sergeants men, who beset and searched the House to apprehend them, but that
they were all departed thence before they came thither, and so escaped their
hands; the cause of this Brief publication.

The secluded Members repute it very hard, and injurious, that they should be
thus frequently, and long secluded by force, and many of them Major Genesis Brown.
imp^isoned and close imprisoned 5. years and 2. months. Mr. Prynne close
imprisoned in D^nste, Taunton. and Pendennis castle 2. years and 8. months. Sir
Will Waller, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Commissary Copley, and Mr.
Walker, two years or more, without hearing or cause expressed.
imprisoned diverse years, and publicly excluded and slandered by their
Fellow Members Votes behind their backs without hearing, or the least admission
to vindicate their Innocence and the justice of the Vote for which they are
secluded, in the House; and yet be searched after and re-imprisoned and secured
by armed Gards by Order of their Secluders, for endeavoring to vindicate their
own Innocence, Parliamentary Rights, Privileges, and the Liberties of those
many Counties, Cities and Boroughs, for which they serve, without Doors, when
as they cannot be admitted to it in the House it self, unless they will first
eat and retract their former Votes, against their Consciences, Privileges, and
abjure their former Oaths, Protestation, Covenant, Declarations, by taking a
new enforced Engagement: Whereupon they desire their few Secluders to consider
the 1 Cor. 12. 14, etc. For the Body is not one Member but many, etc. But now
God has set the Members every one of them in the Body, as it has pleased him.
And if they were all one Member, where were the Body? But now are they many
(not few) Members, yet but one Body. And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have
no need of thee; nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of them; Nay,
much more those Members that seem to be more feeble are necessary, etc. That
there should be no division in the Body, but that the Members should have the
same care one for another. And whether one Member (much more when most of them)
suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or one Member be honored, all the
Members rejoice with it. Which Consideration, with that of Mat. 7 12. Therefore
whatsoever ye would that men should do unto In the case of their own seclusion,
which they so much condemned in Cromwell and Lambert.
you, do you even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets 1 These. 4.
6. Let no man overreach, oppress, or defraud his Brother (much less so many
Brethren of eminency) in any matter. (especially in their public Parliamentary
Trusts, Rights, Privileges,) because the Lord is the Avenger of all such, as we
have forewarned and testified (and their own double forcible Seclusion has
fully exemplyfied,) might now at last convince them of, and convert them from
their former Injustice and Violence, and make them more just and tender toward
us than hitherto they have been, either as Christians or Englishmen, who are
Members of one and the self-same Church, Kingdom, Parliament, House, formerly
united-together in strictest Bonds of Unity and Amity, though now sadly divided
by their force and fury, to the ruin both of the Church, Kingdom, Parliament,
and the House it self whereof they were Fellow-Member, and intolerable
discontent and oppression of the whole Nation, and those for whom they served.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1660.


