THE CHIEF AFFAIRS OF IRELAND TRULY COMMUNICATED.

For a check and reproof to all such as walk Westminster Hall, only to spread
false wonders of the Toryes, and landing of Foreign Forces in Ireland, that
they may discourage any that are now willing to go over either to plant, or
serve in the Wars for the better speeding of the work yet behind.

LONDON: Printed by F: Neile. 1651.

THe Earl of Clanrickard titular Deputy of Ireland, for the titular King of
Great Britain, upon receipt of the Duke of Lorrains Agreement with the Irish
Agents, sends out his Summons to assemble the States of Ireland, that He may
communicate to them the said Agreement, and some other matters of public
concernment. One Copy of his Summons to the County of Gallway follows here
verbatim.

AFter my hearty Commendations, The last General Assembly held at Lough Reagh,
having adjourned their Sessions unto the sixth of November next, which through
eminent occasions, and at Request of the Officers of the Army, has been
appointed sooner, but by reason of the slenderness of Appearance, and power of
the Enemy, was disappointed from concluding any thing, upon the weighty Affairs
they had to debate, and adjourned unto the said day first appointed: We have
therefore thought fit to Renew, and appoint the meeting of the said Assembly at
James Town, upon the said sixth day of November next, at ten of the Clock in
the forenoon, and do hereby pray, and require, that you will under your Hand,
and Seal, return unto the said General Assembly, at the time, and place
aforesaid, either the former persons returned from the County of Galloway, and
Corporations therein, or two other able, and lawfully elected Persons, by an
Assembly, or General meeting of the aforesaid County, and two other able, and
lawfully elected, Persons, by the Inhabitants of every Borough in the said
County there to sit, and vote in all Matters debated, by the said Assembly, and
if the power of the Enemy will not admit such general meetings, you are to
cause the said Election to be made, and returned in the best manner you may,
and to give notice to the Persons by you to be returned as aforesaid, not to
fail in the said hour* the rather that we have to commmunicate to the said*
Assembly, as well a dispatch lately received by us of a transaction made, and
concluded with the Duke of Lorrain, for the Relief of this Kingdom; as also
several matters relating unto, and concerning the said Agreements, and other
matters of much importance to his Ma: service, and the good of this Nation,
which (least any Interruption may be given us by the Enemy) we intend shall be
entered upon, and debated the first day of the Sessions, having resolved to
avoid the danger of a long Session, to hasten as far as in us lies the Results
to be there taken; And so we bid you heartily farewell, And remain: At
Aghnanure the 10. October: 1651.

For the County of Galloway. Your loving Friend, CLENRICKARD.

By virtue of this Summons, a General Assembly was to meet at James-Town in
Connought, November. the 6th. last: but the appearance probably was then very
slender, and the power of the English did (as it had done before at Longh
Reagh) disappoint the formal concluding of any matters of importance. In
Leynster, Munster, Vlster, all the Cities, Buroughs, Towns, and places
Habitable (almost) were in English hands, if any Messengers could be found to
deliver Summons, no competent Electors could be found to observe the same: And
even in Connought the Two head Cities were at once besieged, and the besiegers
of each were so fearles of being raised or disturbed by all the Forces of
Ireland, that divided as they were, they yet further subdivided themselves, and
marched abroad constantly to seek out Enemies, and take in Garrisons, all that
lay within any reasonable distance. It must needs be therefore a very hard
matter for Clanrickard driven to such straits as He himself was, out of a
Nation so far subdued as Ireland, then was to call together any thing, that
might in any construction be admitted to be a General Assembly: or any
Representative fit to conclude of general Affairs.

Howsoever a Copy of that Agreement which had been completed betwixt Charles
the 4th. D* of Lorrain on the one part, and the Lo: Taaffe, viscunt Sir Nic:
Plunket* Knight, and Geff: Brown Esquire of the other part, shall be here
inserted faithfully. Some abbreviation shall be used, as to those tedious,
superfluous repetitions, which the Lawyers style intruder as necessary, but I
shall not recede from the sense, and substance in the least: for that I appeal
to the enemy himself. The Copy follows.

An Agreement betwixt Charles the 4th. D. of Lorrain: and Theobald L: Viscont
Taaf; Sir Ni: Plunket, and Geoff: Brown, deputed and authorized by the Kingdom
and people of Ireland.
1. THe most Illustrious Duke is to be vested with royal power, under the
Title of Protector Royal of Ireland.

2. Because Religion is the prime end and subject of the Treaty: all is to
begin with an imploring application to the Pope for his paternall benediction,
and Help, that He will not be wanting in things spiritual, or temporal: in
consideration whereof it is protested, that constant perpetual obsequiousness
of duty and faithfulness shall be paid to his Holiness, and the Apostolic See.

3. In consideration of this Royal Protectors power granted, the Duke is by
war to prosecute the Kings Enemies, and afford Him all possible assistance.

4. The said Duke is to do nothing in abrogation of the Kings Authority, or
jurisdiction in Ireland, but rather to amplify it: and having restored the
Kingdom, and Religion to their due, pristine estate, He is to resign
cheerfully the Kingdom to the King.

5. Before resignation as aforesaid, the Duke is to be re-imbursed all by Him
preimpended in this business: and for this re-imbursement a general, exact
obedience to the Duke in faith and fidelity from the Kingdom and people is
made, and to be observed; without reservation to any other Superiority
whatsoever.

6. The Duke is not to fail on his part to expel out of Ireland Heretics,
Enemies to Kings, and Religion: and to recover and defend all things belonging
to the faithful Subjects of Ireland.

7. The Duke is solely, and absolutely to exercise all military power, for the
present and future in Ireland, as to the nomination of all Commanders, and
guiding all martial proceedings at his own pleasure, and in his own person:
unles He in his absence substitute some other Catholic person.

8. The Duke is to introduce no innovation into the Towns, etc. to him Assigned
repugnant to the securities, privileges, Immunities, Proprieties, Lands,
Estates, or ancient Laws of the Irish: reserving only to Himself Authority to
apply remedy in any thing accruing, wherein public prejudice may be concerned.

9. The Duke is not to interpose in Administration of judicial, or civil
Affairs, but leave them to be proceeded in according to the fundamental Laws,
and politic form by the Kings chief Governor, and the Assembly instituted.

10. The manner of calling Assemblies to be as formerly, unles complaint arise
against their Government, or other extraordinary emergencys hinder: and then
according to the ancient Laws, the calling of the Assembly is to be at the
pleasure of his Highness.

11. When the work is done in Ireland, by consent of a General Assembly, the
Duke promises to afford Agents to the King, against rebelling adversaries in
other Kingdoms.

12 In case the Duke cannot go in person into Ireland, it is free* in his
choice, and pleasure, to depute any other able man of Catholic piety, who
shall be independent in the militia, and in civil matters shall be received to
all manner of Councels in the same right, as any other Counselor, or
Commissioners.

13. All Cities, Castles, Lands taken from the English, shall revert to the
Owners, if Catholics who have constantly persever'd in the Catholic Quarters
under the Duke, yet the Dukes military power shall be entire over the same, to
Garrison, and dispose of them for public security at his pleasure.

14. All pay to the Soldiery is to pass from the Duke, as well out of the
public Revenue, as of the Dukes coffers, when that fails: always provided that
what the Duke disburses of his proper, for public uses for the future, be
repaid Him, as his former disbursements.

15. All goods of Enemies, and Delinquents, are to be converted to public
military charges, and toward rewarding great merits by the Duke, with advise
of the General Assembly.

16. The Duke besides 20000 li. already contributed, promises all further
accommodations and supplements of War, together with his power, and industry,
whatsoever is not above the reach of his Faculties, and beneath the necessities
of the War: toward repayment whereof as well principal, as the annual
provenue, and use thereof, the whole Nation of Ireland is to be liable, until
the last penny paid, and for caution in the mean time, the Duke is to be seized
and possessed in his own hands of Galloway, Limerick, Athenree, the Castle and
Town of Athlone, and Waterford, and the Royal Fort of Duncannon, (when
recovered from the Enemy) and these are to remain to Him, and his Heirs (until
full, entire satisfaction received) and to pay just obedience: and the
Garrisoned, and commanded at his pleasure.

17. In laying of public Taxes, and leavying the same for the Dukes
satisfaction, the Duke to proceed by advice of the General Assembly, and all
aggrieved parties in case of inequality to seek redress from the General
Assembly.

18. For tiquidating, and stating the Dukes disbursements a certain method
shall be agreed upon betwixt the Duke, and the said Transactors; but for the
Persons to be entrusted in that charge, the Gen* Assembly is to alter them at
their pleasure.

19. The Duke shall make no peace, nor cessation without the Lord Deputy, and
General Assembly.

20. The Lord Deputy, and General Assembly shall make no peace etc. without
consent of the Duke.

July 22. 1651. Signed Charles of Lorrain.

Here is discovered a strange sodering, and patching together of contrary
interests, by four several parties on the one side, only that England may be
undermined; and betrayed by the conjunction of their Counsels, and Forces on
the other side. Here is the pretended Vicar of Christ, the pretended King of
Ireland, the pretended Duke of Lorrain, and the pretended Plemipotentiaries
from the General Assembly of the Irish, and all these make their adverse
pretentions reconcilable to each other, in this transaction, that they may
appear against England, like the Foxes which Absolon coupled together, with
firebrands in their tails, when he intended to burn Joabs standing Corn. The
Pope would certainly govern Ireland entirely, and imediately by his own
substitutes, if it were possibly to be obtained, rather then admit of these
conditions for the King or Duke: but since all cannot be obtained, He will lay
hold of what share he can. The King likewise cannot affect such rivals as the
Pope and Duke: nor can the people of Ireland voluntarily envassal themselves to
so many Signiors: nor would the Duke of Lorrain take the whole burden of this
rugged adventure upon himself, without better security* but al of them bearing
a joint spite against the English, for the satisfying of that common spite,
are willing, though against their wills, to daub up their own particular
concernments with mortar, altogether untemperd. It is not worth while therefore
to inquire at present, what it is that all these treat for here jointly, it is
the dividing of Englands spoils, as appears by the 6t.. 11th. 15th. Articles,
but let us a little inquire what that game is, which every one of these
Treators hunts after, and pursues severally.

The Popes ends are to be found in the 2d. and 1^1* Articles* That help, and
benediction which is expected from Rome, is not to be bestowed in vain: if the
Pope will now set to his assisting hand, and by his holy croisadoes, and other
devote spells, contribute treasure to this work, Ireland shall again return to
his obedience, nay Ireland being happily reduced, England, and Scotland shall
be attempted in the next place. We see the stuped old Bishop dos not yet
despair: though God has already powrd out some vials of his wrath upon his
seven-hilled See, and rent away from him more then a 3d. part of his
Territories, and though there are more viale yet remaining, that must discharge
more indignation shortly upon his Throne: Yet all this dos not quite deterr him
from looking after new acquisitions, and re-installments. Well: let him morgage
a good part of Heaven to raise money, and let him imbarque that money in this
expedition of the Duke of Lorrayn, we are still confident his Empire is in its
declination, and those cups of blood which have been lately filled to Him, by his
Command in Ireland, are the last that he shall ever quaffe in such excess.

The Dukes ends are provided for in the 1. 5. 7. 8. 10. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 18.
20 Articles. He is by Title to be Protector Royal of Ireland, and by that
Office to assume regal power to himself, and Deputies: the administration of
civil, and judicial affairs is to be left to a General Assembly, as
formerly, or to the Kings Deputies, and Ministers: but this in time of War
amounts to nothing: because the military sword is absolutely, and independently
girt upon the Dukes thigh; and it is well enough known, that in times of war the
power military overawes the civil as much, as the civil ought to overaw the
military in times of peace. Moreover, the War is not to be determined till the
Duke pleases, and if any dispute arise in the mean time betwixt Power, and
Power, here is a particular reservation of authority to the Duke to apply
remedy: what that means: I leave to conjecture. Besides, the Duke is to have
some share in the civil administration also, and the issuing of the Treasure,
and managing of the public Revenue is primarily in Him: and till his
disbursements be satisfied (of which there is not yet no Auditor but himself)
for principal, and provenue. All Ireland is his morgage: yea diverse of its
chief Cities, and Fortresses are to be his in possession, for more special
securance, and caution. Upon promise of this security before the signing of the
Treaty, the Duke sent 20000 l. to Galloway, and since the full signing of the
same, some other supplies of the like value have been sent from the same hand,
and questionles, if the Irish Commissioners were able to grant enough to the
Duke, the Duke has contracted warily enough for himself, but the main thing
contracted for is yet in English hands, such as regard neither of the treating
parties. So in conclusion, the Duke is his own security: all that he has
treated for with the Irish, is but a cracked Title: his own coffers must still
purchase that which is to replenish his Coffers: and the expense of his
Militia, must recover that which is to repay him for the expense of his
Militia; It behooves the Duke therefore now to lay all at stake, and not to
dally away his Treasure in Crumbs, (especially since He is dismissed of the Duke
of Newburghs entertainment,) for all the body of his mercinary Larro^s, (if he
had swimming Carriages, sufficient to their march,) and all the plunder, and
hire that that body has inricht him withal, are scarce sufficient to ensure
this one Irish bargain to him.

The young titular Kings ends are conditioned for, in the 3. 4. 9. 11. Articles:
The Duke promises him fair, but leaves him nothing else to depend upon,
besides bare promises. Yea, and the Commissioners also (to whom the Duke has
promised a resignation of the Crown after all demands satisfied, and debts paid)
treat by a Commission from the Kingdom and people of Ireland, not so much as
mentioning Him: if then the young Titular King was privy, and consenting to this
Transaction: so directly threatening the extirpation of Protestants here called
Heretics, and the confusion of England here made the Pray of so many Hunters;
we may safely conclude, that he has abjurde both Religion, and Country; nay we*
may conclude further, that having postponed all other things to private aims
of his own, in the pursuing of those aims, He is rather transported with
counsels of blood, and revenge, then of hope and advantage. But if his consent
was not past to these Articles, so dishonorable, and injurious to himself, his
Irish Subjects are not so loyal, and faithful to him, as sometimes they would
feign profess themselves to be, and as his tame compliance with them seems to
merit at their hands. How wise his Counselors are, I cannot apprehend; for
when I consider that the Scots, and the Irish have been perpetually courted by
him, and gratified with condiscentions against his Religion, against his
Honor, against his Conscience, against his inclination: and yet nothing was
ever hitherto held out to the Governing party in England, but the red Flagg of
defiance: his Counsels seem to me unfathomable.

The advantages of the Irish are now lastly to be looked after, in the 1. 2. 6.
12. 13. 15. 19. Articles. For they are not only to be restored to their own
forfeited Estates: but rewarded also for their bucheries, and outrages with all
that pertains to the English. They are to have negative voices in all Truces,
and Treaties of peace. They are to be governd by a Catholic Prince, and in his
absence by a Catholic Deputy: till the Duke declares himself fully satisfied,
and continued. They are to have the Popes Crosier as predominant amongst them
as ever formerly. In brief, they are to have Popery secured to them for ever,
by virtue whereof, they shall be absolved of all blood by them already drawn,
and enabled to shed, as much hereafter upon all occasions offered, for since
they have not pawnd, but really sold themselves in fee to the Duke of Lorrain,
(knowing, and foreseeing their Countries insolvency, and that the Dukes
pretenses are never probably to be answered in this age, though right reckonings
might be expected) that dear Religion of theirs, which so sweetened to them by
the sacrificing of Heretics, must needs be indefeasibly established amongst
them.

Now all these things sumd up together, need no Commentary to be made upon
them: every English man, that knows what belongs to an English man, will be a
sufficient Commentater to himself. In observing of the Irish especially (for
the other 3. Treators are foreign to us) and their sincerity in Treating, no
man can be deficient: for they we see here, whilst they are professing fidelity
to the Parliament, and seeking freedom of their own consciences, yet are
Articling with the Duke of Lorrain, and other Potentates at the same time, to
root out the very name of English, and Protestant from the face of the earth:
and though they have always made their Kings Cause a principal part of their
quarrel against us, notwithstanding that He is our professed enemy: yet upon all
advantages they are ready to casheir him, though He he has always followed his
Fathers steps in this, in keeping a secret, strict, and servile correspondence
with them: yea, and Espousing so much guilt of blood for their sakes, as all
the water in the Sea betwixt England, and Ireland, will never wash off from his
unhappy Family.

About the beginning of November: Limerick yielded to the Lord Deputy upon such
Articles, as show what distress the Town was in: but the Articles have been
Printed and published already, and therefore I forbear here to insert them.
Howsoever presently after, the Lord Deputy sent his summoning Letters with
offers of fair Terms to Galway, Copies whereof you shall now have.

A Copy of his Excellencies Letter to Gen: Preston, Governor of Galway.
SIR,
I Shall not now do you the courtesy as to Summon you at such a distance,
because your gravity once chid me for it as unadvisedly; But for the good men's
sake of the City, who perhaps may not be so ayery in the notion of a Soldiers
Honor, as to understand the quibles of it, or to find the worth or weight in
them, to admit them in balance against the more feeling concernments of their
own safety, and subsistence (though men of your unhappy breeding think such
glorious Trifles worth the sacrificing, or of other men's lives and interests,
for (however you would your own) I have here sent to them a sober tender of
Conditions, which they may (perhaps) think it behooves them to consider,
whilether's time, and rather at distance then stay till the refusal, bring
mischief or danger nearer their doors. This if you shall fairly communicate as
it is directed, and especially if you be found complyant to the substance and
effect of it, (waving the frivolous impertinencies of a Soldiers Honor or
humor rather) you may partake in the benefit of such Conditions, as your
quality renders you capable of. If you smother or suppress it, you may guess
whose head shall pay for the trouble, or mischief that shall follow if God
enable us to reach it, as I doubt not but he will, because he is, and we have
eminently found him still to be a righteous Judge, pleading the quarrel of the
innocent, and a severe avenger of their blood against those that spill it, or
lightly regard it, as well as a merciful Father, and faithful Master to those
that serve and fear him.

Clare Castle: November: 7. 1651. SIR: Your Servant, H: IRETON.


To the Citizens of Gallway.
Gent:
I Suppose you cannot but understand; That as God has been pleased to bless
and d^spose of our Affairs) we have no place considerable in Ireland to intend
next but your City, where I believe you must needs feel some restraint already,
both to your Trading and supplies, and cannot but foresee more coming on that
will reduce you (by Gods blessing continuing with us) to extremity ere long,
though we should not at all deal with you in a more forcible way. And therefore
though I can expect little fruit of a formal Summons at this distance, and
Season; If you be under the power of mercinary Soldiery* (who will perhaps
pretend point of Honor, not to yield before more extremity, or immediate Force
at hand: but really intend their own interests, so far as to keep themselves in
a warm Quarter, and good pay, whilst they can, though thereby (besides first
milking of you dry) they bring you into as bad a Condition at last, as those in
Limerick, and other places have done the poor people that maintained them, and
then getting as good Conditions as they can for themselves to be gone, leave
you with your more weighty Interests behind, to stand at the stake, yet not
knowing but your wisdom may have kept you so far Masters of your selves, and
your City, as to be able to rid your selves of such Guests when you see cause.
I thought fit hereby to offer you, as once I did to Limerick last year whilst
they were their own Masters, that if you will yet open your Gates, and submit
to the State of England, you shall find more mercy, and favor to all save the
Original Authors of the Rebellion, the first engagers in Command or Council
therein* before the first General Assembly, or such as sat therein, then you
shall ever have from me by bargaining for your selves. Or if you think it
better for you to capitulate for Conditions, I shall (if you accept them)
without farther trouble to us, give you the same in effect, which I tendered to
Limerick at my first setting down before it this year, in case they would have
surrendered then, so as to have set us free for other work the remainder of the
Summer, which if upon the sad example of what they by the refusal have lost,
and what they came to at last, after all the distresses, impoverishments, and
miseries of the Siege, you incline to lay bold on while you may, and so prevent
the like miseries* you shall soon understand them from me. Now indeed though
you should not be ever mastered by an hungry sharking Soldiery, yet the
multitude of Priests, those incendiaries of blood, and mischief amongst men,
and of other desperate persons (engaged upon their principles in the beginning
of this Religion, and in the Murders, and outrages therein committed) which I
understand you have amongst you, makes me apt to doubt that by reception and
protecting of them, and adherance thus far unto them (if not by any bloody and
treacherous acting of your own) you may in the Righteous Judgment of God be so
far involved with them in the same guilt, as to be doomed, to partake with them
in the same Plague, and given up to be either overawed or deluded thereunto, by
the same persons with whom, and for whose sake you have so made your selves
partakers in the guilt, or (at least, I am sure such, as those amongst (so far
as they can prevail to overpowre you, (or deceive you) will endeavor to
engage you as deep, render you as desperate as themselves, and makes your
wealth and strength serve to maintain or protect them, and their broken wicked
interrest, as long as ever they can, yet what ever issue it have, I shall have
the satisfaction in my self of having discharged such a duty toward the saving
and real good of men (if capable of it) and in having by this a good trial,
how God suffers you to be inclined (for mercy or judgment to your selves) and
see the more light what dealing he calls for toward you from our hands. If you
shall be blinded or hardened to the refusal of this mercy whilst you may have
it, and to put the State of England, and us their Servants to the charge,
hardship, and labor of drawing before you to besiege you, when there is no
Town but yours to protract the end of the War, you may well expect (since we
have nothing else considerable to do) that we shall endeavor to the utmost to
make you pay dearly for it in the issue, and more then others before you, by
how much you alone do (with less reason or hopes, and more malignant
obstinacy) lengthen out our charge and trouble, and make your selves the
single, and more singular mark of Justice. But if there be (as I am not without
hope there may be) a generation amongst you, more peaceably or providently
inclined, and not so violent or mad as the rest, who would willingly embrace
mercy while they may, but are over-powred by a faction of other desperate ones,
I shall be glad for those that are so minded if* God gives them Hearts to do
that right to themselves, as to use some means whereby we may know them, and
who the rest are that oppose it, (or the principles of them) that so we may
have some ground of discrimination (when God shall give it into (...) power) to
use that tenderness toward them, and severity toward the other which God in
such ^ase) would call for, and we should desire.


For General Ireton.
SIR,
IT would prove no courtesy unto me, your summoning me at such a distance, but
rather a discurtesie, which had (in my opinion) rendered you guilty of a second
error against the rules of War. You may not think strange that the people of
this Town should stand upon Soldiery, honor, and have skill to oppose an
Enemy, who have of themselves (without the assistance of others) long since
stood out against the threats and attempt^s of the Lord Forbs, who was General
of a Fleet when he besieged them, and forced by them to retire without any
loss to themselves. If my profession be unhappy (as you term it) I cannot but
admire, you should follow the same, which it hitherto has proved to your
content, may hereafter prove unhappy to you according to your own judgment of
it. And if men of that profession shall be backward in venturing men's lives, in
a just cause, (such as I own being for my Religion, King, and Country) they
shall hardly attain to the effecting of any great enterprise. But such as
hazard men's lives without a just cause will one day answer for their blood
before God the just Judge, in which (when you reflect on your own actions) you
will find your self as guilty as others. Your Letter to the Mayer, Aldermen,
and Burgesses of this Town I delivered them, knowing their honest and gallant
resolution to be such, as they may not be drawn or tempted to any the least
distrust or jealousy of the Soldiery amongst them, which you endeavor by
your Letter to fill their imaginations with all, for your own ends, and their
utter ruin, and had I suppressed or smothered it, I cannot guess whose head
should be subject to pay for it: for I hold that the heads of those with you,
are as unsettled on their shoulders, as any I know in this Town.

Your Servant, Tho: Preston Taragh.
Galway, 12 November: 1651.

For the Lord Gen: Hen: Ireton, these.
WE received yours dated at the Castle of Clare the 7th. of this instant,
wherein you seem (under the Cloud of a friendly advice) to set distrust, and
jealousies betwixt us, and the Soldiery amongst us, which perhaps the like
has wrought your desired effects of division and distraction in Limerick, and
other places to their own ruin: yet have we that confidence in the ownipotent
God who is the author, and fountain of Union, and Charity that nothing shall be
able to rent or break the settled conjunction which is between us in the Town,
so that howsoever God shall be pleased to direct our intenions, it will appear
by the effect to be the general Act of all without exception. You were pleased
to speak in your Letter of Conditions offered to Limerick the last year, and
likewise of others offered by you to them, when first you sat before that City
this year, of both which we being ignorant, cannot give that full resolution
upon those offers by you made, we do expect from you the full scope of both
these Conditions mentioned in your Letter, and that without exception of any
Person, or Persons in or of this Town, whereupon we will return unto you such
Answer and Resolution, as God shall direct us, and which shall become good
Christians, and men of our Condition and quality: and so we remain,

Galway 12. November: 1651. Your Servants. Richard Kickwarty. Mayor. Oliver
French. Stephen French Tho: Linch. James Lich. Jo: Stephens. Dominick Boowne.
John Blake.



A Reply to Preston.
SE here old Prestons confidence: Because he fights for his King, County, and
Religion: Because the Citizens of Galloway adhere unanimously to him: because
he has a Maxim of War to warrant him: and because he supposes there is an
insnaring intent in the favorable Conditions offered by the Lord Deputy:
therefore he still resolves to run the hazard of a longer Siege, and will
rather abide the worst events of war, then accept of the favor here tendered.
Death has lately bereaved us of that Pen that would, and best could have
replied to there cavillations: nevertheless such a fained plerophory of
confidence as this must not pass without some Reply. And first his Lordship
should have affirmed, that He fought for a just King, for an oppressed Country,
and for a religion truly Christian: for that which he now affirms is but of
little weight, in as much as all Kings, all National Quarrels, all Religions
are not justifiable, nor to be maintained by force at all times. And as to this
particular case, the King here intimated is such a one, as in a solemnly-sworn,
Scotch Covenant has renounced, and discomission'd Preston himself, and all his
adherants, as Enemies to his Scotch Covenant, yea, and to requite this
renuntiation of the King, the Irish at the same time have offered to renounce
him, and to alienate the Crown from his posterity. Let it be provided; that
Popery may be established in Ireland, and the buchering of 500000 British
Protestants remitted: and there are plemipotentiaries in England at this
instant, that will conclude with us about ejecting Monarchy out of Ireland for
ever. This shows how ingeniously this Governor of Galway makes Kingly interest
one prop of his Cause, and one Plea for his Conscience in a dispute so bloody,
as this has hitherto prooved, and still is likely to prove. Then for his
Country that affords him as weak an argument for the upholding of his Courage,
as his King. For 1. that which he calls His Country has no place to convene, and
vote in but Woods and Boggs: and divide Ireland into 10 parts, and 7. of those
ten have laid down arms, submitted to the Parliament: and desire protection no
otherwise, then as they disavow all that were guilty of the first massacre, and
continue now in hostility against the English. 2ly. admit there were any right
of Government in that minor part of fugitives, which Preston here calls his
Country, merely because they continue to abett, and justify by force the first
Rebellion in 1641. Yet still he knows, those fugitives themselves are now
subdivided into several parties, and contrary counsels. One part of them is
now treating with the Duke of Lorrain, about a resignation of Ireland into his
hands, an other is proposing contrary terms to the Commonwealth of England.
3ly. Grant all Ireland undivided, in a free General Assembly, did impowre
Preston still to maintain by Arms, that horrid conjuration and barbarous
exception of 1641. will he imagine, that such a Power can make the demands of
satisfaction, and expiation illegal in the English, or a denial of the same
legal in Him, and his Principalls? He may as well suppose that Law civil may
abrogate the Law of Nature? and that the commands of impious* bloody man, may
supersede the most fundamental institutions of God. What an incredible
stupidity is this in Preston then, that he puts any comparison betwixt his own
Cause, and the Lord Deputies, when all the world knows his Sword is drawn to
maintain the most execrable outrageous slaughter of Christians, that ever the
earth was made drunk with, and guilty of, and the Lord Deputies is drawn only
to recover due vindication for the same? But Preston alleges further that He
is Religions Champion, as well his Kings, and Countries: and this must needs
move very much with all that know his Religion, for we must understand, by his
Religion, the Virgin Mary commands in Heaven equal at least with Jesus Christ,
even as on Earth the Bishop of Rome governs almost solely, and entirely above
all that is called God. By his Religion, divine merits suffice not without
humane additions By his Religion, the Pope may invert totally Gods most sacred
Ordinances, making Incest Sodomy, Perjury, Rebellion, etc. excusable, and
commendable as often as they serve his advantages, and pretentions by his
Religion, an absolute soveraignity is due to the Pope over all Princes, and
Governments, and to deny the same attaints any man of heresy. By his Religion,
Heresy is a sufficient cause to expose whole Nations, to the destruction of
his emissaries, yea if Oaths have been made to preserve them from destruction,
those Oaths are to be avoided, and falsified upon pain of damnation. By his
Religion, many thousands of Protestants infiduously murdered before open War in
Ireland, since 164^ were piously sacrifized to Christ's Vicar at Rome, and for
him to defend these sacrifizers, merits much of all the Angels and Saints in
Heaven. Of this Religion therefore which thus inables the Pope to do things
diabollicall, whilst it pretends to clothe him with divine Soveraignity, more
need not be said; if this Religion be in any proportion, or shadow answerable
to that which was Preached, and practiced by our Savior, let Preston still
enjoy his confidence in it.

The 2d. thing that buoys up the spirit of the Lord of Taragh is the unanimity,
and stoutnes of the Townsmen under his Command: and this to us signifies very
little: for when a Company of Tradesmen, and Mechanics has a Governor to
flatter them with stories of the Lord Forbes, a Priest to invegle them with
fables of Purgatory, and a Soldier to aw them with Pikes, and Muskets: it is no
great wonder if they promise compliance, and give way to their Mayor, and some
few Aldermen to subscribe for them. Nay if the Lord of Taragh himself seem at
present, as things now stand, to promise himself much from this agreement, and
subscription of the Townsmen, that is as little to be wondered at; because it
may very well be notwithstanding, that he which now speaks big words upon the
approach of Winter, may yet resolve to be more attentive to reason, when the
approach of the Spring ads more advantages to his besiegers. He cannot choose
but remember that in 1650. He had as much assurance of constancy and fidelity
from the Tradesmen, in Waterford, as he has now in Gallway, yet both he and the
Waterfordians in the end found cause to lament that unhappy assurance. Drogheda
suffered for its obstinacy, though it was the first Town that rejected favor,
let Gallway then and Preston too, consider what it is* to reject favor at last
cast, and to remain obstinate after all other places of consequence are
reduced: let not the Lord Deputies fair warning be too far slighted.

A 3d. thing that animates his Lordship, is a Puntilio of Honor, which some
rude, mere sword men reverence, and observe as a Maxim of War; and by this
maxim a Commander in chief is to prefer his own repute before the saving of
thousands under his charge: and it is declared to be forfeiture of repute to him,
to accept of conditions from an Enemy whilst they aree too favorable, and too
timely. All the misery which fell upon Waterford by Pestilence, Famine, and the
Sword in 1650. might have been prevented by this Lord of Taragh, (at that time
Governor there) had not his Honor been inconsistent with the acceptance of the
terms then offered: and the terms then offered were better then his Lordship*
afterward accepted without any blemish to his Honor, they were only
dishonorable in this, that they were offered too soon, and before the City had
sufficiently tasted the miseries of a lasting Siege. At that time before a
Sacrifice had been made of 10000 men, to the Repute of this famous General,
it was not fit for him to march away, but after this due right, and solemnity
performed, He had a maxim of War to warrant the rendition of the place upon
terms more disadvantagious. We know not when, where, not by what Senate of
Martialists, these tyrannous Laws of Honor were Enacted, but the tyranny of
them is very manifest, and by this Tyranny Iredah, Wexford, Limerick, and some
other places in Ireland, have been lately brought to very sad, and tragical
Castrophes: and it should seem Preston thinks himself still necessitated by the
same, to bury himself, and Gallway in honorable Ashes. The Lord Deputy taking
just scandal at such ignorant mercinary swordmen, as these who follow arms
out of choice, not necessity, and not understanding Honor rightly defined,
shed blood for formality, no^ policy* calls the profession of them unhappy: and
this Preston stomachs at, and retorts, as if the Lord Deputy were himself of
the same Profession. Herein his ignorance appears still more at large: for the
Lord Deputy* did not speak disdainfully of all, but only of such Soldiers as
fall under the foresaid distinction: He is as much mistaken in Soldiers now,
as He was before in the Honor of Soldiers: and this shows that his rude, and
truly unhappy trade never tought him rightly either to define, or distinguish.

The last thing that hardens Preston, or rather that is made use of by Preston
to harden the Townsmen of Gallway is this; that the Lord Deputy intends no more
favor to them, notwithstanding all his fair offers of mercy, then he dos to
the Soldiery, and the rest of the desperate incendiaries in Gallway, whom he
excludes from it. And he tells the people the Lord Deputies design is only to
breed variance, and division betwixt both parties, that both might be made his
prey the more easily. Nay he is not ashamed to tell the people that Limerick
was bet^ayed, and lost by the same fraud. What are these people ashamed of? all
the world knows, that Limerick after great hardships, and distresses endured in
a long Siege, was forced at last to submit to that ingens telum, which we call
necessity: and those miserable people that are still surviving after all those
Calamities, will be sad witnesses, that they may curse that obstinate unity
that made them hold out so long, not any factions, or dissentions that made
them submit so soon. The English were never guilty of circumventing Enemies by
subtilties, and of all English men there was never any one more averse from
deluding snares then the Lord Dep: Ireton: let them but name one Town in
Ireland during all these Wars, that ever lost by timely yielding, or had cause
to boast of long holding out, and this argument shall be wholly granted them.

FINIS.

