AN ANSWER TO A PROPOSITION In order to the proposing of A Commonwealth or
Democracy.

Proposed by friends to the Commonwealth by Mr. Harringtons consent; Who is so
over-wise in his own conceit, that he propounds a Committee of Parliament, with
above one hundred Earls, Nobles, Members, Gentlemen, and Divines (named in his
list) may dance attendance twice a week on his Utopian Excellency in the
Banqueting House at Whitehall or Painted Chamber, to hear and see his
Puppet-play of a new Commonwealth: the very first view whereof the presumes
will infatuate all dissenting parties, spectators, and our divided Nations by
their example into a Popish blind obedience thereunto, upon his Ipse dixit.

Prove. 26. 3, 5, 12. A whip for a Horse, a bridle for an Ass, and a rod for the
Fools back. Answer a Fool according to his Folly, lest he be wise in his own
conceit. See thou a man wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a
Fool, than of him. London Printed in the Year, 1659.

A PROPOSITION In order to the proposing of a Commonwealth or Democracy.
IF the Parliament shall be pleased to appoint a Committee to receive Mr.
Harringtons Propositions for settling the Government of this Commonwealth; it is
humbly proposed that unto the Committee of the House may be added

The Earl of Northumberland. The Earl of Denbigh. The Earl of Clare. The Earl
of Kingston. The Duke of Buckingh^m. Lord Gray of Warke. Lord Faulkeland. Lord
Lambert. Lord Bronker. Richard Nevil Esquire Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes. Lord Mayor of
London. Alderman Titchborne. Mr. Thurlo. Mr. William Pierepoint. Sir John
Eveling. Mr. Crew. Mr. Ansl^ of Ireland. Mr. Prynne. Sir Paul Neal. Sergeant
Maynard. Colonel Tailor. Lord Broughall. Mr. Hubard. Mr. Trevor* Captain Adam
Baynnes. Mr. Josias Bernards. Mr. Samuel Moyer. Mr. Anthony Samuel. Major
Wildman. Mr. Maximilian Petty. Mr. William Harrington. Mr. Wren. Mr. Baxter of
Kidderminster. Mr. Walwin. Mr. Brooks. Mr. Arthur Eveling. Mr. Cook. Dr. Fern.
Dr. Haymond. Dr. Owen. Dr. Seaman. Mr. Calamy. Mr. Manton. Captain Andrew
Ellis. Mr. Chalinor Chute. Mr. Slingsby Bethel. Sir Cheany Culpepper. Sir Henry
Blount. Sir Horatio Townshend. Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper. Mr. Job Charleton. Mr.
Edward Waller. Colonel Harloe. Major Harloe. Colonel John Clark. Mr. John
Denham. Mr. Morris. Mr. Hugh Bisscowen. Sir George Booth. Mr. Robert Roles.
Dr. Mills. Sir Orlando Bridgeman. Mr. Robert Stephens. Mr. William James. Sir
Justinian Isham. Lieutenant Colonel Kelsey. Sir Robert Honnywood. Mr. Sedgwick.
Mr. Philip Nigh. Dr. Thomas Goodwin. Colonel Lilburn. Charles Howard Esquire;;
Colonel Ashfield. Sir Thomas Gower. Lord Com. Bradshaw. General Desborow.
Colonel James Berry. Major William Packer. Praisegod Barbones. Sir William
Waller. Colonel Sanders. Colonel Hatcher. Colonel Edmond Salmon. Colonel
Francis Hacker. Mr. Rich. Knightley. Colonel John Burch. Mr. John Swynfen. Mr.
Thomas Bampfield. Colonel John Okey. Mr. William Kiffen. Anthony Pierson.
Colonel Moss. Mr. Frecheville of Stavely. Mr. James Morley. Dr. Philip
Carteret. Captain Richard Dean. Adjutant General William Allen. Mr. William
Forester of Aldermarton. Mr. Edward Harison. Mr. Arthur Samwell. Mr. Samuel
Tull. Mr. Edward Salloway.
That this Committee sit Tuesdayes and Fridayes, by three of the clock
afternoon, in the Banqueting house, Court of Requests, or painted Chamber, the
doors being open, and the Room well fitted for all Comers: and that Mr.
Harrington having proposed by appointment of the Parliament, such others may
propose as shall have the leave of the Parliament.

This by friends to the Commonwealth is proposed with Mr. Harrington's consent.

The Reasons for this Proposition are these:
It is the fairest way of Proposing a Government, that it be first proposed to
conviction, before it be imposed by power.

The Persons herein nominated being convinced, it must necessarily have an
healing influence upon all the Parties, degrees or qualities in this divided
Nation.

THE ANSWER.
It is the desire of our three divided Nations;
THat there be no Committee appointed by those Commoners now sitting to receive
Mr. Harringtons Propositions for settling our old Kingly Government in his new
way of a Commonwealth, till the House of Peers, and the secluded Members of the
Commons House who sat in Parliament till December 6. 1648. be permitted freely
to fit, debate, and vote in Parliament, according to the Statute of 17 Caroli,
c. 7. by which the present Conventicle pretends to sit.

That this being done, a Committee of both Houses may be appointed to receive
Mr. Harringtons propositions. And that the persons named in Mr. Harringtons
list who are no M^mbers, with such other wise men as Mr. Harrington and the
friends to his propounded Commonwealth shall nominate, may have liberty to
propose to the said Committee what Mr. Harrington and they shall think fit in
relation to the forming and erecting of the same.

That to the end the said Mr. Harrington and his friends may in their proposals
be kept within the bounds of sobriety and moderation, according to the ancient
Law of Charondas, the Lawgiver of the Athenians, (the first erectors of
Commonwealths,) Mr. Harrington and his friends may all come to the said
Committee with Ropes about their necks, and in case they shall not convince the
said Committee (and Parliament) that their new Commonwealth is better, safer,
and more profitable for the English Nation, than their old legal hereditarie
Kingly Governusent, that then they shall forthwith by sentence of Parliament be
carried to Tyburne, and undergo the penalty of Charondas Law, to be hanged up
by the neck as Traitors and seditious Persons till they be dead.

But if their proposals take effect: That then Mr. Harrington for his rare
invention and extraordinary good service in minting a New Commonwealth, shall
have the monopoly of coining all new Harringtons, alias brass farthings, which
shall henceforth pass for the only coin of his new copper Commonwealth, Gold
and silver which are Royal mines and metals annexed to the Imperial Crown of
the Realm) being as inconsistent with his New Commonwealth, (which has
swallowed them all up) as Kingship, and therefore to be banished with it.

The Committee is desired to sit every afternoon in the week by two of the
clock at the Sessions house in the Old Baily, or rather in the old Kings Bench
Court in Westminster Hall, being places open to all Comers, and sitted for
that end, without further charge to the poor Commonwealth: That so Mr.
Harrington and his friends may not be delayed from receiving a deserved
execution, or glorious reward.

This by the Generality of our 3 Nations friends to our Ancient Monarchy is
proposed, and they hope to have Mr. Harringtons post-consent thereto.

The Reasons for this Answer to the Proposition are these:
1. It is the fairest way of altering our ancient Kingly Government, and
Parliament, that they be first legally impeached and condemned to conviction
before they be injuriously suppressed by armed power. Therefore M. Harrington
must first answer M Wren and M. Pryns reasons in his new published True and
perfect Narrative; for the restitution of our old hereditarie Kings and
Kingship, as the best of Governments, before he propound his New Vtopian
Republike, to thrust them out of their long-enjoyed possession.

2. That Mr. Harrington and his friends being convinced of the illegality of
the said Commonwealth, and the dangerous consequence of proposing such a
seditious novelties, against our old Kingship and Kingdoms, and duly executed
according to Charondas law, it must needs have a healing influence upon all
the parties, degrees or qualities in these divided nations; since the exemplary
execution of such leading Innovators will so terrify all others that they will
not dare mutter one word for the future against our ancient fundamental
government by King, Lords and Commons; which they are all obliged to maintain
by sacred Oaths and Covenants.

3. All the three Nations will Judge Mr. Harrington and his Republican friends
are in good earnest for the Government of Oceana, and as Valiant as Sir John
Harringtons Ajax, when they shall so fairly adventure a voyage to Tyburne to
introduce it.

Funis coronat opus. Resolved upon the Question, (on Mr. Harringtons friends
Petition) that Dr. Chamberlain shall attend him during all the time of his
travel with his Gigantick Commonwealth, lest it should miscarry, and be
strangled in its birth: That if the orifice of his Brain or Womb be so narrow
that the Doctors hands cannot usher it into the world without suffocation, that
then ( Caesar-like) the General Council of Officers of the Army, shall
violently cut it out of his Womb with their swords, rather then it should be
still born, though with the Parents death: That if it be live-born, it shall
not be christened, till it be able to render an Account of its Faith to
Cardinal Mazarin, Dr. Owen, Mr. Nigh, and John Can: That new dipped Col.
Bennet, Col. Hewson, Major Packer, and Lieut. Col. Allen, shall be Godfathers;
the Whore of Rome, Mrs. Rolls, Mrs. Haggat, and Mal Cutpu^se Godmothers to it:
That it shall be then called by the Fathers name, Harringtons (not Englands)
Commonwealth, and bear his Arms instead of the superstitious red English Cross
upon its Forhead: That in the mean time it shall be strongly guarded night and
day by the Keepers of the Liberties of England, and Col. Fleetwoods Regiment,
lest Dr. Chamberlains Denn of Thieves, or the Queen of Fayries, should fteal it
away out of its cradle, and put a misshapen Changeling without wit or reason,
into its place, to the Parents dishonor, and great disappointment of the hopes
and prayers of all the Publicans and Sinners, falsely styled, the godly people,
and Saints of the 3. Nations, who rather desire to enjoy a share in the
Commonwealth and Crown lands of England, Scotland and Ireland, than in the
Kingdom and Crown of Glory in Heaven, Bonum quo communius eo melius, being a
sure principle, and the chief cornerstone on which they intend to build their
New Commonwealth, having little private wealth of their own, except Brass
Harringtons, to inherit.

FINIS.

