A BRIEF APOLOGY For all NON-SVBSCRIBERS, AND LOOKING-GLASS FOR ALL Apostate
perjured Prescribers and Subscribers OF THE New Engagement, Wherein they may
clearly behold their Presidents, Sin, Horror, Punishment.

LONDON, 1649.

A BRIEF APOLOGY For all NON-SUBSRIBERS, etc.
HE that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy, Prove. 29.11. How often the Prescribers and Subscribers
of the New Engagement, against their manifold former Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, Covenants and Engagements to the contrary, have been admonished
both in Press and Pulpit of the impiety, danger and destructiveness of this
their Apostacy and Perfidiousness both to God and Man, without any fruits of
Reformation or Repentance of this their execrable wickedness, is well known to
their own self-condemning consciences and the world: Let them therefore now in
this small Looking-glass, behold both their Presidents, Sin, Horror of
conscience and their Punishments for the same, which if duly pondered, may
through Gods mercy bring them to sincere Repentance, or else create a
tormenting hell within their Consciences here, and plunge them into everlasting
Hell-tormentings hereafter to their just destruction, who would receive no
admonition in due season.

The Presidents they follow in Prescribing and Subscribing this Oath and
Engagement, and very fatal and dangerous, even the very worst of our English
Rebels and Traitors in former Ages. Jo. Stow his Survey of London, p. 88, 89,
etc. Hollinshed, Speed and Stow in 4 and 5 of R. 2.
In the fourth year of King Richard the second, Walter Tyler, Jack Straw, and
their rebellious rout of the Peasantry, made a great Insurrection and Rebellion
against the King and his Counsel; and marching up to London in a numerous body,
by the favor of the meaner sort of Citizens, who confederated with them,
entered both the City and Tower, beheaded the Archbishop of Canterbury, with
diverse others, affronted, commanded and insulted over the King and Nobles at
their pleasures, as the only Kings of England; tendering the King very high and
insolent Propositions to sign, and notwithstanding his present condescension
to them, conspired to seize upon his Person, and keep him alive amongst them
for a time, that people might the more boldly repair to them, and think
whatever they did was done by the Kings authority, till they had gotten power
enough, that they needed not to fear any force which should be made against
them; And then they resolved to stay all the Nobles that might give any
counsel, or make any resistance against them, together with all Lawyers, with
the Knights of S. John's and the Rhodes: And lastly, they would have killed the
King himself, with all men of possessions, Bishops, Canons, Parsons of
Churches, and Monks, except Friars Mendicants; and have burnt and plundered the
City of London it self, and then have created Wat Tyler King in Kent, and
others of the Chief leading Rebels Kings in other Counties. And to engage all
men in this Confederacy with them, they tendered an Oath to them, (somewhat
better then this New Oath and Engagement) viz. That they should keep Allegiance
to King Richard and TO THE COMMONS, and that they should accept of no King that
was named John; and that they should be ready to assist them whenever they were
called; and that they should agree to no Tax to be levied or granted in the
Kingdom, except a Fifteen. Which Oath they enforced all they met to take; and
those that were not sworn to them, they took off both their Hoods and Heads.
But after they had thus played Rex. and Lorded it over King, Nobles, Gentry,
Country and City a little space, Wat Tyler their new King and General (who made
this vaunt, that before four days came to an end, all the Laws of England
should proceed from his mouth) was struck off his horse by William Walworth
Lord Mayor of London, and slain in Smithfield, in the view of his Commons, and
his head set upon London Bridge; and by the assistance of the Lord Mayor, and
about a thousand loyal Citizens, in whose hearts the Law of the King was
ingrafted, the King was rescued f om their power and butchery, and the Rebels
subdued, who threw down their weapons, fell to the ground and craved pardon;
their principal Leaders and designed Kings taken and executed in all places,
and their heads and parts hanged up for monuments to deter others; their
confederates all dispersed, imprisoned, and put to great fines and ransoms to
redeem their lives and liberties. And so their new Kingdom and Republike
quickly ended in a fatal Tragedy. The King, for the Lord Majors and Citizens
good service, in perpetual memory of all of this their Loyalty, Knighted the
Mayor, and added the Dagger to the Cities Arms; which the present Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and packed Common-Councel-men may do well to consider, for fear they
alter the Dagger into an Ax or Halter for the future: and the Prescribers of
this new Oath and Engagement (who tread in these rebellious Traitors steps, and
prosecute their very designs and Engagement) may do well in time to remember
their sad Story, lest they arrive at their fatal ends, to their temporal and
eternal ruin. The like design and project in effect was afterward hatched
and set on foot by Jack Cade and his rebellious rout, under pretense to reform
Laws and Government; who were all scattered, came to the like Tragical ends,
and for ever branded by an Act of Parliament, 31 H. 6. c. 1. for wicked Rebels
and Traitors to posterity.

In the Month Fox Acts and Monum. 1640. Vol. 2. p. 665. to 677.
of July, 1549, in the third year of King Edward the sixth, as the Commons of
Devonshire and Cornwall raised an Insurrection against the King and his Council
in the West, so the Commons in Yorkshire at the same time raised a Rebellion
in the North, principally out of their traitorous hearts, grudging at the Kings
honorable proceedings in reforming Religion; and trusting to a blind Prophecy
wherewith they were seduced, which themselves thought should shortly come to
pass, by reason of the Rebellions then on foot in Norfolk and Devonshire; the
tenor of Prophecy, and purpose of which Traitors together, was, THAT THERE
SHOULD NO KING REIGN IN ENGLAND; Nota.
THAT THE NOBLEMEN AND GENTLEMEN SHOULD BE DESTROYED, AND THE REALM SHOULD BE
RULED BY FOUR GOVERNORS TO BE ELECTED and APPOINTED BY THE COMMONS HOLDING A
PARLIAMENT IN COMMOTION, (without King or Lords) to begin at the South and
North Seas of England, etc. Whereupon, to execute this their design, and erect
this their new Government and Parliament without King and Lords, (the very
project now on foot, and scope of this new Oath and Engagement) they resolved
to seize and murder such Nobles and Gentlemen of Estate in their Houses and
Counties, and in executing the Kings Commissions, as were favorers of the
Kings proceedings, and likely to resist them. Hereupon, the King sent his
gracious Pardon and persuasions to them, to reduce them by all fair means to
obedience; informing them, that He was their rightful King, Liege Lord and
Sovereign King of England, not by age, but BY GODS ORDINANCE, BEING ORDAINED
THEIR KING AND PRINCE BY ALMIGHTY GOD, possessing his Crown BY BLOOD AND
DESCENT FROM HIS ROYAL FATHER KING HENRY THE EIGHTH. You are Our Subjects,
because We be your King; and rule we will, because God has willed. It is as
great a fault in Us, not to rule, as in a Subject not to obey. If it be
considered, they which move this matter (of his Nonage) if they durst utter
themselves, would deny Our Kingdom. But Our good Subjects know their Prince,
and will increase, not diminish his Honor; enlarge, not abate his Power;
knowledge, not defer his Kingdom to certain years: all is one, to speak against
our Crown, and to deny our Kingdom, as to require that our Laws may be broken
until one and twenty years, etc. Dare then any of you, with the name of a
Subject, stand against an Act of Parliament, a Law of the Whole Realm? What is
Our Power, if Laws should be thus neglected? Yea, WHAT IS YOUR SURETY, IF LAWS
BE NOT KEPT? Herein indeed rests Our Honor, herein stands our Kingdom,
herein do all Kings knowledge us a King: And shall any of you dare breathe or
think against our Honor, our Kingdom or Crown? etc. But neither the Pardon nor
Reason prevailing, these obstinate Rebels were at last twice or thrice
vanquished and utterly routed by a small number of the Kings Forces, many
thousands of them slain, others taken prisoners and executed, and the rest
scattered, so that they could never make head again, by the avenging hand and
just judgment of God. And so their expected new Vtopian Republicke and
Parliament of Commons, without King and Lords, came soon to ruin, before it
received any establishment. Let our New Moulders of our English Republike, and
promoters of the New Engagement, to set up a Republike and Parliament without
King and Lords for the future, consider this ill success of this design
heretofore with fear and trembling, lest it prove their very case in conclusion.

King, Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 3. p. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. Hollinshed, Speed
and Stow, in 1 Mariae.
Edward the sixth lying on his deathbed, and perceiving his Sister Queen Mary
to be an obstinate Papist, like to subvert that Religion and Reformation which
he had established, did by advice of his Council, and learned Lawyers, by his
last Will and Testament, endeavor to disinherit her of the Crown, appointing
the Lady Jane to succeed him: and to establish her Title thereto, caused all
his Privy Council, most of the chief Nobility, the Mayor and City of London,
and all the Judges (exept Judge Hales of Kent, who refused the subscription,
and chief Lawyers of the Realm) to subscribe thereto, against the express
Statute of 35 H. 8 c. 1. (to which they and the whole Kingdom had sworn) taking
the Oath for the succession of the Crown therein prescribed. Hereupon, after
King Edwards decease, they all proclaimed Jane Queen, and rejected Mary,
against whom they sent the Duke of Northumberland with an Army; who departing
from London, the Lords of the Council perceiving the generality of the people
to adhere to Queen Mary, and that she began to gather a considerable strength,
and most of the common people, and some of the Lords standing for her,
thereupon they presently turned their song, proclaimed Mary eldest daughter to
King Henry, Queen, according to the Act of Parliament, and deserted Jane, to
whose Title they had subscribed: whereupon the Duke of Northumberland, the Duke
of Suffolk, Sir John Gates, (three of the Subscribers) together with the Lord
Gilford, Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Wyat, and sundry others were suddenly
apprehended, condemned and executed as Traitors, together with the new Queen
Jane; who all confessed their deaths and condemnation to be just, and that they
deserved to die for these their Treasons; wishing all others to beware by their
examples, and timely to submit to and obey Queen Mary without murmuring or
rebelling against her, as good Subjects ought to do. This was the Tragic end
of those Subscribers and Engagers to disinherite this Queen of her Birthright,
and set up another against the Law, and their Oaths of Allegiance. Which our
present Subscribers and Engagers may do well to ruminate upon, their case being
far worse and more treasonable against the King, then theirs against Queen
Mary, having King Edwards last Will, with all the Kings Council, most Nobles,
Judges, Lawyers, and the Citizens of Londons Subscriptions thereto in King
Edwards lifetime, to countenance them herein; all which these recant, against
his clear Title by the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 1, 2.

But these Examples perchance may extend only to such who have been, or
hereafter shall appear in Arms against the present King, to disinherit him of
his Crown and Monarchy; or to the chief Contrivers and Promoters of the New
Engagement. I shall therefore remember all mere Subscribers of it, through base
fear, cowardice, covetousness, or other unworthy ends, against their former
Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Officers, Clerks,
and the like, their Protestation, Vow, and Solemn League and Covenant, of three
memorable Examples of bare Subscribers only against their Judgments and
Conscience, merely to save their lives, when in most certain and apparent
danger; the consideration whereof may make their souls and joints to quake and
tremble, and put them into Belshazzars trembling agony.

The first is that of M. Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 2. p. 265, 271, 272 Latimers
7 and 8 Sermons
Tho. Bilney, a pious and famous Martyr in King Henry the 8 's Reign; who being
condemned for Heresy by some Popish Prelates, was induced to abjure, and
subscribe his hand to a renounciation of those Truths of God which he formerly
professed, and for maintenance whereof he was condemned to be burnt. But no
sooner was he released, but he was so extremely troubled and tormented in
conscience for near two years space after, that his friends were afraid to let
him be alone by himself, and fain to be with him day and night, to comfort him
as they could; but no comfort would serve. As for the comfortable places of
Scripture, to bring them unto him, it was as though a man should run him through
the heart with a sword. He was in such an anguish, that nothing did him good,
neither eating nor drinking, nor any other communication of Gods Word; for he
thought that all the whole Scriptures were against him, and sounded to his
condemnation. At last by Gods grace, and good counsel, coming to some quietness
of conscience, he fully resolved to give over his life for the confession of
that Faith which he had formerly abjured and subscribed against: and thereupon
preaching and maintaining it publicly, was apprehended, burnt, and undauntedly
sealed it with his blood, to make amends for his former cowardly and unworthy
subscription, having no peace of conscience till then.

The second is that of Fox Acts and Monum. Vol. 2. p. 297, 299, 300 301.
James Bainham a Lawyer of the middle Temple, who being imprisoned, persecuted,
whipped, stocked, chained, wracked, and cruelly tormented by Sir Thomas Moor,
then Lord Chancellor, for his profession of Religion, and ready to be
condemned and burnt for an Heretic, was at last, after many denials, for fear
of death, and to preserve his life, persuaded to abjure the articles and
opinions charged against him, and subscribe to their abjuration under his hand.
And having done his Penance, was set at liberty. But within one month after, he
exceedingly bewailed this his subscription and abjuration, and was never quiet
in his mind and conscience, until he had uttered his fall to all his
acquaintance, and asked God and the world for giveness before all the
Congregation, (in those days in Bowe-lane:) And immediately the next Sunday
after, he came to S. Austins Church with the New Testament in his hand in
English, and The obedience of a Christian man, in his bosom, and stood up there
before the people in his Pew, there declaring openly with weeping tears, that
he had denied God; and prayed all the people to forgive him, and to beware of
his weakness, and not to do as he did; for (said he) if I should not return
again to the Truth (having the New Testament in his hand) this Word of God
would damn me both body and soul at the day of Judgment. And then he prayed
every body rather to die by and by, then to do as he did: FOR HE WOULD NOT FEEL
SUCH AN HELL AGAIN AS HE DID FEEL, FOR ALL THE WORLDS GOOD. After which he had
no quiet, till he writ likewise certain Letters to the Bishop his brother, and
others, to justify the Truths he had renounced under his hands, and suffered
for them at the Stake, to which he was soon after condemned: where being in the
midst of the flames round about him, and having his legs and arms half burnt
and consumed, he spoke thus with a loud voice: O ye Papists, behold, ye look
for Miracles, and here now ye may see a Miracle: for in this fire I feel no
more pain, then if I were in a bed of down; but it is to me as a bed of roses.
So that he who felt such an horror and hell in conscience before, for
subscribing against the Truth and his Conscience even whiles he was at large,
felt no pain nor torment at all in his body in the midst of the flames, when
chained to the Stake, and half burnt to ashes, and had then a very heaven in
his Soul and Conscience. An admirable president both of Gods justice toward
cowardly Subscribers, and comfortable assistance of constant Martyrs and
Adherers to the Truth, and their primitive Engagements.

The third is the memorable example of Fox Acts and Monum. Vol.3. p.666 to 677.
Archbishop Cranmer, who subscribed to Queen Mary's disinheriting, against his
Oath first; and after that, being condemned to be burnt for an Heretic, upon
the solicitation of some Friars and others, who assured him, that if he
recanted his former Tenants against the Papists, he should not only save his
life, of which else there was no hopes, but likewise be restored to the Queens
favor and his former honors, was induced to subscribe such a Recantation as
they tendered him, (to the great scandal of Religion, and triumph of the
Papists) and after that, to write and subscribe two Copies thereof, with his
own hand. For which Subscription, he was so grieved and tormented in
Conscience, that the image and shape of perfect sorrow appeared in his
countenance, and sometimes he lifted up his hands to heaven for pardon, and
sometimes let them fall down to earth for shame and anguish; the tears in the
mean time gushing out from his eyes so abundantly, trickling down his aged
cheeks, that men never saw so many tears in any child, as burst out in him,
which moved all men's hearts to commiseration. When he came to speak to the
people, he exorted them, That next under God they should obey their King and
Queen willingly and gladly, without murmuring or grudging, not for fear of them
only, but much more for the fear of God; knowing that they be Gods Ministers,
appointed by God to rule and govern them; and therefore Whosoever resists
them, resists the Ordinance of God. Then he told them several times, that
there was one Great thing and offense he had committed, which did most of all
vex and trouble him at that time, and did trouble his conscience much more then
any thing he ever did or said in all his life; and that was, his setting his
hand to a writing contrary to the truth, which I (said he) here now renounce
and refuse, as things written with my hand contrary to the truth, which I
thought in mine heart, and written for fear of death, and to save my life, if
it might be: and that is, all such Bills and Papers which I have written or
signed with my hand since my degradation. And forasmuch as my hand offended,
writing contrary to my heart, my hand shall first be punished therefore, it
shall be first burned. Whereupon, the fire being kindled, and coming near him,
stretching forth his arm, he put his right hand into the flame; which he held
so steadfast and immovable therein, (save only that he wiped his face
therewith) that all men might see his hand quite burnt before his body was
touched: taking this exemplary revenge and punishment upon it, for his
scandalous Subscription.

Let every Minister, Lawyer, and other conscientious Englishman then, that
has any fear of God, or remainders of Conscience left within him, which out of
fear, covetousness, or any sordid unchristian ends whatsoever, (when neither
his life nor liberty lay at stake, as these Martyrs did) has perfidiously,
traitorously, and unchristianly subscribed this New Engagement and Oath, with
the self-same hand which he has formerly lifted up to the most high God, in
the Public Congregation, or in the Parliament House, or open Court in
Westminster Hall, when he took the Solemn League and Covenant; and wherewith he
publicly subscribed the same, and likewise swore the Oaths of Supremacy,
Allegiance, Fealty, Homage, or any other Oaths diametrically contrary to them,
to wit, To bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King, HIS HEIRS AND
SUCCESSORS, AND HIM AND THEM, WITH ALL THE ROYALTIES AND PRIVILEGES ANNEXED OR
UNITED TO THE IMPERIAL CROWN OF THIS REALM, etc. TO ASSIST, MAINTAIN AND DEFEND
WITH THEIR LIVES AND ESTATES, AGAINST ALL PERSONS WHATSOEVER; And to procure
THEIR PROFIT, etc. holding it all the time he swore upon the Bible or
Evangelists; and to preserve the Rights and Privileges of both Houses of
Parliament, and zealously and constantly to persevere therein all the days of
his life, and not to be withdrawn from the same by any persuasion, combination,
fear or terror whatsoever, etc. as they should answer the contrary at the
Great day of Judgment before the searcher of all hearts, etc. sadly and
seriously consider of these doleful Examples, and with what face or conscience
he can henceforth lift up his perjured hands to God in Prayer, or look any
conscientious Covenanter in the face, till he has with horror of conscience,
and whole rivers of tears, sighs and groans of spirit, and public abjuration
and recantation of this his Perjury, Treachery, weakness and wickedness, and
renounced, bewailed, and abjured this his New ungodly Subscription: And then he
will either imitate these eminent Martyrs in their horrors of conscience,
contrition, compunction, confession and abjuration of this their Subscription,
and suffering manfully (if there be occasion) for their Oaths, Vows, Covenant,
Protestation, and Engagements; or else fall into absolute desperation of any
pardon or remission from God and man, and with Judas and Abithophel (two Arch-
traitors) hang and execute themselves, for this their abominable Treachery,
Perjury to God, the King, Parliament and Kingdom. Which consideration and
Presidents, may be a sufficient Apology and Satisfaction, to justify and
excuse all Non-subscribers of this Engagement, against all imperious
Prescribers and Inforcers thereof, (especially if pretenders to Piety and
Liberty of Conscience in so eminent a degree, as the chief Contrivers thereof
pretend themselves) and exempt them from all injurious Penalties, Forfeitures
or Losses menaced for their Non-subscription, before all the Tribunals of
heaven and earth; which cannot but give sentence of absolution in their behalf,
since God himself expressly and peremptorily commands them, Levit. 19.12. Ye
shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou profane the Name of thy
God: I am the LORD; and denounces many severe Judgments against breakers of
Oaths and Covenants thorowout the Neh. 5.12, 13. Jer. 34.6. to 20. Ezekiel.
17.11. to 32. Zech. 5.1. to 5. Mal. 3.3.
Old and Romans 1.29, 30, 31. 1 Timothy 1.10. 2 Timothy 3.3, 4.
New Testament.

A Corollary to the Premises.
UNto all these ancient and most memorable Examples of Gods apparent
displeasure, and Consciences fearful workings against all ungodly actings and
engagements against lawful Authority, and former righteous and religious Vows,
Oaths, and Covenants, might here most pertinently be added three or four more
remarkable and most fresh Examples of Gods just indignation, and Consciences
affrightings, fallen out very lately among us, in these our most disloyal,
apostarizing days, upon the perju ious taking and subscribing to this present
new Engagement: As namely, of a Scholar in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, a
Minister in Essex, and a Cirizen of Whitington-Colledge in London. But there is
one more lately fallen out among us, which shall be instar multorum, in stead
of many other, as coming up more clearly and closely to this our present
occasion. And, O that such a sad and sorrowful story had never been told in
Gath, nor published in the streets of Askalon! But Divine providence having so
ordered, that it is so publicly and notoriously known; we cannot but make this
public use of it, for just terror and affrightment of all such like
offenders, whereof both City and Country at this time, too rankly abound among
us. Now the sad relation or story is this. One M. Tho. Hoyle, late Lo. Mayor of
York, and one of the most unhappie Members of the Juncto of Westminster, who
having been in all the former part of his life looked upon and known to have
been a most eminent professor of Religion, and of an unblameable life and
conversation. But since his being a Member of the House of Commons, having been
made Master of Sir Peter Osborns Office, a place of much credit and profit, and
a Committee of the Kings Revenue, (fat morsels, to stifle and choke Conscience)
when the House was purged by the power of the Army, this Gentleman abiding
still in the House with the rest of the Juncto, and acting all along with them,
was listed in the number of those that were to be Judges of the Kings life or
death; but (as it is certainly reported) was not present at the Kings
Condemnation. But, afterward, when the Juncto enacted the taking, and
themselves also took this New Engagement, he not only consented in it, but
(though against the dictate of his conscience, as he had often professed to
diverse, upon several occasions thereunto) himself also took it, and subscribed
to it: wherefore, after this thus taking of the Engagement, being (as it too
apparently was manifested in him) greatly troubled in conscience about it, he
formerly (I mean, before this ensuing fatal act was effected) had attempted to
have destroyed himself; but failing thereof, upon the 30 of Jan. last, 1649.
about the forepart of that afternoon, being in his house at Westminster, and
watching and obtaining an opportunity of being retired from all company, in his
chamber, having provided a Cord in his pocket, he most woefully hanged himself
therewith. Of which his most lamentable and desperate Self-murder, although
diverse do give various censures, especially the Malignant or Royal party,
principally because he was listed one of the Judges of the King, and this his
woeful self-ruine fell out on the very same day twelvemonth, and near upon the
very time of that day whereon the King was put to death, (which I cannot but
acknowledge was very remarkable;) yet the first and safest use thereof which
godly Christians ought to make, may be Caution to every one of us, seriously to
consider what the Apostle Paul says, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall. Secondly, let, O let those most ungodly
self-seeking Prescribers of this perjurious Engagement, look unto it, and be
terrified by it, whom in a most special manner it most nearly concerns. Yea, in
the third place, let all those falfe-hearted, posted, perjured Divines, which
have so sinfully subscribed this Engagement, lay this lamentable example close
to their hearts; especially those two unworthy, low-spirited, yet busy
Champions for the Engagement, (though, God be thanked, with very ill success,
both to the Scribler and Licenser) M. John Dury, and M. Joseph Caryl, who have
so strugled to bring others into the same condemnation with themselves. And in
the fourth and last place, let all Conscience-muffled and perfidious Malignants
or Royallists also lay this most woeful example very close to their souls and
consciences; who, notwithstanding they most falsely pretend themselves to be the
loyallest and most loving Subjects to our late deceased King and his Posterity,
and such fast friends to Monarchy and Kingly Government; yet have most
disloyally and and perfidiously taken this Engagement, and that upon a most
wicked and base Maxim of theirs, lately taken up among them, that, He is a
fool that will not take it, and he is a knave that will not break it. Thus,
like Atheists indeed, either believing there is no God to punish their perjury,
or else that they have God at command, to repent when they please. But let them
see and know, (as here by this most woeful Example is most evident) how severely
and wrathfully the Lord will, sooner or later, be avenged on all Perjurers and
Covenant-breakers: And, let them therefore, (as that even Prophetical Author of
The Arraignment of the Engagement, lately published, did religiously advise all
Prescribers and Subscribers of the Engagement, in the closure of that his said
Treatise; a passage most remarkable, especially considering this most sad
example; which fell out so immediately after it, and which therefore cannot be
too often inculcated and repeated;) Let them all (I say) either, with Peter,
after he had abjured his Lord and Master with an oath, go forth, presently, and
weep bitterly; or else, with treacherous Judas, who betrayed his Lord and
Master, to gratify the Highpriests, go forth, despairing, and hang
themselves, to avoid the shame of the world, and intolerable anguish of their
tormanting Consciences.

Optimum est aliena f^ui insania.
FINIS.

