A BRIEF NARRATIVE Of the manner how diverse Members of the HOUSE of COMMONS,
That were illegally and unjustly imprisoned or secluded by the ARMIES FORCE, in
December, 1648. and May 7. 1659. COMING Upon Tuesday the 27th of December 1659.
(upon the providential reducing of most of the Army to obedience, by the
immediate hand of God) to discharge their Trusts for the several Counties and
places for which they serve, were again forcibly shut out by (pretended) Orders
of the Members now sitting at Westminster, who had formerly charged the Army
with the guilt of the said force, and professed a desire to remove it, that all
the Members might sit with freedom and safety.

Published by some of the said Members, in discharge of their Trust, and to
prevent the Peoples being deceived of their Liberties and Birthright, for want
of Right Information from those who were elected to represent them, but are
forcibly excluded public Councils by some of their Fellow Members,
particularly enumerated.

Habakkuk 1. 3,4. Spoiling and Violence are before me, etc. Therefore the Law
is slacked, and judgment does never go forth; for the wicked does compass
about the Righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds.

London Printed for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1660.

A Brief Narrative of the late forcible Seclusion of the Members of the Commons
house of Parliament.
GOd who never fails by terrible things in Righteousness, to make his Power
and Wisdom known to the sinful and rebellious world, having in a wonderful and
unexpected way, without hands, or visible means, much broken and weakened that
Military Power, which for eleven years imposed upon this Nation at their
pleasure, making themselves and their General Councils (a Fabric intended to
give Laws to the Kingdom, instead of Parliaments,) the instruments of their
own dissolution and confusion; the Officers with a fear when none pursued,
leaving their Commands, and the common soldiers wandering about the streets like
sheep without a Shepherd, ready for any new Masters through want of pay, and
the Members of the House of Commons now sitting at Westminster. being by diverse
rebukes, and dispersions from the Army, prepared to entertain healing Counsels;
there were high expectations raised in the good people of the Land (who had
layen under the smart and burden of many years unsettlement, illegal arbitrary
proceedings, and heavy unjust exactions) that now the Old Parliament should
again sit and vote freely, as they did before that great interruption in
December 1648. the miserable and fatal effects whereof have sadly exercised
these three Kingdoms ever since. But the ambition of some, and guilt of others
representing a free Parliament (though the only probable means of our recovery
and settlement, and therefore deservedly in all times the darling of the
English Nation) to be a monster that would devour us and our Liberties; In
clandestine meetings of some of the Members with William Lenthal Esquire (who by
continuing Speaker longer than ever any did in England, has sufficiently
discovered to us the danger and mischiefs of such a president) it was resolved,
(to prevent a free assembling of all the Members) to give secret summons to as
many of an engaged party as might make a House, to meet in the usual place at
Westminster, on Monday the 26. of December. 1659. about seven of the clock at
night (it being for the more close disguise published in the licensed Diurnal
the same morning, that they intended not to sit till Tuesday the 27th.) And
accordingly by Torch and Candle light, (in the same surreptitious manner as was
done on the 7th. of May last, upon the Armies invitation) late in the night
upon the said 26th. of December, the Speaker, with about forty Members more
went from Whitehall, (where they met) the back way thorough Channel - Row to
the House, where they sat a good while, and settled the temporary conduct of
the Embrio Army (for it is yet to form) in Colonel Okey, Colonel Alured, and
some others, ordered moneys for them, and adjourned till next morning: when, to
avoid repetition, you shall have the names of those who appeared to sit, and
may be guessed, but could not be so easily discovered to have sat the first
night.

On Tuesday morning the 27th. of December, they made haste early to the House,
whereof, and of the former nights practice, some faithful Members of the
House, now eleven years secluded by force, having notice, as many of them as
could suddenly get together, judged it their duty (now that the House seemed by
an admirable providence of God, to be delivered from that force and bondage
they had been under so many years) to attend the discharge of their Trust for
their Country, and contribute their best Assistance and Advice for filling of
the House, that by full and free Councils the sad breaches of these Nations
might be made up, and our Foundations settled. In pursuance of this their
Resolution there went to the House the Persons following, viz.

Sir Gilbert Gerard. Sir William Waller. John Crew Esquire. Arthur Annesley Esquire
Sergeant Maynard. Mr. Nathaniel Stephens. Mr. Richard Knightley. Sir. Anthony
Irby. Sir John Evelin of Surry. Sergeant Waller. Colonel Leigh. Mr. John
Nelthrop. Sir John Temple. Mr. William Prynne. Mr. Povey. Mr. Henry Hungerford.
Sir. Robert Pie. Mr. Owfield. Mr. Charles Pym. Colonel Lloyd, and Mr. Peck.
Mr. Francis Bacon, coming alone to demand his Right, was excluded before they
came.
Being come to the Lobby door through a Guard of Soldiers that were upon the
stairs, we knocked for Admittance; but the Doorkeeper having opened the Door,
and seeing us there shut it again, telling us, That he had Orders to keep all
the secluded Members out; We demanded, from whom? he said, from the house; yet
two of us that were nearest the Door overcame him with reason to let us into
the Lobby; With which those that guarded the House door, being (it seems)
alarmed, (for by the whole carriage of the business, it was apparent, they
expected we would as heretofore continue our claim in the peoples behalf) cried
out aloud, Cooper, (which was the name of the outward Doorkeeper,) keep close
the door, the House has ordered that none of them should be suffered to come
in, and will be very angry if you admit any of them; whereupon he kept out all
the rest, closing the door often upon them striving for entrance when others
passed in or out. But those who had already got in, expressed a great resentment
of this continued force upon the House, demanding if there were any there who
could produce any warrant for what was done? and telling the Guards and
Officers, there, that it was strange usage to the Members of the House, to deny
them this privilege of entrance into the Lobby, where the very Footmen and
others were freely admitted; and how there were some ancient Members without,
viz. Sir Gilbert Gerard, Mr. Crew, Mr. Stephens, Sir William Waller, and
others, who could not bear the crowd upon the stairs, and that we liked their
company so much the better than what we found within, that unless all were
admitted, we and the people took sufficient notice of the force, and affront,
and would be gone. Yet asked first for the Officers that commmanded the Guard,
who were pretended to have orders for this force, viz. Coll. Okey, and Coll.
Alured, who being ready at hand were presently brought to us, and after some
expostulations, were so far convinced of our rude entertainment, that they
caused the Door to be open, and let the rest of us into the Lobby. Our next
attempt was, to go into the House; but then the said Colonels desired us to
forbear: We asked, by what warrant they kept us out whom they knew to be
Members, they having sworn obedience to the Parliament? they replied, they had
orders for what they did; we desired a sight of them, and we would retire, and
trouble them no further; Col. Alured said, that their Order was not about them:
but some others, and one Hage by name said they had verbal Orders to keep us
out; at length Col. Alured told us, if we would rest our selves in the inner
Lobby, he would by the Serjant acquaint the House of our coming, and demand of
admitance; and accordingly he went presently to the House door, and knocking,
the Serjant came to the door to him, but at the opening of it, seeing some of
us there, offering to come in, held the door almost shut; Whereupon Col. Alured
told him, that the Members were come, and endeavored to get into the House,
desiring him to acquaint the Speaker, and house so much, (as some of the
Members did also) which he promised, and immediately did, returning to the
door, to tell us, that he had done so, and that the House had thereupon taken
up the debate of that business, and the Turn-key presently took the key out of
the door, to prevent any further attempt of going in. Col. Ingolsby, whilst we
were at the first door came in, who was the only sitting Member that we saw,
(for none came out whilst we were there;) him we desired to acquaint the House
with our attendance, and the force upon us, which he promised to do, and we
believe did.

Having attended above an hour, with more distance and strangeness, than ever
we were used to, when we went on Messages to the Lords house, who usually came
many of them out, and discoursed very familiarly with us; whereas not one of
these self-made Lordlings (whether out of Pride, Guilt, or both, let others
judge) vouchsafed to come near us. We grew weary of waiting so long and
Servilly upon those who in their highest Capacity are but our equals, though we
had born it thus sar, to acquit our selves of neglecting no condescension, that
might make way to the discharge of the Trust we are in sor our Country. And
therefore we made Col. Alured acquainted, that we were resolved to stay no
longer, unless the House declared they desired we should; Whereupon he went
again to the House door, which upon his knock being opened, he acquainted the
Serjant so much, willing him, to give notice thereof to the Speaker, and
Members sitting: which he presently did, and within a short time after, the
Serjant came out to us, and having made a preamble, that he had no direction to
come and tell us any thing, he told us of his own civility, that the House had
possed a vote in our business, which in effect was, the appointing the fifth of
January, to take it into consideration: Which we looked upon as their
confirming, and owning this sorcible exclusion of us, and so departed.

And because we are well assured, that care will be taken with the Mercenary
pens, to disguise and conceal this affair, as much as they can from the
Nations, since in the very Journal Book, all mention of our address and claim
in the peoples, and our own Rights, has been industriously avoided, that we
may discharge our Trust, as far as we can, to the Kingdom, we have given this
account thereof, and shall now insert the Order it self, with the names of the
Members present at the passing thereof.

Tuesday December. 27. 1659.

Resolved by the So they style and make themselves already.
Parliament.

THat on the fifth day of January next, this If but an House, and that a very
thin one, then no Parliament as yet.
House will take into consideration, the Cases of all We were all present.
absent Members, and also how to supply the vacant places in order to the
filling up of the Why the Parliament, in the prologue; and but this, and the
House, twice in the body of this Vote?
House, and that in the mean time it be referred to a Committee to consider of
all proceedings and all Orders and Cases touching absent Members, and make
their report at the same time, viz.

Mr. Scot. Col. Feilder. Mr. Robinson. Major Salway. Sr. James Harrington. Col.
Lister. Mr. Millington. Sr. Tho. Widdrington. Lord chief Baron Wild. Mr. Say.
Sr. Tho. Wroth. Mr. Skinner. Baron Hill. If a Commoner, no Earl.
Earl of Salsbury, Mr. Garland. Col. Harvey. Mr. Fagg, Mr. Solicitor Reynolds.
Sr. John Trevor. Mr. Lenthal. Alderman Atkins. Mr. Pury, Mr. Challoner. Mr.
Carew Ralegh. Mr. Oldsworth Col. Dove. Col. Eyres. Col. Peter Temple. And the
said Committee are to meet this afternoon at two of the clock, in the Speakers
chamber; and so de die in diem, and to adjourn from place to place.
Besides those named of the Committee, there were present in the House, as the
best Information tells us, these following, viz.

Sir Henry Vane. Col. Henry Martin. Lord Mounson. Isaac Pennington. Col
Ingolsby. Mr. John Corbett. Col. Downs. Mr. James Temple. Mr. Cawley. Col.
White. Col. Sydenham. Mr. Robert Cicill. Mr. Strickland. Sergeant Nicholas.
So that it seems the whole number of the House who have made this high breach
of the privilege of Parliament were 42. which agrees with the entry of a
division the same morning in the Journal book, upon which there were 41. and
17. besides the Tellers, making in the whole Note, that of these 42. Members,
2. were Earls, incapable of fitting as Commoners; 2. Prisoners in Execution,
disabled to sit, whiles such: 3. or 4. no Members of the old Parliament, being
elected since the Kings death, by Writs from the Keepers of our Liberties; So
as their Legal number was but 15. at most, and so no House.
42. As for the dilatory order it self, (wherein they make themselves alone our
Judges, being now our Seeluders,) we shall need say little to it, since it
sounds forth its own emptiness, injustice and delusion; yet we cannot but take
notice of the little ingenuity appears in it, to call us absent Members, whom
they knew to be at the Door claiming our Right, and to talk of considering the
cases of all absent Members, when they knew above two hundred of us have no
other case to be considered, but that which has had a lamentable influence
upon the whole Kingdom, that is to say, our forcible exclusion: which by the
course of Parliamentary proceedings, they well knew, ought as the most
fundamental privilege to be taken into consideration before all other matters,
and not to be deferred to another day, much less for ten days, when the
Members excluded by force attended in crowds at the door, for a removal of the
force. But to say no more, we look upon it (as subtly as it seems to be
carried) as a Discovery evident enough to discerning Spirits, of an intention
to deprive double the major part of the House of their liberty to fit,
(notwithstanding their undoubted right of being Members, and Counselors of the
Kingdoms) and to contract our free and full Parliaments, in whose wisdom and
faithfullness we have been safe and happy for many generations, to a scant,
unsafe Oligarchy, though this must not be known till the yoke is sitted for our
necks, and a sufficient force settled on them.

But since we are now excluded by the Act of our Fellow Members, we do expect
(and doubt not but the Nation will do the same) some account of the grounds and
reasons (if there be any, other than bare power and will) why near three parts
of four, yet living, of the Members of the House of Commons, who are of known
faithfullness to their Country, are thus debarred the liberty of discharging
our Trusts for those who have elected us, and suffer much by having none in
public Councils to represent them, or be sensible of their Grievances: And we
hope whatever illegal impositions and burdens shall be laid upon the people,
or pressures they do undergo during our enforced absence, we shall in the sight
of God and man be clear from the blame of, though we make no further attempts
to vindicate ours and the peoples rights in such way of Address, (to so few of
our Fellows) as would set us below the dignity the Peoples free choice has
placed us in.

And though we do not arrogate to our selves Supreme Authority, or the name of
a Parliament: nor with that formality used by our Fellow Members now sitting,
publish our Resolutions or Opinions to the Kingdoms, yet we doubt not the
people of England, and the rest of the Nations in Covenant with us, are now
more quick-sighted than ever (by the experience of many revolutions through
male administration of Government) to put a right esteem upon transactions on
all hands, and are by Solemn Oaths and Obligations so sufficiently and clearly
minded of their duty, and the Right Constitution of Parliaments, that we shall
have more need to persuade them to a wise moderation and discreet zeal, than
have occasion to warn them of the danger they are in, to lose the Liberties of
Freemen and Parliaments for ever, and call upon them to assert those rights,
which, though we will never betray nor yield up to any, yet we hold our selves
obliged to let them know, we alone are not at present able to defend.

We must not conclude, till we mind the people who have entrusted us, That in
July 1647. when both Houses were under but a sudden, weak and transitory force,
there was a judgment past in Parliament in See the Ordinance of Aug 20, 1647.
August following, declaring the said force to be treason, and all Votes,
Orders and Resolutions passed whilst that force continued, to be null and void,
for this only reason, because the Parliament was under a force, and not free.

And to look further back, because their order providentially reminds us, it
may be remembered that the same 5. day of January in the year 1641. upon a small
breach of Privilege, in comparison to this, made by the late King, in demanding
only 5 Members of the House of Commons, after a particular impeachment of high
Treason, without secluding any. It is declared by the House Exact Collection,
p. 36, 37, 38, etc.
That the same is a high breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
inconsistent with the Liberty and Freedom thereof: and therefore this House
does conceive, they cannot with the safety of their own Persons, or the
indemnity of the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, sit there any longer,
without a full Vindication of so high a breach and a sufficient guard. And
thereupon they adjourned into London, to sit in a grand Committee, and made a
high Declaration, touching the said breach of Privilege; whereas above 200. of
us living, stand still secluded, without the least offer of an impeachment.

And which is a sad circumstance in the force, by which we are now secluded,
some of them are actors in it, and now sitting in the Houfe, or invited
thither, who were very instrumental, in the late interruption, in October last,
and in proceedings pursuant thereunto; as if all crimes in Members were Venial,
but a faithful adhearing to Oaths, Trusts, and Privileges of Parliament
unpardonable, Charecteristical only of Persons unfit to have a share in
Government, by the Interest and Judgment of those that forcibly secluded them,
though called by the people to it.

To conclude, we know not what can be added, to make this Kingdom completely
miserable, but that as the Majority of the Commons being forcibly excluded, the
door is barred againg them, by a few; so by the same power, such qualifications
and tests may be imposed upon the body of the people, as may by being submitted
to, deprive us of free Parliaments for ever, and contract the suffrages of the
people, into the disposure of a very few, to the smart and ruin of all; which
God in his mercy avert. For our parts, we shall have this comfort in the evil
day; if God for the crying abominations of the 3. Kingdoms, shall bring it upon
us, that we have with faithfulness given warning of the inundation, when the
Cloud was but of the bigness of a man's hand, and done what we could to prevent
it.

FINIS.

