ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT OF High Treason, EXHIBITED BY THE Commons of ENGLAND,
IN A FREE PARLIAMENT,

AGAINST Lieutenant General Oliver Crumwel Esquire, Commissary-General Henry
Ireton Esquire, Sir Hardresse Waller Knight and Colonel, Colonel Pride, Colonel
Hewson, Colonel Ewers, Co^ne^ Joyce, Hugh Peter's Clerk, William Lenthal
Esquire, Speaker, Sir Henry Mildmay Knight, Sir Peter Wentworth Knight of the
Bath, Henry Martin, Cornelius Holland, and Thomas Scot, Esquires, Members of
the House of Commons.

Imprinted at LONDON, 1648.

Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, exhibited by the Commons of England,
in a free Parliament, against Lieutenant General Oliver Crumwel Esquire,
Commissary-General Ireton Esquire Sir Hardresse Waller Knight and Colonel, Col.
Hewson, etc.
WE the Commons and Freemen of England, taking into our sad and most serious
considerations the bleeding and desperate condition of England and Ireland at
this present, and the traitorous practices and unwearied endeavors of the
forementioned persons and their confederates, both in the House of Commons and
in the Army, to obstruct and delay the settlement of a firm and blessed Peace,
and perpetuate our War and Desolation, and bring us and these two Kingdoms to
speedy and certain Ruin, to accomplish their own treasonable and destructive
designs: We now at last necessitated, after an over-tired patience, and
fruitless silence, out of a Christian hopeful expectation of their Repentance
and amendment, to exhibit to both Houses of Parliament, and publish to the
whole Kingdom, this ensuing Impeachment of High Treason against them, and every
of them; of which their own consciences and the world must acknowledge them and
every of them to be deeply guilty: and we are, and always shall be ready to
prove and make good against them, by legal and pregnant testimonies, in case
they shall be so impudent as to deny, and plead Not guilty thereunto.

1 That the said Oliver Crumwel, Henry Ireton, Sir Hardresse Waller, Colonel
Pride, Colonel Hewson, Colonel Ewers, Cornet Joyce, Hugh Peter, William
Lenthal, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir Henry Martin, Cornelius
Holland, and Thomas Scot, and every of them, not having the fear of God before
their eyes, nor regarding the solemn Oaths and Covenants lately taken by them
and every of them, for defense and preservation of the Kings Majesty's Person,
His Crown and Dignity, the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, and
Fundamental Government, Laws and Liberties of this Realm; but seduced by the
instigation of the devil, and their own corrupt and ambitious lusts, Have,
since the first day of January, 1646, at several times and places, seditiously,
wickedly and traitorously conspired together, to alter and subvert the ancient
Fundamental Government, Laws and Liberties of the Realm of England, with the
Rights, Privileges, Freedom and Constitution of the Parliament of England, to
^pose and destroy the King, and disinherite the Prince of Wales and the Kings
posterity of the inheritance of the Crown of this Kingdom, and to dissolve
this present Parliament, and to betray Ireland to the Popish Rebels, in case
they cannot raise a party there to join with them in these their traitorous
designs.

2 That for the more effectu^l and irresistible carrying on of these their
heinous and execrable Treasons, they and every of them have since the time
aforesaid, traitorously endeavored to get into their hands and power, and into
the hands of their Confederates, all the P^, Garrisons, Magazines, great Offices
and Forces of this Kingdom, both by Sea and Land, and to engage the General,
Thomas Lord Fairfax, and the Army under him, the Members of both Houses of
Parliament, and the Sectaries, and others thorowout all the Cities and Counties
of this Realm, to aid and assist them in these their Treasons and traitorous
designs, which they have in a great measure effected, and almost fully
accomplished; and have likewise endeavored to raise a party both in Scotland
and Ireland to join with them herein.

3 That all and every of the Impeached persons forementioned, in pursuit and
accomplishment of their Treasons, have, since the time aforesaid, seditiously
and traitorously maintained the Army against both Houses of Parliament, when
voted to disband; kept them together in a Body, dissuaded and hindered such of
them who were designed and going for the relief of Ireland against the Rebels,
and other Forces raised by the Houses for that purpose, from going thither to
relieve the Protestants there: Since which time, they have, and every of them,
and their agents and confederates, traitorously and forcibly seized upon,
removed, imprisoned, and secured under their custody and power, the Kings
Majesty's Person, both at Holdenby and in the Isle of Wight, and at Hurst
Castle, and at other places, without the privitie or consent, and against the
Authority, Votes, Instructions and Faith of both Houses of Parliament, with a
traitorous intent to depose, murder and destroy His Person, to disinherite His
Heirs and Posterity of the Crown of England, and alter or determine the
Monarchical-Government of this Realm: which traitorous intentions they have
declared in diverse late Remonstrances and other printed Papers to all the
world, and by their speeches and acts; and have likewise traitorously engaged
the General, Council, and Officers of the Army, and some Members of the
Commons House to join with them in this their detestable Treasons.

4 That all and every of the said Conspirators and Traitors, perceiving
themselves too weak and unable to engage the greater part of both Houses of
Parliament to join with them in carrying on the Treasons forementioned, did
therefore, in the months of May, June, July, August and September, in the year
of our Lord 1647, invite the General, Officers and Soldiers of the Army
against the Houses of Parliament, and engage them to march up in a mutinous
manner against them, and by menaces and force compel them to retract sundry
Votes and Ordinances for the Public safety, to suspend, imprison and eject
diverse of their eminent Members, upon false and frivolous Charges contrived and
exhibited against them, in the Officers and Armies names; persuaded diverse
Members, upon a pretext of fear, after the fear was over, to desert the House,
flee with them to the Army, and there to enter into a shameful Engagement to
live and die with the Army in this Cause. After which, they and every of them
marched up with the Army in a hostile and forcible manner against the Members
of both Houses of Parliament which continued sitting according to their duties:
and having forcibly driven away, imprisoned, and illegally suspended and
ejected the greatest number of them and their confederates in the House, being
an inconsiderate number, in the absence of most of the Members, repealed and
nulled all Votes, Ordinances, and proceedings of both Houses, passed in them
since the 26 of July, 1647, to the 6 of August following; enlarged the Generals
Power and Commission, altered and weakened the Militia of London, and demolished
the Works and Forts about it, impeached and imprisoned diverse of the Officers
and Aldermen of the City, under the pretext of levying a new War, (of which
they and their confederates were really guilty) to deter them from aiding or
assisting the honest and greatest part of both Houses, opposite to their
Treasons and pernicious designs: and after that, passed some Votes of no more
Addresses to the King, and engaged the General and Officers of the Army to
concur with their faction in over-awing the House of Commons therein, and by
placing a Garrison of Foot and a party of Horse of the Army in White Hall and
the Muse, forced the House of Peers to concur in those Votes, whereby they
generally discontented the whole Kingdom, and traitorously raised a new and
dangerous War therein, to the great danger and loss both of England and Ireland.

5. That after the guards and forces of this Army by reason of these new
commotions raised by the means aforesaid, were removed from the Houses, and
they and their members restored to their honor, freedom and Privilege, the
said Houses for a speedy settlement of the Kingdoms peace, and ending these
unnatural wars voting a personal Treaty with the King in the Isle of Wight;
and sending Commissioners to that purpose thither, who entered into an actual
Treaty with the King upon the Propositions of both Houses, extraordinarily
advantageous both to the Houses and whole Kingdom of England and Ireland, to
most of which his Majesty gave his full and free consent. The said confederates
every of them who wickedly opposed, but were unable to prevent the Treaty in
the House where they were overvoted, in pursuance of their former Treasons and
designs, persuaded and engaged the General, and Council of War on the 20 of
November last, to present a treasonable and seditious Remonstrance, (of the
said Conspirators own contriving) to be presented to the House of Commons by
the said Col. Ewers in the name of the General and his General Council of
Officers, of purpose to enforce the Houses to break of the Treaty with the
King, contrary to their Faith and engagement to the King and Kingdom, before it
was expired, and to bring the King to speedy justice and execution, to
disinherit him and his posterity of the Crown, to alter the ancient frame and
Government of the Kingdom, to dissolve this present Parliament and in stead
thereof, and of all future Parliaments to set up a new Representative or
General Council, without either King, Lords, Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses,
only elected to carry on their Treasonable designs to perfection, which being
laid aside by the votes of the said House, till the Treaty was concluded.
Thereupon the said impeached Conspirators, and every of them caused another
Treasonable Declaration to be published in the name of the General, and
Council of the Army; charging the faithful Members; who dissenting from them
in the House and would not break off the Treaty, with breach of Trust, and
threatening forcibly to exclude and bring them to trial by a mere Arbitrary and
usurped Tiranicall power, and inviting all their Confederates in the House to
desert it and join with them and the Council of war and Army, who would both
own, acknowledge and adhere to them as the true House of Commons, though
inconsiderable for their Number; and thereupon contrary to the House of Commons
express order, traitorously procured the General, Officers and Army to march
up to Westminster to overawe the House of Commons, in their debates and votes
touching the satisfactorinesse of the Kings Answers there in debate, which
being carried against them, by plurality of voices in the said House upon the
Question on Tuesday the 5 of December instant, thereupon the said Confederates,
and every of them on Wednesday and Thursday following being the 6 and 7. of
this instant December caused strong guards of Horse and Foot to beset both
Houses of Parliament to apprehend and keep out the dissenting members who voted
against them, And the said Sir Hardresse Waller, Coll. Pride, Coll. Hewson, and
Cornet Joyce, did violently seize upon, imprison and keep from the said House,
the Lord Wainmar, Sir Robert Harlow, and Sir Robert Pie and about forty other
eminent Members, and pulled out Mr. Edward Stephens, and Coll. Birch, from the
very doors of the said House, as they were going to discharge their duties and
detained them prisoners in the Queens court, refusing to deliver them, though
the House sent their Sergeant twice to release them; after which they were in
scorn and contempt to the House, by the said conspirators means carried
prisoners into a victualing house called Hell, and there shut up in a Room all
night, without beds, or accommodation, on the 7 of December carried prisoners
to Whitehall with strong guards, upon them, and from thence to the Kings head
and swan in the strand, and there detained, and above an hundred other members
since forcibly excluded and driven away from the House, and they and their
consederrtes have since the imprisonment, and seclusion of the said members to
carry on their said Treasons and designs, with some color of authority
repealed sundry votes of the said House when full and free, concerning the
Kings removal and the Treaty, and Treasonably and forceably usurped the name
and power of the House of Commons to them and their faction, to put an end to
this present Parliament and to the Monarch, Parliaments, Government, laws and
privileges of this Kingdom and to depose, destroy, and disinherit the King and
his posterity.

All which respective oharges of high Treason we the Commons of England are and
shall always be ready to make good and prove in a Legal way in this present
Parliament, as soon as it shall be restored to a condition of Freedom, and from
the force that is now upon it, and humbly pray that the said Traitors and every
of them may be forthwith apprehended, secured and brought to Trial, before they
ruin King, Parliament, and the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and enslave
them to their Tyranny.

And because we confidently believe that the General, and most of the other
Officers and the common Soldiers of the Army, have been overreacht and seduced
by these Arch-traitors, under fair pretenses of public Justice, and Settlement
of the Kingdom, to assist and join with them in pursuance of their treasonable
designs, and have acted therein out of honest intentions; we shall become
humble suitors to both Houses in their behalf, upon the acknowledgement of
their error, deserting of these confederate Traitors, and yielding them up to
Public Justice, and returning to their former obedience to the Parliaments
commands, and withdrawing from the City and Houses, that they will pass by all
their former oversights (though they have eclipsed all their former glorious
successes) and take a speedy and effectual course for the satisfaction of all
their arrears: And for this end, we shall in all brotherly love and Christian
affection, speak our very hearts and souls unto them, in the words of Moses to
those Israelites which joined with Corah, Dathan and Abiram in their
Insurrection against Moses and Aaron, much like to those, in adhering to these
Traitors against both Houses and the Kingdom, Numb. 15. 26, 27. Depart, we pray
you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest you
be consumed in all their sins. So they got them up from the tabernacles of
Corah, Dathan and Abiram on every side. Which if they shall refuse, upon this
our brotherly request, we shall then with grief of heart be enforced to declare
their Commissions forfeited, and their persons unfit to be employed and
entrusted for the future; and can neither in conscience, duty, honor, or point
of safety, contribute any thing toward their future subsistence, but look upon
them in the selfsame manner as we do upon these impeached Traitors.

All which we humbly submit to the grave and serious consideration of the
Houses of Parliament, and the whole Kingdom.

FINIS.

