IRENARCHES REDIVIVVS. OR, A brief Collection of sundry useful and necessary
Statutes and Petitions in PARLIAMENT (not hitherto published in Print, but
extant only in the Parliament Rolls) concerning the Necessity, Vtility,
Institution, Qualification, Jurisdiction, Office, Commission, Oath, and against
the causlesse, clandestine dis-commissioning of JUSTICES OF PEACE; fit to be
publicly known and observed in these reforming times. With some short
Deductions from them; and a touch of the Antiguity and Institution of Assertors
and Justices of Peace in other foreign Kingdoms.

TOGETHER With a full Refutation of Sir Edward Cooks assertion, and the
commonly received Erroneous opinion, of a Difference between Ordinances and
Acts of PARLIAMENT in former AGES; here clearly manifested to be then but one
and the same in all respects, and in point of the threefold Assent.

Published for the common good, By William Prynne of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire.

EXODUS 18. 21, 22. Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as
fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them, to be
Rulers of thousands, and Rulers of hundreds, and Rulers of fifties, and Rulers
of tens; and let them judge them at all times.

JOSH. 24. 25. So Joshua made a Covenant with the people that day, and set them
a STATUTE and an ORDINANCE in Sechem.

LONDON: Printed for Michael Spark at the Bible in Green-Arbor, 1648.

To the READER.
COurteous Reader, I here present thee with a brief collection of some
concealed useful Records, Petitions and Acts of Parliament (not hitherto
Printed, and almost quite buried in oblivion) concerning Justices of the Peace,
not altogether unworthy thy knowledge and consideration; together with some
deductions from them, and a concise Refutation of Sir 4. Instit. p. 25.
Edward Cooks and others received mistaken difference between Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament in preceding Ages; who neither knew nor made any such
distinction between them, as is now believed. My sole aim and intention in
reviving and publishing them, is, thy information, and the common good and
settlement, which ignorant or wilful mistaks have much interrupted. If thou
receive any New light or benefit by them, give God the glory, and let the
Author only enjoy thy favorable acceptance of this weak public service for
thine and his Countries welfare, to which he has devoted most of his time and
studies. And so much the rather, to excite and encourage others (especially
Inn, of Court Gentlemen, whose industry and study of the Records, Laws and
Statuts of the Realm, is much declined of late years) to apply their minds and
studies principally, not to mere private gainful lucubrations, but to subjects
of most public concernment, and best advantage to the Republike; to prevent
the introducing of Tyranny, Anarchy, Arbitrary Government, or any destructive
Encroachments upon the peoples Liberties and our Laws, in this present or
sueceeding ages, by any Powers whatsoever; which will inevitably creep in upon
us by degrees, if the study of the Records and Laws of the Realm be either
discontinued, neglected, obstructed; or the ordinary course of Law and Justice
altered or interrupted, by any new arbitrary Ordinances or proceedings before
new-erected Committees, which our Ancestors in former Parliaments never heard
of, nor transmitted to posterity.

Farewell.
Irenarches Redivivus. OR, A brief COLLECTION, etc.
THE institution of Justices of Peace in every County and City of the Realm,
being (as Sir 4. Instit c. 31. p. 170.
Edward Cook asserts) such a form of subordinate Government, as no part of the
Christian world has the like, if it be duly executed; I conceived it neither
unseasonable, nor unprofitable, to publish to the world some Records, Acts and
Petitions of Parliament, concerning the Nomination, Constitution, Jurisdiction,
Commission, Office, Oath, and against the undue and arbitrary dislocation of
Justices of the Peace, not hitherto published in print by any who have written
of this subject, with some brief observations thereupon, necessary for our
present times, which pretend so much to an exact reformation of all corruptions
both in Church and State.

What Laws have been made in this our Realm, for the punishment of Violaters
and infrin^ers of the Peace, before the Conquest, you may read in the Lambord
Archaion, and Hire. ^ c. 2. 3. Spelman^i Conc^^ p. 182. 183. ^68. ^69 370 373.
374
Laws of King Ine, cap. 6. 46. in the Laws of King Alured, cap. ^5, 21, 34,
36. and others; What care foreign Princes and States have anciently taken to
preserve the peace of their Kingdoms, to punish Malefactors and Disturbers of
it, and by what penalties and Officers, those who please may inform themselves
by perusing Capitularia Caroli and Ludovici, Imp. lib. 1. cap. 61. lib. 2. cap.
11, 12, etc. lib. 3. cap. 1, 4, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 44, to 51. Addit. Lud. 4
Tit. 26. and 3 Tit. 15, 63. See Fredericus Lindebrogus, Codex legu^ Antiquarum.
Leges Wisigothorum, lib. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9. Leges Burgundiorum, Lex 9, 10, 11, 12,
25, 26, 27, 33, 37, 41, 70, 71, 80, 89. Legis Burgundiorum Additamentum primum,
Tit. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. Leges Salicae, Tit. 2. to 69. Leges Alemannorum, c. 40. to
99. Leges Bajuvariorum, Tit. 2, 7, to 19. Leges Ripuariorum, c. 1, to 55. Leges
Saxonum, Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 15. Leges Angliorum, Tit. 1, to 11, 14,
16. Leges Frisionum, Tit. 1, 4, 5. 12, 13, 19, 20, 21. and Adtidio Sapientum,
cap. 1, to 9. Leges Longobardorum, lib. 1. lib. 2. cap. 46, 58. Constitutionum
Sicularum, lib. 1. cap. 1, 9, to 30, 37, 41. lib. 2. cap. 1, to 8. lib. 3. cap.
37, to 80. which for brevity sake, I can but mention: Only I cannot pretermit,
how I find the very Title and Office of an Assertor, or Justice of the Peace,
thus expressed and described among the ancient Laws of the Wisigoths, (first
composed by King Theodoricus about the year of our Lord 437.) Fredericus
Lindobrogus Codex Legum Antiquarum, p. 19 35.
lib. 2. cap. 16. Omnium negotiorum causas ita judices habeant deputatas, ut
and criminalia, and cetera negotia terminandi sit illis concessa licentia.
PACIS AUTEM ASSERTORES, non alias derimant causas, nist quas illis Regia
deputaverit ordinandi potestas. PACIS AUTEM ASSERTORES SUNT, qui sola faciendae
pacis intention Regali sola destinantur auctoritate. And cap. 26. Quoniam
negotiorum remedia multimodae diversitatis compendio gaudent, ideo Dux, Comes,
Vicarius, PACIS ASSERTOR, Tyuphadus, Millenarius, Centenarius, Decanus,
Defensor, Numerarius, and qui ex Regia jussione, aut etiam ex consensu partium
judices in negotiis eliguntur, sive cujuscunque ordinis omnino persona, cui
debite judicare conceditur, ita omnes in quantum judicandi potestatem
acceperint JUDICIS NOMINE CENSEANTUR EX LEGE; ut sicut judicii acceperint jura,
ita and Legum sustineant five commoda, sive dampna. By which it is apparent,
that Justices and Assertors of the Peace were in ancient times a special and
peculiar Office among the Wisigoths, authorized by Commissions from their
Kings, to hear and determine matters of the Peace, according to the Laws; and
that they were comprised under, and honored with the Title of Judges, by the
Laws of that Nation. To which I shall further add, that among the Fred.
brogus. ^ Legum. pa: 704 etc.
Siculan or Neopolitan Laws, compiled by the Emperor Frederick the second,
about the year of our Lord 1221. Constitutionum Sicularum. l. 1; Tit. 8. De
cultu Pacis, and Generali Pace in regno servanda. I meet with Justiciarii
Regionum, Justices of Peace appointed in every County, who were to preserve the
peace of the Kingdom, in all and singular parts of that Realm, to whom all
complaints of breach of the peace, violence and crimes were to be made. And
Tit. 41. De Officio JUSTITIARIATUS, I read both the Title, Office and
Commission of these Justices thus set forth, almost in parallel terms with our
Commissions of the Peace at this very day.

Justiciarii nomen and normam jus and justjtiam contulerunt, quibus quanto
magis in nomine sunt affines, tanto eorum very and solliciti debent esse
cultores. Hinc est quod ipsorum judiciis causae capitales maxim reservantur,
and quod ipsorum officium debet esse gratuitum, nec ipsum licet alicui pretii
venalitate mercari: Quae igitur ad ipsorum cognitionem pertinent,
praedecessorum nostrorum assisiis comprehensa, apertius diffinimus: Latrocinia
scilicet magna, furta, fracturae domorum, insultus excogitati, incendia,
incisiones arborum fructiferarum and vitium, vis mulieribus illata, duella,
crimina Majestatis, arma moluta, defensae impositae and contemptae aliis vel
pro aliis ab eisdem, and generaliter omnia, de quibus convicti poenam sui
corporis, vel mutilationem membrorum sustinere deberent. Magnum autem furtum
accepimus, ultra viginti angustales, etiamst civiliter de furto ipso agatur; ut
etiam tamen de quantitate minori coram justiciario ad corporalem poenam
criminaliter possit accusatio intentari, etc. Tit. 43. This Oath is prescribed
both to the chief Justice and Justices of Provinces of inferior rank, when
they took their Places. Vt Deum and Justitiam babendo prae oculis, Vnicuique
justitiam faciant fine fraud; and quam citius poterini, litigantes expedire
curabunt. And Tit. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52. we have a description, what persons
those Justices ougot to be, how and when they were to ride their Circuits, keep
their Sessions, and make general Inquiries throughout their several Provinces
and parts of Provinces, of Malefactors, persons of ill life and conversation,
and how to proceed and punish them after presentiments and conviction: much like
to the proceedings of See Scapnlae Lexicon, page 1770.
our Justices of the Peace, and Oyer and Terminer here in England. Besides, I
read in the ancient Author Aeschines, of an (...), or Pacis Custos, a Keeper or
Justice of Peace, which it seems was an Office even among the ancient Grecians.
All which none of our Writers of Justices of the Peace having formerly
observed, I thought not impertinent briefly to touch for their greater honor
and encouragement.

When Justices of Peace were first instituted in England, is not much
material: 4. Instit. c. 31 p. 176.
Sir Edward Cook informs us, that in Ester Term, 6 E. 1. Coram Rege; was the
first institution of Justices for the conservatio^ of the Peace: others deem
them more ancient, and many Daltons Justice of Peace. Spelmanni Glossarium, p.
407. Minshews Dictionary.
think they were first of all appointed by the Statute of 1 E. 3. Parl. 2. cap.
16. or 18 E. 3. c. 2. I shall not debate the point, but proceed to what I
intend.

In the Parliament of 6 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 5, 6. Sir Jeoffry le Scroop, in the
presence of the King, Prelates, Lords and Commons, by the Kings command,
declared, That this Parliament was called as well to redress the breach of the
Law and Peace, as for the King's going to the Holy Land; for which end he
desired their council and advice: Whereupon the Bishops and Proctors of the
Clergy went by themselves, and the Earls, Barons and other great men by
themselves, to consult therein: After which the Bishops and Proctors of the
Clergy returned this Answer, That it did not properly appertain to them to give
any council in matters of Peace, and to prescribe punishments for Malefactors.
The Earls, Barons and other great men returning afterward; answered all to the
King by the mouth of Beamont, That they think the best course to preserve the
Peace is, That certain Justices should be constituted in every County, and have
power to appoint in every Parish certain men with the Constables, for the
apprehending of Malefactors, and for the levying of bue and cry after them.
Which things being thus ordained by the Earls, Barons and other great men, and
read before the King, Prelates, Knights of Counties, and the Commons, were
pleasing to them all: And it was likewise assented and agreed by the King,
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men, and likewise by the Knights of
Shires, and Commons in Parliamenc, that a sentence of Excommunication, then
read and approved, should be published in every Church throughout the Realm, To
excommunicate all breakers of the Peace, and all such as should defend and
receive them, or be privy thereto.

In the Parliament of 8 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 5. (not printed) it was enacted,
that Justices of the one Bench and of the other, Justices of Assize, and
Justices of the PEACE in every County, shall enquire and determine of false
Jurors and Maintainers: And the King by his Letters Patents has charged all
Archbishops and Bishops weekly to pronounce in every Parish an excommunication
against all such Offenders.

In the Parliament Rolls of 17 E. 3. there are these notable Acts of
Parliament, and Petitions concerning Justices of the Peace, their necessity,
authority, commission, etc. never yet published in print to my knowledge.

Number. 10. Item, it is to be remembered, that on Friday the second day of May,
our Lord the King, the said Prelates, Earls and Barons, and other great men,
and the Commons came into the white Chamber, and there the Chancellor proposed
on the behalf of our Lord the King, how the King upon his return out of
Britain, had understood, That diverse oppressions and grievances had been done
to his people of England, as well in his absence as in his presence, and that
the Law of the Land was not at all so well maintained as it ought, because of
diverse Impeachments and maintenances made in diverse manners. And how the King
desired Soveraignly, That the Law should have its equal course between the
poor and the rich, and that it should be held and maintained in its right
course without impeachment: wherefore our Lord the King would have their
council and advice, How such impeachment and vicious maintenance might be best
removed, and the Law best kept and held in its right course, in such sort, as
it might be equal to the poor and to the rich. And upon this, were the said
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men charged by themselves, and the
Therefore the Houses were then several, and their consultations too.
Commons by themselves, to treat and advise, and to report their advice on
Saturday next ensuing: At which day the Knights of the Counties, and the other
Commons delivered their advice in form as follows.

Number. 11. Most excellent and most honorable Lord, the people of your
Commonalty recommend themselves to you obediently, and thank you here openly,
as much as their meannesse will suffer, for that so tenderly you undertake to
maintain the peace and the quiet of your people: and it seems to them, that it
will be a good and sure thing, for the chastisement of evil, and salvation and
aid of good people, that certain Justices should be chosen now at this
Parliament, by assent of the great men, and of the Commons; and that the said
Justices shall be sworn now at this Parliament before the Peers of the Land,
and the Commons, and in their Sessions (per eugyn ne null home ne soit susduit)
that no man may be seduced (or overreached) by craft (mes mesnes per deiu and
bone foy) but treated by due and good faith, and the good Laws in these times
used to hear and determine felonies, trespasses, conspiracies, consederacies
and evil maintenance: and that Commissions may be made to the Justices so
chosen, to go to the Counties where it shall be Ou miestra serra.
best (or needfullest) and that the parts of their Commissions aforesaid shall
be shown to the Peers of the Land (who have the Laws under you to maintain;)
and to the Commons, before that the Commissions be sealed, or in any point
used: and if they shall advise, that this thing shall be pleasing to God, and
to the honor and the salvation of your people, in maintenance of other Laws
made at other Parliaments before these times, your poor Commons, if you please
to grant it, do thereto agree. And it seems to the said Commons that all other
things may be sufficiently ordered or determined in the Kings Bench, Common
Pleas, and before Justices of Assise, so as delays not covenable may be
(aggregez) redressed (or removed) now in this Parliament by Statute. But
because that it was advised to our Lord the King, and to the Prelates and great
men, who were near him in his Parliament, that it was convenient more expressly
to make mention of the Articles of which the Justices who shall be assigned in
the Counties, ought, for the cause aforesaid, to inquire, they redelivered to
the Knights and Commons aforesaid, some Articles, which were ordained by the
Prelates and great men themselves, for them to advise of, and give their
assent; the which Articles ensue in form underwritten.

It seems good that Justices shall be assigned to inquire, hear, and
determine the points underwritten for the profit of the Realm, and for keeping
the Peace, and maintaining the Law.

First, to inquire of all manners of Felonies, and Trespasses done against the
Peace.

Item, of all manner of Conspiracies, Confederacies, Champerties, Ambodexters,
of maintainers of Malefactors, and of false quarrels, and of all other
falsities done in deceit of the Law.

Item, to inquire of all chatles of felons and fugitives belonging to the King,
after tbe year, etc. and to whom they are delivered, and for what value, and
whether they be worth more or less; and to cause the said Chattles to be
levied to the use of the King.

Item, of Wools, Woolfels and Hides, and other Merchandises customable, not
customed nor cocketted, nor well weighed or conveyed out of the realm of
England.

Item, of false money brought within the Realm.

Item, of Wools bought within the County of Notingham, and of those who have
(mesnez) carried away their proper Wools in another name, contrary to the
Defense and Ordinances in the Parliament style of those times, were nothing
else but Statutes and Acts of parliament. See 11 E 3. c. 1. 14 E. 3 c. 21. 18
E. 3. c. 3 Stat. 2.
Ordinances made concerning it.

Item, of Arms, Victuals, and other Goods and Merchandises carried to the
enemies of Scotland and others.

Item, of those who were Collectors of the Ninths, and collected more, which
they have not answered to the King.

Item, of those who were assigned of Commission for the businesses of the King
and the Realm, and take gifts, and let the said business^s perish, in deceit of
the King, and of the people.

Item, of Assessors and Collectors of Wools, and their Vnder-Collectors, Clerks
and Deputies, who have not at all answered to the King that which they have
received: and also of those who collect the good Wools, and sell them, and buy
others (feables) that are worse for to deliver to the King; and also of those
which take money in lieu of Wools, and buy feable (or course) Wools of less
price, for to deliver to the King, and the remnant of the said moneys retain to
their proper use.

Item, of Customers, Searchers, Controllers, and of all other Ministers of the
King, how they have carried themselves in their Offices.

Item, of those who take Fees, Rents or Pensions of Malefactors for to maintain
and avow them in their misdoings, there where they hold not Lands nor Goods of
them, for which they ought to pay such rents, as well in Wales as in England.

Item, of those who take people, and carry away and detain them till they have
made a ransom at their will.

Item, of those who by force or menace disturb the Justices of our Lord the
King, and all other Ministers going through the Country in their Sessions, so
that they cannot do right, nor the people follow their right.

The which Articles being seen and examined by the said Commons, they assented,
That good and loyal Justices should be assigned to hear and determine those
things contained in these Articles, for the profit of our Lord the King and his
people.

Item, to enquire of Lands and Tenements amortized by religious people or
others, against the form of the Statute made, without license, if they have
purchased nothing more then that which is contained In their license, or of
greater value, and also of the Tenements which are held of the King in chief.

Ibidem n. 41. Item, pray the said Commons, That it would please our Lord the
King to ordain convenient wages for the Justices assigned in diverse Counties,
so as tbey may not endeavor to take any thing of those who have business
before them.

Answ. It pleases the King that it shall be so, and the Chancellor and
Treasurer shall ordain a convenient sum for them, by which they may do it.

Ibid. n. 42. Item, pray the said Commons, that no Sheriff nor Steward of great
men, who have franchizes, shall be associated to the Justices which shall be
now chosen to hear and determine fellonies and trespasses, and other points
ordained and assented, nor Justices of Goaldelivery; but lawful people of the
County, and of good fame shall be associated to them: and that the same
Justices which shall be chosen, shall be sworn, That they will use their
Commission without hardship or cruelty for to please the King, but also as it
shall be most pleasing to God, and agreeable to good Law and good faith, and
that their Sessions shall be ordained in seisons out of August, and hay-making,
in ease of the Commons.

Ans. It pleases the King, that no Sheriff shall be henceforth a Justice, but
that such shall be who know and will do the Law, and that people of the Country
of good fame shall be associated to them, and not others.

20 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 20. Item, the Commons Petition, That in every County
there be ordained Keepers of the Peace of the most sufficient of the Counties,
and that they may have power to enquire and determine Felonies and Trespasses
committed contrary to the Peace, since the last passage of our Lord the King
beyond the Sea.

Answ. As to the keeping of the Peace; let there be good people and covenable
assigned for to keep the Peace: and as to the Oyer and Terminer, the King will
assign wise and sufficient men, who have knowledge of the Law, according to the
agreement in the last Parliament.

In the Parliament of 21 E. 3. n. 70. I meet with this Petition of the Commons.

Most honorable and most redoubted Sovereign: Whereas in this Parliament, your
Commons were charged to advise you, how the Peace of this Land might be best
kept. To which it was answered; That in every County there should be chosen by
men of the County, Justices, of which, two should be of the greatest men, and
two Knights, and two men of Law, of the most valiant, and most loyal of the
said County; and there where there shall be need, more shall be assigned, or
fewer, if there be cause; and that they shall have full power by Commission out
of the Chancery, to hear and determine Felonies, Trespasses and other points
touching the keeping of the Peace of every County, who are abiding in the said
Counties, who may better know, and to the greater ease and less grievance of
the County, punish the felons and trespassers then other Justices who are
strangers, and that known Trebasto^s should not run, as at another time was
assented in Parliament, for that they were all to the destruction and undoing
of the people, and to very little or no amendment of the Law, or of the Peace,
or punishment of Felons and Trespassers.

In the Parliament of 28 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 17. there is this Petition of the
Commons, turned into an Act of Parliament by the King's answer thereunto, with
the Lords consent.

To our Lord the King, pray the Commons, That the Guardians of the Peace may be
of the most loyal and sufficient men of the Counties, residing in the said
Counties, and not in foreign places, and of the Justices of Laborers in like
manner; and that no Justice may be assigned by Commission, if he be not
sufficient of estate and condition to answer to the King and to the people: and
that the names of the Justices of Laborers may be viewed and examined by the
Chancellor and Treasurer, and Justices of the one Bench and the other, and in
presence of the Knights of the Shires; and those who are covenable shall remain
for such number as is necessary according to the greatness of the County; and
in the place of those who shall be put out, let others be named by the said
Knights, WHICH SHALL NOT AT ALL BE PUT OUT WITHOUT SPECIAL COMMAND OF THE
KING, OR REASONABLE CAUSE TESTIFIED BY Nota.
THEIR COMPANIONS. And that the said Justices shall be charged to sit (or keep
their Sessions) at least four days in the year, or more if there be occasion;
and that they shall make good execution of the Statutes already made, and that
the Guardians of the Peace, and the Justices of Laborers may be both one there
where it may well be done.

Answ. As for the former Petition, it is reasonable, and therefore our Lord the
King wills that it be granted.

36 E. 3. n. 29. The Commons Petition, That the Justices of Peace may have
reasonable wages ordained them, as the Kings Chancellor and Treasurer shall
think fit: and that the said Justices may have power to enquire as well of
Victuallers, Regraters, Forestallers within Cities, Towns and Buroughs, and
elsewhere, as of Servants, Laborers and Artificers.

Answ. The King will command to the Chancellor and Treasurer his will hereupon.

37 E. 3. in the Parliament Roll, n. 19. there is this Petition and Answer:
Item, May it please our Lord the King to grant to the Knights of Shires, Cities
and Buroughs which are come to this Parliament, power to choose people to be
Justices of Laborers and Artificers, and keepers of the Peace, and that the
same persons so chosen MAY NOT BE REMOVED BY ANY SUGGESTION, TO PUT Nota.
OTHERS IN THEIR PLACES who are less sufficient.

Answ. Let them cause convenient persons to be named now in this Parliament,
and the King will assign those whom he shall please.

50 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 67. Item, The Commons pray, That whereas the Justices
of Peace are often assigned by brocage of Maintainers of the Country, who
commit great outrage by their maintenance to poor people of the Country, and
are common maintainers of these misdoings: The Commons supplicate, That the
said Justices may be named in every County by the Lords and Knights of the
Counties in Parliament, and that they shall be sworn before the Counsel of the
King in the same manner as other people are; AND THAT THEY SHALL NOT BE REMOVED
Nota.
WITHOUT ASSENT OF PARLIAMENT, which thing will turn to the great profit of the
King: and that convenient wages may be assigned to the said Justices to keep
their Sessions, for without wages they have no care to keep their Sessions,
which is a great loss to the King.

Answ. They shall be named by the King and his continual Counsel; and as to
wages, the King will advise.

In the Parliament of 2 R. 2. held at Westminster, pars prima, n. 41. I find
this Act not printed: Item, the Commons show, That whereas diverse Sheriffs of
Counties are diverse times assigned by Commission of our Lord the King, to be
Justices of Peace in the same Counties where they are Sheriffs, do oftentimes
hold their Sessions of the Peace for to indite many people of felonies, and of
other trespasses, for this purpose, to take of the indicted outrageous
mainprizes and fines, to the great destruction (or impoverishing) and
oppression of the people: that thereupon it would please our most gracious King
and his Counsel so to ordain, that no man during the time that he shall be
Sheriff, shall at all be ordained a Justice of Peace in the same County whereof
he is Sheriff, in amendment of the mischiefs aforesaid.

Answ. Le Roy le voet: The King wills it. So that there was a Statute in
point long before 1 Mariae, Sess. 2. c. 8. which enacts the like.

In the same Parliament, n. 48. Item, the Commons pray, That in every County of
England there may be ordained fix or eight Justices of the Peace, whereof two
shall be skillful of the Law; and that they shall be firmly charged by our Lord
the King and his Counsel, to keep their Sessions four times a year at least,
according to the Statutes: and that all the Servants, Victuallers, Laborers
and Artificers that shall be attainted before them of Excess, and which shall
make a fine for their trespass, that their fine shall not be less then their
Excess, but more if there be cauie, by the discretion of the Justices; so to
punish them, and by all other ways as the Statutes which have been made
concerning them purport; And that every one of the Justices for the time that
they shall be present at any one of the Sessions, shall have wages of our Lord
the King, for every day a certain sum for their Sessions, to be paid by the
hands of the Sheriffs where they shall be Justices, out of the issues of their
Baily-wicks; and that the Justices may have freely Writs for their Fees under
seal out of the Chancery to the Sheriffs, for to pay their Wages aforesaid: And
the Sheriffs may also have Writs out of the Chancery to the Barons of the
Exchequer, to allow them such payments upon their account: That none shall be
associated to the aforesaid Justices by Writ out of the Chancery, nor other
manner: And that the said Justices, Sheriffs, Lords of Mannours, Constables and
Bailiffs in every County, may have power to attach and arrest in their
Baily-wicks, all those vagrants who are strong of body to serve and labor,
according to the Statute; and if they refuse to serve, that they shall be
committed to the next Goal, to continue in prison until they will justify
themselves, according as the Statute has ordained: and that a Statute may be
made in this Parliament to endure perpetually, from the feast of Saint Michael
next to come, and that at the same time Proclamation may be made by the Sheriff
in every Market Town throughout the Realm, of the force of this Statute, so
that the said Servants, Victuallers, Artificers and Laborers, may withdraw
themselvers from their outrageous prises (or wages) if they will, or otherwise,
the said Commons shall be in short time destroyed and undone for ever: And that
the said Justices may be chosen by the advice of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, of the most valiant and discreet of every County, who may and will
continually entend this Office.

Answ. The King by advice of his Counsel, will cause to be ordained a
reasonable number of good and sufficient Justices, in every county of England,
having consideration to the quantities of the counties: and wills, THAT THEY
SHALL NOT BE REMOVED, Nota.
nor others associated to them, without assent of the Counsel: And as to the
penalties to be ordained, there are already ordained sufficient penalties by
the Statutes before these times; which penalties and Statutes the King wills
that they shall be put in due execution. And as to the Wages of the Justices,
two or three of the Justices which shall attend the Sessions for the profit of
the King and of his people, shall have the sixth part of the profits proceeding
from their Estreats, until the next Parliament.

In the Parliament of 2 R. 2. held at Gloucester, n. 50 Item, pray the Commons,
because that Commissions to keep the peace in every County, are directed to the
Lords of the County, who cannot attend at their Sessions, and assign and
associate unto them others who are poor, and not so sufficient, who may ocupy
their Office in their absence, who retain with them the Inditements taken of
Malefactors, without sending their precepts to any Sheriffs, to apprehend such
persons indicted; by reason whereof the Malefactors of the County are more
encouraged to do amiss, who ride in great routs as well by day as by night,
making affrayes, and marching against people in their houses or elsewhere, and
beat and wound, and sometimes kill and maim the poor Commons of the Land: that
it would please, that such poor and insufficient Justices may be removed, and
that the most sufficient and valiant in the County, may be assigned in their
Places, who may and will justify and make redress of the misdoings of such
Malefactors, their maintainers, coadiuters, fosterers, receivers and abettors,
in maintenance of the common Law of the Land, and salvation of the common
people aforesaid.

Answ. The Chancellor, Treasurer, and others of the Counsel of the King,
shall cause to be ordained the most sufficient men of every County to be
Commissioners in such case.

The same Parliament, n. 62. Ittm, The Commons pray, that whereas for the
common profit of the Realm, before these times, it is ordained, and by diverse
Statutes in diverse Parliaments affirmed, that certain Justices of the Peace,
and for to justify Laborers, Victuallers and Artificers, shall be assigned in
all Counties, and keep their Sessions so often, as shall be best for the
punishment of Malefactors, Victuallers, Laborers and Artificers; which
Justices do nothing in many Counties, for that the wages are withdrawn from
such Justices, to the damage of the King, as of the fines and amercements,
whereby Malefactors are more audacious, Laborers outrageous in their wages,
Victuallers more dear in vent of their Victuals, and Artificers in their
degree; hereupon that it would please, that all the Statutes aforesaid may be
duly executed, to the chastisement of the said Malefactors, Laborers,
Victuallers and Artificers; and further, that wages may be assigned to the said
Justices for their Sessions, and that sufficient and wise Justices may be
assigned in every County, to perform the execution aforesaid, so often as shall
be best.

Answ. Let two or three of the Justices who have held their Sessions for the
profit of the King and his people, have the sixth part of the profits proceeding
from their estreats for one year only.

In the Parliament of 3 R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 38, 39, 40, 41* I find these
notable Acts and Records touching Justices of the Peace, never yet printed to
my knowledge, though as necessary and useful to be known, as all, or any other
printed Acts concerning them.

Numb. 38. Item, That there may be added to the Commission of the Justices of
the Peace, the points ensuing. First, That they may have power to enquire and
make execution of the Statutes of Purveyors. Item, That they may enquire and
determine of Extortions, Confederacies and Maintainers of Quarrels (or suits)
and to determine of Larcenies notoriously known, and of Murders, and people
slain by malice prepense, without attending the coming of the Justices of
Assize, and that the Statute lately made of those who give liveries of Hats,
and other liveries, to cause maintenance, be duly executed, according to the
effect thereof. Item, to enquire of all those who ride with great routs, in
affray of the Peace, to do evil; and likewise of all those who lie in wait to
kill, rob or maim people; and of all those, who upon any of the said Trespasses
shall be indicted, and thereupon convicted, that they shall forfeit their Goods
and Chattels to the King, and be imprisoned for a year and one day; and if they
have no Chattels, that they shall be imprisoned for two years, without being
let to mainprize or Bail, or other manner whatsoever, without special command
of the King; and that then upon their deliverance, they shall find surety
sufficient upon a certain pein, for their good behavior toward the King and
his people.

Answ. The King wills and commands by assent of the Lords temporal, that
they shall have such power as they had by the last Commission; that they shall
have special power to hear and determine concerning the death of a man, and of
Extortions, and of those who ride armed, or with force. and in routs beyond the
Peace, and in affray of the people; and of those who lie in wait for people to
maim or kill them, and of those who use Hats or other liveries, to incite by
confederacy, or to make maintenance against the defense and form of the
Statutes and Statutes and Ordinances of Parliament were then both one.
Ordinances heretofore made. Provided always, that in difficulties concerning
Extortions, one of the King's Justices of the one Bench or other, or of the
Justices assigned to take Assizes, at least, shall be present before they
proceed to judgment in this behalf. And as to the forfeiture and penalties
demanded, the King will be advised: But he wills, that the Laws before used
in such case, be put in due execution. And it is to be remembered, that the
Prelates and the Clergy made their Protestation in this Parliament expressly,
upon this new grant, to hear and determine Extortions; that it is not as yet
passed, neither shall ever pass by their assent or will, to the blemishing of
the liberty of holy Church, nor otherwise would they give their assent, unless
it might be done in times to come, as it has been duly done and used before
this times. To which was replied by our Lord the King; That the King neither
for their Protestation, nor other their Nota.
words in this behalf, would forbear to make his Justices in this case, and in
all others to do as they had used to do in times past, and as he is bound to do
by virtue of his Oath made at his Coronation.

Numb. 39. Item, That the Justices assigned for to keep the Peace, shall keep
their Sessions according to the Statute, and that every Justice shall have for
his Wages, for every day that they hold their Sessions, half a Mark, and their
Clerk two shillings, out of the fines and amercements, as well within franchize
as without, arising in their Sessions; and that the Justices upon the Articles
aforesaid, may be chosen by the Lords and Knights of Shires in this present
Parliament; that is to say, eight persons at the most, of the most sufficient
Knights and Esquires Nota.
in every County, of which two shall be skillful in the Law, without making See
12 R. 2. c. 10. according Lerewith.
any association to them hereafter by any way: And that the same Justices at
every quarter of the year, shall cause to be delivered to the Sheriffs of their
Counties, their Estreats of Fines, Issues and Amercements abovenamed by
Indenture; and that the said Sheriffs may have warrant by Writ to pay the said
Justices their foresaid Wages from Session to Session, taking acquitances to
the said Sheriffs under the seal of the said Justices: for the which due
allowance shall be made to the said Sheriffs in the Exchequer upon their
account: and that the other part of the said Indenture, sealed under the seals
of the said Justices and Sheriffs, shall be sent into the Exchequer, for to
charge the Sheriff to Ievy that which shall be arrear above the Wages
aforesaid, to the use of our Lord the King: And that Proclamation may be made
of the Statutes and Ordinances and Statutes then were one and the same.
Ordinances aforesaid, twice every year, at the coming of the Justices of
Assize into the Country; and in case there be no coming of the said Justices
into the Country or that it be delayed, so as the Assizes do not hold, that
then Proclamation shall be made of the said Statutes and Both joined together
as one.
Ordinances at the fullest County Court that shall be held; and in Towns, Fairs
and Markets, as it shall seem best unto the said Justices.

Answ. As to the wages of the said Justices, it is assented, that a Knight
shall take four shillings, an Esquire two shillings, and their Clerk one
shilling, for every day which they shall hold their Sessions only, out of the
issues of the said Esireates, in the form as is demanded: and the said Justices
shall hold their Sessions four times a year in every County, and every time two
or three days together, according as the County is greater or smaller, and
according as the said Justices shall have business before them; so as these
their quarter Sessions shall be holden every year, throughout all and every
part of every County, but not more often then is aforesaid, unless there be
necessary cause, which requires more hasty remedy: And the King our Lord
wills, that the Sheriffs of every County shall be commanded to make the said
Proclamation in full County at the command of the said Justices, once or twice
in a year: And as to the Indentures and manner of paying of the Wages
aforesaid, it pleases the King that it be done in manner as is demanded: And
as concerning the number and names of the said Justices delivered before in
Parliament in writing, the King our Lord will advise: And as to this, that the
same Justices may have the said power to hear and determine the death of a man,
and the other things aforesaid: Let them be sworn to do every one right, in
such manner as the Justices of the King are on their part sworn and make oath.

After which I find, Number. 40. A Declaration made upon the Power given to
Justices of the Peace, of which there is a certain Act enrolled in the Roll of
the Parliament, An. 3. (in form as follows.)

And it is to be remembered, that in Easter Term next after the end of this
Parliament, the Lords temporal, assembled at Westminster in a great Counsel
there held, caused there again to be read before them the enrolment of the An
Ordinance and Act of Parliament was then the same thing.
Ordinance made this Parliament, touching the power of the Justices of the
Peace, in the presence of the Lord Despaign, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and of
all the Justices; and there the said Lords temporal, made a Declaration of the
power of Justices of Peace aforesaid; for they there said, that their intent
was in the said Parliament, although it was not clearly enrolled at that time,
that among other Articles and Points, the same Lustices of the Peace should
have power to hear and determine all manner of Extoritions, as well at the suit
of the King, as of the party; and of certain other Articles comprised in the
said power, they should likewise make a Declaration; and thereupon there was a
certain Note made of the Commission, by advice of all the Justices of our Lord
the King, as well of the one Bench as of the other there present; and this Note
being read in the said Counsel before them, they all assented to the said
Note, and it pleased them well, that it should pass the Seal of the King under
that form, and so were the Commissions made, ensealed, and sent to every County
of England in like manner, with a writ directed to the Sheriff of every County,
to take the Oaths of the Commissioners, well and lawfully to use their
Commission, and to do right to every person, as well to the poor as to the
rich, according to the form of the Cedule enclosed in every of the said Writs;
of which Writs and Cedule, which were likewise made by advice of the King's
Counsel, and the Note of the Commission aforesaid, the Terms or Copies ensue,
word for word.

The Commission of the PEACE agreed upon in PARLIAMENT.
REX
dilectis and fidelibus suis, A, B, C, D, etc. salutem.
Sciatis quod assignavimus vos conjunctim and divisim ad Pacem nostram, necnon
ad Statuta apud Winton. North. and Westminster. pro conservatione Pacis ejusdem
edita, in omnibus and singulis in Com. H. tam infra libertates quam extra
custodiend. and custodiri faciend. and ad omnes illos quos contra formam
Statutorum praedict. delinquentes inveneritis castigand. and puniend. prout
secundum formam Statutorum eorundem fuerit faciend. and ad omnes qui aliquibus
de populo nostro de corporibus suis, vel de ince^dio domorum suarum minas
fecerint, ad sufficientem securitatem de pace and bono gestu suo erga Nos and
populum nostrum inveniend. coram vobis venire; and si hujusmodi securitatem
invenire recusaverint, tunc eos in prisonis nostris quousque bujusmodi
securitatem invenerint salvo custodiri faciend. Assignavimus etiam vos,
quatuor, tres, vel duos vestrum Iusticiarios nostros ad inquirendum per
sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum in Com. praedicto, tam infra
libertates quam extra, per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, de
quibuscunque latrociniis notorie vel aperie, ac Mahemiis, and hominum
interfectionibus per insidias, vel per maliciam precogitatam, ac murdris, ac
aliis feloniis, transgressionibus, forstallariis, regratoriis and extortionibus
in Com. praedicto per quoscunque and qualitercunque factis five perpetrat is,
and quae exnunc ibidem fieri continget; and etiam de omnibus illis qui in
Conventiculis contra pacem nostram and in perturbationem populi nostri vi
armata erint, vel equitaverint, seu exnuncire vel equitare presumpserint; ac
etiam de hiis qui in insidiis ad gentem nostram mahemiand. vel interficiend.
jacuerint, and exnunc jacere presumpserint, ac etiam de hiis qui capitiis and
alia librata de unita secta per confederationem and per manutenentia contra
defensioonem ac formam Ordinances and Statutes both one.
Ordinationum and Statutorum inde ante haec tempora factorum usi fuerunt, ac
aliis bujusmodi librata imposternm utentibus; ac etiam de Hostellariis and
aliis qui in abusu mensur arum and ponderum, ac in venditione victualium, ac
etiam de quibuscunque Operariis, Artificibus, Servitoribus, Hostellariis and
aliis qui contra formam Ordinances here coupled together with Acts, as one and
the same.
Ordinationum and Statutorum pro communi utilitate Regni nostri Angliae de
hujusmodi Operariis, Artificibus, Servitoribus, Hostellariis and aliis inde
factorum, delinquerint vel attemptaverint in Com. praedicto, vel exnunc
delinquere vel attemptare presumpserint: and ed processus versus omnes quos de
feloniis bujusmodi contigerit indictari quousque capiantur, reddantur vel
utlagantur faciend. and ad latrocinia, mahemia, interfectiones and murdra
praedicta, ac ea omnia and singula quae per hujnsmodi conventicula contra pacem
nostram and in perturbationem populi nostri, and etiam ea quae per bujusmodi
insidias ad gentem nostram mahemiend. vel interficiend, and ea etiam per usum
bujusmodi capiciarum and aliarum libratarum per confederationem and per
manutenentia sicut praedictum est attemptata fuerint and attemptari contigerit,
ac transgressiones and forstallarias praedictas ad fectam nostoam tantum, ac
extortiones and regratorias praedictas, ac omnia alia quae per huju modi
Hostellarios and alios in abusu mensurarum and ponderum ac in venditione
victualium, and omnia alia quae per hujusmodi Operarios, Artifices and
Servitores contra formam Ordinances still coupled with, and put before Statutes
Ordinationum Staintorum praedictorum, seu in enervationem earundem in aliqua
praesumpta vel attemptata fuerint, tam ad sectam nostram quam aliorum
quorumcunque coram vobis pro nobis vel pro seipsis conqueri vel prosequi
volentium, audiend. and termidand. and ad eosdem Operarios, Artifices and
Servitores per fines, Redemptiones and Amercimenta, and alio modo pro delictis
suis prout ante Ordinationem de punitione corporali hujusmodi Operariis,
Artificibus, and servitoribus pro delictis suis exhibend. factum fieri
consuevit, castigand. and puniend. secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni
nostri Angliae, ac formam Ordinances and Statutes still conjoined as one.
Ordinationum and Statutorum praedictorum. Proviso semper, quod si cosus
difficultatis super determinationem extortionum hujusmodi coram vobis evenire
contigerit, quod adjudicium inde nisi in praesentia unius Justiciariorum
nostrorum de uno vel de altero Banco, aut Justic. nostrorum ad Assi, as in Com.
praedicto capiend. assignat, coram vobis minime procedatur. Assignavimus etiam
vos, quatuor, tres and duos vestrum, quorum alterum vestrum praefati A. and B.
unum esse volumus, Iusticiarios nostros ad felonias praedictas quarum
determinatio superius declarata non existit, ac omnia processus and
indictamenta, felonias and transstressiones, forstallarias, regratarias and
alia praedicta tangentia coram vobis praefati A. and sociis vestris nuper
custodibus Pacis nostrae and Iusticiariis nostris ad hujusmodi felonias and
transgressiones in Com. praedicto audiend. and terminand. assignat, facta quae
nondum terminata existunt, inspiciend and debito fine terminand. secundum legem
and consuetudinem praedictas, ac formam Ordinances and Statutes still coupled
together.
Ordinationum and Statutorum praedictorum. Et ideo vobis and cuilibet vestrum
mandamus, quod circa custodiam Pacis and Statutorum praedictorum diligenter
intendatis, and ad certos diem and loca quos vos quinque, quatuor, tres vel duo
vestrum ad hoc provideritis, inquisitiones super praemissa facere, and
praemissa omnia and singula audiatis, and terminatis, ac modo debito and
effectualiter expleatis in forma supradicta; facturi inde quod ad justitiam
pertinet secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae salvis nobis
Amerciamentis and aliis inde spectantibus: mandavimus enim Vicecomiti nostro
Com-praedicti, quod ad certos diem and loca quos vos quinque, quatuor, tres,
vel duo vestrum ei scire fac. venire fac. coram uobis quinque, etc. and duobus
vestrum, tot and tales probos and legales Homines de Balliva sua tam infra
libertates quam extra, per quos rei ueritas in praemissis melius sciri poterit
and inquiri, and insuper vobis and cuilibet vestrum super salva custodia Pacts,
and Ordinances, yea, Ordinances and Statutes in former clauses, are here called
Statutes only, which proves them to be but one and the same.
Statutorum praedictorum intendat, and pareat quando and prout per vos vel
aliquem vestrum fuerit super hoc exparte nostra rationabiliter praemunitus; and
vos praefatus A. ad certos dies and loca per vos and dictos socios vestros
super hoc praefigend-processus and indictamenta praedicta coram vobis and
praedictis sociis vestris venire fac. and ea inspiciatis, and debito fine
terminatis, sicut praedictum est. In cujus etc.

Test Rege apud West. 26. die Maii. Per ipsum Regem and Consilium.

The COMMISSION for administering the Oath to Justices of Peace.
REX
Vicecomiti, etc. Salutem:
Quasdam literas nostras Patentes per quas certos Legeos nostros ad Pacem
nostram in Comtuo conservand. and ad quaedam alia in eisdem literis contenta
faciend. and exequend. assignavimus, tibi mittimus per praesentium portatorem.
Mandantes districtius quo poterinius injungendo, quod statim visis praesentibus
quibuscunque dilatione and excusatione postpositis, tot personas de eodem sic
per nos assignatas quot inde infra Ballivam tuam invenire poteris ad certos
diem and locum eis per te ad hoc in prox. statuend. and praefigend. coram te
sine dilatione venire fac. and capto Sacramento eorundem juxta formam cujusdam
cedulae praesentibus inclusae eisdem. sic juratis literas nostras praedictas
liberari facias indilate; dicens and injungens eisdem ex part nostra quod ipsi
non permittant, sicut non est intentionis nostrae, nec omnino volumus quod
aliquis dictorum sic assignatorum se inde in aliquo intromittat, seu
auctoritatem in hac part virtute literarum praedictarum habeat aliqualem, nec
vadia ad hoc ordinata accipiat, seu ei ut Justic. nostro tu vel aliquis alius
intendens sis aut sit quovis modo, nisi prius ad hoc juratus fuerit in forma
praedicta. Et qualiter praesens mandatum nostrum fueris executus, ac de
nominibus coram te sic juratorum Nos in Cancellaria nostra cum ea celeritate
qua fieri poterit sub sigillo tuo districte and aperte certificando. It a quod
pro captione sacramentorum aliorum sic assignatorum si qui remanserint non
jurati debite prout convenit ordinare poterimus, and hoc sicut gravem
indignationem nostram evitare volueris nullatenus ommittas.

Test Rege apud Westminster. 27. die Maii.
The OATH of a Justice of Peace.
YOU shall swear, that well and lawfully you shall serve the King, in the
Office of a Guardian of the Peace, and of a Justice of Artificers, Laborers,
Weights and Measures, and to hear and determine the wrongs and grievances done
to the King and to his people, and of all other things whatsoever, comprised
more fully in the Commission to you and other your companions made, according
to your skill and power: You shall do full right to all, as well to the poor as
the rich, neither for honor, favor, friendship, nor estate of any person, nor
for benefit given or promised, or which may or shall be done to you in times to
come, nor otherwise by art or engine whatsoever, shall you deny, respit or
delay right to any against reason, nor contrary to the Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances and Statutes the same.
Ordinances and Customs aforesaid: and the Counsel of the King touching those
who shall be indicted before you, you shall conceal, and also shall compel the
Juries and Enquests to conceal it on their part lawfully; and all the Records
and Process which shall be made before you, you shall cause to be put in sure
and good custedy, and the estreats of Fines and Americiaments, and other
Profits which unto the King appertain, you shall cause entirely to be put in
writing indented from time to time, whereof one part you shall cause to be
delivered to the Sheriff of the County, and the other part you shall cause to
be sent safely into the King's Exchequer, for to charge the Sheriff there upon
his account; and all the Writs which shall come to you under the King's great
Seal, you shall serve, and cause to be executed without delay; and that you
shall not take nor receive any Clerk unto you for to write or keep the Records
and Process aforesaid, if be be not first sworn before you, to keep the King's
council, and to do and perform well and lawfully on his part whatsoever
belongs to his Office and Degree in this behalf. So God me aid and his
Saints.

To these I shall add, 21 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 4. where the King, upon the
Petition of the Commons against diverse extortions and grievances done to the
people by Colleciors of Wools, and of other Taxes and Tallages, to the great
destruction of the people, whereof they pray remedy for God's sake. Gives this
Answer: The King is pleased, that those who shall be assigned Justices of the
Peace, and to enquire of false Moneys, shall likewise enquire of the things
contained in this Article, and shall do right concerning the things which are
therein contained.

In the Parliament of 29 E. 3. n. 19. Item, Whereas it was lately ordained by
Statute, that there shall be one Measure, and one Weight throughout the Land;
that is to say, the King's Standard, that the Justices of Laborers in all the
Counties may have power to hear and determine, and punish those who come
against this Statute. To which the King answered: Let the Statute thereof made,
be held and kept in all points, so as covenable and sage Justices may be
assigned at what time it shall be best, to enquire, hear, and determine upon
the point: and that these Justices, nor the Justices of Laborers, shall not
make Deputies under them; nor that no Sheriff, Coronor, nor none of their
Ministers, shall henceforth be assigned Justices in no Commission.

Numb. 20. Item, Whereas before these times, diverse Commissions have been made
to Sheriffs, Constables of Castles, and to Keepers of Goals and Prisons, to
enquire of Trespass, Felonies, and other Articles for which the people are
imprisonable; by color of which Commissions, the said Sheriffs, Constables and
Keepers, feign inditements, and that the people are indicted before them, and
they take the people and imprison them, until they have made fines to the said
keepers of Goals and of Prisons for is have suit, also to the Sheriffs for to
be bailed, to the great damage of the Commons; wherefore they pray, that no
Sheriff, nor no man who has the keeping of Prisons, may be put into such
Commissions. The Answer. As to the first point of this Petition, our Lord the
King wilieth that it shall be done.

Numb. 21. Item, Pray tho Commons, that whereas the Justices assigned to
enquire of diverse Felonies, Confederacies, Conspirators and Maintainers of
quarrels, of which points the said Justices judge (molt reddement) over-hastily
in grievance of the Commons: that it would please our Lord the King and his
Counsel, that the points of Confederacies, Conspiracies and Maintainers, may
be declared. The answer. Our Lord the King wills, that none shall be judged
nor punished for Confederacy, but there where the Statute thereof made,
speaks expressly, upon the points contained in the said Statute.

47 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 26. Item, the Commons pray, that the Statute of
Laborers and Artificers made in full Parliament be executed four times for a
year to come: and that the Justices of Peace as well as the Justices of
Laborers, may be removed, in case that any will complain of them, for the
profit of the King, and of the Commons. To which is answered; The King wills
it.

50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 83. To our most excellent and most redoubted Lord the
King, and his Counsel, shows, the poor Commons of the Land, that because the
Sheriffs and Undersheriffs, and Keepers of Goals are now, and of long time
have been Justices of Peace, and often times cause loyal people of the Country
to be indicted before them through malice and envy, for to reap their own gain,
as for to make a fine for the entry into the Goal, afterward for suit of
prison, and after that for Bail, and afterward for to have an enquest procured
for to save their lives, and when they are released, to make a fine to the
Goalers for their Irons, and after for their issuing out of the Gate; whereof
they pray remedy: that therefore it would please your most excellent Lordship,
for God's sake, and as a work of charity, to ordain, that from this day
forwards no Sheriff, nor Undersheriff, nor Keepers Note.
of Goals, shall be a Justice of Peace, nor no Commission directed to them in
their County but in their proper Office. To which was answered: That it pleased
well the King.

There are some 8 E. 3 n. 2, 4, 6. 13 E. 3. par 1. n. 10.
other Acts and Petitions of Parliament concerning Justices of Peace besides
these here cited, exant in the Parliament Rolls, but being of lesser moment
then, and for the most part agreeing in substance with the former, I shall
pretermit them; with other unprinted Laws and Petitions concerning Justices of
Assize, Oyer and Terminer, as 22 E. 3. n. 6. 25 E. 3. n. 11. 2 R. 2. Parl. 1.
n. 35. 6 R. 2. Parl. 1. n. 38, 39, 40, 41. 50 E. 3. n. 65, 69, 213. 25 E. 3.
Parl. 1. 8 E. 3. n. 6, 10. 29 E. 3. n. 27, 28. rot. Parl. n. 17. 10 R. 2. n.
12. 6 R. 2. n. 41, 48. Only from the premised Acts and Records, I shall briefly
deduce these observations and conclusions.

First, that the institution of discreet, valiant, able and active Justices of
Peace in every County of the Realm, in the judgment of our ancient Princes,
Nobles, Peers, Knights and Commons assembled in Parliament, has been always
resolved and enacted to be the most probable, prevalent and succesfull means,
to suppress all public Malefactors of all sorts; to reform and redress all
public oppressions, grievances, disorders and mischiefs in the Commonwealth;
to settle all distractions, and to restore and preserve the peace and
tranquillity of the Kingdom.

Secondly, that Justices of the peace in former times have frequently been
nominated and appointed by the Knights, Commons and Lords in Parliament, by the
Kings assent, as well as by the King, his Counsel, Chancellor and Treasurer;
that such Parliamentary nominations and elections have usually been best, and
most beneficial to the Commonwealth, and that the constituting of able and
active Justices of Peace has been one principal end of ancient Parliaments
convening.

Thirdly, that none are fit to be Justices of Peace but such as are both 18 E.
3. c. 2 34 E. 3. c. 1. 2 H 5 c. 1. 18 ^. 6. c. 11. See. Exodus 18. 21.
discreet and valiant, and somewhat skillful in the Laws of the Land, which
they are both to execute, maintain, and be regulated by in all their
proceedings, as well as landed and wealthy; wisdom and discretion without 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. Ezr. 10. 4. J^sh. 1. 7. 1 Chronicles. 22. 13
courage; courage without wisdom and discretion; wisdom, discretion and
courage, without knowledge of and in the Laws, which must regulate all these;
and all, or each of these without some competency of Estare, to keep men from
corruption, 18 H. 6. c. 11 2 R. 2. n. 50.
bribery, oppression and baseness, being unable singly of themselves to
qualify any man to be an exact Justice: but when they all concenter in one,
that man (if really endowed with the grace and Exodus 18. 21 2 Samuel 23 3. 2 Chronicles. 19 7.
fear of God) and no other, will prove a complete Justice, and such a one as
these Statutes and Petitions require.

Fourthly, that no Sheriff, under Sheriff, Coroner, Keeper of a Goal or Prison,
Retainer or Servant to great men, or person of mean fortune and quality
(disabled by the forecited Petitions and Statutes upon very good grounds) ought
to be put into Commissions of the Peace (whiles they contitinue such) to
prevent extortion, bribery and oppression of the People.

Fifthly, that Justices of the Peace once put into Commission, especially by
public nomination of the Knights and Commons of Counties in Parliament, ought
not to be removed, nor put out of Commission upon any private suggestions
whatsoever, without special command of the King or his Counsel, and that upon
See 4 H. 7. c. 12 8 H. 6. n. 69.
just grounds, or some real misdemeanour or reasonable cause duly proved and
testified by their companions and fellow-Justices; it being against all the
rules and principles of Justice, Law, Honor, Conscience, the express known
fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and the highest kind of
arbitrary Tyranny, to put any Gentleman out of Commission upon malicions
clandestine surmises behind his back, without ever hearing or summoning him to
vindicate his own innocence, or make his just defense against such clandestine
unsatisfactory informations; though a thing too commonly practiced by unworthy,
malicious, self-ended spirits, even in these reforming times, which so much
declaim against arbitrary Government: And in these and other Statutes and
Petitions, I find only these causes of uncommissioning and outing any
Justices of Peace: First, 13 R. 2. c. 7. 2 H. 5. c. 1. par. 2. 18 H. 6. c. 11.
inability and insufficiency in point of skill, wisdom, discretion, courage,
knowledge of the Law, or Estate: Secondly, 28 H 6. c. 11
corruption, misdemeanour or 4 H. 7. c. 12.
negligence in the discharge of this public office of trust: Thirdly, 13 R. 2.
c. 7. 8 R. 2. Dors. Claus. n. 5. Co. 4 Instit. p. 176
Retienorship, or particular engagements to great persons, which may overbyas
Justices to oppress and injure the people, to pleasure those Grandees on whom
they have their chief dependence: Fourthly, 1 R. 2. n. 89. 51 E. 3. n. 59.
age or infirmity of body to discharge this trust: Fifthly, 2 H. 5. c. 4. 2 H.
5. Parl. 2. c. 1. 1 Mariae, c. 8. Sess. o. 2.
removing from, non-refidence in, or being made Sheriff, Jailer, etc. of the
County where they are in Commission: and therefore if any man be indirectly put
forth of Commission without any such just causes as these, or the like, Some
learned men conceive, a Writ of Restitution lies upon a motion in the King's
Bench, to the Chancellor or Commissioners of the great Seal, to put him into
the Commission of the Peace again, in case they refuse to do it voluntarily, as
well as against a See Sir James Baggs Case, Co. 11. Rep. 93, etc. and Master
Estwicks case 23. Car. B. R.
Major or Corporation, disfranchising or putting any Major, Alderman, Freeman
or Common Council man out of his Place or Office, without a just and legal
cause, there being the self-same reason, and so the self-same Law for both.

Sixthly, that Justices of the Peace may sometimes be put into, and sometimes
thrust out of Commission by corrupt and sinister means and false suggestions,
and that such an abuse is worthy the serious consideration and reformation of a
Parliament.

Seventhly, that honest and able 18 E. 3. c. 2, 34. 6 E. 3. c. 1. 13 R. 2. c.
7. 2 H. 5. c. 4. 18 H. 6. c. 11. 8 E. 3. n. 2.
Lawyers in the judgment of our Ancestors, and ancient Parliaments, are the
fittest men to be Justices of Peace.

Eighthly, that though Justices of Peace ought not to be Mercenary, yet the not
allowing of them competent 14 R. 2. c. 11.
wages to defray their extraordinary expenses, especially at general Quarter
Sessions, has been a great occasion of inducing them to be slack and negligent
in the diligent and zealous execution of Justice, and attending at the Sessions.

Ninthly, that the power and jurisdiction of Justices of the Peace since their
first institution, has been much enlarged by sundry new Acts of Parliament and
Commissions; and that the greater authority they have given them, the more are
they enabled to promote the Republics peace and happiness.

Tenthly, that no Justice of Peace ought to act as a Justice before he be
actually sworn; and that the Justices of the King's Bench and Common Pleas, and
Justices of the Peace took anciently one and the self-same Oath.

Eleventhly, that the form and substance of the Commissions of the Peace, and
Oath of Justices of the Peace, were originally ordained by consent in
Parliament.

Twelftly, that Bishops in former times were great countenancers of 8 E. 3. n.
9. 15 E. 3. n. 24. 46 E. 3. n. 36. 50 E. 3. n 75.
Extortion, which they would not have Justices of Peace to hear and determine;
and that an Act of Parliament is See 20 E. 3. n 35. 38. 7 H. 8 Kelway 1 84. 8 7
R. 2. c. 12. 20 E. 3. c 9. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, ^. 19.
good and valid, though all the Bishops (whiles Members) protested against it,
as null and void.

Lastly, that Ordinances and Acts of Parliament, were anciently both one in
substance, and used promiscuously one for another, and were made by joint
consent both of the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament, and therefore
Ordinances of Parliament bound the Subjects as really, as far and long as
Statutes, as well after Parliaments ended, as during the Sessions wherein they
were made: Which is evident by the premises, by most Prologues to our printed
Statutes at large from King Edward the third, to Edward the sixth, by some
hundreds of printed Acts and Statutes, by this clause of the Writ for the
election of Knights and Burgesses; Ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc
ibi de communi consilio Regni nostri (favente Deo) contigerit ORDINARI, (from
which word Ordinari, this title of Ordinance was derived:) and by the Rols of
Parliament, which make express mention of Ordinances of Parliament as all one
with Acts and Statutes, as 15 E. 3. n. 15, 17 E. 3. n. 8. 21 E. 3. n. 8, 16. 27
E. 3. n. 1. Rotulus Ordinationum, 20 E. 3. n. 12, 13. 28 E. 3. n. 10, 16, 55.
37 E. 3. n. 12, 38. 40 E. 3. n. 11. 50 E. 3. n. 10, 12, 13, 75, 79, 34, 110,
186. 51 E. 3. n. 11, 47, 82. 1 R. 2. n. 56. 2 R. 2. n. 46. 2 H. 4. n. 104, 106.
with sundry others, and the Year-books of 39 E. 3. 7. and 8 H. 4. 12, 13.

Indeed I find 4 Instit. p. 25
Sir Edw. Cook putting this difference between an Act of Parliament, and an
Ordinances; that an Ordinance wants the threefold consent (which an Act
always has) and is ordained by one or two of them: which he endeauours to
prove by 25 E. 3. n. 16, etc. 37 E. 3. n. 39. 1 R. 2. n. 56, etc. to which he
might have added, 27 E. 3. n. 19. But under his favor, these Records will
neither prove nor warrant his difference: for first, there was the consent of
the King, Lords and Commons to the Ordinance concerning Apparel, 37 E. 3. n.
38, and 39. which was commanded to be strictly executed as a Law, till the next
Parliament: So as this Record is point blank against him in that very thing for
which he cites it: and his first Record of 25 E. 3. n. 16, etc. has not one
syllable in it concerning Ordinances of Parliament, or to warrant any
difference between Acts and Ordinances, for which he quotes it, which is clearly
refuted by this notably Record of 50 E. 3. n. 47. where The Commons Petition
the King, That NO STATVTE NOR ORDINANCE may be made or granted at the Petition
of the Clergy, without assent of the Commons; and that the Commons shall not
be bound by any of the Clergies constitutions, made without their assent; for
they will not be obliged to their Therefore the threefold assent was then
necessary to Ordinances as well as Statutes.
STATUTES NOR ORDINANCES made against their assent. Secondly, the King's
consent was to all the Presidents he cites, and no Ordinance nor President is
produced by him* of any Ordinance made by the Lords or Commons jointly or
severally, without the King's consent thereto. Thirdly, 27 E. 3. n. 19. puts a
difference between Ordinances of Parliament, and Sir Edward Cook mistakes an
Ordinance of State for an Ordinance of Parliament, which had always the three
fold as^^ut.
Ordinances of State, made by the King and his privy Counsel alone, without
the Lords and Commons assent; the one being to be entered in the Parliament
Rolls, as binding Laws, the other not. Fourthly, all that 1 R. 2. n. 56.
proves, is but this, That the Kings sole answers to the Commons Petitions
(especially without the Lords concurrent assent) makes them See 21 E. 3. n. 43,
46, 47, 52.
no Acts of Parliament, but merely Ordinances of State, AS SOME AFFIRMED.
Whereupon the Commons prayed, That their Petitions, to which King Edward the
third in his Parliament held the 50th year of his reign, gave this answer, Le
Roy le Voet; might be turned into into Acts. But it no ways proves, that Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament are different things, and not one and the same,
since our Parliaments in all Ages have resolved the contrary. This I shall
undeniably manifest by our printed Statutes at large, which every man may
peruse, because some may deem it a dangerous paradox in this innovating and
erring Age. That Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament are all one, is
evident. First, by the printed Prologues and preambles to most of our Statutes
and Acts of Parliament. I shall begin with the Preamble to the Statute of
Marlbridge made in the two and fiftieth year of King Henry the third.

In the year of grace 1267. in the two and fiftieth year of the reign of King
Henry, son of King John, in the Vias of Saint Martin; for the better estate of
this Realm of England, and for the more speedy administration of justice, as
belongs to the Office of a King; the more discreet men of the Realm being
called together, AS WELL OF THE HIGHER AS OF THE LOWER ESTATE; it was provided,
AGREED AND ORDAINED, That whereas the Realm of England of late had been
disquieted with manifold troubles and dissentions, for reformation whereof,
STATUTES AND LAWS be most necessary, whereby the peace and tranquillity of the
people must be conserved; wherein the King intending to devise convenient
remedy, has made these ACTS, ORDINANCES AND STATUTES underwritten, which he
wills TO BE OBSERVED FOR EVERMORE FIRMLY AND INVIOLABLY OF ALL HIS SUBJECTS,
as well high as low.

Then follow twenty nine Statutes, continuing yet in force, all ushered in with
this general Preamble: from which I shall observe,

First, that Acts, Ordinances and Statutes were all one and the same, and used
as Synonumaes in that Age. Secondly, that they were all equally provided,
agreed and ordained by the King, and the more discreet men of the Realm called
together, as well of the higher as of the lower estate: therefore Ordinances
then, as well as Acts and Statutes, had the threefold assent, and the King's as
well as the Lords and Commons concurrence, not the assent only of one or two of
them. Thirdly, that those Acts which are termed Statutes and Laws right
necessary, in the former clause of this Preamble, are called Acts, Ordinances
and Statutes in the later. Fourthly, that Ordinances then, were to be observed
for evermore sirmly and inviolably of all Subjects, as well high as low; and
not mere temporary Laws expiring with the uery Sessions that made them, or
before; and obliging some, but not others, as most new Ordinances now do. Which
had Sir Edward Cook observed in his 2 Instit. p. 101, 102.
Comentary on this very Preface and Statute, it is probable he would have
retracted his mistaken difference, between Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament, which has seduced others, as well in point of practice as opinion.

In 50 E. 3. we have this general Preamble to the printed Acts of Parliament,
and Statutes then made. By assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and
others assembled at the Parliament, holden at Westminster, at the fifteenth of
Saint Hillary, the year of the reign of our sovereign Lord the King, that now
is, of England, the fiftieth: the same our sovereign Lord the King much
desiring, that the Peace of his Land be well kept, etc. has for so much made
and established certain ORDINANCES, etc. which ORDINANCES he will that, to the
honor of God, and of the Church, and quietness of his people, they be firmly
kept and holden in all points. These Statutes (being eight in number) are only
termed Ordinances in this Prologue, though Statutes in the Title; and close to,
Thus ends the Statutes, etc.

The general printed Preambles to the several Acts and Statutes made in the
Parliaments of 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, and 21 Rich. 11.
run all in this form and words; Our Sovereign Lord the King, at his Parliament
holden at Westminster, etc. of the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and other great men, and of the Commons of this Realm, summoned to the
said Parliament, has ORDAINED and established in the said Parliament, for the
quietness of his people, etc. the STATUTES AND ORDINANCES following,
perpetually to endure in his said Realm: Or, has done to be made certain
ORDINANCES AND STABLISHMENTS for the common profit of the Realm, in form
following.

The Preambles to the several printed Statutes made in the 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, and
9 years of King Henry the fourth, and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 9 years of King
Henry the fifth, use these expressions: At the Parliament holden at
Westminster, etc. Our Sovereign Lord the King, by assent of the Prelates,
Dukes, Earls and Barons, and at the special instance and request of the
Commons, assembled at this present Parliament, has done to be ORDAINED and
established certain STATUTES AND ORDINANCES: Or, diverse ORDINANCES AND
STATUTES, in form following.

The printed Preambles to the respective Statutes, made in 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9,
10, 11 14, 18, 20, 23, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33 of King Henry the sixth: In 1, 3, 4,
8, 12, 17, 22 of King Edward the fourth: In 1 of Richard the third; in 1, 3, 4,
11, 12, 19 of King Henry the seventh: and in 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 14, 23 of King
Henry the eight, run all in the like form of words, coupling Ordinances and
Statutes always together as one: In 24 H. 8. this general usual Preamble was
altered into this new modle: Acts made in the Session of this present
Parliament, etc. and from that Parliament till this present, this ancient
usual Preamble has been discontinued and omitted in our printed Statutes.

Secondly, I shall manifest Statutes, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament to be
one and the same, by sundry printed Acts of Parliament which couple them
together, and use them promiscuously for one and the same, as the forecited
general Preambles do. 13 E. 1. the Statute of Merchants: The King and his
Counsel at his Parliament holden at Acton Burnell, has ordained these
establishments; which ORDINANCES and establishments, the King commands they
shall be firmly kept and observed throughout his Realm of England and Ireland:
37 E. 3. c. 1. That the great Charter, and Charter of the Forest, and the
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES made in the times past, be holden and kept, and duly
executed, according to the form and effect of them: 38 E. 3. parl. 1. c. 10.
The STATUTES AND ORDINANCES thereupon made, shall stand in force: 42 E. 3. c.
6. The Statute and ORDINANCE made for Laborers and Artificers, etc. 1 R. 2. c.
5, 7. It is ordained, that all STATUTES AND ORDINANCES made before this time,
etc. be holden and firmly kept i^ all points. It is ordained and assented, that
the Statutes and ORDINANCES made in such case before this time, be kept and
duly executed. 5 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 1. 6 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 1. 7 R. 2. c. 2. 8 R.
2. c. 1. 9 R. 2. c. 1. 13 R. 2. c. 1, 8. 14 R. 2. c. 11. 15 R. 2. c. 1. 1 H. 4.
c. 1. 2 H. 4. c. 1. 4 H. 4. c. 1, 16. 7 H. 4. c. 1. 9 H. 4. c. 1. 11 H. 4. c.
5. and 4 H. 5. c. 1. do all thus couple Ordinances and Statutes together as
one: It is ordained and accorded, etc. That the great Charter, and the Charter
of the Forest, and ALL OTHER GOOD STATUTES AND ORDINANCES before this time
made, and not yet repealed, be firmly observed in all their Articles, and put
in due execution, according to the effect of the same. All these Statutes
giving the title both of an Ordinance and Statute to Magna Charta, the Charter
of the Forest, and to all other Statutes formerly made, clearly resolve,
Statutes and Ordinances to be both one. So 6 R. 2. parl. 1. c. 10. Any
Statutes, Ordinances, etc. had or made to the contrary notwithstanding. 7 R. 2.
c. 11. Diverse Ordinances and Statutes of Fishers of London, and other
Victuallers were made, etc. The same Ordinances and Statutes, etc. c. 13. The
Statutes and Ordinances aforesaid. 11 R. 2. c. 8. Any Statute, Ordinance, etc.
twice. 13 R. 2. c. 7. That the said Justices be sworn to keep and put in
execution all the Statutes and Ordinances, touching their Offices. c. 8.
Statutes and Ordinances, twice: c. 9. As in the great Charter and all other
good Statutes and Ordinances thereof made is more plainly contained, etc. As
has been another time ordained by Statute. So in 14 R. 2. c. 11. 17 R. 2. c.
3. 21 R. 2. c. 12. 1 H. 4. c. 2, 9. 2 H. 4. c. 4. 2 H. 4. c. 9, 17. 4 H. 4. c.
3, 16. 9 H. 4. c. 8. 13 H. 4. c. 3, 6. 9 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 1. 1 H. 6. c. 2. 3
H. 6. c. 5. 6 H. 6. c. 5, 8, 9, 17. 14 H. 6. c. 6. 20 H. 6. c. 8. 23 H. 6. c.
2. 31 H. 6. c. 7. 39 H. 6. c. 2. 3 E. 4. c. 5. 4 E. 4. c. 1, 6, 7. 7 E. 4. c.
1. 14 E. 4. c. 4. 17 E. 4. c. 1, 6, 7. 22 E. 4. c. 1. 1 H. 7. c. 7, 8, 9. 4 H.
7. c. 1, 12, 21, 22. 7 H. 7. c. 3. 11 H. 7. c. 3, 4, 7, 8, 16. 19 H. 7. c. 13,
22, 23: we have the like conjunction of Ordinances and Statutes, Statutes and
Ordinances, Ordinance and Statute, which couple and use them still
promiscuously as one: By the Statutes of 8 H. 6. c. 5. 18 H. 6. c. 11. 12 E. 4.
c. 6. 4 H. 7. c. 1. The Commissioners of Sewers are authorized to make Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances: In 15 H. 6. c. 6. 23 H. 6. c. 4. 7 E. 4. c. 1. 19 H.
7. c. 7. We read of Ordinances, Rules and Statutes made by Fraternities,
Corporations and Companies; in which they are used reciprocally as one and the
same: And as in all these Acts; so in diverse others in King Henry the eighth,
Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth and King James (which for brevity
I omit) we find the like. Therefore by all these numerous evidences, it is
clear and undeniable, that in all former Parliaments and Ages, Statutes, Acts,
and Ordinances, were always judged, reputed one and the same, not diverse, and
made by the selfsame authority and assent.

Thirdly, I shall make this most apparent by sundry Statutes in print, which
expressly style both general Acts of Parliament, and particular Statutes,
ORDINANCES, AN ORDINANCE, THIS ORDINANCE: and yet call them likewise Statutes,
this Statute, a Statute, the Statute, an Act of Parliament, etc. and likewise
style Ordinances, Statutes, Acts of Parliament, etc. For this you may peruse at
leisure the Statute of Marlbridge 52. H. 3. c. 8. If it be found that the
Sheriff delivers any contrary to this ORDINANCE, he shall be grievously
amerced therefore, 13. E. 1. The Statutes of Merchants forecited 27. E. 1. An
ORDINANCE of purchasing Liberties, 33. E. 1. An ORDINANCE of Enquests: and An
ORDINANCE of the Forest, 34. E. 1. An ORDINANCE of measuring Lands. An
Ordinance for Bakers, Brewers, etc. An Ordinance for Measures, 14. E. 3.
Parliament 1. c. 5. this ORDINANCE, c. 9. Against this ORDINANCE, thrice, c.
12. This ORDINANCE, c. 19. This Stablishment. This ORDINANCE, 15. E. 3. Parl.
1. c. 3. The Ordinance 18. E. 3. c. 4. This Ordinance twice c. 6 The said
Ordinance, 23. E. 3. c. 8. 25. E. 3. Par. 1. c. 4, 6, 8. Par. 4. c. 20. 27 E.
3. P. 2. c. 7, 14, 21. This Ordinance. These Ordinances often, 27 E. 3. Par. 3.
The Ordinance of the fees of the Mayor and Constable of the Staple. 28. E. 3.
c. 10. 13. This Ordinance: All the Ordinances made in the great Council at
Westminster, etc. shall be firmly holden and kept FOR A STATVTE TO ENDVRE FOR
EVER, 31. E. 3. Parliam. 1. c. 7. Against the Ordinances: Parl. 2. c. 2. This
Ordinance. These Ordinances: Parl. 3. The Ordinance of Fish, 34. E. 3. c. 21.
Upon the Ordinance of the Staple it was ordained, etc. 36. E. 3. c. 4. 13. 15.
This Ordinance: It is Ordained, that this ORDINANCE and STATVTE of Pleading
begin and hold place, etc. 37. E. 3. c. 1, 3, 5, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19. This
Ordinance, often. 38. E. 3. Parl. 1. c. 2, 7. The said Ordinance, often: then,
Statute or ORDINANCE, Parl. 2. c. 2, 4, 5. Ordinances; good Ordinances: This
Ordinance, etc. sundry times, 42. E. 3. c. 8. This Ordinance shall held place,
43. E. 3. c. 2, 4. This Ordinance: We command thee, that thou do the said
ORDINANCES to be cried and published in the Cities, etc. 2. R. 2. Parl. 1. c.
1. Against this Ordinance: Against this Statute, 3. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 3. This
Ordinance: twice, 5. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 3. Any thing forfeited against this
Ordinance, c. 4. Which Ordinanee shall be duly kept and put in execution. This
Ordinance of Wines shall begin to hold place as soon, etc. Against the form
of these Ordinances of Wines, 6. R. 2. Parl. 1. c. 2. The said Ordinance
(First) The said Statute (afterward) c. 11. The Ordinance, c. 13. No man shall
henceforth ride in Harneis within this Realm, contrary to the Statute of
Northampton. After, that bear Harneis contrary to the Statutes and Ordinances
aforesaid, c. 16. That these Ordinances be duly kept, etc. This Ordinance, 13
R. 2. c, 9. Ordinance often, c. 11. That this Ordinance begin to hold place, 15
R. 2. c. 8, 12. This Ordinance, etc. 16 R. 2. c. 6. This Ordinance, 17 R. 2. c.
7. Ordinance, 21 R. 2. c. 18. A convenient Ordinance, 21 R. 2. c. 20. To repeal
the Statutes or Ordinances (first, and then) Statutes and Ordinances, 1 H. 4.
c. 7. This STATUTE OR ORDINANCE shall begin, c. 8. This Ordinance and Statute
shall hold place, etc. c. 9. Many other Statutes and Ordinances, etc. By force
of the Ordinance and Statute aforesaid, c. 10. Ordained by Staiute, c. 15. This
Ordinance (twice) 2 H. 4. c. 15. The said Ordinance and Statute, c. 22. The
same Ordinance, The said Ordinance, The Ordinances aforesaid, 4 H. 4. c. 17.
This Statute and Ordinance shall hold place for ever: To hold, keep, observe
and preserve the Statute and Ordinance aforesaid, c. 18. This Ordinance, 6 H.
4. c. 4. The said Ordinance (thrice) 13 H. 4. c. 2, 3. Statute or Ordinance,
This Statute, The same Ordinance, The said Statutes and Ordinances be very
profitable, etc. That the said Statutes be holden and kept, c. 6. The Statutes
and Ordinances, etc. That the same Statutes he firmly holden and kept, etc. c.
7. Any Article or Ordinance, 1 H. 5. c. 2. The Statutes made, etc. That the
said Statutes and Ordinances be surely holden and kept, etc. c. 5. This
Ordinance shall begin, c. 7. The said Ordinance, The said Ordinances (four
times) c. 9. The ancient Ordinances, and the Statutes: The Ordinances
aforesaid: This Ordinance and Statute (twice) Which Ordinances, Good Ordinances
(four times) 2 H. 5. c. 4. Ordinances and Statutes (eight times) And all other
good Statutes, c. 6. This Ordinance (five times) c 8. Like Ordinances, etc. c.
9. This Ornance shall stand in force, 2 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 6. The same Ordinance
(twice) 3 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 2. This Ordinance, c. 4. The same Orcinance, c. 8.
This Ordinance, 4 H. 5. c. 4. That this Ordinance hold place: An Ordinance made
in 5 H. 5. concerning Attorneys, 7 H. 5. The Statute made at Westminster
concerning Appeals, has in the body of it, This Ordinance, This present
Ordinance: then follows, Do this Statute and Ordinance to be proclaimed, etc.
To be certified of the said Statute and Ordinance, 8 H. 5. c. 3. This last
Ordinance shall begin, 9 H. 5. c. 2. This Ordinance (twice) c. 3. An Ordinance,
This Ordinance (thrice) c. 4. This Ordinance, c. 8. That this Ordinance endure,
9 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 9. All the Ordinances aforesaid, 1 H. 6. c. 1, 2. Statute
and Ordinance, Statutes and Ordinances made, c. 3. The Ordinance, 2 H. 6. c. 2.
This Ordinance, c. 7. That this Ordinance and Statute hold place, c. 8. In the
same Ordinance excepted; The said Ordinance, c. 11. This Ordinance (twice) c.
14. The Ordinance; The said Ordinances, 4 H. 6. c. 1. This Ordinance, c. 2.
This Ordinance shall endure till the Parliament; Which Ordinance is determined,
etc. Has ordained, that the said Ordinance made the said fourth year, shall
stand as a Statute and Law effectual and available in all points to all
persons, etc. Shall have any benefit of the same Ordinance, c. 3. Which
Ordinance should endure, etc. That the said Statute, etc. shall hold force as a
Statute available and effectual in Law to endure for ever, c. 5. Any
Ordinance, 6 H. 6. c. 1. This Ordinance, c. 2. This Ordinance or Statute, c. 3.
The same Ordinance; A thing ordained by Statute; This Ordinance, 8 H 6. c. 2.
The said King of Denmark against the Sea 1 H. 8. c. 1.
Ordinance, etc. c. 3. The said Ordinance; By Ordinance shall have power to do,
ordain and execute the Statutes, Ordinances, etc. c. 4. Statutes and Ordinances
(six times) and then, The contrary of the said Ordinances, etc. Against the
form of the said Statutes, c. 5. This Ordinance (twice) c. 6. Statutes and
Ordinances; then, This Ordinance (thrice) c. 7. The Ordinances, c. 9. Statutes
and Ordinances; The said Statute and other Statutes, c. 10. This Ordinance, c.
13. That this Statute shall endure, etc. Then follows, Comprised in this
present Ordinance, etc. Have any benefit of the same Ordinance, c. 14. The same
Ordinance shall stand in its force, etc. The said Statutes, etc. The said
Statute shall now be kept, etc. c. 17. Ordained by diverse Statutes and
Ordinances, etc. This Ordinance (twice) c. 18. The Ordinance and Appointment,
c. 25. Any Statute or Ordinance, c. 29. The first Ordinance (five times) The
last Statute; The last Statute and Ordinance, 9 H. 6. c. 2. That Ordinance; The
said Ordinance, c. 3. This present Ordinance, c. 4. This Ordinance, c. 7. This
Ordinancc, c. 9. This Ordinance, 11 H. 6. c. 5. This Ordinance (twice) c. 7.
This Ordinance (thrice) c. 8. The Statutes and Ordinances made of Measures; The
said Ordinances and Statutes (twice) then, The said Statutes and Ordinances
(twice) Wills the same Statutes and Ordinances to be holden and kept; Has
ordained that the said Statutes be proclaimed and put in due execution: Then it
follows, To put all the Statutes and Ordinances in due execution, according to
the form and effect of the said Statutes and Ordinances: Then, To execute all
the Statutes abovesaid, (twice) c. 13. The good Ordinance and Statute;
According to the Ordinance: c. 14. Against the form of the said Statutes: Then
follows, Against the Ordinance abovesaid: c. 15. This Ordinance: 14 H. 6. c.
6. The said Statute and Ordinance: c. 7. This Ordinance: c. 8. Whereas it was
declared and ordained by a Statute, etc. Forasmuch as before the said
Ordinance, etc. The said Statute, etc. (thrice) 15 H. 6. c. 2. This Ordinance:
18 H. 6. c. 4. This Act and Ordinance (thrice) and then, This Provision and
Ordinance: c. 7. The said Statute: then, Which good Statute and Ordinance:
next, The said Statute (twice) c. 9. Any Statute or Ordinance: This Statute and
Ordinance shall begin, etc. And that Proclamation be thereof made, etc.
Incontinently after this Ordinance: To the intent, that Merchant Aliens may
have knowledge of the said Ordinance: c. 11. This Ordinance: c. 13, and 14. It
was ordained, etc. This Ordinance shall stand in force till the next
Parliament, etc. Which Statute by decease of the said King, by opinion of some,
is expired, etc. That the said Ordinance shall be and abide an effectual and
avaylable Statute and Ordinance in Law, perpetually to endure: c. 14 This
Ordinance (thrice) c. 15. This Ordinance (three times) c. 16. This Ordinance:
20 H. 6. c. 1. This Ordinance: c. 2. This Ordinance (twice) c. 3. This
Ordinance: c. 4. This Ordinance: c. 5. This Ordinance: The Statute and
Ordinance aforesaid: c. 7. This Ordinance: c. 8. This Ordinance (thrice) then,
This Ordinance among other Statutes of Purveyors, etc. Shall be sent to the
Sheriffs of every County, to proclaim and deliver the said Statutes and
Ordinances: c. 10. This Ordinance (twice) c. 11. It was ordained by the Statute
made, etc. Forasmuch as before the said Ordinance, etc. then, The said Statute:
And that this Ordinance, etc. c. 12. The Ordinance of Partition (twice) 23 H.
6. c. 2. The said Statutes from henceforth shall be duly kept, etc. That he
shall take nothing of the people, contrary to the said Ordinances: then,
Contrary to the said Statutes (thrice) next, Contrary to the said Statutes and
Ordinances: then, Execution of the said Ordinances: after, That these Statutes
and Ordinances: c. 3. This Ordinance: c. 4. The said Ordinance (twice) c. 6.
All other Ordinances: This Ordinance: then, This Statute: after, The Statute
and Ordinance aforesaid: c. 7. This Ordinance: c. 10. These Ordinances: after,
This Ordinance (twice) c. 11. This Act and Ordinance shall begin: c. 14. This
Ordinance shall begin, etc. Provided always, that by this Act, etc. 27 H. 6.
c. 1. A certain Ordinance: then, Concerning this Act: after, this Ordinance to
endure, etc. c. 2. this Act: then, this Statute: next, this Ordinance: after,
this Act: then, Contrary to the Ordinance of this Statute: next, this Act
(twice) after, this Ordinance; this Grant or Ordinance (twice) then, this
Ordinance (twice) c. 3. this Ordinance (twice) c. 4. the said Ordinance: c. 5.
this Ordinance (twice) 28 H. 6. c. 1. A certain Ordinance: then, this
Ordinance, etc. (six times) c. 2. The Ordinance: c. 3. this Ordinance (twice)
c. 4. this Ordinance (twice) 29 H. 6. c. 2. Endamaged by this Act: And that
this Ordinance shall begin, etc. then, Contrary to this Statute: 31 H. 6. c. 3.
this Ordinance: 33 H. 6. c. 1. the said Ordinance: c. 6. the said Ordinance: c.
7. this Ordinance (thrice) 39 H. 6. c. 1. Acts, Statutes and Ordinances (twice)
1 E. 4. c. 2. this present Ordinance: then, Provided that this Act: after, that
this Act and Ordinance: next, And that this Ordinance: 3 E. 4. c. 1. By this
Ordinance: afterward, that this present Act and Ordinance: c. 3. this
Ordinance (twice) c. 4. this Ordinance or Statute: after, this Ordinance nor
Act, nor none other Ordinance or Act made: c. 4. Ordinances and Statutes: then,
Statutes and Ordinances: after, Contrary to this Ordinance: next, Provided,
that this Statute: then, Nor that this Ordinance: Notwithstanding this
Ordinance: after, Within this Statute: and in the close, that this Ordinance: 4
E. 4. c. 1. this Ordinance (twice) then, the Statutes and Ordinances made
before this time: after, that these Statutes and Ordinances, and other Statutes
and Ordinances made before this time: next, Any other Act or Ordinance: then,
Not according to this Act: c. 2. this Ordinance (twice) afterward termed, this
Act (twice) 4 E. 4. c. 5. Forasmuch as a certain Declaration and Ordinance, in
form of a Statute, evermore to endure, were of late made by the Duke of
Burgony, etc. Which said Declaration and Ordinance (twice) next, the Statute
made against it, is styled, this Ordinance (four times) then, that this Act,
nor none other Act, Statute nor Ordinance, made or to be made (twice) c. 7. the
like. In 7 E. 4. c. 1. 2, 3, 4. 12 E. 4. c. 3, 9. 14 E. 4. c. 1, 24. 17. E. 4.
c. 1, 4, 6. 22 E. 4. c. 2. 1 R. 2. c. 6, 10, 13. 1 H. 7. c. 2, 5, 8, 9. 9 H. 7.
c. 2, 4, 8, 9, 11, 21, 22. 7 H. 7. c. 2, 5. 11 H. 7. c. 1, 4, 8. 19 H. 7. c. 4,
22, 23. and in sundry other Statutes of King Henry the eighth, Edward the
sixth, Queen Marys Queen Elizabeth, King James (which for brevity I forbear to
cite,) we have the like connection of Statutes, Acts and Ordinances, and
interchangeable stiling of Acts and Statutes, Ordinances; and of Ordinances,
Acts, Statutes, Laws, etc. 31 E. 3. Parl. 2. c. 3. 34 E. 3. c. 20. 5 R. 2.
Parl. 2. c. 11. 2 H. 4. Parl. 2 c. 4. 3 H. 7. c. 3. we read of Ordinances to be
made by the Chancellor, Treasurer and King's Council; or by the King and
Barons of the Exchequer by authority of Parliament, to stand as binding Laws;
and of Ordinances made by the Goldsmiths, and by the Major of London, without,
and against Law; and 15 H. 6. c. 6. 23 H. 6. c. 4. 7 E. 4. c. 1. 19 H. 7. c. 7.
we read of Ordinances and Laws made by Fraternities and Corporations; none of
all which are any Ordinances of Parliament: but it is undeniable by these and
all the forecited Statutes, that an Ordinance of Parliament, in the opinion,
resolution, style and judgment of all these See 46 E. 3. n. 13, 14. 21 E 3. n.
6, 18, 37, 60. 5 H. 4. n. ^ 45.
ancient Parliaments before these our days, was all one with an Act of
Parliament, Law, Statute; and that these were used reciprocally one for
another; for what is called an Ordinance in one clause or line, is styled an
Act or Statute, or both of them, in another; and what is called a Law, a
Statute, or Act of Parliament in one place, is termed an Ordinance, or an Act
and Ordinance, a Statute and Ordinance, in another, etc. as the premises
abundantly manifest; therefore there was heretofore no diversity at all between
an Act or Ordinance of Parliament, but they were both one and the same; ever
made by the same concurrent assent of King Lords and Commons, by the opinion,
resolution of all these forecited Parliaments, Statutes 39 E. 3. 7. 8 H. 4. 12,
13, 14, 20. 9 H. 4. 1. Br. Parl. 11.
and of our Judges too.

Fourthly, this is undeniable by the manner of penning and enacting our
Statutes and Acts of Parliament, in all Ages, in these very terms: It is
ORDAINED; Be it ORDAINED; It is provided, agreed and ORDAINED; It is assented
and ORDAINED; It is, or, be it ORDAINED; It is, or be it ORDAINED and
established; The King with the assent, etc. has ordained: For which you may
consult at leisure, the forecited Preambles to most of our Statutes, 3 E. 1. c.
48 7 E. 1. the Statute of Mortmain, 13 E. 1. the Statute of Acton Burnell, 13
E. 1. c. 8, to 16, 33, 36, 38, 39, 41, 46, 48, 13 E. 1. the Statute of
Merchants, 18 E. 1. c. 1. 27 E. 1. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. of Fines, 27 E. 1. A Statute
for persons appealed, 21 E. 1. Articuli super Chartas, the preamble, etc. 1, 2,
3, 11, 20. 30 E. 1. the new Statute of Quo Warranto, 34 E. 1. the Statute of
Jointenants, 9 E. 2. the Statute of Sheriffs, 15 E. 2. the Statute of Carlisle,
18 E. 2. the Statute of Prizes, 1 E. 3. c. 1. 2 E. 3. the preamble, etc. 2, 5,
6, 8, 12. 4 E. 3. c. 2, 15. 9 E. 3. c. 4. and parl. 2. preamble, 10 E. 3. parl.
1. preamble, 18 E. 3. parl. 2. c. 6. 20 E. 3. preamble, c. 4, 5, 6. 21 E. 3. c.
1, 8. 25 E. 3. parl. 1. preamble, etc. 1. parl. 3. c. 2. parl. 4. c. 2. parl.
5. preamble, c. 2, 18. and parl. 6, and 7. 27 E. 3. prologue, and parl. 2.
preamble, etc. 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 14, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 28. 28 E. 3. preamble,
c. 7, 8, 10, 11, 13. 31 E. c. 5, 6, 7, 10, 15. and parl. 2. preamble, etc. 2,
3. parl. 3. the Ordinance for Fish, 34 E. 3. the prologue, c. 21. 36 E. 3. c.
2, 4, to 16. 37 E. 3. preamble, etc. 1, to 20. 38 E 3. parl. 1. preamble etc.
2, 6, 10, 11. parl. 2. c. 2, 4, 5. 42 E. 3. c. 3, 9, 11. 43 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3,
4. 45. E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. 50 E. 3. c. 1, 7, 8. 1 R. 2. preamble, etc. 4, 5, 6,
7, 9, 11, 12, 15. 2 R. 2. stat. 1. c. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7. parl. 2. c. 3. 3 R. 2.
parl. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. parl. 2. c. 1. parl. 1. c. 6, 7, to 16. parl 2. c. 5. 6 R.
2. parl. 1. c. 3, 6, to 13. parl. 2. c. 3. 7 R. 2. c. 4, to 17. 8 R. 2. c. 2,
3. 10 R. 2. c. 1. 11 R. 2. c. 6, to 12. 12 R. 2. c. 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 14, 16.
13 R. 3 preamble, etc. 1, 4, to 20. 13 R. 2. parl. 2. c. 2, 3. 14 R. 2.
preamble, etc. 11. 15 R. 2. preamble, etc. 3, 4, 6, 8. 12. 16 R. 2. preamble,
c. 1, 3, 5, 6. 17 R. 2. preamble, c. 2, 5, 9. 20 R. 2. preamble, c. 1, 5. 21 R.
2. c. 2, to 21. 1 H. 4. c. 5, to 20. 2 H. 4. c. 1, to 25. 4 H. 4. c. 2, to 35.
5 H. 4. c. 2, to 15. 6 H. 4. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. 6 H. 4. c. 2, to 18. 9 H. 4. c. 2,
to 8. 11 H. 4. c. 1, to 9. 13 H. 4. c. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 H. 5. c. 1, to 11. 2 H.
5. c. 1, to 10. 3 H. 5. parl. 2. c. 3, to 9. 4 H. 5. c. 4, 5, 6. 8 H. 5. c. 2,
3. 9 H. 5. c. 2, 3, to 13. 9 H. 5. Parl. 2. c. 1, 2, 7, 9, 10. 1 H. 6. c. 1, to
6. 2 H. 6. c. 2, to 15. 3 H. 6. c. 1, to 6 4 H 6. c. 2, 3, 6. 6 H. 6. c. 1, to
6. 8 H. 6. c. 1, to 30. 9 H. 6. c. 2, to 11. 10 H. 6. c. 2, to 8. And to cite
no more in so plain a case, almost every Statute since 10 H. 6. till this very
day, retains this very form of words: It is, or, Be it ordained, etc. from
whence the word Ordinance is derived: And therefore Acts and Ordinances of
Parliament in proper speech and use must necessarily be one and the same, the
word So Ordinatum est per Curiam, is the usual form of entries in most Courts
of Record.
ORDINARI, and no other word of enacting Laws but it, being used and inserted
into the very Writs of Elections and Summons to the Parliament, as I have
formerly observed, the cause it is so frequent and still retained in our
Statutes and Acts of Parliament till this very day.

Finally, if all these authorities and reasons from our own printed Statutes,
be not sufficient to prove Statutes and Ordinances of Parliament in all former
times, both one and the same, I shall unanswerably evince and clear it by
divine Authorities, out of the unerring word of truth, which resolves AN
ORDINANCE, LAW STATUTE to be all one, couples ORDINANCES AND LAWS usually
together as one, takes them promiscuously one for another; and uses the word
ORDAIN, as the proper term in enacting divine, as well as humane Laws, as
these (...) Texts will manifest; which those who desire satisfaction herein,
may peruse at their leisure: Exodus 12. 14, 24, 43. chap. 13. 10. chap. 15. 25
chap. 18. 20. Leviticus 18. 3, 4, 30. chap. 22. 9. Numbers 9. 12, 14 chap. 10.
8. chap. 15. 15. chap. 18. 8. chap. 19. 2. Joshua 24. 25. 1, ^am. 30. 25. 2 Chronicles. 2. 4. chap. 33. 8. chap. 35. 13, 25. 2 Kings 17. 34, 37 Ezra 3. 10.
Nehemiah 9. 32. Job 38. 33. Psalm 99. 7. and 119. 91 Isaiah 24. 5. chap. 52. 8.
chap. 58. 2. Jeremiah 31. 35, 36. chap. 33. 25 Ezekiel 11. 20. chap. 43. 11,
18. chap. 44. 5. chap. 45. 14. chap. 46. 14 Malachi 3. 7, 14. Luke 1. 6.
Romans 13. 2. 1 Cor. 11. 2. Ephestans 2. 15. Colossians 2. 14, 20. Hebrews 9.
1, 10. 1 Peter 2. 13. Numbers 28. 6. 1 Kings 12. 32, 33. 2 Chronicles. 23. 18.
Esther 9. 27. Psalm 81 5. Daniel 2. 24. Acts 16. 4. Romans 7. 10. chap. 13. 1.
Galathians 3. 19. 1 Cor. 7. 17. Hebrews 9. 6. compared together.

I have taken thus much pains (in an untrodden path) to prove Statutes, Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament to be always anciently and really one and the
self-same, made by consent of the King, Lords and Commons jointly, not of Lords
and Commons alone without the King, or by King and Commons without the Lords,
not any ways to invalid or impeach any late good and absolutely necessary
Ordinances of Parliament, which the exegences of our unhappy distracted times
have enforced the houses to pass without the King's consent (being absent
from, and in Arms against them) for their own and the Sea my Sovereign Power of
Parliaments and Kingdoms
Kingdoms preservation, or any Ordinances for the necessary reformation or
punishment of any general grievances or abuses, according to Law, or
preventing any public mischiefs in a regular manner, by way of Declaration, or
assisting of the common Law: Salus populi and Reipublicae, being suprema Lex,
and extraordinary Remedies to be prescribed by the Houses in such extraordinary
cases and exigencies, when ordinary can find no place at all; but for these
ensuing reasons.

First, to refute the commonly received error of these times, and of some
pretended Grandees of the Law, That Acts and Ordinances of Parliament in former
ages, were distinct and different things, not one and the same; and that the
royal assent was then held only necessary to Acts, but not to Ordinances of
Parliament: for which there is not any one single pregnant convincing president
extant to my knowledge, in any Parliament Rolls or printed Acts: which error
has been principally propagated by Sir Edw. Cooks venerable authority and
assertion, in his 4 Instit. p. 25. whose misallegations and mistakes are too
frequently embraced for Oracles of truth for want of due examination.

Secondly, to abate the excessive fees now taken by Officers in both Houses of
Parliament for private Ordinances, as high (or higher) for the most part, as
the ancient or late Fees for private Acts of Parliament, which had the Royal
assent; a great grievance and oppression to the Subject, generally complained
of, fit to be examined and redressed in these reforming times, when private
Ordinances and exactions for them are so frequent, without any president in
former Parliaments to warrant such new excessive Fees.

Thirdly, to persuade and induce the Members of both Houses of Parliament, not
to multiply these new kind of Parliamentary Ordinances (destitute of Royal
assent, and the peoples general approbation in full Parliament) to the
impeachment or infringement of any ancient Ordinances still in force, the
Statutes or common Law of the Realm, the invasion of the peoples undoubted
Liberties, Rights or Proprieties, which they have so long fought for, and
dearly purchafed with the expense of so much treasure and blood, or to the
inveagling of the consciences of Judges or Lawyers, contrary to their Oaths and
Duties.

Fourthly, to advise both Houses to turn all their former and future necessary,
useful Ordinances into Acts of Parliament, and to press the King's Royal
assent to them in their expected approaching personal Treaty with his Majesty,
for the greater indemnity and security of those who have acted on, or received,
or enjoy any moneys, lands, offices or emoluments by them, to avoid all
questions and scruples in succeeding Parliaments and Ages.

Fifthly, to admonish Committees of all sorts, not to rack or strain any new
Ordinances wanting the threefold assent, (especially such as are penal) beyond
their Letter, or true intention, to the Subjects oppression, who had many times
no legal notice of them; an int^lerable common grievance, contrary to the
ordinary rules of justice, and the Houses primitive purposes, on whom sundry
Committees and their Underofficers extravagancies in this kind, have drawn
much hatred and scandal; the sad effects whereof begin now visibly to appear
in the late insurrections and distempers of the people in sundry Counties, and
hatred of Committee Men, which will hardly be cordially pacified or allayed,
but by the speedy suppression of all such arbitrary, lawless Committees and
Officers, and calling them to a strict and just account both for their
receipts, disbursments, and malicious, vindictive, injurious actions, to the
public prejudice, and the peoples general grievance, oppression and
discontent.

Sixthly, to induce the Houses of Parliament to conform all their future new
Ordinances, and the execution of them, as near as possible, to the forms and
rules of Law; and to be very careful of setting up any such new Ordinances
(without inevitable necessity, and general inconveniences of dangerous
sequel) to repeal, control, or give checkmate to the fundamental known Laws
and Statutes of the Realm, or stop the current of the common Law, and public
justice: it being an abuse, a usurpation of very dangerous and pernicious
consequence, contrary to many Declarations and Remonstrances of both Houses,
and the very tenor of the solemn League and Covenant; wherein they have
solemnly engaged all three Kingdoms: The bitter fruits of such destructive
Ordinances we may chance to taste of, and bewail, when it is too late; such
arbitrary and illegal Ordinances wanting pure metal, as well as the Royal
impresse, will in conclusion but betray, endanger the Coyners of them, and be
branded, rejected for counterfeit Coin, when brought unto the test. Liberavi
animam meam. I shall add no more, but recommend these brief Collections to
Gods blessing, and the unprejudiced Readers kind acceptance.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. line 12. read Additio. p. 14. l. 4. Item. p. 16. l. 17. Justices. p.
19. l. 9. ierint. p. 20. l. 2. terminand. l. 16. transgressiones. p. 21. l. 33.
omittas. p. 2. l. 30. n. 54. p. 28. l. 35. notable.


