To the Mayor and Aldermen, with all others in Authority, both in the Civil and
Millitary affairs in and about the City of London, together with all other
sorts of People of what condition soever, High and Low, Rich and Poor,
Professors and Profane, who reside in and about the said City; Listen and give
good Ear to what is here declared unto you by a Servant of the Lord.
THe Living God of Heaven and Earth whom all people ought to Reverence and
Worship (with all humility) in Spirit and truth in their hearts, has waited
long to be gracious unto you, and has done great things for you; he has given
you life and breath, strength and health, and fullness, and plenty, of all good
things, more has not been in any age as in this latter age; besides all these
outward Blessings and mercies manifested from God unto you; he has also held
forth himself in much love and kindness unto you, in giving his Son a Light
into the World, that has enlightened your understandings, and showed unto you
what is good, and what is evil; and he has long been striving with you
inwardly by his Light and Spirit to draw your hearts out of the evil, into the
good; that you might walk with him, and live unto him in the life that is pure
and holy; and moreover (as the overflowings of his love, and to manifest his
willingness that all might be saved, and none perish) he has sent forth his
Messengers and servants amongst you, to invite you to come unto him and wait
upon him, and serve and obey him in truth and uprightness of heart; and much
more has the Lord done for you, whereby you are for ever left without excuse.
All which Mercies have been abused by many of you, and the proffers and tenders
of Love slighted, and you have kicked against God, and have not turned at his
reproves; but have cast his Law behind your backs, and turned his Grace into
wantonness; you have lived in pride and pleasures, and have delighted (and
taken pleasure more) in the Creatures, then in the Creator: Oh the sins, the
sins of the people of this City are great, drunkenness, whoredom, luxury,
rioting and excess, and all manner of abominations are found within your
borders; and when you have been warned by the Servants of God in the day of
your Prosperity, of the calamity and misery that was coming upon you, and the
Plagues and Judgments that did hang over your heads, (as many have been
faithful in warning of you) you have made a light matter of it, and esteemed
the many warnings as a thing of naught; and despised the Messengers and
Servants of God, and evilly entreating of them by reviling, and scoffing, and
casting them into nasty Prisons, as in these late years past has been largly
manifest. Those who have departed from iniquity, and according to their best
judgment and understanding have cleaved unto the truth, and followed after
Righteousness, they have become even a prey unto you; who could not join with
you in your ways of Worship, which men have invented, and set up, and not God;
and could not go on with you in your vain ways, riotings, and other
flesh-pleasing practices; such have been branded with strange and foul names, as
Phanaticks, dangerous persons, Plotters of mischief, and contrivers of
Insurrection, etc. though none of these things ever was proved, nor never can
be proved against that innocent people called Quakers; though we have deeply
(but most unjustly) suffered, as witness the year last past, how have your
Prisons been filled with a People whose conversations have been and are more
innocent and blamless then yours, (and Oh how many have laid down their
precious innocent Lives in the last year, fresh young people that according to
what we can judge, might have lived many years, and been serviceable to God and
men in their generation, had they not been suffocated and even stifled, and
Nature corrupted in that foul stinking Prison of Newgate, whose blood cries
aloud for vengeance, and surely the Lord ^s now come to render vengeance upon
the Inhabitants of this City for ^his great Sin of persecuting and imprisoning,
and banishing of a People merely for the worship and service of God; and though
you have not mentioned this Sin in your late confession, yet know that this Sin
cries ^ery loud in the ears of God: And now what will you do, in the day of
Calamity and sore misery that is come, and coming upon you, your Sins are so
numerous and weighty, and being so far alienated from the word of eternal Life;
you cannot look death in the face, which has strongly assaulted and entered
your borders, but flies before it, and whether can you fly? Shall not the Lord
find you out, y^a surely, and his judgment will not cease until he have
eased himself ^ his adversaries, he is highly provoked, and his wrath is
kindled very h^t: Oh who can stand before him, or who dare supplicate him on
your be^alf; I know not the man that knows God in Truth, that dare appear for
you, in the state and condition you are in, for though the Lord has visit^ you
in judgment, yet this is observed that most are apt to put it al^ off, and
does not humble themselves by repentance; and though any may draw nigh to God
with their lips, and cry aloud now when the judgment is upon them or near unto
them, yet will not the Lord he them, for your sins have made a separation
between you and the Lord; and though you make many Prayers the Lord will not
hear: Oh what sh^l I say unto you in this day? my heart is even pained within
me because of the misery that is coming upon you from the Lord. I have little
to say to you. because he is angry with you, only as one who has found mercy
from him, and knows what is pleasing and displeasing unto him; I advise and
council you to humble your selves before the Lord, and to break off your sins
by Repentance; open the Prison doors at Newgate and other Prisons, and set
those free who suffer only for their Conscience toward God: and whatever you
know to be evil, shun and avoid it, and whatever you ^ew to be good, embrace
it; The Lord has given you Light to show you what is evil and what is good;
let every one speedily turn from the evil and cleave to the good, and walk
humbly before the Lord, it may be he may then be i^treated, to remove the heavy
Judgment and Plague that is now broken forth, and show mercy unto the penitent,
that not only confesses but forsakes his sins. Delay not time, but now even
now while it is called to day, harden not your hearts, for the Lord will not
always strive with man, but will render vengeance in flames of fire upon all
the stiffnecked and disobedient, and they shall be separated from the presence
of God, and from the Glory of his Power. Blessed are the faithful and obedient,
who follow the Lamb of God in the Regeneration, who have taken up the Cross and
despised the shame; who suffer with him, such shall reign with him; and whether
living or dying, in health, or sickness, in bonds or at liberty, in banishment,
or in any other condition it shall go well with them, and they shall rest in
peace, and dwell with God in his Holy Presence, where there is Joy and
Pleasures for evermore.

Given forth by one that mourns with the Mourners, and suffers with the
Sufferers, who am a lover of Truth and Righteousness, waiting to see it
flourish as a branch, and to run down as a mighty stream, as God has promised.
London 11th. of the 5th. Month 1665.

