A Declaration and Protestation of Will: Prynne and Cle: Walker, Esquires,
Members of the House of Commons, against the present Actings and Proceedings of
the General, and General Council of the Army, and their Faction now
remaining and sitting in the said House.
WHereas long since, for ease of the People, both Houses in a full and free
Parliament Voted the Disbanding of this Army: in opposition to which, some
great Officers of the said Army, (to continue their rich Commands) with some
Members of the House of Commons, (who daily enrich themselves by the troubles
of the times) secretly mutinied the Army against the Parliament. And whereas,
lately the far major part of the House of Commons, pitying the bleeding
condition, and tears of the oppressed People, Voted, and entered into a
Personal Treaty with the King: without which (by the Armies own confession in
their Remonstrance at St. Albons, page 64.) there can be no Peace; which the
Army interrupted by obtruding upon the Commons a Treasonable Remonstrance, 20
November. 1648. tending to destroy the King, and His Posterity, and wholly to
subvert all Parliaments, Religion, Laws, and Liberties for ever; whereby the
Commons in Parliament found it absolutely necessary to prevent such pernicious
innovations, by concluding a safe Peace with His Majesty; whereupon (after
mature debate) the House of Commons the 5 December. 1648. Voted, That the Kings
Answer to the Propositions of both Houses upon the Treaty, were a ground for
the Houses to proceed to the settlement of a safe and well-grounded Peace: Upon
which, the General, and Council of War, Wednesday morning 6 December 1648.
Seized and Imprisoned 41 of the Members going to the House of Commons to do
their Duty, secluded above 160 other Members, besides 40 or 50 Members who
voluntarily withdrew themselves to avoid their violence; leaving only their own
engaged party of 40 or 50 Members sitting, who now pass Acts of Parliament, of
the House of Commons (as they call them) without the Lords; and comply with the
said Council of War, to carry on their said Remonstrance: To which purpose
this present remnant of the Commons have un-voted in a thin House, under the
force of the Army, what was deliberately Voted in a full and free House;
whereas by their own Ordinance passed upon the Tumult of Apprentises, 20 August
1647. to null, and make void ab initio, all Acts, Orders, Votes, etc. passed
under the said force; This remaining Party ought not to sit, act, nor take upon
them the style of a House, under so visible, actual, and horrid a Force.

The premises considered, We, whose names are hereunto subscribed, Members of
the House of Commons, do Declare and Protest, That the said General,
Commissioned Officers, and Genenerall Council of the Army, by the said Act of
violence, upon the major part of the House, which legally, and virtually is the
whole House, have waged War, and Rebelled against the Parliament, their
Masters, who raised them to defend the Privileges of Parliament, and the Kings
Person and Authority, in defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and have
thereby forfeited their Commissions, and have broken and dis-continued this
Parliament; so that, until this force be removed, punished, the Honor of the
Parl. and their wronged Members vindicated, and all the Members resummoned, all
the Votes, Orders, and Actings, Passed, and to be Passed by this nominall House
of Commons, are, and will be void, ab initio, and all such as do, or shall obey
them, are and will be punishable, both by the Armies own Judgment in their
Remonstrance, August 18. and by the Houses Declaration, and the said Ordinnnce,
20 August 1647. We do farther Declare, and protest against this present House
of Commons illegal Acts, Order, or Ordinance, for erecting a High Court of
Justice, and usurping a Power, without any Law or president, to Try, Depose,
and bring to capital punishment the King, and to dis-inherit His Posterity, or
any of them, and against the said General Council of Officers, aiding and
abetting them therein, as highly impious against the Law of God, Nations, and
the Protestant Profession, Traitors against the Stat. of Treasons, 25 Ed. 3.
and against all Laws and our Statutes, Perjurious and perfidious, against the
Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, National Covenant, and Protestation; all the
Parliaments Declarations and Remonstrances held forth to the world; their
treaties and promises made to the Scots, when they delivered the Kings person
into our hands; against our promises made to the Hollanders, and other Nations,
and against all the Professions, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Proposalls
made by this Army, when they made their Addresses to the King at New Market,
Hampton Court, and other places.

19 Janu. 1648. Will: Prynne, Cle: Walker.


