Three Seasonable Quaeres, PROPOSED To all those Cities, Counties and Boroughs,
whose respective Citizens, Knights and Burgesses have been forcibly excluded,
uniustly eiected, and disabled to sit in the Commons house, by those now acting
at WESTMINSTER.
IT being the indubitable birthright, privilege and franchise of all Citizens,
Freeholders and Burgesses of every City, County and Borough of the Realm of
England, freely to elect 2. Citizens, Knights and Burgesses, by virtue of the
Kings Writs, and to give them full and sufficient power by their Indentures
under their Seals, both for themselves and the respective Commonalties of the
said Cities, Counties and Boroughs, to do and consent to all Laws, Aids,
Taxes, and things which shall be ordained or imposed on them by common Counsel,
and consent in every Parliament of this Realm; which Citizens, Knights and
Burgesses, ought freely to fit and vote in the Commons House in their behalf,
as their Trustees and Representatives, from the beginning to the end of every
Parliament for which they are elected without interruption, or exclusion, and
not to be ejected or voted out of the House, but for some notable Misdemeanour
or breach of their Parliamentary Trust, by judgment of Parliament, upon a
particular impeachment or charge against them, after a deliberate hearing,
trial, and judgment pronounced against them at the bar, according to the rules
of Justice and course of Parliament; All which is evident by the known Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, the Writs of Summons to, and Records, Presidents of
Parliament, the Resolutions of Judges, Law Books, and all Writers of the
Parliaments of England, of late and former times.

1. Whether all the Burgesses of the City of Westminster (where the Fragment of
the long Parliament now sits in state) guarded with their Militia, and other
armed forces, whose two Burgesses, John Glyn, now Sergeant at Law, and William
Bell Gentleman, still living; the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Common Council, and
Citizens of London, 2. of whose 3. remaining Citizens, Sir Thomas Soam Knight,
and Samuel Vassal Merchant; all the Freeholders in the County of Middlesex,
(within which they are assembled) whose only surviving Knight of the Shire,
Gilbert Gerrard Baronet; all Freeholders of the County of Hartford, whose 2.
Knights of the Shire, Sir William Litton, and Sir Thomas Dacres Knights: of
Surry, whose 2. Knights, Sir Richard Ownslow Knight, and Sir Ambrose Brown
Baronet; (all adjoining) All Freeholders within the remoter Counties of
Gloucester, whose 2. Knights Nathaniel Stephens Esquire, and Sir John Seymer
Knight; of Oxfordshire, whose 2. Knights Thomas Viscount Wenman, and James
Fiennes Esquire all yet living; and of all other Counties, Cities, and Boroughs
throughout England and Wales, one or both of whose Knights, Citizens or
Burgesses yet in life, have been heretofore forcibly secured, or excluded by
armed Gards from fitting and voting freely in the House of Commons in December.
1648. or in May and December. 1659. by the confederacy, practice, order or
commands of the Membersthen or now fitting, and by their new-printed Vote of
the 5th. of this instant January, instead of admitting them for a New Years
Gift, have voted them quite out of the House and Parliament, and adjudged them
to stand duly discharged by Judgment of Parliament from sitting as Members of
Parliament, during this Parliament; and that new Writs do issue forth for
electing New Members in their places; before any legal impeachment against or
hearing, trial, conviction of all or any of them; and without rendering any
Ground or Reason at all in their Vote or any other Declaration, to these worthy
ejected Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses themselves, or to the respective
Counties, Cities, Boroughs, whose Trustees and Representatives they are, of
this their forcible Seclusion, Ejection, and Non-ability to fit or vote
according to the Power and trust reposed in them by the Counties, and
Commonalties, who elected, returned, and empowered them under their respective
sealed Indentures. Be not all in Justice, Honor, Duty and Conscienee
severally obliged, both by the Laws of the Land, their Protestation, and Solemn
National League and Covenant, and the late President of the Inhabitants and
Freeholders of the County of Buckingham, Jan. 13. 1641. in the Case of Mr. John
Hampden, chosen one of the Knights of that Shire (when impeached and demanded
by the King to be delivered up to him by the House) both for the vindication of
the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the Innocence and Integrity of these
their dis-membered untainted Trustees, in whom they had good cause to confide,
and of their own Judgments, Integrities, Care and Prudence in their Elections,
as the discreetest and ablest Persons to serve them, and the whole Kingdom in
and during the continuance of this Parliament; and for the Preservation of
their own Freedom in their Elections, before they proceed to elect any New
Members in their places, unanimously, magnanimously, and personally at the
House bar, to demand of their bold Ejectors, (thus keeping and casting them out
by armed forces raised only for their protection to sit and vote with freedom
and safety) the true Grounds and Reasons of this their unwarrantable Ejectment;
and in case they cannot or shall not give them a satisfactory account of the
Legality and Justice of this their Exclusion for some particular Misdemeanors
or Breaches of their public Trusts, and of the manner of their Proceeding
theirin without hearing or impeachment, then to require speedy and full
Reparations from them, for the Injury, Indignity and Injustice done thereby,
both to their Trustees and themselves, and not to submit to any thing they vote
or impose, as binding to them, in any kind, till this be effected, since their
assents in their names and steads, is the only reason in Law, that makes their
Acts and Impositions binding to them?

2. Whether the sitting Members may not and will not in all probability, with
as much Justice and Reason, by mere force and will, Exclude and eject all
Members which shall be newly elected by those Counties, Cities or Boroughs, in
place of the old secluded and ejected Members, in case they suspect or conceit
they will not comply with, or will overvote them in their Innovations and
Designs, as they have excluded and ejected those old Members, and put them upon
successive Elections of other Members, till they have completed their
Projections without them; or packed a House of their own Creatures and
Confederates, to carry on their private Interests, not the public Peace,
wealth and settlement of these Nations?

3. Whether their new intended Qualifications of Electors and Persons to be
Elected to fill up the House, and high new Engagement, to be imposed on all new
Members, before their admission, be not a more arbitrary and Tyrannical
violation and subversion of the peoples Rights and Liberties in the freedom of
their Elections, and of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, than ever
beheaded King Charles, or any of his Predecessors were guilty of? an apparent
Breach and repeal of the Great Charter of England, chapter 9. and 29. of 25 E. 1.
c. 1. 28 E. 1. c. 1. 25 E. 3. c. 4. The Petition of Right, 3 Caroli. the
Statutes of 3 E. 1. c. 5. and 9 E. 2. c. 13. That all Elections ought to be
free and freely made: and of the special Acts of 5 R. 2. c. 4. 7 H. 4. c. 15. 1
H. 5. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 1. c. 2. 23 H. 6. c. 15. and 35 H. 8. c. 11.
and 16 Caroli c. 1. for Electing of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to serve in
Parliaments, and Claus. 11.. R. 2. dors. 23, 24? yea a new Machiavelian Policy,
to seclude out of the House, all Persons of Honor, and Piety, who make
conscience of their former Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, Protestation, Vow,
Covenant, and abhor all Perjury and Treachery; since themselves account all
their former Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Covenants and Engagements,
unobligatory to themselves, or the Nation, violating them at their pleasure,
that themselves may still fit, act and rule alone as formerly? Or else a mere
Engine to recruit the House with such New Members (who will swallow down any
Abjurations, Oaths and Engagements themselves shall impose upon them) of their
own party and Confederacy, against the public Interest, by disabling whom they
please, to Elect, or be Elected to fit together with them?

LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1660.


