PENDENNIS and all other standing Forts DISMANTLED: Or, EIGHT Military
Aphorisms, Demonstrating the Vselesness, unprofitableness, hurtfulness, and
Prodigal Expensivenes of all standing English Forts and Garrisons, to the
People of England: their inability to protect them from Invasions, Depredations
of Enemies or Pirates by Sea or Land: The great mischiefs, Pressures,
Inconveniences they draw upon the Inhabitants, Country, and adjacent places in
times of open wars, when pretended most useful: and the grand Oversight,
Mistake, Injury in continuing them for the present or furure Real Defense of
the peoples Lives, Liberties, Estates, the only ends pretended for them.

Penned by William Prynne of Swainswick, Esquire, during his close imprisonment
in Pendennis Castle. And now published for the common benefit, ease,
information of the whole Nation.

Habak. 1. 10. They shall deride every strong hold, for they shall heap dust,
and take it.

Hosea 3. 14. Judah has multiplied fenced Cities, but I will send a fire upon
his Cities which shall devour the palaces thereof.

2 Chronicles. 12. 4. And he took the fenced Cities which appertained to Judah.

Dan. 11. 15. The King of the North shall come, and cast up a mount, and take
the most fenced Cities; neither shall there be any strength to withstand.

Ezeck. 26. 11, 12. He shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong
garrisons shall go down to the ground: and they shall make a spoil of thy
riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise; and they shall break down thy walls,
and destroy thy pleasant houses, and they shall lay thy stones, and thy timber,
and thy dust in the midst of the water.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas in
Green-Arbour, 1657*

To the ingenuous READER.
DUring my near 3 years causeless close Imprisonments, (without the least
Accusation, hearing, crime, then or since suggested against me) by John
Bradshaw and ^his Whitehall Associates, in the since slighted disgarrison'd
Castles of Dunster and Taunton in Sumersetshire, and yet continued Garrison of
Pendennis Castle in Cornwell; I had several Discourses with their Officers and
Soldiers (who, though seeming zealous professors of the Gospel, I found very
unwilling, Isay. 24. Mic. 4. 3. Lu. 2. 14. Heb. 13, 14. Jam. 4. 1, 2.
to beat their swords into Ploughshares, and their spears into pruning Hooks,
and not to lift up a sword against any Christian Nation, nor to leavy Wars any
more, as the God and Gospel of Peace prescribe them) concerning the
Vselessenesse, Hurtfulnesse, and prodigal unnecessary annual expensivenesse
of those and other standing Forts, Garrisons, Inland and maritine, both in
times of War and Peace, as being unable to defend the Realm, or Country round
about them from invading foreign Enemies, or pillaging Pirates, much less any
parts of the Kingdom remoter from them, and drawing many intolerable
pressures, mischiefs upon the Inhabitants in or near them, and on the whole
Nation (especially in times of Hostility when pretended most beneficial)
infinitely over-ballancing all the advantages that could be alleged either
for their original Erection, or future continuation, if duly pondered in the
Scales of right reason. Which being a Theme never yet (to my knowledge)
publicly debated in Print, tending much to the common ease and benefit of the
whole Nation from these unnecessary Pests and Burdens, I did thereupon in my
dark Pendennis Cell (where I had few Books and less light to read) in
September 1652. to pass away idle hours, digest the substance of my Discourses
against Forts, and Garrisous (to which I could receive no satisfactory replies
from any Officers or Soldiers) into these ensuing Aphorisms, which I sent from
thence to a since deceased Friend in London. Where Gods providence (after his
death and my enlargement) unexpectedly bringing them to my hands, I was
thereupon induced to make them public; humbly submitting them to the serious
Consideration, Approbation, or Correction of every candid Reader, and public
spirited Statesman, Sword-man, preferring the Co mmonwealth, ease, interest of
the over- exhausted Nation, before his own personal Pay, Honor, Command, and
self-respects. A very rare Virtue in this self-seeking Age; wherein few
Christian Soldiers can truly say of themselves, as the Thebaean Christian
Legion under Dioclesian the Emperor did; Grotius de jure Belli and pacis l. 1.
c. 2. p. 36.
Offerimus nostras in quemlibet hostem manus, quas sanguine innocentium
cruentare nefas ducimus. Dextrae ipsae pugnare adversus impios and inimicos
sciunt, laniare pios and cives nesciunt. Meminimus nos pro civibus potius quam
adversus Cives arma sumpsisse. Pugnavimus semper pro justitia, pro pietate, pro
innocentium salute; haec fuerunt hactenus pretia periculorum. Pugnavimus pro
fide, quam quo pacto censeruemus tibi, si hanc Deo nostro non exhibemus? And
wherein we may justly take up the Apostles sad Complaint in his time, as suited
to ours, Phil. 1. 20. 21. I have no man like minded, who will naturally care
for your Estate: For ALL SEEK THEIR OWN, NOT THE THINGS THAT ARE JESUS
CHRIST'S, or things really tending to the public liberty, Ease, Wealth, and
Happiness of the Nation; pretended to by all, for selfadvantages alone; but
sincerely intended, endeavored by few or none, if VOX POPULI, or DEI, may be
credited. Accept and peruse this Treatise (I beseech thee) as a New light,
springing out of darkness, first Compiled, and now Divulged, only for the
general Ease and Welfare of our English Nation, by him who has ever studied,
to promote Gods Glory, and his Countries public Liberty, Interest, ease, more
than his own private safety, or self-advantage, and desires to live no longer
then he shall manifest himself upon all occasions to be,

Lincolns Inn. December 6. 1654. His Native Countries faithful Friend and
Servant, William Prynne.

Errata.
Page 4. l. 25 ^lay. r. stay. l. 28. r. rovers. p. 5. l. 10. if of. p. 32. l.
11. Pruda Penda* Margin. p. 27. l. 7* Gul. Nubrig* l. 10. Ecclesiae. l. 14.
Bromten.

(1) EIGHT Military Aphorisms; DEMONSTRATING
The uselesness, unprofitableness, hurtfulness and Prodigal expensivenesse of
all standing English Garrisons to the people of ^ngland; their Inability to
protect them from Enemies Invasions, Depredations by Sea or Land, the great
mischiefs they occasion in peace and open War, the oversight, injury of
continuing them at the Peoples excessive expense, (or any other mercinary
Landforces for the present or future real defense of the Peoples Persons,
Liberties, Laws or Estates.)
THough Garrisons in three or four of our greatest, richest, strongest Cities
(which are as so many Magazenes and places of refuge) may in some respects be
necessary and convenient in times of war; especially when guarded by the
Cities own Arms and Forces yet that our ordinary standing mercenary Garrisons
(especially in small Castles and Blockhouses) are not only altogether useless,
but most dangerous, oppressive and mischievous grievances to the Nation, both
in times of war and Peace, I shall briefly evidence by these ensuing Aphorisms.

1. THat the Principal use, end of Garrisons is only to keep a 2 Samuel 8. 14. 1
Chr. 18. 6. 4, 1 Samuel 13. 3, 1, 22, 23. C. 14. 5. 22, 23. c. 10.
foreign conquered Enemy or Country in constant subjection and contribution
to the Conquerers; therefore not to be contniued in our own free Nation by
those who pretend its Freedom and Enfranchisement from bondage, unless they
resolve to make us their conquered Vassals and ^ributaries, instead of
English-Freemen.

2. That all Garrisons, Castles, Forts and Block-houses throughout England if
their works and fortifications were demolish't, would be nothing else but mere
despicable, worthless, barren Hills, or Clods of Earth, scarce worth two
hundred pounds a year at their best improved value; which no wise State^man or
enemy, upon due consideration, would either value, look after* or go about to
fortify, more then those many thousand unfortified Rocks, Hills upon the
Seacoast or in inland Counties, which any foreign or Domestic Enemies might,
with as much advantage to themselves, and prejudice to the Nation, soon
fortify and Garrison with ^ase and advantage, if they would bestow so much
charge and pains, as on those now fortified and furnished to their hands at the
peoples cost, if once but Masters of the Field* which for^s would stand the
Enemies in no more stead, if now slighted, then any other unfortified Hills,
Rocks, or those Garrisoned Hills and Rocks would do before they were fortified
and Garrisoned, being altogether as unuseful, unable to defend or secure the
Nation and People near them from the Invasion^, Plunder^, Conquests of any
Po^ent Enemy or Party stronger then these petty Garrisons, as any other
unfortified, ungarrison d Hills or Rocks throughout the Island of like, or as
strong a situation, and really serving only to defend the bare mercenary
Garrison-Soldiers in them; and the barren Rocks, Hills alone whereon they
stand, not the whole Nation or Counties adjoining, in time of such Invasion,
Danger, till they be either taken by, or surrendered to the prevailing Party and
Enemy. Therefore to put the Nation, Country to a vast annual expense of many
thousand pounds each year to fortify, furnish and man such Garrisoned
fruitless Rocks and Clods of Earth, (not worth 200. l. a year at utmost value)
which can neither secure the whole Island nor people near them from Foreign or
Domestic, Enemi^s, and to continue them Garrisoned at such a prodigal expense,
is as great a Solecis^, Mad^ess^, Prodigality in true Martial and State
Politics, as it would be ill Country husbandry for the whole Nation or
private Statesmen to bestow one hundred thousand pounds every year in Planting,
sowing the Hills and Rocks whereon these Garrisons now stand, to reap a barren
crop only of 200. l. a year at most; which (as they are now garrisoned) yield
them not one farthing toward the pub^ike ^evenue, and yet have cost the Nation
very many thousand pounds out of their Purses every year, to no use or end at
all, but to cast away so much money on lazy Garrison-Soldiers, to smoke
T^bacco, and cry one to another, Who goes there? (as if we had still too much
money in our dry-dra^n^d-Purses) and to continue them at this grand charge, only
because the Island and places near them, might be endangered, if slighted, and
their ruins supprised regarrison d by an enemy (who will never certainly be so
mad or sottish, as to fortify any slighted Garrisons, unless able to defend
them against the whole Nation) is as gross an absurdity, as to argue; we must
forthwith fortify, Garrison, all other advantageous Sea-^oasts, Rocks, Hills,
^asses in England, because else any Enemy might master, seize and fortify them
to the Nations, Peoples danger, damage; and repair, fortify all old late
demolished Castles, Forts, Block-houses, upon the same reason and account,
(which all the Indian Mines would not suffice to Garrison)

3. That England being subject to the Foreign Invasions, Depredation^ of
Enemies or Pirates, only by Sea with Ships, which no fixed Land-Garrisons can
encounter, assault, board, take, sink, or pursue from place to place, nor
hinder from landing under their Noses, if stronger then they; muchlesse in any
other place out of their command* (as is undeniable by our ancient seizing of
Cadez and sundry Towns, Garrisons in the Indies by Sir Francis Drak, and
others, and our late invading and taking in of the Isles of Silly, Gersey,
Ga^nsey, the Barbados and Scottish Island^, without the loss of any one Ship,
and of very few men, notwithstanding all their Bl^ckhouses, Forts, Garrisons,
for to secure them they are altogether useless Prodigalities; our victorious
puissant Navy being the sole, best, sufficient defense against them, and only
able to resist, take, sink and surprise them: That England (as Mr. Cambden and
M^rcator, Heylyn, Sir Thomas Smith.
others write) being 1836. Miles in compass, all environed with the Sea, except
for some few Miles space next to Scotland; it is as great a mistake in point of
State Policy and as gross an Absurdity in Military-Skill, to assert or
believe, that 40. or 50. standing Garrisons, Forts and Block*houses, distant
sundry Miles one from the other, not taking up or securing 40. whole Miles of
this vast Circuit, and leaving no less then 1800. Miles thereof, and near as
many ^an^ing Places for Enemies and Rovers open to their Invasions; without any
defense at all, can hinder either their Landing or Pillaging, or secure the
Island from Invasions, by any considerable Fleet and Forces now, which they
never could do in former Ages, as its frequent Invasions and Conquests too by
the Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans and others, notwithstanding all our ancient
Castles and Garrisons attest. And to continue them for this very end upon the
impoverished Nations drained-Purses, by imposing unusual, unsupportable Taxes,
Excises on them for their support, is as gross a conceit, as to assert, that
the Garrison and Guns in Dover Gast^e can forciblie keep off any Foreign Fleet
of Enemies or Pirates from Landing or Plundering at the Lands-end, Lizards
Poin^, or Whitsand-Bay in Cornwall, or at St. David's in Wales; or* that the
fortifying of the Tower of London alone, or the useless Block-^ouse^ at
Graves-end (which can neither slay, hurt nor sink any resolute Ship or Vessel,
much less an whole Fleet in a Sunshine-day, nor yet discern them in a mist or
darksome night, and can discharge their Guns at them only at roves but once at
most, with more expense of Powder and Bullet to the State, then harm to the
Vessels they shoot at) will hinder a Whery-Boat or Navy fraighted with Soldiers
at Brainford from landing in ^u^^le-Fields or Windsor; or the guarding and
locking up of Crippl^-Gate alone, hinder an whole Army or Br^gade from entering
into London at Newgate, or any other Gate of the City, though they all stood
open, unguarded, and though all its Walls and Works (like the late Line about
it) were levelled to the ground. Yea, as vain (...) State, a Mi itary Policy,
as formerly to have built a Fort only at Tyburn to secure all London,
Westminster and Southwark, against the late Kings Army, without drawing any
Line of Communication round about them, or placing any other Guards then those
in Tyburn Fort for their defense against them; or to have placed a single
Company of the London Militia at VVhite-chapp^l, to Guard both Houses whiles
they sat at Westminster, without auy other Guardians to secure them nearer
hand; It being both vanity and folly to fortify only one inconsiderable part
of a Town or Garrison (and so if the Island) if all therest be unfortified, and
lie always open to all enemies Invasions without defense.

4. That in all times of public Peace, or when and whiles there is no Enemy
near, it is Peace it self alone, and want or absence of Enemies that secures
the Peoples, Nations Persons Estates from danger, Plunder; not Garrisons or
Field Armies; which cannot universally protect their Lives or Goods in all
places and at all times, when there is any open War or Enemy in the Field, as
Peace alone always does, and will do still, without cost or trouble: Therefore
it must needs be very ill Hu^bandry and no good State-^olicy [in these or other
times of Inland P^ace] to keep up Landforces and Garrisons throughout the
Nation at the Peoples intolerable costs, now there is no Enemy at all in Arms
amongst us, to protect the Peoples Persons and Estates from spoil and danger,
when as our very Peace it self and want of armed Enemies, does and will
absolutely secure them both, without any charge at all, or either of these
costly Lordly Superfluous Guardi^n^; which could not secure the greatest part
of the Nation from the late Kings Forces, Power and Plunder in times of ^^r nor
yet the Kings Forts, his Friends or Quarters from the Parliaments Forces.

5. That in Times of open War, no Garrisons throughout the Nation can secure
themselves and those within them against a puissant Army, or any Party stronger
then these Garrisons; which will soon 2 Kings ^8. 13. 1 Samuel 13. 3, 4* Hab. 1.
10. Dan. 1^. 15.
take them by Force, Stratagem, Composition; or for want of Provision,
Ammunition, and ot her Necessaries; or by (...) reachery or Mu iny within
themselves, unless timely relieved by a ^arching Field-Army able to raise their
Seiges, as late experience and all Histories attest: Yea oft-times a small
Party, far less and nothing so numerous as those Garrisons, by some Stratagem
of War, sudden Surprise, or through security or negligence of the Garrison
Soldiers, or by the casual death of some eminent Commander; unexpected forcing
of a Pass or routing of some of the Garrison Soldiers in their Sa^l^^s* and
entering with them in their Retreat; the successful springing up of some Mine*
the blowing up of a Magezine; the stopping of all Provisions for their Relief,
advantage of Ground* divisions amongst the Garrisons, Treachery, Bribery in
Officers, Soldiers, Sentinels, or Townsmen, and a thousand other Casualties,
have in all former ages (and will hereafter do the like) conquered sundry
strong Garrisons throughout our three Nations, and in all other parts of the
World: Besides no Garrisons in our Nation, without the assistance of a Field
Army, either are or ever were yet able to protect themselves by their own
strength against any powerful Enemies Seige, who resolved for to gain them, in
times of War. It can be therefore little less then apparent folly or frenzy for
us, to perpetuate and maintain them still at so vast a charge in these times of
Inland Peace throughout the Nation, to protect and secure the whole Land or
Country about them; being thus unable to defend and secure themselves in the
heat o^^ War from Foreign or Intestine Enemies.

6. That Garrisons both in times of Peace and War, are so far from being a
benefit, safeguard or protection to the whole Nattor, or to the Inhabitants
within them, the Country about them, and the Contributers toward them; that in
truth they are commonly their greatest Grievance, Oppression, Loss, Damage,
Mischief, and frequent occasions of their u^ter ruin both in Peace and War, as
shall be evidently demonstrated for our Soldiers, State^-men, and Nations
future in formation, and speedy suppression of these grandest Grievances, by
these particulars.

1. In all times of Peace, they put the whole Nation, Inhabitants, Country, to
an excessive prodigal expense of moneys, which would be better employed in
relieving and setting poor people on work, advancing Trade, Manufactures,
Merchandise, improving Lands, and supplying the Peoples particular occasions;
to all which, and the better relief of maimed Soldiers, their continuance is
and will be still extremely prejudicial: They much impoverish, grieve, oppress,
discontent the People by endless Taxes, Excises to maintain them; by Billeting,
Quartering, and oft-times Free-quartering the Garrison Soldiers on them; by the
frequent Mutinies, Misdemeanors, Abuses, Outrages of Garrison Soldiers, and
Lordly imperiousness of their Governors and Officers, over-topping,
overruling, and sometimes abusing in many places the Nobility, Gentry,
Ministry, and civil Magistracy, as well as common People; and interrupting the
course of Justice, by protecting both themselves and their Soldiers from
Arrests and Executions for just Debts, Duties, Trespasses to the People; by
entertaining, listing and detaining children against their Parents, Servants
and Apprentices against their Masters, Husbands against their Wives and
Families good wills, to their great grief and prejudice; by keeping of many
thousands of able, young, lusty men in mere idleness, spending their time in
eating, drinking, gaming, whoring, sleeping, lewdness, or easy useless
duties day and night, only to gaze about them; to call to one another, Stand,
etc. and to spend much Match and Powder to no purpose, but to waste them and
our Treasure in complements; and in the mean time robbing the Nation of the
benefit of their honest painful Labors in their Callings; by their frequent
running away upon discontents or misdemeanors^, leaving their Wives, Children,
and not a few great Bellies and Bastards on the Inhabitants and Countries
charge; running into their scores and debts for Quarters and Necessaries, and
then departing without payment of them; by infecting the Inhabitants and
Country with the Vices, Errors, Blasphemies, Sins, Corruptions, diseases of the
worst and deboysest Soldiers* by occasioning many Murders, Men-slaughters,
Blood-sheds, quarrels, Brawls, Robberies, Thefts Burglaries, Dlsorders,
Oppressions, Drunkenness, Idleness, Gaming, Whoring, Swearing, neglect
contempt of Magistracy, Ministry Cods public Ordinances, Sacraments, Sabbaths
Disturbances of our Ministers and public Assemblies in and near the Garrisons
by dangerous Practices to undo or vex many innocent Persons, which else would
be prevented; by hindering peoples free ingresse into, and egresse out of
Garrisons about their urgent occasions, concerning which their Sentinels,
Corporals, Governors strictly interrogate them ex officio, and force them to
dance attendance on them sometimes many hours space* to extort Beer or Money
from them before they can pass or repasse about their business; by searching
the Houses, Studies, seizing the persons Letters, Writings of diverse persons by
their own bare Authorities or others unlawful Warrants* against all Law and the
Peoples Native Freedom upon feigned pretenses, causeless jealousies, idle
rumors vain fears, and sometimes secret conspiracies against their very lives
and Estates, which are made a prey to these Soldiers: By sundry other abuses,
in seizing their Arms. Birding and Fowling Piec s, Moneys Plate, Horses, Goods;
and impresting their Horses, Ploughs Carts upon needless, or wrongful public
or private occasions and pretenses. In all which, and sundry other respects
they are extraordinary Grievances to the Nation, Garrisoned places and Country
adjoining even in time of Peace. Therefore not to be continued upon any vain
pretense whatsoever.

2. In times of War, when they are pretended most necessary, they are then
most chiefly prejudicial, pernicious, destructive both to the whole Nation in
general; the Places Garrisoned; the adjacent Country and all contributing
toward them, as these experimental Demonstrations will undeniablie evidence
against the erroneous Opinions and Practice of all Pseud^-Politicians and
Soldiers contrary Pretenses, wherewith they delude, yea, cheat the ignorant
people: For, in times of actual Wars (especially civil, when they are most
pernicious) they bring a general mischief on the whole Nation, and that in
these respects: 1. By length ning and drawing out their intestine Wars with the
Plagues and Miseries attending them, for many years space, as our ancient and
late Wars manifest) by a tedious and successive Seige of their Garrisons, till
reduced; to the great waste, spoil, destruction and impoverishing of the
people; the innumerable increase of fatherless children, Widows, poor and
maimed persons, the slaughters, deaths of thousands more then if there were no
such Garrisons. 2. By multiplying the Peoples Taxes, Expenses, to furnish and
maintain these Garrisons, and raise, pay a great Field Army besides, for these
Garrisons security, which would be a sufficient safeguard to the Nation without
them. 3. By lessening the number, weakening the strength, substracting the
Military Provisions with all other supplies and recruits of the Field Armies,
in whose good or bad success, strength or weakness, the Safety or Ruin,
Preservation or Conquest of the Nation (next under God) does alone principally
consist; and whose Victories or ill successes the whole Nation, with all
Garrisons usually do, will and must of necessity follow; their Garrisons being
unable to defend them from Plunder, total and final Conquest, if their Field
Armies be quite routed or destroyed; which would speedily end the Wars by
Pitched Battles in the Field in a few days, weeks, months at furthest, were it
not for besieging and taking in Garrisons, which (through the Artifice of
Mercenary O^ficers and Soldiers) protract the Wars for many years, and continue
the Plagues and Miseries of war upon the Nation far longer then if there were
no Garrisons in it as, ancient and present experience must and will attest.

2. They are in times of actual War most prejudicial to the Towns and Places
Garrisond in these ensuing regards. 1. By doubling, trebling their Taxes,
Contributions, Payments, charges to new fortify and furnish these Garrisons
with Ammunition, Artillery, Cannons, Provisions, Magazines of all sorts;
augmenting their mercenary Guards and Soldiers by hundreds and thousands in
some places, to their great impoverishing and vexation; and that often times, to
betray them to the Enemy at last; yea, to lose those Garrisons in a few days
or howrs, which they have thus (to their vast expense and trouble) been
fortifying, furnishing, guarding many months or years space together, as the
late Presidents of Bristol, Hereford, with other Garrisons belonging both to
the King and Parliament in England, Ireland, Scotland and elsewhere,
demonstrate; and the Histories of all Ages, Countries testify. 2. By continual
billetting* quartering and free-quartering the Garrison Soldiers and Officers
on the Inhabitants, within or near the Garrisons, to their great oppression,
vexation (superadded to their Taxes) often times to their utter undoing. 3. By
drawing the Field-Forces likewise into them, and free quartering them all the
Winter long, or when they are out of action, for their better accommodation and
safety, to add to their former affliction; and by continual uncessant
qnartering of other marching Soldiers on them upon all expeditions, parties
sent out upon emergent occasions; from which heavy Pressures, ungarrison d
places and Villages remote from Garrisons, are either totally exempted or ten
times more free then Garrisons; which would be as free as they, were they not
made Garrisons. 4. By exposing them to all the forementioned mischiefs and
inconveniences of Officers and Garrison Soldiers in times of Peace* doubled and
trebled in seasons of War, when the Soldiers are far more unruly, deboist,
injurious imperious over them in all kinds then in Peace.

5. By inviting, inducing or necessitating the Enemies Forces to besiege, and
inflict upon them the saddest Calamities and Plagues of War, from which
ungarrisoned Towns, and places far from Garrisons are usually exempted; or not
so liable to, especially in civil Wars. To enumerate some particular miseries
accompanying Seiges. 1. Burning, wasting, destroying their own Suburbs,
Neighboring Houses, Villages, Orchards, Gardens, Trees in or near their
Garrisons, Walls or Works, and that frequently by their own Officers and
Garrison Soldiers, to prevent the Enemies quartering in them or some annoyances
from them; or to contract their Works for their better and easier defense of
what remaiins unburnt or unwasted, to the undoing of hundreds and thousands,
left houslesse and harborless by this inhumane Policy, as bad or worse then any
Enemies rage; as the sad late presidents of the firing the Suburbs of Bristol,
Excester, Taunton, Lincoln, York, Colchester, and other Garrisons, experiment;
with some stately Houses, and whole Villages adjoining to them: To which may be
added, the like frequent furious devastations of them by the Enemies, if spared
by themselves. Secondly, Loss of all Trading, Commerce* and Markets, during
the Leaguers about them, when they need them most of all. Thirdly, Perpetual
Fears, Alarms, Disturbances, Watchings, Frights, day and night; continual hard
military duties and skirmishes with the Enemy, even by the Inhabitants
themselves at their free cost, notwithstanding their hired, dear-waged Guardian
Soldiers to secure them. Fourthly, Forcible seisures of the Inhabitants
Houshold-Provisions of all sorts, with their Beds, Bedding, Arms, Money, Plate,
to feed, lodge, arm, pay, their Mercenary Servants (then in all things, their
most absolute Lording Masters) who extort and will take from them and theirs
all they have, of purpose forsooth to protect them, though those their
protected Pay-masters and their whole Families starve, lie cold or naked on the
boards, want money to buy them bread, necessaries, or lie sick in greatest
distress. Fifthly, The loss of many of the Inhabitants lives by Assaults,
Grenades, Fireworks, Sallies, Shots, wounds, Famines, Plagues, Fevers, and
other Sicknesses (usually accompanying Sieges and Wars) by invented false
accusations, suspicions of holding intelligence with the Enemies, or plotting
to betray the Garrison to them; by sudden fears, frights, discontents, firing
or beating down Houses, springing of Mines, and the li^e, during their Seiges;
in many whereof if sharp or long, or accompanied with Plagues and Sicknesses,
above half the Inhabitants or more have frequently been quite consumed, and the
rest utterly undone, though the Enemies left the Seige at last. Sixthly, The
Wounding, Maiming, loss of Limbs of many of the Inhabitants, multiplying of
their poor Widows, desolate Orphans by Seiges, and their new charge to relieve
them. Seventhly, The total Banishment, Captivity, Slaughter and extirpation of
all the Inhabitants and mercenary Soldiers too in Garrisons, if taken by storm
or assault, by putting them all to the Sword, Man, Woman, and Child, without
distinction, or the greatest number of them, and carrying the rest Captives
thence, whereof there are hundreds of sad presidents in Josh. 8. 21, 22. c. 6.
20, 21. c. 10. 28. to 41. 1 Samuel 13. 3, 4. 2 Kings 25. 8. 10 12. 2 Chr. 36. 1^,
etc.
Sacred and Profane History. The famous Protestant Town of Magdeburgh in
Germany, of late years was by bloody General Tilly, put totally to the Sword,
and then burnt to ashes: And Tredagh in Ireland, though for the most part
Protestants, always constant to the Parliament, enduring many long and sharp
Seiges by the Irish Popish Rebels; yet submitting to Marquess Ormond (a
sincere Protestant, formerly General for the Parliament in Ireland, and then
for the King) and receiving a Garrison from him at the last, when their
Governor entered into an offensive and defensive League with Owen Roe-Oneal (the
General of the Popish Rebels) their greatest Enemy, and chief Contriver,
Fomenter of the Irish Massacre and Rebellion; upon the late taking of it by
storm, most of the Inhabitants were thereupon put to the sword, without
distinction, together with all the Garrison Soldiers, by Genesis Cromwell himself
and his Forces, to the great grief of many good Protestants there; which fatal
desolation and total destruction they had all escaped, had they not been a
Garrison. Eighthly, The total demolition and burning to the very ground, of
sundry private Garrisons, Castles, strong magnificent Houses of ancient Nobles
and Gentlemen, and of some fair Churches too, when taken; whereof our late Wars
have produced many sad Spectacles, as Rag land Castle, Basing House, Rowden
House, Cambden House, Litchfiel^ Clos^, Banbury, Pomfret Castles, with sundry
more: And which is yet more grievous, the burning to the ground, and total
desolation, depopulation, ruin of many great famous Garrisons, Cities and
Towns; as Troy, Jerusalem, Tyrus, Athens, with hundreds more; and of the best
and greatest part of other stately Cities, never since repaired, re-peopled,
whereof Josh. 8. ^9, 20' 28. c. 6. 21, 22, 26. 2 Kings 19. 25. c. 25. 9, 10,
11, etc. Isa. 17. 1, 2. c. 25. 12. Jer. 49. 37. Ezekiel. 26. 10. to 15. -- Amos 1.
7, 8, 10, 14, 15. c. 2. 2, 3, 5. Isa. 30. 13. c. 32. 13, 14. Ez. 26. 10, 11, 12.
Sacred and Profane Stories of former ages, our own Annals, and late experience
can furnish us with multitudes of sad Presidents: Which fatal Subversions,
Devastations, they had all escaped, had they not been Garrisoned and stood out
a Siege. Ninthly, the total Spoil, Plunder, Confiscation of all the Inhabitants
Goods and Estates (if not their Lives) to the Enemy, if taken by Assault or
Stratagem, to their universal undoing; and yet putting them to future Fines,
Ransoms, and heavy Taxes afterward, to buy their Peace, or save them from the
general subsequent Plunder of all not formerly spoiled by the Soldiers; All
which they had escaped, if un-Garrisoned. Tenthly, The unavoidable reception of
greater, and usually worse domineering new Garrisons from the conquering
Enemies; often spoiling, plundering, firing ransoming, executing the wealthiest
of the Inhabitants (notwithstanding all Articles of agreement for their
Indemnity and Security) though taken by surrender only, not by storm; which
Articles are usually much violated, and very seldom kept by faithless,
greedy, rude, plundering Officers or Soldiers, who add affliction to
affliction, and a new undoing to the old; to whose new Lording Lawless power,
Orders, Pleasures, Government, the Inhabitants must all submit, or else they
and their Families must be forthwith banished out of their native Habitations,
as enemies, stripped naked of all they have, and forced to wander cold and naked
about the Country like vagrants for bread, clothes, relief, houseroom, which
they plentifully enjoyed before, to the breaking of their hearts, and shortning
of their lives. Eleventhly, These Garrisons are often taken and re-taken over and
over* and so as often plundered, re*plundered, spoiled, ransomed, and new
garrison d by both sides yea those of them who were protected as friends and
favorites to the one side, are sure to be most spoiled, plundered, oppressed,
persecuted by the other* and to suffer thus in their successive turns till they
be quite undone and ruined by their frequent takings and re-takings on both
sides; as bristol, Exeter, with other places* have found by late sad
experience: the vicissitudes and miseries of these Garrisons never ceasing till
their Wars and Garrisons cease, and they became no Garrisons. Twelfly: If any
besieged Garrisons escape taking in the Wars by Seige (as Gloces^er, Hull and
L^me did in our late Wars; but scarce any else*) yet, as it was more through
Gods mercy, and the valor, vigilancie and strength of their own Inhabitants and
other Volunteers then of their hired mercenaries; so the length of Losses and
damages by their very Leaguers, did more indammage, impoverish them, then an
honorable composition with the Enemy at first, or the leaving their Towns quite
ungarrison'd would have done; besides their exemption from all those fears;
hardships and other miseries accompanying their Leaguers. There was no Garrison
in the late Wars throu ghout the Nation, but if left ungarrison'd by either
side, might with the quarter or half quarter of its unnecessary expenses to
make and keep it a Garrison, have avoided all the Miseries, Losses,
Devastations, Plunders, Pressures it suffered as a Garrison on both or either
side, without an^ great danger or Pillage to the Inhabitants, persons or
Estates by either side: And half the charges of our Garrisons on both sides,
would have defrayed the whole charges of both the Field Armies, and ended the
Wars in far less then half the time they were protracted by means of
Garrisons. In brief, our small Castles and Garrisons even in times of wars,
are, and can be no defense at all, but great Oppressions and Grievances to the
people and Country; our great Garrisons are then but small defenses and
greater burdens and grievances to the people then smaller; yea, all of them
after all their fortifications, costs and expenses, are, or may be taken by
Hab. 1. 10. Josh. 10. 28. to 41. 2 King. 18. 10. 2 Chronicles. 12. 4. c 32. 2, 1.
Sam. 3. 4. Dan. 11* 1^ Zeph. 1. 26.
forc^, stratagem* Famine or Treachery at the last, by any Enemy who is but
Master of the Field; Witness the strongest of Cities, ^yrus, Ezekiel. 26. and
Jerusalem Gods own most fortified City, of which the Prophet thus writes, Lam.
4. 12. The Kings of the earth and all the Inhabitants of the world would not
have believed, that the Adversary and the Enemy should have entered into the
Gates of Jerusalem; yet was it often taken, pillaged, dismantled and burnt by
the enemies, 2 Chronicles 12. 4. etc. 2 Chronicles. 36. 7, 10 17, to 21. Yea, our own
Garrisons were the principal seats, theaters of all our former and late Wars,
epsecially when besieged by either party: Whence a Siege is usually termed
Le-Guerre, from the F^ench, that is to say, THE WAR; because there is no War to
speak of, till then: Battles in the Field being fought and ended usually in
half a day or less, and often within one hour or two at most; when as Sieges
(accompanied always with frequent Skirmishes, constant Batteries, sundry
Assaults, Sallies, Stormings on all hands, or in some quarter or other)
continue many days, weeks, months and years, sometimes with far greater danger
and loss of men on both sides; and are usually seconded with many Skirmishes,
bloody Battles and incounters of Armies or Parties sent to victual, relieve the
besieged, or raise the Siege, occasioning more and greater slaughters then a
pitched battle in the Field alone, as all Histories and experience manifest.
Upon all which confiderations, all Statesmen, Soldiers and intelligent
Inhabitants of Garrisons, who have any brains remaining in their heads, or
consciences in their breasts) must ingenuouslye (after due deliberation)
acknowledge; that Garrisons even in times of open Wars (especially intestine)
are so far from being a Benefit, Blessing, Security or Protection to their
Inhabitants and Owners, that they are the extremest Pressures, Grievances,
Curses, Plagues, Dangers, and most destructive, desolating Instruments that
possible can befall them; as bringing all the Furies, Plagues, Miseries and
Extremities of War upon them in perfection, so as it were better, safer for the
Inhabitants of all or most Garrisons at least, and more conducing to their
safety in respect of Bodies, Goods, and Freedom from all sorts of
Inconveniences by War, to continue disgarrison'd, and lie open to both parties
Armies, as Country Villages do, thereby to escape all the forementioned
Plagues, to which Garrisons are exposed; or else (if there be cause) to fire
their own houses before hand, or leave them empty, and fly with their
Families, Goods, moneys, and what else they have, into Bogs, Woods, Rocks,
Caves, Wildernesses (as the the wild Irish, High-landers, Scythi^ns, and all
Nations wanting Garrisons do) and there to secure themselves from the Enemies,
till withdrawn thence, routed, or the Wars ended; and thereby to save all or
most they have for their own and Families uses; then unadvisedly of their own
heads, or by the command of any in Power over them, to put themselves to an
extraordinary vast expense to erect, fortify, furnish and maintain Garrisons
of mercenaries to no other purpose at all, if seriously considered (unless
able to defend themselves without any Mercenaries or Taxes, but merely
voluntary, when and where there is occasion only and no longer) but merely to
expose themselves to all the premised Calamities of War and Garrisons, under a
Brain^esse pretext and lying imposture of defending their Persons and Estates
from! Danger or Molestation by the Enemies or others, the contrary effects
whereunto they ever occasion, both in Peace and War.

Thirdly, In times of open Wars Garrisons bring these manifold Evils and
Miseries on the adjacent Country Villages and contributing Friends and
Neighbors near them, instead of any real benefit or protection from them* which
they neither do, will nor can afford them in their greatest needs, though they
voluntarily or by co-action (against all Reason* and Conscience largely
contribute to their fortifying and supplying for this end. 1, Upon the approach
of any Enemy to besiege them, these very Garrisons (their Friends and
Protectors) like professed Enemies, often fire their adjourning Houses, cut, pull
down their Trees, Orchards, Fences, Ditches, Walls, Pales, drive away all their
Cattle, carry away all their Goods, Money, Plate, Arms, Household Stuff, with
their very Household Provisions into their Garrisons; by mere violence against
their wills, entreaties, cries, tears, without any price or consideration at
all, to victual and furnish the Garrisons with necessaries against the Siege,
or else to preserve them (before the Enemies approach) from the enemies
possession or Plunder, who else would seize them to their disadvantage, when as
the Enemies for their own better accommodation, would use them more favorably,
and not plunder them half so much as these their pretended Friends and new
Protectors. Secondly, They are more frequently visited, Plundered, spoiled,
captivated, fined, ransomed by the Enemy upon all advantages and occasions,
when there is no Siege, then places more remote from Garrisons, and not
contributing to them for protection, upon these two accounts. 1. To deprive or
straiten these Garrisons the more of all provisions, necessaries, Supplies and
Contributions from them, if not totally to withdraw them from them. 2. Because
they account them their professed Enemies, for being Contributers, Friends,
Neighbors to these Garrisons, and so all they have is lawful Plunder without
dispute, unless they will redeem it, by Fines or Ransom s, or by paying as
great or greater constant Contributions to them and their nex t adjoining
Garrisons, as they do to those, to live in Peace; being thus made a double prey
to both sides, under color of Protection by and from both. An intolerable
double Pressure and Imposition, of which our late Wars afforded many
experimental Presidents, in most places next to Garrisons; who if the pillaging
Enemies be strong at any time, neither will, dare not ought (as they hold by
the Laws of War to stir out of their Garrisons to encounter or protect their
country neighboring contributors from their Plunder, even un er their Walls and
view, for fear of being cut off, and losing the Garrison to them: Such notable
useful Protectors are they to the adjacent Country, as not to stir one foot to
help them at their greatest needs, but expose them to their Enemies spoil
without resistance, if unato protect themselves. Thirdly, They are more
frequently then any others of the Country further of, oppressed, vexed,
hindered, impoverished, with the seizing impresting of their Servants, Children,
Ploughs, Carts, Horses, and sometimes taking them quite away, by both sides
alike, either for public services or private occasions, to their vexation or
undoing. Fourthly, They are more oppressed by laboring in, and contributing to
these Garrisons Fortifications, carrying in their Ammunition and other
Provisions cost-free, or for little pay and that long ere received) constant
Contributions to their Garrisons; quartering, Freequartering, insolences,
outrages* abuses of the Garrison Soldiers, of marc^ing Parties of the Field
Army it self, when drawn into Quarters, then any parties more remote from
Garrisons* and their persons more often Imprisoned, Beaten, Wounded, their Wives,
Children, Servants, more abused, their houses more ransacked; Goods, Moneys,
more frequently seized and taken away upon malice, jealousies, pretenses by
crafty Knaves, Officers and pillaging Soldiers, then others farther off them.
Fifthly, When these Garrisons are besieged (as usually and frequently they are)
their Pressures and Miseries are beyond expression: The Men, if well affected
to the Garrisons, are all forced by fear or otherwise from their Houses into
the Garrisons, Woods or other Counties* if not their Wives, Children, and whole
Families likewise, to avoid the Fury, Pressures, Troubles, Insolences of the
besieging Enemies, who fill all their houses with their free-quartering rude
abusive Soldiers, eating, drinking up all their Beer and other Provisions
whatsoever for man or beast, both within and without, not leaving them or their
Families bread to eat, or beer to drink, nor yet any Bed, Bolster, Cushion, or
ought else to rest their heads on, or Straw to lie in: Tread and eat out all
their Grass, Hay, Corn standing or cut, with their Horses: kill, devour, drive
away all their Stock, Cattle, which the Garrisons have left them, as good
booty; burn up all their Pales, Houses, Wood, Timber Trees, Fruit Trees, for
firing, and soon make them all as poor as Job himself.

6. They are more frequently then any others of the Country further off,
oppressed, vexed, hindered, impoverished, as aforesaid; and every new Siege by
either party reiterates the same or worse effects as the first, to their
reiterated beggerie, as many late experiments fresh in peoples minds about
Plymouth, Excester, Lime, ^aunton, Bristoll, Glocest r, Worcester, Oxford,
York, Hull (whose first Siege produced the drowning of all the Country round
it in the beginning of our Wars) and most besieged Garrisons evidence beyond
contradiction; which miseries Countries void of Garrisons, or remoter from
them, do not sustain; the quarterings on them being neither so frequent,
thick, long-lasting, or oppressive, as in places next to Garrisons, especially
in Sieges. 7. In these Garrisoned Leaguers their Gardens, Grounds, Orchards
Houses, are frequentlie destroyed, dug up, or pulled down, their Trees and
Timber felled, their Men, Women, Children, Ploughs, Carts, Horses forced day
after day, to toil and labor in making Trenches, Sconces, Batteries,
Approacees, Mines, Redoubts, or carry Timber, Provisions, Artillery, Arms, and
other Baggage, which remoter Parishes are free from; and themselves would be so
too, but for these Garrisons, which occasion and enforce these Sieges. 8. If
the Opposites Field Army or strong Parties from them during the Sieges,
approach to raise them, or to victual or relieve the Garrisons, the oppressions
of the adjoining Parts ate then doubled, trebled, and spread wider round about
these Garrisons, till the whole Country, ten, twenty* or thirty miles about, by
the long quartering and lying of so many Armies, Parties upon them, and Marches
to and fro to take or relieve the Garrisons, be quite undone and eaten out; and
so one or both Armies necessitated to seek out fresh quarters; or the Garrisons
taken or relieved. After this the necessitated neer-starved Garrisons requiring
new supplies of all sorts, if not taken, extort them from the adjacent
Countries, if they be to be had above ground, which adds much to all their
former afflictions: And then again some other new Sieges or occasions drawing
one or both Armies thither afresh, so soon as the miserable Country People have
gotten any thing about them, they are, to their endless vexation, exposed
afresh to all the fformer miseries of Wars, S^eges, and never eased of them
till the Garrisons either be demolished or disbanded. From all which
experimental Arguments, and real Demonstrations of undoubted verity, all
rational men whatsoever, and no doubt the whole Nation, Country, Inhabitants of
Garrisons, with all conscientious self-denying Statesmen and Soldiers, who
really intend or affect the peoples true weal, ease, or safety (the Supreme
Law, the prrncipal end of War, Peace, Garrisons, Armies, Parliaments, Councils,
Magistrates, Government and higher Powers) as the Army Officers themselves
^emonstrated, in the very worst of their Remonstrances* Nov. 20 1648. making it
the Basis of all their exorbitant unparallel^d Demands therein, and of their
violent Proceedings in p ursuit of them ever since) will and must henceforth
confess, conclude against all Erroneous Opinions and Practices to the
contrary; That the raising, fortifying and holding up of Garrisons, ^ept by
Mercenary Soldiers, even in times of Civil or other Wars, is so far from
being a Protection, Advantage, Security to the Nation in General, the Garrison
Inhabitants, Owners of Garrisoned Castles, or Houses themselves, or the Country
adjoining to and contributing toward them; that they are their Greatest
Oppression^, Gri^vances, Calamities, Plagues, Burd ns, Vexations, Damages,
^or^ures, Heart-^reakings, and usually the chief occasions of their oppression,
utter ruin^, desolati^n, devastation in War and Peace; and so in Reason,
Justice, Conscience, Prudence, ought to be eternally exploded, dismantled,
disgarrison'd (as well as sundry heretofore and of late, there being the self
same Reason for all as for any) for the Nations, Inhabitants, Countries Ease,
Peace, Weal, and future exemption from all the forementioned evils and miseries
attending them both in Peace and War, without delay or further dispute, by all
in present Power, or by the Supreme Authority of the people themselves in their
wilful neglect or delay* out of any Sinister or self seeking ends or designs
whatsoever, which their public ease and benefit should outvie.

7. That in all times of civil or other Wars wlthin the Nation, the true
interest, safety, preservation and protection of the Island and Peoples
Persons, Estates, Laws, Liberties, Inheritances, Rights, consist not in our
Garrisons, or any Mercenary Officers and ^oldiers, English or Forraigners,
modelled or new modelled into a Field Army, since Mercenaries, as well
Domestic as foreign, in all ages have ever sought naught else but their own
private Lucre, Honor, Power, Advancement to places of greatest Authority, Gain,
Trust, and frequently (after good Success in Wars (presuming on their strength
and merits) have supplanted, subverted, suppressed, destroyed those very Powers
and Persons who first raised, paid and confided in them for their preservation,
and preferred their own mercenary Officers and Generals by Treachery, Murder,
Perjury and open Violence to the Imperial and Royal Thrones of their Lawful
Sovereigns and Superiors (murdered and deposed by them) as the Sea Entropius
Zonarus, and Grimstous Imperial History.
Roman Histories and others; the practice of the M^maluhes -- in Egy^; of
Alexander the Great his own Captains, who notwithstanding their extraordinaay
pretenses of honor and respect unto him and his, not only poisoned himself (as
some Authors write) but murdered his own Son, Heir to his Empires and
Conquests, together with his mother, wife, and all his remotest (...) that
might lay claim to his Dominions by Hereditary Right and then divided his
Territories between themselves made, crowned and styled themselves Kings; and
then by Gods avenging Justice out of covetous, ambitious spirits, warred upon
each other so long, till they had all murdered and slain each other, as
Arrianus, Plutarch, Justin, Curtius, Diodorus Siculus and Dr. Usher in his
Ecclesiastical Annals of the old Testament record at large; with Heylyns
Mitrocosme, p. 7. 56, 757, 758, 145, 146, 147, 613, 614, 586. to 590.
other innumerable presidents abroad; and the practice of Vortigerr, Heng^st,
Horsa and diverse others at Home, sufficiently manifest in all times, with
Scripture presidents likewise: But our real Interest, Protection, Safety
resides (next under God) in the Nobilities, Gentries, and Peoples united
voluntary, unmercenary defense and protection of themselves in and by their own
persons, with their own Arms, Servants, Sons, Tenants, Retainers, according to
their respective abilities; as appears by the Politic original Institution of
ancient See Cocks 1. Inst.
^enures in Knight^-Service, Escuage, Castle-Guards, and the like; the old
Charters of our Corporations and Cinque-Poris, obligi^g them to find a certain
number of men and ships at their own costs, to defend the Realm in times of
War; with all ancient Writs, Commissions, P^ecepts for arraying the people of
the Realm in times of War and danger, according to their Tenures, Estates,
Customs, to defend the Realm and themselves from invading Enemies at all t mes
(cited in the printed Argument^ concerning Ship Money, and the Exact coll. ct.
p. 336. and 608. 850. etc.
Declarati^ns both of the King and Par^iament concerning the Commission of
Array) all former Statutes concerning Arrays, Arms, Musters; and the old long
continued practice of our ^rain'^-Bard in each County and Corporation, formerly
reputed the Nations chief ^^curity in intestine and invasive Wars, with the
late Militia'^ raised on and by each County at their own vast expense to defend
it and the nation, as the best and safestguard when all sorts were commanded to
serve in person, (notwithstanding all Garrisons, Mercenary Field-Forces, and
the Army then and since continued) as our fafety. And indeed common reason
proves, that as every man loves and prefers his own person, family, estate
before a strangers, or any others; so he will more vigilantly, sincerely,
effectually defend and protect them from Enemies or Dangers then a y
Mercenaries, how trusty and valiant soever they be. And as every true S^epherd
and owner of Sheep is more careful to defend and preserve them from Thieves and
Robbers with ^he hazard of his own ^^fe, then any Stranger or Hireling whose
the Shee^ are no^, who will s^ie and desert, or else he^p to prey upon them,
and play the ^hief himself in times of danger or advantage, as Christ himself
resolves John 10. So every able private person, Family, Parish, Town County,
Association (and by like consequence the whole Nation) will better, cheaper,
and with less inconveniences by far, defend and secure themselves by their own
unmercenary persons and Arms, voluntarily united according to their respective
abilities, without any general forced Taxes and illegal Excises imposed and
continued on them against their wills, then any Mercenary Officers and Soldiers
whatsoever, (who making only a Trade and Gain of War will therefore spin it out
as long as the Nation or People have any moneys or Estates to pay and enrich
them) and will sooner conclude and settle Peace upon their own terms upon all
overtures and occasions, then Mercenaries, who neither desire nor intend our
public Peace in reality but interrupt it all they may, when near concluded,
(as in the late Treaty) with armed violence both against King and Parliament.
Uup*on which grounds our A^cestors never usually entrusted any Mercenary
Armies, but themselves alone with their own and the Kingdoms defense, scarce
ever imposed any Taxes on the people by public Parliamentary Authority in any
civil Wars and very rarely (except a Subsidy, or fifteen now and then) for the
Kingdoms defense against foreign Invasion; but only for their Inva^ive,
De^ensive Foreign Wars in Fr^nce or elsewhere. Why then the whole Nation,
Nobility, Gentry and People of all sorts, should not now again be trusted with
their own arms and self-defence, as well as in former Ages, being their native
Priviledg^ and B^r^hr^gh, their only best security and prevention against all
public Enemies and Invaders, but are forced to pur their A mes, Lives, Estates
Protection into the hands of Mercenary Officers* Soldiers Garrisons, who
notwithstanding ^ their vast endless expenses for their Pay, have so often
abused, violated their Trusts, lengthned our old, engaged us since in
successive new Wars against our Protestant Brethren and Confederates
themselves* and have almost eaten up all our real and personal private Estates,
with, the whole public ancient Inheritance and standing Revenues of the
Nation; let all prudent Statesmen, and Patrons of their Countries Rights and
Privileges resolve; the rather, because our Mercenary Soldiers* Garrisons,
Forts, are so far perverted from their primitive use, to preserve our Persons
and Estates from Enemies and Violence, that they are now made the only
Janazaries, Goalers, Goa^s, Prisons forcibly to seize, imprison, close imprison
the persons, ransack ^t he Houses* Studies of the emminentest Parliament
Member^, Patrons and Freemen Sufferers for our public Libe^tie^, Laws,
Propertiesr, Religion; and the only Instruments under the New Guardians of our
Liberty*, to bring the whole Nation and all English Freemen of full age, into
perpetual Wardship to these new Seigniours, since the old Cour^ of Ward* for
^nfants, only till they came of full age, is quite voted down as a Grievance,
though not comparable unto this* of men of full age; yea, Parliament Members
new strictest Wardships and close restraints under armed Garrisons and
Sentinels of meanest quality in these Garrisoned new Courts of Wards.

8. That Maritine Garrisons, Forts, Blockhouses at the entrance of our Harbors
(as Pendennis and S. Mawdits Castles at the mouth of Falmouth Haven, Harwich,
and others of that nature) are altogether useless, unnecessary expensive
charges to the Republike, unable to hinder the ingress, egress, or regress of
any warlike ship, ships, or Navy into the Harbors, much less to sinck them,
with all their Cannon-shot, which I shall thus demonstrat^. 1. In dark nights,
and misty days, mornings, evenings (which take up near half the space every
year) they can neither clearly see nor discern any ship or vessel passing into
or out of their harbo^s, muchlesse then hinder their free ingress or egr^ss by
shot or otherwise, when they cannot so much as see them. 2. In clear sunshine
days, and moonshine nights, any small vessels (much more then resolute men of
War, and whole Squadrons, Navies) may safely pass and repass into or out of
these harbors, or anchor in them without any great danger, harm, or sinking by
their Cannons; which standing for the most part high upon the Land (especially
at new Flood, half Tide or Ebb) and not level with the Sea at full tide; an^
being likewise not half so many in number, nor so large in boar, as most Men
of War now carry in one tire or side, discharged for the most part at rovers
by unskilful Gunners and Matrosses one after another, and fixed upon one
Platform, whence they cannot easily or speedily be removed, can hardly in
several shoots so much as hit any one single vessel, much less hurt or sink
it in its passage under sail by these forts and blockhouses, being past their
level and danger at the first discharge of their Cannons over against them,
and quite out of it ere they can be recharged; much less then can they stopp,
sink or mischief an whole Navy or Squadron of Men of War, which I shall
demonstrate by several instances old and new, beyond contradiction. 1. Sir
Francis Drake in his famous voyage to the West Indies with a small squadron of
ships, entered five of the chief Ports the Spaniards there held* took and fired
their ships there riding under their Castles, Forts, Blockhouses, and pillaged
their Towns themselves, notwithstanding all their Cannons and Artiliry playing
upon his ships, both from their Forts, Castles, Blockhouses and Ships there
riding, and that without the loss, sinking or spoiling of any one of his
Vessels: And some other English Sea*Captains then and since did the like, as
Mr. Harkluit in his printed Voyages at large relates. 2. Our English Navy in
Queen Elizabeth's reign, in their expedition against Cadez, took the whole
Island and City in one day, burnt and took all their ships, treasure, magazine
and ordnance there, notwithstanding all their forts, block-houses, numerous
mounted Cannons discharged against them, without the loss or spoil of any one
ship, and of very few men, as Mr. Cambden, Speed, and others inform us in her
life. 3. The Hollanders both in the East and West Indies have frequently entered
the Spanish Havens with their ships, in despite of all their Cannons, Forts and
Blockhouses, anchored in them, and pillaged, fired, took the Spanish Vessels
riding in them under their Castles, without the sinking of any one man of War
by their Cannons firing, as the History of the Netherlands, Purchase and
Hackluit in their Voyages, and others record. 4. The Dutch men of War, and
other Vessels have sundry times in a drunken Bravado, at midday passed in and
out of our Harbors at Harwich, Plymouth, Falmouth, and Southampton, without
striking sail to the Forts there, and gone away without any hurt, danger, stop,
notwithstanding all their cannon-shot to bring them in, as I have heard by many
credible eyewitnesses. 5. Sir Robert Mansel in his Voyage against Algier, with
his boats fired sundry of their ships, drawn on shore under their Castle-walls
and blockhouses, without the loss of one boat or ship, and very few men,
notwithstanding many thousands of cannon and more of musket shot from the
castle and ships, as Captain George Carteret who saw it, and was active in it,
informed me whiles I was prisoner in Jersey. 6. Since our late unhappy wars,
two very small squadrons of our ships successively landed the Parliaments
forces under the very blockhouses and forts of Scilly and Jersey, without the
loss or hurt of one ship or barque by their Cannon shot, and with the loss of
very few men, and reduced the Castles and Islands too with a far lesser
land-force then the King had there in arms to defend them. Since this, Sir
George Ascough with a small Navy entered into the chief part and harbor at the
Barbados, took and brought out thence fourteen or more Dutch Vessels, and
others riding therein, passing and repassing, without the loss, sinking, hurt,
of any one ship, or slaughter of one man, within half pistol shot of their
castle and blockhouses, which played upon his ships all the time with their
cannon and musket shot; and soon after he reduced the whole Island
notwithstanding all their forts and forces; as the printed Diurnalls and
Relation of its taking, and Letters thence inform us. 7. Since this I read in
our Diurnalls, that Prince Rupert took some of our Merchants ships riding under
the Castles and Blockhouses of our English Plantations in the Indies, which
played upon him with their cannon without hurt, he returning them two cannon
shot for one, and riding within musket shot of them without any fear or hurt.
8. To come home to Pendennis Castle and St. Mawdits, so much cried up as the
most useful and considerable of all other: Whiles they were in the Kings power
since these wars, as the inhabitants and some soldiers assure me, a single
man of war of the Parliaments party in the daytime entered the harbor,
boorded, took and carried away thence a rich ship there riding in the view of
both the Garrisons, notwithstanding all their cannon shot and blockhouses,
without any harm at all, she shooting as fast at the castles as they shot at
her, and so departed with her prize. 9. Since my imprisonment in Pendennis
Castle, a Turkish man of War at midday, in the view of all the Garrison, and
my self, came up to the mouth of the Harbor, and very near the Blockhouse,
took a great English Lighter of thirty tun, sunk the vessel in the place, and
carried away some twelve persons in it prisoners into Sally or Tunis; after
which, she came close up to the harbor two or three mornings together till
chased away from thence by a Man of War; One stout ship of War being a
better guard against Pirates and Sea-enemies then all the Maritine forts and
garrisons, being able to pursue, fight and take them, which no forts or
garrisons can do. Not long after a little Pink, not above nine or ten ^un,
anchored some three days together just between Pendennis Castle and St.
Mawdits, to carry away Tin, as was supposed; Sir George Ascough sailing
within view of the Castles with his whole fleet toward Plymouth, *some eight
days before his fight with Ruttier) sent four men of war to convey such ships
as were in the Harbor to Plymouth; two of them came into the Harbor, the
other two plied up and down at the mouth of it, till the other two came out of
the Harbor to them* This little Pink thereupon hoysed sail, as if she were
bound for Plymouth with them, without any discharge or leave from the Castles;
whereupon they shot two warning pieces over, and under her, to bring her in for
this affront, and to make her pay for the shot and custom of Tin, which they
imagined she had stolen; I looking on, the Captain, Gunners, and soldiers
told me, They would warrant me she would come in and submit; but I observing
her course, told them, She would no more come in to their lure then a wild
Hawke got loose; whereupon both Castles discharged their cannons in earnest, to
hit, sink, or bring her back through fear, but she in despite of them (though
there were two men of war before, and two behind her under sail) got away
from them all without any hurt or stop, the whole Garrison looking on.
VVhereupon I laughing at their confidence, and uselessness of these castles,
(serving only to shoot away They have often discharged 20, 30, 40, 50, 60
cannons or more at a time to ships coming in, and the ships as many to them,
since my imprisonment there: A strange prodigality!
powder and bullet in salutes and frollicks) told them, That our wise Statesmen
and the Kingdom were very much overseen to keep two Castles, three or four
Blockhouses, so many score Cannons, Gunners, Soldiers, and Matrosses there, as
cost them eight or ten thonsand pounds a year, under pretense to secure the
Haven and Nation against Enemies and Pirates, when they could not at noon day
(as they now saw by experience) so much as stay, take, hurt or sink one little
Pink of nine or ten tun with four or five seamen only, and not one Gun in
her, whenas there were four Men of War under sail so near her, and she had
stolen Customs: Much less then could they stop, hurt sinck any stout man of
War, or an whole squadron of Ships or Navy, or hinder them from entering the
Harbor, riding or landing there, and returning at their pleasures, their Pieces
and Bl^^khouses not commanding one half quarter of the Harbor when entered, not
being able to hurt or sink them in their entry or retiring, as I clearly
demonstrated to them, then and afterward, especially by these unanswerable
experiments in our late sea Fights. Colonel Blake (my Countryman) in his
first sea Fight with Van Trump, as his and others printed Letters relate, had
many scores (if no^ hundreds) of broad sides discharged against his ship by the
Dutch, at nearest distance, by far greater better Cannons, Cannoneers and Tyres
of Ordinance, charged with Chain and Crossbard shot as well as Bullet, lying
nearer the water then any Guns in Pendennis or St. Maudits Castles,
Blockhouses, or in any other of our Forts, receiving no less then 3000. Cannon
shot in his Hull, tackling Masts, Sails, After which he received in his ship as
many or more broad sides and shots in his third Fight with the Dutch in their
return from France with their Merchant ships; and Sir George Ascough received
near as many in his ship in his fight with Ruttier: Yet all these broad sides
and thousands of shot, did neither sink split, fire, nor make unservicable
either of these ships, which were soon repaired, neither did they kill any
store of their men with their Cannons, their Musket shot and boording only
doing their men most harm. Therefore questionless so many thousand Cannon shot
discharged agaiust any other stout single ship or man of War from these Castles
and Blockhouses at greater distance, uncertainty, and higher level, with
smaller Ordnance balls, by worser Guners can neither sink nor spoil her,
muchless sink, hurt, spoil, stop or take an whole squadron of ships of war
(which our whole Fleets can hardly do) when they cannot come near to board or
fire them; and by this proportion, all the powder, cannon shot, bullets, Guns
in both Castles would not be sufficient to sink or spoil one single ship riding
at Anchor within their command, muchlesse in her passage in or out, since 3000.
shot in her bulk, sails, masts and tackling would not do it; and half of the
Cannons discharged would not hit, but pass besides her: Therefore to keep up
such Castles and Blockhouses to secure Harbors, sink^ships, and hinder any
fleets or squadrons of ships from entering or harboring in them, was but a
prodigal oversight and mistake: there being never any warlike ship yet sunk by
our Forts and blockhouses since their first erection, for ought I could read in
history, or hear by information from credible Witnesses; nor any Navy repelled
from entering, riding, or landing by them* had they a resolution to do it, as
the premised instances with sundry others manifest. (And one since these
Aphorisins penned, namely General Blakes fireing the Turkish ships lying under
their very strongest Castle Walls, notwithstanding all their cannons,
blockhouses, ships playing upon our ships, assaulting them and beating down
their castle about their wars, with the cannon from our ships, without the
loss, sinking, spoil of any of our ships.) A sufficient demonstrative evidence
of the uselesness of Maritine forts and blockhouses, which in truth are mere
idle scarecrows and bugbears to fright raw cowardly seamen, not daunt or keep
off experienced resolute ships or mariners. Wherefore to draw toward a
conclusion, I shall only add,

That the only pretended use of Mereenary Garrisons and Soldiers,, being but
to defend the Peoples Persons and Estates in times of necessity, when and
whiles end angered by a Potent Enemy in actual Arms, who are secure enough
without them, when, where and whiles there is no such visible Enemy to assault
them; it can be neither justice, equity, conscience, honesty, good husbandry
nor true State Policy, to continue any such Garrisons or Field Soldiers on them
to their vast expense and undoing, (now there is no Armed Enemy in the Island,
and so strong a Fleet at Sea to secure them against forraigners) upon endless,
full and constant former pay, without any necessity or actual service till the
next spring or summer, because then peradventure, there may be some new
employments for them, (at home or abroad,) only to enrich the Mercinary
Officers, Soldiers, and oppress, undo the undone people, lying down like
Issachars under both these heavy burdens of Mercenary Garrisons and a
Mercenary field Army too, even with broken backs and bleeding hearts, without
ease or commisseration, notwithstanding all their clamours. No present ruling
Potentates or Statesmen (who should help and right them) will be such Prodigals
or ill husbands of their own Purses and Estates, as to keep those Reapers,
Mowers, who have cut down their Corn and done their harvest work the last
Summer, in full constant harvest pay all the following Autumn, Winter and all
the succeeding spring till the Summer harvest come again, without any other
useful work or employment for them, till then, because peradventure they may
then employ them again for a month or two in reaping and inning their next
years crop, which they have not so much as sown, and are yet uncertain
whether to sow or not; which if they did, would render them ridiculous to every
Country Clown, who has so much Policy, and frugality, as to discharge his
mercenary harvest folk so soon as they have ended their harv st work* and
not to keep them still idle and pay them harvest wages till the next Summer;
because he can then, if need be, soon hire them or other Reapers, Mowers, when
his corn is ripe for cutting, not before, for less then one quarter of the
money their pay would come to if kept in hire till that time, without doing him
any other service: And shall our wise new Statesmen then be such Prodigals and
ill husbands of the exhausted peoples purses and estates; as to keep many
thousands of mercinary Field and Garrison Horse and foot in constant full pay,
(who many months since have done all their summer and present public work
for the peoples safety,) all the censuing Autumn, winter, Spring in no actual
necessary Service for them a^ all, only because perhaps they may make use of
them the Summer following, or a year or two hence (if then) to cut down
imaginary armed Enemies in the Field or Island, if any then appear to invade
the Peoples Persons and Estates; of which there is yet no probability. Verily
if they shall still do thus, every Country Peasant will despise, deride and
ensure this their folly and unthriftinesse, and the whole exhausted oppressed
Nation condemn, if not casheir them for such gross imprudence. Certainly
every rich private Statesmans, Noblemans, Gentleman's, Peasants House, Person,
in these necessitous times, when theives are so busy in all parts of the
Nation, are in greater danger of being robbed, plundered, murdered by Murderers
and Robbers, then any Garrison, Town or Village to be piliaged by any
foreign forces or domestic Enemies, appearing in no parts of the Isle, nor
likely to do it; yet none of them will be so ridiculous, prodigal, or
distrustful of Gods protecting Providence, as upon their own purses to hire
any Horse, or foot perpetually to Guard their Persons, Houses day and night
till the next Summer, because some Thieves and Robbers (these long tedious
winter nights) may probably assault their Houses, steal their moneys, plate,
goods, or murder their persons, but will ease themselves of this cost and
charge, till they be certainly informed of a company of Robbers conspiring for
to plunder, rob, or kill them about some certain time, or have news that they
are ready to execute this design; and then they will time enough summon their
domestik servants and friends to encounter, and surprise them if they come: and
should they not then entrust the peoples persons, estates to Gods Protection
and their own, at this present, without any mercenary Garrisons or Forces to
guard them against their wills or desires, to their superfluous vast expense,
when there is far less probability or fear of danger to them in general
from armed Enemies, then to their own private persons, Houses or moneys, from
Thieves and Robbers? If they be thus continued on them, only to enrich the
Officers, Soldiers, and secure their own Usurpations, Intrusions, or over
ruling powers (preferred before the peoples ease or weal) under a pretext of
danger from some Enemies that may or will infest, plunder, destroy the people
so soon as the Army and Garrisons are disbanded; we shall then desire, that
all officers, Soldiers unwilling to disband upon this pretense of great
imminent danger for the peoples more certain security from Enemies, and
meriting of their future pay, may be strictly enjoined to put on all their
Arms, and draw up all their forces in battalio, where they most fear the
Enemies, in the field; and all their Garrisons likewise kept in a constant
standing Posture*to receive the Enemy, in their respective Forts; and there to
stand night and day in their complete arms* in a perpetual readiness and
posture of defense, till the next summer and our fears be ended* without
putting off their Arms; as our Rogerde Hovesd^n Annal part posterior p. 768
778* Mat West in An. 1 196. p. 17. Gal. Nubigensis. 1 ^ 5. c. In Antique
Ecclesia. Brit. p. 140 Hol nshed P. 150. 151. Chron Johanis Buco^t con^cor.
1272. 1273.
King Richard the first kept the Bishop of Bev^ies taken Prisoner by his forces
in the field, harnessed from head to foot, in his iron Arms night and day,
above two months space, without suffering him all that time to put them off,
lest some Enemies should surprise them, our Island and Garrisons on a sudden,
ere they could arm or put themselves in an actual posture to receive them, if
permitted once to retire into their Winter quarters for their ease; and then we
suppose these pretenders of imminent danger, only to get pay, when and where
they neither do nor can do the people the least real Public service, but
greatest prejudice* as the premises evince; will soon become as humble and
earnest petitioners to our present swaying Powers who continue them, and to the
People (who desire it) to be forthwith disbanded and sent home again to their
friends and further employments as this Harnessed Bishop was to our King
Richard himself, the Pope and his Brother Prelates, to be disrobed, disarmed
of his heavy iron Rochet, so long keept on his back and body to his little ease
and less content; it being altogether as just, equitable, and reasonable for
them to keep the Army and Garrison Soldiers in this unreasonable hard constant
duty and armed Posture day and night till they be disbanded, as to lay
unsupportable endless Taxes, Excises on the oppressed peoples backs to
maintain them in constant pay to their intolerable oppression, till the next
Summer or longer upon the premised pretenses.

Quest.
If any now demand (as many Officers and Soldiers often do, being their chief
plea against disbanding) how shall the Officers and Soldiers live, after all
their good Service in the Wars, if they shall be now at last disbanded to ease
and pleasure the people?

Answ.
The Answer is very obvious, just and equal. 1. How shall the poor people live
or maintain themselves and families, if these Garrisons and Mercinary Forces be
still continued, being already like to starve? 2. How do the poor people live
who are still enforced to give them full pay and maintain them in idleness
without any labor, to do very little duty, and that wholly useless, in Field
or Garrisons; wherein their only necessary, useless, present duty is, to
stand Centinell once or twice a week, one hour or two; to take Tobacco, play,
sleep, drink, and cry stand; or, who goes there? to one another in the night,
as they pass by the Sentinels; to as much purpose, in relation to the peoples
safety, as one night. Owls crying, hallowing is to another; or to demand of
those that enter into the Garrisons in the day time Whence come you? what are
you? what is your name? business? whom would you speak with? Have you taken
the new Engagement? else you must not enter the Fort or Garrison, no not alone
in these times of no danger, as if one disarmed Non Engager might surprise an
whole lasie fortified Garrison, in the day time, as well as a sleeping one in
the night; how much more then an armed Enemy? Which learned questions standing
the Nation in very many thousand pounds every year in Garrisons now kept up, as
much concern the peoples security from Enemies, as the Ministers interrogating
of children formerly in the Church, What is your name? Who gave you this name?
And to maintain near a thousand Block-headed slothful- Gunners in Blockhouses
and Garrisons only to shoot away above six or seven thousand pounds worth of
powder in Courtship, and Frolicks to ships, and Visitors every year, who
deserve rather cashiering for this their prodigal and only Duty, for which
they receive great constant pay. Certainly their Country pay- Masters live not
by such idle, useless, fruitless, rare duties; but by hard studying,
sweating, laboring night and day in their honest lawful callings useful for
the public (the whole profits whereof these idle Lurdanes must still monthly
devour for such ridiculous services, and new kind of Catechizing the people
ex officio like our cashiered unpreaching Curates;) and so must these Officers
and Soldiers too, if they cannot otherwise live as well as they. 3. How did
they live and maintain themselves before they were listed Soldiers? Surely not
as now but like other christian people, by laboring daily in their lawful
callings, living frugally, soberly, obediently like others of their equals, not
in such idleness, luxury, pride, and state as since: And is it not possible
that they may, yea just and equal that they should thus live and maintain
themselves now, and not still live like idle Drones in great sloth, pomp,
state, and honor upon the honey of the poor painful Bees 4. How do many
hundreds of formerly disbanded Officers, Soldiers now live and maintain
themselves, who did as much, and good service as those now in pay? Doubtless
by returning to the diligent exercise of their former callings, or some other
good employments, or going to some lawful foreign Wars. 5. If any old
Officers and Soldiers in present service be so poor, that they know not yet
how to live if they be now disbanded, certainly it is through their own ill
husbandry, pride, or prodigality; never Officers or Soldiers in the world
being more royally, duly, justly paid and rewarded (especially in a Civil War)
than they have been; whereby thou^^^^^ of them (especially Generals, Colonells,
Captains, and Superior Officers, with many inferior ones likewise) are grown
exceeding rich and wealthy over what they were before the Wars (which have
undone most others) and are lately beyond expectation, become the greatest
Purchasers in the Nation of the richest public and Private Manors, Seats,
Revenues, Offices; this Civil War being the richest trade they ever yet met
withal in their lives, which makes them so unwilling now to give it over; and
to continue these poor unthrifty Soldiers still in pay till they grow as rich
as these their fellows, is to be worse husbands for the Nation for the future,
than these unthriving Officers and Soldiers (who have not yet gotten enough to
live by the Wars) have been for themselves in time past, and that only to
maintain and enrich them with the whole Nations ruin. 6. The plain meaning of
those who make this Demand is, that they expect and intend our mercinary
Armies, and Garrisons shall by one means or other, be continued in pay, and our
Wars not ended, our peace not settled till Doomsday, or at least so long as the
people have either Lands, stock, goods, or moneys left, to pay heavy unceasing
Taxes and Excises for them to live upon, at that high, lasie rate as now they
do. But better ten thousand times such idle wretches should be disbanded,
though they starve and perish, if they will not betake themselves to some
honest vocation to live by it; then that the whole Nation should starve or
perish, to keep them and our unnatural, unchristian Wars still a live, to
murder our own Christian Brethren or allies, of purpose to keep our Armies and
Garrisons in action and preserve them from present or future disbanding. As
Deuteronomy 28. 22. c. 23 22. to 27. L^vit 26. 25. to 38. 1 Kings 19. 17. Ezr. 9 8.
Job. 19. 29. Isay. 5^. 19. c* 65. 12. c. 66. 17 Jer. 9. 16. to 23 c. 12. 12. c.
14. 13. to 20. c. 15. 2. to 15. c. 24. 10 c. 25. 16. to 34. c. 29. 17. 18 c.
34. 17. and c. 43. 11. c. 40. 10. to 27. c. 47. 6, 7 c. 50. 16. 35, 3^, 37.
Ezech. 5. 2. to 18. c. 14. 21. c. 21. 9. to 30. Jer. 4. 19. 20. tos 31. 1 ay.
19. 3. Cron. 15. 6.
War and the oppressing Sword of war (especially when Civil) are in Gods own
Judgment and all wise men's, the severest Curse* Plague, Punishment, that God
in his wrath can here inflict upon any people for their sins and wickedness,
as includiug all sorts of other evils, spiritual and temporal, in its
bowels; So for any to make a Trade of War, and to continue, perpetuate this
heaviest Plague and Curse upon their own Native Country without absolute
Necessity, or just grounds, is the worst of Crimes and Treasons; and those that
are guilty thereof the worst of Traitors, of christian men, unworthy the name
of Saints or Christians, whatever their pretenses be to color it. If therefore
Machiavills Atheistical infernal Paradox (applauded and often justified in Print
by his new Disciple Who has printed it man^ times with approbation*
Politicus) He that has once drawn his sword against his lawful Sovereign,
must throw away the scabbard, and never sheath it more; no, not after he has
cut off his Sovereigns Head therewith; has prevailed more with any Machivilian
States*men or Swordmen, than our Saviors own more sacred Christian Gospel
precept and speech to Peter, when he drew his sword, and only cut off Ma^chus
his ear (not Head) coming then forcibly to apprehend our Savior (who presently
cured his ear again, and gave this command to Peter, though certain himself to
be crucified* if then apprehended) * Put up thy sword into his sheath again;
for all they that take the sword, shall perish with the Mat. 26. 51. 52*
sword; and therefore upon his diabolical advise they peremptorily resolve to
keep our Mercinary Armies Garrisons swords still drawn, and unsheathed amongst
us, without ever putting them up again, upon the peoples dry drained Purses,
notwithstanding all their cries and premised reasons against it; (not for the
peoples safey, which cannot now be so much as henceforth surmised, after this
discovery of its gross Imposture, but for their own private present and future
Indemnity alone.)

Let all such cheating oppressing unrighteous Machivilians assuredly know* that
these words of Christ will certainly prove true and take hold of them in
conclusion, he Lam. 1. 20. Rev. 13. 9. 10.
being truth it self that spoke them; and that such who resolve to live in
War still, shall never die nor rest in Peace, but perish by and with John. 14
6. Genesis 9. 6.
the sword at last (as Pompey, Cyrus, Pruda, and others have done,) though they
had all the Garrisons and Armies on earth to protect them; whom God in his
Justice, if other instruments be wanting, can make their unexpected
Executioners in stead of Guardians, when they wander out of his Protection in
ways of violence, Oppression, Rapine, Blood, War, Discord, and will neither
know nor pursue the ways of Peace and Christian unity, for the Peoples public
Ease and whole Nations Welfare.

FINIS.

