Seasonable and Healing Instructions, Humbly tendered to the Freeholers,
Citizens and Burgesses, of the respective Counties, Cities and Boroughs of
England and Wales, to be seriously recommended by them, to their respective
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, Elected and to be elected for the next
Parliament.
WE the Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, Commons and Freemen of the respective
Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of England and Wales, taking into our serious
Considerations the many late various Forms and Revolutions of our public
Government, with the miserable Distractions and Oppressions of our ruinated
Churches and Realms since the violent changes of our ancient established Kingly
Government, and Constitution of Parliaments, consisting of King, Lords, and
Commons, by whose united Counsels and Interests we were happily secured against
all treacherous Plots and Conspiracies of foreign Enemies, and pernicious
Domestic Vipers, and advanced to the highest degree of worldly Peace,
Prosperity, and Felicity. And finding by above eleven years sad Experience,
that there is neither Hope nor Probability of restoring our 3. shipwrack'd
Nations to their Pristine Tranquillity, Unity, Wealth, Honor, Traffic,
Security, but by a speedy Restitution of our ancient Form of Parliaments, and
public Regal Government; and with all observing, that in the Writs of Summons
now issued for a Parliament to be held at Westminster, on the 25th. day of
April next, there is no known single Chief Governor, nor yet any real
Commissioners nominated, (but only Fictitious Utopian Keepers of the Liberties
of England) with whom the Members appearing in Parliament can neither conferr
nor consult, concerning the difficult and urgent Affairs either of the Realm or
Church of England; And that all the Lords and Great Men of the Realm (the
antientest hereditary Members of Parliament, the Grand Counselors of the
Kingdom, and Chiefest Assertors of our Liberties in all precedent times) are
totally omitted out of these new Forms of Writs, and all Clauses in them,
contrary to all former Presidents, without whose concurrent Advice and
Assistance with the Commons House in this approaching Parliament, no firm Peace
or Settlement can probably be expected, a full and free English Parliament,
(from which no legal Members, much less the whole Englsh Peerage and Nobility
ought to be excluded, being the principal thing the Generality of this Nation
lately petitioned and declared for, as the only Instrument under God to compose
all Differences and dissenting Parties, and put a happy period to our manifold
long-lasting Distractions and Confusions: Have thereupon apprehended it our
bounden Duty, seriously to recommend these ensuing INSTRUCTIONS to our
respective Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses elected, and to be elected and
returned by us for our Representatives and Trustees in this approaching
Parliament; who receiving full and sufficient Power for themselves, and the
respective Commonalties of the said Counties, Cities and Boroughs from the said
Commonalties alone who elect them, to do and consent to all such things as
shall be ordained by Common Council of the Realm in the said Parliament, in
their Rights and Behalfs, are thereby obliged in point of Duty and Conscience
as their public Servants and Proxies, vigorously to pursue all such just
Prescriptions for the Common welfare and Establishment of our Native Country,
as they shall present unto them.

We therefore eanestly desire and require them in pursuance of the Trust
reposed by us in them, to improve their uttermost Endeavors and Counsels,
(there being no particulars prescribed to them in the Writs themselves, as
heretofore) to effect these few Individuels.

1. To restore the ancient Constitution, Rights, Privileges and Freedom of our
English Parliaments, their respective Houses and Members, and to preserve them
from all future Mutulations and Violations by armed Force or otherwise, that so
they may by free un-interrupted and combined Counsels proceed to the speedy
Settlement of our distracted Churches and Nations, without any Diversions or
Obstructions by Soldiers or popular Tumults.

2. To re-establish the ancient Fundamental Regal Government of this Kingdom,
and the Dominions thereunto belonging (under which we and our Ancestors in
former Ages have flourished in great Peace and Prosperity) according to our
known Laws, Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, and multiplied Declarations, and
secure it against all future Underminings and Powder-plots of Jesuitical and
Fanatic Conspirators.

3. To revive and ratify the miserably subverted and violated Great Charters,
Fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Land, made for the preservation of the
Persons, Lives, Liberties, Free-holds, Estates and Properties of all English
Freemen, against all Arbitrary and Tyrannycal Judicatures, High Courts of
Justice, Proceedings, Trials, Executions, Judgments, Banishments,
Imprisonments, Confinements, Confiscations, Forfeitures, Attainders,
Outlawries, Sequestrations, illegal Taxes, Impositions, Excises, and public
Charges whatsoever, not granted by Common-consent in Parliament, and to prevent
all future Contempts and Violations of them, after so vast expenses of Treasure
and Blood for their just defense.

4. To establish an able, learned, Orthodox Ministry, and just and righteous
Magistracy throughout our Dominions, and to take special care that the Gospel
of Christ may be duly and sincerely preached, propagated, the Sacraments and
public justice freely and rightly administered in all places, without neglect
or obstruction, to the consolation, protection of all good Christians, and
well-doers, and the terror and suppression of all Malefactors.

5. To advance all sorts of Trade, Merchandise, and Navigation, by diminishing
all excessive Customs, Excises, Imposts at home, by making Peace and holding
good correspondence with all foreign Kings and Nations abroad, and using all
other good means conducing thereunto.

6. To redress all public Grievances, Oppressions, Frauds, and Misdemeanors;
to diminish, retrench and regulate all exorbitant Taxes, Excises, Imposts,
Fees, Extortions, Salaries and superfluous Forces, Garrisons, Officers, (Civil
or Military) by Land and Sea.

7. To procure a speedy, honorable, safe, Christian Treaty and accord with our
long Exiled Protestant King, and Royal posterity, upon moderate, just,
righteous terms and Propositions on either side, whereby the bleeding
Protestant cause and Religion, (much endangered in all places) may be promoted
and secured, the Plots of Popish Enemies to extirpate them prevented; the
Peace, Government, Laws and Liberties of our Kingdoms, restored, preserved, and
perpetuated to posterity; the just public Debts of the Nation and Soldiers
arrears discharged; a general Act of Indemnity* Pardon and Oblivion for all
sorts of persons justly capable thereof, procured; all former Injuries, Feuds,
Animosities totally extinguished, and all just sales of justly confiscated
Estates, made without Fraud, Govin, practice or Duresses for valuable
considerations, confirmed or recompensed; that so all parties and interests
being perfectly reconciled, may henceforth studiously endeavor to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and to live peaceable and quiet Lives
under their lawful Kings and Governors in all Godliness and Honesty; being
Ephesians. 4. 2, 3* 4, 5, 6. 17, 18.
all Members of one and the same Mystical politic Body, having all one
Spiritual and Temporal Lord* one Faith, one Baptism, and one God, and Father;
which should both persuade and oblige them to put away all bittern^sse, wrath*
anger, ^lamour, evil speaking, and all malice, and to be kind one to another,
tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven them, forbearing one another in love. But if we still proceed to 1 Timothy 2. (...) Gal. 5. 15.
bite and devour one another, (as we have done for many years bypast) we shall
suddenly be consumed one of another, and made a prey to our common Enemies,
which the accomplishment of these Instructions by Gods blessing, and the
Parliaments wisdom, will prevent, and make us once more THE GLORY AND LADY OF
ALL CHRISTIAN KINGDOMS, as we are now their reproach.

FINIS.

