TEN Considerable Quaeries CONCERNING TITHES, THE Present Petitioners and
Petitions for their total abolition, as Antichristian, Jewish, burdensome,
oppressive to the godly, conscientious People of the Nation; excited,
encouraged thereunto by disguised Jesuits, Popish Priests, Friars, and Romish
Emissaries, to starve, suppress, extirpate our Protestant Ministers, Church,
Religion; and bring them all to speedy confusion.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Levit. 27. 30. All the Tithe of the Land, of the seed of the land, or of the
fruit of the tree, IS THE LORDS, it is holy unto the Lord.

Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches
in all good things.

Calvin, in Mal. 3. 11. Videmus non esse novum vel insolitum si homines Deo sua
officia imputent, and interea manifest e eripiant ei (Decimas) quod suum est,
et ad se transferunt; manifest e satis appareat eorum impictas, etiamsi velo
simulationis sit obducta.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1659.

Ten Considerable Quaeres concerning Tithes, and the New Petitioners,
Petitions, concerning their abolishing.
I. WHether Nine parts of Ten of the present eager Petitioners against our
Ministers Tithes (if strictly examined by the poll) will not appear to be poor
mecanical persons, of such mean inconfiderable fortunes, estates, condition,
(without any Tithable lands, livings, estates,) as are no ways interessed nor
concerned in the payment of Tithes? And so fitter to be punished as factious,
seditious, schismatical; than thanked, encouraged as zealous, conscientious,
well-affected persons, by those in present power?

II. Whether all or most of these Petitioners, be not really greater Enemies to
our See John Cannes second Voice from the Temple, 1653.
Ministers and their Ministry, then they are unto their Tithes; petitioning
purposely against their Tithes in order to the subversion, extirpation of their
Ministry, Function, and thereby of our Protestant Church and Religion? And that
by the instigation, solicitation of those disguised Jesuits, Popish Priests,
Monks and See My Quakers Unmasked. My New Discovery of Romish Emissaries. And
true and perfect Narrative.
Romish Emissaries, which bear chief sway in most Separate Congregations of
Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Antagonists now attempting the present
abolition of Tithes? If so; (as will appear upon an impartial Inquisition)
whether such persons will not be fitter to be banished as Antichristian, rather
than Tithes, and to be taken into public consideration before the debate of
Tithes?

III. Whether there be not above One hundred religious well affected
Protestants, persons of Honor, Quality, Estate liable to the payment of predial
Tithes, and most concerned therein, who desire the constant payment and
continuance of them for the maintenance of their Ministers, to every one of
those Tith-payers who now petition against them as a grievance, though the
Tithes the most of them pay be not considerable? If so, (as is most apparent,
by comparing the paucity and quality of the Petitioners, with those who refuse
to join with them) Whether it can be conscionable, equitable, just,
reasonable, See Claus. 28 E. 1. m. 3. dorso.
Parliamentarie, to admit of any debates for the abolishing, or altering the
payment of Tithes, upon the Petitions of so few malecontented Sectaries, and
unvaluable persons; against the wills, consents, desires, of the Generality and
most considerable part of the Nobility, Gentry, Farmers, Citizens, Freemen of
the whole Nation? And that during the absence and forcible seclusion of most of
those Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses they duly elected to represent their
persons, and give both their free Votes, Opinions, Assents, and Dissents, to
whatever public businesses should be propounded and ordained in Parliament:
Therefore to this of Tithes which is so universal, and so highly concerns both
our Religion and Proprieties?

IV. Whether it will not be an apparent breach of the Great Charter of England,
chapter 1. and 29. That the Church of England shall be free, and shall have her
whole Rights and Liberties inviolable; That no Freeman shall be disseised of
his Freehold, or Liberties, or Free-Customs, or be outlawed, exiled, or any
otherwise destroyed, nor shall we pass upon him nor condemn him, but by the
lawful Judgment of his Peers, and by the Law of the Land: And of above 40.
other Statutes for its confirmation fince, (some of them in the last long
Parliament, now revived in pretext:) for those now sitting to take upon them,
the debating and voting down of Tithes, or altering their usual way of payment
in any kind (being the Inheritance, Right, Liberty, Freehold of the Church of
England, of every particular Church, Patron, Minister, Impropriator, and many
thousands of Freemen in all parts of the Nation) without any lawful summons
given to them to appear before them, to defend, maintain their respective
Inheritances, Freeholds, rights, interests in them, (ratified by prescription
time out of mind; by sundry Acts of Parliament both under our ancient See Mr.
Seldens History of Tithes, c. 8. Rastals Abridgment, Title Tithes.
Saxon, Norman, English Kings, and many late Ordinances (to which those now
conyened gave their Votes, as fully as others now secluded) as well as by
Divine Right, Institution both before, under the Law, and Gospel too) without
any lawful judgment, hearing, trial by their Peers, or by the Law of the
Land? And whether this will be a conscientious real performance of their
printed Declaration, May 9. 1659 We are resolved (by the gracious assistance of
Almighty God,) to apply our selves to the faithful discharge of our Legal
Trust, to assert, establish, and secure, the Property and Liberty of the people
in reference unto all, both as Men and Christians? Therefore of all Patrons,
Ministers, Members as well as others, unless they repute them neither Men, nor
Christians.

V. Whether See his Second Voice from the Temple, 1653.
John Can, with other Adversaries to and Petitioners against Tithes as Jewish
and Antichristian; ought not first to prove them such, by clear unanswerable
Scriptures, Evidences, Demonstrations, to the conviction of the Judgments,
Consciences of the generality of the English Nation, and all now sitting? And
to answer all the Arguments Authorities, Scriptures, Reasons produced by
Tyndarus, and Rebuffus, in their Treatises de Decimis, Dr. George Carltons,
Tithes proved to be due by a Divine right, London 1606. Dr. Robert Till^slee,
his Animadversions on Mr. Seldens History of Tithes London 1619. Sir John
Sempil his Sacrilege sacredly handled, London 1619. Stephen Nettles his Answer
to the Jewish part of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, Oxon 1625. Richard
Mountague his Answer to the first part of the History of Tithes, London 1628.
Dr. William Sclater, his Ministers portion; Foulke Roberts, The Revenue of the
Gospel is Tithes, due to the Ministry of the word by that word, Cambridge 1613.
Richard Eburne, his Maintenance of the Ministry, London 1609. R. G. his Truth
of Tithes discovered; or the Anatomy of Annanias and Saphiraes Sacrilege,
London 1608. My Gospel Plea (interwoven with a Rational and Legal) for the
Lawfulness and continuance of the ancient maintenance and Tenths of the
Ministers of the Gospel, London 1653. and others, to prove Tithes Due by Divine
Right to the Ministers of the Gospel, and neither Jewish nor Antichristian, nor
illegal, nor burdensome to the people in the least degree, being allowed in all
Leases, purchases, before they be voted down, abolished, and quite abrogated as
such, upon their clamorous, scandalous Petitions, Suggestions, void of all
truth?

VI. Whether the present, and future pretended ease of the people in their
Tithes to their Ministers, (if effected) will not be recompensed with an
Augmentation or Duplication of their Monthly Taxes to the Army, or in Fines,
Rents to their Landlords, to a far greater value than they now pay to their
Ministers, and be levied with greater rigor and harder compositions, if
detained, than now they are? according to Saint Augustines prediction, Sermo
219. De Tempore, If thou will not give thy Tithes, Dabis impio Militi, quod non
vis dare Deo and Sacerdoti; Hoc tollit Fiscus, quod non accepit Christus: Thou
shall be sure to give that to an impious Soldier, which thou will not give to
God, and a pious Minister: The Exchequer takes that away, which Christ's has
not received; as some Parishes have found by experience to their costs and
grief.

VII. Whether it be not a most arrogant, high, inexcusable presumption for a
few giddy-pated Innovators in this Age, to condemn, censure, not only the
practice, wisdom, piety of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and all the
people of God in the Old Testament, before and under the Law, and of most
Christian States, Churches under the Gospel in paying, prescribing Tithes, as
the most equal, rational, just, convenient maintenance for the Priests and
Ministers of God of all others; but likewise of the wisdom, prudence,
providence of God, who is Prove. 8. 1, 14. c. 9. 1.
Wisdom it self, and Romans 16. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Jude 21.
God only wise, 1 Cor. 11. 25.
whose very Folly is wiser than men, in instituting, commanding such a
constant, settled maintenance for them in his Word, as the best, fittest of all
others; wherein both Minister and people equally lose, gain, and sympathise
with each other, which they cannot do with so much indifferency, equallity in
any other way, which human wisdom could hitherto invent?

VIII. Whether it be not an infallable evidence, that those have neither the
Faith nor Piety, and by consequence are not the Sons of Abraham, the Father of
the Faithful, in a Spiritual or Gospel sense, who refuse to do his John 8. 39,
Romans 4. 7. to 15.
works and follow his steps, in paying Tithes of all their spoils of War to
Christ himself, a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. 4.
as other Soldiers by his example did both amongst Israelites, Christians and
Pagans too, Number 31. 26, to 54. 1 Chronicles. 26. 26, 27, 28. Mr. Seldens History of
Tithes, c. 1. 3. and endeavor to spoil them of all other Tithes due from
themselves, and others too; reputing it an eminent degree of their Saintship?
And whether this their practice be not likelier to bring them into Hell
torments, than into Abrabams bosom in conclusion, if they repent not of it?
Luke 16. 23. to 31.

IX. Whether all the Inconveniences objected against Ministers maintenance by
Tithes, be not rather fictitious, imaginary, than real, arising from the
malice, covetousness, impiety, fraud, hypocrisy, injustice, rapine,
perverseness, litigeousnesse of the wilful Deteiners, Opposers of them,
rather than from Tithes themselves? fince many Ministers heretofore, and of
late years, have lived all their lives without any suits for Tithes with any of
their Parishioners, and might do so still, would they make a Conscience to pay
them without any suit? Whether those who refuse to pay Tithes in kind to
Ministers now, out of a pretext of Conscience; will not upon the same Pretense
refuse to pay them any other maintenance that can be invented, and make it more
litigious, contentious, uncertain than their Tithes, since every Innovation in
this kind ingenders new suites and disputes, when all legal Controversies,
suites for Tithes have been long since settled, resolved over and over, both in
Parliaments, and other Courts of Justice?

X. Whether the admission, permission of those few Commoners now acting without
their Fellows, (being scarce the TENTH PART OF THE HOUSE) to vote down, or take
away the Ministers Tenths, or reduce them into one public Treasury, to divide
and distribute them at their pleasures, though amongst the Ministers themselves
at first, will not be a dangerous leading President and encouragement to them
(upon any pretended necessity) to dispose of these Tenths and the other 1 Samuel
8. 14, 15, 16, 17. 18. See I0. Calvini Hom. 29 in 1 Samuel c. 8. p. 155.
nine parts of every Man's estate, and reduce the profits of them into their
public Treasury, for the necessary defense, and preservation of their
New-Commonwealth, and the Armies pay, as they did others sequestered estates
heretofore, because Tithes, though See Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, chapter 11.
The 2. Part of my Gospel Plea.
originally dedicated as a peculiar portion, inheritance, and rent-service to
God himself and his Church, as the Sovereign Lord of all men's Inheritances,
specially reserved by him for his own immediate honor, service, homage,
tribute, for all the other nine parts they enjoy by his free grace and
liberality; may be thus alienated and distributed at their pleasures; therefore
much more the nine remaining parts allotted unto men alone, for their own
private, and the Public good; over which they have a greater probabler,
legaller Jurisdiction, than over God's own peculiar portion, which might
neither be alienated, exchanged, redeemed by any human powers, but only by the
Priests consents in some special cases for their advantage, Numb. 18. 20.
Levit, 27-28, 29, 30, 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 12. 17. c. 14. 22, 23. Mal. 3. 8, 9. Ezech.
48. 9 to 15. Which if once reduced into a new public Treasury, the Ministers
are like to have no other share nor better account of them, then of the Tithes
of Southwales for some years last past, or of the Deans and Chapters
impropriations for the augmentation of incompetent livings, swallowed up for
the most part by the Treasurers and their Instruments, with little or no
advantage to the public, and less to the Ministers, by reason of their
unfaithfullness; far different from those 2 Chronicles. 31. 11. to 20.
Treasurers for the Tithes and First fruits brought to Jerusalem, appointed by
King Hezekiah, over whom Coniah the Levite was ruler, who faithfully brought in
and distributed to their brethren, the Oblations, TITHES, and dedicated things,
as well to the great as the small, without substraction or defalcation. The
Statutes of 27 H 8. c. 20. 32 H. 8. c. 7. 2, and 3E. 6. c. 13. style those evil
disposed Persons, not regarding their Duties to Almighty God, and to the King
their Sovereign Lord; who out of an ungodly and perverse will and mind detain
all or any part or parcel of their Tithes and Offerings, enacting strict
penalties against all Substracters and Detainers of them. How then they can now
be reputed conscientious Godly Saints, unless enrolled for such in the Roman
Calendar, is worthy resolution: some of them (as the Quakers) beginning of late
to work on the Lords day, denying God one day in seven, as well as the Tenth of
their annual increase, deeming both Jewish and Antichristian, as they deem our
Ministers. Ex cauda draconem.

FINIS.

