IX PROPOSALS by way of Interrogation, to the General, Officers, and Soldiers
in the ARMY, Concerning the justness of their late proceedings in Law or
Conscience against, and contrary to the Parliament, tending to Reduce them to
their former LOYALTY and OBEDIENCE; BY Discovering the injustice,
unreasonableness, and dangerousness of their proceedings and demands, wherein
they still persist, only to pick a Quarrel with the PARLIAMENT, without any
real cause.

PSALM. 12. 1, 2. Help Lord, for the godly man cease, for the faithful fail
from among the Children of men, They speak vanity every one with his Neighbor;
with flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak. The Lord shall cut
off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things: who have
said, we will prevail, who is Lord over Us? Amos 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. LONDON (...)

Nine Proposals by way of Interrogations to the General, Officers, and
Soldiers in the Army, concerning the justness of their late proceedings in Law
or Conscience against, and contrary to the Parliament; tending to reduce them
to their former loyalty and obedience, etc.
1 WHether that New Light who should have Prophesied half a year since, that
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell; and the other godly Officers,
Soldiers, and Saints of this Army; should seize upon the Kings own person etc.
contrary to the Votes of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms; march up against the
Parliament toward, and near London, contrary to the Houses commands, the
Cities desires, and their own engagements to them; refuse to disband now the
wars are ended, or to relieve Ireland, enjoin and enforce the Houses to recall
and annul their own Votes, against their Judgments, consciences, honor and
Common justice; impeach their Members by a general and illegal charge which
they are unable to make good, and demand them to be forthwith suspended, and
sequestered from the House, before any particulars produced or proofs made,
contrary to the privilege of Parliament and Law of the Land: require both City
and Parliament not to list men, or take up arms so much as to stand only upon
their own gaurd to prevent all surprisals, violence, plunder, and a new war,
when they are marching up armed against them to their very walls: obstruct the
releif of Ireland, by diverting or recalling the forces designed thither, when
themselves refuse to engage for its defense; and require many unreasonable,
unjust and impossible things at the Parliaments hands, specified in their late
Remonstrances and Letters; especially that of June. 23. 1647. Would not in
their own consciences* judgments, and all others, have been reputed, a most
malicious, false Prophet yea monstrous slanderer, worthy the severest censure;
and these actions deemed most prodigious, horrid, Themselves no doubt would have
deemed them so, in any of the XI. impeached Members, or their Brigades; or in
Essex, Manchesters, or the Scots Armies, guilty of no such Mutinies.
treacherous, Rebellious, and have been so adjudged and censured both by their
own Consciences, and all honest men's suffrages? And yet now (alas for grief) we
see all these things not only really acted, but justified by themselves and
others even in print, to their eternal dishonor (if persisted in) to teach
them, and all their friends this humbling lesson; that their New Lights
overmuch crying of them up, for most precious Saints, the godly party; Gods
peculiar Portion; the Saviors of the Parliament, Laws, Kingdom; and extolling
them far above all other Christians, who are not of their way, has caused God
in his just judgment (to abate their Spiritual pride, and overweening conceit
of their transcendent piety, and fidelity) to permit them thus to fall into
those most foul and scandalous actions of disobedience and disloyalty to the
Parliament, which have blasted all their former glory with a perpetual blot of
infamy; And if they speedily repent not and crave pardon of God and the
Parliament for it with relenting humbled Spirits; into what other more
desperate, unjust, bloody and treasonable acts, they may precipitate
themselves, to the ruin of Parliament, Kingdom, City, Country, Religion, their
own souls, bodies, estates, families; and to what shameful ends they may bring
themselves and their adherents at last, (all which God of his infinite mercy
give them grace truly to consider of and prevent) no mortal is able to divine;
since the very Much more new Meteors and unfixed wandering stars.
stars of heaven may fall unto the earth and be darkened; Rev. 6. 13. and 8. 12.
and the purest Saints have sometimes fallen into the foulest and most
scandalous sins (as David both into adultery, murder, treachery) to humble and
abate their pride, and convict them of their own humane frailty, and parity
with other meaner Saints in their repute.

2. Whether the House of Commons clearing of their XI. accused Members by a
Unanimous Vote upon long debate, on friday last, from anything said or done by
them in the House, touching any matters contained in the Charge or paper sent
from the Army: And resolution, that by the Laws of the Land, no Judgment can be
given to suspend these Members, or any of them from sitting in the House, upon
the Papers presented from the Army: should not engage the Army in part of honor
and justice, to give the House and those injured Members an Honorable
Reparation, and deliver up the accusers of them (for the things pretended to be
said or done by them within the House, of which they are thus absolutely and
legally acquitted) to public Justice, as false Accusers, who have maliciously
framed these falls suggestions against them, only to mutiny, and incense the
Army without any just grounds against the House, to wrack their private malice
upon these worthy gallant men, and carry on their own private interests and
treacherous designs, against the public peace and weal, by suspending them the
House?

3. Whether the Armies Declarations, Papers and Charge against the House and
Members, and the unjust, unreasonable demands therein contained; especially
these. An humble Remonstrance June 23. A Manifesto from the Army.
That the Declaration inviting men to desert the Army (in obedience to the
Parliament) and promising their Arreares in case they do so; be recalled. That
the Army (now in rebellion) may be presently paid up equally to those that have
deserted it, in obedience to the Parliaments just demands; (as if disobedience
to the Parliament, were more meritorious then obedience) That the Members
Charged may be forthwith suspended the House, (before any legal accuser, Charge
or proof:) That those who have deserted the Army (in obedience to the
Parliament and the Law of God, Romans 13. 1.) may be instantly discharged and
dispersed, (but not continued in service for their faithfulness) and receive no
more of their Arrears till the Army (in Rebellion, yea the Malignants and
Sectaries wherewith it is newly recruited to affront the Parliament and are
professed enemies to it) be FIRST satisfied; who yet pretend, they are not
mercenary, and still continued in the States pay, etc. against whom they
mutiny; That the Parliament and City may be speedily and effectually freed
from those multitudes of Reformadoes (had they said Malignants, the motion had
been just, but they must not be so hardly dealt with) and Soldiers that flock
together in or about London (where many of them inhabit; others attend for
their pay and to have their Accounts stated, others upon their other
Law-business and affairs) by a speedy dispatch and discharging them from the
City: which is in truth to banish them from the place of their habitations,
deny them liberty of suing for their Arrears, auditing their Accounts, or
prosecuting their affairs, like free subjects, after they have adventured their
lives for the Parliament, and to deny them the liberty which all Members in the
Army and well-affected Subjects challenge; and is not in the Parliaments or
Cities power to grant without raising tumults in the City, and justly
exasperating all the Reformadoes and Soldiers against them: That all listings
and raisings of new Forces or drawing together of any (for Irelands, the
Parliaments or Cities just defense) and all preparations toward a new war may
be effectually declared against and suppressed) whiles they in the mean time
entertain and receive into the Army all kind of discontented Sectaries, if not
Malignants, and Soldiers in Arms against the Parliament; raise, list new
forces, and make all preparations for a new war, against the Parliaments Votes;
to omit their demand concerning the Kings not coming nearer London; which are
all so dishonorable, unjust, unreasonable, that no conscientious reasonable man
(but he that seeks a quarrel) can demand, nor the Parliament in Honor,
Justice, Prudence or Conscience grant; may not more truly be denominated,
proved the Declarations, papers and Charge, of a dangerous mutinous The
Vindicat^on of 167. Officer^ ^^me off from the Army, proves it fully.
Faction, and seditious party in the Army (resolved to receive no satisfaction
at all from the Houses, and to keep the Army still on foot out of sinister and
private ends, though with the Kingdoms loss and Irelands ruin) rather then of
the body of the Army it self (never acquainted with these unreasonable demands)
whom they abuse with false reports and mis-representations of the Parliaments
proceedings, and intentions? And whether the House, Army, all true
Commonwealths men ought not with more reason and justice to impeach this
mutinous factious party for Mutineers and Jncendiaries; and desire them to be
forthwith suspended, removed out of the Army and Council of war til their
public trials, (especially if Members of the Commons House, or no proper
Members of the Army) then they demand the present suspenfion of the Accused
members from the House? And whether this piece of public Justice in the Army
(who so much pretend unto it) would not quiet al distempers therein, and reduce
it to its former dutifulness, obedience, and fidelity to the Houses?

4. Whether diverse hundreds of English and Irish Soldiers, who during all the
wars bore arms and waged war against the Parliament, under the command of the
Lord Goring and others, have not since the surrender of Oxford, (by the
practice of a factious Malignant party in the Army) been entertained and listed
in the Army, to promote the Kings and Malignants designs; who now declare
themselves privately for the King against the Parliament, and extremely oppress
the Country by receiving large Contributions from the people under color of
free quarter (which yet they take without payment) about Hatfield and other
places; and are as duly paid as any others in the Army? Whether the Parliament
ought not to complain against, and impeach some Officers of the Army for this
gross treachery and abuse; and the Counsel of War in the Army be better
employed in examining and giving an account to the House of this abuse, and how
many such Cavaliers have been entertained, what pay they have received, what
contributions and free quarter they have unduly taken from the Country; and
awarding them to make restitution of their pay and quarters, and then disarm
and cashier all such, to give the Parliament, City and Kingdom satisfaction;
then to draw up new Charges or Remonstrances? Which if they refuse to do, the
world will soon discern whose designs they promote, and report they are as much
the Especially if the heads presented by them to the King on Saturday last be
true, or the first Querie in the behalf of the Army, in Moderate Answer to 9.
Queries.
Kings and Malignants Army now, as the Parliaments heretofore, and may prove
more pernicious to the Kingdom and Parliament then ever any Army of Cavaliers
that the King could raise.

5. Whether many Anabaptists, and dis-contented Sectaries, have not repaired
from London and others parts to, and been listed in the Army, since the
beginning of their late distempers, and the Houses Votes for their disbanding?
who can intend no other but some Anarchical destructive design agreeable to
their principles, to ruin Parliaments, Monarchy, and all kind of Government?
Whether it be just or reasonable that the Parliament should allow these pay, or
the Country free quarter, being Forces listed against them, without their
privity and Commission? Whether many thousands (if not half near the present
Army) have not secretly (without the Houses knowledge or special Order) been
listed in the Army since the Wars ended, to oppress the Subject, and increase
the Kingdoms unsupportable charge? Whether the pay that these new recruits,
(who never were in actual service) have received since the Wars, only for
lying still and mutining against the Parliament, if examined (as in justice it
deserves) would not have fully satisfied all the Arrears due to those old
Forces in the Army who were in actual service during the Wars? And if so,
whether the Houses and old Soldiers in the Army, have not been both abused (by
their own Officers) in these new recruits, who have anticipated those moneys
which should have satisfied their Arrears? And whether all these recruits ought
not presently to be disbanded without further pay and to restore the money they
have actually received, that those who have adventured their lives in service
may be the better paid their just Arrears, the Parliament being unable to
satisfy both?

6. Whether that Army, who in its Printed Declaration (of June 14.) professes
it self; not to be merely mercenary, ought so much to insist upon the full
payment of their Arrears ere they disband? or to demand pay (when they have
taken free quarter) since they have been out of action and Voted to disband?
Whether the Generals and all other Officers Commissions being conditional: To
obey and observe the direction of both Houses of Parliament, etc. be not
absolutely forfeited and made void in Law by their late disobedience to, and
attempts against the Houses Privileges? and so their present continuing
together in Arms, and new recruits, a mere tumultuous assembly of Riotors or
Armed Mutineers against the Parliament, whom all men by Law and Justice are
bound to resist and suppress; and their taking Free quarter, etc. no other then
direct plundering and trespass, if not worse, by the strict Law of God and
Man, of which they cannot in conscience or justice now crave an Act of Oblivion
from the Parliament whose Authority they resist, whose Privileges they
violate, whose Members they wrongfully impeach, and desire causlesly to suspend
contrary to the freedom of Parliaments, to the insufferable injury of those
Countries and Buroughs who have elected and entrusted them to serve for them
and the Kingdom in the House; and contrary to your own pretended desires of
free Parliaments and Elections, which your present Actions diametrally
contradict. Whether the Parliaments and Cities standing on their guard, or
raising Forces to defend the Line, and secure themselves and the Parliament
from Plunder, and the violence of Soldiers in the Army, which the Officers
themselves cannot prevent, and suppressing tumults in the City, can any ways
be interpreted, a raising of a new War, by the Army, (who have presumptuously
sent out their Since excused as a mistake.
warrants for provision even to hundreds within the Lines of Communication) or
any other rational man, more then the Parliaments guard at Westminster ever
since the Wars, or the guarding of the Line heretofore when no Enemy was near,
and the Earl of Essex Forces lay about, or in the City, and Suburbs? Especially
since the Army have broke their promises both to the Parliament and City in
marching up so near the Line, and many of the Soldiers are so violent,
insolent without, and by their disorders have encouraged others to insolences
within the line, and offer affronts unto the Members? Whether their pretenses
of Emissaries sent by the accused members into diverse Countries to raise new
Forces, or introduce foreign Forces, be not a malicious false slander, which
may be truly retorted upon a factious party in the Army, who have sent such
Emissaries to raise the Sectaries in all Counties? And whether the obstructing
and recalling of the Forces for Ireland, if examined, be not a mere treacherous
plot of some of their own Independent party (whose Commissions are now expired)
who have spent more moneys the last year, and put the Kingdom to more expenses
in raising forces for Ireland (and then billiting them on the Country without
transporting them to do service, to oppress and discontent the people) then
would have actually reduced Ireland; for which the Parliament in justice ought
to call them to a strict account, and inflict upon them condign punishment?

8. What assurance can the General or Officers in the Army give the Houses;
that the Army (at least the Major part and unruely turbulent spirits in it) will
absolutely obey their commands or acquiesce with their resolves now, when they
pretended they could not rule them in their march toward London and other
ditempers heretofore? Or that they will not march nearer London without giving
the Parliament and City timely notice, and the reasons of their march (of which
themselves will be the only Judges, though the notice in it self be neither
timely, nor the reasons just)? And whether in duty and conscience they ought
not (if they can command the Army) rather absolutely to command them to retreat
and disband (at lest al such as are recruted since the votes for disbanding)
and give them clear satisfaction herein; then thus to double (if not trifle)
with the Parliament and City, who have dealt so really and condiscendingly
(even below themselves) with them, to allay their unjust distempers? Whether a
Council of War (consisting of the General, some four Members of the House of
Commons, and eight or nine Gentlemen and Tradesmen, newly raised to places of
Command by the Wars) can in conscience or justice take upon them in the name of
the Parliaments own Army, to prescribe the Parliament by way of menace in an
imperious manner, to suspend their own members, recall their Votes, banish,
Reformadoes, etc. and do what ever they please, or else threaten them with a
new War and effusion of blood (as they do in their Letters and Remonstrances)
which is more then the mock-Parliament at Oxford consisting of sundry Lords and
Commons durst attempt? And whether this Council of war, would not have adjudged
the XI. accused Members to be Traitors, and demanded them to be not only
suspended the House, but even corporally suspended or beheaded, had they
carried themselves so to the Houses, and done in their Councels of war and
Armies, (reputed disorderly and profane,) what they have lately Voted and
acted in their Council and Army of Saints? who will never prove, an Army of
Martyrs, but rather of Mutineers, or worse; if they persist and lose their
lives in, or for their present cause and demands, notwithstanding all their
varnished pretenses, sufficiently discovered by their contradictory actions to
be but pious frauds, to delude the Vulgar.

9. Whether all Acts, Ordinances, Votes and Proceedings in Parliament, obtained
by violence, force, Insurrections and Tumults without the Houses full and free
consents, be not invalid, repealable, and ought to be utterly nulled and
repealed both in point of justice and equity; and so clearly resolved to be by
the Statutes of 11. and 21. R. 2. c. 12. 31. H. 6. c. 1. 39. H. 6. c. 1. 17. E.
4. c. 7? If then the Army desire to have the Parliament pass any Votes,
Ordinances or Acts for their own Indemnity, or for any thing else they pretend
for the public good, which may be valid or effectual in law, they must of
necessity retreat, disband, and retract all their former Remonstrances,
Menaces, Impeachments and Proceedings savouring of Menace or force; and leave
the Houses and Members to their full freedom; that so their Acts and Ordinances
may be valid and irrevocable, being passed in a free and fair Parliamentary
Course; otherwise if they continue mutinous and rebellious; what ever Votes,
Acts or Ordinances they shall wrest from them by Duress, Menaces, Force,
Tumults, suspending of Members before any just or legal impeachment demeriting
it; (the highest infringement of the freedom of Parliaments, and a ready way to
subvert and pervert them, and to make a private faction, backed by an Army a
Parliament, todo what they list, and overawe the greater number against their
judgments and Consciences) or marching up to over-aw them, will be no security
for the present, In E. 3. c. 3. 5. R. 2. c. 6. 31. H. 6. c. 1. 9. 3. H. 7. c. 2.
and a mere snare and nullity for the future, most certain to be revoked and
adnulled when the force and fear is over. Which consideration, besides those
mentioned in other late Impressions; and in the Examination of the lawfulness
of the Passages of the Armies Declaration and grounds of justification, June
14.) should now induce all really conscientious or judicious Officers and
Soldiers in the Army (especially such who are Members of the House) to disband,
and give over all forcible tumultuous courses and addresses to the Houses; that
so a sweet unity and correspondency may be settled; a new War prevented, the
Parliament, City, Kingdom preserved from imminent ruin, Ireland relieved; and
the hopes and designs of all Malignants disappointed: which the Lord in his
infinite mercy and wisdom effectually accomplish, to the infallible joy of all
Gods Churches and people: Amen.

Psa. 140. 11. Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. Jam. 1. 20. The
wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.
FINIS.

