THE Machivilian Cromwellist AND Hypocritical perfidious New Statist:
DISCOVERING The most detestable Falsehood, Dissimulation and Machivilian
Practices of L. G. CROMWELL and his CONFEDERATES, whereby they have a long time
abused and cheated both the Houses, City and Country; and the wicked and
treasonable things they have done, and unwarrantable means they have used to
carry on their own ambitious Designs.

Jan: 10thPrinted in the Year, 1648. 1647

THE Machivilian Cromwellist AND Hypocritical perfidious New Statist.
THe Machivilian Practices and Jesuitical Policies of the Cromwellists and
Independent Confederacy, in the Houses, Army, City and Country, to accomplish
their own ambitious ends, and engross all power into their own hands, by
wicked, unjust, and most diabolical means, have been sufficiently laid open to
the world by Mr Edwards in his Gangraenaes; and their own Champion, John
Lilburn, in his I^glers discovered, his Letters to Cromwell and others; The
Anatomy of the Army; The Grand Design or Discovery of that form of Slavery
intended, and in part brought upon the free people of England, by a powerful
party in the Parliament, and L. G. Cromwell, Commissary General Ireton, and
others of that Faction in the Army; tending to the utter ruin and inslaving of
the English Nation: and by other late printed Papers of their own Friends, the
Agitators in the Army and City, who charge the Head of that Faction Cromwell
(cried up for the holiest Saint on earth without the least dissimulation, guile
or falsehood) with these remarkable treasonable Hypocrisies and Contradictions,
detestable both to God and Men.

1. With making many solemn and deep Protestations in the House of Commons, in
the presence of Almighty God, upon his faith and honor, that the Army should
really disband when ^ver the House should give but the least order or
intimation; And yet at the same time giving secret order and directions to his
Creatures in the Army, not to disband upon any terms, but to keep together and
march up to London to force the Hous^^ and City, and compel them by fear to
comply with all his unjust desires and designs.

2. With plotting and ordering in his own Lodgings, at a great meeting there on
Monday night before Whitsonday last, the securing of the Garrison, Magazine,
and Train of Artillery at Oxford* seizing the Kings own person at Holdenby, and
removing him thence into the Army; and giving order to Cornet I^yce, with is
much speed and se^recy as might be, to effect it; which he accordingly did by
his special direction; and yet like a subtle Fox* prote^ted to the House, the
King and others, that it was done both without his Knowledge and approbation.

3. With impeaching the XI Members, and pressing theirs and others suspent^on
from the House before any charge or proof of guilt (contrary to all Law, all
rules of Justice* and the Houses Votes) only to strengthen his own Faction in
the House, though he knew and acknowledged them to be innocent of the Crimes
pretended, in private: and yet exhibiting and printing a most false and
scandalous Charge against them, to wound their reputations in public, by
charging them with such crimes, of which he knew himself more guilty then they.

4 With charging the wel-affecting Lords and Commons, who continued sitting and
acting in the Houses, when the Speakers and some Members (under pretext of a
force past and ended some two or three days before their departing thence) by
his Solications and Menaces treacherously withdrew themselves from the Houses
to the Army; and the Militia, Common Council, and Citizens of London, for
providing only for their own self-defence by Votes and Ordinances of both
Houses; with no less then Treason, in levying a New War against the King.
Parliament and Kingdom: When as he and his Confederates only were truly guilty
of it, both in seizing upon the Kings own person and rescu^ng him from the
Commissioners of both Houses by a strong party of the Army; in causing the
whole Army to march up to London in a warlike and assailing posture against the
Houses express Orders, and forcing them to repeal their Votes, Ordinances, and
yield up their Members to their fury; and after that, in marching up with the
Army it self to the Houses doors, and City, in triumph, against the Houses
express Letters and Orders, wi^h the fugitive Members whom they engaged to live
and dye with them in that quarrel, and in possessing themselves of all the
Works and Forts about Westminster and of the Tower of London, removing the City
Guards, and setting new of their own upon the H^uses; marching through the City
with their whole Army, like Conquerors, and then throwing down their Line and
Forts, first raised for the Houses defense, in a most scornful manner, and
bele^guring the dis^rmed King, City and Houses ever since, with the whole body
of the Army (which they have doubly rec^uited to the peoples infinite
oppression) to captivate them all to their tyrannical pleasures: Which is a
treasonable levying of War, and High Treason in good earnest, incapable of
excuse, transcending that of the impeached Members and Cit^zens.

5. With forcing the Houses to pass an Ordinance, on the 20. of August last,
for declaring all Votes, Orders and Ordinances, passed in one or both Houses,
since the force on both Houses, July the 26. until the 6. of August, to be null
and void; by reason of a force upon the House of Commons, by a company of
unarmed boys and apprentice^, only on July 26. toward the Evening; who
vanished that night and never appeared after: notwithstanding the Speaker and
Commons House met and sat the very n^xt morning without any disturbance, met
securely a^ the F^st the n^x^ day in Margarets Church, where the Speaker
protested, against the honor of his going to the Army under pretext of this
forc^, as a most dishonorable and unworthy act, which he would rather dye in
the House, then be guilty of, to Sir Ralph Ashton and other^; and the Friday
following most of the Memb^rs met, elected a new Speaker, and voted and sat
without the least violence or disturb^nce from the City; til the sixth of
August, and passed all Votes, O^ders and Ordinances, freely without any color
of force; upon which grounds this Ordinance of repeal, after long debate* was
by the major voice of the Commons House passed four or five times in the
Negative, and laid aside, and so ought not by the Rules of Parliament or
Justic^ to be revived. And yet he and his Confederates enforce the Houses to
pass this repealing Ordinance upon a meet pretense of force, by a f^r greater
armed force and violence then that of the Apprentices, which they made the only
ground of this Ordinance of nullity and repeal, enforced to pass against the
hair in this manner. First, by a Treasonable Remonstrance from his Evcellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army under his command, sent to the Houses from the
Headquarters at Kingston, August 19. (but dated the 18.) in which p. 18. they
take notice of the Commons carrying it in the Negative against this Nulling
Ordinance, and thereupon used such high and treasonable Menaces and Expressions
against the Members continuing in it during the Speakers absence, as no age nor
persons ever heard or read the like; threatening to take them as prisoners of
War, and try them by Martial Law; inhibiting them or any of them, to intrude
themselves to sit in Parliament, til they had cleared themselves from giving
their assent to any of the Votes, Orders or Ordinances, past in the Speakers
absence, and to take speedy and effectual courses to restrain them from being
their own, theirs, and the Kingdoms Judges, and to bring them to condign
punishment. Secondly, they put double Guards the next day upon both Houses, who
openly threatened at the Doors, to pull out all the Members by head and
shoulders that sat and voted in the Speakers absence, if they presumed to
intrude themselves, or but enter into the House; Whereupon more Members by fear
refr^ined the House, and went presently out of London, then those who fled to
the Army. Thirdly, all the Officers, that were Members, came that morning from
the Army into the House, where Cromwell and they made very high and menacing
speech^s which da^nted many. Fourthly, Colonel Desborough came with a party of
1000 Horse drawn up in a body to Hidepark-Corner, threatening to force both the
Houses and Members, if this Ordinance passed not. And by this Treasonable
force, ^ractise and Declaration, was this nullifying Ordinance, against a
thousand-fold less force, forced to pass the House when thin and empty, by head
and shoulders, against the Rules and Freedom of Parliaments, through a thin
House of Commons, when most of the Members were kept and driven away forcibly
from it, by the whole Army and their Guards, And to evidence to all the world
and posterity, that this Ordinance was wrested from the Houses by mere
violence, it was even then by Special Order of the Houses, printed and
published with that Treasonable thundering Declaration against the House and
Members which procured it; dated the 18, sent the 19, of August, and read that
day and the next in the Houses, and the same day (being the 20th) compelled the
House to pass it. Which Ordinance declaring all Votes, Orders and Ordinances of
one or both Houses to be null and void, if procured by force, being thus more
forcibly procured then any it repe^lled, must needs be Felo de se, and declare
it self to be more void and null then they; which being for the most part made,
when the Houses were free by a unanimous Vote, without any division of the
Houses, will remain firm and valid; notwithstanding this new forc^d Ordinance,
promoted and carried on, ^il i passed with greater force then any it repeals.

Besides these detestable Machivilian and Hipocritical practices of Cromwell and
his Confederat^s, be pleased to consider only of three or four more; which will
manifest them the greatest Machivillists and Hipocrites under heaven, never to
be credited or confided in hereafter.

1. The first is, his gulling and deluding his own Confederates and Creatures,
the busy Agitators employed by him, to mutiny the Army into public Rebellion;
who underwent the greatest adventure with the hazard of their necks, to
accomplish his designs upon the King, Parliament and City, who having served
his turn; he now most ung^atefully casheers, and endeavors to suppress,
^postatizing from his first principles and pretenses of seeking the Kingdoms
welfare and peoples Freedom, to advance himself, his kindered and allies,
though with the Kingdoms and Agitators ruin, playing the mere Jugler, and
Hocus-Pocus with them; as their Advocates, Lilburn, Henry Martin, Scot and
Rainsborough complain most bitterly, and others of their Fraternity, in sundry
of their Pasquills.

2. The 2d is, his and his Confed^rates treachery and villainy toward the Lord
Mayor, Alder^en and imprisoned Citizens of London, to whom though they promised
all fair quarter indemnity and security of their first approaches to, and
match through the City in triumph; yet soon after they cause them suddenly to
be impeached of high Treason, committed to the Tower and other prisons; expel
the Recorder (without any legal proof or hearing, from a sudden Report from a
packed Committee of those who engaged with the Army) out of the House, and send
him to the Tower to accompany the Mayor and Aldermen, where they yet detain
them prisoners without any further prosecution; and all this to bring in an
Independent Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and others of their own F^ction, into their
pl^ces, and keep them from acting in the City, and being chosen into public
Offices; In pursuance of which design, he and they have endeavored, and lately
threatened, to bring up the Army to quarter in the City this Winter, under
pretext of levying Arrears; but in truth to bring in what Common-Councel-men,
and other Officers they pleased, of their own Faction, upon the New Elections,
and make Allen and E^^wick Aldermen; That being prevented of this design, Mr
Speaker must discover a New Plot to seize upon the Tower by a company of horse
and foot (who must drop out of the clouds) and the Houses too; to bring up the
Army to guard them til the new elections be past. But this not taking, and
proving as false as he that discovered it, there upon a new Ordinance must be
suddenly drawn up, and passed in a moment before any notice of it, to deprive
the City and Citizens of their free elections of their City Officers and Common
Council men, and make many of the best affected among them, who had any hand
in the Cities Engagement etc. incapable to be elected themselves, or give any
voice in the election of others; to exclude the Presbyterians and
Anti-Sectarists, and bring in a New Independent recruit of Cromwels and the
Armies Confederates, to undo and betray the City, Parliament and Kingdom, and
enthrall them to their bondage; which their Confederacies, Engagements and
Treasons against the King, Houses, City and Kingdom, must make them capable of
all Offices and Preferments, and disable them from none.

3. The 3d is* his and his Confederates in the Armies damn^ble Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation* both toward the Houses, City and Country, and ^eer che^ting
them of their money and free quarter. At first he and they pretended, that if
the Houses and City advanced but so many months pay for the Soldiers, they
should all presently disband, and not trouble the Country more with Free
quarter or Taxes, and that they would pay their quarters out of it. Whereupon
the pay desired, was sent and received, and yet never a Soldier disbanded, but
new recruits, even of Cavaleers against the Parliament, entertained without the
Houses Order, nay against it; and no quarters at all discharged: Since which,
upon sundry complaints of the Countries oppression by free quarter, they have
four or five several times, at least upon receipt of so many weeks pay set
down, faithfully engaged to disb^nd their supernumer^ry Forces, lessen the
Army, and pay their quarters; yet no sooner is the money desired, received* but
they refuse to do either, and grow more high and insolent in their demands then
ever* and more oppressive to the Country. At the last general R^nd^zvouz* they
made the like promise of disbanding and paying quarters, upon the recipt of
forty thousand pounds, which with much difficulty was procured and sent (though
the Forces in Ireland, in great want, and a^^^uall hard service against the
Rebels, are like to perish for want of pay, while these Idle droans devour all
the money the Houses can rake up by any means) and thereupon some supernumerary
Forces and Recruits were actually disbanded, and word sent of it to the House*
but within a day or two they were all ag^in entertained, and others to boot, by
Ord^r from the General and Council of War, co^rary to their E^gagement, and
the Houses Order; and not one penny paid the Country for ^^ee quarter^ and
within two or three days after, a new Repres^ntation (full of Arrogance and
Insufferable language) must be sent* to the Houses, wherein they demand the
sixty thousand pounds monthly tax, to be augmented to one hundred thousand;
justify their not disba^ding the supernumeraries, augmented by them now to such
a number* that the whole Kingdom can neither pay, nor qu^rter them without
ruin. And now they make dem^nds of new sums, and then they will obey the Houses
Orders just as they did before; and thus they cheat the Parliament, City and
Country of their money, and free quarter too; and though they pretend
themselves no Mercenary people, but public spirited Saints, who regard no pay
but higher ends; yet they stick not impudently to press the Houses over and
over, against their Votes, and vote it in their Council of War in opposition to
all the Houses; That all Deans and Chapters, Lands, Forrest-Lands, the
remainder of Bishops Lands sh^l be sold, the fines of the Impeached Cit^zens,
and Lords (whose only Treason is, that they are Rich and Faithful to their
Country, and opposite to their real Treasons) and the third part of all
Delinquents, of ^he Exc^se too, in course, designed for payment of their
pretended Arrears, since their refusal to disb^nd* and yet must have one
hundred thousand pounds a month levied on the Kingdom, besides, for present
pay, to maintain them in their mutinies and Rebellions, and ruin the
Parliament, King, Kingdom, and dying Ireland.

4. His detestable malicious Charg^ng the XI Impeached Members most falsely,
with The Particular Charge of ^he Army.
holding private intelligence with the Kings party, drawing up and sending
Propositions privately to the King, for settling of a peace without the Houses
privity; holding Correspondency with disaffected persons, to put conditions
upthe Parliament, and bring in the King upon their own terms; undertaking to do
more for the King then the Army would do; obstructing the relief of Ireland,
favoring Delinquents and Malignants, giving no account for the great sums of
money they received, driven away the Parliament Members. And thereupon by
violent m^ans enforced them to quit the House (and some of them the Kingdom
too) though innocent, and not convicted of any of those crimes. And yet himself
and his Creatures in the Army, at the self same time and ever since, holding
private intelligence with the King and his Party; admitting them into the
Armies quarters, and there keeping Cabinet Counsels with the chiefest of them,
drawing up, and sending Propositions privately to the King without the Houses
privity* holding correspondency with Sir Edw. Ford, Sir John Bently Ashburnham,
Legg^, Dr Hammond, Dr Sheldon, and other desperate Malignants, and
confederating with them to put conditions on the Houses, and bring in the King
upon his own terms; undertaking to do more for the King then the Scots or
Presbyterians, removing him from Hampton Court to the Isle of Wight (put into
the hands of Colonel Hammond for that purpose some months before) to
accomplish his designs the better; obstructed Irelands relief both with men and
money almost a year together, and intercepting all the moneys, that should now
supply the pressing necessities, to pay his mutinous idle Army, for undoing the
K^ngdom and eating out the Country* pleaded openly in the House for the
exemption of the greatest Malignants in Arms out of the first and second
Articles, because the Army had (without the Houses privity) engaged to mitigate
their fines and interceed in their favor, though they aggravate the pretended
offenses of the injuriously impeached Lords and Citizens to the highest,
pressed their exemption out of the general pardon and Act of Oblivion; and
desire the confiscation of their whole estates: has hither^o given no Account
of the vast sums of Money, Horse and Arms he has received from the State,
professing that he cannot do it: and driven many of the faithfullest Parliament
Members both out of the House and King^om. And therefore deserves to be
susp^nded, imprisoned, cast out of the House, and driven out of the Kingdom as
a most Treacherous Impostor and Traitor to the Parliament, City and Kingdom,
whose ruin he endevors, to prevent his own.

This is the Faith, Honesty, Sincerity and plain dealing of these Cromwellists
and Machivilian Saints; the infamy of the Gospel; the shame of Christianity;
the Sinks of all Hypocrisy, Fraud and Treachery, and unsatiable Gulfs of
avarice, whose consciences are now so free and large, that they can swallow
down the g^eatest sins, contrive and carry on the gross^st Villainies and
Treasons against their King and Country, Church and State; betray and impe^ch
their best and dearest Friends, blow up Parliaments, make use of any Iesuitical
Policies, an^ unlawful means and instruments, to accomplish their exemplary,
temporal and eternal ruin, if they repent not speedily, which God give them
Grace to do in time.

FINIS.

