THE PETITION OF RIGHT OF THE FREEHOLDERS and FREEMEN OF THE KINGDOM OF
ENGLAND:

Humbly presented to the Lords and Commons (their Representatives and
Substitutes) from whom they expect a speedy and satisfactory Answer, as their
undoubted Liberty and Birthright.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE PETITION OF RIGHT OF THE Freeholders and Freemen OF THE Kingdom of
England
In all humbleness show unto the Lords and Commons now in Parliament assembled;
THat whereas the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, in the third year of his Majesty's reign, that now is, did, in their
most famous Petition of Right, among other things, claim these ensuing, as
their and our undubitable Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, viz.

That no Freeman in England should be compelled to contribute to make or yield
any Gift, Loan or Benevolence, Tax, Tallage, or other such like charge, without
common consent by Act of Parliament. That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be
outlawed or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, or be adjudged to death, but
by the Lawful Judgment of his Peers by the Law of the Land, and due process of
Law.

That the quartering of Soldiers and Mariners in any Freemens houses against
their wills, and compelling them to receive them, is against the Laws and
Customs of this Realm, and a great grievance and vexation of the people;
[Notwithstanding the Commons in this present Parliament, in their Remonstrance
of the State of the Kingdom, 15 December. 1641. published to all the Kingdom:
That the charging of the Kingdom with billeted Soldiers (complained of in the
Petition of Right, as aforesaid) and the Concommitant Design of German Horse,
that the Land might either submit with fear, or be enforced with rigor to such
ARBITRARY CONTRIBVTIONS, as should be required of them; was a product and
effect of the Jesuited Councels, of Jesuits, Papists, Prelates, Courtiers and
Counselors, for private ends. And therefore not to be approved or endured in
themselves, or in any Officers or Soldiers under their command, raised
purposely to defend, and not invade our just Rights and Properties, especially
since the Wars determination in this Realm, since they desire in that
Remonstrance, That all Sheriffs, Justices, and other Officers be sworn to the
due execution of the Petition of Right, and those Laws which concern the
Subject in his Liberty.] And that all Commissioners for the executing and
putting of men to death by Martial Law, (except only in Armies in time of War)
are wholly and directly contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And did
in their said Petition grievously complain, That by means of diverse
Commissions, directed to sundry Commissioners in several Counties, his
Majesty's people have been, in diverse places, assembled and required to lend
certain sums of Money to his Majesty (pretended for the public safety) and
many of them, upon their refusal so to do, have had an Oath tendered to them,
not warrantable by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and been constrained to
become bound to make appearance and give attendance before the Privy Council
and in other places, and other of them have been therefore imprisoned, censured
and sundry other ways molested and disquieted, and diverse other Charges have
been laid and levied on the people in several Counties by Lord Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners for Ministers, Justices of Peace, and others
against the Laws and free Customs of this Realm. And that diverse Subjects have
of late been imprisoned without any cause, or any just or lawful cause shown;
and when for their deliverance they were brought before his Majesty's Justices
by Writs of Habeat Corpora, there to undergo and receive as the Court should
order, and their Keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no
cause was certified, but that they were detained by his Majesty's special
command, signified by the Lords of his Privy Council, and yet were returned
back to several prisons without being charged with any thing, to which they
might make answer according to the Law. And that of late great companies of
Soldiers and Mariners have been dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm,
and the inhabitants, against their wills, have been compelled to receive them
into their houses, and there to suffer them to sojourn against the Laws and
Customs of this Realm to the great grievance and vexation of the people. And
that diverse Commissions under the great Seal had been granted to proceed
according to Martial Law against Soldiers, Mariners and others, by color and
pretext whereof some of his Majesty's Subjects had been illegally put to death
and executed. And also sundry grievous offenders, by color thereof, claiming
an exemption have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, by reason that diverse Officers and Ministers of Justice have
uniustly refused or forborne to proceed against such Offenders according to the
said Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said Offenders were punishable
by Martial Law, and by Authority of such Commissions, as aforesaid.

And therefore they did then in their said Petition most humbly pray his most
Excellent Majesty, that no man hereafter be compelled to make or yield any
Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax or such like charge, without common consent by Act
of Parliament. And that none be called to make answer, or take such Oath, or to
give attendance, or be censured, or otherwise molested or disquieted concerning
the same, or the refusal thereof. And that no Freeman, in any such manner, as
is before mentioned, be imprisoned or detained. And that his Majesty would be
pleased to remove the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that his people may not
be so burdened in time to come. And that the foresaid Commissions for
proceeding by Martial Law may be revoked, recalled and annulled. And that
hereafter, no Commissions of the like nature may issue forth to any person or
persons whatsoever, to be executed as aforesaid; lest by color of them any of
his Majesty's Subjects be destroyed or put to death, contrary to the Laws and
Franchises of the Land. All which they then most humbly prayed of his Majesty,
as their Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm. And that his Majesty also would vouchsafe to declare, that all the
awards, doings and proceedings to the prejudice of his people, in any of the
premises, shall not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example. To all which
the King then fully condescended, and gave this royal Answer in Parliament; Let
Right be done as is desired.

These undoubted Rights, Franchises and Liberties, and that our Knights and
Burgesses ought to enjoy their ancient Privileges and Freedom, and to be
present at all binding Votes and Ordinances, we do here claim and challenge as
our Birthright and Inheritance, not only from his Majesty, but from both the
Houses of Parliament now sitting, who have in sundry printed Remonstrances,
Declarations and Protestations, and in the Solemn League and Covenant, often
times promised and seriously vowed and covenanted, in the presence of Almighty
God, inviolably to maintain and preserve the same, and to bring the Infringers
of them to condign and exemplary punishment, and have engaged all the
well-affected Freeborn people of England, by like solemn Protestations, Leagues
and Covenants, to maintain and defend the same with their lives and estates:
And therefore we at this present not only humbly desire but also require both
the said Houses and every Member of them, even in point of Justice, Right, Duty
and Conscience, not of favor or indulgence, inviolably, without the least
diminution, to maintain, defend and preserve these our Hereditary Rights and
Liberties, intailed on us and our posterities by so many Statutes, confirmed
and ratified by such a multitude of late Declarations, Protestations,
Remonstrances, Vows and Solemn Covenants, wherein they have mutually engaged us
together with themselves, and for the preservation whereof against the Kings
Malignant Counselors, and Forces, and Party, (now totally subdued) have of
late years put us and the whole Kingdom to such a vast expense of Treasure and
Gallant English blood: and likewise pray their public Declaration against, and
exemplary Justice upon the present open professed Invaders and Infringers of
them, in a more superlative degree then ever heretofore.

For not to enumerate the manifold Encroachments on, and Violations of these
our undoubted Privileges, Rights and Franchises, by Members, Committees, and
all servants, of persons military and civil employed by both Houses, during the
late uncivil Wars, occasioned the inevitable Law of pure necessity, all which
we desire may be buried in perpetual oblivion, we cannot but with weeping eyes
and bleeding hearts, complain and remonstrat to your honors: that contrary to
these undoubted rights; Privileges and Franchises; many of us who have always
stood well-affected to the Parliament, and done and suffered much for it, have
partly through the power, malice and false suggestions, either of some Members
of both Houses who have born a particular speen against us, but principally
through the malice and oppression of diverse City and Country-Committees,
Governors, Officers, Soldiers and Agents employed by Parliamentary Authority,
been most injuriously and illegally imprisoned, sequestered, plundered, put out
of our Offices, Benefices, Livings, Lands, Free-holds, enforced to send diverse
sums of money without any Act or Ordinance, to take unlawful Oaths, enter into
bonds to make appearance, and give attendance upon several persons and
Committees, both in the Country, London, Westminster, and other places, for
diverse months together, and have been confined, restrained, and sundry other
ways oppressed, molested and disquieted, and utterly ruined; of which when we
have complained to the Houses, we can find either no Redress at all, or such
slender and slow relief, as is as bad or worse then none at all. And when we
have sought our Enlargement from our unjust imprisonments in a Legal way, by
writs of Habeas Corpora, in the Kings Courts; our Keepers have either refused
to obey them, or to certify the causes of our detainer, or else have certified
generally, that we were detained by order or command of one or both Houses, or
of some Committees or Members of Parliament, whereupon we have been remended to
our respective prisons, without being charged with any particular offense, to
which we might make answer according to Law: And if we seek to right our selves
against those who have thus unjustly and maliciously imprisoned, oppressed,
plundered and disseised us of our Free-holds, Lands and Goods, by actions of
false imprisonment, Trespass, Trover, Assise, or the like at the Common Law,
which is our Birthright; These Members and their Servants, who have injured and
ruined us, plead exemption from our suits, by reason of their Privileges, so
as we neither can nor dare to sue them; and Committee Men and others, when we
sue them for any injuries, Trespasses or oppressions by Land or Sea, plead the
Ordinances of Indemnity, to justify their most unjust and exorvitant actions,
warranted by no Law nor Ordinance whatsoever, and by color thereof stay both
our Judgments and Executions at Law, after verdicts given against them for our
relief; and force us to travail from all parts of the Kingdom unto Westminster,
and there to dance attendance upon Committees of Indemnity, and the like, for
many weeks and months, til they enforce us to spend, more then the damages we
justly recovered, and to release our just Actions and Executions, at the last,
contrary to our just Rights and Privileges, the expres^ Letter of Magna
Charta; We will deny, we will deferr right and justice to no man; And to the
very purport of the Ordinances of Indemnity, which never intended to exempt
any Committees or other Officers, Agents, Soldiers or Seamen employed by the
Houses from any unjust or injurious actions done out of private malice, or for
private ends, or lucre, without, besides, or against all Ordinances, or from
any gross abuses of their power and trust to the peoples prejudice and
oppression (all which are now patronized and maintained by pretext thereof) but
only to secure them from unjust vexations and suits, for what they sincerely
acted for the public good, according to their trust and duties. And which is
yet more sad and doleful, the very greatest Malignants, who have been most
active against the Parliament, and for our good affections and service to it,
have burnt down much of our Houses, seized upon our goods and estates,
imprisoned, beaten, wounded and mained our persons, imposed heavy taxes on us,
indicted us of high Treason for bearing Arms in the Parliaments defense, and
enriched themselves with our spoils and estates; by color of the Articles of
Oxford, Exeter, Winchester, and the like: exempt themselves from our Actions
and Arrests, stay our Judgments and Executions after our expense, in suits and
Recoveries at the Law, when we have received not one quarter of the damages we
sustained by them, by verdict and trial; and summon us from all parts of the
Kingdom, to appear and wait for diverse weeks before the Commit of Complaints
at Westminster, to our intolerable vexation and expense, where they find more
friends and favor commonly then we, and force us to release both our damages
and costs of suit to our utter undoing: The very extremity both of Injustice
and ungratitude, which makes Malignants to insult and triumph over us, out of
whose estates we were by diverse Remonstrances and Declarations of both Houses,
promised full satisfaction for all our losses and sufferings in the Parliaments
cause; who are now on the contrary thus strangely protected against our just
suits against them, for our sufferings by them, and are promised a general act
of Indemnity and oblivion (as we hear) to secure themselves for ever against
us, whom they have quite undone; which if obtained, will break all honest men's
herats, and discourage them ever hereafter, to act or suffer any thing for the
Parliament, who instead of recompencing them for their losses and sufferings,
according to promise and justice in a Parliamentary way, do even against Magna
Charta it self, and all Justice and Conscience, thus cut them off from all
means and hopes of recompense or relief in a Legal way, and put Cavaleers into
a far better and safe condition, then the faithfulest and most suffering
Parliamenteers, a very ingrate and unkind requital.

Besides we cannot but with deepest grief of soul and spirit complain, that
contrary to these our undoubted Rights and Privileges, many of our
faithfullest Knights and Burgesses, whom we duly chose to consult and vote for
us in Parliament, have through the malice, practice and violence of diverse
mutinous and Rebellious Soldiers in the Army; and some of their Confederates
in the House, without our privity or consents, or without any just or legal
cause, for their very fidelity to their Country, for things spoken, done and
voted in the Houses, maintaining the Privileges of Parliaments and opposing
the Armies late mutinous, Rebellious, Treasonable and Seditious Practices, been
most falsely aspersed, slandered, impeached, and forced to desert the House and
Kingdom too; others of them arrested and stayed by the Army, and their
Officers, without any warrant or Authority: others of them suspended the House
before any Charge and Proofs against them; others expelled the House, and
imprisoned in an Arbitrary and Illegal manner, when most of the Members were
forced thence by the Armies violence, without any just cause at all, or any
witnesses legally examined face to face, and without admitting them to make
their just defense as they desired: And that diverse Lords and Members of the
House of Peers have likewise been impeached of High Treason, sequestered that
House, and committed to Custody, only for residing constantly in the House, and
acting in, and as an House of Parliament, (for which to impeach them of
Treason, is no less then Treason, and so resolved in the Parliaments of 11. R.
2. and 1. H. 1. in the case of Tresilian and his Companions) when others who
dis-honorably deserted the House, and retired to the mutinous Army, then in
professed disobedience to, and opposition against both Houses, are not so much
as questioned; and all this by mere design and confederacy, to weaken the
Presbyterians and honest party in both Houses, which were far the greatest
number, and enable the Independent Faction, to vote and carry what they pleased
in both Houses; who by this Machivilian Policy and power of the Army (under
whose Guard and power, the King, both Houses, City, Tower, Country have been in
bondage for some months last past) have extraordinarily advanced their
designs, and done what they pleased without any public opposition, to the
endangering of all our Liberties and Estates. Nay more then this, we must of
necessity Remonstrate, (...) the Representative body of the Kingdom, and both
House of Parliament, by their late Seditious and Rebellious Army, have not only
been diverse ways menaced, affronted, disobeyed, but like wise overawed, and
enforced to retract and null diverse of their just Votes, Declarations and
Ordinances against their Judgments and Wills, to pass new Votes, Orders and
Ordinances sent and presented to them by the Army, to grant what demands, and
release what dangerous Prisoners they desired of them; to declare themselves no
Parliament, and the Acts, Orders and Ordinances passed in one or both Houses,
from the 26 of July, to the 6 of August mere Nullities, during the Speakers
absence in the Army, by a public Ordinance then laid aside by the major votes,
and at last enforced to pass by a party of one thousand horse (a far greater
force then that of the Apprentices) drawn up into Hide-Park to overawe the
Houses, because the General and Army, had voted them no Parliament, and their
proceedings null. Since which they have in their printed Treasonable
Remonstrance of the 18th of August, not only protested and declared against the
Members Vote^ and Proceedings of both Houses, both during the Speakers absence
and since, but likewise thus Traitorously and Rebelliously close up their
Remonstrance with this protest and declaration to all the world. p. 23. 24.
That if any of those Members, who during the absence of the Speakers, and the
rest of the Members of both Houses, did sit or vote in the So they term them.
pretended Houses then continuing at Westminster, that hereafter intrude
themselves to sit in Parliament, before they have given satisfaction to the To
wit, the fug^tive Members who withdrew unto and engaged with the Army, and by
their engagement are made parties and incompetent Judges.
respective Houses whereof they are* concerning the ground of their said
sitting at Westminster, during the absence of the said Speakers, and shall have
acquitted themselves by sufficient evidence; That they did not procure nor give
their consent unto any of those pretended Votes, Orders or Ordinances, tending
to the No, it was only for their own just defense against the Armies force and
rebellious reproaches against them.
raising and levying of a war ( (...) is before (falsely) declared) or for the
Kings coming forth with to London; WE CANNOT ANY LONGER SVFFER THE SAME; but
shall do that right to the Speakers and Members of both Houses who were They ran
away before they were driven, and might have set on the said day as well as
others without disturbance, as they did the very next morning after the tumult.
driven away to us, and to our selves with them A detestable Parenthesis and
horrid scandal.
all whom the said Members have endeavored in an hostile manner to destroy)
and also to the Kingdom, (which they endeavored to embroyle in a new war)
(...) to take some speedy and effectual course This is their maintenance of the
Parliaments Privileges and freedom, and the Liberty of Conscience the Army
contends for.
WHEREBY TO RESTRAIN THEM FROM BEING THEIR OWN AND OURS AND THE KINGDOMS
IVDGES, in these things wherein they have made themselves This disables all
your fugitive Members.
parties, and by this means to make War; that both they and others who are
guilty of and parties to the aforesaid treasonable and destructive practices
and proceedings against THE FREEDOM of PARLIAMENT and Peace of the Kingdom, may
be brought to condign punishment, (and that) at the judgment of A FREE
PARLIAMENT, consisting (duly and properly) of such Those who treacherously fled
to you, brought you up against the City, and signed your Engagement, are no
such Members, but engaged Parties.
Members of both Houses respectively, who stand clear from such apparent and
treasonable breach as is before expressed: Since which, they have in their
General Council at Putney and in their printed Papers, Voted down the House of
Peers and their negative Votes, prescribed the period of this present
Parliament, and a new model for the beginning, ending, Members and Privileges
of all succeeding Parliaments received and answered many public Petitions
presented to them, and voted and resolved upon the question the greatest
affairs of State, as if they only were the Parliament and Superior Council both
of State and War; voted the Sale of Bishops* Deans and Chapters, and Forest
Lands for the payment of their (supposed) Arrears, notwithstanding the Commons
Votes to the contrary after sundry large debates; voted against the Houses
sending Propositions to the King; to prevent which, as they first traitorously
seized upon his person and rescued him out of the custody of the Commissioners
of both Houses at Holdenby, and ever since detained him in their power per
force from the Parliament* so they have lately conveyed him into the Isle of
Wight, and there shut him up Prisoner without the privity and contrary to the
desires of both Houses. All which unparaleld insolences and treasonable
practices, we declare to be against our Rights, Freedom and Liberties, and the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and of our Members there who represent
us, and to his Majesty's honor, and safety, in whom we have all a common
interest.

And we do likewise further complain and Remonstrate that the Officers and
Agitators in the Army, and their confederates in the Houses, have contrary to
our foresaid Rights and Liberties many ways invaded and infringed the Rights
and Privileges of the City of London, the Parliaments chiefest Strength and
Magazine, and Metropolis of the whole Kingdom, which extremely suffers in and
by its sufferings, and that by altering and repealing their New Militia
established by Ordinances of both Houses when full and free, without any cause
assigned, against the whole Cities desire; in marching up twice against the
City in an hostile manner, not only without, but against the Votes and Commands
of both Houses; in dividing and exempting the Militia of Westminster and
Southwark from their Jurisdiction and Command; in seizing upon and throwing
down their Line and Works (raised for the Cities and both Houses securities at
a vast expense) in a disgraceful and despiteful manner; in marching through the
City with their whole Army and Train of Artillery in triumph in wresting the
Tower of London out of their power, and putting it into the Armies and Generals
Custody; in removing the Cities Lieutenant of it without any reason alleged,
and placing in a New one of the Armies choice; in committing the Lord Mayor,
Recorder, Aldermen, and diverse Colonel, Captains and Common Council men and
other Citizens of London (who have showed themselves most active and cordial
for the Parliament and impeaching them of such grand Misdemeanors and Treasons,
which all the City and Kingdom, and their accusers own consciences inform them
they were more guilty of, without ever bringing them to a legal Trial; only for
doing their du^ies in obeying the Parliament in their just Commands, and
standing up for their just defense according to their duty and Covenant, of
purpose to bring in others of their own Faction into their places to inslave
the City; and commanding two Regiments of Foot to come and quarter in the City,
and levy some pretended arrears t^ ^^ein by open force, which many by reason of
poverty for want of trade and former loans and taxes to the Parliament, are
^^^^rly unable to satisfy. And when such affronts and violence is offered to
London it self by the Army, by whose contributions and loans they were first
^^^sed and have been since maintained, and that under the Parliaments Notes,
who are those engaged to them for then supplies and preservation and constant
affections since their first ^^tting to this present; the Freeholders and
Free-subiects in the Country and more remote Counties, must necessarily expect
Free Quarter, affronts, pressures and violations of our just Rights and
Liberties from them: The rather, because the Garrison Soldiers of the City of
Bristol, who not long since refused to receive the Governor appointed them by
both Houses of Parliament, have lately seized upon one of the well affected
Aldermen of that City as he was sitting on the Bench with his companions, and
carried him away per force, refusing to enlarge, or admit any person to see or
speak with him, or bring any provisions to him, til they receive some, months
Arrears in ready money and good security for all their remaining pay, and an act
of Indemnity for this their insolency and injurious action in particular, and
all other offenses in general, from both Houses. Of which unparaleld oppression
and injustice from Soldiers, who pretend themselves the only Saints and
Protectors of our Rights and Liberties, we cannot but be deeply sensible, and
crave your speedy redress in our Liberties, Rights and Properties.

But that which most nearly concerns us, and which we can no longer endure* is
this* wherein we expect your present redress; That this degenerated, disobedient
and mutinous Army, contrary to the Votes and Ordinances for their disbanding
and securing their Arrears in March and May last past, have traitorously and
rebelliously refused to disband, and kept themselves together in a body ever
since, offering such affronts and violence to the Kings own royal person, both
Houses of Parliament and their Members and the City of London, as no age can
parallel; and yet have forced the Houses when they had impeached and driven away
most of their Members, and marched up in a body against them and the City in a
menacing, manner, not only to own them for their Army, but to pass a new
Establishment of sixty thousand pounds a month for their future pay, to be
levied on the Kingdom (who now expect ease from all such Taxes) besides the
Excise and all other public payments; which now they importune the Houses may
be augmented to one hundred thousand pounds each month, and that they
themselves may have the levying thereof: which insupportable Tax being procured
by force and menaces, when the Houses were neither full nor free, against
former Votes and Ordinances for the Kingdoms ease, and not consented to by most
of our Knights and Burgesses then driven away by the Army, and dissenting
thereto when present, and being only to maintain a mutinous and seditious Army
of Sectaries, Antitrinitarians, Antiscripturists, Seekers, Expectants,
Anabaptists, recruited Cavaliers, and seditious, mutinous Agitators, who have
offered such insufferable violence and Indignities both to the King, (whose
person and life was endangered among them, as he and they confess) the
Parliament, City, Country, and so earnestly endeavored to subvert all
Magistracy, Monarchy, Ministry, all civil, Ecclesiastical and Military
Government, Parliaments, Religion, and our ancient Laws and Liberties (as their
late printed Papers evidence) that they cannot without apparent danger to the
Parliament; King and Kingdom, be any longer continued together, being now so
headstrong that their own Officers cannot rule, but complain publicly against
them: And therefore we can neither in point of duty, conscience, law or
prudence, subject to pay the said monthly Tax so unduly procured by their
violence, were we able to do it, being contrary to our Solemn League and
Covenant, for the maintenance of such a mutinous and rebellious Army, who
endeavor to enslave and destroy both King Parliament, City, Kingdom, and
monopolize all their power, wealth and treasure into their own Traiterous
hands, which they have well nigh effected, having gotten the Kings person, the
Tower of London, all Garrisons and Forces in the Kingdom by Land, and the
command of the Navy by Sea, into their power, and put the City and both Houses
under the Wardship of their armed guards, attending at their doors and
quartering round about them, and forced the run-a-way Speakers and Members not
only to enter into and subscribe the solemn Engagement to live and dye with
them in this cause, but likewise to give them a full months pay, by way of
gratuity, for guarding them back to the Houses, where they might and ought to
have continued without any danger, as the other faithful Members did, and to
which they might safely have returned without the strength of the whole Army to
guard them. And to add to our pressures and afflictions, this godly religious
Army of disobedient Saints, who pretend only our Liberty and Freedom from
Tyranny, Taxes and Oppression, demand not only this new heavy monthly Tax, and
the remainder of Bishops, and all Deans and Chapters, and Forest Lands in the
Kingdom, and Corporation stocks for their Arrears (which if cast up only during
the time of their actual service til the time they were voted and ordered to
disband, will prove very small or little, their free quarter, exactions and
receipts for the Parliament and Country being discompted) but (which is our
forest pressure) do violently enter into our Houses against our wills, and there
lie in great multitudes many weeks and months together, til they quite ruin
and eat out both us, our families, stocks and cattle, with their intolerable
Free quarter, and that in these times of extraordinary dearth and scarcity; for
which they raise and receive of us of late twice or thrice as much as their
whole pay amounts unto, devouring, like so many Locusts and Caterpillars, all
our grass, hay, corn, bread, beer, fuel and provisions of all sorts, without
giving us one farthing recompense, and leaving us, our wives, children,
families, cattle, to starve and famish; the very charge of their free quarter
(besides their insufferable insolences and abuses of all sorts) amounting in
many places to above six times, or in most places to double or treble our
annual Revenues. Besides the abuses in their quartering are insufferable; Many
of them take and receive money for their quarters double or treble, their pay
from two or three persons at once, and yet take Oats and other provisions from
them besides, or free quarter upon others: Some of them demand and receive
free quarter in money and provisions the double or treble the number of their
Troops and Companies: Others take free quarter for their wives, truls, boys,
and those who were never listed: Others of them will be contented with none but
extraordinary diet wine, strong beer, above their abilities with whom they
quarter, thereby to extort money from them; and if an* complain of these
abuses, he is sure to be relieved with an addition of more, and more unruly
quarterers then he had before. If they march from their quarters to any
randezvouz, or to guard the Houses, they must have victuals and money too, til
their return. Diverse of the Troopers and Dragooners must have quarter for two
or three horses a piece, which must have at least a peck of corn or more every
day (though they lie still) both Winter and Summer; their 7200 Horse, and 1000
Dragoons devouring above two thousand bushels of corn (besides grass, hay and
straw) every day of the week, and this time of dearth, when the poorer sort are
ready to starve for want of bread. In brief, the abuses of free quarter are
innumerable, and the burden of it intolerable, amounting to three times more
then the whole Armies pay, who are doubly paid all their pretended Arrears, in
the money and provisions they have received only for freequarter upon a just
account; and therefore have little cause to be so clamorous for their pretended
Arrears from the State, who have received double their Arrears of us, and yet
pay us not one farthing for all our Arrears for quarters when they receive
their pay. Which free quartering we do now unanimously protest against, as an
high Infringement of our Hereditary Rights, Liberties, Properties and Freedom,
and contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and warranted by no
express Ordinance of Parliament, now the Wars are ended, and the Army long
since voted to disband, and such an excessive oppression and undoing
heartbreaking vexation to us, that we neither can, nor are any longer able to
undergo it.

And therefore we humbly pray and desire this of both Houses of Parliament, as
our unquestionable Liberty and Birthright, of which they cannot in justice
deprive us, without the highest treachery, tyranny, perjury and injustice; that
all these forementioned Grievances and unsupportable Pressures, under which we
now groan and languish, may be speedily and effectually redressed without the
least delay, to prevent a general Insurrection of oppressed and discontented
people, whose patience, if any longer abused, we fear, will break out into
unappeasable fury; and by their public votes and Remonstrances, to declare and
order for our general satisfaction and ease.

1.
That no Habeas Corpus shall be denied to any free Subject, imprisoned by any
Commit whatsoever, or by any Officers or Agents of Parliament: and that any
such person shall be bayled and discharged by the Keepers of the Great Seal in
vocation time, of the Judges in the Term, upon an Habeas Corpus* if no legal
cause of commitment or continuance under restraint shall be returned.

2.
That every person who has been well-affected to the Parliament, may have free
liberty to prosecute his just remedy at Law against every Member of Parliament,
Committee-man, Officer or Agent employed by the Parliament, who has
maliciously or injuriously imprisoned, beaten, sequestered, plundered or taken
away his money or goods, or entered into his bounds and possessions contrary to
Law, and the Ordinances of Parliament, and the power and trust committed to
him, notwithstanding any privilege, or the Ordinances, or any Orders made for
their Indemnity; which we humbly conceive, were only made to free those who
acted for the Parliament from unjust suits and vexations, for acting according
to their duties, and not exempt any from legal prosecutions for apparent
unjust, malicious and oppressive actions and abuses of their trust and power.

3.
That no well affected person may be debarred from his just and legal actions
against Malignants in Commission, or Arms against the Parliament, who have
imprisoned, plundered and abused them for their adhering to the Parliament, by
color or pretext of any Articles Surrender, made by the General or any other,
or by any future Act of Oblivion, so as they prosecute their Actions within the
space of 3 years next ensuing; and that the Committee of Complaint may be
inhibited to stay any such proceedings, such Judgments or Executions, as
prejudicial to the Parliament, and injurious to their suffering friends.

4.
That all Members of either House of Parliament lately suspended, imprisoned,
impeached or ejected by the Armies menaces and violence, without legal trial
may be forthwith enlarged, restored and vindicated, and both Houses and their
Members righted and repaired against all such who have violated their
Privileges and Freedom, and freed from the guards and power of the Army.

5. That the Kings person may be forthwith delivered up by the Army, into the
Custody and possession of both Houses under pain of high Treason, in any who
shall detain him from them, that so a firm and speedy peace may be established
between him and his people, for their comfort. And Cornet Joyce who first
seized, and those Agitators who lately intended violence to his Royal Person
and Life, may be apprehended and proceeded against.

6.
That the imprisoned Aldermen and Citizens of London may be forthwith enlarged,
restored and repaired; and the repealed Ordinance for their new Militia
revived; the Tower of London put into the Citizens hands as formerly, and firm
Reconciliation made between the City and both Houses.

7.
That the Isle of Wight, and all Garrisons by Land, and the Navy by Sea, may be
put into the command and custody of those who enjoyed them by Votes and Orders
of both Houses, before the 26 of July last past, unless just exemptions can be
taken to any of them by the Houses.

8.
That all Votes and Ordinances formerly made and repealed only by the menaces
and over-awing power of the Army may be revived, and all new Votes and
Ordinances made by their threats and violence, when diverse Members were driven
away by their terror, repealed and made void; especially that Ordinance for
nulling all Proceedings in Parliament, during the Speakers wilful absence, at
least five times laid aside, by Vote of the House Commons; and forced to pass
by a particular menacing Remonstrance from Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army, and
a party of a thousand Horse drawn up in Hide-Parke to overawe the Houses,
besides an armed Guard then standing at their doors.

9.
That the true grounds of the Speakers and other Members deserting the Houses
and repairing to the Army and their entering into an Engagement to the Army,
may be fully examined; and what Members subscribed their names thereto: and who
of them that sat in the Houses, at any time, during the Speakers absence in
the Army.

10.
That all recruited Soldiers in the Army* entertained since the taking in of
Oxford, may be presently disbanded without pay, the residue reduced only to
five or six thousand; and none to be continued but such, who have taken the
Solemn League and Covenant and shall be sworn to be obedient to both Houses
commands.

11.
That no Free Quarter shall from henceforth be taken by any Officer or Soldier
in any Gentleman's, Husbandmans, Ministers, Merchants or Tradesmans House
without his free consent, and pay duly for the same, under pain of death,
unless in a March for one night or two upon special service, when no other
quarters can be procured, but only in Inns, Alehouses, and common Victualing
Houses. And that no Troopers Horses may be allowed Oats or Provender, whiles
they lie still, and are out of actual service.

12.
That all Commissions for Martial Law may be revoked, and all Soldiers, for all
Misdemeanors and offenses punishable by Law, made and declared to be subject to
the Jurisdiction and power of the Judges of Assise, Justices of Peace, and
chief Officers in any County and City; and liable to arrests and executions for
their just debts, and other Actions at the common Law.

13.
That the Tax for sixty thousand pound a month, for the Armies pay, may be
wholly remitted and taken off us; and a moderate Assessment only laid on the
Kingdom for the necessary relief of Ireland, and pay of such few Soldiers as
shall be necessary to continue til the well-affected in each County be put into a
posture to defend it self and the Kingdom.

14. That Lieut. General Cromwell, Commissary Ireton, and other Members of the
House of Commons, residing in the Army, and the Council of War and Agitators,
who compiled and drew up the late insolent and Treasonable Remonstrances and
Representations to both Houses, especially that of the fifth of this instant
December, may be forthwith apprehended and impeached of High Treason, of which
they are far more guilty then any Members or Citizens formerly accused or
impeached by their means, out of the ruins of whose estates they desire the
satisfaction of their own pretended Arrears.

15.
That the General and Army, together with the Council of War, Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, may be presently sent to, and give an answer to both
Houses, whether they continue together as an Army, by virtue of any Commission
and Authority derived from the Houses only; and if so, to take an Oath to be
obedient to all their just Commands; or else keep together in a body, only by
their own private Engagement and Authority as a pretended call from the people,
as John Lilburn in late printed Papers affirms they do: which, if really true,
we can repute them no other, but a most riotous Assembly of Rebels and Traitors
against King, Kingdom and Parliament, and their taking of free quarter on us
against our wills, no better then Burglary and Felony, for which they ought to
suffer death.

16.
That the extraordinary damages the Kingdom, City and Country have sustained
by free quarter and loss of trade, through the Armies refusal to disband, and
late recruits, contrary to the Votes of both Houses for their disbanding (which
damages amount to above twenty times their pretended Arrears) may be satisfied
out of their Arrears as far as they will go, to be totally struck off for that
purpose, and the residue out of the estates of such Officers and others who
have been the chief instruments of continuing and recruiting the Army, and free
quartering them near the City, and consequently the original causes of these
damages. The rather, because it is Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Council of the
Armies own Law and Justice in their Arrogant Representation to the Houses;
December. 7. 1647. p. 21. where they thus declare their desires. Yet now, IN
JUSTICE, we cannot but desire that, besides the levying of the (Cities) Arrears
at last, (for which we have been put to stay so long) there may now likewise be
SOME REPARATION thought on from the City to the parts adjacent for abeve one
hundred thousand pounds damage through the ARMIES attendance here on the Cities
defaults and delays; which reparation we (if necessitated thereunto, or called
upon by the Country) must in their behalf demand from the City to the full; and
now also (the rather in order to that) we must earnestly desire, that the
proceedings against those Citizens and others lately impeached, may be hastened,
and out of their fines or confiscations, SOME PART OF REPARATION MAY BE MADE TO
THE COUNTRIES ADJACENT FOR THE AFORES AID DAMAGES, which the crimes of those
persons (they should have said, the Rebellion and Disobedience of the Officers
and Army to both Houses) did first bring upon them, etc. And what reparation of
Damages they thus prey from others, who are innocent and no causes of them, is
just they should first make themselves, being the real Authors thereof, by
their own confession.

All which we humbly pray, as our just Rights and Liberties, in our own and the
whole Kingdoms behalf, who shall, by Gods assistance, with our Lives and
Fortunes resolutely maintain and defend his Majesty's Person and lawful Power,
the Ancient Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and our own unquestionable
Rights, Properties and Franchises (according to our Solemn Vow and Covenant)
against all Encroachments, Powers, and private Factions whosover, for the
honor, benefit, and safety of us and our posterities, and will no longer suffer
the King, Parliament, City, Country and Kingdom to be enslaved and trambled
upon by a dangerous and perfidious Combination of self-ended men, who endeavor
nothing but to advance themselves by our public ruins and confusions.

FINIS.

