The Remonstrance of the Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen,
Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses and Commons of the late Eastern, Southern,
and Western Associations, who desire to show themselves Faithful and Constant
to the Good Old Cause, the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, the Liberty
and Property of the Subjects, Laws of the Land, and true Reformed Religion,
which they were formerly called forth and engaged to defend by Declarations of
Parliament, the Protestation, and Solemn National League and Covenant.
WE the Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Freeholders, Citizens,
^gesses and Commons of the late Eastern, Southern, and Western Associations of
England, whose names are hereunto subscribed, having for a song season with
bleeding hearts, perplexed spirits, weeping eyes, and overmuch patience and
silence, beheld the miserable public Distractions, intolerable Oppressions,
various Revolutions, great Tumults, and destructive Confusions, wherewith our
former most glorious, flourishing Churches and Nations (for want of a settled
Government, and Free Parliament) have many years bypast been violently rent in
pieces, wasted, consumed, made the very hissing, scorn, laughing stock of all
Neighbor Countries; whether Friends or Foes, Christians or Infidels; and
thereby exposed to the justly dreaded hostile Invasions of combined foreign
Romish Adversaries, whose Emissaries have been very active, instrumental in our
late Combustions and Changes; being now deeply sensible of the deplorable,
desperate Condition and imminent ruin, not only of our own Persons, Families,
Posterities, but of our dearest, exhausted, enthralled, dying Native Country,
and Protestant Religion too, far dearer to us than our Lives or private
Interests, the preservation whereof is the Supremest Law; and calling to our
minds the first public ends and causes for which we took up arms (since
totally perverted, subverted, oppugned by ambitious, self-advancing Commanders,
Officers of the Army, and others contrary to their trusts and Commissions) with
the manifold Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Solemn League and Covenant, and other
Sacred as well as Civil Obligations lying upon our Consciences, engaging us all
in our several places and callings in this day of Englands trouble, and extreme
danger, to put to our helping hands and best advice to obviate those Perils,
and remove those Disorders, Grievances, Confusions which menace utter
desolation both to her and us, if we should any longer sit stupidlie silent, or
unactive in our spheres, like persons altogether uninterested or unconcerned in
these perilous times of unpresidented exorbitances, usurpations, tyrannies
over our persons, estates, Laws, Liberties, and Parliaments themselves, by
ambitious, turbulent self-seekers and Incendiaries, and of universal decay of
trade by Sea and Land; Have thereupon conceived it our necessary bounden duties
in this sad posture of our Sacred and Civil Concernments both as Christians and
English Freemen, by this our joint REMONSTRANCE to tender to the rest of our
English Brethren throughout the whole Nation of what rank, calling, or
condition soever; such just, legal, safe, rational, honest and Christian
Proposals, as through Gods blessing upon our and their unanimous, vigorous
prosecution of them against all self-ended Opponents, may redeem us from our
present bondage, dangers, Schisms, Confusions, frequent Rotations of public
Government, and restore our tottering Church, State, Kingdoms, Religion, to
their pristine Unity, Tranquillity, Purity, Stability, Dignity, Felicity, and
secure them against all future Concussions and Convulsions.

For which end we all passionately desire, and shall unanimously and cordially
endeavor by all lawful means within our Orbs,

1. That a legal, full and free Parliament of England may be speedily
summmoned, according to the prescription of 16 Caroli, c. 1. enacted for this
purpose, not hitherto put in execution; and that free elections of able
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, by and of all well-affected persons to Peace,
and the old Parliaments good Cause, to represent them therein, may be no ways
disturbed, nor restrained by force of arms or otherwise.

2. That the said Parliament may safely, freely meet at Westminster on the
third Monday in January next, to consult of, vote, and settle the Peace,
Government of our distracted Churches and Nations, without the interruption,
disturbance, force or dissolution of any Commanders, Officers or Soldiers of
the Army, or other tumultuous persons whatsoever, under pain of being declared,
prosecuted, executed as Traitors and Enemies to the public.

3. That the full power of the Militia both by Sea and Land be delivered up to
this Parliament, on the first day of their Convention therein, for the better
assurance of their free and peaceable Session, and not continued as a distinct
body or interest in opposition, contradistinction, or super-inspection, but in
real subordination to the Parliament and people.

4. That the whole frame and settlement of the Government of our Nations be
entirely referred to the Parliaments unanticipated consideration, the proper
Judges thereof, without any antecedent restrictions, prescriptions, or
impositions by the Army Officers, or any others.

5. That the Supreme management of all Civil, Politic, Military affairs, and
appointment of all Great Officers of State and Ministers of Justice, shall be
in all the surviving Members of the long Parliament without secluding any, as
in a General Council of State and Safety only (who are all desired to meet for
that purpose) till the New Free Parliament shall assemble, and no longer.

6. That the Preservation of the Peace, Government of each County, shall be in
the hands of such Sheriffs, Conservatorss of the Peace, and other ancient
Officers, as the Freeholders of every County shall publicly elect in their
County Court, according to their ancient Rights and Liberties; and of every
City and Corporation in the Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Officers
elected by them, according to their Charters, Customs, and in none other
Officers imposed on them, till the Parliament shall take further Order therein.

7. That no Taxes, Contributions, Excises, Imposts, New Customs, Militiaes, or
other Payments whatsoever shall be henceforth imposed, assessed, levied upon,
or paid by the people, but by their common grant and consent in free and full
Parliament, by Act of Parliament, under pain of High Treason in the Imposers,
Assessors, Collectors, and voluntary payers thereof; this being the peoples
indubitable Birthright, acknowledged, declared, confirmed by manifold Acts and
Declarations old and new.

8. That such an Act of Indemnity may be agreed on and assented to in this
Parliament by Common consent, as may secure and indemnify all persons, whose
future peaceable deportment till this Act passed shall demerit it.

9. That care may be therein taken for the speedy satisfaction of all just
arrears of all Officers and Soldiers, duly listed before the 7. of May last,
who shall peaceably and dutifully submit to the free convening and safe sitting
of this desired Parliament. That all others who shall tumultuously oppose or
interrupt the summoning, assembling, or sitting thereof, shall forfeit all
their Commands, arrears, indemnity, and incurr the penalty of Traitors and
public Enemies to the Parliament and Nation.

10. That an effectual course may be taken both for the settled old
maintenance, succession, protection and encouragement of a godly, learned,
painful Orthodox, preaching Ministry throughout the three Nations.

11. That due care and order may be taken for the speedy detection, banishment,
and execution of the Laws against all Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Freers, and
other Romish Emissaries, or Seducers whatsoever, employed to divide, corrupt,
seduce the people; and the Oath of Abjuration duly tendered by Justices of
Peace and other Officers to all persons, who shall be accused and justly
suspected to be such, for their better detection.

12. That the causes of the great extraordinary decay of all sorts of Trade,
Merchandise, Shipping, Scarcity of Bullion, Coin, with all frauds and abuses in
Manufactures; dilatory vexatious proceedings, extortions in Courts of Law and
Equity, may be diligently inquired into, redressed, punished; and the great
destruction and waste of Timber in all parts inhibited under severe penalties.

13. That all Treasurers, Receivers, Collectors, Farmers of any Moneys,
Customs, Excises, Rents, Revenues, Taxes, Imposts, Sequestrations or other
goods, profits whatsoever to the use of the public, may be speedily called to
account in each County, by fitting, unaccountable persons appointed for that
end, and all their frauds and abuses therein inquired of and condignly punished.

14. That all good Laws formerly enacted for the preservation and defense of
the Persons, Lives, Liberties, Properties of the Subjects, against illegal
Imprisonments, Banishments, Restraints, Confinements, Corporal punishments,
executions by any Person or Persons, Powers, Committees, Council of State,
Military, Civil Officers, or Judicatures whatsoever, and against all unjust
Taxes, Confiscations, Sequestrations, Rapines, Plunders, may be ratifyed; and
the late, and future high wilful violations of them, exemplarily punished.

15. That every Person who shall henceforth Canvas for Voices to make himself a
Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron of the Ports, in the next, or any ensuing
Parliament, either by Letters of Recommendation from Great men, feasting the
Electors before, at, or after Elections, Gifts, Bribes, or otherwise, shall
upon due proof thereof, be made Incapable to sit or serve in Parliament.

16. That all Members of Parliament, Officers of State, Justices, Sheriffs,
Mayors, Recorders, shall henceforth take a Corporal Oath, to the best of their
knowledge, skill, power, inviolably to preserve the Fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Franchises of the Freemen of England, and to give all Laws for the
defense of them in charge to the Grand Jury, in their respective Assizes, and
General Sessions of the Peace, that they may inquire and present all Offenses
against, and violations of them, to be condignly punished according to Law.

17. That all Unnecessary Garrisons, Supernumerary Soldiers, and Seamen, may
be speedily paid off, dismantled, disbanded, and all superfluous Officers,
excessive Fees, and extortions whatsoever taken away, for the Impoverished
peoples ease; And the manifold extortions, abuses of Gaolers, Marshals,
Messengers, and other detainers of Prisoners, punished and redressed.

18. That Able, Faithful, Conscientious, fitting Persons fearing God and
hating Covetousness, may be preferred to all Offices, Places of public Trust,
and Administration of Justice; and detur digniori, made the only rule in all
Elections and Preferments whatsoever.

19. That all Universities, Colleges, Schools of learning in our three Nations,
with all Lands, Rents, Annuities, Gifts, Revenues, for their support, may be
^onstantly maintained, preserved from rapine, and all misimployments,
substractions of them, and of any Lands, Rents, Annuityes, Monyes, Gifts,
Legacies to them, or any other public or charitable use whatsoever, diligently
inquired after and reformed.

All which proposals we are resolved by Gods gracious assistance with
unanimitie, constancy, and activity, in our several stations, with our lives
and fortunes, to prosecute and accomplish to our powers by all just, and legal
ways, with what ever else may conduce to the Peace, Safety, Unity, Wealth,
Prosperity of our Lacerated, Macerated, Naufragated Church and State; wherein
as we shall constantly pray for Gods Divine assistance and blessing upon our
weak endeavors, without which they will be altogether succeslesse: So we
cannot but confidently expect and shall importunately desire the cordial
Concurence, assistance, Prayers of all other Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen,
Clergymen, Freeholders, Citizens, Burgesses, and English Freemen, without the
mallest opposition, that so Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other, and
glory once more dwell within our Land, wherein they have been strangers
overlong: And let all the People (by their joint subscriptions) say, Amen,
Amen, Amen.


