A short, legal, medicinal, useful, safe, easy PRESCRIPTION, To recover our
Kingdom, Church, Nation from their present dangerous, distractive, DESTRUCTIVE
CONFUSION, And worse than Bedlam Madness; SERIOVSLY Recommended to all English
Freemen who desire Peace, Safety, Liberty, Settlement.

By William Prynne, Esquire a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

Judges 19.30. Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.

Prove. 12.19, 20. Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the
counselors of peace, is joy: There shall no evil happen to the just, but the
wicked shall be filled with mischief.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1659.

A short, legal, medicinal, useful, safe, easy Prescription, etc.
THe Ambition, Treachery, Turbulency, Avarice, and late infused Jesuitical
Principles of some swaying Officers in the Parliaments Army, aspiring after the
Supreme Authority, Government, and public Revenues of our Three Kingdoms,
having so far corrupted their judgments, seared their Consciences, depraved
their wills, and hardened their hearts, as openly, frequently to violate all
sacred Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Obligations, Trusts, Commissions, Engagements to
the late King his Heirs and Successors, the old Parliament, Kingdom, Nation;
(for whose defense they were originally raised, commissioned) and to their own
new-created Antiparliamentary Junctoes, Conventions, Protectors and
Conventicles, which they have all successively subverted, engrossing the
Sovereign Royal and Parliamental Power into their own hands, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3^ 4.
opposing and advancing themselves (by mere Treachery, Perjurie, Violence, and
other desperate ways of Unrighteousness) like that man of sin, and Mystery of
Iniquity, above all that is worshipped and called God; making no less then 3.
public Revolutions of our Government, and forcibly dissolving two Parliaments
(as they deemed them) of their own modelling, See their claration, May 6. 1659.
convening, within 6. months space, last past; and thereby made our formerly
renowned Nations, the scorn, reproach, wonder, derision of all the world;
themselves the Monsters of Men, the Shame of Christianity, Chivalry; exposed
our three Nations to the uttermost extremity of danger by new unpresidented
Ataxies, Divisions, Encroachments upon their hereditarie Rights, Liberties,
Properties, caused a total decay of all sorts of Trade, Justice, Legal
proceedings at home, and occasioned a speedy, much feared invasion from our
potent combined Popish adversaries abroad, when thus miserably distracted,
discontented, impoverished, and totally disabled to repulse them: It is high
time for every publike-Spirited Englishman in this strange, distracting
Confusion (which has almost as much divided, discontented all conscientious
Officers, Soldiers in the Army, Navy, as the people of all callings,
conditions) to contribute their best advice, by all just, legal, hopeful,
speedy ways, agreeable with the Laws of God and the Land, and those Rights,
Liberties of the people, (the defense whereof all Officers, Soldiers in the
Army have so See their Collection of Engagements, Remonstrances, etc. for
settling the Subjects in their just Liberties and Freedoms, London 1657.
frequently, constantly avowed they were principally raised, and resolved to
defend, though they have hitherto failed in their promises) to recover us out
of the labyrinth of our almost inextricable amazing Confusions, settle our
pernicious distractions, and prevent that visible, imminent, universal
desolation else likely to fall upon our Church, State, Nation, Religion, beyond
all possibility of escape, through the Army Officers rash destructive Counsels,
and violations of their Trusts, Oaths, Engagements, both as Soldiers,
Christians, and Members of the Kingdom.

The only just, legal, probable Means now left that I can prescribe both for
our Nations, Churches, Armies present and future Safety too (if they will
cordially and christianly submit thereto, as they ought in conscience, justice,
prudence) is,

1. For all the ancient Nobility of the Kingdom (the Sea my Plea for the
Lords, p. 43.51, to 60.
hereditary Great Counsel and Counselors of the Nation in all actual
Interregnums, and public Confusions, (as our Historians, Records, Law Books,
and the Commons themselves in the long Parliament resolved) both by Custom,
Law, Right) to assemble themselves by Common consent at Westminster, or so many
of them at least, or their heirs if dead, who constantly adhered to the long
Parliament; and there to issue out Writs according to the Statute of 16 Caroli
cap. 1. on the 3d Monday of November next, under 12 or more of their hands and
seals, for a free and legal election of Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, Barons,
in every City, County, Borough, Port, according to former usage, to appear at
the Parliament House in Westminster, the third Monday in January next ensuing,
at a Parliament then and there to be held, in such manner and form as this Act
prescribes: wherein such Proposals and Counsels may by common consent be
pursued, as may through Gods blessing, soon restore our pristine peace, trade,
honor, wealth, prosperity, felicity, settlement, and secure us from all future
changes.

2ly. For all Freeholders in every County of the Kingdom at the next County
Court in November, to meet together and make choice of the ablest, honestest,
wisest, stoutest Gentlemen for their Sheriffs, to keep the Peace of the County,
command the Militia, suppress all Insurrections, elect, return Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses to serve in Parliament, and execute the office of a
Sheriff; it being their ancient legal Right and Privilege, by special grants
of our Kings, both in and out of Parliament, which none in late or present
power ought to encroach upon, or deprive them of, and they are all now bound to
exercise and maintain for their own preservation and safety. This their right I
shall clearly evidence beyond contradiction.

1. By the peoples ancient Right in Edward the Confessors time, or before, in
their Folkmote to choose an Heretoke (a Baron or person of Quality) in every
County, in nature of a Captain, who had the power of the County and Militia in
every Shire, ficut et Vicecomites Provinciarum et Comitatuum eligi debent per
singulos Comitatus in pleno Folkmoto: as Sheriffs of Provinces and Counties
ought to be chosen in every County; as you may read at large in Mr. Lambards
Archaion, f. 135. de Hetetochiis; in Sir Henry Spelmans Glossarium, Dux and
Heretochius, p. 232, 348, 349. My Sovereign Power of Parliaments, part 2. p.
24, 25. Cooks 2 Institutes, p. 174, 175.

2ly. By Rot. Claus. Anno 16 Johannis Regis, part 1. m. 2. dorso. Dominus Rex
concessit Baronibus suis, Militibus and libere tenentibus de Cornubia, quod
habeant Vicecomitem de aliquo ipsorum ad Electionem eorun^. Idem vero Barons,
Milites, and libere tenentes concesserunt Willielmo Wise, quod baleat Hundredum
de Estweneleser ad feodi firmam, sibi and haeredibus suit imperpetuum, per
dimidium marci Argenti, ad festum Sancti Michaelis reddendum.

3ly. DeCom. Cornub.
By Rot. Pat. An. 5 H. 3. memb. 6. H. Dei gratia, etc. Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, libere tenentibus and aliis omnibus
de Com. Cornub. salutem. Sciatis quod concessimus Vobis quod liberam habeatis
electionem eligendi vobis in Vicecomitem nostrum unum de Com. Cornub. Et ideo
vobis mandamus quod eligatis tres fideles and discretos de Com. Cornub. and
illos nobis praesentari fac. apud London in Octab. Clausi Pasche, and nos unum
ex illis tribus prout nobis placuerit, Vobis dabimus ad Vicecomitem. Et interim
commissimus Comitatum illum Cornub. cum omnibus illis quae ad nos pertinent
dilecto and fideli nostro Reginaldo de Valletorta custodiend. vobisque mandamus
quatinus eidem Reginaldo usque ad praedictum terminum sitis intendentes et
respondentes in omnibus, tanquam Vic. nostro and ballivo nostro. Et in hujus,
etc. T. H. de Burgo etc. apud Westminster. xxviij. die Jan. an regni nostro 5to.

4ly. De Vic electo in Com. Sum. and Dorset.
By Pat. 10. H. 3. memb. 4. Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, libere tenentibus, and omnibus
aliis de communibus Sumerset and Dors. salutem. Sciatis quod electioni quam
fecistis de Willo: fill. Henr. ad Vic. nostrum faciend. de Comitat. Sumerset and
Dorset assensum nostrum praebuimus. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ei tanquam Vic
nostro quamdiu nobis placuerit intendentes sitis and respondentes. In cujus,
etc. Test Rege apud Winton. xxvij die Jan.

5ly. By Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster, Daniel, and others who record, that in
the 45 year of King Henry, the 3d. the King placed new Sherifs in every
County, displacing the Sheriffs the Barons and people had made; whereupon the
people in every County, manfully resisted the Sheriffs, and would not obey,
nor regard nor answer them in any thing, whereat the King was much troubled.
Much less then ought they now to obey any Sheriffs obtruded on them by the
Army Officers, or any other illegal usurped power.

6ly. By the Statute of Articuli super chartas, An. 28 E. 1. chap. 8. The King
has granted to his people, that they shall have the election of Sheriffs in
every Shire (where the Shrivalty is not of fee) if they will. And chap. 13. For
as much as the King has granted the election of Sheriffs to the Commons of the
Shire, the King wills, that they shall choose such Shyrifs as shall not charge
them, and that they shall not put in any Officer for rewards or bribes. And
that they shall not ledge too often in one place, nor with poor persons, nor with
men of Religion. By which Statutes, (being but confirmations of the peoples
former rights by custom, or Kings grants, on which some of them encroached,
which was the occasion of these Acts) all Counties used to elect their
Sheriffs: And if they elected any mean or unfitting person, as they sometimes
did, he then commanded them by his Writs to choose another who was fit to
discharge that Office; witness this memorable record ensuing.

Cl. 31 E. 1. m. 13. dorso. Rex Coronatoribus et toti communitati Comitatuum
Salop. and Stafford. salutem. De Vic. elig.
Cum nuper pro communi utilitate regni nostri inter alia concesserimus populo
ejusdem regni, quod habeat si voluerit electionem Vic. in singulis comitatibus
dicti regni cum opus fuerit Vicecom. praedict. in eisdem, ubi videlicet
Vicecomes de feodo non existit. Ac Ricus: de Harlegh per vos in Vic. comitatuum
praedictorum nuper electus, ad officium illud faciendum minus sufficiens est,
sicut ex testimonio fidedigno accepimus: Vobis mandamus quod aliquem qui melius
sciat and possit officio Vic. dictorum comitatuum intendere et utilior fuerit
ad idem officium exequendum in Vic. eorundem comitatuum pro vobis, si
volueritis, eligatis, et ipsum sic electum per aliquem legalem et circumspectum
hominem ex part vestra cum literis vestris patentibus sub sigillis sex de
discretioribus and probioribus Mil. eorundem comitatuum These. and Baronib.
nostris de Scaccario in crastino Sancti Michaelis prox. futuri sine dilatione
praesentetis, ut ipse ^unc ibidem praestito sicut moris est sacramento, extunc
ea faciat and exerceat, quae ad officium Vicecomitis pertinent in com
praedictis. Et habeatis ibi tunc boc breve. Sci^uri, quod si talem per vos
electum modo praedicto non praesentaveritis coram praefatis These. and
Baronibus nostris in crastino praedicto, praedicti These. and Burones extunc
nobis de alio Vicecomite Vobis praeficiendo in defectu vestri providebunt.
Test Rege apud Sarum. xvi. die April.

8. By Claus. 12 E 3. pars 2. m. 15. Claus. 13 E. 3. pars 3. dors. 16. Cl. 14 E
3. pars 2. m. 3. De Vicecomitibus Eligendis per totam Angliam: where in are
several writs issued authorizing and commanding the people to elect their
Shyrifs in every County throughout England, with other Records to the like
effect over-tedious to recite at large.

9ly. By Mr. Lambards Archaion f 135. and Sir Edward Cooks 2. Institutes on
Magna Charta p. 174, 175, 558, 559, 566. who resolve: That Sheriffs in ancient
times were and often to be chosen by the Freeholders, of the County in the
County Court, as Conservators of the Peace, Coroners, Verderers, Constables,
Petty Constables, were then and since Elected likewise by the people; as well
by the Kings writs, as without them, in cases of necessity.

Xly. By the constant custom of all Corporations which are counties within
themselves, having power Annually to choose Sheriffs only by the Kings Charters
without any special writ, as London, Bristol, Gloucester, York, Canterbury,
Coventry, etc. use to do. Therefore every County in England and Wales, may do
the like without any special writs, being a necessary annual, ancient standing
Office, especially in these confused times, when none have any legal Authority
to issue out Writs or Commissions to elect or swear Sheriffs, by virtue of the
premised Statutes; And the Army Officers with other self-created Usurping
Powers may as lawfully obtrude Mayors, Sheriffs, and other Officers on every
Corporation of England without their election, and deprive them of their
freedom to elect them; as thrust Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Coroners, or
other eligible Officers upon Counties; and rob them of this their just ancient
right and privilege; now strenuously to be revived, asserted for their common
safety, against all encroachments thereon. The Statute of Westminster 1. chapter 5.
enacting, declaring, That all Elections ought to be free, and not disturbed by
force of arms under great forfeitures by no Great men nor others.

3ly. Let all Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports, make choice of the wisest,
ablest, stoutest, discreetest Persons, such as are best affected to Peace,
Settlement, and the Nations public Interest, for their Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, not of raw, unexperienced, timorous, or timeserving, unstable,
self-seeking, turbulent men.

4ly. Let all Counties, Cities, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Clergymen, and
Freemen of the Nation unanimously resolve, to obey no new, illegal, tyrannical,
upstart Powers, Officers, Conventicles, Committees or Councils of men
whatsoever forcibly obtruded on them; nor to execute any of their Orders or
commands; but only to obey such legal Officers as themselves shall legally
elect, or a Free Parliament duly elected by them: nor pay any Taxes, Customs,
Imposts, Excises, Contributions whatsoever to any Officers, Soldiers,
Collectors, but such as shall be imposed by common consent in a free and
lawful Parliament, it being their ancient Birthright (for defense whereof the
Army was first raised) ratified not only by sundry ancient Statutes, and the
late Petition of Right, but several Acts, Votes, Declarations, Judgments the
last long Parliament of King Charles, acknowledged in the Instrument of
Government it self, the late Petition and Advice, the Armies own former
Declarations, and the late dissolved Juncto in their very last Knack of the 12.
of this instant October, their Plea and Papers since.

5ly. If any Officers, and Soldiers of the Army, out of faction, ambition,
self ends, or Jesuitical seduction, shall obstinately, traitorously,
maliciously, or tyrannically oppose the people in their elections of Sheriffs,
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, or levy any Taxes, Excises upon them by armed
violence, contrary to all their former-forfeited, now-expired Commissions,
Declarations, Engagements; let them then unanimously declare and proceed
against them as professed public Enemies, Traitors to their Native Country;
who by their former and late Treacheries, Rebellions, and unwarrantable
proceedings against all their Superiors, (transcending all presidents in
profane or sacred stories) have actually in Law, justice, forfeited not only
all their Commissions, Commands, and Arrears of pay, but a their very lives,
lands, estates; and that our whole 3. Nations by their Solemn, League and
Covenant, for their own future preservation, are obliged to bring them to
public Justice, as themselves have proceeded against hundreds, nay thousands
of other Delinquents not half so criminal as themselves; and thereupon entreat
all other Officers, Soldiers in the Army, who have any fear of God, or love to
themselves, their posterities, or Native Country remaining in their breasts, as
Moses did the Congregation of Israel in the Rebellion of Korah. Dathan, and
Abiram, who mutinied the people against him and Aaron, Numb. 16. Depart I pray
ye from the Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be
consumed in all their sins. So they gat up from the Tabernacle of Korah,
Dathan and Abiram on every side. And as many Officers, Soldiers as shall
thereupon desert the Tents of their Rebellious Commanders, and contribute their
assistance for the speedy calling and safe sitting of a free, lawful
Parliament, without any future mutinies, to interrupt or dissolve it when
convened according to the premised Statute of 16 Caroli c. 1. let them be
assured of their full arrears, and of indempnitie for what is past, which none
else but a free and lawful Parliament can grant them, all other Indemnities
being void in Law. And if this will not satisfy, let them beware, lest the
earth cleave asunder that is under them; and then open her mouth and swallow
them up alive, with their houses, men, goods, and all appertaining to them, and
they perish from among the Congregation, as Korah, Dathan and Abiram with their
families and adherents did, by this or some other exemplarie Judgments, and a
universal Insurrection of our three whole discontented, oppressed, ruined
Nations against them, which they may justly fear and expect, if they believe
there is a righteous God that judges in the earth, a Lord of hosts able to
scatter, punish, execute vengeance on them here, and cast them into hell for
ever hereafter, for their manifold unlamented, reiterated, transcendent
Rebellions: or repute these Texts Canonical, which I shall recommend to their
saddest Meditations. Prove. 29.10. He that being often reproved hardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. (as the late
Anti-Parliamentary Junctoes, and Protectors have been) Prove. 11.21. Though hand
go in hand, yet the wicked shall not go unpunished. Psalm. 68.21. God shall
wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on
still in his Trespasses. Ezech. 24.14. I the Lord have spoken it, it shall come
to pass, I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither
will I repent; but according to thy ways and according to thy doings I will
recompense and they shall judge thee, says the Lord. Col. 3.25. He that does
wrong shall receive according to the wrong done, and there is no respect of
persons with God; who can in a moment as easily destroy an whole Army, and
great host of men (as he did 2 Kings 13.35. 2 Chronicles. 13.16, 17,
Sennacheribs, Jeroboams, and other Armies) as any one single person.

October the last, 1659. the day of King-condemning John Bradshawes death, and
translation to his proper place, and arraignment in the Highest Court of
Justice.
FINIS.

