A SEASONABLE, LEGAL, AND HISTORICAL VINDICATION AND Chronologicall
COLLECTION of the Good, Old, Fundamental, Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws
of all English Freemen (their best Inheritance, Birthright, Security, against
Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Egyptian Burdens) and of their strenuous Defense in
all former Ages; of late years most dangerously undermined, and almost totally
subverted, under the specious Disguise of their Defense and future
Establishment, upon a Sure Basis, their Pretended, Greatest Propugners.

Wherein is Irrefragably evinced by Parliamentary Records, Proofs, Presidents,
That we have such Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws, That to
attempt or effect the Subversion of all or any of them, (or of our Fundamental
Government) by Fraud or Force, is High Treason: The principal of them summed
up in 9 Propositions: The chief printed Treatises asserting them, specified: A
Chronologicall History of our Ancestors zeal, vigilance, courage, prudence, in
gaining, regaining, enlarging, defending, often confirming, and perpetuating them
to posterity, by Great Charters, Statutes, New Confirmations, Excommunications,
Special Conservators, Consultations, Petitions, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Oaths, Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants, and likewise by their Arms,
when necessitated during all the Britons, Saxons, Danes, Normans and English
Kings Reigns, till this present; collected for present and future public
benefit: With a Brief Touch of their late unparalelled Infringements and
Subversions in every particular: The Trial of all Malefactors by their Peers,
and Juries, justified, as the only legal, best, most indifferent; and all
other late arbitrary Judicatories, erected for their Trial, exploded,
destructive both to our Fundamental Laws and Liberties.

Collected, recommended to the whole English Nation, as the best Legacy, he can
leave them.

By William Prynne of Swainswick, Esquire.

Psalm 11. 3. If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psalm
82 5. They know not, neither will they understand, they walk on, etc. Dan. 7.
24 25, 26. And another shall arise after the Kings, etc. London Printed for the
Author, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas in Green Arbor, 1654.

A Seasonable, Historical, Legal, VINDICATION, AND CHRONOLOGICAL COLLECTION
Of the good Old Fundamental Liberties, Franchises, Rights, Laws, of all
English Freemen; (their best Inheritance, Birthright, Security, against
Arbitrary Tyranny, Egyptian Slavery and Burdens) of late years most dangerously
undermined, oppugned, and almost totally subverted, under the specious feigned
Disguise of their Defense, Enlargement, and future Establishment upon a sure
Basis.
IT is an universal received Principle, and experimental Truth, beyond all
contradiction, That no natural structure, no artificial Building, no Civil or
Ecclesiastical Corporation, Realm, Reipublike, Government, or Society of men;
no Art nor Science whatsoever, can possibly be erected, supported, established,
preserved, or continued in their being or well-being, without FOUNDATIONS;
whereon as they were at first erected, so they must necessarily still depend,
or else they will presently fall to utter ruin.

Hence it is, (to wave all Humane Authorities in so clear a Verity) that in
God's own sacred unerring Jo^. 17. 17. 2 Cor. 6. 7. Ephesians. 1. 13. Jam. 1. 18
Word of Truth, we find frequent mention of the natural 2 Samuel 22. 8, 16. Jo^
38. 4, 6. Psalm 18. 15 and 102. 25. and 104. 5. Prove. 8. 29 Isa. 24. 18. and 40.
21. and 48. 13. and 51. 13, 16. ^er. 31. 17. Zech. 12 1. Mica. 1. 6. Jo^. 17.
24. Ephesians. 4. 4. Heb. 1. 10. and 4. 3. and 9 26. 1 Pet. 1 20.
FOUNDATIONS of the vast natural Fabric of the Earth, Heavens, and World it
self; of the Artificial Material 1 King. 5. 17. and 6. 37. and 7. 9, 10. Ez^.
4. 13 and 6. 3. Psa. 137 7. Ezekiel. 41. 8. Hag. 2. 8. Zech. 4 9 and 8. 9. Mat. 7.
26, 27. Luke 6 48, 49.
FOUNDATIONS of the material Temple, walls, City; of Gods own most famous city
Jerusalem; and of private houses: of the Spiritual Isa. 28. 16. and 54. 11.
Psalm. 87. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 11. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 6. Rev. 21. 14, 19.
FOUNDATION of the Spiritual Temple, City Jerusalem, and whole Church of God;
even Jesus Christ himself: of the Doctrinal 2 Timothy 1. 19. Heb. 6 1, 2.
FOUNDATIONS, and first Principles of Religion, Christianity, Salvation: yea,
of the Political Jer. 50. 15. Micah 1. 6, 7. Luke 6. 48, 49. M^t. 7. 26, 27.
FOUNDATIONS of Kingdoms, Reipublikes, Churches, Governments, States: which
being once shaken, undermined, subverted, razed, or destroyed, bring
unavoidable ruin and desolation upon them, ( Psalm. 11. 3. Psalm. 82. 5, 6. Jer.
50. 17. and 51. 15, 16. Mic. 1. 6, 7, 9.) even as we daily see Castles, Walls,
Houses, to fall instantly to the ground, and become an heap of Confusion, when
their Foundations are blown up, decayed, or demolished.

Upon which consideration, those Public Laws, which establish, fence,
fortify, support the Fundamental Constitutions, Rights, Liberties,
Privileges, of any Nation, Kingdom, Reipublike, (essential to their being and
subsistence, as a free or happy people, against the Invasions, Underminings,
Encroachments, of any Tyrants, Usurpers, O pressors, or public Enemies, are
usually styled FUNDAMENTAL LAWS; and have ever been reputed so sacred,
inviolable, immutable, in all ages, upon any Pretenses of Necessity, or Public
Safety, that most Nations, and our own English Ancestors, above others, have
freely chosen to hazard, yea lose their Estates, Lives, in their just defense,
against such exorbitant Tyrannical Kings, and other Powers, who by force or
policy have endeavored to violate, alter, or subvert them, rather then out of
Cowardice, S^tt^shness, Carelessness, or want of cordial love to the Public, to
suffer the least infringement, repeal, or alteration of them, to the
inthralling of Themselves, or their Posterities, to the arbitrary Wills of such
Domineering Tyrants, and Usurping Powers.

Now because, after all our Old and New (many years) bloody, costly, dangerous
Contests and Wars, for the maintenance of our Good Old Fundamental Liberties,
Laws, Rights, Privileges, against all secret or open underminers of them, I
clearly behold, with grief of heart, that there is a strange monstrous
Generation of New TYRANNICAL STATE-HERETICKS sprung up among us; who are grown
so desperately impudent, as not only to write, but publicly to assert in
Print, (in Lilb. tried and cast, p. 39, 40, 142, to 148. 154. J. Canne's Voice
from the Temple, which persuades the subversion and abolishing of all former
Laws, especially for Tithes and Ministers support.
Books printed by AUTHORITY, even in Capitals in the very Title Page) That the
Freemen and People of England have no such unalterable Fundamental Laws and
Liberties left them by their forefathers, (as our Ancestors heretofore
contested for, both in the Field and Parliament House, with William the
Conqueror, Henry the first, King John, Henry the third, Edward 1, 2, 3. Richard
the second, with other Kings and Princes; and our late Parliaments and Armies
too, with King James, and King Charles.) That neither Magna Charta, nor the
Petition of Right, nor the Laws for trying malefactors by Juries of their
peers, are Fundamental, or unalterable; but that the STATE-PHYSITIANS (or
rather Mountebanks) of our time, (who are not tied up to them, but left free
unto themselves) may lay them quite aside, either in part or whole, as they see
cause: Yea, (having now attained to such a super-transcendent Authority, as)
may (as they assert) LAY ASIDE ALL PARLIAMENTS and PARLIAMENTARY WAYS, and
appoint SOMETHING ELSE, as more seasonable and proper to us, and as Providence
makes way for it, if they see it more conducing to the safety and good of the
Commonwealth, (that is, to their own private Interests, Honors, Profits,
Securities, Designs, Oppressions, Rapines, gilded over with this specious
pretext.) And then peremptorily conclude, That to plead for these and other
Fundamental Laws and L^berties, as unalterable, (though the only Bulwarks and
Badges of our Freedom) is nothing else but to enslave the Nation: for by such a
Principle, People do not only lose their Liberty, but are brought under such a
kind of Tyranny, out of which (AS BEING WORSE THEN THE EGYPTIAN BONDAGE)
there is no hope of deliverance. An absurd Tyrannical Paradox, transcending any
I ever yet met with in any Author; stripping us naked of all our long-enjoyed
Laws, Liberties, Franchises, Great Charters, at once; tending only to reduce,
and perpetually inthral us under such an absolute EGYPTIAN BONDAGE and
Tyranny, without any hope of future deliverance from it, which some now
endeavor to enta^l on us and our posterities for ever, by an Iron Law, and
Yoke of Steel, in stead of restoring to us that Glorious Freedom, which we have
so long expected from them in vain.

And because I find the Generality of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy,
Commonalty, of our Nation, after all their late years expensive bloody wars,
and Parliamentary Disputes, for the defense and preservation of these our
Ancient Hereditary Fundamental Charters, Laws, Liberties, Privileges, so
strangely degenerated both from themselves, and their Heroic prudent
Ancestors, as that they are more readily inclined, upon every occasion, out of
a base, un-Christian, unmanly, un-English fear, or sottish cowardice and
stupidity, wittingly to desert, betray, surrender them all up into the hands of
any invading Usurpers, without the least Public Claim, Dissertation, Defense,
or Dispute; then diligently or courageously to contend for them, as of late
they did: So as that which Paul once taxed in the slavish besotted Corinthians,
2 Epist. 11. 20. may be most truly averred of our degenerated, insatuated,
English Nation: Ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you,
if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, (above your Laws, Liberties,
Franchises, Parliaments, Kings, Nobles, Properties, Lives, Consciences, and 2
These. 2. 4.
all that is called God, or worshipped) if a man smite you on the face;
notwithstanding all their manifold late See Exact collect. and a general
Collect. of all Ordinances, etc.
Protestations, Vows, Covenants, Remonstrances, Declarations, and Public
Engagements, to the contrary. And withal, after diligent enquiry, discovering
scarce one man of Eminency or Power in the Nation, nor so much as one of my
degenerated temporizing Profession of the Law, (even when the Sea Culpep^r's
and Lilly's Merlins and Almanacks, John Can' s 2 Voice, Lilb. tried and cast;
with many Pe^itions and Pamphlets against the Law and Lawyers. The Order of
Aug. 19. 1653. That there should be a Committee selected to consider of A NEW
BODY of the Law, for the government of this Commonwealth.
whole Body of our Laws, and all its Professors, are violently assaulted, and
devoted unto sudden ruin, by many lawless spirits) who has so much Courage,
Magnanimity, Honesty, Zeal, or cordial Love to his native Country, remaining in
his breast, as manfully to appear in Public, for the strenuous necessary
defense of these our Hereditary, Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights,
Franchises, (though their own, and every other English Freeman's best
Inheritance and Security) for fear of being persecuted, imprisoned, close
imprisoned, exiled, condemned, destroyed, as a Traitor, Rebel, Seditious
person, Enemy to the Public, or disturber of the Kingdoms Peace, by those who
are truly such: I thereupon conceived, I could not undertake or perform a more
necessary, seasonable, beneficial Service for my Country, (and not to be like
those, who are ashamed, afraid, for the most part, to own, visit, or be seen in
the company of those Gallant men, much less to assist, defend, and stick close
unto them in their dangers, according to the sixth Article of their late Solemn
League and Covenant, who have suffered, acted, and stood up most for their
Common Liberties, Rights, Freedoms, Religion, against all invading Tyrants, to
their great discouragement and betraying) nor pitch upon any Subject more
proper for me, either as a common Lawyer, or as a constant Advocate and
Sufferer for the Public Cause, and Liberties of the Nation, as well under our
late extravagant Free State, as former Regal and Episcopal arbitrary Tyranny,
then in this juncture of our public affairs, to present our whole distracted
unsettled Kingdom with An Historical and Legal Vindication, and Chronological
Collection, in all Ages, of these Ancient Hereditary Liberties, Franchises,
Rights, Contests, Laws, Charters, Records, Monuments of former and late times,
for their Confirmation, and inviolable Observation, which our Ancestors and our
Selves have always hitherto reputed FUNDAMENTAL, UNALTERABLE, INVIOLABLE, upon
any pretext; and have most eagerly contended for, with the prodigal expense of
many millions of Treasure, and whole oceans of gallant Christian English blood.

And if, upon the serious perusal of them, the universality of our degenerated
Nation, after their many late solemn Protestations, Vows, Leagues, Covenants,
Remonstrances, inviolably to defend and maintain them, shall still so
undervalue them now at last, (as most actually have done) as not to esteem them
worth the owning, maintaining, vindicating, or perpetuating any longer; and
thereby draw upon their heads the real guilt of all those bloody Wars, Murders,
Tumults, Violencies, Rapines, Oppressions, Sins, Mischiefs, Illegal Taxes,
Excises, Exorb tancies, which their many late years pretended Necessary Defense
and Preservation have brought upon our three whole Nations; let them
henceforth, like so many dastardly conquered Bondslaves, bored through the ears,
publicly disavow, disclaim, renounce, abjure them, for themselves and their
Posterities for ever, as mere worthless toys, or pernicious inventions, fit
only to kindle perpetual Wars and Discords between King and People, Head and
Members, Superiors and Inferiors; or, as poor slender Cobwebs, (as now they
prove) fit to hold none within compass but the very weakest flies; broken
through with ease and impunity by every greater fly, creeping up into any Power
or Supreme Authority, by Right or Wrong; and swept down to the very ground, by
every New Broom in the hand of upstart Innovators.

But if, upon saddest deliberation, they shall really estimate them to be such
incomparable, rich, precious jewels, and ancient inheritances, as are every way
worth the infinite Treasures, Wars, Blood, Cares, Consultations, Troubles,
heretofore and of late years expended, both to gain, retain, confirm, and
perpetuate them, to them and their posterities for ever, as their principal
earthly Security and Pea^itude; I hope they will all then unanimously
henceforth conclude with the Poe^,

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, PARTA TUERI: and both by their Votes, and
Actions, return the self-same peremptory magnanimous answer to any Caesar,
Conqueror, Potentate, Power, or Combination of men whatsoever, (who shall
endeavor by force, fraud, or flattery, to compel or persuade them, to sell,
resign, betray, or give up these their Ancestral Privileges, Inheritances,
Birthrights, to them) as Naboth once did to King Ahab, 1 King. 21. 3. The Lord
forbid it us, that we should give (sell, or betray) the INHERITANCE OF OUR
FATHERS (and our Posterities likewise) unto thee, or you; though they should
suffer for this Answer and refusal, as much as Naboth did from bloody Ahab and
Jezebel.

But whatever low price or estim^te this spurious, stupid, sordid, slavish Age
may set upon these richest Pearls; yet for my own particular, upon serious
consideration of these Chronological Collections, and the Solemn Oaths,
Prote^^ations, Vows, League and Covenant, obliging me to defend them to the
uttermost; I value the whole Nations public, and my own (with my cordial
friends) private interest in them, at so high a rate, that I would rather
cheerfully part with ten thousand lives, and all the treasures of the Nation,
were I owner of them, then wittingly, negligently, or unworthily sell, betray,
or resign them up to any Mortals or Powers whatsoever, upon any Pretenses or
Conditions, after all my former Publications, Contests, Sufferings, etc. for
their just Defense.

Now to the end all others might now take special notice of the inestimable
value our Ancestors in all Ages have set upon them, and what successive Wars,
Conflicts, they have cheerfully undertaken for their preservation; I have, at
vacant hours compiled this ensuing Vindication and Collection of the O^d
Fund^mental Liberties, Franchises, Laws of all E^glish Freemen, which I shall
bequeath to my most beloved native Country in general, and every real Heroic
Patron of them in particular, as the best Legacy I can leave behind me, both
for their present and future Enfranchisement, Immunity, Security from all
Arbitrary tyranny, Slavery, and yokes of Bondage, under which they have a long
time langu^shed, and lamented, in the bitterness of their spirits.

The Method I resolve herein to pursue, is this:

1. I shall produce some punctual Authorities of moment, to evidence, That the
Kingdom and Freemen of England have some ancient Hereditary just Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Laws and Customs, properly called
FUNDAMENTAL; and likewise a FUNDAMENTAL Government, no ways to be altered,
undermined, subverted, directly or indirectly, to the Public prejudice, under
pain of High Treason in those who shall attempt it, especially by fraud, force,
or armed power.

2. I shall in brief Propositions present you with the chiefest and most
considerable of them, which our Ancestors in former ages, and our latest real
Parliaments have resolved to be, and eagerly contended for, as FUNDAMENTAL,
essential to their being and well-being, as a Free People, Kingdom, Reipublike,
unwilling to be enslaved under any Yokes of Tyranny, any Arbitrary Impositions
or Powers whatsoever. And then give you a brief Touch of their several late
unparalled violations, both by the Edicts and Actions of usurping Powers.

3. I shall in a Chronological way tender you a large Historical Catalogue of
Contests, Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances, Oaths, Vows, Protestations,
Covenants, Engagements, Evidences, Statutes, Charters, Writs, Records,
Judgments, and Authorities, in all ages, undeniably evidencing, declaring,
vindicating, establishing, perpetuating these Fundamental Hereditary Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Customs, Laws, and abundantly manifesting
the extraordinary care, industry, zeal, courage, wisdom, vigilance of our
Ancestors, to defend, preserve, and perpetuate them to posterity, without the
least violation or diminution.

4. I shall vindicate the excellency, indifferency, and legality of trying
all Malefactors whatsoever by Juries of their peers, upon legal Process and
Indictments; and manifest the illegality, injustice, partiality, dangerous
consequences, of admitting or introducing any other form of Trials, by New,
Arbitrary, Martial Commissions, or Courts of High Justice, (or rather Summum
jus, est summa injuria. C^c. de Offic^^s, p. 611.
Injustice) inconsistent with, and destructive to the Fundamental Rights,
Liberties, Privileges, Laws, Franchises of the English Nation, and of most
dangerous President to Posterity; being set up by the greatest Pretenders to
Public Liberty, Law, and the chiefest inveighers against Arbitrary Regal
Tyranny and Power, which never publicly established them by any Law, and may
fall to imitate them in future Ages.

Each of these I intend to prosecute in distinct Chapters in their order.

For the first of these: That the Kingdom and Freemen of England, have some
Ancient Hereditary Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Laws and
Customs, properly called FUNDAMENTAL; and likewise a FUNDAMENTAL ^OVERNMENT, no
ways to be altered, undermined, subverted, directly or indirectly, under pain
of High Treason in those who shall attempt it, especially by fraud, force, or
armed power.

I shall confirm the first part of it, by these ensuing punctual Authorities of
moment, against those Lilb. tried and cast, p. 39, 40, 142. to 148 and
elsewhere. John Canne's 2 Voice from the Temple. John Rogers Mean, T^k^l,
Per^z, p. 6. Lilly and Culpeper in their prognostications Anno 1653. and 1654.
See the Armies Proposals.
traytorous late-published Pamphlets, which professedly deny it, and endeavor
a total abrogation of all former Laws, to set up a New Model and Body of the
Law, to rule us for the future, according to their Pleasures.

The first is, the express words of the Great Charters of the Liberties of
England, granted by See Matthew. Paris, p. 216 and Magna Chart. 9, 11. 3 H. 3. c.
1. and 38. 25 E. 1. c. 1, etc. 28 E. 1. c. 1, etc. Cook' s 2 Instit. p. 2, 77.
King John, Anno 1215. in the 17 year of his Reign; regranted and confirmed by
King Henry the third, in the ninth year of his Reign, and sundry times
afterward; and by King Edward the first, in the 25 and 28 years of his Reign:
wherein these three Kings successively, by their several Grand Charters under
their Great Seals, did grant, give, and confirm, to all the Freemen of the
Realm of England, FOR THEMSELVES AND THEIR HEIRS FOR EVER, the Customs,
Liberties therein contained; TO HAVE AND TO HOLD THEM, TO THEM AND THEIR HEIRS,
FROM THEM AND THEIR HEIRS FOR EVER. Concluding their Charters thus: All these
Customs and Liberties aforesaid, which we have granted to be holden within this
our Realm, as much as appertains TO US AND OUR HEIRS, WE SHALL OBSERVE. And
ALL MEN OF THIS OUR REALM, AS WELL SPIRITUAL AS TEMPORAL, ( as much as in them
is) shall observe the same against all persons in likewise. And we have granted
unto them, THAT NEITHER WE NOR OUR HEIRS SHALL PROCURE OR DO ANY THING WHEREBY
THE LIBERTIES IN THESE CHARTERS CONTAINED, SHALL BE INFRINGED OR BROKEN. We
ratifying and approving these Gifts and Grants aforesaid, CONFIRM and
CORROBORATE ALL THE SAME, FOR US AND OUR HEIRS PERPETUALLY: and by these
Pr^sents (as the later Charters run) do renew the same: Willing and granting,
FOR US AND OUR HEIRS, THAT THESE CHARTERS, AND ALL AND SINGULAR THEIR ARTICLES,
FOR EVER SHALL BE STEADFASTLY, FIRMLY, AND INVIOLABLY OBSERVED.

Sir Edward Cook, (that reverend learned Judge and Professor of our Laws) in
his Preface to his second Institutes, and p. 2. and 77. thereof, wherein he
comments on this Great Charter, (printed by two Orders of the House of Commons
in Parliament, dated 12 Maii 1641. and 30 Junit 1642.) resolves in direct
terms, That the Great Charter was for the most part declaratory of the
Principal Grounds of THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF ENGLAND: That these words therein,
[for us and our heirs for ever] were added, to avoid all scruples; THAT THIS
GREAT PARLIAMENTARY: CHARTER MIGHT LIVE AND TAKE EFFECT IN ALL SUCCESSIONS OF
AGES FOR EVER. A clear Resolution, that the principal Liberties, Customs, Laws,
contained in these Great Charters, and ratified by them, are both Fundamental,
perpetual, and unalterable; being since confirmed in all points by near forty
several special Acts of Parliament in succeeding Parliaments: and likewise by
the Solemn Oaths of our Kings, Nobles, Judges, Great Officers, and of the
People too, (all several times sworn to defend and maintain the same) and by
sundry Solemn Excommunications against the infringers or contemners of them in
any kind; as I shall prove more fully in the third Chapter.

The second is, the punctual Resolution of the whole Jacobi, even in a Printed
Act of Parliament, chap. 2. and of King James himself, in his Speech therein,
as is evident by this Prologue to that Act: Whereas his most excellent Majesty
has been pleased, out of his great wisdom and judgment, not only to
represent unto us, by his own prudent and Princely Speech on the first day of
this Parliament, how much he desired (in regard of his inward and gracious
affection to both the famous and ancient Realms of England and Scotland, now
united in Allegiance, and by all subjection IN HIS ROYAL PERSON, TO HIS MAJESTY
AND HIS POSTERITY FOR EVER) that by a speedy, mature, and sound Deliberation,
such a future Union might follow, as should make perfect that mutual love, and
uniformity of Manners and Customs, which Almighty God in his providence, for the
strength and safety of both Realms, has so far already begun, in apparent
sight of all the world; but also has vouchsafed to express many ways, how far
it is, and EVER SHALL BE, from his Royal and sincere care and affection to the
Subjects of England, TO ALTER OR INNOVATE THE FUNDAMENTAL AND ANCIENT LAWS,
PRIVILEGES, and GOOD CUSTOMS OF THIS KINGDOM; whereby not only HIS ROYAL
AUTHORITY, but THE PEOPLES SECURITY OF LANDS, LIVINGS, and PRIVILEGES ( both
in General and Particular) ARE PRESERVED AND MAINTAINED; Nota.
and, BY THE ABOLISHING OR ALTERATION OF THE WHICH, IT IS IMPOSSIBLE BUT THAT
PRESENT CONFUSION WILL FALL UPON THE WHOLE STATE AND FRAME OF THIS KINGDOM,
etc. In which memorable Clause, these four things are observable 1. That the
Kin^dom and People of England have Fundamental ancient good Laws, Privileges,
and Customs. 2. That these are no ways to be altered or innovated; and that it
always has been, is, and ever shall be, far from the thoughts and intents of
all good Kings, Governors, and Parliaments, who bear a sincere care and
affection to the Subjects of England, to alter or innovate them. 3. That by
these ancient good Laws, Privileges, and Customs, not only the Kings Regal
authority, but the Peoples Security of Lands, Livings, and Privileges, (both
in general and particular) are preserved and maintained. 4. That by the
abolishing or altering of them, it is impossible, but that present confusion
will fall upon the whole State and frame of this Kingdom. Which I wish all
Innovators and New Modellers of our Laws, would now at last say seriously to
heart, and the whole Kingdom and English Nation sadly consider, who have found
it an Experimental truth of late years, and no imaginary feigned Speculation.

Remonstrance of the whole House of Commons in Parliament, delivered in writing
to K. James, in the Parliament of 7 Jac. anno 1610. which begins thus.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WHereas we your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the Commons assembled in
Parliament, See Prop. 1. and 6. in chap. 2.
have received, first by Message, and since by Speech, from your Majesty, a
Command of restraint, from debating in Parliament your Majesty's Right of
imposing upon your subjects goods exported out of, or imported into this Realm,
yet allowing us to examine the grievance of these Impositions, in regard of
quantity, time, and other circumstances of disproportion thereto incident: We
your said humble Subjects nothing doubting but that your Majesty had no intent
by that command, to infringe THE ANCIENT AND FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OF THE LIBERTY
OF PARLIAMENT, in point of exact discussing of all matters concerning them and
their Possessions, Goods, and Rights whatsoever; which yet we cannot but
conceive to be done in effect by this command, Do with all humble duty make
this Remonstrance to your Majesty.

First, We hold it an AN ANCIENT, GENERAL, and UNDOUBTED RIGHT OF PARLIAMENT,
to debate freely all matters which do properly concern the Suject, and his
Right or Estate: which freedom of debate being once fore-closed, Nota.
THE ESSENCE OF THE LIBERTY OF PARLIAMENT IS WITHAL DISSOLVED.

Here the whole House of Commons, in a special Remonstrance to King James,
(printed and published by Order of a Committee of the House of Commons for
licensing of book^, dated 20 Maii, 1641. 17 Caroli) declare, resolve,
vindicate, and maintain, One principal, ancient, Fundamental, general,
undoubted Right of the Liberty of Parliament, against the Kings intrenchment on
it: Of which should they be but once fore-closed, the Essence of the Liberty of
Parliament is withal dissolved.

And peradventure it may not be unworthy the most serious Disquisition of the
next ensuing nominal or real Parliament, to examine, whether some Clauses and
Restrictions in the 9, 12, 14, 16, 17, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 30, 32, 33, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40 Articles (or Strings) of the New Instrument, entitled, The
Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging; as it was publicly declared at Westminster the
16 day of December, 1653. etc. do not as much, nay far more entrench upon the
ancient, Fundamental, General, undoubted Right and Liberty of Parliament, and
Parliamentary free Debates, to the dissolution of the Essential Liberty of all
future Parliaments, as this Command of King James did, or as the Bishops late
Canons imposed on the Clergy in and by the Convocation, Anno 1640. ever did;
and this Clause in their etc. Oath then made, (now imitated by others, who
condemned it:) I A. B. do swear, that I will never give my consent TO ALTER THE
GOVERNMENT OF THIS CHURCH BY ARCHBISHOPS, BISHOPS, DEANS, AND ARCHDEACONS,
etc. AS IT STANDS NOW ESTABLISHED, AND AS BY RIGHT IT OUGHT TO STAND: See Cant.
Doom, p. 19, 26. 40. Diurn. Occurrences, p. 13.
Resolved by the whole house of Commons, and Peers too, without one dissenting
voice, in Parliament, December. 1640. to be a most dangerous and illegal Oath,
contrary to THE RIGHTS and PRIVILEGES OF PARLIAMENT, and to the FUNDAMENTAL
LAWS and STATUTES OF THE REALM, etc. and OF DANGEROUS CONSEQUENCE. The
contriving whereof was objected to the late Archbishop of Canterbury, in his
Original and Additional Articles of Impeachment, to be HIGH TREASON; for which,
amongst other things, he lost his head.

Petition of Grievance of the whole House of Commons in Parliament, presented
to King James in the seventh year of his Reign, after their Vote against his
right to lay any Impositions on Goods imported or exported, without assent of
Parliament; in these ensuing words.

THe Policy and Constitution of this your Majesty's Kingdom, See Propos. 1. in
chap. 2.
appropriates unto the Kings of this Realm, with assent of Parliament, as well
the Sovereign power of making Laws, as that of taxing or imposing upon the
Subjects Goods or Merchandises, wherein they have justly such a Property, as
may not without their consent be altered or changed: this is the cause, that
the People of this Kingdom, as they have O how are they now degenerated!
ever showed themselves faithful and loving to their Kings, and ready to aid
them in all their just occasions, Nota.
with voluntary Contributions: SO HAVE THEY BEEN And should they not be so now,
then?
EVER CAREFUL TO PRESERVE THEIR OWN LIBERTIES AND RIGHTS, WHEN ANY THING HAS
BEEN DONE TO PREJUDICE OR IMPEACH THE SAME. And therefore when their Princes,
either occasioned by War, or by their own bounty, or by any other Necessity,
have without consent of Parliament set on Impositions, either within the Land,
^r upon Commodities exported or imported by the Merchants, they have in open
Parliament complained of it, in that it was done without their consents; AND
THEREUPON And shall we now at last fail h^rein?
NEVER FAILED TO OBTAIN A SPEEDY AND FULL REDRESS, without any Howdare then any
self created powers, who are neither Kings nor Parliam^n^s now arrogate to
themselves, or exercise such a super-Regal arbitrary power and prerogative?
Claim made by the Kings, of any Power or Prerogative in that point. And though
THE LAW OF PROPERTY BE ORIGINAL, and carefully preserved by the Common Laws of
this Realm, WHICH ARE AS ANCIENT AS THE KINGDOM IT SELF; yet those famous
Kings, for the better contentment and assurance of their loving Subjects,
agreed, THAT THIS OLD FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT (observe the words) should be further
declared, AND ESTABLISHED BY ACT OF PARLIAMENT, wherein it is provided, That no
such Charge should ever be laid upon the People without their Common consents,
as may appear by sundry Records of former times.

We therefore your Majesty's most humble Commons assembled in Parliament, Nota.
And O that we would sollow it now again!
FOLLOWING THE EXAMPLE OF THIS WORTHY CARE OF OUR ANCESTORS, AND OUT OF OUR
DUTY TO THOSE FOR WHOM WE SERVE, finding that your Majesty, without advice of
your Lords and Commons, has lately (in times of Peace) SET BOTH GREATER
IMPOSITIONS, AND FAR MORE IN NUMBER THEN ANY YOUR NOBLE ANCESTORS DID EVER IN
TIME OF WAR, do with all humility present this most just and necessary Petition
unto your Majesty, THAT ALL IMPOSITIONS SET WITHOUT ASSENT IN PARLIAMENT, MAY
BE QUITE ABOLISHED AND TAKEN AWAY. And that your Majesty likewise in imitation
of your Royal PROGENITORS, will be pleased, that a Law in your time, and during
this Session of Parliament, may be also made, to declare, THAT ALL IMPOSITIONS
OF ANY KIND SET, OR TO BE SET UPON YOUR PEOPLE, THEIR GOODS OR MERCHANDISES,
SAVE ONLY BY COMMON CONSENT IN PARLIAMENT, ARE AND SHALL BE VOID; wherein your
Majesty shall not only GIVE YOUR SUBJECTS GREAT SATISFACTION IN POINT OF THEIR
RIGHT; but also bring exceeding joy and comfort to them who now suffer, partly
through the abating of the price of Native Commodities, and partly through the
raising of all Foreign, to the overt^ row of Merchants, and Shipping, the
causing of general dearth, and decay of all wealth among your people, who will
be thereby no less discouraged, then disabled to supply your Majesty when
occasion shall require.

In which memorable Petition, the whole House of Commons resolve in direct
terms: 1. That the Subjects of England have old original Fundamental Rights,
(and more particularly in the Property of their goods, exempted from all
Impositions whatsoever in times of Peace or War, without their common consent
in Parliament) declared and established both by the ancient Common Law of
England, and sundry Acts of Parliament, and Records of former times. 2. They
declare, the constant vigilant care, zeal of our Ancestors and former
Parliaments in all Ages, inviolably to maintain, defend, preserve the same
against all encroachments, together with their own care, duty and vigilance in
this kind in that very Parliament. 3. They relate the readiness of our Kings to
ratify these their Fundamental Rights by new Acts of Parliament, when they
have been violated in any kind. 4. They declare the benefit accruing both to
Prince and People, by the inviolable preservation and establishment of this old
Fundamental Right, and the mischiefs accruing to both by the infringement
thereof, by arbitrary illegal Impositions, without full consent in Parliament.
5. They earnestly (in point of conscience, prudence, and duty to those for whom
they served) Petition his Majesty, for a new Law and Declaration against all
new Impositions and Taxes on Inland Goods, or Merchandises imported or exported
without the Peoples free consent in Parliament, as null, void, utterly to be
abolished and taken away. Whether it will not be absolutely necessary for the
whole English Nation, and the next ensuing Notional, or real Parliament to
Prosecute, Enact, Establish such a Declaration and Law against all such future
arbitrary, illegal, oppressive Taxes, Impositions, Excises, that have been
imposed and continued for many years together on the whole Kingdom, by new
extravagant, self-created, usurping Army- Officers, and other Powers, without
free and full consent of the People in lawful English Parliaments, against all
former Laws, Declarations, and Resolutions in Parliament, to their great
oppression, enslaving, undoing, and that in far greater proportions,
multiplicity, and variety, then ever in former Ages, without the least
intermission; and likewise against their late declared design, to perpetuate
them on our exhausted Nation, without alteration or diminution, (beyond and
against all Presidents of former Ages) both in times of Peace and War for the
future, by the 27, 28, 39, 30, 9. Articles of the Instrument entitled, The
Government of the Commonwealth of England, etc. I remit to their most serious
con^^derations to determine, if ever they resolve to be English Freemen again,
or to imitate the wisdom, prudence, zeal, courage, and laudable examples of
their worthy Ancestors, from which they cannot now degenerate without the
greatest Infamy, and enslaving of themselves with their Posterities for ever,
to the arbitrary wills of present or future Usurpers on their Fundamental
Rights and Libe^ties, in an higher degree then ever in any precedent ^ges,
under the Greatest Conquerors or Kings, after all their late, costly, bloody
Wars for their Defense against the Behe^ded King.

The fifth is, A learned and necessary Argument made in Anno 7. Jacobi, to
prove, That each Subject has a Propriety in his Goods; showing also, the
extent of the Kings Prerogative in Impositions upon the Goods of Merchants
exported or imported, etc. By a late learned Judge of this Kingdom, printed at
London by Richard Bishop, 1641. and Ordered to be pub^ished in Print, at a
Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons, for examination and
Licensing of B^oks. 20. Maii, 1641. In which Parliamentary Argument, p. 8, 11,
16. I find these direct Passages: That the New Im^ositions contained in the
Boo^ of Rates, imposed on Merchandises, imported and exported by the Kings
Prerogative, and Letters Patents, without consent in Parliament, is against THE
NATURAL FRAME AND CONSTITUTION OF THE POLICY OF THIS KINGDOM, which is Jus
Publicum Regn^, AND SO SUBVERTETH THE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF THE REALM, and
introduces a new form of State and Government: Can any man give me a reason,
why the King can only in Parliament make Laws? No man ever read any Law,
whereby it was so ordained; and yet no man ever read, that any King practiced
the contrary; therefore IT IS THE ORIGINAL RIGHT OF THE KINGDOM, Nota.
AND THE VERY NATURAL CONSTITUTION OF OUR STATE AND POLICY, being one of the
highest Rights of Sovereign Power. If the King alone out of Parliament may
impose, And do not those do so (...) as ^lay mont^ly (...), Customs, and
N^w-Impost on us daily out of Parliament, and that for many months and years
yet to come, against the Letter of their own Instrument and Oath too?
HE ALTERS THE LAW OF ENGLAND IN ONE OF THESE TWO MAIN FUNDAMENTAL POINTS; He
must either take the Subjects Goods from them, without assent of the Party,
which is against the Law, or else he must give his own Letters Patents the
force of a Law, to alter the property of the Subjects Goods, which is also
against the Law.

In this and sundry other Arguments, (touching the Right of Impositions) in the
Commons House of Parliament by the Members of it, arguing against them, it was
frequently averred, and at last voted and resolved by the House, 7. Jacobi.
That such Impositions without consent in Parliament, were AGAINST THE ORIGINAL
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS AND PROPERTY OF THE SUBJECT, and Original Right, Frame, and
Constitution of the Kingdom; as the Notes and Journals of that Parliament
evidence: An express Parliamentary resolution in point, for what I here assert.

The sixth is, 6.
A Conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of both Houses,
concerning the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, 3. Aprilis. 4. Caroli,
1628. entered in the Parliament Journal of 4. Caroli, and since printed at
London, 1642. In the Introduction to which Conference, Sir Dudley Diggs, by the
Commons House Order, used these expressions: My good Lords, whilst we the
Commons, out of our good affections, were seeking for money, we found, I cannot
say a Book of the Law, but many A FUNDAMENTAL POINT THEREOF NEGLECTED AND
BROKEN, which has occasioned our desire of this Conference: Wherein I am first
commanded to show unto your Lordships in general, That the Laws of England are
grounded on Reason more ancient then Books, consisting much in unwritten
Customs, yet so full of Justice and true Equity, that your most Honorable
Predecessors and Ancestors propugned them with a NOLUMUS MUTARI; and so
ancient, that from the Saxons days, notwithstanding the injuries and ruins of
time, they have continued in most parts the same, etc. Be pleased then to know,
THAT IT IS AN UNDOUBTED AND FUNDAMENTAL POINT OF THIS SO ANCIENT COMMON LAW OF
ENGLAND, THAT THE SUBJECT HAS A TRUE PROPERTY IN HIS GOODS AND POSSESSIONS,
which does preserve as sacred that Meum and Tuum, that is the Nurse of
Industry, and the Mother of Courage, and without which there can be no Justice,
of which Meum and Tuum is the proper object. Bu^ the UNDOUBTED RIGHT OF FREE
SUBJECTS, has lately not a little been invaded and prejudiced by Pressures,
the more grievous, because they have been pursued by imprisonment, contrary to
the Franchises of this Land, etc. which the Commons House proved by many
Statutes and Records in all Ages, in that Conference, to the full satisfaction
of the Lords House; since published in print.

The seventh is, 7.
The Vote of the Sea Canterburies Doom, p. 19. Diurnal Occurrences, p. 13.
whole House of Commons, 16. December, 1640. Nullo contradicente, entered in
their Journal, and printed in Diurnal Occurrences, p. 13. That the Canons made
in the Convocation ( Anno 1640.) ARE AGAINST THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM,
the Property and Liberty of the Subject, the Right of Parliament, and contained
diverse things tending to Faction and Sedition.

The eighth Authority is, 8.
Exact Collection, etc. p. 112, 113.
The Votes of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the security of Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, 15. Martii 1641. Ordered by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament to be forthwith printed and published (as they were then
by themselves, and afterward with other Votes and Orders) Resolved upon the
Question, nemine contradicente; That in case of extreme danger, and of his
Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the Militia, does
oblige the people, See Chap. 2. Proposition 3, 7
and ought to be obeyed, by THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THIS KINGDOM. A very vain,
false, absurd, and delusory Vote, if there be no such Law^, as some now affirm.

The ninth punctual Authority is, 9.
Exact Collection, p. 850, 854, 887, 888.
A second Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
concerning the Commission of Array; printed by their special Order of 12.
Januarii 1642. Wherein are these observeable passages. The main drift of the
answer is to maintain, That the King by the Common Law may grant such a
Commission of Array as this is, upon this ground, because it is for the defense
of the Kingdom: And, that the power which he has to grant it by the Common
Law, is not taken away by the Petition of Right, or any former Statute, but the
King notwithstanding any of them, may charge the Subjects for Defense of the
Kingdom, so as the charge imposed come not to himself, nor to his particular
advantage.

These grounds thus laid, extend not to the Commission of Array alone, but to
all other charges that his Majesty shall impose upon his Subjects, upon
pretense of Defense of the Kingdom; for there is the same reason of Law for any
other charge that is pretended for Defense, as for this. If his Majesty by the
Common Law may charge his Subjects to find Arms, and other things in the
Commission enjoined, because they are for Defense of the Kingdom; by the same
reason of Law, he may command his People to build Castles, Forts, and Bulworks,
and after to maintain them with Garrisons, Arms, and Victuals, at their own
charges: And by the same reason he may compel his Subjects to find Ships, and
furnish them with Men, Ammunition, and Victuals, and to find Soldiers pay,
coat and conduct-money; provide victuals for Soldiers, and all other things
NECESSARY FOR AN Do not the Army Officers now enforce them to all this without
a Parliament?
ARMY; these things being as necessary for Defense, as any thing that can be
done in execution of this Commission. And for that exposition of the Petition
of Right, and other Statutes therein noted, (if it should hold) does it not
overthrow, as well the Petition it self, as all other Laws that have been made
for the Subjects benefit against Taxes and other Charges, either in this or any
other Parliament?

These Positions thus laid down and maintained, DO SHAKE THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS
OF THE KINGDOM, (THE ANCIENT BIRTHRIGHT OF EVERY SUBJECT) both for THE
PROPERTY OF HIS GOODS, AND LIBERTY, OF HIS PERSON: Nay, they strike at the root
of Parliaments: What need his These Expostulations reach to those at White Hall
now, who presume to impose Taxes, Customs, Excises, and make b^nding Laws,
which no Kings there ever did in like nature, no^ their Counc^ls in any Age.
Majesty call Parliaments to provide for Defense of the Realm, when himself may
compel his Subjects to defend it without Parliaments? If these grounds should
hold, what need the Subjects grant Subsidies in Parliament for Defense of the
Kingdom in time of real danger, if the King for defense at any times, when he
shall only conceive or pretend danger, may impose Charges upon his Subjects
without their consent in Parliament?

Upon that which has been said in this and our former Declaration, we doubt
not but all indifferent men will be satisfied, that this Commission of Array is
full of danger and inconvenience to the Subjects of England, AND AGAINST THE
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE LAND, both for PROPERTY OF GOODS, AND LIBERTY OF
PERSON, etc. 2. As it is against THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM, so no
Statute makes it good, etc. And the Lords and Commons do upon the whole matter
here conclude, that they are very much aggrieved, that after so many
Declarations and solemn Protestations made by his Majesty to rule by the known
Laws of this Land, his Majesty by advice of his ill Counselors should be
persuaded to set such a Commission on foot, which is so clearly contrary TO THE
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THIS LAND, the Right of Property, and Liberty of the
Subject, contrary to former Resolutions of Parliament, and to the Petition of
Right.

I am certain the generality of the Nation are now as much and more aggrieved,
that some who were Parties to this Declaration, and others who have made as
many or more Declarations and Protestations as his Majesty ever did, to rule by
the known Laws of the Land, should since this, far exceed his Majesty in the
like, or more exorbitances in the Militia, Excises, Taxes, Impositions,
Imprisonments, arbitrary extravagant proceedings, and capital executions in
new- erected Courts of Injustice, as diametrically contrary as the Kings
Commissions of Array, to the Fundamental Laws of the Land (four times together
so styled and insided on, as such, in this one Declaration of both Houses) the
Right of Property of the Subject, contrary to former Resolutions, and the
Petition of Right; yea (which is most abominable) to their own Declarations,
Remonstrances, Votes, Protestations, Vows, Solemn Leagues and Covenants in
Parliament, to their own eternal Infamy, as well as the peoples intolerable
oppression and Slavery, who thereupon may justly conclude and protest against
them, as both Houses did in the close of that Declaration against the Array,
viz* Exact Collection, p. 888.
And the Lords and Commons do and shall adhere to their former Votes and
Resolutions, That all those that are Actors in putting of this Commission of
Array in execution, shall be esteemed disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom,
and the Properties and Liberties of the Subject.

The tenth evidence is, 10.
A Collection of all (...) Order^ (...) and Declarations of Parliament, p. 451,
452, 457, 458.
the Vote and Letter of both Houses of Parliament sent to his Majesty at Oxford
9. March 1643. in answer to his Majesty's of the third of March, wherein there
is this passage: We the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England, etc. have resolved, with the concurrent advice and consent of the
Commissioner^ of Scotland, to represent to your Majesty in all hum^^ity and
plainness as follows; That this present Parliament convened according to the
known and FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE KINGDOM (the continuance whereof is
established by a Law consented to by your Majesty) is in effect denied to be a
Parliament, etc. And hereupon we think our selves bound to let your Majesty
know, That since the Yet forcibly dissolved by the Army, and some new in Power,
against their Commissions, Oaths, Trusts, Protestation, Covenant, and an Act of
Parliament for their continuance; who may do well to peruse this (...). See
Chap. 2. Proposition 6. 7.
continuance of this Parliament is settled by a Law, (which, as all other Laws
of your Kingdom, your Majesty is sworn to maintain, as we are sworn to our
Allegiance to your Majesty, these Obligations being reciprocal) we must in
duty, and accordingly are resolved, with our lives and fortunes, to defend and
preserve the just Rights and full Power of this Parliament: To which the Earl
of Essex ( then General) by both Houses direction, in his Letter to the Earl of
Forth, Jan. 30. 1643. adds this Corollary, My Lord, the maintenance of the
Parliament of England, and the Privileges thereof, is that for which we are
all resolved to spend our blood, as being THE FOUNDATION WHEREON ALL OUR LAWS
and LIBERTIES ARE BUILT: Which both the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, in their Declaration of 23. Martii 1643. touching their proceedings
upon his Majesty's Letter concerning a Treaty of Peace; ( wherein this Earls
former Letter is recited) thus second: The Parliament of England is the only
Basis, the chief Support and Pillar of our Laws and Liberties, etc. And if
notwithstanding all these Obligations, the King shall How much more ^h^n, if
the Army, o^ Army Officers shall do^^, without question or exemplary punishm^nt
again and again, and i^stifie it still in (...)?
at his pleasure dissolve this Parliament, the Kingdom is not only deprived of
the present, but made incapable of enjoying the benefit of any future
Parliament or Laws, any longer then shall stand with the will and pleasure of
the King, and consequently THE FUNDAMENTALS OF ALL OUR LAWS and GOVERNMENT ARE
SUBVERTED. Let the Parliament-dissolving Officers, Army, and their Confederates
seriously ponder this, with all who shall hereafter sit in Parliamen^, consider
it in the first place.

The eleventh is, ^1.
the A Collection, etc. p. 504.
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, 13. Junii 1644. for the Forces raised
in the County of Salop, which begins thus: The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, taking into their serious considerations, the great oppressions
under which the Inhabitants of the County of Salop, by reason of insupportable
Taxes, etc. and the present condition of the County, by reason of the great
number of Irish Rebels that have invaded it, and joined with Papists and other
ill-affected Persons now in those parts, does threaten the extirpation of the
Protestant Religion, and the s^b^e^sion of THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS and GOVERNMENT
OF THE KINGDOM. For prevention whereof, etc.

The twelfth is A Collection, etc. p. 877, 878, 879.
A Declaration of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament 17. 12.
Aprilis 1646. Of their true intentions concerning the AN^^IENT and FUNDAMENTAL
GOVERNMENT OF THE KINGDOM, securing the people against ALL ARBITRARY
GOVERNMENT, etc. wherein they complain, That the Enemy being in despair to
accomplish his designs by War, do misrepresent our intentions in the use we
intended to make of the great Successes God has given us, and the happy
opportunity to settle peace and truth in the three Kingdoms; to beget a belief
that we now desire to exceed or swerve from our first Aims and Principles in
the Undertaking of this War, and to recede from the Solemn League and Covenant,
and Treaties between the two Kingdoms; and that we would prolong these
uncomfortable Troubles, and b^eeding Distractions, IN And is not this now
proved a real exper^^mental (...), in some of (...) Remonst^^s, to their shame?
ORDER TO ALTER THE FUNDAMENTAL CONSTITUTION and FRAME OF THIS KINGDOM, to
leave all Government in the Church loose and unsettled, and our selves to
exercise THE SAME ARBITRARY POWER OVER THE PERSONS and ESTATES OF THE SUBJECTS,
which this present Parliament has thought fit to abolish, by taking away the
Star Chamber, High Commission, and other Arbitrary Courts, and the exorbitant
Power of the Council Table: ( all which we have seen since experimentally
verified in every particular in the highest d^gree, notwithstanding this
Declaration, by some in late and present Power, notwithstanding this
Publication:) All which being seriously considered by us, etc. We do declare,
THAT OUR TRUE and REAL INTENTIONS ARE, and OUR ENDEAVOR SHALL BE, to settle
Religion in the purity thereof, And can most of the (...) monst^^ns (...) or
present power, (...) joy this (...) truth or really? And must not they be
utterly asham^ed, confounded before God and men, when they consider how they
have dissembled, prev^ri^ated with God and men herein in each particular?
TO MAINTAIN THE ANCIENT andFUNDAMENTAL GOVERNMENT OF THIS KINGDOM, TO PRESERVE
THE RIGHTS and LIBERTIES

In the Walsingha^ Stow, Hollinshed, Speed, Grafton, Baker An. 5. R. 2. John
Stows Survay of London. p. 89. 10 103. Mr. St. John's Argument at Law, at
Straffords Attainder, p. 14
fifth year of King Richard the second, the vulgar Rabble of people and
Villains, in Kent, Essex, Sussex, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire and other Countries,
under the Conduct of Wat Tyler, Jack Straw and other Rebels, assembling
together in great multitudes, resolved by force and violence to abrogate the
Law of villenage, with all other Laws they disliked, formerly settled; to burn
all the Records, kill and behead all the Judges, Justices, and men of Law of
all sorts, which they could get into their hands; to burn and destroy the Innes
of Court, (as they did then the new Temple, where the apprentices of the Law
lodged, burning their Monuments and Records of Law there found) to alter the
tenures of Lands, to devise new Laws of their own, by which the Subjects should
be governed, to change the ancient Hereditary, Monarchical Government of the
Realm, and to elect petty elective Tyrannies and Kingdoms to themselves in
every Shire: ( a project eagerly prosecuted by some Anarchicall Anabaptists,
and Jesuits, Levellers, very lately: and though withal they intended to
destroy the King at last, and all the Nobles too, when they had gotten
sufficient power, yet at first to cloak their intentions for the present, they
took an Oath of all they met; Quod Regi and communibus fidelitatem servarent,
that they should keep Allegiance and faith to the King and Commons, this their
resolution and attempt thus to alter and subvert the Laws and Government, upon
full debate in the Parliament of 5 R. 2. n. 30, 31. was declared to be HIGH
TREASON against the King and against the Law; for which diverse of the chief
actours in this Treasonable Design were condemned and executed, as Traitors, in
several places; and the rest enforced to a public submission, and then
pardoned.

2. In the Stow, Holinshed, Sp^ed, Graften, Baker in XI. 21. R. 2. and 1. H. 4.
Satutes at large, 11. and 21 R. 2. and 1. H. 4 M. St. ^ohns Speech concerning
the shipmony Judges, p. 28. to 37. And Argument at Law, at Straffords Attainder.
Parliament XL. R. 2. ( as appears by the Parliament Rolls and printed Statutes
at large) three Prive Councillors, the Archbishop of York, the Duke of
Ireland, and Earl of Suffolk; the Bishop of Exeter the Kings Confessor, five
Knights, six Judges, (whereof Sir Robert Tresilian Chief Justice was one) Blake
of the Kings Council at Law, Vsk and others, were impeached and condemned of
High Treason, some of them executed as Traitors, the rest banished, their Lands
and goods forfeited, and none to endeavor to procure their pardon, under pain
of Felony; for endeavoring to overthrow a Commission for the good of the
Kingdom, and contrary to an Act of Parliament of force of arms and Opinions in
Law delivered to the King, tending to subvert the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm, overthrow the Power, Privileges, and proceedings of Parliament, and
betray (not all the house of Lords, but only) some of the Lords of Parliament,
which Judgment being afterward reversed in the forced, and packed Parliament
of 21. R. 2. was reconfirmed in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. c. 3. 4, 5. and the
Parliament of 21. R. 2. totally repealed, and adnulled for ever, and has so
continued.

3. In the Mr. St. John at Law against Straffords Attainder. p. 13. 14, 17.
Parliament of 17 R. 2. n. 20. and Pas. 17. R. 2. B. RS. Ror. 16. Sir Thomas
Talbot was accused and found guilty of High Treason for conspiring the death of
the Dukes of Gloucester, Lancaster and other Peers, who maintained the
Commission confirmed by act of Parliament, X. R. 2. and assembling people in a
warlike manner in the County of Chester, for the effecting of it, in
destruction of the Estates of the Realm; and OF THE LAWS OF THE KINGDOM.

4. In the 29. year of King Henry the sixth, Jack Cade, under a pretense to
REFORM, alter, and abrogate some Laws, Purveyances and extortions importable to
the Commons (whereupon he was called JOHN AMEND ALL) drew a great multitude of
Kentish people to Black Heath in a warlike manner to effect it: in the
Parliament of 29. H. 6. c. 1. this was adjudged High Treason in him and his
Accomplices; by act of Parliament: and the Parliament of 31. H. 6. c. 1. made
this memorable Act against him, and his Imitators insucceeding ages; worth
serious perusal and consideration by all who tread in his footsteps and
over-act him in his Treasons.

" Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious, and errant FALSE
TRAITOR, John Cade, calling himself sometimes Mortimer, sometime Captain of
Kent, (which Name, Fame, Acts and Feats, to be removed out of the speech and
mind of every faithful Christian man, perpetually,) falsely and traitorously
purposing and imagining the perpetual destruction of the KINGS PERSON and
FINAL SVBVERSION OF THIS REALM, taking upon him And have not others of late
assumed to themselves, more Royal power than he? resolved to be Treason by 21.
E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 15.
ROYAL POWER, and gathering to him the Kings people in great number, BY FALSE,
SUBTLE, IMAGINED LANGUAGE, and seditiously made a stirring Rebellion, and
insurrection, UNDER COLOVR OF JUSTICE FOR REFORMATION OF THE LAWS OF THE SAID
KING, robbing, slaying, spoiling a great part of his faithful people: Our said
Sovereign Lord the King, considering the premises with many other, which were
more odious to remember, by advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and
Temporal, and at THE REQUEST OF THE COMMONS, and by authority aforesaid, has
ordained and established, that the said John Cade shall be had named and
declared A FALSE TRAITOR to our said Sovereign Lord the King; Nota.
and that all His Tyranny, Acts, Facts, false Opinions, shall be voyded,
abated, adnulled, destroyed, and put out of remembrance for ever. And that all
indictments in time coming, in like case under power of Tyranny, Rebellion and
stirring had, shall be of no regard, nor effect, but void in Law: and all the
Petitions To wit by Cade and his confederates for the alteration of the Laws,
etc.
delivered to the said King in his last Parliament holden at Westminster, the
sixth day of November, the 29. of his Reign, against his mind, by him not
agreed, shall be taken and put in oblivion out of remembrance, undone, voided,
adnulled and destroyed, for ever, as a thing purposed against God and his
Conscience, and against his Royal estate and pre-eminence, and also
DISHONOVRABLE and UNREASONABLE.

" 5. In the Sea Mr. St. John's Argument against Strafford, p. 178. Halls
Chronicle and Hollinshed.
8 year of King Henry the 8. William Bell, and Thomas Lacy, in the County of
Kent conspired with Thomas Cheyney (the Hermit of the Queen of Fairies) TO
OVERTHROW THE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE REALM: for effecting whereof, they with
200. more met together, and concluded upon a cause or raising greater forces in
Kent, and the adjacent Shires, this was adjudged high Treason, and some of them
executed as Traitors. Moreover, it Cooks 3. institutes, p. 9. 10.
was resolved by all the Judges of in the reign of Henry 8. that an
Insurrection against the Statute of Laborers, or for the inhansing of Salaries
and wages was TREASON, a levying war against the King, BECAUSE IT WAS GENERALLY
AGAINST THE KINGS LAW, and the offenders took upon them THe REFORMATION
THEREOF, which Subjects by gathering of power ought not to do.

Cooks 4. Institutes, chapter 8. p. 89. to 96.
6. On December 1. in the 21. year of King Henry the 8. Sir Thomas Moore, Lord
Chancellor of England, with 14. more, Lords of the Privy Council, John
Fitz-James, Chief Justice of England, and Sir Anthony Fitzherhert, one of the
Judges of the Common Pleas, exhibited sundry Articles of impeachment to King
Henry the 8. against Cardinal Wolsy: That he had by diverse and many sundry
ways and fashions committed High treason, and NOTABLE GRIEVOUS OFFENSES,
misusing, Altering, and subverting the order of his Graces Laws, and
otherwise; contrary to his high Honor, Prerogative, Crown, Estate and Dignity
Royal; to the inestimable great hinderance, diminution and decay of the
uniuersall Wealth of this his Graces Realm. The Articles are 43. in number: The
20, 21, 26, 30, 35, 37, 42, 43. contain, his illegal, arbitrary practices and
proceedings to the subversion of the due course and order of his Graces Laws,
to the undoing of a great number of his loving people. Whereupon they pray.
Please therefore your most excellent Majesty of your excellent goodness
toward the Weal of this your Realm, and Subjects of the same, to see such
order and direction upon the said Lord Cardinal, As may be to terrible example
of other, to beware to offend your Grace, and your Laws hereafter: And that he
be so provided for that he never have any Power, Jurisdiction or Authority
hereafter, to trouble, vex, or impoverish the Common wealth of this your Realm,
as he hoth done heretofore, to the great hurt and damage of every man almost,
High and low. See Speed, Holished, Grafton, Stow, Antiquitates Ecclesiae, Brit.
p. 378. and 379. and Goodwin in his life time.
His poisoning himself prevented his judgment for these his Practices.

M. St. John's Argument against Strafford
7. The Statute of 1. Marie c. 12. Enacts that if 12. or more shall endeavor By
force to alter any of the Laws or Statutes of the Kingdom; the offender shall
from the time therein limited be adjudged ONLY AS A FELON: whereas it was
Treason before; but this Act continuing but till the next Parliament, and then
expiring, the offense remains Treason, as before.

Cook 3 Inst. c. 1. 9, 10. and M. St. John's Argument at Law, against Strafford
p. 15, 16.
8. In the 39. of Queen Elisabeth, diverse in the County of Oxford consulted
together, to go from House to House, in that County, and from thence to London
and other parts, to excite them to take arms for the throwing down of
enclosures throughout the Realm; nothing more was prosecuted, nor Assemblies
made; yet in Easter Term 39. Elisabeth, it was resolved by all the judges of
England (who met about the case) That this was High Treason, and a levying
War against the Queen, because it was to throw down all enclosures throughout
the Kingdom, to which they could pretend no right, and that the end of it was,
to OVERTHROW THE LAWS AND STATUTES for Enclosures. Whereupon BRADSHAW and
BURTON (two of the principal offenders) were condemned and executed at
Aiciston Hill in Oxfordshire, where they intended their first meeting.

See the Journals of both Houses, and Act for his Attainder, Mr. Pyms
Declaration upon the whole matter of the Charge of High Treason against him,
April the 12. 1641. M. St. John's Argument at Law at his Attainder, and Diurnal
Occurrences.
9. To come nearer to our present times and case. In the last Parliament of King
Charles, Anno 1640. 1641. The whole house of Commons impeached Thomas Earl of
Strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland of High Treason, amongst other Articles, for
this crime especially (wherein all the other centred,) That he has TREASONABLY
ENDEAVORED by his Words, Actions and Counsels, to SUBVERT THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS
OF ENGLAND and IRELAND, and introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government.
This the whole Parliament declared and adjudged to be High Treason, in and by
their votes, and a special Act of Parliament for his Attainder; for which he
was condemned and soon after executed on Tower Hill, as a Traitor to the King
and Kingdom, May 22. 1641.

See the Commons and Lords Iournals, his printed impeachment, Mr. Pyms Speech
thereat, Canbuties Doom. p. 25, 26, 2^ 38, 40*
10. The whole House of Commons the same Parliament impeached William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury of HIGH TREASON; in these very terms, February 6. 1640.

First, That he has traitorously endeavored to subvert Fundamental Laws and
Government of this Kingdom of England, and instead thereof to introduce An
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law: See chap. 2. Proposition 1.
"and he to that end has wickedly, and TRAITOROUSLY advised his Majesty, that
he might at his own will and pleasure, L^vy and take money of his Subjects
without their consent in Parliament, and and this he affirmed was warrantable
by the Law of God.

Secondly, He has for the better accomplishment of that his Traiterous design,
advised and procured Sermons and other Discourses, to be preached, printed and
published, in which the Authority of Parliaments, and the force of the Laws of
this Kingdom have been denied, and absolute and unlimited Power over the
persons and estates of his Majesty's Subjects maintained and defended, not
only in the King, but in himself and other Bishops against the Law.

Thirdly, He has by Letters, Messages, Threats and promises, and by diverse
other ways to Judges, and other Ministers of Justice, interrupted, perverted,
and at other times by means aforesaid has endeavored to interrupt and pervert
the course of Justice in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster and other Courts,
TO THE SUBVERSION OF THE LAWS OF THIS KINGDOM, whereby sundry of his Majesty's
Subjects have been stopped in their just suits, deprived of their lawful Rights,
and subjected to his Tyrannical will, to their ruin and destruction.

Fourthly, That he has traitorously endeavored to corrupt the other Courts of
Justice, by a vising and procuring his Majesty to sell places of Judicature,
and other offices, CONTRARY TO THE LAWS and CUSTOMS in that behalf.

Fifthly, He has TRAITOROUSLY caused a Book of Canons to be compiled and
published, without any lawful warrant and Authority in that behalf; in which
pretended Canons many matters are contained, contrary to the Kings Prerogative,
to the fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to the Rights of
Parliament, to the Property, and Liberty of the Subject, and matters tending to
sedition and of dangerous consequence; and to the establishing of a vast,
unlawful, presumptuous power in himself and his Successors etc.

Seventhly, That he has traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true
Religion BY LAW ESTABLISHED; and instead thereof to set up Popish Religion and
Idolatry, And to that end has declared, and maintained in Speeches and Printed
Books, diverse Popish Doctrines, and opinions, contrary to to the Articles of
Religion, ESTABLISHED BY LAW. He has urged and enjoined diverse Popish, and
Superstitious Ceremonies WITHOUT ANY WARRANT OF LAW; and has cruelly
persecuted those who have opposed the same, by corporal punishments, and
imprisonments; and most unjustly vexed others who refused to conform thereunto
by Eccclesiasticall Censures, Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation and
Degradation, CONTRARY TO THE LAWS OF THIS KINGDOM.

13. He did by his own authority and power contrary to Law procure sundry of
his Majesty's Subjects, and enforced the Clergy of this Kingdom to contribute
toward the maintenance of the war against the Scots.

That to preserve himself from being questioned for these and other his
Traiterous Courses, he has labored to Subvert the Rights of Parliament, and
the ancient Course of Parliamentary Proceedings, and by false and malicious
slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments.

"

All which being proved against him at his Trial, were after solemn Argum^nt
by Mr. Samuel Brown in behalf of the Commons House proved; and soon after
adjudged, to be High Treason at the Common Law, by both Houses of Parliament;
and so declared in the Ordinance for his Attainder: for which he was condemned
and beheaded as a Traitor against the King, Law and Kingdom, on Tower hill,
January 10. 1644.

11. In the Sea the Commons and Lords Journals, Durnal Occurrences p. 15, 16
19. 37. 191. to 264. and Mr. St. John's Speech at a conscience of both Houses of
Parliament concerning shi^mony and these Judges. Together with the Speeches of
Mr. Hide, Mr. Walker, Mr. P^erpoint, Mr. Denzill Hollis, at their impeachments
^uly 16. 1641. aggravating their offenses in Diurnall Occurrences and Speeches.
same Parliament, December 21. Jan. 14. February 11. 1640. and July 6. 1641.
Sir John Finch, then Lord Keeper, chief Justice Bramston, Judge Berkly, Judge
Crawly, Chief Baron Davenport, Baron Weston, and Baron Turnour, were accused
and impeached by the House of Commons, by several Articles transmitted to the
Lords, OF HIGH TREASON, for that they had Traitorously and wickedly endeavored
to subvert the Fundamental Laws, and est^blished Government of the Realm of
ENGLAND, and instead thereof to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law; which they had declared by Traitorous and wicked words,
opinions, judgment, and more especially in this their extrajudiciall opinion
subscribed by them in the case of Ship Money, viz. We are of opinion, that when
the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole
kingdom in danger; Your Majesty may by Writ under the Great Seal of England
(without consent in Parliament) command all your Subjects of this your
Kingdom, See chapter 2. Proposition 1.
at their charge to provide and furnish such a number of Ships, with Men,
Victual and Ammunition, and for such time as your Majesty shall think fit, for
the Defense and safeguard of the Kingdom, from such danger and peril. And we
are of opinion, that in such case, your Majesty is the sole Judge both of the
danger, and when, and how, the same is to be prevented and avoided. And
likewise for arguing and giving judgment accordingly in Master John Hempdens
case, in the Exchequer Chamber, in the point of Ship money in April 1638.
which said Opinions are Destructive to the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, the
subjects Right of Propriety, and contrary to former Resolutions in Parliament,
and the Petition of Right; as the words of their several Impeachments run. Sr.
John Finch fled the Realm to preserve his head on his Shoulders; some others of
them d^ed through fear, to prevent the danger soon after their Impeachments;
and the rest put to Fines, who were less peccant.

12. Mr. John Pim, in his Declaration upon the whole matter of the Charge of
High Treason against Thomas Earl of Strafford, April 12. 1641. before a
Committee of both Houses of Parliament in Westminster Hall; printed and
published by Order of the House of Commons; proves his endeavor to subvert the
Fundamental Law of England, and to introduce an Arbitrary Power; to be High
Treason, and an offense very heinous in the nature, and mischievous in the
effects thereof; which (says he) will best appear, if it be examined by that
universal and supreme Law, Salus Populi: the element of all laws, out of which
they are derived: the end of all Laws, to which they are designed, and in which
they are perfected.

1. 'It is an offense comprehending all other offenses. Here you shall find
several Treasons, Murders, Rapins, Oppressions, Perjuries. There is in this
Crime, a Seminary of all evils, hurtful to a State; and if you consider the
Reasons of it, it must needs be so. The Law, is that which puts a difference
betwixt Good and Evil: betwixt just and unjust. Nota.
If you take away the Law, all things will fall into Confusion; every man will
become a law to himself, which in the depraved condition of humane nature must
needs produce man great enormities. And are they not so now?
Lust will become a Law, and Envy will become a Law; Covetousness and Ambition
will become Laws; and what Dictates, what decisions such laws will produce, may
easily be discerned in the late Government of Ireland, (and England too since
this.) The Law has a power to prevent, to restrain, to repair evils: without
this all kind of mischiefs and distempers will break in upon a State. It is the
Law that does the King to the Allegiance and Service of his people: it intitles
the People to the Protection and Justice of the King, etc. The Law is the
Boundary, the measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the peoples Liberty,
whiles these move in their own O^b, they are a support and security to one
another: but if these Bounds be so removed that they enter into contestation
and conflict, one of these mischiefs must needs ensue. If the Prerogative of
the King overwhelm the Liberty of the people, it will be turned into Tyranny:
If Liberty undermine the Prerogative it will turn into Anarchy. The Law is the
safeguard, the custody of all private interests, your honors, your lives, your
liberties, and estates are all in the keeping of the Law, without this every
man has a like Right to any thing: and this is the condition into which the
Irish were brought by the Earl of Strafford, (and the English by others who
condemned him.) And the reason which he gave for it, has more mischief than
the thing it self: THEY ARE A CONQUERED NATION (Let those who now say the same
of England, as well as Scotland and Ireland, consider and observe what
follows,) There cannot be a word more pregnant and fruitful IN TREASON, then
that word is. There are few Nations in the world, that have not been conquered,
and no doubt but the Conqueror may give what Laws he please, to those that are
conquered. But if the succeeding Acts and agreements do not limit and restrain
that Right, what people can be secure? England has been conquered and Wales
has been conquered; and by this reason will be in little better case than
Ireland. If the King by the Right of a Conqueror give Laws to his people,
shall not the people by the same reason be restored to the Right of the
conquered, To recover their Liberty if they can? What can be more hurtful,
more pernicious than such Propositions as these?

2. It is dangerous to the Kings person: and dangerous to his Crown: It is apt
to cherish Ambition, usurpation and Oppression in great men: and to beget
Sedition, Discontent in the people, and both these have been, and in reason
must ever be causes of great Trouble and Alterations to Prince and State. If
the Histories of those Eastern Countries be perused, where Princes order their
Affairs according to the mischievous Principles of the Earl of Strafford, LOOSE
and ABSOLVED FROM ALL RULES OF GOVERNMENT; they will be found to be frequent in
combustions, full of Massacres, and of the tragical end of Princes. If any man
shall look into our own Stories in the times, Nota.
when the Laws were most neglected, he shall find them full of Commotions, of
Civil Distempers: whereby the Kings that then reigned were always kept in want
and distress, the people consumed with CIVIL WARS: and by such wicked
Counsels as these, some of our Princes have been brought to such miserable
ends, As Note this all whole commons-house Opinion then.
no honest heart can remember without horror and earnest Prayer, that it may
never be so again.

3. As it is dangerous to the Kings person and Crown, so it is in other
respects very prejudicial to his Majesty, in honor, profit and greatness
(which he there proves at large, as you may there read at leisure) and yet
these are the Guildings and Paintings, that are put upon such Counsels: These
are for your Honor, for your Service.

4. It is inconsistent with the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a Nation.
It is destructive to Justice, the mother of Peace: to Industry, the Spring of
Wealth; to Valor, which is the active virtue, whereby the prosperity of a
Nation can only be procured, confirmed, and enlarged. It is not only apt to
take a way Peace, and so entangle the Nation with wars, but does corrupt
Peace, and powrs such a malignity into it, as produces the effects of War:
both to the Is not this an experimental truth now.
NOBILITY and others having as little security of THEIR PERSONS OR ESTATES, in
this peaceable time, as if the Kingdom had been under the fury and rage of
war. And as for Industry and Valor, who will take pain^ for that, which when
he has gotten, is not his own? or who fights for that wherein he has no other
interest, but such as is subject to the will of another? etc. Shall it be
Treason to embase the Kings Coin; though but a piece of twelve pence or six
pence, and must it not needs be the effect of GREATER TREASON to And were they
ever so base, cowardly, slavish as now?
embase the Spirits of his Subjects, and to set a stamp and Character of
Servitude upon them, whereby they shall be disabled to do any thing for the
Service of the King or Commonwealth?

5. In times of sudden danger, by the Invasion of an enemy, it will disable his
Majesty to preserve himself and his Subjects from that danger. When war
threatens a Kingdom, by the coming of a foreign enemy, it is no time then to
discontent the people, to make them weary of the PRESENT GOVERNMENT, and more
inclinable to a change. The Supplies which are to come in this way, will be
unready, uncertain; there can be no assurance of them, no dependence upon them,
either for time or proportion. And if some money be gotten in such a way, the
Distractions, the Divisions, Distempers, which this cause is apt to produce,
will be more prejudicial to the public safety, than the Supply can be
advantageous to it.

6. This crime is contrary to the Pact and Covenant between the King and his
people; by mutual agreement and stipulation, confirmed by OATH on both sides.

7. It is an Offense that is contrary to the ends of Government.

1. To prevent Oppressions; to Was ever their power, violence so unlimited,
unbounded in all Kinds as now?
limit and restrain the excessive power and violence of great Men: to open
passages of Justice with indifference toward all.

2. To preserve men in their Estates, to secure them in their Lives, and
Liberties.

3. That virtue should be cherished, and vice suppressed: but where Laws are
subverted, and arbitrary and unlimited power set up; a way is open not only
for the security, but for the Advancement and Encouragement of evil. Such men
as are Is it not most true of late and still?
aptest for the execution and maintenance of this power are only capable of
Preferment, and others, will not he Instruments of any unjust Commands, who
make conscience to do any thing against the Law of the Kingdom, Nota.
and Liberties of the Subject, are not only not passable for employment; but
SUBJECT TO MUCh JEALOUSY and DANGER, (Is not this their Condition of late and
present times? expertus loquor.)

4. That all Accidents and events, all Counsels, and Designs should be improved
to the public good. But this arbitrary power is apt to dispose all to the
maintenance of it self. And is it not so now?

8. The Treasons of Subersions of the Laws, violation of Liberties can never
be good or justifiable by any circumstance or occasion, being evil in their own
nature, how specious or good soever they be pretended. He alleges it was a
time of GREAT NECESSITY and DANGER, Nota.
when such Counsels were necessary FOR THE PRESERVATION OF THE STATE, (the Plea
since, and now used by others, who condemned him:) If there were any NECESSITY
IT WAS OF HIS OWN MAKING. He by his evil Counsel had brought the King ( as
others the Kingdom since) into a necessity; and by no Rules of Justice can be
allowed to gain this advantage to his Justification; which is A GREAT PART OF
HIS OFFENSE.

9. As this is Treason in the nature of it, so it does exceed all other
Treasons in this; that in the Design and endeavor of the Author, it was to be
A CONSTANT and PERMANENT TREASON; a standing, perpetual Treason, which would
have been in continual Act, not determined within one time or age, but
transmitted to Posterity, even from Generation to Generation. And are not
others Treasons of late times such, proclaimed such, in and by their own
Printed Papers, and therein exceeding Straffords?

10. As it is a crime Odious in the nature of it, so it is odious in the
Judgment and estimation of the Law. TO ALTER THE SETTLED FRAME AND CONSTITUTION
OF GOVERNMENT IN ANY STATE. (Let those consider it who are guilty of it in the
highest Degree, beyond Strafford, Canterbury, or the Shipmony Judges in our own
State) The Laws whereby all parts of a Kingdom are preserved, should be very
vain and defective, if they had not a Power to secure and preserve themselves.
The Forfeitures inflicted for Treason by our Law, are of Life, Honor and
Estate, even all that can be forfeited: and this Prisoner, although he should
And others, as well as he, of far inseriour place and Estate.
pay all these Forfeitures, will still be a Debtor to the Common wealth.
Nothing can be more equal, then that he should perish by the Justice of the
Law, which he would have subverted. Neither will this be a New way of blood.
There are marks enough to trace this Law to the very Original of this
Kingdom. And if it has not been put in execution, as he alleges this 240
years; it was not for want of Law, but that all that time had not bread a man
But have not our times bred men much bolder then he, since this Sp^ech was
made, and he executed.
bold enough to commit such crimes as these: which is a circumstance much
aggravating his Offense, and making him no less liable to punishment, because
he is THE Since he has many followe^s.
ONLY MAN, that in so long a time has ventured UPON SUCH A TREASON AS THIS.'



Thus far M. John Pym; in the Name and by the Order and Authority of the whole
Commons House in Parliament, which I wish all those, who by their Words, Actions,
Counsels (and printed Publications too, have traitorously endeavored to subvert
the Fundamental Laws, Liberties of England and Ireland, and to introduce an
arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law, as much as ever Strafford
did, and out stripped him therein, (even since his execution) in all
particulars, for which he was beheaded; would now seriously lay to heart, and
speedily reform, lest they equal or exceed him in conclusion, in Capital
punishments for the same, or endless, Hellish Torments.

The next Authority I shall produce in point is, The speech and Declaration of
Mr. Oliver St. John at a Conference of both Houses of Parliament, concerning
Shipmony upon Judge Finches Impeachment of High Treason, January 14. 1640.
printed by the Commons Order, London, 1641. wherein he declares the sense of
the Commons. p. 12. etc. ' That by the Judges Opinions (forecited) concerning
Shipmony THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS OF THE REALM CONCERNING OUR PROPERTY and OUR
PERSONS ARE SHAKEN. Whose Treasonable Offense herein, he thus aggravates. p.
20. etc. The Judges as is declared in the Parliament of 11. R. 2. are the
Executors of the Statutes, and of the Judgments and Ordinances of Parliament.
They have here made themselves the Have none done so since them.
EXECVTIONERS OF THEM; they have endeavored THE DESTRVCTION OF THE FVNDAMENTALS
OF OUR LAWS and LIBERTIES. Holland in the Low Countries lies under the Sea: the
Superficies of the Land, is lower than the Superficies of the Sea. It is
Capital therefore for any man to cut the Banks, because they defend the
Country. Besides our own, See chap. 2.
even Foreign Authors, as Comines observes, Proposition 1.
That the Statute DE TALLAGIO, and the other old Laws are the Sea walls and
Banks, which keep the Commons from the innundation of the Prerogative. These
Aave not other Pioners and Jasses done the like?
Pioners have not only undermined these Banks, but they have levelled them
even with the ground. It one that was known to be Hostis Patriae, had done
this, though the Damage be the same, yet the Guilt is less; but the
Con^ervatores Riparum, the overseers entrusted with the Defense of these Banks,
for them to destroy them; the breach of Trust aggravates, nay alters the nature
of the offense. Breach of Trust though in a private Person, and in the least
things, is odious amongst all men: much more in a public Person, in things of
great and public concernment, because This is now grown a mere Paradox.
GREAT TRUST BINDS THE PARTY TRUSTED TO GREATEST CARE AND FIDELITY.

It is TREASON in the Constable of Dover Castle to deliver the Keys to the
known enemies of the Kingdom, because the Castle is the Key of the Kingdom:
whereas if the housekeeper of a private person, deliver possession to his
Adversary, it is a crime scarce punishab^e by Law. The What are they now of
late times of public Changes?
Judges under his Majesty, are the Persons trusted with the Laws and in them
with the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the whole Kingdom. This Trust of all
we have, is primarily from his Majesty, and See 27 H. 8. c. 24. 26. Magna
Charta. c. 12. 29 32 H. 3. c. 1. 3, 5. 9, 20 3 E. 1 c. 44. 45, 46. 13 E. 1. 10,
12 30 31. 35, 39. 44. 45. 25 E 1. c. 1, 2. 27 E., 1. c. 2, 3. 34 E. 1. c. 6. 12
E. 2. c. 6. 2 E. 3. c. 3. 14 E. 3. c. 10. 16. Rastal Justices.
in him delegated to the Judges. His Majesty at his Coronation is bound by his
Oath TO EXECUTE JUSTICE TO HIS PEOPLE ACCORDING TO THE LAWS, thereby to assure
the people of the faithful performance of his Great Trust: His Majesty again,
as he trusts the Judges with the performance of this part of his Oath; so does
he likewise exact another Oath of them, for their due execution of Justice to
the people, according to the Laws: hereby the Judges stand entrusted with this
part of his Majesty's Oath. If therefore the Judges shall do wittingly against
the Law, they do not only break their own Oaths, and therein the Common Faith
and Trust of the whole Kingdom, but do as much as in them lies, sp^rce and
blemish the sacred Person of his Majesty with the odious and hateful sin of
Was it ever so freque ^t a sia as now in all sorts of late Judges, Officers
Subjects?
Perjury.

My Lords, the heinousness of this offense is most legible in the Do none
deserve as severe now?
severe punishment which former ages have inflicted upon those Judges, who have
broken any part of their Oaths wittingly, though in things not so dangerous to
the Subject, as in the case in question. See Cooks 3. Instill. p. 146, 147* and
f. 133 Hollirshed p. 284, 285. Speeds History p. 651. S^ow, Walsingham, Daniel
in 18 Ed. 1.
Sir Thomas Wayland, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 17 E. 1. was attainted
of Felony for taking bribes, and his Lands and Goods forfeited, as appears in
the Pleas of Parliament, 18 E. 1. and he was banished the Kingdom, as unworthy
to live in the State against which he had so much offended. See Cgoks 3.
Instit. p. 145.
Sir William Thorp Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in Edward the thirds time,
having of five persons received five several Bribes, which in all amounted to
one hundred pounds, was for this alone, adjudged to be hanged, and all his
Goods and Lands forfeited: The reason of the Judgment is entered in the Roll
in these words. Quia praedictus Wilielmus Have none of this Name, or of his
Function since done the like in an higher degree?
Thorp qui Sa cramentum Domini Regis erga populum suum habuit ad custodiendum,
fugit malitiose falso and rebelliter, quantum in ipso fuit. There is a notable
Declaration in that Judgment, that this Judgment was not to be drawn into
example, against any other officers, who should break their Oaths, but only
against those, qui praedictum Sacramentum fecerunt, and fregerunt, and Let
Custodes Legum and Lib^rtatum Angliae remember it.
habent Leges Angliae ad custodiendum: That is only to the Judges Oaths, who
have the Laws entrusted unto them. This Judgment was given 24 E. 3. The next
year in Parliament 25 E. 3. Number. 10. it was debated in Parliament, whether this
Judgment was legal? Et nullo contradicente, it was declared, TO BE JUST AND
ACCORDING TO THE LAW: and that the Let the Repater and others consider it.
same Judgment may be given in time to come upon the like occasion. This case
is in point, That it is death for any Judge wittingly, to break his ^ath in any
part of it. This oath of Thorp is entered in the Roll, and is the same verbatim
with the Judges Oath in 18 E. 3. and is the same which the Judges now take.
(And let those who have taken the same Oath, remember and apply this President,
left others do it for them.)

Your Lordships will give me leave to observe the differences between that and
the case in question.

1. That of Thorp, was only a selling of the Law by Retail to those five
persons, for he had five several bribes, of these five persons; the Passage of
the Law to the rest of the Subjects for ought appears, was free and open. But
these Opinions are a conveyance of the Law by wholesale, and that not to, but
from the Subject.

2. In that of Thorp. as to those five persons, it was not an absolute denial
of Justice, it was not a damming up, but a straitning only of the Chanel. For
whereas the Judges ought Judicium reddere, that is, the Laws being THE
BIRTHRIGHT and INHERITANCE OF THE SVBJECT, the Judge when the parties in suit
demand Judgment, should re dare, freely restore the Right unto them; now he
does not dare, but vendere, with hazard only of perverting Justice; for the
party that buys the Judgment, may have a good and honest cause. But these
Opinions, besides that they have cost the Subjects very dear, dearer than any,
nay, I think I may truly say, than all the unjust Judgments that ever have
been given in this Realm, witness the many hundred thousand pounds, which
under color of them have been levied upon the Subjects, amounting to This is
nothing in comparison to the late Taxes, or Excises imposed on the Subjects,
without a Parliament amounting to above 20 times as much as the Kings Shipmony,
and more frequent, uncessant, and endless than it
seven hundred thousand pounds and upwards, that have been paid unto the
Treasurer of the Nav^, (in sundry years) besides what the Subjects have been
forced to pay Sheriffs, Sheriffes-Bayliffes, ( and now an hundred times more
to T^oopers, and Soldiers, who forcibly levy their unlawful Contributions,
and Excises) and otherwise; which altogether as is conceived, amounts not to
less than a million (in five years space, whereas now we pay above two
Millions in Taxes, Imposts, Excises, every year) besides the infinite v^xations
of the Subject by suits in Law, binding them over, attendance at the Council
Table, taking them from their necessary employments, in making Sesses, and
Collections, and imprisonment of their persons (all now trebled to what then) I
say besides what is past, to make our miseries complete, they have as much as
in them is MADE THEM ENDLESS (as others since have done) for by these Opinions
they have put upon themselves and their Successors, An impossibility of ever
doing us right again, and an incapacity upon us of demanding it so long as they
continue (as the Compilers of the late Instrument, with 42. Strings, intitu^ed,
The Government of the Commonwealth of England, etc. Artic. 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 12,
22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 31, 32. 36, 37, 38, 39. have done, as far as they, and
much beyond them.)

In that sore famine in the Land of Egypt, when the inhabitants were reduced to
the next door to death (for there they say, why should we die?) for bread,
First they give their money, next their flocks and Cattle, last of all their
persons and Lands for bread; all became Pharaohs; but by this Lex Regia, there
is a transaction made, not only of our persons, but of our bread likewise,
wherewith our persons should be sustained; that was for bread, this of our
bread. For since these Opinions, if we have any thing at all, we are not at all
beholding TO THE LAW FOR IT, but are wholly cast UPON THE MERCY and GOODNESS
OF THE KING. Again, there the Egyptians themselves, sold themselves, and all
they had to the King, if ours had been so done; if it had been so done by our
own free consent in Parliament, we had the less cause to complain: But it was
done against our wills, and by those who were trusted, and that upon Oath, with
the preservation of these things for us. The Laws are our Forts, and Bulwarks
of Defense: If the Captain of a Castle, only out of fear and Cowardice, and
not from any Compliance with the enemy surrender it, This is TREAON, as was
adjudged in Parliament, 1 R. 2. in the two Cases of Comines and Weston, and in
the Case of the Lord Gray, for surrendering Barwick Castle to the Scots, in
Edward the thirds time, though good defense had been made by him, and that he
had lost his eldest son in maintenance of the Siege: and yet the loss of a
Castle loses not the Kingdom, only the place and adjacent parts, with
trouble to the whole. But by the Opinions, there is a Surrender made of all our
Legal defense of Property: that which has been preached is now judged; that
there is no Meum and Tuum, between the King and people; besides that which
concerns our Persons.

The Law is the Temple, the Sanctuary, whether Subjects ought to run for
shelter and Refuge: hereby it is become Templum fine numine, as was the Temple
built by the Roman Emperor, who after he had built it, put no gods into it.
We have the Letter of the Law still, but not the sense: we have the Fabric of
the Temple still, but the Dii Tutelares are gone. But this is not all the Case,
that is, That the Law now cease to aid and defend us in our Rights, for then
possession alone were a good Title, if there were no Law to take it away:
Occupanti concederetur, and melior esset Possidentis conditio: But this, though
too bad is not the worst: for besides that which is Privitive in these
Opinions, there is somewhat positive. For now the Law does not only not defend
us, but the Law it self, (by temporising Judges and Lawyers) is made the
Instrument of taking all away. For whenever his Majesty or his Successors,
shall be pleased to say, that the good and safety of the Kingdom is concerned,
and that the whole Kingdom is in danger, the when and how, the same is to be
prevented, makes our persons and all we have liable to bare will and Pleasure.
By this means, The Sanctuary is turned into a Shambles; the Forts are
slighted, that so they might neither do us good nor hurt; But they are held
against us by those who ought to have held them for us, and the mouth of our
own Can^n is turned upon our own selves: and that by our own military Officers,
Soldiers and others since, as well as the Ship money Judges then)'

Thus far Mr. Oliver St. John (by the Commons Order) whose words I thought fit
thus to transcribe at large, because not only most pertinent, but seasonable
for the present times; wherein as in a Looking Glass, some pretended Judges
and Grandees, of these present and late past times, may behold their own faces
and deformities; and the whole Nation their sad condition under them. In the
residue of that his Printed Speech, he compares the Treason of the Shipmony
Judges, and of Sir Robert Tresylium and his Accomplices in XI. R. 2. condemned
and executed for Traitors by Judgment in Parliament, for endeavoring to
subvert the laws and statutes of the Realm by their illegal Opinions then
delivered to King Richard at Nottingham Castle, not out of conspiracy, but for
fear of death and corporal Torments wherewith they were menaced: whose offense
he there makes transcendent to theirs then in six particulars, as those who
please may there read at leisure, being over large to transcribe, I could here
inform you, that the Fundamental laws of our Nation, are the same in the Body
politic of the Realm, as the Arteries, Nerves, Veins, are in, and to the
natural Body, the Bark to the tree; the Foundation to the House: and therefore
the cutting of them asunder, or their Subversion, must of necessity, kill,
destroy, disjoyn and ruin the whole Realm at once: therefore it must be
Treason in the highest degree. But I shall only subjoyn here some material
Passages, in his Argument at Law, concerning the Attainder of high Treason, of
Thomas Earl of Strafford, before a Committee of both Houses of Parliament in
Westminster Hall, April 29. 1641. soon after printed and published by Order of
the Commons House: wherein p. 8. he lays down this Position; recited again, p.
64.

That (Straffords) Endeavoring To subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government
of England and Ireland, and instead thereof to introduce a Tyrannical
Government against Law, is Treason by the Common Law. That Treasons at the
Common Law, are not taken away by the Statutes, by 25. E. 3. 1. H. 4. c. 10. 1.
Mar. c. 1. nor any of them.

The Authorities, Judgments, in and out of Parliament which he cites to prove
it, have been already mentioned, with some others he omitted; I shall therefore
but transcribe his Reasons to evince it to be Treason, super-added to those
alleged by him against the Shipmony Judges.

Page 12. It is a War against the King (Let our Military Officers and
soldiers consider it) when intended. The alteration of the laws or Government
in any part of them. This is a levying War against the King (and so Treason
within the Statute of 25 E 3.)

1. Because the King does maintain and protect the laws in every part of them.

2. Because they are the Kings laws. He is the Fountain from whence in their
several Channells, they are derived to the Subject. Whence all our indictments
run thus: Trespasses laid to be done, Contra pacem Domini Regis, etc. against
the Kings Peace for exorbitant offenses; though not intended against the Kings
Person; against the King his Crown and dignity.

' Page 64. In this I shall not labor at all to prove, That the endeavoring by
words, Counsels and actions, To subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of
the Kingdom is Treason at the Common Law. If there be any Common Law Treasons
at all left, NOTHING TREASON IF THIS NOT, TO MAKE A KINGDGME NO KINGDOM. Take
the Polity and Government away, England's but a piece of earth, wherein so many
men have their commerce and abode, without rank or distinction of men, without
property in any thing further than in possession; no Law to punish the
murdering, or robbing one another.

' ' Page 70, 71, 72. The horridness of the offense in endeavoring to
overthrow the Laws and present Government, has been fully opened before. The
Parliament is the representation of the whole Kingdom, wherein The King as
Head, your Lordships as the more Noble, and the Commons, the other Members are
knit together in one body Politic. This dissolved, the Arteries and Ligaments
that hold the body together, THE LAWS. He that takes away the Laws, takes not
away the Allegiance of one Subject only, but of the whole Kingdom. It was
made Treason by the Statute of 13 Eliz. for her time to affirm, That the Laws
of the Realm do not bind the descent of the Crown. No Law, no descent at all,
NO LAWS NO PEERAGE, no ranks nor degrees of men, the same condition to all.
Its Treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench; this kills not Judicem sed
JVDICIVM. There be twelve men, but no Law; never a Judge amongst them. Its
felony to embezel any one of the Judicial Records of the Kingdom: THIS AT
ONCE SWEEPS THEM ALL AWAY and FROM ALL. Its Treason to countefeit a twenty
shilling piece: here is a counter feiting of the Law: we can call neither the
counterfeit nor the true coin our own. Its Treason to counterfeit the Great
Seal for an Acre of Land: No property is left hereby to any Land at all,
Nothing Treason now, against King or Kingdom; No Law to punish it.

My Lords, if the Question were asked in Westminster Hall, whether this were a
Crime punishable in Star chamber, or in THE KINGS BENCH, by Fine or
imprisonment? They would say, It were higher. If whether Felony? They would
say, That is an offense only against the life or goods of some one, or few
persons. It would I believe be answered by the Judges, as it was by the Chief
Justice Thirning, in 21 R* 2. That though he could not judge the Case TREASON
there before him, yet if he were a Peer in Parliament; HE WOULD SO ADJVDGE IT.
(And so the Peers did here in Straffords, and not long after in Canterburies
Case, who both lost their Heads on Tower Hill.)

' I have transcribed these Passages of Mr. Oliver St. John at large for five
Reasons.

1. Because they were the voice and sense of the whole House of Commons by his
mouth; who afterward owned and ratified them by their special Order for their
publication in print, for information and satisfaction of the whole Nation, and
terror of all others who should after that, either secretly or openly, by
fraud or force, directly or indirectly, attempt the subversion of all, or any
of our Fundamental Laws, or Liberties, or the alteration of our Fandamentall
Government, or setting up any arbitrary or Tyrannical power, Taxes,
Impositions, or new kinds of arbitrary Judicato^ies, and imprisonments against
these our Laws and Liberties.

2. To mind an inform all such who have not only equalled, but transcended
Strafford and Canterbury in these their High Treasons, even since these
Publications, Speeches, and their exemplary executions, of the heinousness, in
excusablenesse, wilfulness, maliciousness, Capitalnesse of their crimes;
which not only the whole Parliament in generality, but many of themselves in
particular, so severely prosecuted, condemned, and inexorably punished of late
years in them: that so they may bewail, repent of, and reform them with all
speed and diligence, as much as in them lies. And withal, I shall exhort them
seriously to consider that Gospel terrifying Passage, Romans 2. 1, 2, 3.
Therefore thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judge; for
wherein thou judge another, tbou CONDEMNEST THY SELF; FOR THOU THAT JUDGE,
DO THE SAME THINGS. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according
to truth, against them which commit such things. And think thou this, O man,
that judge them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall
escape the Judgment of God.

3. To excite all Lawyers, especially such who of late times have taken upon
them the style and power of Judges, to examine their consciences, actions, how
far all or any of them have been guilty of these crimes and Treasons, so highly
aggravated, and exemplarily punish^d of former and later times, in corrupt,
cowardly timeserving, degenerate Lawyers and Judasses, rather than Judges, to
the disgrace of their Profession, and prejudice of the Fundamental Laws,
Liberties, Rights, Privileges of our Nation, Peers, Parliaments, subversion of
the Fundamental Government of this famous Kingdom, whereof they are Members.

4. To instruct those Jesuited Anabaptists, Levellers and their Factors,
(especially John Can, and the rest of the Compilers, Publishers, Abetters of
the Pamphlet entitled, Lieutenant Colonel Lilburn, tried and cast, and other
forementioned publications:) who professedly set themselves by words, writing,
Counsels and overt Acts to subvert both our old Fundamental (and all other
Laws) Liberties, Customs, Parliaments, and Government, what transcendent
Malefactor^, traitors and Enemies they are to the public, and what Capital
punishments, they may thereby incur, as well as demerit, should they be
legally prosecuted for the same; and thereupon to advise them timely to repent
of, and desist from such high Treasonable Attempts.

5. To clear both my self and this my seasonable Defense of our Fundamental
Laws, Liberties, Government, from the least suspicion or sh^dow of Faction,
Sedition, Treason, and Enmi^y to the public peace, weal, settlement of the
Nation, which those, (and those only) who are most Factious and seditious, and
the greatest Enemies, Traitors to the public tranquillity, weal and
establishment of our Kingdom, (as the premises evidence) will be ready
maliciously to asperse both me and it, with, as they have done some other of my
writings of this nature; with all which, they must first brand Mr. St John Mr.
Pym, the whole House of Commons, the last two, with all other Parliamens
forecited, ere they can accuse, traduce, or censure me, who do but barely
relate, apply their words and judgments without malice or partiality, for the
whole Kingdoms benefit and security.

To these punctual full Jury of Records and Parliamentary Authorities in
point, I could accumulate Sir Edward Cook his 3. Institutes, p. 9. printed and
authorized by the House of Commons special Order, the last Parliament: The
several Speeches of Mr. Hide, Mr. Walker, Mr. Pierpoint and Mr. Hollis, July
6. 1641. at the Lords Bar in Parliament, by order of the Commons House, at the
Impeachment of the Shipmony Judges of High Treason, printed in Diurnall
Occurrences, and speeches in Parliament, London 1641. p. 237. to 264. Mr.
Samuel Browns Argument at Law before the Lords and Commons at Canterburies
Attainder; all manifesting, their endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws
and government of the Nation to be HIGH TREASON; with sundry other printed
Authorities to prove, That we have fundamental Laws, Liberties, Rights, and a
fundamental Government likewise, which ought not to be innovated, violated, or
subverted upon any pretenses whatsoever, by any power or prevailing Faction.
But to avoid prolixity, (the double Jury of irrefragable and punctual
Authorities already produced, being sufficient to satisfy the most obstinate
Opposites formerly contradicting it) I shall only add three swaying
Authorities more, wherewith I shall conclude this point.

The first is a very late one, in a Treatise entitled, A true State of the
Common wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, in Reference to the late established Government, by a Lord Protector
and a PARLIAMENT. It being the Judgment of DIVERSE PERSONS, who throughout
these late troubles, have approved themselves faithful to the Cause and
interest of God, and their COUNTRY: presented to the Public, for the
satisfaction of others. Printed at London 1654. who relating the miscarriages
of the last Assembly at Westminster, use these expressions of them, p, 13, 14,
16, 17, 21, 22. But on the contrary, it so fell out in a short time, that there
appeared many in this Assembly of very contrary Principles to the interest
aforesaid, which led them violently on to attempt and promote many things, the
consequence whereof would have been: A Subverting of the fundamental Laws of
the Land, the Destruction of Property, and an utter extinguishment of the
Gospel. In truth their Principles led them TO A PULLING DOWN ALL? AND
ESTABLISHING NOTHING. So that instead of the expected settlement, they were
running ^ut into FURTHER ANARCHY and CONFUSION. As to the Laws and Civil Rights
of the Nation, nothing would serve them, but A TOTAL ERADICATION OF THE OLD,
and INTRODUCTION OF A NEW: and so the Good, Old Laws of England, (the Guardians
of our Lives and Fortunes) established with prudence, and confirmed by the
experience of many Ages and Generations: (The Preservation whereof, was a
principal Ground of our late Quarrel with the King) having been once
abolished, what could we have expected afterward, but an inthroning of
Arbitrary Power in the Seat of Judicature, and an exposing of our Lives, our
Estates, our Liberties, and all that is dear unto us, as a Sacrifice to the
boundless Appetite of Mere Will and Power, etc.

Things being at this Pass, and the House (through these proceedings)
perfectly disjointed, it was in vain to look for a settlement of this Nation
from them, thus constituted on the contrary, nothing else could be expected,
But that the Commonwealth should sink under their Hands, and the great cause
hitherto so happily upheld and maintained, to be for ever lost, through their
preposterous management of these affairs, wherewith they had been entrusted.
Whereupon they justify their dissolution, and turning them forcibly out of
doors by the Soldiers, with shame and infamy; to prevent that destruction
which thereby was coming on THE WHOLE LAND, but this New Powder Treason Plot,
set on foot by the Jesuits and Anabaptists, to destroy our Laws, Liberties,
properties, Ministers, and Religion it self, at one blow, and that in the very
Parliament House, where they had been constantly defended, vindicated,
preserved, established in all former ages by all true English Parliaments.

The second is, See my Speech in Parliament. p. 100. to 108.
The Votes of the House of Commons, concerning a Paper presented to them,
entitled An agreement of the people for a firm and present peace, upon grounds
of Common Right 9. November, 1647. viz.

Resolved upon the Question, That the matters contained in these Papers, Are
destructive to the being of Parliaments, and to the Fundamental Government of
this Kingdom,

Resolved, etc. That a Letter be sent to the General and those Papers
enclosed, together with the Vote of this House upon them; And that he be
desired to examine the proceedings of this business in the Army ( where it was
first coined) and return an Account hereof to this House.

These Votes were seconded soon after with these ensuing votes, entered in the
Commons Journall, and printed by their special Order, 23. November, 1647.

A Petition directed to the Supreme Authority of England, the Commons in
Parliament assembled, The humble petition of many Free born people of England,
etc. was read the first and second time.

Resolved upon the Question, that this petition is, A sedititious and
contemptuous avowing and prosecution of a former petition and paper annexed,
styled, an agreement of the people formerly adjudged by this House, to be
Destructive to the being of Parliaments and Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That Thomas Prince Cheesemonger, and Samuel Chidley, be
forthwith committed prisoners to the Prison of the Gatehouse, there to remain
prisoners during the pleasure of this House, for a Seditious avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition, and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of
the People, formerly Ajudged by this House to be destructive to the being of
Parliamen's and fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

Resolved etc. That Jeremy Jues, Thomas Tailor and William Larnar, be forthwith
committed to the Prison of Newgate, there to remain Prisoners, during the
pleasure of this House, for a seditious and contemptuous avowing and
prosecution of a former Petition and Paper annexed, styled, An Agreement of the
people, formerly adjudged by this House, to be destructive to the being of
Parliaments and Fundamental Government of this Kingdom.

Resolved, etc. That a Letter be prepared and sent to the General; taking
notice of his proceeding in the execution (according to the Rules of War) of
a mutinous person (avowing and prosecuting this agreement in the Army contrary
to these Votes) at the Rendezvous near Ware; and to give him thanks for it: and
to desire him to prosecute that Business to the bottom; and to bring Such
guilty persons as he shall think fit, to condign and exemplary Punishment.

Resolved, etc. That the Votes upon the Petition and Agreement annexed, and
likewise the Votes upon this Petition be forthwith printed and published.

After which by a Special Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, 17 December,
1647. No person whatsoever, who had contrived, plotted, prosecuted or entered
into that Engagement entitled The agreement of the people declared To be
destructive to the being of Parliaments, and Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom, for one whole year, was to be elected, chosen or put into the office
or Place of Lord Mayor or Alderman, Sheriff, Deputy of a Ward, or
Common Counsel man of the City of London; or to have a voice in the Election of
any such Officer.

All these particulars, with the Capital Proceedings against White and others
who somented this Agreement in the Army, abundantly evidence the veriey of my
foresaid Proposition, and the extraordinary guilt of those Members and
Soldiers, who contrary to their own Votes, Ordinances, Proceedings and
Censures of others, have since prosecuted this, the like, or far worse
Agreement, to the destruction of our ancient Parliaments and their Privileges,
and the fundamental Government, Laws and Liberty of our Nation, which I wish
they would now sadly lay to heart.

The third is the memorable Statutes of 3. Jacobi chapter 1, 2, 4, and 5. Which
relating the old Gunpowder Treason of the Jesuits and Papists, and their
infernal, inhumane, barbarous, detestable plot, to blow up the King, Queen,
Prince, Lords, Commons, and whole House of Peers with Gunpowder, when they
should have been assembled in Parliament, in the upper House of Parliament,
upon the fifth of November, in the year of our Lord 1605, do aggravate the
heinousness and transcendency thereof by this circumstance, That it was (as
some of the principal Conspirators thereof confessed) purposely devised and
concluded to be done in the said House, That where sundry necessary and
Religious Laws for Preservation of the Church and State were made, ( which they
falsely and slanderously term, Cruel Laws enacted against them and their
Religion) Both Place and Persons should be all destroyed and blown up at once:
And by these dangerous consequences if it had not been miraculously prevented,
but taken effect. That it would have turned to the utter ruin, overthrow and
Subversion Of the whole State and Commonwealth of this flourishing and
renowned Kingdom, and Gods true Religion therein established by Law, and of our
Laws and Government. For which horrid Treason, they were all attainted, and
then executed as Traitors, and some of their heads, Quarters, See Speeds
History, p. 1250 and Mr. John Vica^'s History of the Gunpowder Treason, and the
Arraignment of Traitors.
set up upon the Parliament House for terror of others. Even so let all other
Traitors, Conspirators against our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Government,
Kings, Parliaments, and Religion, treading presumptuously in their Jesuiticall
footsteps, Judges 5. 31
perish O Lord, but let all them who cordially love, and strenuously maintain
them against all Conspirators, Traitors, Underminers, Invaders whatsoever, be
as the Sun when he goes forth in his might: That the Land may have rest,
peace, Settlement again, for as many years at least, as it had before our late
innovations, Wars, Confusions, by their restitution and establishment.

CHAP. II.
HAving thus sufficiently proved, That the Kingdom, and Freemen of England,
have some ancient, hereditary Rights, Liberties, Franchises, Privileges,
Customs, properly called FVNDAMENTALL, as likewise a Fundamental Government,
no ways to be altered, undermined, subverted, directly or indirectly, under
the guilt and pain of High Treason in those who attempt it; especially by
Fraud, Force, or armed Power.

I shall in the second place present you in brief Propositions, a Summary of
the chiefest and most considerable of them, which our prudent Ancestors in
former ages, and our latest real Parliaments, have both declared to be, and
eagerly contested for, as Fundamental and Essential to their very being and
well being, as a Free people, Kingdom, Republic, unwilling to be enslaved
under any yokes of Tyranny or arbitrary power, that so the whole Nation may the
more perspicuously know and discern them, the more strenuously contend for
them, the more vigilantly watch against their violations, underminings in any
kind, by any Powers, or Pretenses whatsoever; and transmit, perpetuate them
entirely to their posterities, as their best and chiefest inheritance.

I shall comprise the Sum and Substance of them all in these 9. Propositions;
beginning with the Subjects Property, which has been more frequently,
universally invaded, assaulted, undermined by our Kings, and their evil
instruments; and thereupon more strenuously, frequently and vigilantly
maintained, retained by our Nobles, Parliaments and the people in all ages
(till of late years) than any or all of the rest put together, though every of
them have been constantly defended, maintained, when impugned, or incroached
upon by our Ancestors and our selves.

1. That no Tax, Tallage, Aid, Subsidy, Custom, Contribution, Loan,
Imposition, Excise or other Assessement whatsoever, for Defense of the Realm by
Land or Sea, or any other public ordinary, or extraordinary occasion, may or
ought to be imposed, or levied upon all or any of the Freemen of England, by
reason of any pretended or real Danger, Necessity or other pretext; by the
Kings of England, or any other Powers, but only with and by their common
consent and Grant, in a free and lawful Parliament duly summoned and elected:
Except only such ancient, legal Ayds, as they are specially obliged to render
by their Tenures, Charters, Contracts, and the Common Law of England.

2. That no Freeman of England ought to be arrested, confined, imprisoned, in
any private Castles, or remote, unusual Prisons under Soldiers or other
Guardians, but only in usual or Common Gaols, under sworn, responsible
Gaolers, in the County where he lives, or is apprehended, and where his Friends
may freely visit and relieve him with necessaries: And that only for some
just, and legal cause expressed in the Writ, Warrant, or Process, by which he
is arrested, or imprisoned; which ought to be legally executed by known, legal,
responsible sworn Officers of Justice, not unknown military Officers, Troopers,
or other illegal Catchpols, That no such Freeman ought to be denied bail,
Mainprise, or the benefit of an Habeas Corpus, or any other Legal Writ for his
enlargement, when bailable or incumpernable by Law; nor to be detained prisoner
for any real or pretended Crime, not bailable by Law, then until the next
General or Special Jail-deliver, held in the County where he is imprisoned;
where he ought to be legally tried and proceeded against, or else enlarged by
the Justices, without denial or delay of Right and Justice. And that no such
Freeman may or ought to be outlawed, exiled, condemned to any kind of corporal
punishment, loss of Life or Member, or otherwise destroyed or passed upon, but
only by due and lawful Process, Indictment, and the lawful Trial, Verdict
and Judgment of his Peers, according to the good old Law of the Land, in some
usual Court of Public Justice: not by and in new illegal* Military, or other
Arbitrary Judicatories, Committees, or Courts of High Justice, unknown to our
Ancestors.

3. That no Freeman of England, unless it be by Special Grant and Act of
Parliament may or ought to be compelled, enforced, pressed or arrayed to go
forth of his own Country (much less out of the Realm into foreign parts)
against his will in times of War or Peace, or except he be specially obliged
thereto by ancient Tenures and Charters; save only upon the sudden coming of
strange enemies into the Realm, and then he is to array himself only in such
sort, as he is bound to do by the ancient Laws and Customs of the Kingdom
still in force.

4. That no Freeman of England, may or ought to be disinherited, disseised,
dispossessed or deprived of any inheritance, Freehold, Liberty, Custom,
Franchise, Chattle, Goods whatsoever without his own Gift, Grant, or free
Consent, unless it be by lawful Process, Trial and Judgment of his Peers,
or special Grant by act of Parliament.

5. That the old received Government, Laws, Statutes, Customs, Privileges,
Courts of Justice, legal Process of the Kingdom and Crown ought not to be
altered, repealed, suppressed, nor any new form of Government, Law, Statute,
Ordinance Court of Judicature, Writs, or legal Proceedings instituted or
imposed on all or any of the Freemen of England, by any Person or Persons, but
only in and by the Kingdoms free and full consent in a lawful Parliament,
wherein the Legislative Power solely resides.

6. That Parliaments ought to be duly summoned, and held for the good and
safety of the Kingdom every year, or every three years at least, or so often
as there is just occasion. That the Election of all Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, to sit and serve in Parliament (and so of all oother Elective
Officers) ought to be free. That all Members of Parliament hereditary or
Elective, ought to be present, and there freely to speak and vote according to
their judgments and Consciences, without any overawing Guards to terrify
them; and none to be forced or secluded thence. And that all Parliaments not
thus duly summoned, elected whilst held, but unduly packed, and all Acts of
Parliament fraudulently and forcibly procured by indirect means, ought to be
nulled, repealed, as void, and of dangerous president.

7. That neither the Kings nor any Subjects of the Kingdom of England, may or
ought to be summoned before any Foreign Powers or Jurisdictions whatsoever,
out of the Realm, or within the same, for any manner of Right, Inheritance,
Thing belonging to them, or Offense done by them within the Realm.

8. That all Subjects of the Realm are obliged by Allegiance and duty to defend
their Lawful Kings, Persons, Crowns, the Laws, Rights and Privileges of the
Realm, and of Parliament against all Usurpers, Traitors, violence, and
Conspiracies. And that no Subject of this Realm, who according to his duty, and
Allegiance shall serve his King in his Wars, for the just defense of him and
the Land, against Foreign enemies or Rebels, shall lose or forfeit any thing
for doing his true duty, service, and Allegiance to him therein; but utterly
discharged of all vexation, trouble, or loss.

9. That no public War by Land or Sea ought to be made or levied with or
against any Foreign Nation, or Public Truce or League entered into with
Foreign Realms or States, to bind the Nation, without their Common advice and
consent in Parliament.

10. That the ancient, Honors, Manors, Lands, Rents, Revenues, Inheritances,
Right, and perquisites of the Crown of England, originally settled thereon for
the Ease and Exemption of the people from all kind of Taxes, payments
whatsoever (unless in cases of extraordinary necessity) and for defraying all
the constant, ordinary expenses of the Kingdom, (as the expenses of the Kings
household, Court, Officers, Judges, Ambassadors, Garrisons, Navy and the like)
ought not to be sold, alienated, given away or granted from it, to the
prejudice of the Crown and burdening of the people. And that all Sales,
Alienations, Gifts, or Grants thereof, to the empairing of the public Revenue,
or prejudice of the Crown and people, are void in Law, and ought to be resumed,
and repealed, by our Parliaments and Kings, as they have frequently been in all
former ages.

For the Readers fuller satisfaction in each of these propositions (some of
which I must show here but briefly, touch for brevity sake, having elsewhere
fully debated them in print) I shall specially recommend unto him the perusal
of such Tractates, and Arguments formerly published, wherein each of them has
been fully discussed, which he may peruse at his best leisure.

The first of these Fundamentalls (which I ^ntend principally to infist on) is
fully asserted, debated, confirmed by 13. H. 4. f. 14. By Fortescue Lord Chief
Justice, and Chancellor of England, de laudibus Legum Angliae, dedicated by
him to King Henry the 6. f. 25. c. 36. f. 84. By a learned and necessary
Argument against impositions in Parliament, of 7. Jacobi: by a late Reverend
Judge, printed at London 1641. By Mr. William Hakewell, in his Liberty of the
Subject against Impositions, maintained in an Argument in the Parliament of 7.
Jacobi: printed at London 1641. By Judge Crooks, and Judge Huttons Arguments
concerning Shipmony both printed at London 1641. By the Case of Shipmony
briefly discussed London, 1640. by Mr. St. John's Argument, and Speech against
Shipmony, printed at London, 1641. By Sir Edward Cook in his 1. Institutes, p.
46. and 57. to 64. and 528. to 537. By the 1. and 2. Remonstrance of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, against the Commission of Array. Exact Collection p.
386. to 398. and 850. to 890. and by my own Humble Remonstrance against
Shipmony, London, 1643. The fourth part of the Sovereign power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, p. 14. to 26. and my Legal Vindications of the Liberties of
England against Illegal Taxes, etc. London 1649. and by the Records and
Statutes cited in the ensuing Chapter, referring for the most part to the first
Proposition.

The second, third, and fourth of them are largely debated and confirmed by a
Conference desired by the Lords, and had by a Committee of both Houses,
concerning the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, 3. Aprilis, 4. Caroli
printed at London 1642. By Sir Edward Cook in his Institutes on Magna Charta.
c. 29. p. 45. to 57. By the 1. and 2. Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons
against the Commission of Array, Exact Collection p. 386. etc. 850. to 890. By
Judge Crooks, and Judge Huttons Arguments against Shipmony: By Sir Robert
Cotton his Posthuma p. 222. to 269. By my Breviate of the Prelates
encroachments on the Kings Prerogative, and Subjects Liberties. p. 138. etc. My
new discovery of the Prelates tyranny, p. 137. to 183. and some of the ensuing
Statutes, and Records.

The fifth and sixth of them are fully cleared and vindicated in and by the
Prologues of all our Councils, Statutes, Laws, before and since the Conquest.
By Sir Edward Cooks 4. Institutes. chapter 1. Mr. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts.
Title, High Court of Parliament: My Sovereign power of Parliaments and
Kingdoms, p. 1, 2, 3, 4. My Legal Vindication against illegal Taxes, and
pretended Acts of Parliament, London 1649* Prynne the Member, reconciled to
Prynne the Barrester, printed the same year. My Historical Collection of the
ancient great Councils of the Parliaments of England. London 1649. My Truth
triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty. London 1645. and some of the
Records hereafter transcribed. In this I shall be more sparing, because so
fully confirmed in these and other Treatises.

The seventh is ratified by Sir Edward Cooks 1. Institutes, p. 97, 98. 4.
Institutes p. 89. and 5. Report Cawdries Case of the Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws: and Rastals Abridgement of Statutes. Tit. Provisors, Praemunire and
Rome, 11. H. 7. c. 1. and other Records and Statutes in the ensuing Chapter.

The eighth and ninth are fully debated in my Sovereign Power of Parliaments
and Kingdoms, Part. 2. p. 3. to. 34. Part fourth, p. 162. to 170. and touched
in Sir Robert Cottons Posthuma p. 174. 179.

How all and every of these Fundamental Liberties, Rights, Franchises, Laws,
have been unparalelledly violated, subverted, in all and every particular of
late years beyond all Presidents in the worst of former ages, even by their
greatest pretended Propugners; their own printed Edicts, Instruments,
Ordinances, Papers, together with their illegal oppressions, Taxes, Excises,
Imposts, Rapines, violences, Proceedings of all kinds, (whereof I shall give a
brief account in its due place) will sufficiently evidence, if compared with
the premised propositions. Which abundantly confirm the truth of our Saviors
words, John 10. 1. 10. and this rule of Johannis Angelius, Wenderhagen:
Politicae Synopticae. lib. 3. c. 9. sect. 11. p. 310. Hinc Regulae loco
notandum, Quod omne Regnum Vi Armata acquisitum in Effectu Subditis Semper in
durioris Servitutis conditiones arripiat, licet a principio Ducedinem
prurientibus spirare videatur. Ideo cunctis hoc cavendum, Ne temere se duci
patiantur.

FINIS.

