A Short DEMURRER To the JEWS Long discontinued REMITTER into ENGLAND.

Comprising, An exact Chronological Relation of their first Admission into,
their ill Deportment, Misdemeanors, Condition, Sufferings, Oppressions,
Slaughters, Plunders, by popular Insurrections, and regal Exactions in; and
their total, final Banishment by Judgment and Edict of Parliament, out of
England, never to return again: collected out of the best Historians.

With a Brief Collection of such English Laws, Scriptures, as seem strongly to
plead, and conclude against their Readmission into England, especially at this
season, and against the General calling of the Jewish Nation. With an Answer to
the chief Allegations for their Introduction.

By William Prynne Esquire; a Bencher of Lincolnes-Inne.

2 Chronicles. 19. 2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. Prove. 6. 27. Can a man
take coals in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Council. Toleta. 4. cap.
57. Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 734. Tanta est quandam cupiditas ut quidam eam
appetenles etiam a fide erraverint: multi quippe hucusque ex Sacerdotibus atque
Laicis accipi^ntes a Judaeis munera, perfidiam little suo patrocinio sovent, qui
non immerito ex corpore Antichristi esse noscuntur, quia contra Christum
faciunt. Quicunque ergo deinceps Episcopus, sive Clericus, sive Secularis,
illis contra fidem Christianam suffragium vel munere, vel savore praes^iterit,
vere (ut prophanus and Sacrilegus) anathema effectus, ab Ecclesia Catholica,
and Regno Dei habeatur extraneus: quia dignus est ut a corpore Christi
separetur, qui inimicis Christi PATRONUS efficitur. Printed at London, for
EDWARD THOMAS dwelling in Green-Arbor, 165^.

To the Christian Reader.
THat I may not justly 1 Pet. 4.
suffer (so much as in thy Thought) as a busie-body in other men's matters, for
publishing my Opinion in a public Case; wherein I conceive my self some ways
interessed, both as a Christian and English Freeman: I shall inform thee of
the true original cause of this my sudden unpremeditated undertaking.

Being much affected with God's late admirable Providence, in causing the Sea
the Declaration of 21 Nov. 1655.
sixth day of this instant December to be set a part for a Day of Solemn
Fasting and Humiliation, for the late Rebukes we have received, the Tares of
Division that have been sown by the envious one, and the growth they have had
through his subtilty; the abominable Blasphemies, Apostacies, and abuse of
Liberty by many professing Religion, and the continual Series of Difficulties
we have been exercised under: and, inviting all the People of God in these
three Nations on that day, to join in solemn and earnest Supplications to the
Throne of Grace, That the Lord will be pleased truly to humble our present
Governors, and the Nation, under his Righteous Hand, that we may be every one
searching out the Plague of his own Heart, and turn unfeignedly from the evil
of our ways. This being the very day of the Month, whereon this time seven
years, ( December 6. 1648.) Colonel Pride with other Officers of the ARMY,
besetting the Parliament House with their armed Forces A Collection of
Ordinances, p. 599, 623.
raised to Defend its PRIVILEGES and MEMBERS) against their Trusts, Duties,
forcibly seized, secured my self, with above forty Parliament-Members more, as
we were going into the Commons-House to discharge our duties; translating us
that day from the Queens Court (where they first imprisoned us) to Hell in
Westminster, and there lodging us upon the bare boards without Beds, all that
miserable Cold Night, like so many Turkish Gally-slaves, rather than Parliament
- Members: seconded with other succeeding Restraints, and high unparalleled
Violations both of our Parliamentary Privileges, and Hereditary Laws and
Liberties. Which transcendent Exorbitancies, as we may justly fear, are the
Plague of the Heart, and Evil of their Ways, who were the chief Contrivers or
Actors of them; if not the greatest Rebukes the English Parliament or Nation
ever received; the most dangerous Tares of Division that have ever been sown
by the envious one in our Realm, which have since extraordinarily grown and
spread amongst us through his subtilty; the saddest Apostasy, and abuse of
Liberty by men prosessing Religion ever heard of amongst Christians, and the
very Fountain of all that continued series of difficulties we have since been
exercised under. For which the principal Architects, Executioners, and whole
English Nation had never publicly been humbled, nor seriously lamented,
repented them in seven whole years space; It pleased God by his overruling
Providence, beyond the Intentions or Thoughts of Men, so at last to bring it
about, that this very forgotten sad day, whereon this was publicly acted,
should be now by a printed Declaration, specially devoted for A Day of solemn
Fasting and Humiliation, throughout this Commonwealth, to lament and bewail
these former enormious Actions on it as well as other Crimes. Having informed
diverse thereof, both before and on this Fast Day, who were much taken with it:
On the seventh of December, (the day after the Fast on which the secured Members
that time seven years were carried from Hell to White Hall, and there kept
fasting till past seven a clock at night to attend the Army Officers, who
pretended a desired conference with them, and at last, without vouchsafing to
see them, sent them PRISONERS through the dirt with Musketeers at each of
their backs, and other Guards of Horse by their sides to the King's Head and
Swan, where they long remained:) I walked down to Westminster, to visit some of
my then Fellow Prisoners and Members, to acquaint them with this memorable
Providence; in my passage thither in Martin's-Lane, I unexpectedly met with Sir
John Clotworthy (who was one of them) leading his Lady on foot toward
Wallingford-house, the place whether the Officers promised to carry, and there
to confer with us, when they thrust us into Hell; who taking notice of, and
saluting me, I informed him of the foresaid adorable Providence, in appointing
the former days Fast on that day seven years whereon we were seized: who
prosessing he had forgotten it, and that it came not within his thoughts; but
in truth it was very miraculous, and worthy special observation. We thereupon
walked on, discoursing of it till we came to Wallingford-house-gate, where
Colonel Pride, who then seized, met us full but; and I not perfectly knowing
him, Sir John told me, here is Colonel Pride, and then gave him this seasonable
Memento; Fellow Pride, Remember this time seven years. So we parting company, I
went and visited some others of my then Fellow Prisoners in Westminster;
discoursing with them of these Providence, (wherewith they were much affected,
as having not observed them before) and of our Fast at White Hall this day
seven years. In my return homewards that day by the Garden-wall at White Hall,
Mr. Nigh the Minister, going very fast, there overtook, and saluting me by name,
presently demanded this unexpected Question of me; Whether there were any Law
of England against bringing in the Jews amongst us? for the Lawyers had newly
delivered their Opinions, there was no Law against it. To which I answered,
That the Jews were in the year 1290. all banished out of England, by Judgment
and Edict of the King and Parliament, as a great Grievance, never to return
again: for which the Commons gave the King the fifteenth part of their Movables:
and therefore being thus banished by Parliament* they could not by the Laws of
England, be brought in again, without a special Act of Parliament, which I
would make good for Law. He replied, I wish it might not be done otherwise;
and, that this business had been formerly moved in the Bishops time, rather
than now. To which I subjoyned; That it was now a very ill time to bring in the
Jews, when the people were so dangerously and generally bent to Apostasy, and
all sorts of Novelties and Errors in Religion; and would sooner turn Jews, than
the Jews Christians. He answered, He thought it was true, and was sorry he
could not discourse longer with me, the Committee about the Jews being sat,
and staying for him as he feared. Whereupon, as he was turning in toward
White-Hall-Gate, I told him, The Jews had been formerly great Clippers and
Forgers of Money, and had crucified three or four Children in England at least,
which were principal causes of their banishment. To which he replied, That the
crucifying of Children was not fully charged on them by our Historians, and
would easily be wiped off. Whereto I answered, He was much mistaken: and so we
parted. As I kept on my way, in Lincolnes-Inne. Fields, passing by seven or
eight maimed Soldiers on Stilts, who begged of me; I heard them say aloud one
to another* We must now all turn Jews, and there will be nothing left for the
poor. And not far from them another company of poor people, just at
Lincolnes-Inne back Gate, cried aloud to each other: They are all turned Devils
already, and now we must all turn Jews. Which unexpected concurrent Providence
and Speeches, made such an impression on my Spirit, that before I could take my
rest that night, I perused most of the passages in our English Histories
concerning the Jews carriage in England, with some of their misdemeanors in
other parts, to refresh my memory, and satisfy my judgment; making some
Collections out of them, which after I enlarged and digested into this ensuing
Demurrer, with as much speed as the sharpness of the season would permit; and
was induced to publish it (knowing no particular discourse of this Subject
extant) for the general information, satisfaction of others, and honor of my
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the righteous, whom the Jews with
malicious hearts, and wicked hands Act 2. 23. 36. c. 3. 14. 15. 1 shell. 2. 14,
15, 16. Mat. 26. and 27.
crucified in person heretofore, and their posterity by their blasphemies,
despiteful actions against Christ, his Kingdom, Offices, Gospel H^b. 6. 6 1
John 4. 3.
crucify afresh, every day trampling under foot the Son of God, putting him to
open shame, offering despite to the Spirit of Grace, and counting the blood of
the Covenant an unholy thing. And in all their public and private Devotions,
praying constantly for the sudden, universal, total, final subversion,
extirpation, perishing of Christ's Kingdom, Gospel, and all his Christian
Members, which they plot, and continually expect, such is their implacable
transcendent malice. I have deduced their introduction into England, only from
William surnamed the Conqueror, because I find not the least mention of them
in any of our British, or Saxon Histories, Councils, Synods, Canons, which
doubtless would have mentioned them, and made some strict Laws or Canons,
against their Jewish as well as against Pagan Superstitions, had they exercised
them here, as they would have done as well as in Spain, and other places, had
they resided here. That any of them were here in the time of our famous Emperor
Constantine, is but a dream of such, who because they find an Epistle of
Constantines in the Council of Nice, to all the Churches of Christ in Spelmanni
Council. p. 43* 44* See here p. 51*
Sir Hen. Spelmans Collections of the Decrees, Canons, and Constitutions of the
British World, wherein is mention made of the Churches of Britain, in that age,
as well as in Rome, France and other parts, keeping the Passover in a
different manner from the wicked blinded Jews, would thence infer, there were
then Jews resident in Britain; of which there is not one syllable in that
Epistle, nor in any Classick Author Foreign or Domestic, I yet ever saw or
heard of.

That they were settled in our Island in the Saxons time, is collected, only
from that Law* inferted by Annal. pars posterior, p. 604.
Hoveden, and Spelmanni Cancil, p. 623.
Spelman amongst Edward the Confessors, here cited, p. ^. But there being no
mention of the Jews in any of our Saxon Kings Raigns, Councils, Decrees, Laws,
before the Confessor, out of which all his Laws were Malmesbury de gest is
Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 1. p. 75. Chronicon Johannis Bromcol. 956. 957. Spelmanni
council. p. 625.
wholly extracted, and this Law of the Jews being not to be found in the true
Original Copy of the Confessors and Conquerors Laws of Abbot Ingulphi Hist. p.
914.
Ingulphus, who flourished in that age, was present at their confirmation, and
then brought them to Croyland Abbey, published by Mr. Ad Eadmerum Not^, p. 172,
to 195.
John Seldom, nor yet in Bromton, I cannot but reject it as counterfeit, and
esteem it rather, a Declaration of the Jews Condition in England in Hovedens
time (inserted by him, as well as some other things of pu^ier date, amongst
these Laws) rather than any Law of, or in the Confessors days, wherein I can
find no evidence of any Jews residence here, but only this interpolation and
forged Law, which Mr. Seldom wholly omittes in his Collection of his Laws. The
History of King William Rufus, his compelling the Jews of Rhoan that were
turned Christians, to renounce their Christianity and turn Jews again, ACCEPTO
PRETIO APOSTASIAE, upon the complaint and money given him by the Infidel Jews
there, with the Dialogue between Him and Stephen the Jew, cited out of
Holinshed, here p. 5, 6. I find originally recorded of him by Historiae
noverum, l. 2. p. 46, 47.
Eadmerus, living in his reign: who though very bitter and injurious to him, by
reason of the great Contests between him and Anselme (whose Favorite, Follower
and Companion in adversity Eadmerus was) yet he relates it not as a certain
Truth, but as a Report of others of that Country, who had another Opinion of
Rufus, Quam de Christianis Christianos Lex Christiana docet habere: quae tamen
sicut illa accepimus simpliciter ponam, non astruens vera an secus extiterint,
an non. Only he adds this passage to the story of Stephen, which Holinshed
omits: That St. Stephen appearing to him as he was traveling on the way, he
demanding of him who he was? Answered, That he was long since of a Jew made a
Christian, and was Stephen the first Martyr; but for this cause, I have now
come down from Heaven to Earth, that thou casting away thy Jewish Superstition,
might be made a Christian; and being baptized in Christ, might be called
by my name. Whereupon he became a Christian, and was baptized. That immediately
after the conference between the King and Stephen, (which agrees with that in
Holinshed) he being thrust out, and meeting his Father standing before the
door, expecting the event, being animated against him, said; O Son of death,
and ^ewel of eternal perdition, is not thine own damnation sufficient for thee,
unless thou also cast me head long into it together with thee? But God forbid,
that I to whom Christ is now revealed should ever acknowledge thee henceforth
for a Father, because the devil is thy father.

I have omitted in this Demurrer, no passage to my knowledge, in any of our
Historians, relating to our former English Jews, reciting them all in a
Chronological Order in the Historians own words, quoted in the Margin: only I
find these 2 Records concerning them, which I shall here supply.

Rot. Claus. 1. E. 1. R^^.] The King constituted by his Charter, Hamon,
Hattain, and Robert de Luvenham his Justices for the custody of the Jews; and
thereupon issued a Mandate to the Treasurer and Barons of the Eschequer, to
deliver unto them the Keys of the Chest of the Jews, together with the Rolls,
Writs, and all other things belonging to that Office of the Jews, as had
formerly been accustomed to be done to other Justices. And Rot. Claus. 3. Ed.
1. Mem. 17. The King sent a Mandate to the Justices of the Jews, to do justice,
and proceed in a cause, according to the custom of Judaism.

I have P. 64. 65. 89, 90.
herein only briefly touched, not handled, the great Question, of the general
calling and conversion of the Jewish Nation to the Faith of Christ, toward the
end of the world; for which I cannot find any satisfactory grounds in
Scripture. That Text of Levit. 26. 41, to 46. on which some build their general
call, having these two clauses in it, that seem strongly to oppose, or make it
very dubious, v. 41. IF THEN their uncircised heart be humbled, and that they
accept of the punishment of their iniquity, etc. and v. 46. I will not cast
them away, neither will I abhor them to DESTROY THEM UTTERLY. And that other
Text of Romans 11. whereon others most rely, having this conditional passage and
express clauses against it, v. 23. And they also, IF they abide not still in
unbelief, shall be grafted in, for God is able (he says not resolved) to
graffe them in again. And v. 3, to 8. I have reserved to my self 7000 men, etc.
Even so then at this present time there is a Remnant according to the election
of grace, etc. But the Election has obtained it, and the rest were hardened, or
blinded. Which compared with Romans 9. 27, 29. ( Isaiah also says concerning
Israel, Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea,
yet a remnant of them (only) shall be saved, Isa. 10. 22, 23, etc.) will
necessarily evince, that Romans 11. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved, etc.
(on which they ground this general call) must be intended only; of all this
small elect remnant of the Israel of God, and seed of Abraham according to the
faith, not flesh, Romans 4 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 3. 7, 8, 9, 14, 16. Ga.
6. 16. of all such who are Jews inwardly, and have the Circumcision of the
heart, Romans 2. 28, 19. not of the whole Jewish Nation. And those who will
strain that Text further, must necessarily aver, not only an universal calling,
but likewise salvation and taking away the ungodliness and sins of that whole
Nation then by Christ, (of which that Text only speaks) not only conttary to
these forecited Scriptures, and Gods dealing with all other Rev. 3. 4.
Churches, Nations; but to Jer. 3. 14. I will take you, one of a City, and two
of a Tribe, and I will bring you to Sion. Mat. 21. 16. Many are called, but few
chosen: and few saved, Mat. 7. 14. Luke 13. 23. Therefore for any to call in
the Jews among us upon this surmise of their general approaching Conversion, is
a strange Solecism, both in State Policy and Christianity, especially in this
age, wherein that Speech of De uni^ate Ecclesiae Francofurti. 1600. p. 108,
109, 116, See Jacobus usierius, De E^c^^siaurm Christian Successione and Statu
c. 5. p. 108, 109, 119.
Wal^ramus Bishop of Naumburge, is most truly verified, Diabolus videns Idola
derelicta, and per nimium credentium populum seeds suas ac templa deserta,
excognitavit novam fraudem, ut sub ipso Christiani nominis titulo fallat
incantos; haeresesque inevnit and schismata, quibus subverteret fidem,
corrumperet veritatem. Exinde divisa est Ecclesia, and divisa sunt Ecclesiae
Sacerdotia, atque omnia scandalorum orta sunt gene^a. Exinde crevit grave and
diuturnum bellum, and non solum civil bellum, sed and plusquam civil bellum,
and factae sunt absque divino pariter and humano respectu vastationes
Ecclesiarum, and caedes hominum: Exinde etiam corruptae sunt divinae pariter
and humanae leges, sine quibus non subsistit vel Dei Ecclesia, vel Imperii
Respublica: and ex inde violata est fides and publica, and Catholica: exinde
etiam illa crevit injustitia, ut pro veritate falsa testimonia, and pro fide
Catholica, abundent perjuria: ut post quam Leges bello silvere coactae,
impleaturiam ista Domini sententia per Osee Prophetam: Non est veritas, and non
est misericordia, and non scientia Dei in terra: maledictum, and mendacium, and
homicidium, and furtum, and adulterium inundaverunt, and sanguis sanguinem
tetigit. Ipse Diabolus videtur nunc de carcere suo solutus esse. Hinc publicae
civium contra Cives congressiones, aliis pro pastoribus legitimis, aliis vero
contra pastores dimicantes: as he and De Investigatione Antichristi Syntagma,
p. 41.
Gerhobus Richerspergensis writ of Pope Hildebrands days.

If any man chance to censure me, as overharsh or earnest in my expressions
against the Jews; I hope that speech of their royal Prophet, (a man after Gods
own heart) Ps. 139. 20, 21, 22. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and
am I not grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a
perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies: for they speak against thee
wickedly; depart from me therefore ye bloody men: will apologize for me;
especially seeing their Proposals are, Not only to be admitted and received
into our Commonwealth under the protection and safeguard of our Governors, AS
THE NATIVES THEMSELVES: and that all the Heads and Generals of Arms may take an
Oath to defend them upon all occasions, that they may be permitted to traffic
freely in all sorts of Merchandise as others; but to be judged by their Judges
in differences between themselves, according to the Mosaic Law: And to be
allowed PUBLIC SYNAGOGUES, not only in ENGLAND, but also IN ALL OTHER PLACES
under our tower; and TO OBSERVE IN ALL THINGS THEIR RELIGION AS THEY OUGHT:
That in case there have been any Laws against their Jewish Nation, they may IN
THE FIRST PLACE, and BEFORE ALL THINGS BE REVOKED. A clear evidence of an
intended design in them, only to set up their Rev. 2. 9. c. 3. 9.
Synagogues of Satan, Judaism, and Jewish Ceremonies in the highest degree,
amongst us, as lawful, in direct opposition and subversion of our only Lord,
Savior, Redeemer, Mediator, Jesus Christ his Person, Offices, Kingdom, Gospel
and Christianity it self, without any thoughts of turning Christians
themselves. In which case not to be passionately zealous, not to Number. 25. 15
Gal. 4. 18. Jude 3. 4.
contend earnestly for the Faith against these ungodly men, turning the Grace
of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ; is in a great measure to deny and betray him, together with our
Church, and Nation at once, unto these their inveterate enemies. For whose
Conversion, (not National, but of the Elect Remnant of them) as I shall pray,
so I cannot but pray and write against their Readmission amongst us on these,
or any other terms, for the Reasons here humbly presented to thy view, and
Christian Consideration, by

Thy Christian Brother, and Companion in tribulation, and in the Kindom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, William Prynne.
Lincolnes-Inne, 14 December, 1655.
ERRATA.
Title p. for quandam read quorundam. p. 9. l. 12. est, r. et. p. 12. l. 7.
homes, r. houses. p. 22. l. 21. p. 23. l. 26, r. Iuvel. p. 37. six, r. ten. p.
48. l. 3. quod. l. 8. co^um. p. 51. l, 16. ex^aecati. p. 70. l. 2. dele record.
p. 88. l. 1. receive, revive.

A short Demurrer to the Jews long discontinued Remitter into ENGLAND.
HOw the Nation of the Jews ( once Deuteronomy. 7. 6. c. 14. etc. 26. 19.
Gods own beloved, special, chosen People) after their Acts 2. 22. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
15, 16.
malicious crucifying of our Savior Jesus Christ, and imprecation, That Mat.
27. 25.
his Blood might be on them and their children, were for this 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15,
16.
their crying sin especially, made the saddest Spectacles of divine Justice,
and humane Misery of all other Nations in the World, being quite extirpated out
of their own Land, almost totally deleted by the sword, pestilence, famine;
carried away Captives, and dispersed like so many Vagabonds over the face of
the whole Earth, as the very off-scowring of the world, and execration,
derision of all other people, having no place, City, Form of Government, or
Republike of their own, in any corner of the Universe; (according to Gods
Comminations against them, Levit. 26. 14. to 46. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. to 68. Jer. 9.
10. c. 13. 24. Ezech. 5. 2. to the mid. c. 12. 15. c. 22. 15. Mich. 1. 21. Mat.
24.) Or what banishments, punishments, oppositions, restraints by penal Laws,
suppressions of their Synagogues, Ceremonies, they have received in all ages
from Christian Kings, Princes, Republikes in Foreign parts, for their
implacable malice, blasphemy against our Savior Jesus Christ, Christians,
Christian Religion, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors to which they are most
addicted, is not the subject of my intended Brief Discourse, and so fully
related by Josephus, Egesippus, Eusebius, Nicephorus, Zonaras, Paulus Diaconus,
the Magdeburgian Centuriators, out of them and other Historians, in their 2. to
their 13 Centuries, chap. 14, and 15. in Baronius his Annals, and H^yl^^s
Microcosm, p. 568, 569, 570. where all may peruse them, that I shall not spend
time to recite them, but wholly confine my self to a Brief Relation of their
first admission into, their ill deportment, misdemeanors, sufferings, popular
insurrections against them in, and their final banishment by Judgment and
Edict of Parliament out of England, never to return again, collected out of the
best Historians: to which I shall subjoyn, a taste only of such Laws,
Scriptures, and Reasons, as seem strongly to plead against their readmission
into our Island, especially at this season.

When the Jews came first into England, appears not certainly by any
Historians, there being no mention of their being here in any of our British or
Saxon Kings reigns, to my remembrance. Antoninus in his Chronicles Tit. 16. ca.
5. records, That William the Conqueror King of England, translated the Jews
from Rhoan to London; and the Magdeburg Centuries out of him, Centur. xi. cap.
14. Col. 686. adds thereto, that it was OB NUMERATUM PRECIUM, for a sum of
money given to him by them, (which I find not in Antoninus.) Both these Authors
intimate, That this was their first arival in England, yet in what year of this
King, they are silent. With them concurs Raphael Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 15.
where thus he writes, Among other grievances, which the English sustained by
the hard dealings of the Conqueror, this is to be remembered, That he brought
Jews into the Land from Rouen, and appointed them a place to inhabit and
occupy: (reputing their very first introduction a Grievance to the English, and
hard dealing.) Which John Stow in his Annals of England, p. 103. thus seconds,
King William brought the Jews from Rhoan here to inhabit in England. But this
Law concerning the Jews, inserted amongst the Laws in the Confessors time,
seems to prove their arrival and settlement in England, to be before this
Normans reign; unless mis-placed in point of time amongst his Laws by
Hoveden, being rather in my opinion, a Declaration of the Jews servile
condition under King William, and Richard the first, when Hoveden writ, then
any Law in King Edwards reign, or before, as the words import.

To. Hoved. Annal. pars posterior p. 604. Spelmanici Council. 623. Lombard.
A^chaiori.
De Judaeis in Regno constitutis.
SCiendum est quoque, quod omnes Judaei, ubicunque in Regno sunt, sub tutela
and defensione Domim Regis sunt; nec quilibet eorum alicui diviti se potest
subdere, sine Regis licentia. Judaei, and omnia sua Regis sunt. Quod si
quispiam detinuerit eis pecuniam suam, perquirat Rex tanquam suum proprium: (
or detmuerit eos, vel pecuniam little perquirat Rex, si vult, tanquam suum
proprium, ( as Sir Henry Spelman renders it.)

This Law or Declaration (being the first record making mention of their being,
and condition in England:) proves, That as all the Jews when they came first
into England, were under the Kings protection and patronage where ever they
resided: that they were under him only as his mere Vassals, their persons and
goods being his alone; and that they could dispose of neither of them without
his License: Into which slavish condition they doubtless then put themselves,
(being banished out of other Nations for their Villainies) only to avoid the
fury of the common people, to whom they were most detestable, who else would
have quickly murdered, or stoned them to death, and stripped them of all their
wealth; as the sequel will declare.

The next Passage in Historians concerning the Jews being and condition in
England, is that of De Gestis Regum, l. 4. p. 122.
William of Malmsbury in William Rufus his reign. The Jews (writes he) in his
time gave a testimony of their insolency: Once at Rhoan, endeavoring by gifts
to persuade and revoke certain men to Judaism, who had deserted their error:
Another time at London, being animated to enter into a combat (or dispute)
against our Bishops, because the King (in merriment, as I believe) had said,
That if they should* overcome the Christians, and confute them by open
arguments, he would then revolt to them, and become one of their Sect;
Whereupon it was managed with great fear of the Bishops and Clergy, and with
pious solicitude of such who were afraid of the Christian Faiths miscarriage.
And from this combat the Jews only brought away nothing besides confusion;
although they would many times boast, that they were overcome not by argument,
but by a faction. Chronica^ ^ars 2. Tit. 16. c. 5. f. 167.
Antoninus relating the story in the same words, adds only this, That the Jews
coming to this King on a certain Solemnity, and offering him gifts; (after
their removal from Rhoan to London) he thereupon animated them to a conflict
against the Christians, swearing by St. Lukes face, that if they overcame them,
he would revolt to their Sect: (as if he spoke it in good earnest) with whom
the Centur. xi. ^. 14. col. 687.
Magdeburge Centuries accord.

By which we may observe, That the Jews were no sooner transported and settled
in Rhoan and London, but they presently began to grow very insolent against the
Christians; 1. Endeavoring to pervert some of them by moneys to Judaism. 2ly,
Attempting to corrupt the King himself, by gifts, to side with them against the
Bishops and Clergy, and to become one of their Sect. 3ly, By entering into open
Disputations with the Bishops and Clergy against the Christian Faith, to the
great fear of the Professors, and hazard of the Christian Religion. 4ly, By
boasting frequently when they were overcome, That it was only by power and
faction, not truth or disputation. And will not this be their very practice
now, if readmitted, to the hazard of our Christian Religion, and seduction of
many simple, unstable souls, in this unsettled, apostatizing age? when not only
the ignorant People, but many great Professors, turn Atheists, Heretics,
Seekers, Apostates, Blasphemers, Ranters, Quakers, Antiscripturists, and what
not, but real Christians?

This History of William Rufus, causing a disputation between the Christians
and the Jews, is related by Raphael Holinshed in his Chronicle; Vol. 3. p. 27.
who likewise records of him, That he being at Rhoan on a time, there came to
him diverse Jews, who inhabited that City, complaining to him, that diverse of
that Nation had renounced their Jewish Religion, and were become Christians:
wherefore they besought him, that for a certain sum of money which they
offered to give, it might please him to constrain them to abjure Christianity,
and turn to the Jewish Law again. He was content to satisfy their desires, and
so receiving the money, called them before him; and what with threats, and
putting them otherwise in fear, he compelled diverse of them to forsake Christ,
and to turn to their old errors. Hereupon, the Father of one Stephen a Jew,
converted to the Christian Faith, being sore troubled for that his Son was
turned a Christian, and hearing what the King had done in such like matters,
presented to him 60 Marks of Silver, conditionally, That he should enforce his
Son to return to his Jewish Religion; whereupon the young man was brought
before the King, unto whom he said, Sir, thy Father here complains, that
without his license thou art become a Christian: If this be true, I command
thee to return again to the Religion of thy Nation, without any more ado. To
whom the Young man answered, Your Grace (as I guess) does but jest. Wherewith
the King being moved, said, What? thou dounghil knave, should I jest with
thee; Get thee hence quickly, and fulfill my commandment, or by St. Lukes
face, I shall cause thine eyes to be plucked out of thine head. The Young man
nothing abashed thereat, with a constant voice answered, Truly I will not do
it; but know for certain, that if you were a good Christian, you would never
have uttered any such words; for it is the part of a Christian, to reduce them
again to Christ, which are departed from him, and not to separate them from
him, which are joined to him by Faith. The King herewith confounded, commanded
the Jew to avaunt and get him out of his sight: But his Father perceiving, that
the King could not persuade his Son to forsake the Christian Faith, required to
have his money again. To whom the King said, He had done so much as he promised
to do; that was, to persuade him so far as he might. At length, when he would
have had the King to have dealt further in the matter; the King (to stop his
mouth) tendered back to him the one half of his money, and received the other to
himself. All which increased the suspicion men had of his Infidelity.

By this History we may perceive what a prevailing Engine the Jews money is,
both to scrue them into Christian Kingdoms, though the most bitter, inveterate,
professed Enemies of Christ himself, Christians, and Christianity; and how
their money can induce even Christian Princes to perpetrate most unchristian,
and antichristian actions; and enforce by threats and violence, even converted
Christian Jews, to renounce their Christianity, and apostatise to their former
Jewish Errors which they had quite renounced. And do not they still work even
by the self-same Money-Engin? preferred by too many Christians, even before
Christ himself, and Christianity?

In the year of our Lord, 1145. during the reign of King Stephen, the Jews grew
so presumptuous in England, that they crucified a child called William, in the
City of Norwich, in derision of Christian Religion, as Matthew Westminster,
Flores Historiarum, Ann. 1145. p. 39. Chronicon Johannis Bromton; Col. 1048.
Hygden in his Polychronicon; Antoninus: Centuriae Magdeburgenses: Cent. 12. c.
14. Mr. John Fox in his Acts and Monuments, 1640. Vol. 1. p. 302. Richard
Grafton in his Chronicle, p. 46. Raphael Holinshed in his Chronicle, Vol. 3. p.
56. and others jointly attest. Not long after this, Anno 1160. (the 6. year of
Henry the II.) they cracifyed another child at Gloucester, (in contempt of
Christ and his Passion) as John Bromtons Chronicon. col. 1050. Henry de
Knyghton, de Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. col. 2394 Polychronicon: Fox Acts and
Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 302. Grafton, in his Chronicle, p. 46. and others record.
And in the same Kings reign, Anno 1181. upon the same account, the Jews on the
Feast of Easter martyred and crucified another child at St. Edmonds-bury,
called Robert; who was honorably interred soon after in the Church of St.
Edmunds, and grew famous by miracles there wrought; as Gervasius Dorobernensis,
in his Chronica, col. 1458. relates.

What punishments were then inflicted on them for these Murders, and
Insolences, I find not recorded; perchance they purchased their Peace with
moneys: For I Gervasius Dorobern: Chro. col. 1403.
read, That in the year 1168. King Henry the 2. wanting moneys, banished the
wealthiest of the Jews out of England, and fined the rest of them in 5000
Marks; most likely for these their Misdemeanors.

The Chronicon Johann. Bromton, col. 1129. Polydor Virgil l. 13. Holinsheds
Chronicle, Vol. 3: p. 101. Graftons Chro: p. 79. Cent. Magdeburg. 12 c. 15.
col. 1759.
Jews, though there were a great multitude of them in England, in every quarter
of the Realm, had only one Churchyard allotted them, and that at London; in
which they were enforced to bury all-their dead corpse wheresoever they died;
which being a great trouble and annoyance to them, thereupon in the year 1178.
they petitioned King Henry the 2. (being at Stanstede) for a License to have
Churchyards without the Cities wherein they inhabited, in convenient places
where they could purchase them, wherein to bury their dead; which he then
granted to them.

It seems the Jews were then so odious to the whole Nation, that they would not
permit them to bury their very dead corpse in any English soil, for fear of
polluting it, nor near any Christians bodies, without the Kings special License.

Guliel. Nubrigens. Hist. l. 4. c. 1. 7^8. etc. Matthew west. Matthew. Paris,
Rog. Hoveden, Hygden, Fabian, Holinshed, Grafton, Slow, Speed, Fox, Daniel, in
the life of Rich. 1. Chronicon Johannis Bromton, col. 1152, 1160. 1171.
Radulphus de Di^eto Ymagines historia^u^, 647. 651. Henricus de Knyghton, de
Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. ^. 13. col. 2401.
King Richard the first being to be crowned King at London, in the year of our
Lord, 1189. the chiefest of the Jews flocked together from all parts to his
Coronation, resolving to purchase the favor of the New King with most ample
gifts, and to get their former privileges confirmed, which they feared they
should lose. But they being suspected of Sorcery and Magic, the King by a
public Proclamation prohibited all Jews from entering the Church while she was
crowning, or his Palace, whiles he was therein feasting. Notwithstanding some
of the principal Jews secretly got into the Church and Palace; who being
discovered one after another were well beaten, and thrust out of the Church and
Court by the Kings Officers and Christians. Upon which the common people then
flocking in greatmultitudes to the Kings Coronation, fell upon the Jews
standing in great multitudes at the Palace gate, first beating them with their
fists, and then taking up clubs and stones slew some of them, and left the
others half dead: whereupon one of them called Benedict of York; being so
beaten and wounded, that he despaired of life, and extraordinarily terrified
with the fear of death, received Baptism from William Prior of St. Mary's of
York, and thereby escaped the peril of death, and hands of the persecutors. In
the mean while there was a great rumor spread throughout the City of London upon
this occasion, That the King desired, and had commanded, that all the Jews
should be banished and destroyed; Whereupon an infinite number of People, as
well out of the City, as most Counties of England then coming to the
Coronation, inflamed with the desire of booty, betaking themselves to their
arms, fell pell-mell upon the Jews, and slew and pillaged them both in the
streets and in their houses; and those who defended themselves for a time in
such strong houses which they could not enter, were there soon after burnt and
consumed, together with their houses, by the furious multitude, who put fire to
their houses, and burnt down most of them, Synagogae dat^ dedec^ri, and
likewise defaced their Synagogues, as Radulphus de Diceto records. The King
being informed hereof whiles he was feasting with his Nobles, thereupon sent
Ranulphus de Glanvd then chief Justice of the Realm, a potent and prudent man,
together with other great Noblemen, to persuade and restrain these bold people.
But all in vain, for in so great a multitude, none would hear their voices, nor
reverence their persons; but rather murmuring against them, exhorted them
speedily to return: whereupon they advisedly declining their unbridled rage,
the fury of these Plunderers ceased not till the next day. Ac licet immensit
as, tantae rabiei si dissimulata est inulta transiret, primordia regiae
majestatis denigraret plurimum; propter re^^um tamen infinitam multitudinem
dissimulari oportuit quod vindicari non potuit; writes Henry de Knyghton. Yet
the very next day the King sending his Officers throughout the City, commanded
some of the said malefactors to be apprehended, and brought before him, of
which three were hanged by the judgment of his Court: one, because he had
stolen the goods of a certain Christian: and two because they had made a fire
in the City, whereby the houses of Christians were burned. After which the King
sent for the man, who of a Jew was made a Christian, and demanded of him, in
the presence of those who had seen him baptized, Whether he were made a
Christian? Who answered, That he was not, but that he permitted the Christians
to do to him what they would, that he might escape death. Then the King
demanded of the Archbishop, in the presence of many Archbishops and Bishops,
What was to be done concerning him? Who answering very indiscreetly, said: If
he will not be a man (or servant) of God, let him be a man (or servant) of the
Devil; And so he returned to the Judaical Law. In the mean time the King sent
his Writs throughout all the Counties of England, prohibiting, That none should
do any harm to the Jews, but that they should enjoy his peace. But before that
Edict was ^ublis^e, the Jews which were in the Town of D^nstaple (to preserve
their lives from the peoples fury) being con^erted to the Christian Faith were
baptized, b^^roathing their Wi^es after the manner of Christians; which was
likewise done through many Cities of England. And although the King by his
Proclamation had decreed Peace to the Jews, yet notwithstan^ing the fury
against the Jews kindled at London, not verily out of a zeal of Faith, but of
Gain, vehemently raged in other places of the Land. For a certain Jew at Lynne
happening to be made a Christian; thereupon the Jews persecuting him, as a
prevaricator of the Law, taking an opportunity, assaulted him with arms as he
passed through the city; whereupon he took sanctuary in the Church; yet
notwithstanding he raging Jews would not rest quiet ^or this, but with a
continued fury presently began to assault the said Church with great violence
presently hereupon there arose a great clamor; and the Christians assistance
was desired with loud outcries. This clamor and fame incensed the Christian
people, and young men who were strangers, of which a great number at that time
resorted thither, by reason of traffic; who running to the Church armed,
valiantly assaulted the proud Jews, who being unable to resist the assault of
the Christians, presently betook themselves to flight. After which, the
Christians assaulting and taking their houses, spoiled, and then burnt them
with fire. Hereupon the youngmen who were strangers, laden with prey, departed
with it speedily to their ships, lest they should be questioned, and perchance
enforced to restore their booty, by the Kings Officers. But the inhabitants of
the place, when they were questioned for this by the Kings Officers, translated
this fact to the strangers, who were then departed from thence; although
themselves were not altogether innocent, taking up arms against the Jews upon
the outcry, but yet doing nothing against the Jews, for fear of the Kings
displeasure,

Not long after, in Lent there arose a new storm against the Jews at Stanford;
for there being solemn Fairs there held in Lent, the young men and Soldiers
who had taken upon them the sign of the Cross, and were then ready to go to
Jerusalem with the King, assembling together there out of diverse Counties,
disdaining that the Jews, being the enemies of the Cross of Christ, possessed
such great store of goods and wealth, when as they had not sufficient to defray
the necessary expenses of so great a journey; and imagining that they should do
God good service, if they assaulted these his enemies; boldly rushed upon them,
no man opposing himself against so great attempts; whereupon diverse of the Jews
were slain, and the rest being received into the Castle, hardly escaped with
their lives, their goods being all plundered, and the plunderers departing
freely away with their booty, none of them being so much as questioned, or
punished by the Kings discipline. The Citizens of Lincoln hearing what was done
to the Jews of Stanford, taking occasion, and being animated by the examples of
others, were willing to do something against them: and being assembled together
against the Jews inhabiting together with them, became enraged against them.
But these Jews being made more wary by the slaughters and damages of others,
some few of them suffering harm and damages, the rest fled timely with their
moneys into the Royal Fort, and there secured themselves. In all other places
wheresoever the Jews were found, they were pillaged and slain by the hands of
the Pilgrims, who hastening through England toward Jerusalem, decreed to rise
up first against the Jews, before they invaded the Saracens. Hereupon all the
Jews who were found in their own houses at Norwich were slain on the 8. of
February, some few of them only escaping to the Castle. At the same time, The
Nobles and Gentry of Yorkshire, nothing fearing the Kings Proclamation, the
wicked Jews having by Usury reduced the^ to extreme poverty, joining with them
some holy soldiers, brake up the Houses of the chief Jews, equal to the Kings
Palace, sle^ their families, spoiled their goods, and burnt their ho^^s in the
night, and then retired themselves to their h^mes in the dark. After which, the
promiscuous multitud^ making an assault upon the Jews, slew them without
di^^^^ction of sex or age; except some few who would give up their names to
Christ in baptism to save their lives. On the 18 day of April, being
Palm Sunday, the rest of the Jews in the City of York, (being 500 men and
women, besides their children) fearing the violence of the Christians, shut up
themselves within the Castle of York by the will and consent of the Guardian
thereof, and of the Sheriff; who being thus received into the Castle for their
defense by the Guardian and Sheriff, would not afterward deliver it up unto
them again. Whereupon the Sheriff and keeper of the Castle being much offended
with them, assembled the Soldiers of the County, and men of the City, that
they might free the Castle from those Jews, exhorting them to do their utmost
endeavors to effect it: who when they had assaulted the Castle day and night,
the Jews offered a great sum of money to save their lives; but all in vain,
the people being so incensed against them that they would not accept it:
whereupon a certain Jew skillful in their Law, stood up, and said. Men of
Israel hearken to my counsel; It is better for us to die for our Law, then to
fall into the hands of the enemies of our Law; and our very Law commands the
same thing. Upon which all the Jews, as well men as women, consented to his
counsel, and every Father of a Family going with a sharp razor, first of all
cut the throats of his own wife and children, and then of his family, casting
the dead corpse of those whom they had thus sacrificed to Devils, over the
Castle walls upon the Christian people. After which, burning their rich
clothes, an / casting their golden Vessels and Jewels into Privies, that the
Christians might not be enriched by them, these murderers shutting up
themselves and the rest they had killed in the Kings house, set it on fire, and
so burnt both themselves and it. After which the Citizens of York, and the
Soldiers of the County burnning all the Jews houses together, spoiled their
goods, seized their possessions to themselves, and burned all the charters of
their debts. The King being informed hereof, and much incensed, both for the
contempt of his Royal Proclamation and Authority, and damage to his Exchequer,
to which all the Goods and Debts of the Jews, being Usurers belonged, commanded
his Chancellor to inflict due punishment upon the authors of this Sedition.
Whereupon, after Easter, the Bishop of Ely the Kings Chancellor gathering a
great Army together, came to York, to apprehend those as malefactors who had
destroyed the Jews of the City: And understanding that this was done by the
command of the Sheriff and Governor of the castle, he put them both from their
Offices; and took sureties from the Citizens of the City, for to keep the Peace
of the King and Kingdom, and to stand to the Law in the Kings court concerning
the death of the Jews: and commanded the Soldiers of the County who were at
the destruction of the Jews, to be apprehended; but the chief of them flying
into Scotland, escaped, not one of them all being put to death for this great
massacre and Riot.

Henry de Knighton, De Eventibus Angliae, l. 2. c. 13. gives this censure of
these slaughters and popular tumults against the Jews. The Zeal of the
Christians conspired against the Jews in England, but in truth not sincerely,
that is, for the cause of faith; but either out of emulation and envy because
of their felicity, or out of gaping after their goods: The Justice truly of God
not at all approving such things, but decently ordering them, that by this
means he might punish the insolency of a perfidious Nation. He likewise adds;
That one John, a most bold Christian, flying from Stanford with many spoils of
the Jews to Northampton, was there secretly slain by his Host, to get his
money, and thrown without the city in the night, the murderer flying thereupon.
After which, through the dreams of old women, and falacious signs, the simple
people atributing to him the merits of a martyr, honored his Sepulcher with
solemn vigils, and gifts. This was derided by wife men, yet it was acceptable
to the Clerks there living, by reason of the gains. Which the Bishop hearing
of, presently unsaincted him, and profaned the Monuments of this false martyr,
continued by the study of simple and covetous persons. I wish no such
plunderers as this, might be saincted and adored in our age, as too many of
them are, even before their deaths, who will be un-saincted after them, as well
as this bold plunderer of the Jews.

Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 305. relating the story of the
massacres of the Jews this year out of the Chronicle of Westminster, says:
That there were no less than a thousand five hundred of the Jews destroyed at
that time in York alone, (beside those slaughtered in other places) so that
this year, which the Jews took to be their Jubilee, was to them a year of
confusion. Neither was this plague of theirs undeserved for every year commonly
their custom was, to get some Christian man's child from the Parents, and on
Good Friday to crucify him, in despite of our Religion.

King Richard the first, after his return out of the Holy Land in the year,
1194. appointed Justices, Laws and Orders, for preventing the frauds, and
regulating the contracts of the Jews, both between themselves, and between
Christians and them, thus recorded at large by Annalium pars posterior, p. 745.
Chron. Johan. Bromton, col. 1258. Holinshed Vol. 3. p. 155.
Roger de Hoveden, and briefly touched only by some others.

All the Debts, Pawns, Morgages, Lands, Houses, Rents and Possessions of the
Jews, shall be registered. The Jew who shall conceal any of these, shall forfeit
to the King his body, and the concealment, and likewise all his possessions and
chattels; neither shall it be lawful to the Jew ever to recover the
concealment. Likewise 6 or 7 places shall be provided, in which they shall make
all their contracts, and there shall be appointed two Lawyers that are
Christians, and two Lawyers who are Jews, and two egal Registers; and before
them, and the Clorks of William of the Church of St. Mary's, and William of
Chimilli, shall their Contracts be made: and Charters shall be made of their
contracts by way of Indenture. And one part of the Indenture shall remain with
the Jew, sealed with his seal to whom the money is lent; and the other part
shall remain in the common chest; wherein there shall be 3 locks and keys,
whereof the 2 Christians shall keep one key, and the 2 Jews another, and the
Clerks of William of St. Mary's Church, and William of Chimilli, shall keep the
third. And moreover, there shall be three seals to it; and those who keep the
seals, shall put the seals thereto. Moreover the Clorks of the said William and
William shall keep a roll of the transcripts of all the Charters; and as the
Charters shall be altered, so let the roll be likewise: For every Charter there
shall be 3 pence paid, one moity thereof by the Jew, and the other moity by him
to whom the money is lent; whereof the 2 writers shall have 2 pence, and the
keeper of the roll the third. And from henceforth no contract shall he made
with, nor payment made to the Jews, nor any alteration made of the Charters,
but before the said persons, or the greater part of the^, if all of them cannot
be present. And the aforesaid 2 Christians shall have one roll of the Debts or
receites of the payments which from henceforth are to be made to the Jews, and
the 2 Jews one, and the keeper of the roll one. Moreover, every Jew shall swear
upon his Roll that all his debts and pawns, and rents, and all his goods and
possessions he shall cause to be enrolled, and that he shall conceal nothing,
as is aforesaid: And if he shall know that any one shall conceal any thing, he
shall secretly reveal it to the Justices sent unto them; and that they shall
detect and show unto them, all Falsifiers or forgers of Charters, and clippers
of moneys, where or when they shall know them, and likewise all false charters.

By these strict politic Laws, the King and his Officers knew the particular
wealth, moneys, goods, debts, and real and personal Estates of every Jew, and
in whose hands they were, and so could seize and command them at their
pleasure, upon any real or pretended misdemeanors, or complaints against them.

Mat. West. A^. 1210. Mat. Paris, Hist. Angliae. Londini 1640 p. 229.
Holinshed. Vol. 3. p. 174. John Stow, p. 168. Daniel p. 115.
King John, in the year of our Lord 1210. commanded all the Jews of both sexes
throughout England to be apprehended and imprisoned; and to be afflicted with
most grievous torments, that so they might satisfy the Kings pleasure with
their money. Some of them being grievously tortured, gave all things which they
had, and promised more, that they might by this means escape so many kinds of
torments. Amongst whom one Jew at Bristol, punished with various torments, when
as he would neither redeem himself, nor submit to any fine, the King commanded
his tormentors, that they should every day pull out one of his grinding teeth,
until he should pay to the King Ten thousand marks of silver. And when at last
for 7 days space they had pulled out 7 of his teeth, with intolerable
torment, and now on the 8 day the Tormentors had begun the like work again;
this Jew, an over-slow provider for his profit, gave them the aforesaid money,
that he might save the 8 tooth to himself, the other 7 being pulled out: who,
with much more wisdom, and less pain, might have done so before, and have saved
his 7 teeth, having but 8 in all.

Mat. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 314, 315. Antiq. Eccles. Brit. p. 152. Bracton l. 3.
c. 9.
In the year 1222. in a Council at Canterbury under Archbishop Stephen, a
certain Apostate Jew, made of a Christian a Deacon, and afterward
apostatizing, was there judicially punished, whom Falco presently apprehending,
caused to be hanged, as Matthew Paris writes; but Bracton and others record,
that he was burned to ashes.

Mat. Paris hist. Ang. p. 365 Mat. Westminster, p. 128. Holinshed, p. 221.
King Henry the 3* Anno 1230. wanting moneys, constrained the Jews, whether
they would or would not, to give him the third part of all their movable goods,
and that with all expedition.

Jo. Stows Chronicle, p. 182.
The Jews in the year of our Lord 1231. builded a Synagogue very curiously, but
the Christians obtained of the King, that it should be dedicated to our blessed
Lady, and was since by the same King Henry, granted to the Brethren of St.
Anthony of Vienna, and called St. Anthonies Hospital.

Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 393. Stow, p. 183. Speed, p. 519.
In the year of our Lord, 1233. King Henry the 3. at his proper costs built in
London, not far from the old Temple, a decent House and Church, sufficient for
a Covent, with other convenient edifices thereto belonging, called Near the
Rolls.
The house of the Converts: To which house the converted Jews flying, leaving
the blindness of Judaism, under a certain honest rule of living, might have a
certain habitation, a safe refuge, and a sufficient livelihood during their
whole lives, without servile labor, and the gain of Usury. Whereupon it came
to pass, that in a short time there was gathered together to that place, a
great number of Converts, who were there baptized and instructed in the
Christian Faith, and lived laudably, being governed by a skillfull Rector,
specially appointed for that purpose.

Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 409. Mat. Westminster. p. 136. Holinshed Vol. 3. p. 219.
Stow p. 183. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423. Speed p. 521. Polychronicon, l.
7. c. 35. Fabian part 7. p. 46. Grafton p. 122. Mat. Park. An^iq. ^. Eccl. Bri.
p. 178
King Henry in the year 1235. keeping his Court and the Nativity at
Westminster with many of his Bishops and Nobles, there were brought before him
upon the complaint of John Toly, 7 Jews, who had circumcised a certain child in
Norwich, whom they had stolen away from his parents, and kept for a years
space from the sight of Christians, intending to crucify him on the feast of
Easter. But being convicted for this fact, they confessed the truth of the
thing in the Kings presence; and so being at the Kings pleasure, both for their
life and members, were detained in prison for this fact, and some of them drawn
and hanged.

Mat. Paris p. 532.
In the year of our Lord, 1240. the Jews circumcised a Christian child at
Norwich, and being circumcised, they called him Jurninus: but reserved him to
be crucified, in contumely of Jesus Christ crucified. But the Father of the
child, from whom the Jews had stolen him, diligently seeking after his Son,
at the last found him shut up in the custody of the Jews: and with loud
clamours declared, that his Son, whom he thought to have been lost, was
wickedly kept up in the chamber of a certain Jew. Which great premeditated
wickedness coming to the knowledge of the Bishop, William Rele, a prudent and
circumspect man, and of other great men, lest through the slothfulness of the
Christians so great an injury of Christ should be passed by unpunished, all the
Jews of the City were apprehended: and when as they would have defended
themselves by Regal authority; the Bishop said, These things belong to the
Church, and are not to be determined in the Kings Court, seeing the Question to
be discussed, is concerning Circumcision, and the breach of faith. Whereupon 4
of the Jews being convicted of the aforesaid wickedness, were first dragged
about at the tails of Horses, and at last hanged on the Gallows, lamentably
breathing forth the relics of life.

The very next year the Jews in Foreign parts, especially in Germany,
believing, that the Tartars were of their own Nation, entered into a secret
League with them, to destroy the Christians, and subdue the whole world to
themselves; to which end they provided many, Hogsheads filled with arms to be
transported to the Tartars; pretending to the Christian Princes, that they were
Vessels filled only with poisoned Wines, wherewith they intended to poison and
destroy the Tartars, who would drink no wines, but such as were made by the
Jews. But this their Treachery being detected by the Customers in Germany; who
found these pretended Vessels of Wine, to be fraught with arms for the Tartars
wherewith to destroy the Christians; thereupon the Jews were delivered to
Tormentors, to be perpetually imprisoned, or slain with their own swords, as
Matthew Paris more at large relates. Anno 1241. p. 564.

Mat. Paris, p. 605.
King Henry, Anno 1243. exacted a great ransom from the most miserable Jews,
both in gold and silver: so that, besides what he exacted from others, he
extorted from one Jew, Aaron of York, 4 marks of gold, and 4000 marks of
silver: the King himself receiving the gold with his own hand from every Jew,
man or woman, being made of a King, a new receiver of Custom; but the silver
was received by others for the King.

Mat. Paris, p. 644.
Anno 1244. in August, the corpse of a little male child was found buried in the
City of London, in whose thighs and arms, and under his paps, there was a
regular inscription in Hebrew Letters. To which spectacle when as many
resorted, admiring at it, and not knowing how to read the letters, knowing that
the Letters were Hebrew, they called thither converted Jews, who inhabited the
House which the King had founded in London, that they as they loved their life
or members, for the honor, love, and fear of their Lord the King, without
figment of falsehood, might declare that writing. For the Kings Bailiffs and
Conservators of the Peace were present. They likewise believed, neither without
cause, that the Jews had either crucified that little child in obloquy and
contumely of Christ (which was related frequently to have happened) or had
afflicted him with sundry torments to crucify him, and when he had given up the
ghost, they had now cast him there, as unworthy the Cross. Moreover, there
appeared in his body blew marks, and rents of rodds, and manifest signs and
footsteps of some other torment. And when as those Converts were brought, to
read those things that were inscribed, and studied that they might perfectly
read them, they found the Letters deformed, and now not legible, being many
ways disordered, and tossed up and down, by reason of the extension and
contraction of the skin and flesh. But they found the name of the Father and
Mother of the little child, suppressing their surnames, and that the child was
sold to the Jews; but to whom, or to what end, they could not find. In the mean
time, certain of the London Jews took a secret and sudden flight, never to
return again, who by this very thing rendered themselves suspected. And some
assirmed that the Lord had wrought miracles for the child. And because it was
found, that the Jews at other times had perpetrated such wickedness, and the
holy bodies crucified had been solemnly received in the Church, and likewise to
have shined brightly with miracles, although the prints of the 5 wounds
appeared not in the hands and feet, and side of the said corpse, yet the Canons
of St. Paul took it violently away, and solemnly buried it in their Church, not
far from the great Altar.

Mat. Paris p. 641.
The same year (1244.) The Barons in Parliament ordered, That there should be
one Justice at the least appointed for the Jews, by the nomination of the
Parliament.

Mat. Paris p. 778, 779. 785. Speed. p. 529.
In the year of our Lord; 1250. King Henry the 3d. burning with a covetous
desire, commanded money to be extorted from the Jews without all mercy, so as
they might seem to be altogether and irrecoverably impoverished; exacting what
moneys soever they had in their chests. Notwithstanding, although they were
miserable, yet they were pitied by none, because they were often proved and
convicted to have been counterfeiters as well of moneys as of seals. And to
pass by the moneys of others, we shall only mention one, that their malice may
the more appear to many. There was a certain rich Jew, having his abode and
house at Berkamstede and Wallingford, Abraham in name, not in faith, who was
very dear to Earl Richard, who had a very beautiful wife, and faithful to
him, named Flora. This Jew that he might accumulate more disgrace to Christ,
caused the Image of the Virgin Many, decently carved and painted, as the manner
is, holding her Son in her bosom. This Image the Jew placed in his house of
Office* and which is a great shame and ignomy to express, blaspheming the
Image it self, as if it had been the very Virgin her self, threw his most
filthy, and not to be named excrements upon her, days and nights, and commanded
his wife to do the like. Which when his wife saw, after some days, she grieved
at it by reason of the Sex, and passing by secretly, wiped off the filth from
the face of the Image most filthily defiled. Which when the Jew her husband had
fully found out, he therefore privily and impiously strangled the woman her
self, though his wife. But when these wicked deeds were discovered, and made
apparent, and proved by his conviction, although other causes of death were not
wanting, he was thrust into the most loathsome Castle of the Tower of London.
Whence to get his freedom, he most certainly promised, That he would prove all
the Jews of England, to have been most wicked Traitors. And when as he was
greatly accused almost by all the Jews of England, and they endeavored to put
him to death, Earl Richard interceded for him. Whereupon the Jews grievously
accusing him both of the clipping of money, and other wickednesses, offered Earl
Richard a thousand marks, if he would not protect him; which notwithstanding
the Earl refused, because he was called his Jew. This Jew Abraham therefore
gave the King 700 marks, that he might be freed from perpetual imprisonment, to
which he was adjudged, the Earl assisting him therein. The King thereupon at
the same time sent the Justices of the Jews throughout all England, to search
out all their money both in Debts and Possessions, and with them a certain most
wicked and merciless Jew, that he might wickedly and falsely accuse all the
rest against the truth; who verily reprehended the Christians, pitying and
weeping over the affliction of the Jews, and called the Kings Bailiffs,
lukewarm and effeminate; and gnashing with his teeth over every Jew, affirmed
with many great Oaths, that they could give twice as much more to the King,
then what they had given, although he most wickedly lied against his own head.
This Jew, that he might more effectually hurt the rest, revealed all their
secrets daily to the Kings Christian Exactors. In the mean time the King ceased
not to scrape money together from all hands, but principally from the Jews; so
that from one Jew alone, born and living in York, called Aaron, (because he
was convicted of falsifying a Charter, as was reported) he extorted 14000
marks, and 10000 marks of gold for the Queens use, for a little times respite,
that he might not languish in prison. All which sums being paid, it was found
that this Aaron had paid to the K. since his return from foreign parts, 30000
marks of silver, and two hundred marks of gold to the Queen, as the said Aaron
upon the attestation of his honor and faith averred to Matthew Paris, who
records it. Yet notwithstanding, although the Jews might be pitied, yet were
they pitied by no man, seeing they were corrupters and counterfeiters of the
Kings money and of charters, and manifestly and frequently proved, condemned,
and reprobated as such.

Mat. Paris, p. 827.
Philip Lunel Clerk, called to the service of the King, and addicted to the
custody of the Jews, Anno 1251. was grievously accused before the King, his
adversaries affirming, that when he and Nicholas of St Albans Clerk, were sent
toward the Northern parts to tax and squeeze the Jews, he privily received
most precious Vessels from a certain Jew, that he might spare him in his
Tallage to the King; and that he likewise took secret gifts from others, that
he might spare them; and that he oppressed these Jews notwithstanding, to the
damage of the King, and the violation of his Faith. Whereupon the King being
very angry, commanded Philip himself to be unworthily handled, until he should
satisfy him for this great transgression. Philip hereupon, a crafty and
circumspect man, humbly craved advice and assistance from the Lord John
Mansell, the Kings Prime Counselor, concerning his great tribulation, because
he had promoted him to the Kings service, who effectually procured that he
recovered the Kings favor, giving him a great sum of money for it, a thousand
marks, as was reported. Yet notwithstanding he was removed from his Office, and
not a little disgraced.

It seems the Kings Officers could fleece the Jews in that age, by secret
Bribes and Gifts, as well as himself, by intolerable Exactions.

Mat. Paris, p. 831. 856.
King Henry the III. to satisfy the Popes desire in taking a Voyage to the
Holy Land, Anno 1252. extorted from the Jews whatsoever those miserable
wretches might seem to have, not only by scraping or excoriating, but even by
unbowelling them. Being also an Hydropical thirster after gold, he so greedily
sucked talents, or Bullion, or Jewels, as well from Christians as Jews, that a
new Crassus might seem to be raised from the dead. And th^s very year Robert de
la Ho, to whom the King had committed the custody of the Jews, and of the Seal
which belonged to their Exchequer, was grievously accused before the King,
being charged with this crime, That he had oppressed the innocent Son of a
certain Knight, by a certain false Charter, confirmed with the Seal, of which
the said Robert, Justice of the Jews, was the bearer and keeper. Whereupon he
was basely apprehended, and committed to a close Prison; and defamed with the
like scandal wherewith Philip Lunel but the year just before had been entangled
in the-snares of the perfidious Jews, who was then their Justice. At last, by
the great labor of his friends, the malice of the Jews is detected, but the
innocence of the said Robert then set free, scarce declared. Whereupon being
put from his Offices, he openly paid 4 marks of gold at least for his fine.

Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 861* 862. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423.
This very year (1252.) there came out of the holy Land a Mandate from the King
of France; that all the Jews should be expelled out of the Realm of France, and
condemned to perpetual exile; with this clause of moderation added thereto: But
he who desires to remain, let him be an artificer, or handicrafts-man, and
apply himself to mechanical artifices. For it was scornfully objectd to the
said King by the Saracens; That we Nota.
d^d little love or reverence our Lord Jesus Christ, who tolerate the murderers
of him to live among us.

Mat. Paris, p. 873, 874.
In the year of Christ, 1253. November. 10. the Obligatory Charter wherewith the
Abbot and Covent of St. Alban were held bound for the debt of Richard de Oxaie
Knight, was taken out of the hand of Elias the London Jew, and freed out of the
chest; and it was proclaimed in the School of the Jews at London (where it
seems they had then a School) that the foresaid Abbot and Covent should be quit
from all this debt against them, from the beginning of the world till then, as
the Statute obtained by them protests.

Fox 'Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423. ex Eulogio.
The Jews in Northampton about the year of our Lord, 1253. had among themselves
prepared wildfire, to burn the City of London; for the which diverse of them
were taken and burned in the time of Lent, in the City of Northampton.

Mat. Paris p. 887.
Anno 1254. King Henry after Easter so cruelly raged against the most miserable
people of the Jews, that they loathed even to live. And when they were called
together, Earl Richard exacted of them for the use of the King, who was in
great want, no small sum of money, under pain of a most loathsome prison, and a
most ignominious death. Elias therefore of London, High Priest of the Jews,
taking counsel with his Companions, answered for them all, who had frequently
paid very great sums of money, whether they would or would not. O noble Lords,
we see undoubtedly that our Lord the King purposes to destroy us from under
heaven. We entreat, for Gods sake, that he would give us license and safe
conduct of departing out of his kingdom, that we may seek and find a mansion in
some other place, under some Prince who bears some bowels of mercy, and some
stability of truth and faithfulness. And we will depart, never to return again,
leaving here our housholdstuff, and houses behind us. How can he love or spare
us, miserable Jews, who destroys his own natural English? He has people, yea
his own Merchants, I say not Usurers, who Nota.
by usurious contracts heap up infinite heaps of money. Let the King rely upon
them, and gape after their emoluments. Verily they have supplanted and
impoverisht us. Which the K. howsoever dissembles to know, exacting fro us
those things we cannot give him, although he would pull out our eyes, or cut
our throats when he had first pulled off our skins. And speaking this with
sighs and tears hindering his speech, he held his peace, falling almost into an
ecstasy, ready to die. Which when it came to the knowledge of the Magistrates,
they permitted them not to depart out of the Realm; saying. Whether will ye
flee, O wretches? Behold the King of France hates and persecuteth you, and
has condemned you to perpetual exile: shunning Charibdis, you desire to be
drowned in Scylla. And so the small little substance, which was left to them
for their mean sustentation, was violently extorted from them.

Mat. Paris p. 902. Mat. West. p. 270. Holinshed. Vol. 3. p. 252.
King Henry the 3d. An. 1255. exacted with great earnestness from the Jews,
although very frequently impoverished, 8000 marks, to be speedily paid unto him
under pain of hanging. But they seeing nothing else hanging over them, but
destruction with confusion, answered all unanimously. Sir King, we see that
thou sparest neither Christians, nor Jews, but studiest with crafty fetches to
impoverish all men: we have no hope of respiration left us: the Usurers of the
Pope have supplanted us; permit us to depart out of thy kingdom with safe
conduct; and we will seek for our selves such a mansion as we can, be it what
it will. Which when the King had heard, he cried out with a querulous voice,
saying: It is no marvel if I covet money, it is an horrible thing to imagine the
debts wherein I am held bound. By the head of God they amount to the sum of two
hundred thousand marks, and if I should say of three, I should not exceed the
bounds of truth. I am deceived on every side. I am a maimed and abridged King,
yea, now but an halfed King. For having made a certain estimate of the expenses
of my rents, the sum of the annual rent of Edward my Son amounts to above
15000 marks. There is therefore a necessity for me to live of the money gotten
from what place soever, from whomsoever, and by what means soever. Therefore
being made another Titus, or Vespasian, he sold the Jews for some years to Earl
Richard his brother, that those whom the King had excoriated, he might
eviscerate. Yet the Eatl spared them, considering their abbreviated power, and
ignominious poverty.

Mat. Paris p. 912. Fabian part 7: p. 58. Fox Acts and. Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423.
Jo. Stow, p. 190. Grafton, p. 127 Holinshed, p. 253. Balaeus Cent. 4. c. 22.
Johan. Major l. 4. c. 12. Cent. Magdebur. 13. c. 14. col. 1282.
The same year, about the Feast of Peter and Paul, the Jews of Lincoln stole a
child called Hugo, being 8 years old, and when as they had nourished him in a
certain most secret chamber, with milk and other childish aliments, they sent
almost to all the Cities of England wherein the Jews lived, that in contempt
and reproach of Jesus Christ, they should be present at their sacrifice at
Lincoln: for they had, as they said, a certain child hid to be crucified.
Whereupon many assembled at Lincoln. And coming together, they appointed one
Lincoln Jew for the Judge, as it were for Pilate. By whose judgment, by the
consent of all, the child is afflicted with sundry torments. He is whipped even
unto blood and lividnesse, crowned with thorns, wearied with spittings and
shriekings: and moreover he is pricked by them all with ponyards, made to drink
gall, derided with reproaches and blasphemies, and frequently called by them
with grinding teeth, Jesus the false Prophet. And after rhey had derided him in
diverse manners, they crucified him, and peirced him with a spear to the heart.
And when the child had given up the ghost, they took down his body from the
cross, and took the bowels out of his corpse, for what end is unknown, but it
was said it was to exercise Magical arts. The mother of the child diligently
sought for her absent son for some days, and it was told her by neighbors,
that the last time they saw her child whom she sought, he was playing with the
children of the Jews of his age, and entered into the house of a certain Jew.
Whereupon the woman suddenly entered that house, and saw the body of the child
cast into a certain pit. And having warily called the Baylifs of the City
together, the body was found and drawn forth; and there was made a wonderful
spectacle among the people. But the woman, mother of the child, complaining and
crying out, provoked all the Citizens there assembled together, to tears and
sighs. There was then present at the place John de Lexinton, a circumspect and
discreet man, and moreover elegantly learned, who said. We have sometime heard,
that the Jews have not feared to attempt such things in reproach of Jesus
Christ, our crucified Lord. And one Jew being apprehended, to wit, he into
whose house the child entered playing, and therefore more suspected than the
rest; he says unto him. Owretch! know thou not that speedy destruction
abides thee? All the gold of England will not suffice for thy deliverance or
redemption. Notwithstanding I will tell thee, although unworthy, by what means
thou may preserve thy life and members, that thou may not be dismembered. I
will save both to thee, if thou do not fear to discover to me whatsoever
things are done in this case without falsehood. Whereupon this Jew, whose name
was Copin, believing he had thus found out a way of escape, answered, saying.
Sir John, if thou make thy words good by thy deeds, I will reveal wonderful
things to thee; and the industry of Sir John animating and exciting him
thereto, the Jew said. Those things are true which the Christians say. The Jews
almost every year crucify one Nota.
child, to the injury and contumely of Jesus; but it is not found out every
year: for they do this secretly, and in hidden and most secret places; But this
child whom they call Hugo, our Jews have most unmercifully crucified, and when
he was dead, and they desired to hide him being dead, he could not be buried in
the earth, nor hid. For the corpse of the innocent was reputed unprofitable for
Divination, for he was unbowelled for that end. And when in the morning it was
thought to be buried, the earth brought it forth, and vomitted it out, and the
body sometimes appeared inhuman, whereupon the Jews abhorred it. At last it was
cast headlong into a deep pit, neither as yet could it be kept secret, For the
importunate mother diligently searching all things, at last showed to the
Baylifs the body she had found. But Sir John notwithstanding this, kept the Jew
bound in chains. When these things were known to the Canons of the Church of
Lincoln, they requested the body to be given to them, which was granted them.
And when it had been sufficiently viewed by an infinite company of people, it
was honorably buried in the Church of Lincoln, as the corpse of a most precious
Martyr. The Jews kept the child alive for 10 days, that being fed for so many
days with milk, he might living suffer many sorts of torments. When the K.
returned from the Northern parts of England, and was certified of the
premises, he reprehended Sir John, that he had promised life and members to so
flagitious a person, which he could not give; for that blasphemer and homicide
was worthy the punishment of many sorts of death. And when as unavoydable
Judgment was ready to be executed upon this Offender, he said. My death is now
approaching, neither can my Lord John preserve me, who am ready to perish. I
now relate the truth to you all. Almost all the Jews of England consented to
the death of this child, whereof the Jews are accused: and almost out of every
city in England Nota.
wherein the Jews inhabit, certain chosen persons were called together to the
immolation of that child, as to a Paschal Sacrifice. And when as he had spoken
these things, together with other dotages, being tied to an horses tail, and
drawn to the Gallows, he was presented to the aereal Cacodaemons in body and
soul; and 91 other Jews, partakers of this wickedness, being carried in Carts
to London, were there committed to prison. Who if so be they were casually
bewailed by any Christians, yet they were deplored by the Caursini (the Popes
Italian Usurers) their corrivals with dry eyes. Afterward by the Inquisition of
the Kings Justices, it was discovered and found; That the Jews of England by
Common Council had slain the innocent Child, punished for many days, and
crucified. But after this the Mother of the said child constantly prosecuting
her appeal before the King against them for that iniquity and such a death; God
the Lord of Revenges, rendered them a condign retribution, according to their
merits; for on St. Clements day, 88. of the richest and greatest Jews of the
City of London, were drawn and hanged up in the air upon new Gibbets especially
prepared for that purpose, and more than 23 others were reserved in the Tower
of London to the like judgment.

I have transcribed this History at large out of Matthew Paris, who flourished
at that time, because our other Historians do but briefly touch it, and
because it undeniably manifests the transcendent impiety, blasphemy, malice,
persecution, and obloquy of the Jews against our Savior Jesus Christ, and
Christians, and their constant, usual practice of crucifying Children almost
every year, in contempt and reproach of our crucified Savior, by common
consent; which Mr. Nigh conceived might be easily wiped off, as false, and not
fully proved or charged on them by our Historians, which this ensuing passage
concerning these Jews will further ratify.

Mat. Paris. p. 922.
Certain infamous Jews being 71 in number, adjudged to death by the Oath of 25
Knights, for the miserable death of the Child crucified at Lincoln, being
reserved in the Prisons of London to be hanged Anno 1256 (the year after their
condemnation) sent secret Messengers (as their enemies affirm) to the Friars
Minors, that they might intercede for them, that they might be delivered from
death and prison, being notwithstanding worthy of the most shameful death.
Whereupon they (as the world reports, if the world in such a case be to be
credited) by the mediation of money, freed them by their prayers and
intercession, both from the prison and from the death which they had deserved;
led thereto with a spirit of piety, as I think is piously to be believed:
Because so long as any man is in life, and in this world, he has free will,
may be saved, and there is hope of him. But yet for the Devil, or the
manifestly damned we are not to hope nor pray, because there is no hope of
them; for death and a definitive sentence, at once irrevobly entangle them;
Neither could this answer excuse the Minors, for although they were not guilty,
yet the scandal did defame them. The common people now has withdrawn their
hands, that they do not benefit them with their alms, as heretofore, and the
Londoners devotion is grown cold toward the Minorites. For procuring these
condemned Jews life and liberty, whose money (it seems) could even corrupt
these very self-denying Popish Saints, who had renounced the world in habit,
but not in heart.

Mat. Paris. Addi^amenta, p. 202. 207.
All the Prelates of England in the year 1257. drew up certain Articles in
writing concerning their liberties, which they intended to present to the King
and Nobles, to be ratified by them in Parliament in due season; wherein they
complain, Artic. 32, 33. That when as the Jews are convicted before the
Ecclesiastical Judges for delinquency against an Ecclesiastical person, or for
Ecclesiastical things, or for sacrilege, or for laying violent hands upon a
Clerk, or for adultery with a Christian woman; the conusans of the cause is
hindered by the Kings prohibition: because it alleges that they have their
proper Judge, the Sheriff of the place, and their proper delegated Judges, who
may and ought to have conusance of these things. And yet if they be convented
by a Clergyman or Layman before them for such things, upon the denial thereof
by the person alone, the simple assertion of another Jew, and of one Christian,
without the administering of any Oath they purge themselves, the proof of the
prosecutor being utterly rejected.

Item, If Communion be denied to them by the Church because they bear not their
Table or sign, or because they retain Christian Nurses against the precepts of
the Church, or if they be excommunicated for some other excesses; the Bailiffs
(or Officers) of the King communicating with them, command on the behalf of our
Lord the King himself, that they be not avoided by any, and cause them to be
admitted and received to Communion.

Against which Grievances in derogation of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the
Bishops then thus provided. And because in like manner the office of the
Prelates is hindered when as it happens a Jew offending against Ecclesiastical
things and persons, shall be convented for these things before them, and for
other things which apperta^n to the Ecclesiastical Court of mere right; We
provide, that the Jew notwithstanding shallbe compelled to answerin these cases
by the interdict ofcommerce, contracts, and communion of the faithful:
likewise the inhibiters, hinderers and distrainers shall incur the
punishments of interdiction and excommunication.

(l) In the year of Christ 1259. On the Feast of Christ's Mat. Paris. Hist.
Angl. p. 982.
Nativity, a certain creature, Elias a Jew of London, whose Surname was Bishop,
fearing danger and manifest damnation to himself, fled to the laver of defense
and salvation, and was newborn in the Spirit; for being cleansed with wholesome
Baptism, two others also accompanying him, he was delivered out of the lot of
the Devil, and saved from the revenge of the most wicked crime heretofore
committed by him. For it was said, that in his house that poisonous drink was
made, which had proved mortal and perilous to many Nobles of England,
(poisoned therewith by the Jews) which even he himself, as was reported, well
confessed. But then he was a Devil, but now thoroughly changed, and a Christian,
and as the condition, so the operation is changed. As Matthew Paris Ironically
writes of him.

Mat. Paris hist. Ang. p. 990 Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 423. John Stow. p.
91.
A certain Jew in the year 1260 fell into a Privy at Teuk^sbury; but because it
was then the Sabbath, he would not suffer himself to be pulled out, except on
the following Lords day, for the reverence of his Sabbath: Wherefore Richard
Clare Earl of Gloucester, commanded him (in reverence of the Lords Day) to be
kept there till Monday, at which time he was found dead of the stink, or hunger.

John Stows Chronicle p. 210. Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 263.
The Barons of England Ann. 1262. robbed and slew the Jews in all places: There
were slain of them in London to the number of 700. the rest were spoiled, and
their Synagogues defaced. The original occasion of which massacre was, because
one Jew had wounded a Christian man in London, within Cole-church, and would
have enforced him to have paid more than two pence for the Usury of 20 s. for
one week.

Mat. West. An. 1264. pars 2. p. 320. Rapbael Holinshed, Vol. 3. p. 267.
In the year 1264. in the Passion week, the Jews that inhabited the City of
London, being detected of Treason, which they had devised against the Barons
and Citizens, were slain almost all the whole number of them, and great riches
found in their houses, which were taken and carried away by those that
ransacked the same houses.

Holinshed Vol. 3. p. 272.
The disinherited Barons and Gentlemen in the Isle of Oxholme, in the year
1266, took and sacked the City of Lincoln, spoiled the Jews, and slew many of
them, entered their Synagogue, and burnt the Book of their Law.

Mat. West. An. 1278. p. 367. Walsingham, Hist. Ang. Anno 1279. p. 18. Ypodigma
Neustriae, p. 69. F^bian, part. 7. p. 124. Grafton, p. 164. Stow, p. 200.
Holinshed, p. 279.
In the 7th year of King Edward the 1. Ann. Dom. 1278. as some, or 1279. as
others compute it, the King held a Parliament at London, which was chiefly
called for the reformation of his coin, which was then sore clipped, by reason
whereof it was much diminished and impaired. In the time of this Parliament in
the month of November all the Jews throughout England, (as Matthew
Westminster) or many of the Jews in London, and other parts of the Realm, were
apprehended in one day, and imprisoned in London for clipping of money: and in
December following, diverse Enquests were charged in London to enquire of the
said Jews and all others who had so blemished and clipped the Kings Coin; By
which Enquests the Jews of the City, with the Goldsmiths that kept exchanges
of silver were indicted. Andshortly after Candelmas, the Mayor and Justices of
the Land sat at London, where before them was cast 297 persons for clipping; of
the which 3 only were Englishmen, and all the other were Jews, born either
within this Realm, or elsewhere, but most of them English Jews; who were all of
them at sundry places and times put to execution in London; who impeached the
chief men of London, and very many Christians, who consented to their
wickednesses. After which a very great multitude of Jews were hanged in other
Cities of England for the same offense.

John Stow, p. 20.
Anno 1279. The Jews of Northampton crucified a Christian boy, but did not
throroughly kill him, upon Good Friday; for the which fact many of the Jews at
London, after Easter, were drawn at Horses tails, and hanged.

John Stow his Chronicle p. 202.
In the year of our Lord 1282. John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, sent an
express precept and command to the Bishop of London, to suppress and destroy
all the Synagogues of the Jews within his Diocese.

Stow his Chronicle, p. 203. 204.
On May 2. Anno 1287. All the Jews of England were apprehended by the Kings
precept, for what cause was not known; who ransomed themselves for 12000l. of
silver; They had then a Synagogue at Canterbury. Fabian writes, that the Jews
of England were sessed at great sums of money (perchance the cause of their
seizure) which they paid unto the King; But of Fabian part 7. p. 131. Grafton
p. 168. Holinshed vol. 3. p. 283.
other Authors it is said, That the Commons of England then granted to the King
the fifth part of their movables, for to have the Jews banished out of the
land. For which cause the said Jews, for to put the Commons from their
purposes, gave of their free wills great sums of money to the King, which
saying appears to be true, for that the said Jews were exiled within few
years after, with whom Grafton and Holinshed accord. A strong evidence of the
potency of Jewish money, over-powring the whole Commons of England in
Parliament, and this their Liberal subsidy for their banishment at that season.

About this year (as I conceive) the Statutes of Edward the first, Entitled de
Judeismo, were made and published, Printed in rench in Tottles Magna Charta
Anno 1556. part 2. f. 58, 59. which being not printed amongst our Statutes at
large in the English Tongue, I shall here insert and translate.

Nota.
1. For that the King has seen, that many mischiefs and disherisons of honest
men of this land have happened by the Usuries which the Jews have made therein
in times past, and that many sins have therein risen from thence: Albeit he and
his Ancestors have had great profit from the Jews both now and in times past:
Nota.
Notwithstanding this, for the honor of God, and for the common benefit of the
People, the King does ordain and establish; that no Jew hereafter shall take
ought for usury upon lands, rents, nor upon other things: and that no Usury
shall run from the Feast of St. Edward last past, and before, but that the
Covenants before made shall be held, save only that the Usuries themselves
shall cease. Provided that all those who are indebted to Jews upon pawns
moveable, shall discharge them between this and Easter at furthest, and if not,
let them be forfeited: And if any Jew shall take usury against this
establishment, The King neither by himself, nor any of his Officers, will not
intermeddle to cause him to recover his debt (or use) but will punish him at
his pleasure for the Trespass, and shall do right to the Christian to recover
his gage.

2. And it is provided, that the distresses for the debt of Jews, shall not
hereafter be so grievous, that the moity of Lands and Chattels to the
Christians shall not remain for their sustenance. And that no distress shall
be made for the debt of a Jew, upon the heir to the Debtor named in the Charter
of the Jew, nor upon other which holds the Land which was the Debtors, before
the debt shall be dereigned and acknowledged in Court. And if the Sheriff or
other Bailiffs by commandment of the King ought to make seisin to a Jew, to one
or more, for their debt, of chattels, or of lands, to the value of the debt;
the chattels shall be praised by the Oath of honest men: the chattels shall be
delivered to the Jew or Jewesse, or to their Attorney, to the value of the
debt. And if the chattels be not sufficient, the lands shall be extended by the
same Oath, before that the seisin shall be delivered to the Jew or Jewesse,
every one according to the value: and so that they may after know certainly the
Debt is discharged, that the Christian afterward may then have his lands:
saving to the Christian for ever the moity of his lands, and of his chattels
for his sustenance, as before is said, and the chiefhouse.

3. And if any thing stolen at this hour shall be found in the possession of a
Jew, and any will sue, let the Jew have his summons, if he may have it, and if
not, he shall answer so, that he shall never be privileged for it otherwise
than a Christian.

4. And that all the Jews shall be residents in the Cities and in the Buroughs
which are the Kings own, where the Sea here, p. 15. and Rot. Claus. 1 E. 1. m.
3.
Chest for the Jews Indenture is wont to be. And that every Jew after he is
past 7. years of age, shall carry a sign (or badge) in his chief garment; that
is to say in form of two Talles of yellow taffety, of the length of six
fingers, and breadth of 3. fingers (or handfulls.) And that every one after he
is past 12 years, shall pay 3 d. the poll every year to the King, which shall
be paid at Easter; and this shall be intended as well of women as of men.

5. And that no Jew shall have power to infeoff another Jew nor Christian of
their houses, rents or tenements which they have now purchased, not to alien
them in any manner, nor to make an acquittance to any Christian of his debt,
without the special license of the King, until the King has otherwise
ordained.

6. And because holy Church wills and suffers, that they should live and be
protected, the King takes them into his Protection, and gives them his peace,
and wills that they shall live, and shall be guarded and defended by his
Sheriffs, and his other Bailiffs, and by his Leiges; and commands that none
shall do them harm, injury, nor force in their bodies, nor in their goods,
movables or unmoveables. And that they shall not be impleaded, sued nor
challenged in any Court, but in the Sea Rot. claus. 3 E. 1. memh. 17.
Kings Court, wheresoever they are.

7. And that none of them shall be obedient, respondent, nor render rent, but
to the King and his Bailiffs in his name, if it be not of their houses which
they now hold rendering rent; saving the right of holy Church.

8. And the King grants them, that they shall live in their lawful
merchandises, and by their labor, and that they shall converse with the
Christians for lawful merchandising in selling and in buying. But yet, that by
this privilege, nor any other, shall they be levant (rising) or couchant
(lying down) amongst them. And the King will not, that by reason of their
merchandise, that they should be in lots nor scots, nor Tallage with those of
the Cities or Buroughs where they remain, seeing they are tailable to the
King, as his own Vassals, and to none other.

9. Moreover the King grants them, that they may buy houses and curtelages in
the Cities or Buroughs where they reside, so as they hold them in chief of the
King: saving to the Lords the Services due and accustomed.

10. And that they may take Lands to farm for term of six years, or under,
without taking homages or fealties, or such manner of service of a Christian,
and without having advowson of holy Church, for to support their life in the
world, if they know not how to merchandise, or be unable to labor. And this
power for to take Lands to farm, shall not endure to them but 15 years from
this time forth to come.

By these Laws this politic King to please his English Christian Subjects, who
desired and solicited the Jews banishment in Parliament, abridged many of
their former privileges, and put many new restraints upon them. And yet on the
other hand, to gratify the Jews, (who gave him more moneys than the English,
to reside here still) he takes them all into his special protection, prohibits
all violence to their persons or estates, and grants them some petty
privileges for the present, which seemed to content them, and made for his own
advantage, more than theirs.

Thomas Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 14.
K. Edward the 1. the next year (1288.) being in Gascoigne, a certain English
Knight decreed to convent a Jew, for the undue detention of a certain Manor
morgaged to him, before the Judges: but the crafty Jew refused to answer,
pretending a Charter of King Henry heretofore, which was granted to him, that
he should not be drawn into judgment before any Judge, except only before the
person of the King. The Knight being troubled at this, went into Gascoigne,
that he might obtain some remedy hereupon from the King. Whom when the King had
heard, he answered: It is not seemly for children to make void the deeds of
their parents; to whom by Gods Law they are commanded to give reverence:
wherefore I have decreed, not to make void the deed of my Father; but I grant
to thee, and to the rest of my Realm by the like Law (lest a Jew might seem
better than a Christian) that for any injury whatsoever done to the Jew, so
long as he shall enjoy his Charter, you shall not be convented before any
Judge, except my self. The Knight returning with this privilege, the Jew
considering that danger and peril hung over his head, voluntarily renounced his
Charter, evacuating the condition of his privilege, and wishing that both
parties might be subject to the Common Law.

Th. walsingham, Hist. Angl. p. 15.
The year following, Anno 1289. King Edward taking upon him the character of
the Cross at Blankeford in Gascoigne, presently banished all the Jews out of
Gascoigne, and all other his Lands which he possessed in the Realm of France,
AS ENEMIES OF THE CROSS. From whence returning into England, Anno 1290, he was
joyfully received at London, both by the Clergy and all the people; and the
same year exiling the Jews likewise out of England, giving them expenses into
France he confiscated all the rest of their goods.

Upon what grounds, by what Authority, for what time, in what manner, with what
desire of, and content to all the whole Commons and Realm of England, the Jews
were then banished thence, these ensuing Historians will at large relate, in
their own words, which I shall transcribe for the better information and
satisfaction of all sorts of men, whether Christians or Jews.

Flores Hist. par. 2. ann. 1290. p. 381.
Matthew Westminster (flourishing at that time) gives this relation of it.
About the s^^days, namely the 31 of August, the exasperating multitude of Jews,
which dwelt confidently in times past through diverse Cities and strong Forts,
JUSSA EST, was commanded with their wives and children, together with their
moveable goods, to depart out of England, about the Feast of All Saints, which
was assigned to them for the term, WHICH THEY DARED NOT TO TRANSGRESS UNDER
PAIN OF HANGING: whose number was supposed to be 16511. Such A DECREE had
issued out before from the landable King of England in the parts of Aquitain,
from whence all the Jews were likewise banished.

Ypodigma Neustriae, p. 72.
Thomas Walsinghaem, living near that age, thus records it. The King returning
out of Gascoigne to London, was solemnly received by the Clergy and all the
people, who the same year banishing all the Jews out of England giving them
their expenses into France, confiscated the rest of their goods. This year the
King held A Parliament, in which were made the Statutes called Westminster the
3d. In quo etiam Parliamento pro expulsione Iudaeorum, concessa sunt Regi a
Populo, quinta decima pars bonorum. In which Parliament likewise for the
banishment of the Jews, there was granted to the King by the People, a
fifteenth part of their goods.

De eventibus Angliae, l. 3. c. 1. col. 2462, 2466.
Henry de Knyghton a Canon of Le^cester, a most diligent Antiquary flourishing
in Richard the 2ds. reign, renders it in these terms* King Edward grievously
punished the Jews and their consorts for clipping of money, and corrupt
exchanges, where upon in one day he caused all the Jews to be apprehended, some
he hanged, the rest he banished. When he had done his will upon his corrupt
Judges (fined, deposed, and some of them banished in the same Parliament that
the Jews were exiled) presently another cause moved him concerning Money, which
he found to be basely clipped and corrupted, to the prejudice of the Crowns,
and the great damage of the people, By the Infidelity and Malice of the Jews as
it was inquired and found, Et fe^it stabilire unum Parliamentum, in quo
convicti sunt Iudaei de ea falsitate: Et statuit, quod omnes Iudaeos exirent de
Terra Angliae, deinceps non redituri, propter eorum incredulitatem
principaliter, et propter falsitatem quam eis dure imposuerat: et pro hac causa
cum festinatione facienda, et sine d^latione explenda, communes regni ^ederunt
Regi quintum denarium de omnibus bonis suis mobilibus. And he caused a
Parliament to be (...)ed, wherein the Jews are convicted of that falsehood; And
he ordained, that all the Jews should depart out of the Realm of England, not
to return again afterward, for their incredulity, principally, and for their
falsenesse, which he had hardly pressed upon them. And for this (their
banishment) speedily to be made and executed, without delay, the Commons of the
Realm gave to the King the fifth part of all their moveable goods.

Histor. Majoris Brit. l. 4. c. 9.
John Major, and the Centur. Magd. 13 c. 15 col. 1286.
Centuriators of Magdeburgh, out of him, thus register it to posterity. In the
year 1290 the Jews were banished out of England, for the Englishmen had made a
great complaint to Edward the 1. that by their usuries and frauds most m^n of
the inferior sort were reduced to nothing, which thing was gainful to the
King; for every of the Commoners gave the King the fifteenth penny, that he
might banish the Jews.

=Our learned Centur. 4 Script. Brit. c. 60. in Appendice.
John Bale Ju. Ed. 1.
Polydor Virgil, and the Century VVriters out of him thus express it. Anno
1291 [It should be 1290] In the Parliament at London, there was a debate in the
first place, Concerning the banishing of the Jews; whereof there was a great
multitude throughout England; Sed edicto Publico Concilii Londinensis (writes
one) Publico igitur decreto (says another) But by the public Cent. Magd. 13
c. 9. col. 967. c. 13. col. 1284.
Edict of the Parliament assembled in London, and by a public decree; They
were all commanded to depart the Realm, with their goods, which they, Concilii
jussis obedientes, obeying the commands of the Parliament, speedily did.

To these Latin Authors, I might annex Thomas Stubs his Act a Pontificum
Eboracensium: col. 1728. who makes mention of this universal banishment of them
out of all England in one day; but I shall pass to our more Common English
Historians.

Fabian, in his Chronicle, part 7. p. 133. Mr. John Fox in his Acts and
Monuments, Land. 1640. Vol. 1. p. 443. and Richard Grafton in his Chronicle. p.
169. thus report it, in the same words almost. This year also [1290.] all the
Jews were utterly banished the Realm of England, for the which the Commons gave
the King a fifteen.

Nicholas Trivet in his Polychronicon, and William Caxton, in his Chronicles,
printed 1502. in the life of K. Edw. the 1. thus stories the Jews banishment,
out of Hygden and Trev^sa, in their words; A none after the King had done his
will of the Justices, tho let he inquere and espy how the Jews dysceyved and
beguyled his people, thorough the sin of falsness: and of Usury. And let
Ordain a Prevy Parliament among his Lords: So they ordained among them, That
all Jews should void out of England for their Mysbyleve, and also for their
false Usury that they did unto Christian Men. And for to speed and make an end of
this thing, All the Comynalte of England gave unto the King the XV. Penny of
all their Goods mevable: and so were the Jews driven out of England. And tho
went the Jews into France, and there they dwelled, through leve of King Phylip
that tho was King of France. Raphael Holinshed in his Chronicles, out of them,
Vol. 3. p. 285. thus publishes it. In the same year was a Parliament holden at
Westminster, wherein the Statutes of Westminster the 3d. were ordained. It was
also DECREED, That all the Jews should avoid out of the Land: in consideration
whereof, a fifteenth was granted to the King: and so hereupon were the Jews
banished out of all the Kings Dominions: and NEVER SINCE COULD THEY OBTAIN ANY
PRIVILEGE TO RETURN HITHER AGAIN. All their goods not moveable were
confiscated, with their tailles and Obligations, but all their goods that were
moveable, together with their coin of gold and silver, the King licensed them
to have and convey with them. See Cooks 2. Instit. p. 508.
A sort of the richest of them being shipped with their Treasure in a mighty
tall ship, which they had hired, when the same was under sail, and got down the
Thames toward the mouth of the River beyond Quinborow. The Master Marmer
bethought him of a wile, and caused his men to cast anchor, and so rode at the
same till the ship by ebbing of the stream remained on the dry sands. The
Master herewith enticed the Jews to walk out with him on land for recreation:
and at length, when he understood the tide to be coming in, he got him back to
the ship, whether he was drawn by a cord. The Jews made not so much have as he
did, because they were not ware of the danger. But when they perceived how the
matter stood, they cried to him for help? Howbeit he told them, that they ought
to cry rather unto Moses, by whose conduct their Fathers passed through the red
Sea, and therefore if they would call to him for help, he was able enough to
help them out of these raging floods, which now came in upon them: They cried
indeed, but no succor appeared, and so they were swallowed up in the water.
The Master returned with the ship, and told the King how he had used the
matter, and had both thanks and reward, as some have written. But Chron.
Dunstap. Cooks 2 Instit. p. 508.
others affirm, (and more truly as should seem) that diverse of those Mariners
which dealt so wickedly against the Jews, were hanged for their wicked
practice, and so received a just reward of their fraudulent and mischi^vous
dealing.

John Stow in his Annals, p. 204. writes thus of it; King Edward banished all
the Jews out of England, giving them to bear their charges till they were out
of the Realm. The number of the Jews then expelled, was fifteen thousand and
sixty persons, whose houses being sold, the King received an infinite mass of
money.

John Speed, in his History of Great Britain, p. 545. thus varieth the
expression of it. King Edward, Anno 1290. to purge England from such
corruptions and oppressions as under which it groaned, not neglecting therein
his particular gain, banished the Jews out of the Realm, confiscating all their
goods, leaving them nothing but money to bear their charges, they by their cruel
Vsuries HAVING EATEN HIS PEOPLE TO THE BONES.

To pass by Heylms Microcosm, p. 570. Henry Isaacsons Chronology, Ann. 1290.
with others, who mention this their final banishment out of England, I shall
conclude with the words of Samuel Daniel, his History, p. 160. Of NO LESS
GRIEVANCE (than corrupt Judges then fined, displaced, banished) this King eased
his people, by the banishment of the Jews, for which the kingdom willingly
granted him a Fifteenth, HAVING BEFORE [in Anno Regis 9.] OFFERED A FIFTH PART
OF THEIR GOODS TO HAVE THEM EXPELLED: But then the Jews gave more, and so
stayed till this time; which brought him a great benefit by confiscation of
their immoveables, with their Tallies, and Obligations, which amounted to an
infinite value. But now has he made his last commodity of this miserable
people, which having never been under other cover, but the will of the Prince,
had continually served the turn in all the necessary occasions of his
Predecessors, but especially of his Father and himself.

Sir Edward Cook in his 2d. Institutes, p. 506, 507, 508, in his Commentary
upon Statutum de Judaismo forecited, seems to contradict these forecited
Historians touching their Banishment, whose words I shall at large rehearse,
and refute to in this particular. This Statute was made (writes he) in the
Parliament of 18 Edw. 1. That the mischiefs before this Statute, against Jewish
Usury, were these. 1. The evils and disherisons of the good men of the land. 2.
That many of the sins and offenses of the Realm, had risen, and been committed
by reason thereof, to the great dishonor of Almighty God. (And are not these
two sufficient grounds to keep them out now, as well as to restrain and banish
them then?) The difficulty (adds he) was how to apply a remedy, considering
what great yearly revenue the King had by the Usury of the Jews, and how
necessary it was, that the King should be supplied with Treasure. What benefit
the Crown had, before the making of this Act, appears by former records, as
take Rot. Pat. Anno 3 E. 1. m. 14. 17. 20. william Middleton reddit Compot.
one for many. From the 17 of December in the 50 year of H. 3 until the Tuesday
in Shrovetide, the 2d. year of Edward the first, which was about 7. years, the
Crown had four hundred and twenty thousand pounds, fifteen shillings and four
pence; De exitibus Judaismi: at which time, the ounce of silver was but 20 d.
and now it is more than treble so much. So as the recital of the Preamble is
true, That he and his Ancestors had received great profit from Judaism. (i)
Many provisions were made both by l) Temp. R. 1. Jo. Char. 2. oh an. n. 49. 53.
18 H. 3. Dors. claus. m. 27. Dors. Pat. 55. H. 3. m. 10.
this King and others: Some time they were banished, but their cruel usury
continued, and soon after they returned: and for respect of lucre and gain,
King John, in the second year of his reign, granted unto them large Liberties
and Privileges, whereby the mischiefs rehearsed in this Act multiplied. But
the lucre and gain which King John had, and expected of the Infidel Jews, made
him, IMPIE JUDAISARE: for to the end they should exercise the Laws of their
Sacrifices (which they could not do without a Priesthood) the King by his
Charter granted them to have one, etc. Which for the great rarity thereof, and
for that we find it not either in our Books or Histories, I will rehearse in
haec verba.

Rot. char. 1. Reg^s Johan. part. 1. m. 28. Char. 171.
Rex omnibus sidelibus suis, and omnibus, and Judaeis and Anglis, salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, Jacobo Judaeo de Londoniis Presbytero, Judaeorum
Presbyteratum omnium Judaeorum totius Angliae. Habendum and tenendum quam in
vixerit, libere and quiet, and honorifice and integre; it a quod nemo ^i super
hoc molestiam aliquam, aut gravamen infer praesumat. Quare volumus and
firmiter praecipimus, quod eidem Jacobo quoad vixerit, Presbyteratum Judaeorum
per totam Angliam, garantitis, manu-teneatis, and pacifice defendatis. Et si
quis eum super eo sorisfacere praesumpserit, id ei sine dilatione (salva nobis
emenda nostra) de forisfactura nostra emendare faciatis, tanquam Dominico
Judaeo nostro, quem specialiter in servicio nostro retinuimus. Prohibemus etiam
ne de aliquo ad se pertinente ponatur in placitum, nisi coram nobis, aut coram
capitali Justiciario nostro, sicut Charta Regis Richardi fratris nostri
restatur. Test S. Bathoniens. Episcopo, etc. Dat: per manus Huberti
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi Cancellarii nostri apud Rothomagum 21 die Julii,
Anno Regni nostri primo.

To which Charter Sir Edward Cook annexeth this marginal Note, This King had a
most troublesome and dishonorable rrign, God raising against him, FOR HIS JUST
PUNISHMENT, two potent Enemies, Pope Innocent the 3 and Philip King of France.
And besides, which was the worst, he lost the heart and love of his Baronage
and Subjects, and at the last had a fearful end.

He adds (l) Our Noble King Edward 1 and his Father (i) Rot. 2. E. 1. m. 1. 3.
5. Rot. Claus. 3. l. 1 m. 8. 10. 13. 16. 23. Rot. Parl. 3 E. 1. m. 36. and 17.
Dors. Claus. 7 E. 1. m. 6.
H. 3 before him, sought by diverse Acts and Ordinances, to use some means and
moderation herein, but in the end it was found; That there was no mean in
mischief, and as Seneca says, Res profecto Stulta est nequitiae modus (And
will it not be so now in their new limited readmission if consented too?) And
therefore King Ed. 1. as this act says: for the honor of God, and for the
common profit of his people, without all respect, (in respect of these) of the
filling of his own Coffers, did ordain, That no Jew from thenceforth should
make any bargain or contract for usury, nor upon any former contract should
take any usury, from the Feast of St. Edward then last past. So in effect all
Jewish Usury was forbidden, This Law struck at the root of this pestilent weed,
for hereby Usury it self was forbidden, and thereupon the cruel Jews thirsting
after rich gain, to the number of 15060 departed out of this Realm into foraign
parts, where they might use their Jewish trade of Usury, and from that time
that Nation never returned again into this Realm. Holinshed p. 285. Walsing.
Tpodig. 72. Flerileg. chron. Dunstable.
Some are of opinion, (and so it is said in some of our Histories) That it was
enacted by authority of Parliament, that the usurious Jews should be banished
out of the Realm: But the truth is, that their usury was banished by this Act
of Parliament, and that was the cause, that they banished themselves, into
other Countries, where they might live by their usury. So that by his opinion,
they were not then banished by the King or Parliament, but only voluntarily
banished themselves upon the making of this Statutes aginst their Usury.

But under the favor of this deceased reverend Judge, whose memory I generally
reverence, this opinion of his is a mere mistake. For 1. This Statute of
Judaisme was made some years before their banishment hence, as I formerly
hinted, and the last clause thereof for renting houses (to continue for 15
years) manifests; not in 18E. 1. 2ly. No Record nor Historian mentions, that
they voluntarily banished themselves upon the making of this Law, neither can
their voluntary departure hence upon this occafion be styled a Banishment. 3ly.
The forecited Historians record, that they gave but few years before a vast sum
of money to prevent their banishment, then urged in Parliament by the Commons,
with the profer of the 5 part of their goods to the King for their banishment
and therefore it is very improbable they would at the same time volunntarily
banish themselves. 4ly. All the last cited Historians of these latter times
unanimously record, and theywere judicially, really banished both by the King
and Parliament, principally for their infidelity, and other fore-alloaged
reasons, commanded under pain of hanging to depart out of it by a set day; for
the effecting and hastening whereof, the Commons gave the King a sifteenth.
Therefore not banished by of themselves alone. Who are more to be credited than
this Judges singular opinion. 5ly. His own subsequent words and Records in
direct terms contradict this opinion of his no less than 5 times, which I
wonder he observed not, I shall recite them at large to undeceive his
over-credulous Readers of the long Robe, who take his words and works for
Oracles (though in many things very full of gross mistakes contradicted by by
his own Records, he cites, specially in his Chapter of See my Levellers
levelelled and Plea for the Lords.
Parliament and Admiralty.

2 Instit. p. 507.
And for that [writes he] they were odious both to God and Man, that they might
pass out of the Realm in safety, they made Petition to the King, that a
certain day might he prefixed to them to depart the Realm [it was prefixed by
the King and Parliament against their wills] to the end that they might have
the Kings writ to his Sheriffs for their safe conduct, and that no injury,
molestation, damage or grievance be offered to them in the mean time, One of
which Writs we will transcribe.

Rot. claus. 18 E. 1. m. 6. 11 Julii. The like writs, to other Counties and
entitled, De Judaeis Regno Angliae exeuntibus.
Rex, Vic: G. Cum Judaeis Regni nostri universis CERTUM TEMPUS PRAEFIXERIMUS (
therefore prefixed by the King himself, without their Petition) ^ regno illo
transfretandi: Nolentes quod ipsi per ministros nostros, aut alios quoscunque,
aliter quam sieri consnevit, indebite pertrectentur: Tibi praecipimus, quod per
totam Ballivam tuam, public proclamari, and firmiter inhiberi facias, ne quis
eis intra terminum predictum, injuriam, molestiam, damnum inferat, seu
gravamen. Et cum contingat ipsos cum catallis suis, quae eis concessimus,
versus parts London, causa transfretationis, suae, dirigere gressus suos,
salvum and securum conductum eis habere facias sumptibus eorum. Proviso, quod
Judaei praedicti, ante recessum suum, Vadia Christianorum quae penes se habent,
illis quorum fuerint, si ea acquietare voluerint, restituant, ut tenentur.
Test Rege apud Westminst. 18. die Julii, Anno 18 E. 1.

This Statute, De Judaismo, was made at the Parl. 1 3 E. 1.
Parl. post festum Hilarii, Anno 18 E. 1. At which Parliament the King had a 15
granted to him, PRO EXPULSIONE JUDAEORUM [Therfore by his own confession they
were banished by the King and Parliament against their wills and a Fifteenth
given for it, as the former Historians note] And this writ was granted in July
following [in pursuit therefore of their Judgment of banishment, not upon
their petition] the King beginning his reign November. 16* For the Parliament
knew [a strange conceit of a Judge] that by banishing of Usury [Did they banish
it only, not the Jews?] the Jews would not remain. And thus this Noble King by
this means BANISHED FOR EVER THESE INFIDEL USURIOUS JEWS [Ergo, their persons,
as well as Usury only] the number of which Jews THUS BANISHED, was fifteen
thousand and threescore.

Plac. Parl. Post Pascha apud London. 21 E. 1. rot. 4.
We will here add a (Parliament) Record de Priore de Bridlington; thus.

Et quod praedictus Prior cogno cit, quid praedicta pecunia praed. Judaeo
debebatur, viz. 300l. nec ei solvebatur ANTE EXILIUM JUDAEORUM ( therefore by
this Parliamentary record but 3 years after, they were judicially banished by
Parliament, not voluntarily of themselves, no banishment in Law.) Et quicquid
remansit reorum, debitis aut catallis in regno POST EORUM EXILIUM, [ again
repeated] Domino Regi fuit. Consideratum est, quod Dominus Rex recuperec
pecuniam praedictam: and dictum est eidem Priori, quod non exeat Villaean equam
Domino Regi de praedicta pecunia satisfaciat: Et respondeat Johannes
Archiepiscopus Eborum, quia praecepit dicto Priori solvere Valetto suo
praedictam pecuniam in deceptionem Regis, contra Sacramentum and fidelitatem
suam Domino Regi datam. Idem in alio Rot. An. 22 E. 1. rot 5.

Therefore by these 3 records resolutions cited by himself, the Jews were all
banished by sentence of Parliament, in such sort as our Historians record, and
not in his New sense alone, amounting but to a Recesse.

By all these concurrent Testimonies it is apparent [against Sir Edward Cooks
groundless conceit.]

1. That all the Jews were then banished out of England, never to return again,
at the special instance, and request of the Commons in two several Parliaments,
as an intolerable grievance and oppression under which they then groaned.

2. That the principle grounds of this their perpetual banishment were, their
infidelity, Usury, forgeries of Charters, clipping and falsifying of moneys, by
which they prejudiced the King and kingdom, and much oppressed and impoverished
the pople.

3. That this their banishment was so acceptable to all the people, who
oft-times pressed it in Parliament, that they gave the King a Fifth and
Fifteenth part of their movables, to speed and execute it.

4. That this their banishment was by the unanimous desire, Judgment, Edict,
and Decree both of the King and his Parliament; and not by the King alone: and
this Banishment, total, of them all, and likewise final, Never to return into
England. Which Edict and Decree not now extant in our Parliament Rolls (many of
which are lost) nor printed Statutes; yet it is mentioned by all these
Authorities.

From whence I shall infer and conclude: That as by the fundamental Laws of
England, No Freeman and Natives of England can be justly banished or exiled out
of it, but by special judgment of Parliament, or by Act of Parliament; as is
evident by Magna Charta c. 29. The banishment of Sir Thomas Wayland Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas 19. E. 1 Rot. Parl. rot. 12. and these Jews then
banished. Exilium Hugonis le Dispenser patris and filii. Tottles Magna Charta,
f. 50, 51. The double banishment of Peter de Gaverston out of England, assensu
communi Procerum and Magnatum, and of the King in Parliament. Walsingham Hist.
Angliae p. 68, 71, 72. The Statute of 1 Edward the 3. c. 2. 11 Richard the 2.
c. 2, 3, 4. for the banishment of Belknap, and other Judges into Ireland, 21.
R. 2. Rot. Pa^ l. n. 16. 17. For the banishment of Thomas Arundel Archbishop
of Canterbury, The Statute of 35 Eliz. c. 1. of 39 Eliz. c. 4. For banishing
dangerous Sectaries, Rogues, out of the Realm after conviction, upon Indictment
only, not before, (which could not be done by Law, before these Acts) Cooks 2
Institutes f. 47. Mr. St. John's speech against the Shipmony- Judges p. 22 My
New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, p. 166, 167, 168. Walsingham, Hist.
Angliae, p. 394: and other Testimonies; as also by 1 E. 3. r. 5. 4 H. 4. c. 13.
The Statute for the pressing of Soldiers for Ireland. 17 Caroli. Exact
Collect, p. 435. The Petition and Protestation of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament against serving the King in person, or contribution to his wars in
Flanders and other forain parts, 25 E. 1. Walsingham Hist. p. 35, 37, 38, etc.
nor yet in Gascoigne, France, Notmandy, Scotland, or Ireland, Cooks 2 Instit.
p. 528. 4. H. 4. n. 48. 1 H. 5. n. 17. 7 H. 5. n. 9. 18 R. 2. n. 6. So, none
once banished the Realm by judgment or Act of Parliament, can, may, or ought,
by the fundamental and known common Laws of England, to be restored and
recalled again, but only by a like judgment, Act and Restitution in full
Parliament, as is adjudged, declared, resolved by the cases, and Petitions of
the two Spencers and Pierce Gaveston, Walsingham, Ypodig. Neustriae. p. 152.
and Hist Angl. p. 68. 71, 72. Holinshed, p. 328. Speeds History, p. 674. The
Printed Statute of 20 R. 2. c. 6. for the restitution of Belknap, and the other
exiled Judges 28 E. 3. Rot. Parl. n. 8. to 14. and 29 E. 3. Rot Parl. n. 29.
touching the Repeal of the Judgment in Parl. against Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, 17 R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 18. for the pardon and restitution of the
Justices banished into Irel. 21 R. 2. n. 55. to 71. for confirmation of the
repeal of the exile of Hugh de la Spencer, Father and Son, An. 15. E. 2. and
the revocation of the repeal thereof in 1 E. 3. [A notable full Record in
point.] 3 H. 7. 10. 4 H, 7. 10. 1. H. 7. 4. 10 H. 7. 22 b. 15. E. 3 Fitz Pet^t.
2. 9. E. 3. 23, 24. 9 E. 4. 1 b. with sundry other Records, for the repeals of
Judgments and Acts of former Parliaments, by the subsequent Judgments and Acts
of other Parliaments, in Cooks 4 Institutes. c. 1. and Ashes Tables.
Parliament. 16. and Statutes 68. Therefore the Jews being so long since by
Judgment, Edict and Decree both of the King and Parliament for ever banished
out of England (never since repealed or reversed) neither may, nor can by Law
be readmitted, reduced into England again, but by common consent and Act of
Parliament: which I conceive they will never be able to obtain.

I have now presented you with a true Historical and exact Chronological
Relation of the Jews first admission into England; (not in the time of the
Emperor Constantine the great, as some groundlesly would collect, from his
Socrates Scholast l. 1. c. 9. Theodoret, l. 4. c. 10. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l.
4. c. 25. Cent. Magd. c. 3. col. 650, 651. Spelman. Council. p. 43, 44
General Epistle to all Churches, touching the Decrees of the Council of Nice,
and the Unanimous observation of the Feast of Easter, not after the Jewish
computation; wherein there is mention of the Churches in Britain, (as well as
in Rome, Africa, Spain, France, and other places) concurring with other
Churches herein; but not one syllable of any Jews therein, or in Britain then;
nor in any other particular places; but only these general passages against
Christians complying with them in their Paschal observation. Ac primum quidem
indigna res fuit sanctissimum eum diem imitatione atque consuetudine Iudaeorum
celebrare, qui manibus suis nefario flagitio contaminatis, non injuria quoque
animis sunt excaecato, homines scelerati. Quidni enim liceat, gente ea rejecta,
rectiore, verioreque ordine, quem a primo passionis die hucusque servavimus, ad
futura quoque saecula observationis hujus ritum transmittere]? Item nihil nobis
commune sit cum infestissima Iudaeorum turba, etc. Quin and strictior ipsa
atque exactior ratio flagitare videtur, NEQUA NOBIS CUM IUDAEORUM PERJURIO
COMMUNIO. From whence no rational man can infer, that there were any Jews at
that time observing their Jewish Passover in Britain, of which I can find no
syllable in any Domestic or foreign Historians or Writers whatsoever; nor yet
that they inhabited here, or were here in the Briton, Saxon, or Danish Kings
reigns; which if they had, some of our Historians, Synods, Decrees, and Laws in
those ages would have mentioned it, (as well as the Sea Leges Wisigothorum l.
12. Tit. 2. 3. Surius Council. Tom. 2. 3. Hispaniae Illustratae, Tom. 5.
Gothish, Spanish Histories, Laws, Councils, and Constitutions, where they
resided) in which there is not one syllable of them, but only in the forecited
Law foisled in amongst the Confessors, to which doubtless it was puny:) but in
Will the Conq. reign: Together with, their ill deportments, misdemeanors,
sufferings, massacres, servile condition, and manifold popular tumults against
them, during all the time of their residence in England, and final banishment
out of it, never yet to my knowledge, collected into one entire History* before.
The serious consideration whereof, will, in my weak judgment, sufficiently
satisfy, convince the whole English Nation, that they have just grounds and
reasons, in point of piety, of policy, never to re-admit them more into our
Island; and likewise resolve the very Jews themselves, that they have little
cause or reason at all to desire to re-plant themselves in England, where their
ancestors in times past, sustained so many miseries, massacres affronts,
oppressions, fleecings upon all occasions, and themselves can expect little
better usage for the future. To this principal part of my undertaking, for
fuller satisfaction, I shall hereunto subjoyn a Taste of such Laws,
Scriptures, Reasons, as seem strongly to plead, yea conclude against their
readmission into England, at least in that latitude and freedom as formerly
they there enjoyed.

As 1. To erect new Synagogues, Temples amongst us, or turn any of our
Churches, Chapels into Synagogues, for the free public exercise of their
Judaisme, Jewish Worship, Customs, Religion, See Centur Mag 2 to 13. c. 15. in
each. Antonini Chronica. pars 2. Tit. 16. c. 12.
diametrically contrary to the Gosple, Person, Kingdom, Priesthood, Offices,
Mediation, Redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ, which they thereby professedly
deny, renounce, as false and fabulous.

2ly. To set up a Jewish Corporation or Fraternity amongst us in our Cities and
Corporations, distinct and separate from the English, subject to their own
immediate peculiar Officers and Judges as heretofore.

3ly. To purchase Houses, Habitations, Rents, Lands, Exercise of all sorts of
Trades, and Manufactures amongst us, as free Denizens or Merchants, upon such
terms and qualifications as shall be indulged to them.

1. For our Laws and Statutes, these following, make directly or obliquely, by
way of necessary consequence, against their readmission.

1. For their Jewish Synagogues, worship, Sacraments, Religion; these ancient,
pious Laws of our Saxon and Danish Kings (made in their great Parliaments and
Councils before the Jews first coming into England) strongly oppose their
admission now.

As namely the Chron. Johannis Brompton col. 829, 901, 908 Lambardi Archaion,
and Spelman Council. p. 376, 513, 515, 521, 522. 549. 550, 599.
Laws of King Alfred and Guthern, Lex. 1. 2. of King Ethelred in the Council of
Aenham, c. 1. 3. 27, 29, 30. of Habam, c. 1. with the Laws of King Cnute the
Dane, Lex. 1. 27, 28: All which enact, That the only true God and our Lord be
loved, worshipped in all ages by all the people, with all their might: the one
Christian, holy Catholic faith, orthodoxly kept, and the Churches of God to be
diligently frequented throughout the Realm. That all Paganism and false
Religions be renounced both in words and deeds; That who ever wickedly
resists the Laws of Christ, shall be grievously fined and put to death: and,
that all men should diligently seek out by all means; Ut recta Christi religio
maxim provehatur; That the right Religion of Christ might be most of all
advanced: obtesting all Ecclesiiastical and secular persons again and again;
most earnestly, to keep the sincere faith unanimously in the true God; and the
right Christian faith in a right manner: diligently to hear the Teachers of
Gods word; studiously to follow their Doctrine and Precepts; to maintain peace
and tranquillity in the Church of God, and there diligently to pour forth their
prayers. All which particulars exclude all Jewish Synagogues, and Judaisme, and
are of perpetual force, being grounded on the very Law of God.

Moreover King Spelmani* Council. p. 553, 566.
Cnute his Ecclesiastical Laws [made by the advice of his wise men* to be
observed throughout all England] prohibited, That no Christian should be sold
or sent out of the Realm, or banished amongst those who had not as yet embraced
the faith in Christ, lest per adventure those Souls should perish at anytime,
which our Lord Jesus Christ had redeemed with his own blood and life. If
Christians for this cause ought not to be sent, sold or banished amongst Jews
and Infidels, much more then ought not Infidel Jews, with their Jewish
Synagogues, Religion, Ceremonies, to be now introduced amongst us Christians,
to the hazard of many Christian Souls redeemed by Christ's blood.

2. All the Statutes concerning Uniformity of Common Servicc, and
administration of the Sacraments, as 1 Ed. 6. c. 1, 2. 2 Ed. 6. c* 1. 6 Ed. 6.
c. 1. 1 Eliz. c. 2. 23 Eliz. c. 1. 35 Eliz. c. 1. 2. [most of them still in
force, being never legally repealed] do fully and directly oppugn the
introduction of any Jewish Synagogues, Service, Sacraments, Worship,
Ceremonies, with the use of them in any place within our Realm.

3. The Statutes of 3 E. 6. c. 10. 13 Eliz. c. 2. 23 El. c. 1. 28 Eliz. c. 2.
6. 35 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Iac. c. 4. against Popish Recusants, Seminary Priests,
Jesuits, Friars, Masse-Books, Agnus Dei's, Popish Books, Superstitions: for
preventing the withdrawing of the Subjects of this Realm, from the public
Ordinances, Sacraments and Religion here established; and for speedy banishing
all Seminary Priests and Jesuits, and keeping them perpetually out of the
Realm, (upon this account, amongst others) though professing Christ, Christian
Religion, and agreeing with us in all Articles of the Creed, and most
fundamental points of Christianity: Must in Substance, Law, Reason, (in this
regard) much more perpetually exclude, abolish all Jews, Jewish Priests,
Rabbis, Synagogues, worship, Ceremonies, Superstitions, out of our Dominions,
being far more dishonorable to Christ, opposite to our Christian Religion,
and destructive to the peoples souls, if once admitted, then any Jesuits,
Seminary Priests, Friars, Popish Recusants, or any Romish Masses, Superstitions
whatsoever. And if the Jewish Priests, Judaism, and Jewish Ceremonies, may be
now set up and practiced publicly amongst us, notwithstanding all these
Statutes, then much more Mass Priests, Masses, Popery, and Prelacy, by the
self same reason, justice, equity.

To these I might annex, all the late Ordinances for the Directory, The solemn
League and Covenant, and for Suppressing, punishing of Heresy and Blasphemy:
therefore of Judaism, which is both Heresy and Blasphemy, and Jewish
assemblies, the very Synagogues of Satan, and Jews great blasphemers, by
Christ's own resolution, Rev. 2. 9. c. 3. 9. Acts 18. 6. Romans 2. 21. With the
late printed Article 37.
Instrument of Government: which though it allows not only toleration, but
protection to all Sects and Religions professing faith in God through Jesus
Christ, (though differing from the Doctrine and Discipline publtkely held forth
in the Nation,) except only to Popery and Prelacy; yet certainly it can no ways
extend to the toleration or protection of Jews and their Antichristian
blasphemies against Christ himself and the Gospel; seeing they are so far from
professing faith in Jesus Christ; that See Petrus Alphonsus, adversus Judaeos.
Antonini Chro. pars 2. Til. 16. c. 12. Agobardus De Insolentia Judaeorum, and
Judaicis superstitionibus, and Cent. Magdeburg. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
12, 13, c. 14, 15. where this is largely proved and Judaism refuted.
they utterly renounce, and professedly decry him to be the true Savior and
Messiah of the world; rejecting the whole New Testament and Doctrine of the
Gospel: and so by consequence, are necessarily secluded by this Instrument, and
Oath for its observation, from practicing their Jewish worship, Ceremonies, or
erecting any Synagogues in our Nation for that purpose.

2ly. Though the Sea Brooks and Ash. Corporation and Prerogative.
Kings of England by the Law and their Prerogative may in sundry cases erect
New Corporations of their Subjects by their Charters only, yet notwithstanding,
no Corporation or Fraternity of Jews, being mere Aliens, may, can, or ought to
be erected in England, by the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Realm,
but only by full consent of the Nation in Parliament, by special Acts of
Parliament; it being one of the greatest Intrenchments that can be upon the
English Nations Rights, Liberties, Customs, Privileges, Profit, and a
violation of all the ancient Charters, Privileges, Rights, Franchises,
confirmed to them by the Great Charter of England, (forty times since ratified
by new Acts of Parliament.) This is evident by the Statutes of Magna Charta, c.
9. 37. 34, E. 1. c. 4. 1. E. 3. c. 9. 14. E. 3. c. 1. 1. H. 4. c. 1. 2. H. 4.
c. 1. 7. H. 4. c. 1. 9. H. 4. c. 1. 13. H. 4. c. 1. 3. H. 5. c. 1. 2. H. 6. c.
1. compared with 2 E. 3. c. 9. 27. E. 3. c. 1. to 29. 28 E. 3. 13. 15, 36. E.
3. c. 7, 19 H. 7. c. 12, and all other Acts for the Sea Rastals Staple.
Staple and Styliard: and with 3. E. 4. c. 6. 1. R. 3. c. 9. 14 H. 8. c. 2. 21
H. 8. c. 16. 22 H. 8. c. 8. 32 H. 8. c. 16. touching Artificers, Merchants and
Aliens.

3ly. The Sea my Sovereign power of Parliaments, parl. 2. p. 76, 77, 78.
preambles of the Statute of Merton, 20 H. 3. 3 E. 1. with c. 17. 48. 6 E. 1.
of Quo Warranto, and of Gloucester, 13 E. 1. 12 E. 2. of York, 9, 10, 14, 15,
25, 28, 36, 37. E. 3. 1. 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 21. R. 2. 1, 2, 4, 6.
H. 4. 1, 8, 10, 12. 36. H. 6. 18 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. R. 2. Rot. Parl. n. 36, 40.
6 H. 6. c. 5. and other Acts, declare and resolve, That the Kings of England by
their Oath and Duty, and the Lords and Commons in Parliament, are all obliged
by their trusts and our Laws, to advance, uphold, maintain and defend the
welfare, wealth, safety of the Church, Realm, Subjects, People of England, and
to prevent, redress, suppress, remove by wholesome Laws and Ordinances, all
Grievances Mischiefs, Damages, Inconveniences, Disinherisons contrary
thereunto; it being a fundamental Maxim both in our Laws and Law Books, SALUS
POPULI SUPREMA LEX: which the Army Officers in their Declaration of 16 Nov.
1648. and Mr. John Pym in his Speech against Strafford 12 April 1641. p. 3.
etc. printed by the Commons special Order, much insist on. Moreover, it is
another Maxim in our Law, Cooks reports.
Summa ratio est, quae pro religione facit. Now the admission of the Jews into
England, as appears by the Statute de Judaismo, and premised Histories, is no
way consistent with the welfare, profit, wealth, safety of the Church, Realm,
Subjects, People, or Religion of England, and will be an extraordinary damage,
mischief, grievance, inconvenience, and disinherison to them all. Therefore
prohibited, enacted against by the general scope of all these Laws and Maxims,
and no ways to be admitted.

4ly. The Jews heretofore in England, an ^ still in all See Cent. Mag. 3 to 13.
c. 14.
other parts, being most grievous Clippers, Coyners, Forgers of money, Usurers,
Extortioners, and the greatest Chea^ors, Cozeners, Impostors in the world, in
all their Merchandises and Manufactures whatsoever: upon this account they are
and ought to be still excluded, and never readmitted amongst us, by the
provisions of See Rastals Abridgement Title, Artificers, Aliens Money, Treason,
Drapery, etc.
all our Laws, yet in force, prohibiting clipping, coining, usury, extortion,
frauds, deceipts, in any Merchandises or Manufactures whatsoever; unless we
intend to have them all now more practiced by them and others among us, then
ever heretofore. The rather, because they were never admitted free Trading and
Habitation in England by See Rastals Abridgment, Tit. Merchants and Merchandise.
any of our Laws touching Alten Merchants, and Artificers free Traffic amongst
us, from the time of their forementioned banishment, till this present, under
the Name and Notion of Jews, Foraign Merchants, or Artificers. And therefore
not to be admitted to those desired Privileges, from which all these forecited
Laws (in my weak Judgment) with the former old Parliamentary Judgment, and
Edict, for their per petual banishment, in Law, Justice, Conscience still
debar them readmittance, till repealed; and they (if ever readmitted against
all these Acts and Statutes) must be introduced, resetled by special Acts of
Parliament, which no English Parliament (in probability) will ever indulge unto
them, as the peoples general present declamations in all places, against their
endeavored introduction, prognostic. And thus much I thoughr meet to inform
the Nation, touching those Laws and Statutes which (in my poor opinion)
directly or by consequence oppose their readmission, and refute those Lawyers
misinformation, who confidently averred, there is no Law of England at all
against it, if Mr. Nigh did truly inform me.

2. For Scriptures, these Texts may engage us against their readmission.

1. Matthew. 5. 13. Lu. 14. 34, 35. Salt is good: but if the salt have lost its
savor, wherewith shall it be seasoned? It is neither fit for the land, nor yet
for the dunghill, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. This
is the condition of the Jews, who have lost both their Savior and their Savor
too. Therefore not fit for our land or dunghils; but to be kept and cast out
from amongst us, and trodden under foot of all true Christian men.

2. 1 Cor. 16. 22, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha. That is, separated and cast out from all Christian society
and Communion until the day of Judgment, the highest kind of Jewish
Excommunication. Now the Jews are such, who do not only not love, but deny,
defy and hate our Lord Jesus Christ in the highest degree. Therefore to be
excommunicated and secluded from our Christian Communion and Cohahitation
amongst us, to which they can pretend no right.

3. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, etc. Be ye not unequally yoaked together with
unbelievers: for, what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? and what part has he that believes with an Infidel? and what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? etc, Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and
I will receive you. The unconverted Jews, are both Unbelievers, Infidels,
Darkness, Belialids, and the very Synagogue of Satan, as the Scripture
resolves them, Acts 14. 1. Mar: 6. 6. Romans 11. 20. 23. 32. Heb. 4. 6. 11. Ioh.
1. 5. Mat: 8. 12. Rev. 2. 9. 1 Th^ss. 2. 14, 15, 16. Therefore we Christians
ought not to be unequally yoaked, or to have any fellowship, communion,
agreement, part or mixture with them; much less to receive them into our land
and bo^omes, from whence they were formerly spued out, but to keep our selves
separated from amongst them, lest God reject us, as he has done them.

4. 2 John 9. 10. 11. Whosoever transgressith, and abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has
both the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him, God speed: for he
that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. The Jews abide not
in the Doctrine of Christ; and if they come unto us, they will not bring this
Doctrine to us, but the quite contrary: Therefore we ought not to receive them
into our Dominions or Houses, nor bid or wish them God speed, in returning to
dwell amongst us. And if any do the contrary, they are and shall be partakers
of their evil deeds.

5, Tit. 1. 10, 11, 13, 14, For there are many unruly and vain talkers and
deceivers, ESPECIALLY THEY OF THE CIRCUMCISION; whose mouths must be stopped,
WHO SUBVERT WHOLE HOUSES, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy
lucres sake. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the
faith: NOT GIVING HEED TO JEWISH FABLES, and commandments OF MEN THAT TURN
FROM THE TRUTH. If the circumcised Jews were such unruly Deceivers, seducers,
and subverters of whole houses, even in the Apostles own days, and their
Jewish fables then did turn so many from the truth. With what color of
Christianity, piety, conscience, can we call them in amongst us now, in these
times of fearful, and almost universal Apostasy from the truth, when less
dangerous seducers have subverted whole houses, parishes, and almost Cities and
Counties too?

6. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15, 16. For ye also have suffered like things of your
Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: who both killed the Lord Jesus, and
their own Prophets, and have persecuted (or chased out) us, and they please not
God, and are contrary to all men: Acts 4. 17, 18, c. 5. 28, 29. 40. c. 13. 45.
Let those who now imitate them, inejecting and silencing Ministers from
preaching, consider and repent of this Jewish crime.
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always* FOR THE WRATH IS COME UPON THEM TO THE UTTERMOST. This Gospel
character of the Jews, expressing their transcendent malice to the Lord Jems,
their own Prophets, the very Apostles themselves, the Gentiles, with their
contrariety to God and all other men and Gods wrath upon them for it to the
uttermost: administer plenty of invincible arguments, against our receiving
them in again amongst us, lest they bring along with them the extremity of Gods
wrath upon the whole English Nation, who have enough thereof already.

7. Acts 18. 5, 6, 7. Paul was pressed in spirit, and testified to the Jews,
that Jesus was Christ. And when they opposed themselves and blasphemed, he
shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads: I am
clean, from henceforth, I will go unto the Gentiles. And he departed thence and
entered into a certain man's house named Justus, who worshipped God; etc.
compared with Acts 13. 44. to 52. The next Sabbath Day came almost the whole
City together to hear the word of God: But when the Jews saw the multitude,
they were filled with envy, and spoke against those things that were spoken by
Paul, contradicting and blaspheming: Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and
said, It was necessary the word of God should first have been spoken unto you;
but because ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life; LO WE TURN TO THE GENTILES: For so has the Lord commanded us, etc. And
the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region. But the Jews
stirred up the devout and honorable women; and the chiefmen of the City, and
raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
coasts; but they shock off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto
Iconium. This malicious carriage and persecution of the Jews, even against the Sea the like, Acts 17. 5. to 16. c. 19. 8, 9, 10. c. 28. 25. to 31.
Apostles themselves and their Doctrine, and the Gentiles salvation, and
casting them maliciously out of their coasts; with their Separation from them,
and turning themselves wholly to the Gentiles upon this account, by Gods own
command; demonstrates, what all Gods faithful Ministers, and we Christian
Gentiles must expect from them now: and that being formerly cast out of our
Coasts by our Ancestors for their infidelity, crucifying of Christ in his
Members, and such like misdemeanors, and so being separated in cohabitation and
communion from us, we neither may nor ought now to resume them into our Land,
Bosoms, or Communion again upon any pretense.

8. When God was bringing the Jews into the promised Land which he gave them to
inherit, he gave them these special commands. Thou shall drive the Inhabitants
of the land out before thee Exodus 23, 31, 32, 33. c. 34. 1. to 17. Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
to 9. Jos. 23. 3 to 15. Judge. 2, 3, 4.
Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor with their Gods, THEY SHALL NOT
DVVELL IN THY LAND, l^st they make thee sin against me, and it be a snare in
the midst of thee. Thou shall make no Covenant with them, nor show mercy to
them, Nether shall thou make marriages with them. Thy Daughter thou shall not
give unto his Son, nor his Daughter shall thou take unto thy Son; for they will
turn away thy Sons from following me, that they may serve other Gods, so will
the anger of the Lord be kindled against thee, and destroy thee suddenly: If ye
do IN ANY Wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these Nations, and go
in unto them, and they to you, know for a certain, that the Lord will no more
drive out any of these Nations before you; but they shall be snares and traps
unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish
from the good Land which the Lord your God gives you: But thus ye shall deal
with them, ye shall destroy their Altars, and break down their Images, and cut
down their groves, etc. for thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. Now,
THE NOT DRIVING OF THESE NATIONS BY THE ISRAELITES FROM AMONGST THEM, according
to these commands of God, is charged as a special sin upon them by God, enticed
them to Idolatry, and brought his severe wrath upon them, Judges 1. 27. to 36.
c. 2. 2, 3, 12, 13, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and is thus expressed by the Psalmist
Psalm. 106. 34 to 43. They did not destroy the Nations, concerning whom the Lord
commanded them; BUT WERE MINGLED AMONG THE HEATHEN, AND LEARNED THEIR WORKS;
and they served their Idols, which were a snare unto them, yea they sacrificed
their Sons and Daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent blood* even the blood
of their Sons and Daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan, and
their Land was defiled with blood. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled
against his people, insomuch that he a^horried his own inheritance, and he gave
them into the hands of the Heathen; and they that hated them were Lords over
them: their enemies also oppressed them, they were brought into sub jection
under their hands. The morality, ground and equity of which precepts, as they
justify our Ancestors expulsion of the Jews out of England, with their
adulterous worship, Ceromonies and Synagogues heretofore; So I conceive they
strongly oblige all English Christians (especially after our late solemn
forgotten League and Covenant) to seclude and keep them out from re-entring,
coming in, mingling, and dwelling, amongst us now, for fear they draw the
self-same sad effects, and bring down the same, or like heavy Judgments of God
upon us, as these Scriptures threatened, and God himself inflicted on the
Israelites for transgressing them.

In brief, the Parables of the Vineyard and Husbandmen, the King going into
foraign parts, and Marriage Supper, Mat. 21. 33. to 46. c. 22. 2. to 11. c. 23.
21. to the end. Mar. 12. 1. etc. Luke 19. 12. to 28. c. 20 9. etc. particularly
applied to the Jews, and notably setting out their desperate malice against our
Saviors person, Kingdom, Government, Ordinances, Ministers, Gospel, and his
rejection of them for it. Together with Romans 16, 17, 18* 1. 32. 1 Cor. 5, 4.
etc. Phil. 3. 2, 3. Mat. 7. 15 c. 16. 7. 11. 12. 17. Col. 2. 8. 2. Pet. 3. 17.
c. 2. 1. etc. 7, 8, 20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 10 c. 2. 16, 17. Titus 3. 10,
11. Revelations 2. 9. 14. Hebrews 6. 4. to 9. c. 16. 26. to 32. Phil. 4. 2, 3.
will all furnish us with sundry arguments against their readmission amongstus,
as likewise Prove. 6. 27. 28. Psalm. 101. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 119. 104. Ps.
139. 21. 22. Number. 8. 13. Number. 16. 26. Ps. 6. 8. Ps. 119. 115. Ps. 139. 19.
which every good Christian may peruse at leisure, and apply as he sees cause.

3. For Reasons against their readmission into England they are diverse,
Theological, Political, and mixed of both.

1. God himself by his Prophets, Son, Apostles, before their rejection, while
they were his special, peculiar chosen people, treasure, above all other
Nations of the world, most frequently complains of them, and the generality of
the Nation, Deuteronomy. 9. 6, 7, 13. ^. 31. 17. Exodus 32. 9. c. 33. 3. 5. Psalm. 78.
8. 9. Jer. 3. 6. to 22. c. 5. 23. c. 8. 5. c. 2. 11. c. 23. 14. Isay. 3. 9. c.
24. 5. Ezech. 2, 3. to 9. c. 3. 26, 27. c. 12. 2. to 26. c. 17. 12. c. 16. 46.
56. 57. c. 24. 3. c. 44, 4. Hos. 4. 16. c. 5. 7. c. 6, 7. c. 11. 7. Mat. 3. 7.
c. 11. 23. 24. c. 23. 33. Acts. 7. 51. 52. and other texts.
that they were a most rebellious, disobedient, gainsaying, stiffnecked,
imp^nitent, incorrigible, adulterous, whorish, impudent, froward, shameless,
perverse, treacherous, revolting, back sliding, idolatrous, wicked, sinful,
stubborn, untoward, hard-hearted, hypocritical, foolish, sottish, brutish,
stupid, ungrateful, Covenant Breaking Nation, House, People; a seed of
evildoers, a generation of Vipers, doing evil greedily with both hands,
according to all the Nations that were round about them: as bad, nay worse than
Sodom or Gomorrha, casting all Gods Laws, Ordinances behind their backs,
trampling them under their feet, (H) Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Isay. c. 1. and 9.
and 14. and 29. and 32. Jer. cap. 1. to 30. Lam. c. 1. to 5. Ezech. c. 2. to
25. Hos. c. 1, to 11. Joel, c. 1. and 2. Amos, c. 2. to 3. Mat. c. 1. 2. Zeph.
1. Zach. 11. 2 Kings 17. 2 Chronicles. 36. Mat. 24. Lev. 22. Egesippu^, Eusebius,
and others.
rejecting, forsaking, despising God himself, provoking him continually to his
face, grieving him to the heart, forgetting him days without number, always
^rring in their hearts, and disobeying his voice, and the lik: And dare, can
wethen harbor such a Nation as this, and bring them in amongst us, now they
are worse in all these respects than ever?

2. God himself has denounced against, and inslicted upon the Jews grea^^^,
severer W^^s, Judgments, Calamities, Dispersons, D^v^s^ations, Captivities,
Desolations, Curses, P* ^gues of all kinds, for their sins, rebellions,
imponnencies, and to their Nation, Kingdom, Country ^ Cities, than to any
(...) Nations, Kingdoms, People; and that more frequently th^n against any
other* S(...) against them in his wrath, that they should never (...) into his
r^st, Psalm. 95. 11. Hebr. 3. 10, 11, 18. stiling them, the Generation of his
wrath, Jer. 7. 29. and averring of them, that wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 16. And can or shall we then receive such a Nation
as this into our bosoms now, without entertaining, and pulling upon us, that
wrath and curses of God which are denounced against, and do now pursue and
accompany them in all places?

3. The Jews were always heretofore Exodus 15. 24. c. 16. 2. etc. Number. c. 14.
c. 16. c. 20. c. 21. 2 Samuel 1. 15. to 21. 2 Kings c. 12. c. 15. c. 16. 2 Kings
c. 9. c. 10. c. 12. 20. c. 14. 17. c. 17. 21. 23. c. 23. c. 20. c. 27. 2 chronicles.
c. 23. c. 36. Ezech. 17. 13. to 24.
a very murmuring, mutinous, discontented, rebellious, seditious people for the
most part, not only against God, but their Lawful Governors, Kings, Priests,
Prophets, ^oft tumultuously rebelling against, disobeying, revolting from,
deposing, murdering their Kings, and Sovereigns; and contemning, disobeying,
slaying, killing the Prophets, Messengers whom God sent unto them. Whence God
himself gi^es us this black Character of them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. And the
Lord God of their Fathers sent unto them by his Messengers, rising up betimes,
and sending, etc. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose against his
people, till there was no remedy, etc. And our Savior Christ a worse: Lu. 13.
33, 34. It is impossible (or cannot be) that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem:
Mat. 23. 27. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest those that are sent unto thee! Which St. Stephen thus seconds, Acts 7.
51. 52. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears* ye do always
resist the holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophets
have not your Fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which have showed
them before of the coming of the Just One: of whom ye have been now the
betrayers and murderers: Which St. Paul also confirms in the forecited
observable Text, of the 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15, 16. And can we then in point of
piety or policy; even in these distracted, rebellious, mutinous times,
enterrain, or bring in such a Nation, People as this amongst us? Or can our
despised Ministry in this age, have any hopes of reclaiming or converting such
a people, who have thus abused, murdered, stoned their own Prophets in former
times, though immediately sent unto them by God himself?

4. Mat. 21. 33. to 36. c. 26, and 27. and 28. Mar. 14. and 15. Lu. 22. and 23.
John 5. 16. 18. c. 7. 1. c. 9. 22. c. 10. 31, etc. c. 11. 8. 55. c* 1^ and 19.
c. 20. 19. Act. 2, 23. 36. c. 3. 13, 14, 15.
They were the greatest haters, revilers, persecuters, blasphemers, betrayers,
and the only murderers, crucifiers of our 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15.
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and his Act. 4. 1. to 23. c* 5. 5. 17. to 42. c. 6.
9. to 15. c. 7. c. 8. v. 9. c. 12. 3. c. 13. 42. to the end. c. 14. 2. 4, 5,
19. c. 17. 6. to 17. c. 18. 12. etc. c. 21. to c. 27. c. 28. 17, 18, 19. ^ Cor.
11. 24. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. 15, 16.
Apostles, whiles on earth, as the Evangelists, Acts, and other Scriptures
testify. And although Christ and his Apostles miraculously converted some
thousands of them by their preaching and miracles, to the faith of Christ, Acts
2. 41. c. 21. 20. Yet the generality and body of the Nation continued still
blind, obstinate, under the very most powerful Ministry of the Prophets,
Apostles, and Christ himself, being then, and ever since that time, judicially
and penally given up to a blind, obdurate, obstinate, impenitent, stupid heart
and spirit, a reprobate sense, a cauterized conscience; and divorced, rejected,
reprobated, broken off, cast of by God himself, proclaiming them to be no more
his people, to be reprobate silver, because be has rejected them; to make way
for the calling, conversion, salvation of the Gentiles, whom be has ingrafted,
called, and taken into special covenant in their stead, as is evident by Acts
13. 45, 46, 47. c. 19. 9. c. 28. 25, 26, 27, 28. Isa. 8. 14. to 17. c. 10. 22,
23. c. 29. 8. to 15. c. 65. 2, 3 9. c. 53. 1. Jer. 6. 10. c. 7. 29. c. 14. 19
Lam. 5. 22. Ho^. 1. 9. 10. c. 4. 6. Mat. 13. 13, 14, 15. c. 21. 24. to 46. v.
22. 2. to 11. Mar. 4. 12. Luke 2. 34. c. 8. 10, etc. John 9. 39. 41. c. 12. 37.
to 44. Romans 9. 24. to 33. c. 10. 16. 19. 20, 21. c. 11. 5. 7. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2.
14, 15, 16. Heb. 10. 26. to 31. compared together. Which Texts conjoined with
Lu. 18. 8. Joh. 1. 11. 1 Timothy 4 1. 2, 3. 2 Timothy 1. 3. to 10. c. 4. 3, 4. 2 Pet.
2. 1. 2. etc. c. 3. 3 1. John 2. 18. Jude 18. in my judgment unanswerably
refute, that commonly received opinion, of the calling and conversion of the
whole Nation and Body of the Jews in these latter days to the faith of Christ,
which some have over-confidently asserted, and now insist on, as the chiefest
argument for calling in the Jews amongst us at this season; as if they were
able more effectually to persuade, convert them, then either their own
Prophets, or Christ himself and his Apostles, and remove that veil of
obstistinate blindness, and obduration which God has laid upon thoir hearts
and eyes, to this very end, that they might neither see, hear, nor understand,
nor be converted, that he might heal them. Acts. 28. 25, 26, 27, 28.

5. God himself, (especially for their rejection of Jesus Christ, and refusing
him to be their King to rule and reign over them) has utterly extirpated and
ejected the Jews out of their own promised land, which himself bestowed on them
for their peculiar Genesis 15. 7. 8. c. 26. 5. Number. 26. 54, 55. c. 27* 7. 8. c.
32. 18, 19. c. 33. 55. Josh. c. 14. to 20. Ps. 78. 55. Ps. 105. 11. 1 Kings 8.
36. Ezech. 48, 29
inheritance, and habitation, and settled them in actual possession thereof by
an outstretched hand, and power: yea, scattered, dispersed them into other
Nations like chaff before the wind, without any fixed habitation, according to
the ancient comminations and curses long since denounced against and now fully
executed upon them. Deutr. 28. 63, 64, 65, etc. Levit. 26. 33. 36, 37, 38, 39.
Deutr. 4. 27. c. 32. 26. 1 Kings 14, 15. Neh. 1. 8. Ps. 106. 27. Jer. 9. 16.
and 17. 24. c. 18. 17, c. 49. 32 36. Ezech. 5. 2. to 13. c. 12, 14. 15, c. 20,
23. c. 22. 15. Daniel 12. 7. Zach 1. 21. Ezech. 11. 16, 17. c. 6. 8. c. 17. 21.
which scattering, is principally intended only amongst Heathen Nations, where
they should be totally deprived of all Gods Ordinances, and means of salvation,
where they shall serve other Gods, which neither they nor their Fathers have
known, even wood and stone; as these texts expressly resolve and import.
Therefore, to receive them into, and settle them in our Christian Kingdom and
Island, whereunto they have no title, nor color of inheritance, which God has
See Acts 17. 28. Exodus 36. 43. Number. 20 14. to 22. c. 21. 21. 22. 23. Deuteronomy 2.
26. to 32. Judge. 11. 12. to 29. Deuteronomy. 2. 9. 2 Chronicles. 20. 10. Genesis 34. 20. Number.
26. 54. Deuteronomy. 26. 9. Ezech. 36. 5. Exodus 20. 17.
appointed to the English alone for their portion, (and therefore these Aliens
may not invade or intrude themselves into it, without the whole Nations general
consent) is in some sense to cross these sacred Texts, and neither convenient
for us to grant, nor for them to request; being already over-stored with Native
Englishmen.

6. Since the Jews crucifixion of our Savior Jesus Christ himself, and their
extirpation and dissipation for it, they have oft-times in sundry places, ages,
in high contempt and despite of his person, and passion, maliciously acted it
over and over again in representation; not only by Athanasius de Passione
Imaginis Christi, Cent Magd. 4. c. 13. col. 1445. Cent. 6. col. 825. Cent. 8
col. 122. Cent. 10. col. 633. cent. 11. c. 657. Fasciculus Tem. po^um. f. 56.
Sigeberti Chro^ Hermannus Schedel. chron. f. 168.
piercing his Images with swords and spears, and in Chron. mag. Germaniae, An.
1036. p. 268, 269. Hermanus Schedel. chron. f. 278. 289. Genebr. chronogr. p.
824. 825. Jansenius, l. 4. Mer. Gallobelgici.
stabbing, piercing, boiling, burning, braying in a mortar, and otherwise
despiting the consecrated Sacramental bread, representing his crucified body,
as the Historians in the Margin at large relate; and likewise by crucifying a
Ram at Easter, as they did at Johannis Bromton chron. col. 1005.
Syracusa, in the year 1113* but likewise by crucifying sundry Christian
children on Good Friday; o^ near Easter, on a Cross, in a most barbarous
manner, in derision of our Saviors death and passion. To pretermit those 7. or
8. forecited instances in England alone, I shall instance in some foreign ones
recorded by Historians. About the year of our Lord, 430. the Jews in their
public Socrates Scholast. l. 7. c. 16. Centur. Magd. ^. c. 14.
Enterludes and Dances, held on their Sabbath, openly crucisied a Christian
child in contempt and derision of Christ's death and passion, at Inmestar in
Syria; first nailing him to a tree, and lifting him up on high; then deriding
and laughing at him, after that like mad men, scourging him as long as any
breath remained in his body: whereupon there arose great contention between
them and the Christians; and by the Emperors command, the Jews who had done
this in jest, were punished in earnest, Anno 1172. Sigeb^rti continuatur. Cent.
Magd. 12. c. 14. Cent. 13. c. 14.
they crucified in like manner another Christian Child at Bloyes in France. And
near the same time, the Jews at Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Gaguinus
l. 6. de Francis, cent. Magd. 12. c. 14. col. 1670.
Bray in France, crowned a Christian man (whom they accused for a Malefactor)
with thorns, then led him publicly about the Town, scourged him with many
stripes, and at last crucified him in contempt of Christ. Not long after the
Vincentius Spec. Hist. l. 29. c. 25. cent. Magd. 23. c. 14. Munsteri Cosm. l.
2. p. 170.
Jews at Paris in France, in like manner crucified a Christian child called
Richard; and sundry others yearly.

Anno 1236. Fragmentum Historicum Chronicon* Hirsaug. Mun^zerus. Centur. Magd.
13. c. ^4.
the Jews at the Monastery of Fulda, killed many Christian Children in a Mill,
piercing them with ponyards, and squeezing out their blood, to mix and knead it
with their unleavened bread in their Passover, as was generally reported,
which being discovered many of them were burnt to death for it, and the rest
grievously persecuted. At Cranzius. l. 7. c. 14. in Vandalia Cent. Magdeb. 13.
c. 14.
Prague in Bohemia, the Jews on Good Friday in the year 1283. shutting their
gates, crucified a Christian man, having first of all done unto him, in
contempt, what ever they had learned was done to Christ by their Ancestors,
which when the people had discovered, running to their arms, they raged cruelly
against, and slew many of these impious Murderers

The Jews Chron. Hirsaug. Cent. Magd. 13. c. 14. Fasciculus Temporum. Aventinus
Annalium Boiorum l. 7. p. 576.
Anno 1286 stole away, cruelly tormented, pricked with ponyards, drew the
blood, and impiously crucified a Christian Child called VVernerus, not far from
the Rhene in Germany, barbarously murdering him after sundry torments. Sebast.
Munsteri Cosm. l. 3. p. 482.
Anno 1287. they tormented and crucified another Christian Child at Bern called
Rodolphus, for which they were massacred and cruelly handled by the furious
vulgar. The Jews at Hermanus Schedel. Chron. f. 285. 286. Ant. Coc. ^ius
Sabellicus ^^ead. 10. l. 6. p. 742.
Trent on Good Friday, in the year 1475. tortured, whipped, pierced and
crucified to dearh a Christian child about 13 years old called Simeon, in
contempt of Christ's passion, and Christians, kneding their Paschal unleavened
bread with his blood, which History is as large related by the Marginal
Historians, And to instance in no more particulars, Vincentius Beluacensis And
so does Sebast. Munster Cosmog^. l. 2. c. 57. p. 171.
Speculum Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Gaguinus l. 6. de Francis. Centur. Magd. 12. and
13. c. 14 record, That the Jews in Paris did every year steal some Christian
child or other brought up in the Kings Court, and carrying him to a secret
house or vault, did on Good Friday, or Easter Day, in contempt and derision of
Christ and Christian Religion, crucify him on a Cross (as Christ was
crucified) and that they had been frequently appprehended per severing in this
wickedness; for which, upon Detection, they were usually murdered, stoned,
burned, destroyed, hanged by the furious multitudes violence, or executed;
imprisoned, banished by Christian Kings and Magistrates, yet such was their
mal^ce to Christ, that they would st^ll persevere there^n, and act it over
again upon every opportunity. How can or dare we then receive into our
Christian Island, such barbarous, bloody obstinate murderers and inveterate,
incorrigible malicious enemies to, and deriders, despisers of our blessed
Saviors death and passion, formerly cast out by our Ancestors (amongst other
things) for their bloody impieties and unchristian blasphemies of this nature,
unless we first renounce both our Christianity and Humanity at once, and
become as bad as the very worst of Jews?

7. The Jews ever since their dispersion, in all ages, places to their power,
have been more bitter enemies to the Christians than the worst of Pagans,
bending all their studies, forces, wits, endeavors to hinder, oppugn,
blaspheme, extirstate the Christian Religion, and all professors of it out of
the world; stirred up many bloody persecutions against them, upon all
advantages, confederating both with Julian the Apostate, the Pagan, Persians,
the Tartars, Sarazens, Turks, to murder and delete them, having a great hand in
raising the 4th* persecution, and murdering, stoning to death, burning,
destroying even those of their own Nation, yea poisoning their own Wives,
Children, for embracing Christianity, Moreover they have raised up many
seditions, rebellions against Christian Princes, poisoned, destroyed some of
them and their Nobles, yea raised, occasioned many great popular Tumults,
Commotions, Seditions against them in all ages, places, as well as formerly
here in England, as you may read at large in Socrates Scholasticus, Eccl. Hist.
l. 7. c. 13. Zonaras Tom. 3 Paulus Diaconus, l. 16, 17, 18. Nicepkorus Eccles.
Hist. l. 14, c. 14. l. 17. c. 6, Ambrose Epist. l. 5. Epist. 29. Jerome. in cap.
4 ad Galatas, and in Abdiam. Sozomen Hist. l. 1. c. 8. Mat. Paris Historia
Angl. p. 564 Aventinus. Annal. Boyorum, l. 5. and 7. Abbas Uspergensis Parale.
p. p. 346. Centur. Magd. 4. c. 14. 15. etc. 3 col. 85, 86. Cent. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
11, 12, 13. ^. 3. 14, 15. Mr. Fox Acts and Menuments, vol. 1. p. 56. with
sundry others record. Upon this ground, certain Christians on the contrary, out
of an over-furious zeal, have endeavored to extirpate them all from under
heaven, unless they would turn Christians. Anno. 1101 Aventinus Annal.
Boiorum. l. 5. p. 468. Hedio in Chron. Annot* Cent. Magd. 11 c. 15. col. 689.
Emicho a German Earl, and the Inhabitants near the Rhene, pillaged, plundered,
banished, slew, and destroyed all the Jews in those parts, who refused to turn
Christians, slaying no less than twelve thousand of them, many of the Jews
killing each other with their own hands, to avoid their fury; but the rest
receiving baptism, and turning Christians only to save their lives, relapsed
to their Judaisme again when the storm was over. In the year 1146. one Ot^o de
Gestis. Fred. 1 ^mp. l. 1. c. 37. 38. p. 428. Cent* Magd. 12. c. 14. Genebrardi
Chronogr l. 4. p. 108.
Rudolphus a Monk, out of a misguided fur^ous zeal, stirred up many thousands
of people in France and Germany, near the Rhene, to take up the Cross for the
holy wars; exhorting them in his preaching, that they should in the first place
kill and destroy all the Jews remaining every where in the Cities and Towns, as
being the greatestenemies of Christ. The seeds of which doctrine took such deep
root in many Cities of France and Germany. that in a tumultuous sedition and
uproar, they slew most of the Jews in those parts, but such who fled into
fenced Cities and Castles, under the protection of the Emperor Fred. the 1.
which bloody Doctrine and proceeding was reprehended by St. Bernards Letters to
these people, informing them, that the Jews for their excessive wickednesses
were not to be slaughtered but dispersed. In the year of Christ^ 298. See
Munsteri Cosmog. l. 3. p. 547, 707.
one Rindflash an Husbandman in Germany, openly preached to the people; That he
was sent from heaven, and specially chosen by God to root out the Jews in all
places: And proclaimed, whoever will have the Christian Commonwealth to be
safe, let him follow me; Whereupon the people flocking to him in great
multitudes, and choosing him for their Captain, sought out the Jews in
Wirtzburgh, Nurinburgh, Rorenburgh, Bamberge, Orenberge, and all other Towns
and Villages in Franconia and Bavaria, and slew many of them, the greatest part
of them in these places, both men and women obstinately setting their own
houses on sire, and burning both themselves* wives, children, with their
houses, housholdstuff and goods together, that they might not fall into the
Christians hands. In the year M. Alberti^ Argentini Chron* and de rebus gestis
Bertoldi. p. 147. 148, 149, 177. 178. See Abbas Uspergensis Paraleip. p. 346.
Seb. Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 3. c. 139. p. 563. 707.
1349. There being a great plague and mortality in Germany, the Jews were
generally accused for the chief Authors or increasers thereof, by poisoning all
the Wells and Fountains, to destroy all the Christians, and corrupting
likewise some baptized Jews, and other Christians with money, and charms so
far* that they could willingly have destroyed and slain all their fellow
Christians, which some of them confessed upon their examinations. Hereupon the
Common people in great rage and fury, against their Magistrates and Bishops
wills, and commands (who neither could nor durst withstand their violence) fell
upon all the Jews in Bern, Friburgh, Argentine, Worms, Oppenheim, Francfort,
Mentz, Spires, and other places, slew, and brained many of them, burned other
of them, hanged up many others upon Gibbets, pillaging, burning, breaking, and
pulling down their Houses, the Jews themselves in many of these places burning
both themselves, wives, children, goods, to avoid the enraged peoples fury;
very few of them escaping, who were baptized to preserve their lives: The
Inhabitants of Spire, fearing the air would be infected with the stink of the
slaughtered Jews dead corpse lying in the streets, although most of them were
burnt, put them into empty Caskes, and threw them into the Rhene. All such who
protected any of the Jews for money (as some did) were so murmured against, and
hated by the people, that they were in great danger of their lives, which some
of them lost, as Albertus Argentinensis records at large which sad calamity
came upon them by Gods just judgment, many of them being found guilty of all
sorts of wickednesses, poysonings, the murder of many Children, forging of
Letters, counterfeiting and corrupting of moneys, thefts, deceipts, and other
villainies, whereby they offended the Divine Majesty. To these I might add many
other such tumults, uproars, occasioned by, and massacres, burnings and
destructions of them for their villainies, recorded in Hermannus Schedel. Chron.
f. 243, 248. 258. 271, 272. and Genebrardi Chronog. p. 461, 627, 660, 618, 688,
824. 830. with those forementioned in England. And can we then in point of
Christian piety or prudence, now bring in such a generation of men as these
amongst us, especially in these unsettled, unquiet, discontented times, to
kindle new flames of discontent and tumults amongst the people?

8. The Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 735. Gratian. Did. 28. qu. 1. and 29. qu. 1.
conversation of the Jews is so dangerous to Christians, that the 4 Council of
Toledo: can. 59, 61, 62. made this Decree, The Conversations and Companies of
evil men do oftentimes corrupt even the good, how much more then those who are
prone to vices. Let therefore the Jews who are converted to the Christian faith
have no further Communion henceforth with those, who still continue in their
old Jewish rites, lest peradventure they should be subverted by their Society:
Therefore we decree, that the Sons and Daughters of those Jews which are
baptized, that they be not again involved in the errors of their parents, shall
be separated from their Company, and placed with Christian men and women
fearing God, where they may be well instructed, and grow in faith and Christian
manners; and that the Jews believing Wives shall be divorced and separated
from their Husbands, unless upon admonition they turn Christians. The like
was Fredericus Lindebrogus Codex Legum, Antiq.
Enacted by the Wisigothes, Laws: lib. 12. Tit. 2. 3. Yea, Centur. Magdeb. 12.
c. 7. col. 1079.
Pope Alex. the 3. Decretal. l. 6. c. 7. prohibited all Christians, under pain
of Excommunication, to cohabit with the Jews, or keep company with them,
because their manners and Christians accord in nothing, and they by reason of
their continual conversation, and daily familiarity, might EASILY incline the
minds of simple people TO THEIR SUPERSTITION AND INFIDELITY. And should not
those then, who pretend themselves far greatet Zealots then the Goths,
Spaniards, or Pope, upon these very grounds, much more oppose, prohibit their
readmission into England, in this giddy Apostatizing age, lest their Company
and Society should easily seduce the unstable people to their Judaism and
Infidelity, to Christ's dishonor, their own damnetion, and the infamy of our
Church and Government. The rather, because if extraordinary care be not taken
herein, under pretext of Jews, we shall have many hundreds of Jesuits, Popish
Priests and Friars come over freely into England from Portugal, Spain, Rome,
Italy, and other places, under the title, habit, and disguise of Jews, of
purpose to undermine our Religion, Church and State, and sow the seeds of
Heresy, Blasphemy, Popery, Superstition, Schisms, and Divisions amongst us;
they having formerly sent over some of late years amongst us, under the notion
and vizard of converted Jews, as Ramsey the Scot, and Eleazer, and Joseph
Ben-Isaiah, all Jesuitical, wicked cheating Impostors: the two last whereof,
have cheated the honest people of the Nation of many thousand pounds, being
notorious Villains, one of them formerly a Trooper and Plunderer in Prince
Ruperts army, as he confessed to his Hostess at Dursly in Glocestershire in
his drink, where he would have ravished the Maidservant of the house, locking
the door upon her, whiles she was warming his bed in the night, and upon her
crying out for help, fled away presently in the night, to avoid apprehension;
And yet wanders about cheating the people in other places, instead of being
brought to Tyburne for his Villainies. And if they abuse and cheat us thus
already, much more will they do it upon, and after the Jews admission.

9. To pretermit their banishment out of Rome by the Emperor Claudius, recorded
Acts 18. 2. and that as Orosius, l. 2. c. 6. Cent. Magd. 2. col. 26 Euscb. l.
2. c. 8. Opmeeri Chron. p. 185. Metamerus de Ac^ demiis Hisp.
Ecclesiastical Historians report, for their cheating, and tumults there
raised. I shall only in brief relate, how they have from time to time been
banished, expelled many Christian Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, and their
Synagogues burnt and destroyed, especially for their Infidelity, and other
forementioned Misdemeanors, Crimes, Villainies. Socrates Schol. Eccl. Hist. l.
7. c. 13. Agobardus de Judaicis superstit. Bibl. Patrum. Tom. 9 pars 1. p. 564.
Cent. Magd. 4. col. 1081. 1490
About the year of Christ 430. at the instigation of St. Cyril Bishop of
Alexandri^, and the Christians there, they were expelled and banished that
famous City, where they had long inhabited, for their insolences, and
seditious conspiracies against the Christians. About the year of Christ, 615.
they were banished out of Jerusulem it self, by Heraclius the Emperor, as
Zonaras, Tom. 3. in his life: Paulus Diaconus, rerum Romans l. 18. and Cent.
Magd. 7. c. 14. story. About Anno 616. Rodericus Toletanus de Rebus Hisp. l.
2. c. 17. Vasaeus Chron. Hisp. 685. Jo. Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 6. c. 3.
Sigeberti chro. Ado Viennensis. Opmeerus Orbis Universi. Chronogr. p. 355 Cent.
Magd. 7. c. 14. Genebrar. Chronogr.
King Sisebutus banished them all out of Spain, unless they would turn
Christians, which the most of them refusing to do, departed thereupon into
France, as the marginal Authors unanimously attest. About the year 618. they
were all banished out of France by King Dagobert, unless they would renounce
their Judaism, and turn Christians, upon the command and instigation of Her
a^lius the Emperor; as Regino, Chron. l. 1. and Cent. Magdeb. 7. c. 14.
relate. King Wamba about the year 710. banished them out of the Province of
Narbon; as Rodericus Toletanus de Rebus Hisp. l. 3. c. 11. informs us. The
Paulus Diaconus, l. 17. Zonaras Tom. 3. Cent. Magd. 7. c. 15. col. 588.
Emperor Phocas, about the year 60^. banished them out of the City of Antioch,
for the tumults they had there raised against the Christians and Government.
About the year 1196. they Cent. Mag. xi. c. 14. etc. 15. col. 689.
were banished out of the City of Mentz, and near the same time out of the City
of Triers, and the Bishopric thereof, by Bishop Everhard. Vincentiu^ Belu.
Spe. Hist. l. 29. c. 25. Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 17. c. 9. Mat. Paris
Hist. Angl. p. 861. A^b ^^ ^sp^^g: Paral. p. 346. Herman. Schedel Chro. f. 231.
Cent. Mag. 12. ^. 15. col. 1781. Genebrardi ^hron. l. 4; p. 638. Fox. Acts and
Mon. Vol. ^. p. 423, Cooks 2 Inst. p. 507. Seb. M^^. Cos^. l. 2, c. 57. f. 171.
Philip Augustus King of France, banished them all out of France by several
Edicts, Anno 1152, 1162. and 1182. for these reasons: because they had diverse
times crucified children of Christians in Paris, and elsewhere, in contempt of
Christ and his Passion; entertained Christian men servants and maid servants in
their houses, who did likewise play the Jews with them, contrary to the Decrees
of God and the Church; above measure oppressed* impoverished by their Usuries,
the Citizens, Knights, Gentry, and Country people both in the Cities, Suburbs,
and Villages of France, and detained some of them prisoners in their houses,
like captives, binding them by an Oath, not to depart out of them; most vilely
profaned the sacred Vessels pawned to them by churchmen in cases of necessity,
causing their little children ordinarily to drink wine and eat sops out of them
(in contempt of the Sacrament) and casting the silver Vessels, Crosses, and
gilded Books of the Gospel pawned to them, into Jakes in a sack, that the
Christians might not find them; and because the Saracens upbraided the
Christians for entertaining them amongst them, being the professed Enemies of
Christ. Upon these grounds, as also because their wealth and Number were so
increased, that they had almost gotten half the City of Paris into their hands,
King Philip caused them to be all apprehended through France in one day, as
they were in their Synagogues: then spoiled them of all their rich gold and
silver garments, confiscated all their Lands, Houses, Possessions; and banished
them the Realm, notwithstanding the intercessions of many Bishops and Nobles
(bribed with their gold and gifts) on their behalf, and the proffers, of great
sums of money to him by the Jews, wherewith he would not be mollified. After
which, he caused their Synagogues to be profaned, and then consecrated and
converted to Churches; that so where Christ was first blasphemed after the
manner of the Jews, he might in the same places be praised both by the Clergy
and people, as Vincentius records at large. After this, creeping into that
Realm again by money and Bribes, they were Aemilius l. 8. Gaguinus, l. 7.
Genebrardi chronogr. l. 4. p. 634. 660, 667. Heylins Microcosme, p. 576.
again banished out of France, and their goods confiscated by King Philip the
Fair, in the year 1293. as some, or 1307. as others compute it, and driven into
Germany. In the year 1349. at the earnest importunity of the people they were
all banished out of Alberti Argentinensis chron. p. 147, 148. De Rebus Ge^lis
Bertoldi p. 177, 178.
Alsatia, and the Imperial Cities, by the agreement of the Bishops and Nobles,
and most of them burnt and destroyed, as they had been formerly in those parts
by Earl Aventinus Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 468.
Emicho, An. 1102. who then banished them thence. Ludovicus Duke of Bavaria,
about the year 1450, banished all the Jews out of his Territories, as Aeneas
Picolom^neus in his Europ^ staius sub Frederico, l. 3. c. 32. p. 79. assures
us. Seb. Munste^t Cosmog. l. 2. p. 72, 73. 171. Hieron. Conestaggius de
Portugal. and Cast. conjunct. p. 1064, 1065. Vasaeus chron. Hisp. Johan.
Mariana de Rebus Hisp. l. 26. c. 1. 3. The General History of Spain in their
Lives. Genebrardi chronog. p. 380. 634. 660. 667. 703. 705, 708. Heylins
Microsme, p. 570. Opmeeri chronogr. p. 429.
In the years 1474. 1482. and 1492. they were all banished out of Spain by King
Ferdinand, surnamed the Catholic, from whence they were transported and
received into Portugal, they paying to K. John 2. 8. Ducats for every poll of
them at first, for their admission; which much augmented his Eschequer, though
it diminished his piety and honor. Not long after, Anno 1497. they were driven
and banished out of Portugal by King Emanuel: And in the year 1539. they were
banished out of Naples and Sicily by Charles the 5th. To which I might add the
destruction, burning and utter extirpation of the Jews by the Rubeaquenses Anno
1309. and 1338. Munst. Cosm. l. 3. p. 547. out of Worms and Spires, An. 1092.
Munsteri Cosm. l. 3. p. 580. Out of Prague, by VVratislaus for hating and
slaying the Christians, Geor. Bartholdus Pontanus, Bohemiae Piae. l. 2. p. 20.
Out of Berne, An. 1287. Munsteri Cosm. l. 3. p. 582. Having therefore been thus
frequently banished by Christian Kings, Princes, from time to time, at the
earnest solicitation of their godly Christian Ministers, Bishops, People; and
by our King and Parliament too out of Annals Domin. colmariensium, p. 25.
England, so long since, never to return again, what shadow, color of Piety,
Policy, Prudence, Justice, Law, Reason, there can be for any person or persons
whatsoever to re-admit them (except the Argument of dishonest, private, filthy
underhand Bribes or Lucre, by which they usually scrue themselves into those
places, whence they have been exiled) transcends my shallow capacity to
comprehend, especially at this season, when we are so over-stored with English,
that some think of sending and planting Colonies in another world; whither
these Gold-thirsty Jews may do well to transplant themselves, if they be weary
of their former habitations.

9. The forecited Christian Authors, Historians old and new, much applaud and
magnify those Christian Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, States, who have most
opposed, restrained, suppressed by See Leges wistgothorum l. 12. Tit. 2. 3.
Surius council. Tom. 2. 277. 608. 640. 679. 696. 674. 680. 734. 735. 1092. Tom.
3. p. 552. 622. 670. 726. 754. Cent. Mag. 4. col. 541. 1461. cent. 6. col. 824
cent. 7. col. 588
severest Laws, Edicts, the Jewish Synagogues, Ceremonies, Superstitions,
Rites, Abuses; and banished these Antichristian Blasphemers, and Enemies of
Christ Jesus out of their Kingdoms and Territories, especially for their
Infidelity, and censured those who favored them. And Matthaeus Flacius
Illericus, Johannis Wigandus, Andreas Corvinus, Thomas Holthuter, 4 famous,
learned Protestant Historians and Divines, in their laborious, learned
Ecclesiastical Centuries, as they every where do the like: So in their 12.
Cent. cap. 7. col. 1078, 1079. they pass this sharp censure against the
Decrees of Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 726.
Pope Alexander the 3. and Clement the 3. ( prohibiting the Jews to build any
new Synagogues where were none before, yet tolerating the^ only to repair old
ones where they were fallen down or defaced, to use their rites in. But withal
forbidding all Christians under pain of Excommunication, communion with them,
for fear of being seduced to their Superstitions, etc.) Denique ut EXTREMAM
Romanorum Paparum IMPUDENTIAM ET STUPENDAM IMPIETATEM VIDEAS, non pigebit eorum
Decreta, PRO BLASPHEMA IN DEUM GENTE JUD AEORUM LATA, adscribere. And Peter
Herlin in his Microcosme, p. 569, 570. writing, That the Jews having been put
to diverse fines and ransoms, they are at last even quite thrust out of Europe
also. They were banished out of England by Edward the 1. Anno 1290. Out of
France, Spain, Portugal, Naples, and Sicily ( by the Kings forecited) subjoyns
by way of Censure. Yet are they found in great numbers in the Romish part of
Germany and Poland, in most Cities of Italy, especially Rome, where there are
not less than 15000. or 20000. of them; and also in the Popes Country of
Avignion. The reason why they are permitted to live thus under our Holy Fathers
nose, is forsooth, AN EXPECTATION OF THEIR CONVERSION: Nota.
WHICH IS A MERE PRETENSE, THE REASON BEING INDEED, THE BENEFIT HENCE ARISING
TO HIS HOLINESS COFFERS. But the hopes of their conversion is small, and the
means less, etc. And therefore we cannot now readmit them in to England upon the
self-same Papal pretense and Ground of Gain; without incurring the like
Censures from Protestants and Papists too; and bringing intolerable Scandal,
Diss^onor, Reproach, on our Nation and Religion, in these times of pretended
highest Reformation; they being the professed Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who will not not have him to rule over them, Luke 19, 27. and so odious to the
Heylins Microcosm, p. 170.
very Turks them selves for cru^fying Christ, that they often use to say in
detestation of a thing, I would I might die a Jew. Neither will they permit a
Jew to turn Turk, unless he be first baptized.

11 Many of the wisest Heathen Lawgivers, Politicians, States, have especially
prohibited the introduction and habitation of foraigners amongst them. Hence
Alexander ab Alexandro, l. 4. p. 203. Plutarch's Laconica instituta Xenophon de
Lacaedem. Republica, Thucidides coelius Rhodiginus antiqua in lect. l. 18. c.
5. Boemus de moribus Gent. p. 199.
Lycurgus the famous Legislator, and the Spartans by his Law and advice
expelled all foraigners out of their City and Country, lest by insinuating
themselves amongst them, they should teach their Citizens some ill, introduce
foraign manners, and an ill disordered kind of life; upon which ground they all
prohibited their Citizens to travel into foraign Countries. Upon these grounds
the Thebans and also Apotloniatae (in imitation of the Spartans, banished all
foraigners out of their City, as Aelian Variae Historiae l. 13. c. 16. and
Alexander ab Alexandro l. 4. c. 10. record. Plato the Philosopher Dialogo 12.
de Legumlatione, though he permits forainers by way of study, trade, travel,
and embassy to come into his City and Republike, under certain Laws, R^ules,
yet he totally secludes them from inhabiting therein, or to trade, without
strict Laws to prevent their danger. Solet enim civitatum in commerc^is
permixtio, varios mores civitatibus ammiscere, dum externi externiis vicissim
novationes inducum: quae res civitatibus per rectas leges been institutis
MAXIMUM DETRIMENTUM AFFERT: De Republ. l. 5. c. 2.
Arist. observes, Thatthe bringing in of forainers is a principal cause of
seditions, quarrels; Qui inquilinas aut advenas (...)nt in vitatem, Hi fere
Omnes aut certe plurimi SEDITIONIBUS CONFLICTANTUR. Sphaer^ civitatis, l. ^. c.
3. p. 435, 437, 438.
Dr. Jo. Case gives the reason of it. Nam ut nihil citius corpus humanum
inficit quam pestilentium vaporum malis humoribus copulatio; ita NIHIL VELOCIUS
CORRUMPIT CIVITATEM, QUAM PEREGRINORUM HOMINUM ADMISSIO, in qua contagio and
venenum latet. And hereupon he raises this question from Aristotle's Text;
Utrum periculosa sit in Rempublicam peregrinorum admissio? And thus resolves
it. It is perilous to take Snakes into the Bosom, and Forraigners into the
Commonwealth; for as they being refreshed with heat do bite and sting; So
these being enfranchised destroy the Republike. To prove this by arguments, we
may consider that every Nation has its proper manners and ceremonies which
they bring along with them, and do not change with the climat when they come
into another Country; Wherefore there is great danger, lest by receiving
strangers the ancient manners and Laws should be changed into new and forain.
Now what sooner begets sedition then alteration of Laws and Customs? (as we may
see even in sundry Scripture examples, which he remembers not, and of the Jews
especially Acts 14. 2. to 7. 16. c. 16. 19. to 25. c. 18. 5, 6, 7, 17, 18, 19.
c. 17, 12. to 18 c. 19. 24. to 41. c. 21, 27, to 40. c. 22. 22. etc. c. 23. and
24. and 25.) What therefore is more perilous than the admission of Foraigners
into our Commonwealth? Moreover, wherefore has Nature instructed like to
associate together with like, if it should draw men of strange and different
manners into a Republike. Nature will not that sheep should be associated with
wolves, neither wills Prudence that Natives should be coupled with forraigners;
For Philosophy persuades this, that contraries cannot dwell in the same place;
but strangers for the most part are enemies to the Citizens with whom they
converse. Add to this, that as Locusts are to the corn, so are foraigners to
the Republike; for as they do wast and consume the grain of corn, so these
devour the fruit of the Commonwealth; for although they are branches of the
same plant, yet they suck not wholesome juice but poison from the root,
wherewith at length the whole plant being infected perishes. This he proves by
several examples out of De Repub. l. 5. c. 2. 3.
Aristotle himself; as by the Trezenii, Zanclei, Sybarites, Bysantii
Antissiaei, Apolloniatae, Chii; Syracusani, Aniohipoli^e, who by receiving
strangers into their Cities and Countries, were all much infested, and some of
them quite supplanted and ejected by them, the rest enforced to expel them by
force of arms. Then he subjoyneth, That the strangers admitted among Gods own
people, proved briars and thorns unto them, and Solomon himself by many strange
women fell into idolatry: concluding thus, The Spaniards in my judgment did
not unjustly BANISH THE SEDITIOUS JEWS OUT OF THEIR COASTS: propius non
accedo, sed Christum oro, ne peregrinarum turba immanis turbo in civitate
fiat., As these Grecians in ancient times prohibited the introduction of
strangers amongst them, for the forementioned reasons, so likewise did some of
the wisest Romans: Pennus in ancient times, and Papius after him (as See
Thucidides Hist. l. 6. p. 506.
Cicero relates; Peregrinos Vrhibus prohibent, eosque exterminant; which
although he thus censures as a cruelty, usu vero urbis prohibere peregrinos,
sane inhumanum est; Yet he intends it only of excluding strangers from all
trading and commerce, not from cohabitation, as Denizens, from which he holds
it just to debar them, there being a special Law then in force for that
purpose, which he thus expresses: Nam esse pro cive qui civis non sit, RECTUM
EST NON LICERE: QUAM LEGEM TULERUNT SAPIENTISSIMI CONSULES, Crassus and
Scaevola. Hence Claudius the Emperor benished the Jews out of Rome, Acts 18. 2
and Suetonius in his life. And the mischief of admitting forraigners is largely
argued in Cicero de Officiis, l. 3.
Cornelius Tacitus, who were after his time banished out of Room* as Page 218,
210, 220.
Coelius Rhodiginus relates out of Ammianus Marcelinus; So the Carthaginians,
Antiqu. Lection, l. 1^. p. 5.
(p) Alexander ab Alexan. Genesis Dier. l. 4. c. 10.
Scithians, Scythotauri, Jamphasanti, Seres, Indians, and Egyptians in some
places; The Aethenians also exluded forraigners company and conversation; Ne
cives longo usu dissimiles mores imbuerent, and in alienas leges ritusque
transirent, as Alex. ab Alexandro, Genesis Dierum l. 4. c. 10. and Boemus de Mor.
Gentium record. And we read of the Purchase pilg^image, l. 4. c. 13, 19. p. 537,
538.
Tartars and most politic Inhabitants of China, at this day, that they will
admit no strangers into their Countries, so much as to travel or traffic, for
fear of discerning their secrets, and corrupting their manners, and those few
they admit by special license to enter into their Country, they will by no
means suffer to return thence, nor permit Merchants and Mariners there trading
to walk abroad publicly in their Cities and Countries, nor to lodge on land,
but only in their ships; which practices of theirs, being if not grounded on,
yet at least warranted by Gods own forcited Precepts to the Israelites, and
being warranted by the Jews own practice, who had no dealings with the
Samaritans, John 4. 9. and the Samaritans reciprocal carriage toward the Jews,
whom they would neither lodge nor entertain, Lu. 9. 51, 52, 53. Why we should
not upon this account seclude those alien Jews, so different from us both in
manners, customs, Laws, Religion, and obeying not the Laws of our Savior
Christ Jesus, it being not for the Kings or the Kingdoms profit to suffer them,
(as Haman, Esther 3. 8. once said of them in another case) I refer it to all
wise Statesmen to resolve, since it may be truly said of such unwelcom guests.

Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes. Neither will this contradict that
Gospel precept, Heb. 13. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: or Deutr.
10. 18. 19. c. 23. 7 Mat. 25. 35, 43. which extend only to Christian
hospitality, liberality, and pity toward exiles, travelers, and other private
distressed strangers, coming in to lodge or sojourn with us for a short season
in our houses, or Country, and standing in need of our releif, as is clear by
the Texts themselves, compared with Romans 12. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 9. 3. John 5. but
especially to such who are of the household of faith, not Jews or Infidels) Gal.
6. 10. Not to the reception of any whole foraign Nation or Colony into our
Island to cohabit perpetually with us (the only point in question) which the
Scripture nowhere commands nor in ends, but disallows in the forecited Texts,
and Neh. 9. 2. c. 13. 30. And these Scripture expressions, Pro. 5. 10. Lest
strangers be filled with thy wealth. Isay 1. 7. your land strangers devour in
your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown by strangers, Lam. 5. 2. Our
inheritance is turned unto strangers, our Houses to aliens, Hosea 7. 9.
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not; sufficiently
manifest both the illegallity, folly, and sad consequences of our receiving
Jews and other strangers in such a nature, of which our Ancestors had
sufficient experience in the Jews themselves; enforcing them for ever to exile
them hence.

These general Reasons against the Jews readmission premised, which I hope will
satisfy most men; I shall conclude with some particular Reasons drawn from
late published Declarations of our Grandees, which I conceive will best
satisfy them of any other: and for this end (I hope without any just offense,
or Scandalum Magnatum) I shall crave leave to press them home in this common
cause, for the defense of the Glory, honor, Scepter, Gospel, Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the only 1 Timothy 6. 15. Col. 2. 10. and 16. Rev. 1. 5. c. 17.
14. c. 19. 16 Romans 9. 4.
Potentate, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, the head of all Principality and power, and God over all blessed for
ever, before whose feet, all other subordinate Kings and Potentates whatsoever
ought to Rev. 4. 9. 10, 11; c. 19. 4 Romans 11. 36.
prostrate, not only their persons, but Crowns, and most peremptory Royal Wills
and Edicts too; for whose pleasure, honor and glory alone, all things and
powers likewise both are and were created: in whose cause we must be most
Ezech. 2. 3. to 9. Acts 4. 19. 20. c. 5. 29. 30, etc.
bold and zealous, not fearing the faces of any Mortals.

My 1. Reason shall be drawn from the very words of the Declaration of 21
November. 1655. inviting the people of this Commonwealth to a day of solemn
Fasting and Hum liation, on the 6. of December last ( a 2 Kings 19. 3.
* day of trouble and of rebuke, of blasphemy, and provocation, in respect of
the violence acted on it that time seven years, when the children were come to
the birth, and there was no strength to bring forth, but only to obstruct and
pull out the Members, to prevent our peace and settlement.) The principal cause
whereof they Declare to be; The abominable Blasphemies vented and spreading of
late, through the Apostasy of, and the abuse of Liberty by many professing
Religion. And to join with them in solemn and earnest supplications to the
throne of Grace; That the Lord will disappoint the designs of those, that
labor to lift themselves up against the interest of Christ and his people:
That he will rebuke the foresaid Evils, and give his people to know the things
that belong to their Peace, that so we may with one heart and shoulder serve
the Lord, both theirs and ours. The Jews of all other Nations in the world, are
the greatest venters, spreaders of abominable Acts 13. 45. Rev. 2. 9.
Blasphemies against our Savior and the Gospel; the greatest Apostates from
God and abusers of Liberty of any professing Religion; The greatest designers,
plotters and lifters up of themselves against the interest of Christ and his
people; as the Premises undeniably evidence: And their introduction amongst us
at this season, when the generality of the people, and professors of Religion
likewise are so bent to Apostasy, and all kind of Errors, of Novelties in
Religion, will no ways allay, but most certainly increase the venting and
spreading of abominable Blasphemies amongst us, multiply the Apostacies of, and
abuse of liberty by the professors of Religion, and make thousands in
probability turn Apostate Jews, instead of converting any of the Jews to
Christianity. It will not disappoint, but most of all advance the designs of
those that labor to lift up themselves against the interest of Jesus Christ
and his people; this being (as some justly fear) the Jews very end and plot in
pressing now to be received amongst us, to seduce us unto Judaism, to which
many are now inclined; and to deny our Savior Christ in words, as too many
have Tit. 1. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 2. Pet. 2. 1. Jude 14. 1 John 4. 3.
denied him in their works, and some in their opinions of late years. It will
not rebuke, but foment the foresaid Evils; obstruct Gods people both from
knowing and pursuing the things that concern their peace; and instead of
enabling them with one heart and shoulder to serve the Lord, divide them into
more Sects and Schisms, than formerly, and set up Judaism to affront
Christianity with open face, as 2 Pet. 2. 1. Jude 3. 4. etc. Tit. 1. 10. 11. 1 John 4. 3. resolve: and so multiply the late Rebukes and Judgments of God upon
the Nation. Therefore their readmission into England after such a Solemn
Declaration, and Day of Humiliation as this (and some others formerly
prescribed, observed through the Nation, for the late monstrous growth and
spreading of Errors and Blasphemies amongst us,) if resolved and effected, will
be reputed by God and Men, A most palpable violation, yea contradiction of this
Declaration and Humilation; a most hypocritical, Atheistical mocking of God
himself to his face; a most profane abuse, and perversion of this Solemn. Fast
and Humiliation; a frustration of all the prayers, hopes of most religious
people thereon, who observed it for far other prescribed ends, and an high
Provocation of Gods severest wrath against the perverters of it, to this very
end, to introduce the long-since banished Jews, the debate whereof was proposed
immediately before, and began the very next day after it.

My 2. Reason shall be deduced from the Declaration of the 24 November. 1655. in
order to the securing of the peace of the Commonwealth; Declaring it necessary
to use all good means to secure the Peace of the Nation, and prevent future
troubles within the same. The bringing in of the Jews at this season, when the
people are so generally divided, discontented, and declare (for ought I can
learn) their highest, unanimous dislike, and derestation of it, is the most
probable means to disturb the peace of the Nation, and to engender future new
troubles, Tumults within it; the generality of the people in England, and in
other Countries, having in former See here p. 8. to 15. 18. 24. 32. 33. 64. 65.
67. 68. to 77. 79.
ages frequently risen up in arms against them; massacred, burnt and destroyed
them, notwithstanding their Kings and Magistrates Proclamations and Edicts to
the contrary. And the Sea Socrates Scholast. l. 7. c. 13. Sozomen, l. 4. c. 7.
Cent. Magd. 4. 5. 7. 12, 13, c. 14.
Jews themselves in all ages having been principle firebrands of sedition both
in their own Land, and all places where they have been dispersed, as the Texts
and Authors in the 3. and 7. premised reasons, with the foregoing Relations out
of our English Historians attest. Therefore their readmission into England,
(especially in this unquiet season) must needs be diametrically contrary to the
scope of this Declaration; and neither in policy nor prudence to be resolved
on, but utterly rejected.

My 3d. reason shall be grounded on this clause of that Declaration: That no
person who has or shall be sequestered, or ejected for Delinquency, or being in
actual arms for the late King against the then Parliament, or for Charles Stuart
his Son, etc. out of any Benefice, School, or College, shall from and after
the 1. day of December, be kept as a Chaplain or Schoolmaster in any
sequestered persons house; Nor after the 1. day of January, keep any School
public or private; Nor preach in any public place, or private meeting of any
other persons than those of his own* family; Nor shall administer Baptism, or
the Lords Supper, or Marry, etc. upon pain that every person so offending in
any of the premises shall be proceeded against, as by Orders (therein mentioned)
is provided: prescribing 3 months imprisonment for the 1. 6 months for the 2d,
and banishment for the 3d Offense, as I am informed. If native freeborn
Englishmen, formerly ejected out of any Benefice, College or School, only for
their old delinquency in adhering to the lare King and Prince (though according
to their Oaths, duties and dictate of their consciences) after some years
public liberty to preach, Articles of Agreement confirmed by the Army and both
Houses, and that which some call, An Act of Oblivion, and future indemnity,
though orthodox in Doctrine, unblameable in conversation, and eminent in
learning, without any particular impeachment, hearing, conviction of any new
Delinquency or misdemeanors whatsoever, must not have so much liberty as to
keep any School, or preach Gods Word in public or private, or to be
entertained in formerly sequestered Englishmens houses, under the foresaid
penalties at this season, only in Order to the Nations peace: Then much less
ought Jews, mere aliens, who always have been, and still are professed Enemies
in arms against the Person, Kingdom, Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ (which the
late Parliament by their solemn Protestation, Vow and Covenant, engaged by all
good means to defend and advance) to be entertained by any English Christians,
or publicly or privately to teach, preach, spread, propagate their Jewish
Doctrines, Errors and abolished Ceremonies in our Island, but to be banished
for ever from amongst us, if any of Immo qui Regi paruerit pro excommunicato
habeatur, qui contra regem fecerit, a noxa injustitiae, and penurii absolvatur,
as Sigebertus Gemblacensis, Chron. Au. 1088. writes of Pope Hildehrand, and his
Abettors.
them should publicly or privately artempt to creep in amongst us; Else not
only all sequestered Delinquents, but the whole English Nation and world too,
will cry out and say, [ x] the faithful loyal Chaplains, Servants, followers,
Friends of the late K. and Pr. though English Nativs, Freemen, ye our fellow
brethren Members in Christ are more execrable to, more injuriously,
unchristianly, uncharitably dealt with by their Fellow English Christians in
present power, only for their loyalty and conscientious adhering to their late
temporal King and Prince, than the very alien Jews, who both denied, rejected,
crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, their own temporal Sovereign, who Mat. 2. 2.
c. 27, 37. Lu. 1. 32. 33. Rev. 25. 9.
was born King of the Jews, and had this very title inscribed on his Cross;
and their and our only spiritual King and Savior, whose Honor, Power,
Kingdom, Gospel, we a vowedly profess to advance; and that they enjoy less
Christian or civil liberty for themselves, their wives and families necessary
subsistence, now in their Native country and must neither teach nor preach
Christ Jesus to any in public or private, though Gods word and their
function, condition enjoin, 1 Cor. 9. 16

2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.


necessitate them to do both, when as these admitted Jews may both teach and
preach against him too in public and private. Which restraints on these
English Royalists on the one hand, and indulged liberty to the alien Jew 1 John
4 3.
Antichrists on the other, if now put in execution, I humbly refer it to the
saddest considerations and conscientious meditations of all in power to resolv
themselves how scandalous and odious it will prove both to God and all good men
how much it will resemble the proceedings, not only of the malicious Jews
themselves against the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, recorded* Acts 4. 1.
to 24. etc. 5. 24. to 32. 1 These. 2. 14, 15, 16. of beheaded Canterries Doom,
p. 107. 138, 491, 496.
Canterbury against Mr. Workman of Gloucester, But likewise of that detestable
Apostate Emperor Ambros. Epist. l. 5. Ep. 29. Cent. Magd. 4. cap. 3. col. 114
to 120. c. 14. 1438, 1459. Nazianzon Oration 2. in Julianum Socrates Schol. l.
3. c. 22. Ruffinus, l. 1. c. 28. Theodoret, l. 3. c. 20. Nicephorus l. 10. c.
^3. 4. 5. 24, 25, 33 f. 32. Sozomen. l. 5 c. 22.
Julian, who out of his desperate malice to Christ, to undermine and extirpate
Christian Religion without shedding the blood of Christians, first showed
himself a most zealous Christian professor, reducing the Orthodox Bishops,
Ministers, christians, whom the persecuting Arian Emperor Constantius had
exiled, and restoring them to their confiscated Bishoprics, to ingratiate
himself with the people; but not long after turning Apostat he took away all
the Privileges, honors, revenues of the Clergy settled on them by Constantine,
with the Laws for their establishment, shut up the Churches and Schools* of the
Christians, prohibiting them to teach in public or private, or set their
children to School, unless they would renounce their former Religion, and turn
Pagans, impoverished, oppressed the Christians with extraordinary doubled
Taxes, from which the Pagans were exempted, and castmany of them into prison.
But on the contrary at the same time, he showed extraordinary favor and
affection toward the Jews, sent for the chiefest of them to his court, where
he discoursed with them, writing a special Letter to them, wherein he desired
their prayers for him, granted them free exercise of their Jewish ceremonies,
and sacrifices long discontinued, encouraged and assisted them with moneys out
of his public Treasury to re-edifie the Temple at Jerusalem, to receive and
set up all their Jewish Sacrifices and customs there formerly used, whereupon
they began to build it, till-miraculously interrupted therein^; and all to vex
and undermine the Christians. By which indulged Liberty, the Jews then grew so
insolent against the Christians, that they greivously persecuted diverse of
them, destroyed and burnt down some of their Churches, and threatened to
persecute them worse than the Pagan Romans had done; as the Marginall
Historians record more at large. The imitation of whose proceedings now in any
degree in these particulars, what harsh constructions and sad events they may
produce, I refer to all wise Christian Statesmen seriously to ponder, for
their own and our Religions honor and Security.

My 4. argument is this, The Orders for securing the peace of the Nation, which
the Declaration relates to; See here, p. 49. 50. 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 44, 47,
50. Memineritis, nihil posse judicio fieri contrarium magis, quam sine judicio
proscribere aliquem. Non sinit Lex decretum lege plus valer^: iste cum tot sunt
leges, decretum ratum facit, leges tollit: Demosthenes, Oration contra
Timocratem, p. 200.
contrary to all the Statutes, Acts, Resolutions of our Parliaments and
Law Books forecited, upon another occasion) authorize the Major Generals and
Commissioners named in them. To banish and send into Foraign parts and
Plantations, all persons of the royal party formerly in arms, of no estate, and
living loosly, and all persons whatsoever that shall appear by their words or
actions to adhere to the party of the late King or his Son, and to be dangerous
Enemies to the peace of the Commonwealth, even without and before any Legal
indictment, trial, conviction of any particular crime, for which a Sentence of
Banishment is prescribed by our Laws: or any Judgment or Act of Parliament
inflicting this heavy Punishment upon them, far worse to many than death it
self. Now I shall earnestly entreat in the name and fear of God, all those whom
it most concerns, to consider in their own retired thoughts, how unjust,
unrighteous, unreasonable, unchristian it will seem to all Freeborn English
men, and conscientious Christians, both at home and abroad, and what great
scandals it may bring, both upon our Nation, Government, and Religion it self,
in this manner, (and on this old account alone) to banish these Christian
English freemen one of their Native Country, both from their Wives Children,
Kindred, and Gods own public Ordinances; and at the self-same time to call in
foraign, Infidel Jews, (greatest Enemies to Christ himself and Christians, and
in that respect more dangerous to the peace and welfare of the Nation than
those thus to be banished) to supply their places, even against an express old
Judgment and Edict of the whole Kingdom in Parliament, for their perpetual
exile. What a sad p^rnicious Mat. 7. 2. Luke 6. 37. 38. and Rev. 13. 10. Obad.
15. and Joel 3. 6, 7, 8.
president it may prove in future ages, upon every new revolution to banish all
English freemen of a contrary party and call in Forraigners in their rooms:
Whether it will not revive that ancient complaint of Lib. 5. Epist. 33. and
Cent. Mag. 12. ca. 14.
Petrus Cluntacensis. Lex nam vetusta sed vere diabolica ab ipsis Christianis
Principibus processit, etc. Manet inultum scelus detestabile in Judaeo, quod
exilio vel horrenda morte suspendi^ punitur in Christiano. Pingrescit inde and
deliciis affluit Iudaeus, unde laqueo suspenditur Christianus? And whether upon
consideration of this and the precedent reasons deduced from these
Declarations, and all the premises, they ought not peremptorily to conclude
against the Jews present and future readmission into England? most seriously
to determine.

I shall close up all with an Answer to the two principal Allegations for their
reception into our Allegat. 1.
Realm.

1. The main and only conscientious Argument for their introduction, is this,
That it may be a very probable hopeful means of the general calling and
conversion of the Jewish Nation to the Christian Faith, which has been so long
prayed for and expected by Christians, and seems now approaching; which their
seclusion from us may much obstruct.

Not to enter into any large debate of this conversion of the Jews, wherein
learned See Hyperius, Osiander, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Melancthon; Calvin,
Selneccerus, Marlorat, Paraeus, Willet, I Wilson, and others on Romans 11. Dr.
Prideaux, Orat. 6. de Vocatione Judaeorum*
Orthodox Divines and Writers, are much divided. I say, 1. That I could never
yet be satisfied, that there shall be such a general call and conversion of the
whole or major part of the Nation of the Jews, as some expect, but only of an
elect remnant of them, The Here p. 63, 64, 65, 66.
foreciced Texts, with I say 30. 8, 9, 10, 11. Now go write it before them in a
Table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come FOR EVER and
EVER, That this is a rebellious people, children that will not hear the Law of
the Lord, which say to the Seers see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not
unto us right things, etc. cause the holy one of Israel to depart from before
us. Luke 20. 16, 17, 18. Mat. 21. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, John 1. 11. 12. Romans 9.
27. 26. 33. c. 11. 2, 5, 7, 8. contradicting such a general conversion of them,
and that of Romans 11. 26, 27, 28. And so all Israel shall be saved, being meant
only of the Elect, and true Israel of God, both Jews and Gentiles, as many
judicious Expositors, and Romans 2, 26, 27, 28, 29. c. 9. 6, 7, 8. c. 11. 1. to
8. Gal. 3. 7, 9, 14, 16, 22, 28, 29 c. 6. 16. seem to expound it, not of the
whole Jewish Nations calling and salvation at the last. 2ly. It is agreed by
most who expect such a general calling and conversion of the Jews Paraeus
Willet, Peter Martyr. Wilson on the place, and Dr. Prideaux, Orat. 6.
That it shall not be till the fulness of the Gentiles become in, as Rom, 11,
24, 25. resolves, And whether this fulness be yet come in, there being so
many Gentile Nations yet See Purchase Pilgrimage, and Pilgrim. Edward Brerewood
his Inquiry touching the diversity of Religions through the chief parts of the
world.
unconverted, especially in Asia, Africa, and America, and those infinitely
exceeding the Gentiles yet converted to the Gospel, let those consider who now
expect the Jews conversion. 3ly. If this fulness of the Gentiles conversion
to Christ, must preceed the general calling of the Jews, as a necessary
preparative and introduction thereunto, then we ought by this allegation in the
first place to call the Turks, Tartars, Persians, Chinoys, and all other
unconverted Gentile Nations into England, and first convert them to the
Christian faith, before we bring in the Jews, whose conversion is to succeed
theirs, and the Gentiles fulness, And then we shall have Religions enough in
England to please all Novellists, and a thousand aliens to each English Native.
4ly, There are far more express, direct promises, texts, grounds, both in
the Ps. 2. 8. Ps. 22. 27. Ps. 72. 1. to 18. Ps. 67. 3. 4. 6. 7 Ps. 86. 9, 10.
Ps. 100. 1, 2, 3, 4. Ps. 148, 11, 12. 1. Kin. 8. 43 Isay 2. 1, 2 3, 4. c. 9. 2.
7 c. ^1, 10. c. 18. 7. c. 35. 1, 2, etc. c. 40. 4, 5. c. 41. 2. c. 42. 1, 6, 7,
10 11, 12, 16. c. 59. c. 6, 7, etc. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. c. 54. 1, 2, 3, 4. c.
55. 4, 6. c. 56 c. 56 5, 7, 8. c. 60. through out, c. 61. 5, 6, 9, c. 62. ^2.
c. 65. 1. c. 66. 19. to 24. Jer. 16 19. Dan. 7. 14, Hag. 2. 7. Mic. 4. 1. to 8.
Mal. 1. 10. Hos. 1. 10. c. 2. 23. Genesis 49. 10.
Old and Mat. 12. 21. c. 28. 19, 20 Mar. 16. 15. Luke 2. 32. Ioh. 7. 25. Acts
9. 15. c. 10. 1. etc 44. 65. c. 11. 1. 18. c. 13. 42. to 49. c. 14. 27. c. 15.
3. to 24. c. 16. 4. to 13. c. 17. 12. c. 18. 9, 7. etc. c. 19. 10. c. 21. 25.
c. 22. 21. c, 26. 20, 21, 22, 23. c. 28. 28. Romans 1. 13. c. 9. 24. 30. c. 10,
12, 13, 18, 19, 20. c. 11. 11, 12 etc. 25* 30. c. 18. 4. to 30. c. 16. 4. 26. 1
Cor. 12. 2. to 24. Gal. 2. 2. 16. c. 3. 14. Ephesians. 2. 1. 11. to 22. c. 3. 6. to
12. Col. 1. 6. 23, 26, 27. 1 Timothy: 2. 1. to 9. c. 3. 16. 2 Timothy 1. 11. c: 4. 17.
Rev. 5. 10. c. 6. 9, 10. c. 11. 15. c. 14. 1. 3. 6. 7.
New Testament, for the calling, conversion of all Gentiles, and yet
unconverted Heathen Nations to the faith of Christ, then of the Jewish Nation:
not one Nation of them (for ought we read) being so far rejected, broken off,
and given up to an obduration of heart, and blindness of mind, by Gods
judicial decree, as we read the Jews to be; Isa. 6. 9, 10, 11, c. 8 14. 15,
16. c. 29. 9, 10, 11, 12. Mat. 13. 14, 15. Mar. 4. 11, 12. Lu. 8. 10. John 12.
37, 38, 39, 40. Act 28. 25, 26, 27, 28. Romans 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. Therefore our
prayers and endeavors ought first to be for the conversion of all Gentiles yet
unconverted to the faith, being more hopeful, more successful in all
probability, than our prayers, endeavors for the Jews conversion, at least till
the Gentiles fulness be come in. 5ly, Admit either a general or special
calling and conversion of the Jews in the latter end of the world; yet the
calling of them into England to cohabit with us in such a manner as they now
desire, is no ways necessary for that end. For 1. it is no where declared in
Gods word, that they must be called in England, or by English men. 2ly. If they
were principally to be converted by English Divines or Laics, we may with more
ease, less danger and prejudice to our Nation and Religion, send English
Divines and Laics into other foreign parts where they now reside, to
instruct, teach, convert them to the faith, than call them into England to
convert them now, in this giddy, unsettled, apostatizing age, wherein they are
likelier to gain a thousand English Proselytes to their Judaisme, than we one
Jewish convert to Christianity, if introduced with their Synagogues and Jewish
ceremonies; perhaps their hopes of such a harvest here, is the principal motive
that they are so pressing to be now admitted again into our English climate,
without delay. 3ly. If we admit them with all their Jewish worship, Synagogues,
Ceremonies, as they now propose, it will be rather a means to harden, then
convert them; a 1 Timothy 2. 3. 10. Romans 3 8.
doing of evil that good may come of it: a swallowing down of a certain deadly
poison, in hope to correct it with a subsequent antidote; and to set up a
present Rev. 2. 9. c. 3. 9.
Synagogue of Satan, upon hopes hereafter to convert it into a Church of
Christ. 4ly. God can convert them in any other Countries, as well as in
England, and by any other Christian Nations, as well as Englishas he has done
See Cent. Mag. 4. to 13. c. 14. Par^us Com. in To. 13. p. 1101. Here p. 17.
Antonini Chron. pars 2. Tit. 16. c. 12. and Tit. 17.
some few of them in all ages, as Petrus Alphonsus, Lyra, and Junius, three
eminent Divines and Writers, amongst others: And there being as learned able
Protestant Divines in Holland, Germany, France, Denmark, as any* in England,
if they cannot convert them, what hopes have we to do it? 5ly. Conversion of
their hearts to the truth of the Gospel, and saving Grace, is Jer. 31. 18.
Ephesians. 2. 1. etc. John 3. 8. c 12. 40. Phil. 2. 13.
only the work of God, not men, who can work it when, where, and by whom he
pleases, and is not tied either to place or persons, much less to our English
climate to effect it. And, it is Gods and Christ's usual prescribed way of
converting Nations, People, to send Apostles, Ministers to preach the Gospel
to, and convert them, in the Countries, places where they dwell; not to call
them into another Foreign Land where the Gospel first shined, or where it is
entertained: as he sent his Apostles from Jerusalem into all the world, to
convert the Gentiles, not called them all to Jerusalem or Palestine, to be
there instructed and converted, Mat. 9. 38. c. 10. 5. 6. c. 28. 19, 20. Mar.
16. 15. Isay 2. 3, 4. Acts 9. 15. c. 10. 20. c. 22. 12. Ephesians. 3. 8. 2 Timothy 4.
17. 3. John 7. Why then we should take this newfound contrary way of calling
the Jews in to us to convert them, and not rather send out Ministers to them, I
cannot discern; The rather, because the Surius Council. Tom. 4. 57 ^ox Acts and
M^n. Vol. 1. p. 913. Summa Rosella and Angelica, Tit. Judaeus.
Council of Basil, An. 143 1. Sessio 19. prescribes this course both for the
converting of the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles to the Orthodox Faith; That all
Diocesans should yearly, at appointed times, provide certain men well learned
in holy Scriptures, and in the Tongues, to preach and explain the truth of the
Catholic Faith, IN SVCH PLACES WHERE THE JEWS AND OTHER INFIDELS DID DWELL,
in such sort, that they acknowledging their error, might for sake the same. To
which preaching they should compel all of both Sexes that were at years of
discretion to resort, by interdicting them commerce with Christians, and other
sitting penalties. Provided, the Diocesans and Rreachers should behave
themselves toward them mercifully, and with all charity, whereby they might
win them to Christ, not only by declaring of the truth, but also by other
Offices of humanity. 6ly. If the observation of learned Paraeus be true, that
the [m] Comment. on Romans 11. p. 1101, 1102.
overflowing of all sorts of wickednesses, crimes, murders, wars, oppressions,
rapines, injustice, tyranny, cruelty, extortions, usuries, the infinite
multiplicity, contrariety of Sects, Schisms, Religions, and unchristian,
heathen, atheistical practices of one Christian toward another, be principal
obstacles to hinder the Jews conversion, especially amongst Protestants (as
these, with idolatrous worship of Images, Saints, and the Hostia amongst
Papists) than the calling of them now into England, where See my Quakers
unmasked: and New Discovery of Free State Tyranny.
all these abound more than ever heretofore, and more than in other Nations,
will be a means more to harden them, and hinder their conversion, then any
furtherance thereunto: the rather, because the desperate Apostasy, and
atheistical actions of sundry late eminent Professors, have caused many English
Christians to turn Antiscripturists, Seekers, Atheists, and like the Jews, to
repute Christ and Christianity mere Fables. 7ly, Most of the Jews, who since
their dispersion have been baptized, and turned Christians in any age or place,
have done it either out of fear, to save their lives, or estates, when
endangered by popular tumults, or judgments of death denounced against them for
their Crimes; or for fear of banishment, or by coercion of penal Laws, not
cordial^y and sincerely, they still playing the Jews in private upon every
occasion, and renouncing their baptism and christianity at last, either before
or at their deaths, as our own See here p. 9, 10, 12, 16.
forecited Historians; the 4th Council of ^oledo, cap. 58, 59, 62. 63. Leges
Wesigothorum, lib. 12. Tit. 2, 3* Vincensius Beluacensis spec. Hist. l. 29. c.
25. Rodericus Toletanus, de rebus Hisp. l. 2. c. 17. Aventinus, Annal. Boiorum
l. 5. p. 468. Abbas Uspergensis Chrou. p. 227 228. and Cent. Magd. 4. Col.
1470. Cent. 8. col. 3 Joan Mariana de rebus Hispan. l. 19. p, 481, 482.
Munsteri Cosmogr. l. 1. c. 19. c. 73. Sum. Rosella. Tit. Judaeus.
other authors at test, Of which we have this late memorable History recorded
by Munster in his Cosmography, l. 2. c. 19. f. 72, 73. There being no less
than one hundred twenty four thousand Jews banished out of Spain, Anno 1492.
leaving all their gold, jewels, houses behind them, and paying two ducats a
pole to the King for their transportation into Portugal; some of them there
seemingly turned Christians, and were baptized, but yet secretly practiced
their Judaival rites, being Christians only in show, but not in heart,
observing the Passover, and eating flesh with the Jews: Upon the discovery
hereof, there arose a great tumult of the people against them in Lisbon, the
people complaining thereof to the King, Anno 1506. Whereupon the King commanded
16 of them to be imprisoned, and at last dismissed them without other
punishment. Upon this the Citizens conspiring againg the King and Governor,
raised a commotion against these Jews and false Christians, slaying all those
false converted new Jews they could find throughout the City, to the number of
six hundred, whom they likewise burnt; which example spreading into the
Country, there were slain in the City and Country of these Jewish, false
converts, to the number of 1630: which the King hearing of, being then absent,
he was so incensed against the Jews, that he imprisoned very many of them,
whereof some were burned, others beheaded, others hanged on Gibbets, and all
the rest spoiled of their goods, then expelled and banished the Kingdom, A sad
judgment on them for their Hypocritical conversion; and such converts mostly
we are like to find them, and none other. 7ly. If any private Jews out of mere
conscience or sincere desires of being converted to the Christian faith, shall
upon that account alone desire admission into England, to be instructed by our
English Divines, I suppose no English Christians will oppose, but further their
desires herein, and contribute both their prayers and best endeavors for their
conversion, and if there be cause, admit them into our Churches Communion upon
real testimonies of the truth of conversion in, and work of grace upon them;
which is as much as they can desire at our hands; But to admit whole multitudes
and Colonies of infidel Jews at once into our Nation, who neither desire nor
pretend conversion to Christianity, together with the free use of their Jewish
Synagogues, Rites, Ceremonies, (which they strongly insist upon) is such an
Impious, Unchristian, Antichtistian dangerous president (glossed over only with
a possibility of their future conversion) as no sincere English Christians can
approve of, nor the Jews themselves desire: For as the Jews by Deuteronomy. 7. 5.
Exodus 23. 35. c. 34. 13, 14. 2. Chron. 30. 14. c. 31. 1 c. 34. 3. to 9. 33
Levit.* 17. 12. c. 24. 16. 22. Nurin. l. 5 16. 30, 31. Deuteronomy. 31. 12. See Mr.
Seldom. de Jure naturali and Gentium, juxta Disciplinam Judaeor^m. l. 2. and 3.
Gods own Laws, and their own Jewish Rabbis precepts, neither might, nor yet
would permit any Heathen Gentiles heretofore to set up any Altars, Images,
Idols, Groves, or exercise any Idolatrous worship amongst them, or to
blaspheme, reproach their God or Religion, under pain of death if they
transgressed therein, There being the self sum* Law of God in these things
both to Gentiles, and Jews. And like as they afterward would not permit the
Apostles and Christians in Jerusalem, or any other Cities, for to preach the
Gospel, and exercise the Christian Religion freely, but raised up present
tumults against and persecuted and cast them out, as 1 These. 2. 14, 15, 17, the
whole History of the Acts, and premises abundantly testify: So by the very
self same justice and equity, they can neither now demand nor expect that we,
or any Christian Realm or State should tolerate or connive at, much less
openly countenance and protect them in the public or private exercise of their
Iudaisme, or Jewish Rit, and Blaspemies against our crucified Savior, and his
Gospel: All then that English Christians can do for them, is to Romans 10. 1. 1.
Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3.
desire, and pray for the conversion of all Gods elect amongst them in his due
time, by such means as he shall think meetest, and to instruct them in the
faith, by learned Ministers sent to them, if they desire it; but not to admit
them (and perchance many disguised Jesuits, Papists and Friars with them)
promiscuously into our Nation; to undermine our Church and Religion, and undo
many thousand Souls, it being our duty, 1 Cor. 10. 32.
as to give no just offense to the Jew, so neither to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God, whom their admission amongst us will offend. Lastly those Popes
and Popish Princes, who have heretofore admitted any Jews to inhabit amongst
them, have done it under these several cautions and limitations prescribed to
them by their Fredericus Lindebrogus codex ligum Antiqu. leges wis^gothorum. l.
12. Tit. 2, ^ 3. Laur. Surius, Council. Tom. 2. p. 277. 322, 366, 608. 646, 634,
674, 679, 698, 735, 1042. Tom. 3. p. 552. 670. 726, 754, 632, 753, 495, 466.
Council Basilens. Sess. 19. Surius Tom. 4. p. 57, 56. Alexander, 3 Decret. l. 5.
Tit. 6. c. 4, 5, 7, 8. Innocentii, 3. opera. Tom. 1. p. 488. Tom. 2. p. 798
805. Graliau Cause. 28. qu. 1. Panormitan; ibid. ^n^onii Corseti, Repertorium in
^ha^. qu. J^de^s Cardinalis Hostinensis. Summa cum additionibus, Nicholai
Superanti^ l. 5. Tit. 1^ de Judaeis and Saracenis and eorum servis Baptista
Trovomala Summa Ros^l^a Tit. Jud^^s Angelus de Clav^sio Summa Angelica. Tit.
Iudaeus, Th Zerul a Pra^is ^^fcopa^^s pars; 1 Tit. Judaeus, Centur. Magd. 12 c.
7. Iac. de Graffiis Decin. A(...) pars, ^. lib. 2. cap. 23. de Judaeis and
Saracenis Calderius de Judaeis. Consil.
Laws, Councile, Canons, Decrees, Divines and Canonist's. 1. That they should
build no new Synagogues, nor repair any old ones quite demolished. 2. That
where there were old Synagogues formerly used by them, they should only repair,
but not enlarge or build them higher than before, nor extraordinarily ad^rn
them. 3. That they should not stir out of their doors on good Friday, nor open
their doors, windows, shops, or do any servile work, on the Lords days, or
other solemn Christian Festivals. 4. That they shall utter no blasphemons
words, speeches against God, Christ, Christians, or Christian Religion, nor
manifest their open contempt of them by gestures or actions, under pain of
peouniary, corporal, and capital punishments, according to the quality of the
offense. 5. That they shall be admitted to no degrees of learning, honor,
dignity, office or preferment whatsoever in state or Church, because it is most
absurd and unjust, that any blasphemer of Christ should exercise any power or
authority over Christians in any Christian State. 6. That they should neither
eat, nor drink, nor have any daily familiarity or communion with Christians,
nor entertain any Christian man or woman in or out of their houses, either as a
Servant, Nu^se to their Children, or otherwise, nor yet administer physic to
any Christian in his sickness, lest any simple Christians should be seduced by
them to Judaisme by th^se means. 7. That all Jews both males and females should
always wear a specicial See here, p. 35.
badge or sign in all places upon their outward Garments or heads, whereby they
might be distinguished from Christians, and known by all men to be Jews, to
avoid c^mmixtion and communion between them and Christians, which otherwise
would happen. 8. That they should be disabled to bear witness, or give in any
legal testimony against Christians, or to exercise usury amongst them, or to
purchase any advowson or Ecclesiastical preferment, or to bequeath any legacy
to the Nation or Corporation of the Jews. 9. That they should be subject both
to the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts and Judges for all Yea King Eringi^s
and Leges VVisigothorum l. 12. Tit. 3. c. 3. 4. 7. prohibited the Jews the use
of Circumcision keeping of the Pass^over Jewish Sabbaths of and differences of
me^ats, under pain of whip^ing, consiscation ^f Goods loss of noses, goni al^*
banishment.
offenses properly punishable by them which they should commit. 10. That they
should pay all predial and personal Tithes to the Christian Ministers where
they lived. 11. That though they should not be compelled to be baptized or turn
Christians against their willt, yet they should at certain times be all
constrained to come to the Sermons of such Christian Priests and Ministers as
were appointed to instruct them in the Christian faith, and to preach unto them
to convert them 12. That their Servants and Children being Jews; when once
baptized and turned Christians should no more c^habit with, nor be under their
power. 13. That upon their conversion to Christianity, all their goods and money
gotten by usury and cheating should be distributed to pious uses, and the rest
only retained for their proper use and livelihood. 14 That if any of them after
their baptism apostatized and turned Jews again, or fell into Heresy, they
should be proceeded against and burned, ^executed as Apostates, and Heretics.
15. That no Christians should communicate with them in any kind, except in
buying and selling, nor cohabit with, serve them as a Nurse or Servant, under
pain of excommunication, yet notwithstanding all these restrictions and
cautions, we read of few Jews really converted by them, and that the Jews have
Zonaras Tom. 3. Centur. Magd. 9, c. 14. col. 614. Marianus Scotus. General
Hist. of Spain, p. 775 458.
perverted and seduced sundry Christians to Iudaisme, and made them professed
Jews; persuaded other Christians to observe Mosaical ceremonies, besides
Baptism, whereby they made a confused Chaos of Religion; yea they corrupted
Michael Balbus the Emperor so far, that he commanded Christians to fast on
their Sabbath, and made him as it were a sink of Sects, as Zonaras and others
record; Yea, Sedechias the Jewish Physician Alarini Poloni supputationes. Anno
876. Sigeber^i chron. Grimston and others in his life.
poisoned the Emperor Charles the Bald his body, as well as others in that age
after poisoned other Christians souls. What mischiefs then they may do to men's
bodies in England, by poisoning of them, (as they did the Sea here, p. 31. 71.
English Barons heretofore, and Dr. Lopez a Jew, would have poisoned Cambden,
Speed, and others in her. life.
Queen Elizabeth of late) and what desperate venom they may infuse into their
souls by their Jewish Doctrines, Synagogues, and Antichristian Ceremonies, if
admitted without such or upon these restrictions or any other, let all prudent
Christians resolve: Since Constitut. l. 2. Constit. 22. Oper. Tem. 2. p. 798.
Pope Innocent the 3. himself, and Summa li. 5. tit. 11. De Judae^s, etc.
Cardinal Hostiensis, with other Popish Canonists, who have tolerated them,
give us this account of their requital for it, in positive terms. Iudaei
ingrati, progratia reddunt contumeliam, pro familiaritate contemptum,
impendentes nobis illam retributionem, quam juxta vulgar proverbium, MVS IN
PERA, SERPENS IN GREMIO, IGNIS IN SINV, suis consueverunt Hospitibus exhihere,
Nam sunt quidam (quod nefandum est dicere) Nutrices Christianas habentes, non
permittunt lactare filios cum corpus Christi sumpserunt, nisi prius per triduum
lac effuderint in latrinam, (quasi intelligunt, quod corpus Christ
incorporetur, and ad s^cessum descendat.) and alia inaudita committunt, and
detestabilia, quae a fidelibus sunt minime toleranda, ne si haec negligunt quae
inducunt confusionem fidei INDIGNATIONEM DIVINAM INCVRRANT. As therefore
C^nsil. 87. and ^64.
Aldredus de Ponte; Abbot Panormitan, Repertorium in Ab. Panormitan. Tit.
Judaus fac. de Graff. Decis. Aur. Tom. 2. l. 2. 23. Sect. 60.
Antonius Corsitus, and other Popish Canonists conclude positively. That
Christians and Christian Kings may lawfully expel and banish all Jews and
Infidels out of their Realms, though peaceable, for their Infidelity, and other
just causes: So may all English Protestants likewise upon the premised reasons
conclude: we may as justly, as lawfully now keep them from re-entring into
England, notwithststanding the pretense of their conversion to the Faith, which
I hope I have satisfactorily answered.

The 2. Allegation for bringing in the Jews is merely Allegat. 2.
politic, That it will bring in much present and future gain and money to the
State, and advance trading.

I answer, 1. That if this argument overpoysed not the Answer.
scales, that of conscience, (the hopes of their conversion) would be lighter
than the dust of the balance and stick with no man, their money being the only
engine, which has opened the gate and passage for them into any Christian
Kingdoms at first, and made new entrance for them when they have been expelled,
as Surius Council. Tom. 3. p. 534.
Concilium Toletanum, 4. c. 57. and others inform us. This opened their first
passage into See here, p. 2.
England, Hironimus Conestaggius de Portugal et Castil. unione. p. 1064. 1065.
Opmeris Chronog. p. 429
Spain, Portugal: and Philip Augustus who banished them out of France, An.
1183. Postea vero quum propter bella inopia laboraret pecuniae, acceptae grandi
a Iudaeis pecunia redditum cis concessit and domicilium Parisiis, as Cosmogr.
l. 2. p. 171. Vincentius, l. 29. c. 25, Gaguinus and others.
Munster and others inform us. And this kept them so long in England
heretofore, till their very banishment; A sign we love their money better than
their souls or our own. 2ly, This argument, for their readmission, is but
wordly, carnal, sensual: the very same with that of Hamer to the Shechemites,
when he would persuade them to be circumcised, and turn Jews, Genesis 23. 25.
shall not their cattle and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours?
only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us. An argument only
fit for such whom the Apostle characterizeth, Phil. 3. 18, 19. For many walk of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies
of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly,
and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things; Or for such Princes
or Governors as God of old complained thus of Ezech. 22. 27.
Her Princes in the midst thereof are like Wolves ravening the prey, and to
shed blood, and TO DESTROY SOULS TO GET DISHONEST GAIN. It proceeds from such
Icr. 22. 17.
whose eyes and hearts are not but for their Covetousnes Phil. 2. 20, 21.
who all seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ's. And if the root
of it be covetousness Ephesians. 5. 3. Col. 3. 5.
which is Idolatry, which Christ commands all Lu. 12. 15.
to take heed and beware of, and Ephesians. 5, 3.
is not so much as to be named (much less practiced) amongst Christians, whose
Heb. 13. 5.
conversation ought to be without covetousness, and they to rest contented
with those things they have; Because (l) They that will be rich fall into
temptations, and a snare, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
and into many foolish and noysom lusts which drown men in perdition and
destruction; For the of Love of money is the root of all evil, which whiles
some covered after, they have been seduced (or erred) from the faith, (as
thousands of late years have been) and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows, Therefore it is not as much as once to be named or insisted on amongst
us, unless we will renounce our Christianity, make great gain our only
godliness, instead of making 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Godliness with contentment our great gain; Mat. 26, 15, 16. c. 27. 3, 4.
betray and sell our Savior Christ again to the Jews, like Judas, for thirty
pieces of silver, without repenting and making restitution of it to the Jews,
as he did; and most blasphemously transfer our very Saviors most blessed
Deity, and stamp his most sweet and most highest Title Mat. 1, 2, 3. 4.
GOD WITH US, upon a contemptible piece of white and yellow shining clay, as
some have lately done on all our New State coin (as if it were the only God
with them and us) how christian-like, let themselves determine. 3ly. God
himself who says Ezech. 22. 12, 13.
Behold I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain, which thou have
greedily gained of thy neighbor by oppression, and other unlawful means; will
certainly smite his hand at this gain by the Jews readmission. And therefore
let us give that resolute answer to the Jewish Agents, if they proffer to
purchase an idenization amongst us by their gold, as Acts 8. 18, 19, 20.
St. Peter once did to Simon Magus in another case: THY MONEY PERISH WITH THEE;
Thou have neither part nor lot in this business, for thy heart is not upright
with God. 4ly. None ever gained by the Jews introduction or continuance in any
Christian State, but the King and some of his bribed Officers, and that by
oppressing, squeezing, fleecing, taxing: excoriating, eviscerating, crucifying,
pillaging, plundering the poor Jews in such an unchristian, inhuman, illegal,
unrighteous manner, against Exodus 22. 21. c. 23. Mic. 2. 1, 2. c. 3. 2. 3, 4,
9. Zeph. 3. 3. Ezech. 22. 27. 28. Jer. 22. 17. Mal. 37. Levit. 13. 34. Baptista
^^ouomola, Sum Rosella Iudaeus. 2. ^ngelus de Clavasio, Sum Angelica Iudaeus,
sect. 30. Oldradus Consil. 83. 264. Iacobus de Grassus Decis. Aurearum. Tom. 2.
l. 2. c, 23. Sect. 60. Gratian. Cause. 23 qu. 7.
the express commands of God, as made both Christians and Christianity most
detestable to them, brought a secret curse of God upon all those unrighteous
gains as also upon their very persons and Government, (witness See Mat.
Paris, and others in their lives.
King John, and Henry the 3d.) and encouraged them to oppress, fleece and
pillage their Native Subjects, by illegal Taxes and Projects, and to use them
rather like Jews than Christians, enforcing them thereby to take up arms
against them for their Laws, Liberties and Properties just defense, as those
Kings reigns, and others sufficiently evidence. 5ly, The introduction of the
Jews into England and other Nations, never advanced the public wealth of the
Natives and Republike, but much impaired it by their Vsuries and Deceits,
clipping and falsifying moneys, engrossing all sorts of commodities into their
hands, usurping the Natives trades, and becoming such intolerrable grievances
to them, that they were never quiet till they were banished, as their greatest
Annoyance, and purchased their Exiles even with public Subsidies granted to
their Kings to be quit of them; as the Here p. 33. 34. 38. to 46. 74, 75. John
Stowes Survey of London 1633. p. 288. 289.
premises abundantly evidence. 6ly. The Trade of this Nation flourished more
after their banishment hence, then ever it did before; and their introduction
now, will but supplant, undo our English Merchants and other Natives, to
enrich them, and some few other Grandees, who shall share with them in their
spoils and unrighteous gains: 7ly, The taking off all long continued, uncessant
new, illegal Taxes, Excises, Imposts See my Legal and Historical Vindication,
of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, part. 1. p. 60, 61, etc. part
2. p. 65. to 80. Si quis Mercatores novis Thelon^orum, and Pedagiorum
exactionibus molestare tenta verit Christiana communione car^at, donec
satisfecerit, Gratian Cause. 24. q. 3. Vincen^ii Spec. Doctrine. l. 10, c. 163.
imposed without common consent in Parliament on the Nation, engrossing,
anticipating most of the current Moneys of the Land, which are the nerves and
wheels of Trade, eating up all the Merchants, Peoples gains and labors, and
overclogging all or most Commodities imported or exported. The disbanding of
all unnecessary mercenary Forces and Garrisons, who have devoured most of the
public and private wealth of our three Kingdoms, and extraordinarily
impoverished them, only to enrich and advance themselves; and setting up the
old unmercinary Trained Bands and Legal Militia of the Realm in their steads:
The encouraging of Merchants to bring in gold and silver Bullion, to set the
Mint on work, which has lain for the most part idle near 15 years: the
suppressing of the superfluous making, wearing, use of gold and silver lace,
wyre, gilding, which consume many thousand pounds of current coin every year:
The inhibiting of the excessive use of that late intoxicating smoke of Tobacco,
causing such a prodigal expense of money, time, and hindering more necessary,
useful, staple merchandises and plantations. The regulating of the gross
abuses of Letters of Mart, now little better than commissioned open pyracies,
occasioning the ruin of Trade and Merchandise by way of Reprisal: The ordering
according to Law, Justice, Conscience, that all prizes taken from any foraign
Enemy, or other who pillage or damage the English, by the States Ships, and men
of War, set out by the Merchants Customs, Tonnage, Poundage, Imposts, and
therewith maintained for their defense, (which therefore Qui sentit onus,
s^ntire debet and commodum; is, and o^ght to be Law in this case.
should be equally distributed to our English Merchants that are damnified,
undon by them, toward the reparation of their losses, who maintain them, to
enable and encourage them in their trading, especially when much impoverished
or undone by their losses) and not all converted to the use of that some style,
the Admiralty and State, or Mariners who take them; (at whose cost they are not
maintained:) The binding of all Captains of all States men of war, See 5 R. 2.
Stat. 2. chapter 3.
to make good all the English Merchants, and their Allies losses, sustained by
their default or negligence: The Sea My Historical Vindication, part 1. p. 64.
resuming of all the late alienated ancient Lands, rents, revenues of the
Crown, got into private hands, which ought to defray the constant expense of
the Government, now extorted for the most part by arbitrary new devices, out of
the exhausted peoples purses. The speedy preventing of the late unparalleld
wastes in all places of English Timber, for shipping, of which there is like to
be such scarcity ere long, as will both destroy our Navy, and Fishing Trade.
All these, and every of them will far more advance the Trade and Traffic of
the Nation, and the public wealth, and give all the people far better content
and satisfaction ten thousand fold, then this New distastefull pernicious
project of bringing in the Jews: against which I shall only discharge this
ancient Surius Council. Tom. 2. p. 734, 735.
Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo in Spain, under their most religious King
Sysenandus in the year of our Lord 681. which thus batters all ecclesiastical
and temporal promoters of this allegation for filthy Lucres sake with this
direful thunderbolt; So great is certain men's lucre of money, that some
coveting after it, according to the Apostles saying, have erred from the faith.
For many hitherto of the Priests and Laity receiving gifts from the Jews,
foster their perfidiousnesse (or infidelity) by their patronage; who not
undeservedly are known to be of the body of Antichrist, because they act
against Christ: Therefore whatsoever Bishop or Clergy m^n, or secular person
shall from henceforth give his suffrage to them against the Christian faith.
Either For reward or favor, being (as profane and sacrilegious) really made
accursed, let him be reputed, excommunicated from the Catholic Church and
Kingdom of God; because he is worthy to be separated from the Body of Christ,
who is made a Patron or Protector to the enemies of Christ.

I shall close up all with the memorable apposite History (y) Ambrosii Epist.
l. 5. Epist. 29. Ag^bardus de Judaicis superstitionibus. ^^bl. Pa rum, Tom 9.
p. 516. Tripart. ^^ist. l. 3. c. 1. l. 9. c. 1. Zonares Tom. 3. Cent. Magd. 4.
col. 1165. 1166.
and words, of that famous ancient Bishop of Millain St. Ambrose (z) The
Eastern Christians, out of Christian zeal, burnt down a Synagogue of the Jews
in the Castle of Callinico, by their Bishops instigation and command, for which
the Emperor Theod^sius being much incensed against them by the Jews and their
Instruments, commanded his Lieutenant of the East to punish the people, and the
Bishop to re-edify the Synagogue for the Jews at his own costs: Of which St.
Ambrose being informed, and unable to go to the Emperor, writ an Epistle to
him, wherein he most boldly pleads the cause both of the Bishop and people,
proving by evident arguments; The burning of this Synagogue of impiety to be
just, and that the Emperor should sin both against his own and his Kingdoms
safety if he should do any thing severely against the Bishop or (...)ople for
it; Adding, that he himself was prepared ra(...) to suffer death in this cause,
than that he should by (...) dissimulation make the Emperor a Prevaricator,
who (...) commanded such an unjust thing against the Church. (...)er which the
Emperor coming to Millain, and St. Amb. (...)aring that the Jews had built a
Synagogue in the Market (...) Constantinople: he publicly preached against it,
and justified the peoples burning of the other Synagogue in his Sermon before
the Emperor and people: wherein amongst other passages, he used this Speech to
the Emperor himself in ^he person of Christ. O Theodosius! I have made thee of
an obscure private person, an Emperor, committing my flock unto thee: I have
adorned thy formerly squalid head with a Crown: I have delivered the forces of
thine Enemy unto thee, I have reduced thine Enemy under thy power, I have made
thee triumph without labor; and do thou make mine Enemies to triumph over
me? and offer contumely unto me, by preferring those whom I have rejected,
before those by whom I am worshipped? by offering violence unto them, and
suffering a Synagogue to be built in the midst of that City, wherein I am
worshipped, and my Cross adored, by those who have been my Murderers? When St.
Ambrose came forth of the Pulpit, the Emperor saying to him: O Bishop, you have
this day preached against us. He thereunto replied; He had not spoken against
him, but for him. To which the Emperor subjoyning, O Bishop, will you have the
people in a well governed Commonwealth, to have license rashly and impudently
to do what they please? St. Ambrose thereto rejoyned: Neither is this verily to
be granted, That the Jews should have Synagogues in the midst of a Christian
City, and offend the ears of the Godly with blasphemous Prayers: Nor ought
thou to Decree this, most holy Emperor; Whereupon the Emperor being quite
silenced and convinced of his error, forthwith gave his faith and promise to
St. Ambrose, to reverse his former decree for re-building the Jews Synagogue,
before he went to the Altar to receive the Sacrament at his hands. I wish this
my Demurrer may produce the like effects.

Gal. 5. 2, 3, 4. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if As every Jew is.
ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; For I testify again to
every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law: Christ
is become of no effect unto you; whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye
are fallen from Grace.

1 John 4. 3. Every Spirit that The Case of every Jewish Spirit.
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and THIS
IS THE SPIRIT OF ANTICHRIST, whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even
now already is in the world.


FINIS.

