A Just and Solemn PROTESTATION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
Sheriffs, Common-Councell-men, and other Citizens and Freemen of LONDON.
AGAINST Two late Ordinances of the Lords and Commons that now sit; For the
Choosing of COMMON-COUNCELL-MEN and other Officers within the City and
Liberties thereof for the YEAR ensuing, in the general; And against some
Clauses in them in particular: Which ORDINANCES bear date the 18, and 20 of
DECEMBER, 1648.

Imprinted at London, 1648.

A just and Solemn Protestation and Remonstrance OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen,
Sheriffs, Common-Councel-men, and other Citizens and Freemen of London, against
two late Ordinances of the Lords and Commons that now sit.
WE the Lord Major, Aldermen, Sheriffs, Common-councel-men, and other Citizens
and Freemen of the City of London, who have exhausted our estates, adventured
our lives, lost our blood, and for eight years space together day and night
upon all occasions indefatigably contributed our utmost labors, treasures
travails, counsels, prayers, and endevors to maintain the honor, freedom and
safety of both houses of Parliament; and stood by them in their greatest
straits, assisting them with our purses and forces, when few else would own or
stand by them, and hazarded the loss of all that is dear and precious to us for
their defense, who else had been swallowed up and destroyed by their
Prelaticall, Popish, Malignant enemies sundry times ere this, and brought to
utter desolation; For all which faithful Services, and real testimonies of our
most cordial affections toward them (which they have frequently and
gratefully acknowledged both in the Houses and City upon sundry occasions, and
remonstrated to the world in diverse printed Ordinances and Delarations.) We did
at least expect a free and full enjoyment, if not a confirmation and
enlargement of all Our ancient Hereditary freedoms, privileges, rights,
Franchises and Customs ever constantly enjoyed by us and our Predecessors from
before the Conquest, till the last year, confirmed by Magna Charta it self,
Chap. 9. which enacts, That the City of London shall have all the old Liberties
and Customs which it has been u^ed to have; and entayled to us and our
Successors for ever, by many successive Charters and Acts of Parliament of most
of the noble Kings of England, as well before as since; which neither one nor
both Houses of Parliament, in their fullest and freest condition, have or can
pretend to have any just or lawful power to repeal or diminish in the least
degree, without our own consents or desires, and the Kings concurrence
thereunto by an Act of Repeal; much less whiles under the actual force and
power of disobedient mutinous Army, who have forcibly imprisoned, excluded and
driven away most of their Members. But in stead thereof we find (to our
deepest grief and astonishment) a most ungrateful, and dishonorable requital
of all our former faithfulness, love, bounty and services, not by the
generality of the Members of both Houses (whose favors and sincere affections
toward us, in studying to preserve and enlarge our Privileges, Franchises and
Charters upon all occasions and Treaties with his Majesty, we shall ever
gratefully acknowledge) but only of a small inconsiderate party in the Houses,
wholly acted and swayed by a Jesuitical and Anabaptistical powerful party in
the Army, who have a long time made it their principal study and Masterpiece,
to rend and disengage the City and Houses from, and dash them in pieces one
against another, and divide them into factions and fractions among themselves,
whereby to enslave and ruin them both, and by their slavery and ruins to make
way for their own ambitious designs, and intended Greatness and Tyranny, far
more intolerable and grievous then any we or our Ancestors formerly sustained
under tbe worst of all our kings; which they have no hopes to accomplish,
whiles the Houses and City enjoy their ancient Privileges, Freedoms, and
continue cordially united: and therefore have at this present most perfidiously
and traitorously endeavored to captivate and enslave, not only the King, but
both Houses of Parliament, and the City together; and in them the whole Kingdom
and English Nation. For which end and purpose, having brought up the whole Army
to London and Westminster, contrary to the Houses Order* and quartered many of
them in and about the City, in the principal places of strength and advantage,
beyond our expectation, and contrary to their own Engagement to us; seized upon
our Treasuries and Halls; imprisoned one of our Sheriffs, though a Member, and
carried him caprive out of our liberties; and by armed power and a horrid force
upon both Houses, most injuriously imprisoned, and forceably kept out, and
driven away all or most of their faithful Members admiting none to sit, but
only such who are confederate with them in these their Treasonable designs, and
that under their force and imposed Guards to overawe them; They have on the 18
and 20 of December last, caused these their Confederates (who usurp and take
upon them the Name and Authority of the two Houses of Parliament, when as in
truth, they are and have been neither, and no Houses at all ever since their
being under such a visible force, and violent restraint and seclusion of the
greatest Number of their Members from thence by the Officers and Armies armed
power, contrary to the undoubted known Rights, Privileges and freedom of
Parliament, which they, we, and the whole kingdom and Army are engaged by
Covenant inviolably to preserve) to make and publish two Printed Papers:

The first whereof they style, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament for the choosing of Common Councel-men, and other officers within
the City of London, and liberties thereof for the year ensuing, The second, an
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: concerning the
Election of Common Councel-men, and other Officers in the City of London.
Wherein among other things they do Declare and Ordain; That no person
whatsoever that has been imprisoned or that did subscribe or abet to the
Treasonable engagement (as they term it) in 1647, or that did aid, assist, or
abet the late Tumult within the Cities of London and Westminster, or the
Counties of Kent, Essex, Middelsex, or Surrey shall be elected, chosen, or put
into the Office and place of Lord Major, Alderman, Aldermans Deputy, Common
Councel-men, or into any Office or place of trust within the City for space of
one whole year, or be capable to give his voice for the chosing any person to
any the Offices aforesaid. And it is thereby further Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid (though null and void) That if any person or persons comprehended
under the aforesaid exceptions, being chosen, shall presume to sit in the court
of Aldermen, Common Council, etc. or to execute any of the aforesaid Offices
contrary to the true intent of this Ordinance, shall forfeit the sum of two
hundred pounds, the one half whereof shall be within twenty days paid unto
him or them that shall make proof thereof, and the other Moiety to be paid unto
the Treasurers appointed by Parliament for the use and relief of the maimed
Soldiers; And it is hereby declared; That all such elections are null and
void, and the Lord Major for the time being is hereby required from time to
time to give order, that this Ordinance be published at all elections, and that
the same be strictly and punctuolly observed, as also by affording the liberty
of Pole, it being required by any of the Electors present; And for the better
execution of this present Ordinance be it further ordained, That the Lord Major
of London, the Sheriffs, and Aldermen, and Justices of Peace within the said
City of London, or any two of them shall, and are hereby authorized and
required to commit to prison all such persons, as after due proof upon oath to
be made unto them, or any two of them of any person that shall make any
disturbance at any election, contrary to this Ordinance, and to leavy the said
fine of two hundred pounds by distress, and sale of the goods of the person so
offending contrary to this Ordinancee.

Which pretended Ordinances, being made and published by Confedracy as
aforesaid, whiles both Houses remained under the unparalleld, force of the
Officers and Army, who have levied open war against them, and violently
imprisoned, excluded and driven away most of the Members, and end^avour to
dissolve the Parliament, and tending wholly to alienate our affections from,
and engage us against the Parliament, to deprive us of our undoubted Hereditary
Liberties, Freedoms, Franchises and Customs, confirmed and settled upon us by
so many Royal Charters and Acts of Parliaments, and enjoyed always by our
Predecessors under the worst of Kings and Tyrants; to subvert the whole
Government, Magistracy and Freedom of the City, and to put us into present
confusion and mutinies, that s^ they might thereupon take advantage to enslave,
plunder and destroy us at their pleasures: We do therefore in this our great
extremity and perplexity, which so nearly concerns the present Government,
weal, safety, and very life and being both of City, Parliament and Kingdom,
here seriously and unanimously Protest before the Almighty all-seeing God,
Angels and men, That these two pretended Ordinances, being made by confederacy
as aforesaid while both Houses lay under so great a force, and most Members
were violently excluded and forced thence, (there being at the passing of them
not above 3, or 4. Lords, and 45. Commons at most present, and they under the
forced guards of the Army) are in themselves mere null, void and u^obligatory to
us and all others, to all intents and purposes, and were and are declared to be
so, at the very time of their making. by the Ordinance of both Houses of the 20
of August 1647 made by those very Members who passed these two pretended
Ordinances. And that all elections of any Officers whatsoever within the said
City and Liberties, wherein any of us have been deprived of our Voices and
Freedom by color of either of these two Ordinances are merely null and void to
all intents. And we further hereby in like manner declare and protest, that the
fore mentioned clauses contained in these pretended Ordinances (though the
Houses had been never so repleat and free when passed) which deprives us of the
undoubted liberty and freedom of our voices in electing our officers; disables
any persons elected by us to bear any office when elected, and which do
declare the said elections void, imposing a forfeiture of two hundred pound
upon such who shall in the least degree execute any trust or office to which we
shall elect him, to be levied by distress and sale of his goods; and giving
authority to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Justices of Peace within the City,
to imprison all such persons, (who coming to give their voices, or claiming and
maintaining their freedom and the Cities) shall make any disturbance at any
election contrary to these pretended Ordinances; though never so faithful to
the Parliament, and active in their service heretofore: are likewise void and
null in themselves, and the highest and most tyranicall usurpations over our
liberties, franchises, Persons, estates and freedom in our elections, that the
heads of our professed enemies could invent, and most contrary to all the
Houses former Professions, Remonstrances, Declarations, promises, and
engagements, and to their solemn League and Covenant, to defend and protect our
liberties, franchises, customs rightes and freedoms, yea contrary to the
fundamental Laws and Statutes of the land; the manifold Charters and Acts of
Parliament made from time to time, for the confirmation of our Customs,
Liberties, and Freedom in the Elections of our Officers; and to the express
Statute of 3 Edw. 1. c. 5. which enacts, That all Elections ought to be free;
and that no great man, nor other by force of Arms or menacing, shall disturb
any to make free Election* (much less by menacing Ordinances, Fines and
Imprisonments;) which Sir Edward Cook in his Commentary thereon (printed by
both Houses special Authority) affirms and proves to be the Common Law of
England, and the Subjects Birthright. And contrary to the Statutes of Magna
Charta c. 29. 5. Ed. 3. c. 9. 25. Ed. 3. c. 4. 28. Ed. 3. c. 3. 37. Ed. 3. c.
18. 42. E. 3. c. 3. and the Petition of Right; for defense whereof we have in
our seven last years Wars, expended so many millions of Treasure, and lost such
streams of gallant English blood. And finally, we do hereby unanimously further
declare and protest* That notwithstanding these pretended void Ordinances, or
any other of this nature, made in derogation of our just Franchises, Rights,
Liberties, Customs and ancient Government, we are resolved, according to our
oaths as Citizens and Freemen of London, and according to our solemn League and
Covenant, as Christians and Freemen of England, through Gods assistance, to the
utmost of our powers and, abilities, with our lives and estates constantly and
inviolably to maintain, defend, and preserve our just Hereditary Freedom and
right of electing all our City officers, whatsoever, acording to our ancient
and uninterrupted Charters, Customs, Acts and Vsages, with all other our
undoubted Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, Rights and Customs left unto us
by our Ancestors, (especially in these times of so much contesting for common
Liberty and Freedom;) and will protect and defend the same against all Invasion
and Encroachment of any usurped, arbitrary and tyrannical (Parliamentary or
other) power whatsoever. In witness whereof we have thought meet to publish
this our Declaration and Protestation to all the world. January 1. 1648.

FINIS.

