The Subjection of all TRAITORS, REBELS, as well PEERS, as COMMONS in IRELAND,
TO THE Laws, Statutes, and Trials by Juries of good and lawful men of ENGLAND,
in the Kings Bench at Westminster, for Treasons perpetrated by them in IRELAND,
or any foreign Country out of the Realm of ENGLAND.

BEING An Argument at Law made in the Court of Kings Bench, Hill. 20 Caroli
Regis, in the case of Connor Magwire, an Irish Baron (a principal Contriver of
the last Irish Rebellion:) Fully proving; That Irish Peers, as well as Commons,
may be lawfully tried in this Court in England, by the Statute of 35 H. 8. c.
2. for Treasons committed by them in Ireland, by a Middlesex Jury, and outed of
a Trial by Irish Peers: Which was accordingly adjudged, and he there upon
tried, condemned, executed as a Trayur: Wherein are comprised many other
particulars and notable Records, relating to the Laws, Peers, Statutes, affairs
of Ireland, not obvious in our Lawbooks, and worthy public knowledge.

By William Prynne Esquire a Bencher of Lincolnes Inn.

Numb. 35. 31, 33. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer,
which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death. So ye shall not
pollute the land wherein you are; for blood de fileth the land, and the land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it.

LONDON Printed by J. Leach for the Author, 1658.

TO THE Ingenuous Readers, ESPECIALLY Professors, Students of the Laws of
England, and Ireland.
HAving lately published a much enlarged Edition of my Plea for the Lords and
House of Peers, wherein the undoubted ancient Birthright of all English Lords
and Barons to sit, vote, and judge in all Parliaments of England, and their
trial by their Peers, is irrefragably vindicated by Histories and Records in
all ages, and larger Discoveries made of the Proceedings and Judicature in our
Parliaments in Cases as well of Commoners, as Peers, than in all former
Treatises whatsoever: I apprehended it neither unseasonable, nor unprofitable
to publish this Argument at Law, concerning the Trial of Irish Peers for foreign
Treasons acted by them, made by me near 14 years past in the Kings bench Court
at Westminster, in the Case of Connor Magwire an Irish Baron, there indicted
for High Treason, in having a principal hand in the late bloody Rebellion in
Ireland; against whom I was (by special Order) assigned Counsel, among others,
by the Parliament then sitting; upon whose Plea, and a Demurrer there unto, I
first argued this new point in Law, never formerly disputed, adjudged in open
Court; Whether an Irish Peer, for Commoner) committing Treason in Ireland, sent
over from thence into England against his will, might be lawfully tried for it
in the Kings Bench at Westminster by a Middlesex Jury, and outed of his trial
by Irish Peers of his condition, by the Statute of 35 H. 8. c. 2? After two
solemn Arguments at the Bar, by my self, and Sergeant Rolls against, and Mr.
Hales, and Mr. Twisden for the Prisoner, and Mr. Justice Bacons Argument on the
Bench, his Plea was overruled, adjudged against him; it being resolved, he
might and ought to be tried only by a Jury of Middlesex, not by his Peers of
Ireland; Whereupon he pleading, Not guilty, to his Indictment, was tried by a
Substantial Jury (to whom he took both his peremptory and legal challenges,
which the Court allowed him of right) and after a very fair and full trial was
found guilty by the Jury, upon most pregnant evidence; and then condemned,
executed as a Traitor at Tyburn, as he well demerited.

The Reasons inducing me to publish this Argument were:

1. The near affinity and cognation it has with my Plea for the Lords.

2ly. The Novelty, Rarity of the Subject and points debated in it, not formerly
discussed at large in our Law Books.

3ly. The generality and public concernment thereof, extending to all Irish
Subjects, whether Peers or Commons, and so worthy their knowledge, perusal.,
and of all public Officers in Ireland; especially Lawyers.

4ly. The prevention of Misreports of this case and Argument, in this age,
wherein many Arguments at Law, and Reports of Cases have been lately published
by In^udicious hands, mistaking, mangling, or misreciting the Reasons, Records,
Lawbooks cited both at Bar and Bench, and sometimes the Cases, Judgments
themselves; to the prejudice, seduction of young Students of the Law, and
scandal of the Law it self.

5ly. The importunity of some Friends who formerly desired Copies thereof from
me, when I had no leisure to furnish them therewith.

6ly. The Vindication, declaration both of the Parliaments and Kings Bench
honorable, resplendent, equal, untainted Justice against this Arch-Irish-
Traitor and Rebel, and that in these particulars;

1. In trying this notorious Offender, guilty of the horridest, universallest
Treason and Rebellion that ever brake forth in Ireland; and that in a time of
open War both in Ireland and England, only by a Legal Indictment, and
indifferent sworn Jury of honest and lawful Freeholders, according to the known
Laws and Statutes of the Realm; not in a Court Marshal, or any other New-minted
Judicature, by an arbitrarie, summarie, illegal or martial proceeding, without
any lawful presentment, indictment or Trial by a sworn, impartial, able Jury,
resolved, to be diametrically contrary to the fundamental Laws, Customs, Great
Charters, Statutes of the Realm, and inherent Liberty of the Subject,
especially in time of Peace when all other Courts of Justice are open, and of
very dangerous consequence, and thereupon specially prohibited, enacted
against; as you may read at leisure in the Statute of 5 R. 2. Parl. 1. chapter 5.
Rot. Parl. n. 57. 2 R. 2. rot. Parl. n. 57. 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 44. 2 H. 4.
rot. Parl. n. 89. The Votes of the House of Commons and Lords against it, May
7. 1628. the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli, Mr. Cambdens Annals of Qu. Elizabeth,
p. 242, 243. Cooks 3 Instit. p. 52. 124. and accordingly declared by the
Commons House in their An Exact Collection, p. 8.
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, 15 December. 1641. and by the whole
Parliament, and most now in power, in the case of the Lord Mount-Norris; whose
trial and capital condemnation in a Court Marshal in Ireland by Martial Law, in
time of peace, without a lawful Indictment and Trial by his Peers, in a
summarie way, by the Earl of Straffords power, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, was
one of the principal See Straffords Impeachment and Trial.
Charges, evidences against him, to make good his general impeachment of High
Treason, for which he was condemned and beheaded on Tower hill for a Traitor,
by judgment and Act of Parliament; Namely, That he had TRAITOROUSLY endeavored
TO SUBVERT THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS AND GOVERNMENT OF THE REALM, and instead
thereof TO INTRODUCE AN ARBITRARY and TYRANNICAL GOVERNMENT AGAINST LAW: though
this Lord was not executed or put to death by that Sentence against him; Which
if executed, had been WILFUL MURDER both in his JUDGES and EXECUTIONERS, as
Sir Edward Cook resolves in his 3. Institutes, p. 52. 124. printed by the House
of Commons special order; and King Alfred long before him, who hanged up no
fewer than 44 of his Justices in one year AS MVRDERERS, for condemning and
executing some of his Subjects, WITHOUT A SWORN JURY of 12. men; and others of
them for offenses not Capital by the known Laws, or without pregnant evidence:
as Andrew Horn records in his Myrrour de^ Justices; chapter 5. p. 296, 297, 298:
who thence infers; Abusion est (de la Commen ley) que JUSTICES and lour
MINISTRES que occient la gent per FAUX JUDGMENT, NE SONT DESTRUITS AL FOER DE
AUTRES HOMICIDES, que fit le Roy Alfred, que FIST PENDRE* 44 JVSTICES EN UN AN,
TANT COME HOMICIDES pur lour FAUX JUDGMENTS, which others guilty of the like
crimes (especially since these ancient and Straffords, Canterbu^ies, with the
Ship-mony-Judges, late Presidents, Impeachments, Sentences, to the prejudice of
the Subjects lives, estates,) may do well to ruminate upon.

2ly. In assigning this Arch-Traytor such learned Counsel as be desired, to
advise and plead for him in this Case of High Treason in all matters of Law
arising therein; which the Parliament likewise allowed to Strafford and
Canterbury, though impeached of high Treason: and therefore cannot in 2 Stamf.
l. 2. c. 63. 1. H. 7. f. 23.
point of Justice be denied to any other person or persons in like Cases, if
desired.

3ly. In admitting him free liberty to put in a plea in writing to the manner
of his Trial, and to the Jurisdiction of the Kings Bench it self (though the
Cooks 4 Instit. c. 6.
highest Court of Justice in all England but the Parliament, and having lawful
conusans of all sorts of Treasons whatsoever) and not peremptorily overruling,
rejecting it forthwith, and giving judgment against him pro confesso, or as
Stamf. l. 2. c. 60.
standing mute, for not submitting to its Jurisdiction, and a Trial by an
ordinary Middlesex Jury, being a matter of Law and right; but permitting, yea
ordering his Plea upon a Demurrer thereunto, to be publicly argued pro and
contra at the Bar by Counsel, and then solemnly argued at the Bench by the
Judge, before it was overruled (being a Case of general concernment) to
satisfy him and all the world of the legality and Justice of his Trial. And
then permitting him according to Law, to plead not guilty, and put himself upon
his Trial by the Country; not sentencing him to death for Treason without any
Trial or good evidence produced to convict him.

4ly. In allowing him a free honorable Trial upon an Indictment, first found
upon Oath by the grand Jury, and then suffering him to take not only his
particular chalenges by the poll to every of the Jurors returned, upon a voyre
dire (not formerly heard of, yet allowed him, as reasonable, to take away all
coulor of partiality or non indifferency in the Jurors) Whereupon every Jury
man was examined before he was sworn of the Jury: Whether he had contributed or
advanced any moneys upon the Propositions for Ireland, or was to have any share
in the Rebels Lands in Ireland, by Act of Parliament, or otherwise? But
likewise in permitting him to take his peremptory challenge to 35 of the 2
Juries returned, without any particular cause alleged; which Liberty Cooks 3
Th^^^. p. 27. Stamf. Pleas of the Crown l. 3. c. 7. 32 H. 6. f. 26. 14 H. 7. f.
19. Brook chal 86, 211, 217.
our Laws allowing men in favorem vitae, and because there may be private
causes of just exceptions to them known to the Prisoner, not fit to be
revealed, or for which he wants present proof, and that in Cases of
High Treason as well as of Felony, the Court though^ just and equal to allow
the same to him, though a notorious Irish Rebel. Wherefore it ought much more
to be allowed to all English Freemen less peccant, and not so notoriously
guilty as this transcendent Traitor; the debarring the party indicted of his
lawful challenges, being to debar him of a principal matter concerning his
Trial, yea a means to take away his life without just cause or guilt; much more
then a Trial by such Jurors, Committees, Commissioners or other Judges
nominated by persons interessed, or parties, without the denomination or
direction of sworn Officers of Justice alone, against the course of the Common
law, as the Statute of 11 H. 4. c. 9. and Cooks 3 Instit. p. 32, 33. resolve.

In this Argument the Readers (especially Irish Students of the Law may take
notice; First, of some observable passages and Page 32 to 9. 42 to 49, 38, 59,
63, 68, 59.
Records touching the settling of the Laws and Great Charter of England in
Ireland, the endenization of Irish-Natives to make them capable of the Laws and
Liberties of the English there; the Statutes, Peers of Ireland, and the Trial
of Peers there for Treasons, not obvious in other Law Books; to which I at
first imended to have added an Appendix of the most remarkable passages in our
Histories, and chiefest Records in the Tower relating to the Sover aign
Jurisdiction of the Kings and Parliaments of England over Ireland, and to the
Parliaments, Officers, Government, and affairs thereof, not hitherto published,
and unknown to most, of very necessary and excellent use. Which being
over-large for an Appendix, I must reserve for a particular Treatise by
themselves; or joined with some other Records and Histories relating unto
Scotland, most worthy of public view, if God send health and opportunity to
communicate them to posterity. Only I shall here insert one pertinent Record to
manifest, that the trying of Irish Malefactors in England, the binding them to
appear, the recording their defaults, and giving judgment against them for not
appearing here for Murders, Robberies, and Felonies committed or acted by them
in Ireland, is no Novelty (having omitted it in my Argument) it being in use in
the ninth year of King John, as this Patent manifests.

Ror. Pat. An. 9. Johan. Reg. m. 4. n. 46.
Rex M. filio Henrici, Iusticiario Hiberniae salutem. Mandamus vobis quod
deduci faeiatis secundum judicium Comitis Dublin, Galfredum de Marisco and
alios qui rectati sunt de incendio and roberia and morte homnum, and aliis
rectis quo^ pertienent ad Coronam nostram unde eis dies datus est coram nobis
in Anglia a die sancti Michaelis ad 15 dies, ad quem non venerunt nec pro se
responsales miserunt, et absentiam suam die illo Attornatis eis in defaltam Et
ipsos (...) secundum judicium ^^^dict, Comiti^ de vita et membris, et
obsidibus, et vadiis, et plegiis. Test me^pso apud Theoukesbury, 12 die
Novembris.

2ly. The Readers may herein discern the Treacheries, Conspiracies,
Insurrections, Rebellions of the Native Irish in all Ages since their
submission to King Henry the 2d. Anno 1171. and their swearing of fealty to him
and his Heirs, for ever as to their lawful Kings and Lords, recorded at large
in our Hoveden, Annal. pars post. p. 527, 528, 529. Giraldus Cambrensis,
Hybernia Expugnata, l. 1. and 2. chron. Johan. Bromton, col. 1069, 1070, 1071.
Mat. Westminster. and Mat. Paris, An. 1171, 1172. and others
Historians, toward our Kings and English Nation, and their frequent
endeavors utterly to cast off their Dominion, and extirpate them out of
Ireland, which is notably expressed in many of our Records, as Claus. 5 E. 3.
part 2. m. 12. dorso. Pa^. 5 E. 3. pars 1. m. 25. Cl. 35 E. 3. m. 36. Claus.
36. E. 3. m. 42. dors. and Claus. 42 E. 3. m. 6. and dors. 13, Whence Giraldus
Cambrensis (who went along into Ireland with King Henry the 2d. and with his
son john, when made King thereof by his Father, who made the first and fullest
description of it, and its Conquest, and of the manners, qualities of the
Irish; of any of our Historians) gives this Character of them and their
deportment toward the English in that age; Typographia Hybernia, c. 20, 22, 24.
Praeomnt alia gente Proditionibus semper insistunt; fidem datam nemini
servant, fidei et Sacramenti Religionem quam sibi semper servari summopere
volunt, aliis praestitam quotidie violarenec verecundantur, nec verentur: unde
et cum cautelas omnes observaveris and adhibueris, cum securitati and
indemnitati tuaetam Sacramentis et obsidibus, quam ami^itiis firmiter junctis,
and beneficiis multimode collatis, modis omnibus invigelaveris, tunc primo
timendum est tibi: quia tunc prae^ipue ipsorum vigilat malitia, cum ex
securitatis abundantia te tibi praesenserint non invigilare: Tum demum ad arcem
nequitiae, tum ad assueta fallaciae telae confugiunt, ut sumpta securitatis
occasion laedere valiant vel improvisum. He subjoins. Inter alia multa artis
iniquae figmenta, hoc unum habent tanquam praecipuum argumentum: ( and o that
too many English as well as Irish were not guilty of this transcendent
Treachery and Hypocrisy!) Sub religionis et pacis obtentu ad sacrum aliquem
locum convenient cum eo quem oppetere cupiunt: primo compaternatis foedera
jungunt: Deinde ter circa Ecclesiam se invicem portant; postmodum ecclesiam
intrantes coram altari reliquiis Sanctorum, sacramentis multifarie praestitis,
demum missae celebratione, et orationibus Sanctorum sacerdotum canquam
dispensatione quadam, indi^^olubiliter faederantur. Ad ultimum vero ad majorem
amicitiae confirmationem, et quasi negotii consummationem sanguire^ sponte ad
hoc fusum, uterque alterius bibit. Hoc autem de ritu Gentilium adhuc habent,
qui sanguinem in firmandis faederibus uti solent. O quoties in ipso
desponsationis hujus articulo A VIRIS SANGUINUM ET DOLOSIS, tam dolose and
inique funditur sanguis, ut alteruter penitus maneat exanguis! O quoties eadem
hor a et in continenti, vel sequitur, vel praevenit, vel etiam inaudito more
sanguinolentum divortium ipsum interumpit desponsationem! Adeo proditionis
pestis h^c invaluit et quasi radices pouit, adeo in naturam converti praevalet
pravae consuetudinis longus abusus, adeo a convictu mores formantur, et qui
tangit picem coni^quinabitur ab ea, adeo mali vis magna est, quod etiam advenae
eodem vitio inquinati sunt. He adds in another place, Hybernia Expugnata, l. 2.
c. 25. P. 808.
Ad resistendum Anglis, et antiquae libertatis sub capitum discrimine iura
tuendum, unanimi voto conspirant. Et ut hunc before affectum deducere possint
ad effectum, vinctis undique faederibus, de novo fiunt ex hinc amici qui antea
fuerunt inimici. All which we find verified of them in this last rebellion and
massacre of the English, for which this prisoner was indicted and executed: So
as we may well conclude of the Irish in his ensuing words. Hybernia Expug. c.
97.
Nationis subdolae long fortius timenda est ar^, quam Mars; pax, quam fax;
mel, quam fell; ma litia, quam militia; proditio, quam expeditio; amicitia
praefucata, quam inimicitia despicata.

3ly. The Readers may here in part discern, by whom, and in what manner the
Laws of England were first established in Ireland, and how far, and to what
persons there: to which I shall add this passage of Hist. Ang. Edit. Land.
1640. P. 126.
Mat. Paris, An. 1172. touching K. Henry the 2. his settling our Lawsthere. Rex
Pater antequam ab Hybernia rediret apud Lissemor Concilium congregavit, Ubi
Leges Angliae ab omnibus sunt gratanter acceptae, et juratoria cautione
praestita, confirmatae. With that of Hybern. Expug. l. 1. c. 34.
Sy^vester ^^ a^^us, who ^^^^^ing the Constitutions made at the Council of
Cassils in Ireland under this King Henry for the Government of the Church, and
^eformation of the manners of the Irish, there recorded at large, concludes
thus. Itaque ^m^^^ divina ad instar sacrosanctae Eccles^e Iuxta quod Anglicana
observat Ecclesia in omnibus partibus Hyberniae amo^o tra^^^^tur. Dignum etenim
and sust issi^^m est, ut sicut Dom^nium et Reg^m ex Anglia, sortita est
divinitus Hybernia, sic etiam EXINDE vivendi formam reci^i^^nt m^li^^em. Ipsi
namque Regi magnifico tam Ecclesia quam Regnum Hyberniae debent, quicquia de
b^n^ pac^s, ^i incremento Religionis hactenus est assecuta. After which the
Irish rebelling, and casting off the English Laws, Mat. Paris H^st. A^gl. p.
230. H^n. de K^yghton de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 15. col. 2420.
King John Anno Dom. 1211. arriving at Dublin with a great Army; Occurrerunt ei
ibidem plusquam viginti Reguli illius Regionis, qui omnes ^imore maximo
perterriti, ^^m^gium illi and fidelitatem fec runt: Fecit quoque R^^ ibidem
construere Leges et Consuetudines Anglicanas, ponens Vicecomites et alios
Ministros qui populum Regni illius juxta Leges Anglicanas judicarent, (^o ^^^;
Sir John Davis his Irish Reports, p. 37, 38.
in the English Pale, and territories reduced into Counties, and under the
Kings dominion) as Matthew Paris and others story.

Fourthly, the Readers and our whole Nation may hereby and herein discover, for
their present and future information, the provident care and prudence of our
English Parliaments in all former ages, to secure the lives and inheritances of
all English Freemen and Irish Subjects against all arbitrary, tyrannical Power
and proceedings whatsoever, even in cases of pretended or real Treasons, and
the highest capital offenses, by providing and enacting from time to time, that
not only all English Freemen, but all other Irish or outlandish persons accused
of any High Treasons, misprisions or concealments of Treasons committed by them
either within or without the Realm of Engl. should be impeached of, and
arraigned for the same, only upon a legal Presentment or Indictment first found
against them by a Jury of good and lawful men upon their oaths; and after that
tried for the same by another legal Jury of 12. honest and substantial
indifferent Freeholders upon their Oaths, or by the lawful judgment of their
Peers (if English Peers) and not for judged of life or limb, nor outlawed,
exiled* put to death passed upon or any way destroyed, but only by the lawful
judgment of their Peers, according to the due course of the Common Law, and
not otherwise, ^^ the Grand ^harter of King John, the statute of Magna Charta,
chapter 29. in 9 H. 3. 25 E. 1. c. 1. 28 E. 1. c. 1. 5 E. 3. c. 9. 20 E. 3. c. 2.
25 E. 3. c. 2. of Treasons, 28 E. 3. c. 3. 42 E. 3. c. 3. 2R. 2. rot. Parl. n.
57. 1 H. 4. rot. Parl. n. 44. 2 H. 4. n. 60, 89. 2 H. 5. c. 6. 20 H. 6. c. 9.
22 H. 8. c. ^. 23 H. 8. c. 13. 26 H. 8. c. 13. 28H. 8. c. 7, 10, 18. 31 H. 8.
c. 8. 14. 32 H. 8. c. 4, 35. 33 H. 8. c. 12. 20, 21, 23. 35 H. 8. c. 2, 3. 1 E.
6. c. 12. 5. E. 6. c. 11. 1 Mar. c. 6. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar c. 10, 11. 1 Eliz.
c. 1. 6. 5 El. c. 1. 13 El. c. 1. 14 El. c. 1. 18 El. c. 1. 23 El. c. 1. 27 El.
c. 2. 3 Jac. c. 2. the Pitition of right 3. Caroli, with sundry other Statutes
enact, and Stamfords plees of the Corone, l. 3. c. 1. to 8. Cooks 2 Instit. p.
48. to 53. 3 Instit. c. 1, 2. Brook, Fitzh. Statham, Ash* ^ir. Coron. Trial,
Treason.
all our Law books resolve: so that no man's life whatsoever can legally be
hazarded or taken away for any real or pretended Treason or capital crime,
without a double Jury, and the verdicts of 24 sworn good honest men at the
least, or more, or by a Grand Jury, and 12 or more Peers of the Realm, if an
English Peer; and in case of Forrai ners, by a Jury of 6. English, and 6. of
their own Contrymen (if so many may be found fit to be returned of a Jury)
to avoid partiality: which seconded must be with the Judgment of one or more
sworn Judges setting on the Tribunal of Justice. Which treble Bulwork and grand
fundament. I security of all English Freemens and others lives, Inheritances,
Families, Estates, against all unlawful Conspiracies, Practices, Combinations,
subordinations of Witnesses, machiavilian Policies, and arbi^rary tyrannical
Powers, proceedings whatsoever, especially in perilous treacherous times, if
once undermined, subverted, or interrupted by arbitrary Courts-Martial,
Committees, or any other new erected Tribunals, by what names or specious
pretenses whatsoever of public safety, danger, or necessity, what sad effects
it would soon produce to the endangering, yea loss of the Lives, Inheritances,
Fortunes of the most innocent, best-deserving Persons, and real Patriots of
their Countries Laws and Liberties, through the power, policy, confederacy,
covetousness, ambition, reveng, malice, emulation, suspicion, tyranny,
injustice, partiality, self-interests of suborned, perjured Witnesses, or
despitefull, powerful Prosecutors, Accusers, and of unrighteous packed,
partial prae-ingaged Judges, (admitting no legal Pleas against their exorbitant
Jurisdictions no legal challenges to their petsons, nor appeals from their
unjust sentences, though capital, without any clear testimony to prove them
guilty and worthy of death by our known Laws) all Lovers of their own Families,
Friends, Neighbors, Liberties, Lives, Estates, or the public safety, may
eafily resolve, not only from sundry experiments and See Sir Walter Rawlegh his
Preface to the History of the World, D. Beards Theater of Gods Judgments on
the 6th. Commandment.
Histories in former and late ages over-tedious to recite; but by the memorable
Presidents of innocent Nahoth recorded for this purpose in sacred Writ. 1 King.
21. and of the Propher Zechariah, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20, 21. 22. compared with that
of Psalm. 94. 20, 21. shall the Throne of inquity have fellowship with thee
which frames mischief by a Law? They gather themselves together against the
Soul (or Life) of the Righteous and condemn the innocent Blood: with Ezech. 22.
6, 9* 12, 27. and I say 59. 6, 7. Behold the Princes of Israel, every one were
in thee to their power to shed blood. In thee have they taken Gifts to shed
blood. Her Princes in the midest thereof are like Wolves ravening the prey. To
shed Blood and to destroy Souls (that is the Sea Lyra, Tostatus, Lavater,
Polanus, Maldonat, Cornelius a Lapide Junius, and otherson these Texts.
lives of innocent men under a pretense of Law, Justice for pretended crimes,
Treasons) to get dishonest gain: their ways are ways of iniquity, the At of
VIOLENCE is in their hands; their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed
innocent blood: their thoughts are thonghts of iniquity* wasting and
destruction are in their paths, there is no Judgment (or Justice) in their
going^, they have made them crooked paths: Paralleled with Jer. 22. 17. But
thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed
innocent blood, and for oppression and violence to do it. Such Monsters of
Injustice, rapine, oppression, violence, against all Laws of God and Man, do
Kings, Princes, and great men degerate into even among Gods own people, when
they break down the Pales and Fences of public Laws and Justice made for
their Subjects preservation, and let loose the reins to arbitrary government,
and lawless proceedings, to shed their blood, or confiscate their Estates,
supplant, and ruin their posterity in a seeming way of Justice. The
consideration of which sacred Texts and Presidents should both caution and
engage all future English Parliaments, the whole Nation, and every individual
member thereof, for ever to abandon and abominate such irregular Judicatures
and extravagant proceedings, and not to give the least countenance or
encouragement thereunto, especially after this memorable President of the Lord
Magwire, and our many years late contest in Parliament and bloody encounters in
the field, to maintain the fundamental Laws, Privileges, and good Customs of
this Kingdom (whereof the Trial of men by a lawful Indictment, Jury, and
verdict of their Peers, is the principal) whereby not only the Supreme
authority, but the peoples security of lives, Lands, Livings, and Privileges
(both in general and particular) are preserved and maintained, and by
abolishing or alteration of the which, it is impossible but that present
confusion will fall upon the whole state and frame of this Kingdom; as King
James himself, and the whole Parliament long since resolved in the Act of 1
Jacob. chapter 2. and without the full possession of which fundamental Rights,
Laws, and liberties, we can have little hopes, (as to humane Considerations) to
enjoy any comfort of life, or so much as life it self, but at the pleasures of
some men, ruling meerite by will and power; as the General, Officers, and Army
themselves have long since published and declared to the Parliament and world,
in express words, in their A Declaration of the Armies engagements, etc. p. 36,
37. 112, 114.
Declaration and Representation humbly tendered to the Parliament, concerning
THE JUST and FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS and LIBERTIES OF THEMSELVES and THE KINGDOM.
June 14. 1657. which they may do well to remember and pursue* In prosecution
whereof, in the Heads of Proposals agreed upon by his Excellency and the
Council of the Army, to be tentred to the Commissioners of Parliament residing
with the Army; containing the particulars of THEIR DESIRES in pursuance of
their former Declarations and Papers, August 1. 1647. Proposal. 10. they
desired, That the Rights of the Commons of England might be cleared, as to A
DUE EXEMPTION from any Judgment, Trial, or other Proceedings against them by
the House of Peers, without the concurring Judgment of the House of Commons.
As also FROM ANY OTHER JUDGMENT, SENTENCE, OR PROCEEDING AGAINST THEM OTHER
THAN BY THEIR EQUALS, OR ACCORDING TO THE LAW OF THE LAND. Which how
inconsistent it is with all Military and summary proceedings in all new Courts,
Committees, or Commissions since erected, I refer to their own Consciences and
Judgments to resolve.

5ly. The Readers may hereby discern, that Errors themselves in the Courts of
Ireland, with other grievances could not anciently be redressed in the
Parliaments thereof, but See here p. 19. Crooks 1. Rep. m. 14 Car. p. 511, 512.
only in England, till 29 E. 3. as is evident by this memorable hitherto
unprinted Record made for relief in such Cases.

Claus 39 E. 3. m. 12. De erroribus corrigendis in Parliamentis tenendis in
Hibernia.
Rex Justiciario and Cancellario suis Hiberniae, salutem. Ex part nonnullorum
fidelium nostrorum Communitatis terrae nostrae Hiberniae, Nobis est graviter
conquaerendo monstratum, ut cum ipsi dampna and gravamina quamplurima a magno
tempore sustinuerint ex hoc, quod ipsi terras and tenementa sua in manum
nostram per Ministros nostros, terrae praedictae, cum nomine districtionis, cum
ex causa transgressionis, sive alienationis sine licentia nostra, factae,
voluntary and absque causa rationabili capta, extra manus nostras, licet rite
and processu debito inde penes vos and alios de Consilio nostro in partibus
illis, juxta legem and consuetudinem terrae praedictae prosecuti fuissent See
Pat. 8. Johan. Regis, m. 1, 2. Pat. 9. Johan. Reg. m. 4. n. 26.
recuperare non possunt. Et etiam ex hoc, quod ERRORES qui in Recordis and
Processibus placitorum coram Justiciariis nostris and aliis Curiis and Placiis
in eadem terra, quae Recordum habent, habitis, and in redditionibus judiciorum
and placitorum eorundem intervenisse praetendantur in Parliamentis in eadem
terra Nota.
corrigi neqeunt, nec alias justicia inde fieri sine remedio in Anglia
querendo; propter quod, quidam propter labores and expensas circa praemissa
oppositas ad maximam miseriam and inopiam deducuntur, and quidam omnino
exhaeredati existunt; unde iidem fideles nostri Nobis cum instancia
supplicarunt, ut super praemissis remedium congruum apponi faciamus. Et quia
videtur Nobis and Consilio nostro durum esse et grave, quod conquaerentes super
assecutione Justiciae de iniutiis sibi illatis in partibus praedictis, taliter
absque remedio fatigerentur; per quod pro quictae, et indempnitate populi
nostri in terra praedicta sub nostro regimine existentis, cui in exhibitione
Iusticiae sumus debitores; ordinavimus, quod de omnibus terris and tenementis
in terra pradicta per Justiciarios, Escaetores, seu quoscunque alios Ministros
nostros sub Sigillo nostro in manum nostram ^aptis, illis qui pro eisdem terris
and tenementis extra manum nostram debito and justo processu coram vobis
prosequi voluerint, super hoc plena Justicia secundum legem et consuetudinem
terrae nostrae Angliae, of dictae terrae nostrae Hiberniae fiat, quibuscunque
mandatis nostris See 2 E. 3. c. 8. 18 E. 3. Stat. 3. 20 E. 3. c 1. 2 Claus. 5.
E. 3. part 1. m. 27. 1 R. 2. n. 96. 2 R. 2. n. 51. Claus. 20 E. 3. part 1.
dors. 13.
sub magno vel privato sigillo nostro Angliae, vobis aut aliis Ministris in
terra praedicta ante haec tempora directis, non obstantibus. Et quod ad
prosecutionem omnium and singulorum qui conqueri voluerint errores in recordis
vel processibus coram aliquibus Justiciariis seu aliis Ministris praedictis
intervenisse. Rotuli eorundem Recordorum and Processuum in Parliamentis nostris
in eadem terra tenendis, per Justiciarios seu Ministros, coram quibus Recorda
and Processus illa fuerint, deferantur, et ibidem eadem Recorda et Processus
diligenter recitentur et examinentur, et errores si quos in eisdem inveniri
contigerit, debite corrigantur. Et ideo Vobis mandamus, quod Ordinationem
praedictam in terra nostra praedicta teneri, and partibus conquaerentibus
plenam and celeram Justiciam fieri faciatis in forma predicta, quibuscunque
mandatis vobis aut aliis in terra praedicta ante haec temporae in contrarium
directis, nonobstantibus. Ita quod aliquis materiam non habeat Nobis pro
defectis Justiciae, super casibus praedictis, de caetero conquaerendi. Test
Rege apud Westminster. 30 die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem et Consilium

If then the King and his Counsel in England might thus by this their Ordinance
made in England, without a Parliament, redress these grievances and faylers of
Justice in cases only of private concernment in Ireland it self, formerly
examinable and remediable only in England, for the ease and benefit of the
loyal Subjects (not of Irish Enemies, and Rebels) there; much more may the King
and Parliament of England for the preservation of the Kings Crown, interest,
and of the lives, inheritances of all his loyal Subjects there, and securing
the peace of Ireland, enact and ordain, that all Irish Rebels, Traitors,
committing, High Treason, and taking up Arms against the King, and destroying
his Liege people there (especially in times of universal Rebellions and
Insurrections) shall be sent over thence, and tried for the same in England, by
a sworn Jury of lawful indifferent Englishmen in the Kings Bench, be they
Commons or Peers of Ireland, without any injury or injustice.

Thus submitting this Argument to the candid censure, and friendly embracement
of every judicious Reader, and craving a share in his Prayers for Gods gracious
blessing both on me and it, I leave it to the Readers immediate perusal without
further Prologue.

From my Study in Lincolns-Inne June 19. 1658. on which day of the Month 1637.
I was taken A new Discovery of the Prelates tyranny, p. 5^ 37. 122, 147.
Pro confesso by the Star Chamber Lords upon a pretended contempt, in REFUSING
TO ANSWER; when as themselves refused to give me leave to plead, or answer, and
rejected the Answers tendered in Court under my own and my Councels hand, to the
Information there exhibited, against all Rules of Law, Justice, and of that
very Court. William Pryn.

THE ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM PRYNNE of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire Hill. 20 Car. Banc.
Regis. IN THE Case of the Lord Cannor Magwire Baron of Ineskellin in Ireland
(the chief contriver of the late Irish Rebellion and Massacre of the Protestant
English) against whom he was assigned Council by both houses of Parliament.
COnnor Magwire, by the name of Connor The Case and Plea of the Lord Magwire.
Magwire of London Esquire, was in Michaelmas Term last, Indicted in this
Court for several high Treasons committed by himself, together with Hugh
Mac-Mahon and diverse other Conspiratours and false Traitors against our Lord
the King within the Realm of Ireland in partibus transmarinis, on the 23 day of
October 17 Caroli, Upon his Arraignment at this Bar, after not guilty pleaded,
being demanded, how he would be tried? he put in this special Plea, as to the
particular manner of his Trial only, under his Councels hand.

That by the Statute of Mag. Charta, it is enacted, That no freeman ought to be
imprisoned etc. Nor will we pass upon him, but by the lawful Judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law of the Land. That after this in a Parliament held at
Droghedah in the Kingdom of Ireland in the 10th. year of King Henry 7th. it
was enacted: That all Statutes late made within the Realm of England concerning
or belonging to the Common an a Public weal of the same, from thenceforth
should be deemed good, and effectual in Law: and over that, be accepted, used
and executed within the Land of Ireland in all points, at all times requisite,
according to the tenor and affect of the same. And that by authority aforesaid
they and every of them be authorized, approved, and confirmed in the said Land
of Ireland: That before the time of the supposed Treasons, King Charles by his
Letters Patents under the great Seal of Ireland, bearing date the last day of
August, in the 4th. year of his Reign at Dublin in Ireland, did create Brian
Magwire, Father of the said Connor Magwire, Baron of Iniskellin in the County
of Farmanagh in the said Realm; and granted to him and the Hei^ ^males of his
hody, the title, honor and dignity of the said Barony, and to have a place and
voice among the Peers and Nobles of Ireland in the Parliaments of that Realm;
By virtue whereof the said Brian was seized in his demesne as of Fee tail of the
said Barony, and dyed seized thereof at Dublin 1 Feb. 12 Caroli. before the
supposed Treasons: after whose death, the said Barony descended to him as Heir
in tail: That by virtue of these Letters Patents, before the said supposed
Treasons committed, he was one of the Barons, Lords, and Peers of Parliament in
the Realm of Ireland; and at the Parliament begun and held there the 16th. day
of March. 16 Car. at Dublin, and continued until the 17th. of August then next
following, and then adjourned till the 9th. of November next ensuing, and
thence proroged to the 24 of February next following, and from thence continued
till the 24 of June Car. he was present as one of the Peers of the Realm of
Ireland. And further says, that on the 23 of October 17 Car. he was taken and
arrested by certain Persons to him unknown at Dublin in Ireland, and there
committed to safe Custody for the Treasons pretended to be committed by him,
till afterward he was on the 12 of June 18 Car. by certain Persons to him
unknown, brought in safe Custody, against his Will, to Westminster within the
Realm of England, and then and there committed to the Tower of London, where he
is yet detained. And therefore prays, that he may be tried and judged by his
Peers of the Realm of Ireland for the supposed Treasons in the Indictment. To
this plea of his, Mr. Ask the Kings Attorney in this Court has demurred in
Law, and the Prisoner has joined in demurrer: And whether this Plea of the
Prisoner as to his trial by his Peers of the Realm of Ireland, be good in Law?
is the sole question to be now argued.

This Case is of very great concernment, and yet of greater expectation: It
concerns the whole Peerage of Ireland in some respects, on the one hand; and on
the other, the Justice both of the King, Parliament and Kingdom of England, in
bringing a desperate Rebel and Arch-Traytor to condign punishment, for the
most horrid, bloody Treason against the Kings Royal Crown and authority, the
Protestant Religion, and the whole English Nation inhabiting Ireland (devoted
to destruction by this Traitor and his Confederates) that ever was plotted or
executed under the Sun. The eyes of all our 3 Kingdoms highly concerned in and
deeply suffering by this Treason) but more especially the eyes and hearts of
our adjoining vigilant Parliament (which has specially recommended it to this
Court and assigned my self among others, Counsel in this Case) are intentively
fixed upon the final result and issue of it. I wish my vacancy to study and
ability to argue this public Cause, had been such as might have satisfied
expectation, and discharged the trust reposed in me; but other public
services having much interrupted me therein, I shall begin to argue it for the
present with the best skill I may, and so leave it to those learned Gentlemen
of the Law (if there shall be need of any further Arguments) who are provided
to argue after me, to supply what is defective in this my proemiall Argument.

All matters of fact and form arising in this Plea, have What not in question.
been already admitted true, and sufficiently pleaded in Law by mutual consent,
and nothing but the mere matter in Law rests now to be debated, which I
conceive to be but one short single point.

For though the Prisoner pleads, that there was a Parliament, of which he was a
Peer and Member, continuing in Ireland by prorogation at the time of his
apprehension and sending over into England; Yet this Privilege of Parliament,
comes no ways in question as to the point of his trial, now only in issue (as
has been falsely suggested to the Lords house and intimated in an Ordinance of
theirs since revoked,) but relates only to his first apprehension, which is not
here in controversie' Besides, he pleads not, that this Parliament is yet
continuing and actually sitting in Ireland, of which he ought to have See 3 E.
4. c. 1. in Ireland.
the privilege; but that it was continued till the 24 of June 17 Car. which is
3 years since, and so intended to be long since ended: Nor pleads he, that he
ought to be, or to have been tried for this Treason in the Parliament of
Ireland, nor that his privilege of Parliament ought to extend to secure him
from any apprehension or Indictment for high Treasou, (when the Treason is
visible and real, as his is, and not imaginary only, in which Case of Treason
no privilege of Parliament is to be admitted, as has been resolved 8 H. 6.
rot. Parl. n. 57. 31 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 25, 26, 27. Cooks 4. Instit. fo. 25.
So as the matter of his privilege of Parliament, is quite out of doors, and the
sole point in issue is but this.

Whether a Peer of Ireland committing high Treason in The Question
Ireland, for which he is there apprehended, and afterward by order of
Parliament here, brought thence into England against his Will, may be endicted
and tried for that Treason in this Court of Kings Bench, by a Jury of Middlesex
only; not by his Peers of Ireland; by virtue of the Statute of 35 Hen. 8. chap.
2.?

And under favor, I conceive in some clearness affinmatively, that he man and
shall be tried here by an Ordinary Jury of Middlesex, and outed of his Peerage,
by virtue of this Act.

The Question arising merely upon the Act it self, which is very short, I shall
first recite it, and then draw my Arguments, out of the very intention, words
and bowels of it.

FOrasmuch as some doubts, and questions have been The Act of 35 H. 8. c. 2.
moved, that certain kinds of Treasons done, perpetrated or committed out of
the Kings Majesty's Realm of England and other his graces Dominions, cannot, ne
may by the Common Laws of this Realm be enquired of, heard and determined
within this his said Realm of England; for a plain remedy, order, and
declaration therein to be had and made; Be it enacted by Authority of this
present Parliament, that all manner of offenses being already made or declared,
or hereafter to be made or declared by any the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
to be Treasons, misprisions of Treasons, or concealments of Treasons, and done,
perpetrated or committed by any person, or persons out of this Realm of
England; shall be from henceforth, inquired of, heard and determined before the
Kings Justices of his Bench, for Pleas to be holden before himself; by good and
lawful men of the same Shire where the said Bench shall sit and be kept: or
else before such Commissioners, and in such Shire of the Realm, as shall be
assigned by the Kings Majesty's Commission, and by good and lawful men of the
same Shire, in such manner and form, to all intents and purposes, as if such
Treasons, or Concealments of Treasons, had been done, perpetrated and committed
within the same Shire where they shall be so inquired of, heard and determined
as is aforesaid.

Provided always, that if any the Peers of this Realm shall happen to be
endicted of any such Treasons or other offenses aforesaid, by authority of this
Act, that then after such Indictment they shall have their Trial by their
Peers, in such like manner as has been heretofore accustomed.

From this Act I shall deduce several Arguments and conclusions to prove, that
the Prisoner at the Bar, though a Peer of Ireland, shall be tried by an
ordinary Jury of Middlesex, here, not by his Peers in, or of Ireland, for the
Treasons committed in Ireland, whereof he stands here indicted.

For my more methodical proceeding, I shall divide the single point in
controversy into these 3 subordinate Questions.

1. Whether this S^atute extends to Treasons committed in Ireland, by Irish
Commoners?

2ly. Whether it reaches to Treasons in Ireland perpetrated by Irish Peers, as
well as by Irish Commons?

3ly. Admit it extends to Irish Peers as well as Commoners, whether it does not
then inevitably out them of their Trials by Irish Peers, and Subject both of
them alike to a Trial at this Bar, by a Middlesex Jury?

For the first, Whether this Act extends to Treasons committed Question 1.
in Ireland by Irish-Commoners? There is but little doubt of it. For first, it
is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that this Act extends to all Treasons done
or perpetracted in Ireland by Irish- Commoners; for the main scope and intent
of this Law being, to make all manner of offenses then made or declared, or
hereafter to be made or declared to be Treasons, misprisions of Treasons, or
concealments of Treasons, by any Laws or Statutes of this Realm, done
perpetracted or committed by any person or persons out of England, inquirable
or tryable within this Realm, without any scruple or difficulty, either in this
Court, or before such Commissioners in such Shire of this Realm, as the King by
his Commission shall assign (the very sum and substance of this Act, as the
express letter thereof resolves,) the Realm of Ireland, being out of this Realm
of England, and no part thereof, and Treasons therein committed by Commoner,
being Treasons done and perpetrated out of this Realm of England; (as is clear
by 20 H. 6. f. 8. a. b. ^9 H. 6. 53. b. 32 H. 6. 25. b. 2 R. 3. f. 12. 1 H. 7.
f. 3. Plowden, 368. b. Dyer, f. 360. b. Cook 7. Report. f. 22, 23. Calvin's
case, ^ H. 5. c. 8. 4 H. 5. c. 8. 4 H. 5. c. 6, Cooks 3 instit. p. 1^. 18.)
These treasons must certainly and most necessarily be both within the intent
and words of this Law; and so consequently tryable in this Court by an ordinary
Jury of Middlesex, without any scruple or difficulty. The rather because
Ireland, though out of this Realm of England, is vet part of the Kings
dominions, and a subordinate Kingdom, united and annexed to the Crown of
England, governed by the Laws of England, and bound by Acts of Parliament made
in England in many Cases, as is resolved and undeniably evidenced by Pat. 6.
Johan. in. 6. n. 17. Rot. Pat. 8 Johan. m. 1. Claus. 12. H. 3. m. 8, Pat. 30 H.
3. m. 3. 14 H. 3. The Statute of Ireland. Pat. 5 E. 3. pars 1. m. 25. 11 E. 3.
c. 2, 3, 4, 5. 27 E. 3. c. 3, 18. 13 E. 1. Stat. de M^rcat. 1 H. 5. c. 8. 4 H.
5. c. 6. 1 H. 6. c. 3. 3 H. 7. c. 8. 1 H. 8. c. 5. ^32 H. 8. c. 4. 35 H. 8. c.
2. 32 H. 6. Statutes of Ireland, c. 1. 8 E. 4. in Ireland, c. 1. 10 H. 7. in
Ireland, c. 4, 5. 22. 7 H. 8. in Ireland, c. 1. 28 H. 8. in Ireland, c. 2, 3,
5, 6, 7, 8, 13, 15. 18, 19. 33 H. 8. in Ireland, c. 1. 1 H. 7. f. 3. Kelway, f.
202. b. Cooks 7 Rep. of 22, 23. Calvin's case. 1 In^tit. f. 141. b. 4 Instit. f.
349, 350, etc. 3 Instit. p. 18, Mr. Saint John's Argument at Law at Straffords
attainder, p. 53. to 64. And therefore Treasons there committed are more apt
and proper to be tried here within the letter and intention of this Law, then
Treasons done in France, Spain, or any parts else out of the Kings dominions,
where our Laws and Acts of Parliament are not obligatory.

2. This Statute (as I conceive) was principally made to punish Treasons,
misprisions of Treasons, and concealments of Treasons in Ireland, where they
were more frequently done and perpetrated, than in any or all parts of the
world out of this Realm of England, as our Histories and the Sea the statutes
of Ireland, 3 E. 2. c. 4. 18 H. 6. c. 2, 3. 25 H. 6. c. 4, 5. 28 H. 6. c. 1. 1
E. 4. c. 2. 5 E. 4. c. 6. 18 E. 4. c. 2. 10 H. 7. c. 6, 8, 9, 10, 13, 17, 19.
28 H. 8. c. 1, 3, 9, 11. 3 Phil. and Mar. c. 11. 1 Eliz. c. 6, 17. 27 Eliz. c.
1. 28 Eliz. c. 8, 9. 11 Jac. c. 4. and the Annals of Ireland.
Irish-Statutes record: And the ^orid general Treason, Insurrection and
Rebellion in Ireland (much like this for which the Prisonner is indicted)
mentioned in the Statute of Ireland, 28 H. 8. c. 1. but 7 years before this
Act, with other frequent Treasons and Rebellions there, were no doubt the
chiefest ground of making this new Law. And that which puts it out of all
dispute is the Statute of 28 H. 8. made in the Parliament at Dublin in Ireland,
c. 7. which reciting the Statute of 26 H. 8. c. 13. made in England concerning
Treasons, and enacting, (as this of 35 H. 8.) That if any of the Kings
Subjects, Denizens, or others do commit or practice out of the limits of this
Realm (of England) in any outward parts, any such offenses which by this Act
are made, or heretofore have been made Treason, that then such Treason,
whatsoever it be, that shall so happen to be done or commitshall be inquired
and present^d by the oaths of 12 good and lawful men, upon good and probable
evidence and witness, in such Shire and County of this Realm, before such
persons ^^ it shall please the Kings Highness to appoint by commission under
his great Seal, in like manner and form as Treasons committed within this Realm
have been used to be inquired of and presented, and that then upon every
indictment and presentment founden and made of any such Treasons, and certified
into the KINGS BENCH, like process and other circumstance shall be there had
and sued against such offenders, as if the same Treasons so presented had been
lawfully found to be done and committed within the limits of this Realm, etc.
Adds this memorable clause thereto, Considering then this Statute made in the
Realm of England, is most beneficial and expedient to have due execution within
the Kings Land and Dominion of IRELAND, especially in respect of the high
rebellion here lately committed, that the odible infamy against the King and
Queen in the same Act expressed, and other offenses, abuses, and abominations
there mentioned, principally have been promulged, pronounced, done and
attempted within this said Land, Be it therefore established, ordained and
enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that the aforesaid Statute and
Ordinance, and every thing and things therein con^ained, be established,
confirmed, acce^ted, deemed, judged and taken for a good and right Law within
the Kings Land and Dominion of IRELAND, and to be as good, effectual, and of
the same strength and quality, effect, force and virtue to all intents and
purposes within the said Land, as the same is or ought to be in the Realm of
ENGLAND; and that the said Statute and Act made in ENGLAND, and every thing
therein contained, shall have relation, and take effect within this Land of
IRELAND against all offenders contrary to the form thereof, etc. Now that Act
of 26 H. 8. c. 13. with this of 35 H. 8. c. 2. being principally made and
intended for the Treasons done and committed in Ireland, as this
Irish-Parliament resolves in terminis, and being most beneficial and expedient
for that Realm; it would be very illegal, yea irrational, absurd, impolitick,
and improvident to exclude Ireland out of this Law, where Treasons were most
frequent, most dangerous to out Kings and Realm, and to extend it only to other
places out of the Realm, where Treasons were seldom done or perpetrated, and
nothing so perilous to the King and Realm of England, as Treason^, Rebellions
in Ireland have usually been in former and later ages.

3ly. It has been adjudged by all the Judges of England both in See Mr. St.
John's argument against Strafford, p. 52, 53.
Orourks case, 33 Eliz. and in Sir John Parrets case 24 El. cited in Calvin's
case, Cooks 7 Report. f. 23 a. in his 1 Institutes on Littleton, f. 26. b. 3
Institut. p. 11, 24. and so was it agreed without any argument in Hugh Mac^
Mahones case this last Michaelmas Term (the P^l^o^e^^ Confederate in this
horrid Treason) that Treason committed in Ireland it self by an Irish Commoner,
is tryable in this Court by this very Statute, contrary to the sub^tane
extrajudicial opinion of Dyer, M. 19, and 20 Ell^. fol. 360.) resolved since to
be no Law; Seeing then it has been thus frequently resolved heretofore, and in
case of the Treasons now in question this very last Term without any scruple;
That an Irish- Commoner committing Treason in Ireland, and brought over from
thence hither against his will, is tryable in this Court by a Middlesex Jury;
there is no doubt at all of the first question, but that this Statute extends
to Treasons committed in Ireland by Irish Commoners, and the doubt (if there be
any) will rest merely in the second point, which I am already arrived at.
Namely,

Whether this Act extends to Treasons perpetrated in Ireland Quest. 2d.
by Irish- Peers, as well as by Irish Commoners? And under correction, I
conceive with much clearness that it does for the s^^^suing reasons.

1. From the generallity and universality of the Act it self, wherein I shall
observe a fourfold universality, which supplies me with four undeniable
arguments, to prove Irish Peers, within this Law, as well as Irish Commoners.

The first, is a universality of the Kinds of offenses specified in the Act, in
these general Terms; All manner of offenses being already mad: or declared, or
here after to be made or declared by any the Laws or Statutes of this Realm, to
be Treasons, misprisiion of Treasons, or concealment of Treasons, done or
perpetrated out of this Realm of England, shall be enquired of by the Kings
Justices of his Bench etc. Now these general words All manner of offenses, etc.
must necessarily extend to all manner of Treasons perpetrated or committed out
of this Realm by Peers as well ar Commoners; To the Treasons of the Lord
Magwire, as well as to the Treasons of Mac Mahone Esquire, they being the selfsame
Treasons in substance, and a manner of Treasons specially made and declared by
the Laws of this Realm, since there are no restrictive words to confine these
general clauses of Treasons only to Commoners, and no express exception for
the offenses or Treasons of Irish Peers to be found within the Statute; else
there would be a repugnance and contradiction between the text and the Glo^^e,
and this general should be turned into a specifical in respect of the Traitors
offending. Therefore this general clause extending to all Treasons whatsoever
done or perpetrated out of the Realm, must necessarily extend to the Treasons
of all Irish Peers as well as Commons, and so both of them by the words and
intention of this Law shall be triable in this Court.

The second is, a universality of time. All manner of offenses already made or
declared, or hereafter to be made or declared Treason etc. done perpetrated or
committed, or hereafter to be done, perpetrated or committed, shall be enquired
of by the Kings Justices of the Bench, etc. which extends to all former
Treasons done out of the Realm at any time before the making, and to all future
Treasons since the passing of this Act: Now this universality of time extends
as well to the Treasons of Irish Peers as Commoners, to the Treasons of Baron
Magwire as well as of Mr. Mac-Mahone, both being alike Treasons committed after
this Act.

The 3d. is. a See Cooks 3 Instit. p. 34.
universality of place, All manner of Treasons done, perpetrated or committed
out of this Realm of England: that is, in any place whatsoever out of the Realm
of England, be it in Ireland, Scotland, France, Spain, Germane, Italy,
Barbary, Turkey, the East or West Indies, as was resolved in Dr. Stories case,
Hill. 13 Eliz. Dier 298 b. ^ and 3. Phil. and Mar. Dier 131, 132. Now this
extends generally to all foreign Treasons committed by Peers as well as Commons,
and so to the Treason of the Prisoner at the Bar, it being done in Ireland, out
of this Realm of England, and so fully within the Act.

The 4th. (which is fatal and unanswerable) is a universality of Persons,
coupled together with all the 3 former generalities in these express words.
All manner of offenses made Treason etc. done, perpetrated or committed By any
Person or Persons out of this Realm of England; shall be from henceforth
inquired of, heard and determ^^e^ before the Kings Justices of his Bench, etc.
Now any Person or Persons, being a universal expression, equivalent to all
manner of Persons whatsoever, Collectively: or, to all and every Person
whatsoever, distributively, extends to Irish Peers as well as Commoners, yea to
all Subjects of all Ranks whatsoever, within the compass of this Law in regard
of the manner of Trial, but such only who are excepted out of it by special
Proviso. Now Irish Peers are none of those Persons excepted, as I shall prove
anon.

That these words any person or persons, extend to Peers as well as Commoners,
where there is no exception of Peers, is undeniable.

First because a Peer is a Person, though of a higher rank or degree than an
ordinary Commoner or Freeman; and one kind of person in Law; therefore within
these words any person or persons.

2ly. Because general Laws made for the common good safety of the Realm, and
punishment of the grand crime of High Treason, are like to Go himself, Acts 10.
3, 4. Romans 2. 11. Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 3. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
No respectors of persons, but bind and punish all alike. Therefore any person
or persons in such a public Law as this, made for the common good, safety, and
punishment of the greatest Treasons, Evils, must necessarily include all
persons, subjects whatsoever, and except none, especially the greatest, whole
examples and offenses are commonly most dangerous and pernicious.

Thirdly in all public Acts whatsoever; These words any person or persons,
extend to Peers as well as Commoners, and I know no one President to the
contrary. To instance in some few Acts instead of many; In the Statutes of 26
H. 8. c. 13. and 5, and 6 E. 6. c. 11. concerning Treasons, any person or
persons; or any of the Kings Subjects, Denizen, or others, that shall commit or
practice Treason out of the limits of this Realm, in any outward parts; extend
to Peers as well as Commons. Therefore in this Act of the same nature. So in
the Statutes of 1 Ed. 6. c. 1. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 1. 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1. and 1
Eliz. c. 2. If any person or persons shall deprave or revile the most blessed
Sacraments, or the book of the Common prayer, etc. In the Statute of 1 Eliz.
cap. 1. and also of 5 Eliz. cap. 1. If any person or persons, etc. shall
extol, etc. the power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See, 13 Eliz. c. 1. If
any person or persons shall bring in, or put in ure any Bull from the Bishop of
Rome, Agnus Dei, Pictures, Crosses, etc. In the Statute of 23 Eliz. c. 2. If
any person or persons shall with a malicious intent speak any false or
seditious news of the Queen, etc. In 27 Eliz. c. 2. If any person or persons
shall harbor or contribute any money to the maintenance of any Jesuits,
Priests etc. In all these Acts (to pretermit See 25 H. 8. c. 3, 10, 13, 26 H.
8. c. 2. 32 H. 8. c. 4, 7, 9 13. 5 Eliz. cap. 9. 14, 15, 21, 22, 23. 8 Eliz. c.
2, 3, 4. 13 Eliz. c. 8. 13, 14 Eliz. c. 3. 1, and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 3. 1
Eliz. c. 6.
many others) the words any person or persons, extend to Peers as well as
Commons, as is resolved in the bodies and Provisoes of all these Acts: Yea, in
the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. of Treasons (though a most penal Law) the words
are only; If a man do compass or imagine the deach of the King; If a man do
levy war against the King in his Realm, etc. If a man counterfeit the Kings
Broad or Privyseal, or his money, etc. Yet it has been resolved without dispute
in all times, and so agreed by Sir Edward Cook, Institutes 3. p. 4, 5. That
this word a man, extends to both sexes alike, including women as well as men,
Peers as well as Commoners, Lords, as well as Pesants. yea all ranks, callings,
conditions of men who are Subjects: and that this word man in the singular
number only, extends to many men to any number of men committing any of these
Treasons jointly, as well as to a single man or Traitor, because it is a
general Law, made for the safety of the Kings person, and the Realm. Much more
then must any person or persons, in this Statute, being both in the singular
and plural number, and in common acceptance a far more universal, general, and
comprehensive expression than this of a man, in 25 E. 3. c. 2. extend equally
to all sorts, sects, and degrees of men, as well as it, and so to Peers as much
as it, and to Peers as well as to Commons, as it does in the Statutes of 25 H.
8. c. 22. 26 H. 8. c. 13. 27 H. 8. c. 2. 33 H. 8. c. 12. and 20. 5 E. 6. c. 11.
1 Mar. c. 6. 1. and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 9, to, 11. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 13 Eliz. c. 2.
18 Eliz. c. 1. 23 Eliz. c. 1. 27 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Jac. c. 4, concerning Treasons.

2ly. My second Argument to prove Irish Peers within this Statute, is, because
Irish-Commons are within its Verge even for Treasons committed in Ireland, as
has been adjudged in the forecited cases of Orourk, Sir John Parrot, and
Mac-Mahone: For Laws and Law givers being no respectors of persons, where the
offenses be the same, and there being no one clause, word, or syllable in this
Statute extending to Irish-Commoners Treasons, but which does, may and ought by
the self same Justice, reason, equity to extend to the Treasons of Irish-Peers,
(this Statute making no distinction between the one and other, and the Commons
of Ireland having as absolute a right and Inheritance in their native Privilege
of being tried by their Peers in Ireland, (which yet is taken away by this Act
in case of Treason) as the Peers in Ireland have in their Peerage to be tried
there by their Irish-Peers:) We must not, yea we cannot in point of Justice
distinguish between the one and other, where the Law it self makes no
distinction: Therefore since the Irish Commoner is undoubtedly within the words
and scope of this Act to be tried at this Bar by a Middlesex-Jury, the
Irish-Peer (unless we will judge with respect of persons, and coin a
distinction not warranted by this Act) must be also tried in the self-same
manner. The Law is the same, the crime is the same, both in Magwires and in
Mac-Mahones cases, therefore the Trial and Judgment too must in law, reason be
the same in both.

3ly. It will be granted me without dispute, That if an Irish-Peer commit
Treason in any foreign parts out of England and Ireland, as in Spain, France,
Flanders, Italy, or Germany, he shall be tried in this Court by an ordinary
Jury if Freeholders, and not by his Peers in Ireland, by virtue of this Act.
Nay, if he commit Treason in Ireland, and fly into England; he may and shall
be tried for that very Treason by an ordinary Jury at this Bar, See Cooks 3
Instit. p. 31.
because by flying his Country, and a legal trial there, he has outed himself
of the benefit of his Peers. Therefore it extends to Irish-Peers, even for
Treasons done in Ireland, else they could not be tryable here in any of these
Cases, which are granted on all hands to be Law.

4ly. It is evident by the Proviso in this Act, that English Peers committing
any manner of Treasons out of this Realm, are tryable for it in England by
virtue of this Law, as well as English Commons, though they were not so by the
Common Law. Therefore Irish Peers committing Treason, shall be within it
likewise, and so tryable here as well as Irish Commons, else they should be in
far better condition than English or Scottish Peers, and quite exempted out of
this Act. Now the same words that bring English-Peers within this Law, must of
necessity hook in Irish-Peers too, there being no clause which exempts or
includes the one more than the other.

5ly. The very letter, intent, and scope of this Act (as appears by the body of
it, and likewise by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. and 5, and 6 E. 6. c. 11.
to the same effect) was, to make all Treasons done or commiteed out of England
by any person or persons whatsoever, tryable in England, either before the
Justices in this Court, or See 26 H ^ c. 13. 1 E. 6. c. 11.
before special Commissioners in some other Counties; but to be still tryable
within this Realm, as the words ( All manner of Treasons hereafter to be done,
perpetrated, or committed by any person or persons out of the Realm of England,
shall be from henceforth enquired of, head, and determined before the Kings
Justices of his Bench etc.) clearly resolve in direct terms: Therefore to make
the Treasons of Irish-Peers committed in Ireland or elsewhere tryable here in
England, as well as the Treasons of English-Peers, or Irish-Commoners. And to
send them back into Ireland to be there tried by their Peers, when once they
are here in Prison, and indicted in this Court, by exempting them out of this
Act, contrary to the very letter and intent of the Law, is to run point blank
against the very words and meaning of this Law and the Lawmakers: Therefore he
must by this Act be tried at this Bar, and that by an ordinary Jury only, as I
shall prove anon.

6ly. The very scope and sole purport of this Act is not to make new Treasons
or Traitors, which were none before, but to bring real Traitors only for
Treasons formerly made, or hereafter to be made and declared Treasons by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, to exemplary punishment in this Kingdom, for
the peace and preservation of the King, Realm, and the better execution of
Justice (the very life of Laws) upon Delinquents only of the highest rank, for
the most transcendent crimes of High Treasons, of misprision, or concealments
of Treasons, not for Felonies, or petit Treasons: Which consideration must
necessarily induce us, for the common good, to give it the largest, fullest,
and most equitable constraction that may be. Thus the Judges in former times
have always interpreted it, as appears by Dyer, f. 132, 298. Cooks 7. Rep.
Calvin's Case, f. 23. a. his first Institut. on Littleton, f. 26. his 3 Instit.
p. 24. and in Orourkes case; wherein the Judges resolved. 1. That the Statute
of 1 Mar. Sess. 1. repealing all former Treasons, but those within 25 E. 3. and
of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 10. enacting, That all Trials hereafter to be had
for any Treason, shall be had and used only according to the due course of the
Common Law of this Realm, and not otherwise: exend not to the taking way of
forem Treasons or their trials by this Law; And in Orourks case, they extended
it by equity, beyond, and in some sort against the letter of the Law it self;
for he standing mute, and refusing his Trial, was thereupon condemned and
executed for a Treason committed by him in Ireland, though the words of the
Statute are, The Treason shall be enquired of, heard and determined before the
Justices of the Kings Bench by good and lawful men of the same Shire, where
the said Bench shall sit; and the Act speaks nothing at all of standing mute.
But this being a public Law for the Common good, to bring Traitors only to
their Trial and just punishment, his refusal to put himself upon his Trial, was
adjudged to be a determination and conviction of his Treasons within the Act,
else any Traitor by standing mute might evade and frustrate this good Law. If
then this Statute may thus be construed by equity and dilated beyond the words
to one who stands mute, for a Treason done in Ireland: much more may it be
extended to a treason by an Irish-Peer, who is fully within the words and
intent of it, as I have already manifested: And it would be a most pernicious
gloss which should either elude or nullify this beneficial public Law.

7ly. It is clearly resolved in and by our Parliaments, 13 E. 1. Proem. 13 E.
1. of Statute Merchants, 21 E. 3. rot. parl. n. 67. in the Statute of 5 H. 5.
chapter 6. and in diverse of our 1 H 7. 3. Co. 7. Rep. Calvin's case, f. 16, 17, 23.
Cooks Instit. 1. p. 35 Mr. St. John's Argument at Law at Straffords Attainder,
p. 61, 62.
Law Books, That Acts of Parliaments made in England, wherein Ireland is either
specially named or generally and necessarily included, do bind those in Ireland
both Commoners or Peers alike. This therefore being such a Law, extending and
binding those in Ireland as has been resolved in the forecited Cases, it must
certainly bind both the Peers and Commons of Ireland to a Trial at this Bar for
Treasons done in Ireland, when the King and Kingdom deem it necessary or
expedient to try them here in England.

8ly. The Proviso in this Act for trial of Treasons done out of this Realm, by
Peers within the same, extends only in positive terms to Peers of this Realm of
England, because they only are Peers within England, and so only tryable by
their Peers, for foreign Treasons within the same, not to Peers of Ireland who
are no Peers at all, nor tryable by their Peers within this Realm of England,
Therefore this Proviso extending only to Peers of this Realm, excludes all
other foreign Peers whether Irish or Scots, from any trial by their Peer^ in
England for Treasons acted out of it.

9ly. There is very great reason why Natural Irish Peers and Barons should be
within the compass of this Law as well as Commoners, and rather they than any
other foreign Peers, because as our Mat. Parls An. 1230. Mr. Cambdens Ireland p.
114. to 140. The Annals of Ireland in Mr. Camb. Britan. p. 154, 156, 157, 158,
159, 160, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 869, 170 to 201.
Historians, the Irish Annals, Statutes and our Records do testify, ever since
their conquest by K. Henry the 2d. and submission to the Kings of England, they
have frequently (almost every year) in most Kings Reigns broken footh into
private, petit, or general Rebellions and Insurrections against the English (as
I could instance in sundry particulars) in which Rebellions I commonly find a
Magwire, a Mao-Mahon, and Oneal, in the van, as Ringleaders of all the rest,
as they were in this last Rebellion, wherein most of the native Irish Peers and
greatest septs have been deeply engaged as principal Conspiratours. Among other
Rebellions I find in Story, and (which is more authentic) in the * See 1 E. 3.
rot. parl. n. 4, 5, 6. 6 E. 3. n. 11. 6 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 3. 7 R. 2. n. 4. 13
R. 2. n. 2. See p. ^.
express Statute made in the Parliament at Dublin in Ireland, anno 28 H. 8. c.
1. (but 7 years before this Law;) That Gerald Fitz Gerald Earl of Kyldare, the
Earl of Desmond, with diverse other of the Irish Peers and Gentry conspiring
together, to extirpate the English, and deprive the King of his Sovereignty in
Ireland, did send to the French King, the Emperor and Bishop of Rome, for aid
and assistance for taking the same Land out of the Kings and English
possessions; and thereupon with Banners displayed and great forces traytorously
invaded the Kings dominions there, besieged the City and Castle of Dublin,
murdered the Kings good Subjects, who withstood them, and resisted the Kings
forces sent from hence, etc. for which they were all by this Act attainted of
High Treafon. The like general Rebellions have there broke forth sundry times
both before and since that Act; but none so generally, dangerously, bloodily,
as this for which the Prisoner at the Bar stands endicted. The Treasons
therefore in Ireland being commonly so frequent, so general, (wherein most of
the native Irish-Peers, and some of the English extraction too) were usually
chief Actors; there was very great reason, policy and justice too, why such a
Law as this should be made, to reach to Ireland, and why in such cases as
these, (Rebellions there being so universal, and most of the Irish Nobility,
Conspiratours, and parties in them) that these Peers and the chiefest
Conspiratours when surprised, should be presently sent over from thence into
England and tried there for their Treasons.

1. To secure their persons from escapes and rescues, which might be there more
easily procured, especially when and where the Irish Rebels are Masters of the
Field, as the Statute of 17 H. 7. in Ireland. c. 14. resolves.

2ly. To avoid a Upon which ground writs of Error lie in the Kings Bench in
England, to reverse erroneous judgments in the Courts and Parliaments of
Ireland, Cooks 4 Inst. p. 352. Mr. St. John's Arment at Law against Strafford,
p. 58, 61.
fayler of Justice there, when by reason of the many Irish Peers there out in
actual Rebellion, or by means of alliance of most other Peers to them, or of
the flight of other thence, or the employment of them in service, or places of
trust, or by reason of the interposition of the Rebels forces between them and
the place of their Trial chere, a competent number of indifferent Irish Peers
for a speedy Trial cannot be assembled with safety or convenience in Ireland to
try a Rebellious Traitor by his Peers there; which obvious defects are all
supplied by this Act.

3ly. To prevent all partiality and injustice in such Cases, which might happen
in Trials by Peers in Ireland either by consanguinity or alliance of the Peer
to be tried, to the Irish Peers who are to try him, or by confederacy of the
Tryers in the same Treason with the party tried; or through fear of mischief or
revenge upon the Tryers, Jury, Witnesses, Judges, by the tried Rebels Friends,
Kindred and Confederates, in case he should be condemned by them and executed
(none being so vindictive and bloody in this kind as the Irish) Upon all which
weighty reasons, there was special cause, why both in justice, policy, and
prudence, all Irish Peers, who by public Rebellion commit High Treason in
Ireland, should be sent over and tried here by ordinary Juries, to prevent the
forenamed mischiefs and fayler of Justice, and bring them to condign
punishment. Now in this case here in judgment at the Bar, all these recited
reasons hold. For first, most of the Irish Peers were in actual Rebellion when
the Prisoner was sent over: most of the English and Protestant Irish Peets
there, eimurthered or forced to fly thence, or so dispersed and employed, that
they could not assemble a competent number of indifferent Peers to any place
with convenience to try him in Ireland. 2ly. The enemies and Irish Rebels were
then Masters of the field in most places, the Prisoner in danger to be rescued
by force from them, or by treachery likely for to escape out of their hands;
and the times so troublesome, as would admit no leisure for such a Trial. 3ly.
Most of the Irish were-allyed to Magwire, or engaged with him in the self-same
Treason and Rebellion; and so neither in Law, Justice, or Prudence fit or
indifferent persons to pass upon his Trial in this Case of most public
concernment. 4ly. The Judges, Witnesses and Peers that should try him there,
would have been in extreme peril of their lives, and of exemplary public
revenges from their Confederate-Rebels, who threatened revenge, as appears by
Mac-Mahons Speech ( Magwires Confederate) to the Justices upon his first
examination: I am now (said he) in your hands, and you may do with me what you
please: But I am sure within few days I shall be revenged: and by like words
of revenge used by Owen Oneile in Flanders so soon as he heard Magwire was
apprehended. 5ly. If he should now be sent back from hence into Ireland to be
tried, the Rebels and his party are there so predominant, that scarce any
Witnesses, nor Peers, nor Judges either would or durst there to appear openly
against him; or else such means would be made to delay or delude his Trial and
Execution, that by some device or other, there would questionless be a fayler
of Justice against him. Therefore for all these weighty reasons, he may and
ought by all rules of Policy, Equity, and Justice to be arraigned and tried
only at this Bar by virtue of this Act, which so clearly extends unto him; That
so the blood of Dr. Jones others printed Relations concerning the Irish
Rebellion.
above one hundred and fifty thousand innocent Protestants shed in Ireland in
less than four months space by means of this Rebellion, which cries loud to
Heaven and Earth for revenge against this great Contriver and Arch-promo of it,
may not go un-revenged in a way of public Justice to our eternal infamy. I
have quite done with the second and main Question, and proved an Irish Peer to
be within the Statute, as well as an Irish Commoner.

I shall now proceed to the last point, arising from the Quest. 3d.
manner of this Plea, that he may be tried by his Peers, not expressing, where
or how, and intimating that he would be so tried here in England. It is briefly
this. Admitting an Irish Peer to be tryable in England for a Treason committed
by him in Ireland, whether this does not inevitably out him of his Trial by
Irish Peers, and subject him him to a Trial at this Bar by an ordinary Jury, as
well as an Irish Commoner? And I conceive without any scruple, affirmatively;
that it does, for these undeniable Reasons.

1. Because Irish Peers, are Peers only in Ireland, not in England, and cease
to be such in judgment of Law so soon as ever they arive in England, both
personally in themselves and relatively to others, being here in judgment but
mere Esquires, not Lords, and are to be sued as such, not as Lords or Peers,
even as Peers of Scoland, France, or Spain are, as is resolved and adjudged 11
E. 3. Fitzh. Brief 473. 8 R. 2. Process, Fitzh. 224. 20 E. 4. 6. Brook, Nosme
de dignity, 49 M. 19 and 20 Eliz. Dyer 360. b. Cooks 7 Rep. f. 15, 16. Calvin's
case, Co. 9 Rep. f. 117. the Lord Sanchers Case in point, and Cooks 3 Instit.
p. 30. The Prisoner then being no Peer in England, it is impossible that he
should be tried in England by his Peers.

2ly. Because no such way of Trial was ever yet heard of in any age, of any
Irish or other foreign Peer, tried here in England, either by English Peers, or
by his Irish or foreign Peers; Therefore such a Trial shall not nor can be had or
admitted now,

3ly. Because neither the Kings Bench, nor the Commissioners before whom the
Statute limits these foreign Treasons to be tried, nor yet the High Steward of
England, (if any such should be created) have any power or jurisdiction to
summon a Jury of Peers out of Ireland to appear before them here in England
upon such a Trial as this; neither are the Peers of Ireland bound by any Law to
appear or attend as Peers on any such service or trial here, being Peers, and
bound to service as Peers (which their Patents express) only in Ireland, and no
Peers here. Therefore a Trial by his Irish Peers here in England is an
impossibility, as well as illegality.

4ly. Admit a Jury of Peers might be summoned and sent from thence, yet it
would be a great delay of Justice, it requiring a long time to procure a full
appearance of Peers thence: yea, a betraying of Ireland to the Rebels at this
instant, to send for so many Protestant indifferent Peers now from thence as
might serve to try him here. Moreover, it would be an infinite expense, charge,
trouble, besides the danger by Sea, to summon a Jury of Peers from thence; and
if they failed to appear in England upon summons, as is probable they would,
and lawfully might they being not bound to it by any Law and so no fine certain
to be set upon them for not appearing, nor legal means of coercion to compel
them to come over upon such a Trial, there should be a fayler of Justice for
want of such a Peerage; And therefore no such Trial may or can be expected,
which would delude and null this Law.

5ly. This Statute directs the Trial of foreign Treasons in express terms, to be
before the Judges in the Kings Bench, or the Commissioners appointed by the
King in any County of this Realm. Now no Trial by English or Irish Peers was
ever heatd of either in the Kings Bench, or before such Commissioners, But it
always has been, and ought to be either in the house of Peers in Parliament;
or before the Lord High Steward of England, as all former Presidents accord,
and 15, E. 3. c. 2. 1 H. 4. 1. 10 E. 4. 6. b. 13 H* 8. 12. Brook Treason, 29,
33. Cooks 3 Institutes, c. 1. and. 2. p. 28, 29, 30. 4 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 1.
50 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 21 to 31. 34. 7 R. 2. n. 15. to 24. 10 R. 2. n. 6. to
18. 11, n. 2. n. 6, 7. 14 R. 2. n. 14. 21 R. 2. n. 12 to 17. and Placita
Coronae coram dom. Rege in Parl. n. 1. to 20. 1 H. 4. Plac. Coronae in Parl. n.
1. to 11. Walsingham Hist. Ang. p. 402. 2 H. 4. n. 30. 31. 5 H. 4. rot. Parl.
n. 12. resolve. Therefore no Trial can be in this case by Peers either in this
Court, or before Commissioners, by virtue of this Act or any other Law.

6ly. This Statute is introductive of a new way of trying foreign Treasons, done
out of this Realm by a Jury within England, which by the rules of the Common
law could neither inquire nor take notice of any Treasons or matters committed,
perpetrated, or acted beyond the Seas, as is evident by the Prologue of this
Act, the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. 5 E. 6. c. 11. M. 2 and 3 E. 1. Coram Rege
Rot. 56. Hereford. M. 2 E. 2. Fitzh. Obligation 15. and Utlagary 18. Tr. 8 E.
2. Fitzh. Testament 6. 6 E. 3. f. 17. 18. 27 Ass. 43. 41 E. 3. 19. 48 E. 3. 2,
3. 20 H. 6. 28, 44. 15 E. 4. 14, 15. 20 E. 4. Perkins, sect. 121. 494. 737.
Cook 4 Instit. c. 17. 1 Instit. ^. 74. Stamford l. 2. c. 14. Cook 2 Rep. 49 a.
Long and Pecocks case, 5 Rep. f. 107. a. 3 Instit. f. 48, 49. Whereupon it
altering the Common law in this particular, it outs all former doubts, and most
punctually prescribes all the particulars and appurtenances belonging to the
Trial of them, from which there neither may nor can be any variation by Law.

First, it appoints the place where they shall be tried.

1. In general, within this Realm of England.

2ly. In particular, either in the Kings Bench wherever it sits, on in such
County as the King by his Commissions shall assign. 2ly. The Judges before whom
the Trial shall be are thus particularly described, The Justices of the Kings
Bench, o^ such Commissioners as the King shall appoint under the great Seal.

3ly. The Jurymen by whom they shall be t^yed are thus defined in Terminis in
the Act, By good and lawful men (not Peers or Commons of Ireland) of the same
Shire where the said Bench of the King shall sit, if the Trial shall be in the
Kings Bench; And if before Commissioners assigned by the King in any shire of
the Realm, then by the good and lawful men of the same shire where the
Commissioners sit, which is doubled (^ike Pharohs dreams) to make it more
certain: and likewise precisely enacted by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. and
5, and 6 E. 6. c. 11. in pursuance of this Act.

4ly. The manner how the Trial, shall be is thus punctually specified. In such
manner and form to all intents and purposes as if such Treasons, etc. had been
done, perpetrated and committed within the same See Dyer f. 31. 232, 298, 360.
Cooks ^ Rep. f. 23. 11 Rep. f. 65.
shire where they shall be so inquired, heard and determined, as is aforesaid;
which last words (with the very like in the Sratutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. and 5
E. 6. c. 11. extending to our case) put an end to the point in Question; For if
the Lord Magwire now at the Bar had committed the Treasons for which he is now
endicted in Westminster, there is no doubt nor scruple of it, but he should
have been tried by a Jury of Middlesex notwithstanding his Peerage in Ireland;
and he could neither have pleaded nor demanded his Peerage, as is resolved
expreslie in Calvin's case, C. 7 Rep. f. 15, 16. and in the Lord Sanchiars Case.
Cooks 9 Rep. f. 117. who was tried condemned by an ordinary Jury, for suborning
Carliel to murder Turner with a pi^toll in England, though a Peer of Scotland,
because he was here no Peer; and the forecited Books are express, that the same
Law holds in case of a Peer of Ireland. Since then this Law expreslie enacts,
That the Trial of all foreign Treasons shall be by good and lawful men of the
same Shire where the Kings Bench shall sit in such manner and form, To all
intents and purposes, as if the same Treasons had been committ^^ here in
Middlesex where the Kings Bench sits. There neither may nor can be any other
form of trial for the Prisoner, nor in any other place, nor before any other
Judges, nor by any other Jury, but such as this Statute has punc^e defi^ed;
and than is by a Jurie of Middlesex, To all intents and purposes as if the
Treasons for which the Prisoner stands indicted had been plotted and executed
in Middlesex. Therefore to admit him to a Trial by Irish Peers, and not by good
and lawful men of Middlesex; or to send the Prisoner back to Ireland there to
be tried by his Peers, is to run quite counter and pointblanck against this
unanswerable clause of the Statute, That he shall be tried by good and lawful
men of the same Shire where the Kings Bench sits, to all intents and purposes
as if the Treasons had been there committed. And had they been there committed
actuallie, as they are legallie by the express purview of this Law, it could
never so much as be scrupled and made a quere; whether he should be tried by
his Irish Peers here? or sent over to be tried in Ireland for Treasons acted
there, after an Endictment for them here found against him? In one word,
Statutes which prescribe new forms of Trial in such a particular way as this
Act does, are like Letters of Attorney, or Licenses of Alienation, 21 H. 7. 7 Br
Alienation 9. 30 E. 3. 17 Br. Alienation, 23 and 30.
they must be most strictly pursued, and not varied from in the least
punctilio; as was resolved by all the Judges of England, Hill. 21 Jac. in the
case of Penal laws, Co. 7 Rep. f. 36, 37. Therefore no other form of Trial
ought to be admitted in this Case than what the Statute prescribes, and that is
only by good and lawful men of Middlesex, not by Irish Peers.

7ly. The Proviso in this Act puts a period to this Case.

Provided always, that if any the Peers of this Realm shall happen to be
endicted of any such Treasons or other offenses aforesaid, by authority of this
Act, that then after such Endictment, they shall have their Trial by their
Peers, in such like manner as has been heretofore accustomed.

From whence I shall observe these five particulars.

First, that Treasons committed by English Peers in foreign parts, are tryable
here in England, within the very body and purview of this Law. Therefore by
the selfsame reason, law, and justice, Treasons committed out of this Realm in
Ireland even by Irish Peers, are triable in England by this Act, else Irish
Peers should be quite out of this Act, and in better condition than English or
any Irish Commoners, who are clearly adjudged within it.

2ly. That Trial by Peers, is saved by this Proviso only to the Peers of this
Realm, which both in the Prologue and body of this Act is expressly styled this
Realm of England. But the Peers of Ireland are no Seldens tit. of Hon. p. 837,
840, 841.
Peers at all of this Realm of England, as is resolved in 11 Ed. 3. Brief 473.
20 E. 4. 4. Co. 7 Rep. f. 15, 16. and 9 Rep. Lord Sanchars case, f. 117. Co. 3
Instit. p. 30. and Dyer f. 360. b. Therefore no ways within the compass,
words, or reason of this Proviso, but clearly secluded out of it, and so not
tryable by their Peers. And this Statute prescribing a new way of trial for
foreign Treasons, not triable here by Peers before, had excluded all English
Peers from trial by their Peers, by the body of the Law, as some conceive, had
it not been saved to them by this special Proviso: Therefore certainly Irish
Peers who are not provided for at all, and no Peers in England, must
necessarily be excluded from their Peerage by it upon their trial here.

3ly. The reason why this Law does save the trial by Peers to Peers of this
Realm only and to no others (which as some conceived was not saved to them in
cases of foreign Treasons by the Statute of 26 H. 8. c. 13. as appears by the
Lord Grayes case hereafter cited makes an end of the Case in Question, because
Peers of the Realm of England are Peers in every shire and County of England.
Therefore by the great Charter of England, and all other Acts confirming it,
and the Common law it self, they ought to be tried only by their Peers within
all Counties and places of the Realm of England: But- Irish, Scottish, and
foreign Peers are no Peers in any County of England, as the forecited Books
^esolve. Now this Statute enacting, all foreign Treasons to be triable not in
Ireland or any other his Majesty's Dominions, but in England only; it was
necessary and convenient by this special Proviso to save the Trial by Peers to
all English Peers to be tried for foreign treasons only in England, according to
Cap. 29. See Cooks 2 inst. p. 48, 49.
Magna Charta and the Common law, being their birthright, because they are
actual Peers in all places of England, and may have English Peers enough at
hand to try them without delay upon all occasions. But Irish and other Peers
being no Peers at all in England, and it being a thing improper to try them by
English Peers being no real Peers to them, and a thing impossible to try them
here by Irish or any other foreign Peers, for the reasons formerlie alleged, and
this Statute confining the trials within it only to England; it had been a
direct contradiction and absurdity to provide, that these foreign Peers should
be tried here by their foreign Peers for Treasons, and not by an ordinary Jury,
because they are neither Peers themselves in England, nor others who should
come hither from Ireland or other foreign parts, who lose their foreign Peerage,
as soon as they set foot on English ground, with relation unto England, where
their Peerage presently cease.

4ly, The Statute is, That the trial for such Treasons, etc. shall be in such
manner and form to all in^ents and purposes as if they had been committed in
England. Now if English Peers commit Treason in England, they shall by the
Statute of Magua Charta, cap. 29, (yea by King John's Charter, and by the Common
law long before, as Sir Edmund Cook proves in his Commentary upon it; and I
have at large demonstrated in my Page 202 to 307.
Plea for the Lords and House of Peers) be tried only by their Peers, and not
by any ordinary Jurie, by English but not Irish Peers, as I have formerlie
proved. Therefore the ground of saving trial by Peers, to Peers of England by
this Act is, an unanswerable argument to deny such a trial here to any Peers
of Ireland by Irish or English Peers.

5ly. The last words of this Proviso determine the case in question without
more dispute; Provided always, that if any Peers of this Realm happen to be
indicted of any such Treasons aforesaid by authority of this Act they shall
have such trial by their Peers, in such like manner as has bean heretofore
accustomed. It being always the Custom of England See my plea for the Lords
and House of Peers. p. 202, 203 to 309. where this is largely proved, and p.
424.
since Magna Charta, and long before, in cases of Treason at the Kings suit, to
try all English Peers in England only by their Peers, and such a privilege as
3 Instit. f. 30.
Sir Edward Cook holds, they cannot waive if they would, as it was adjudged in
the Lord Dacres case, Pas. 28 H. 8. and since in the Earl of Castlehavens ease
7 Car. But on the other side it is most certain, that it has never been
accustomed heretofore, that Irish or any other foreign Peers should be tried
for any Treasons here committed by English, Irish, or any other foreign
Country Peers within the Realm of England, Nay, no one President of this kind
was ever heard of: and it is an impossible thing in point of Law, as I have
proved; therefore no such trial by any Peers can be once thought of or
imagined for the Prisoner or any other Peer of Ireland, within the purview or
proviso of this Act.

5ly. I shall add further ex abundanti, to put this case out of all question
that I have made some cursorie search into most of the Irish Annals, Histories,
Antiquities, Statutes, upon this occasion and I should have made a further
inquisition had I enjoyed any vacant hours to do it) yet I cannot find so much
as one President of any Irish Peer tried in Ireland for Treason, or any other
offense, by his Peers, before this Statute of 35 H. 8. and I believe the
Prisoners Council cannot (as indeed they neither did nor could) produce one
example of such a trial there, by Peers, before this Law, nor any Act of
Parliament in that Realm before this Statute concerning Treason, which
provides, that Irish Peers, shall be tried by their Peers, there being no such
clause or least hint thereof to be found in the Statutes of 18 H. 6. c. 2, 3.
^^ H. 7. c. 13. 13 H. 8. c. 1. 28 H. 8. c. 1, 2, 7. which make sundry offenses
Treasons, and extend to and mention Irish Lords and Rebels by name, as well as
Commons: all and every of these Acts leaving both the Irish Peers and
Commoners to the self-same rrial by a Jury. And since this Act I presume they
cannot produce above one president (and that a very late one in case of
Treason) where an Irish Peer was tried by his Peers, and it was the case of the
L. Slane, much about 20 years since there tried and acquitted by his Peers in
Ireland, as I am informed; before which time, it was then confessed by the
Judges there they never heard or read of any one such trial used in Ireland;
and since it we have heard of no other trial there by Peers, to second it, but
only of one Noble Lord (the Lord of Valentiae, Vicount Norris) there
extrajudiciallie condemned by meet Martial-law in a Council of War, even in
times of peace, by the Earl of Strafford An. dom. 1635. but not executed, nor
tried by his Peers in a legal way: all their Peers formerlie being there either
attainted by Act of Parliament, as is evident by the Irish Statutes of 28 H. 8.
c. 1. 3 and 4 Ph. and Ma. c. 2. 11 El. c. 1. 13 Eliz. c. 6, 7. 27 Eliz. c. 1.
28 Eliz. c. 8, 9. 11 Jac. c. 4. 2 H. 6. rot. Parl. n. 8. or executed by
Martial-law, as soon as apprehended in the Wars, or else slain in actual
Rebellion, or pardoned upon their submissions, without any trial for their
Treasons by their Peers.

For Attainders of Irish Peers, and other Traitors and Rebels by Act of
Parliament in Ireland; I find the Earl of Kildare with others attainted for a
Treason and Rebellion (much like this for which the Prisoner stands here
indicted) in a Parliament held at Dublin in Ireland, 28 H. 8. c. 1. Since this
in 11 Eliz. c. 1. Shan O Neale, a bloody desperate Rebel, was attainted by
Parliament after his death (being hewn in pieces by the Scots) and the name of
Oneyle extinguished, it being made High Treason for any to assume that name;
And I find a Mac-Mahon and Magwire forfeiting Lands among other Rebels in that
Act, which largely sets forth the Queens Title to Ireland, 27 Eliz. ca. 1.
James Eustace, Viscount of Baltinglas, was attainted of High Treason for a
public Rebellion against the Queen. 28 Eliz. cap. 9. I find John Brown and
near one hundred more Irish-men by name attainted of High Treason by this Act
for an open Rebellion. In 11 and 12 Iac. C. 4. I find Hugh Earl of Tyrone, Jury
Earl of Tirconell, Caconaugh Magwire, Mac-Mahon, and above 20 more chief Irish
Gentlemen, attainted of High Treason by this Act, for their open Rebellions.
But for a trial of any Irish Peer for any Treason in Ireland by his Peers, I
can meet with no president as yet, but that of the Lord Slane only, and shall
be glad to be informed of any other, to parallel it.

Indeed in the printed Statute of 2 Eliz. c. 1. made in Ireland, for restoring
to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power repugnant to the same; and in the
Statute of 2 Elizabethae in Ireland cap. 6. entitled; An. Act whereby certain
offenses are made High Treason. I meet with these two clauses concerning the
trial of Irish Peers for Treasons only within these Acts. And if it shall
happen that any Peer of this Realm shall fortune to be endicted of and for
any offense that is made Praemunire or Treason by this Act, that then the same
Peer or Peers so being indicted, shall be put to answer for every such
Indictment before such Peers of this Realm of English blood ( not Irish mark
it) as by the Lord Deputy, Governor or Governors of this Realm shall be by
Commission appointed under the Broad Seal, and to have his and their trial by
his and their Peers; and to receive and have such like judgment upon the same
trial of his or their Peers, or making open confession of the same offense or
offenses, as in other Cases of Treason and Praemunire has been used, or is used
in other Cases of High Treason and misprision of Treason; Which later clauses,
As in other cases of Praemunire and High Treason has been used; And as is used
in other cases of High Treason, or misprision of Treason, relate only unto
those words; to receive and have like judgment upon trial; and so only to the
judgment and sentence given in these new Treasons and offenses enacted by
these Acts: not to the manner of trial by Peers, which is meerlie a new kind of
trial never mentioned in any other Irish Acts before these, and restrained
only to the new Treasons and Premunires specified in these Acts, in imitation
of the 1 El. c. 1. 6*
English Statutes made in the self-same Cases; which provide, a Trial by Peers
for our English Peers; which was never heard of in any Acts of Parliament in
Ireland till these, and never practiced that I read of in that Realm, either
before or since. To clear this up more fully, the Statute of 11 E. 3. c. 4.
makes mention of Prelates, Earls, and Barons in Ireland, as well as in England:
And the Statute of 4 H. 5. c. 6. prohibits, that any one of the Irish Nation
should be chosen to be an Archbishop, Abbot, or Prior within Ireland, because
many of them (against a former Act there made) had been made Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, whereby they became Peers of the Parliament in the same
Land, and brought with them Irish Servants to the Parliaments and Counsels
there holden, whereby the privities of the Englishmen within the same Land have
been and be daily discoverd within it to the Irish people Rebels to the King,
to the great peril and mischief of the Kings lawful liege people in the same
Land. And the Statute of 10 H. 7. in Ireland c. 16. enacts, That the Spiritual
and temporal Lords of the Land of Ireland, shall appear in every Parliament
holden in that Land in their Parliament Robes, in like manner and form as the
Lords of the Realm of England appear in the Parliaments holden within the said
Realm, under pain of forfeiting 100 s. to the King: which use of Robes they had
there for penury omitted by the space of 20 or 24 years. But there is no
mention of any Trial by their Peers in these or any other English or Irish
Statutes; but those forecited of 2 Eliz. c. 1. and 6. Yea the Statute of 25 H.
6. in Ireland c. 28 enacts, For that there is a Law established, that every
Lord that is called a Lord of the Parliament in all pleas personal as well as
real, in which amerciaments do lie, shall be amerced 100 s. to the great
impoverishment of the said Lords, for as much as their livings are diminished
and wasted by war; That no Lord of Parliament shall be amerced from thence
forward in the said pleas otherwise than other persons, notwithstanding any Law
made before to the contrary. The amerciaments therefore of Irish Lords and
Commons being alike by this Law, it is very probable their trials by Jurie were
both alike, and that they were not tried by their Peers.

Now the Prisoners council have pleaded in his plea, that Magna Charta gives
the trial by Peers in Ireland; and no other Law but it: and that it was not
accepted, received, confirmed, and used as a Law in Ireland till the Statute of
10 H. 7. and the words thereof (if it be confirmed by that Act) are most clear
in it, That all Statutes late made, etc. from henceforth be deemed, accepted,
usea, and executed within this Realm of Ireland in all points; And if it were
made a Law there by the Statute 8 E. 4. c. 1. (which I rather believe) the
words of that Act are, That from henceforth all other Statutes and Acts made by
authority of Parliament in England, be ratified, confirmed, and adjudged by
authority of this Parliament in their force and strength, from the sixth day of
March. So as Magna Charta was not a general Law in force, use, acceptance, or
execution in Ireland, at least amongst the Irish, till 8 E. 4. or 10 H. 7. as
is evident by these Acts. Because I would leave nothing concealed or unanswered
that might make for the prisoners advantage, I must acknowledge, that King
Henry the 3d. in the first year of his Reign sent a Roll of the liberties which
his Father King John and he had granted to this Realm of England unto Ireland,
out of his special grace, by unanimous consent of all his Lieges, and confirmed
the same to all his Spiritual and Temporal Lords and faithful Subjects there
(for their fidelity to him and his Father) to them and their Heirs for ever, as
a signal bedge of his favor, by this patent. Par. 1 H. 3. m. 3.
Rex, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, et
libere tenentibus et omnibus fidelibus suis per Hiberniam constitutis, Salutem.
Fidelitatem vestram in Domino commendantes, quam Domino patri nostro semper
exhibuistis, et Nobis estis diebus nostris exhibiti; volumus, quod in signum
fidelitatis vestrae tam prae^lare, ^am insigniter Libertatibus Regno nostro
Angliae a patre nostro et nobis concessis, de gratia nostra et dono in Regno
nostro Hiberniae gaudiatis vos et vestri imperpetuum: Qu^^ distinct in Rotulum
redactas, decommune consilio omnium fidelium nostrorum vobis mittimus, signatas
sigillo Domini Gu^^onis Apostolicae sedis Legati, et fidelifsimi nostri
Willielmi Marescalli King Hen. being then a Minor and under his Regiment.
Rectoris nostri et Regni nostri, quia sigillum nondum babuimus; easdem
processu temporis majorum constlio proprio sigillo firmandas. Test apud
Gloverniam, 3 die Februari: he being Mat. Paris Hist. Angl. p. 278.
c. owned but on the 28 of October before at Gloucester, where this Patent
bears date.

After which King Henry having ratified the Great Charter of Liberties in
England, in the 9th year of his reign (printed in all our Statutes Books, and
in Cooks 2 Institutes) in the 12 year he commanded it to be published openly in
Ireland by his Writ, Claus. 12 H. 3. pars 1. m. 8.
Rex dilecto et fideli suo R. Burgo. Justice. suo Hiberniae, salutem. Mandamus
vobis firmiter praecipientes, quatenus certo die and loco faciatis venire coram
vobis Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Comites and Barons,
Milites, et libere tenentes, and Ballivos singulorum Comitatuum* et coram eis
public legifaciati. Cartam Dom. Regis Johannis patris nostri cui sigillum suum
appen^um est, quani fieri fecit jurari a Magnatibus Hiberniae, de legibus and
consuetudinibus Angliae observandis in Hibernia. Et praecipiatis eis ex part
nostra, quod leges illas et consuetudines in Carta praedicta contentas de
caetero firmiter teneant and observent. Hoc idem per singulos Comiratus
Hiberniae clamari faciatis et teneri Prohibentes firmiter ex part nostra, et
super forisfacturam nostram, ne quis contra hoc mandatum nostrum venire
praesumat, eo excepto quod non de morte nec de catallis Hibernensium occasion
nichil stauatur ex part nostra citra quindecem dies a die St. Michaelis anno
r. n. 12. super quo respectum de dedimus Magnatibus nostris Hiberniae, usque ad
terminum praedictnm: Test m^ipso apud Westminster. 8 die Maii anno 12.

In Cooks 3 Instit. f. 141. b. 4 Instit. p. 3^9. b. and in 18 H. 3. Rot, pat.
m. 17. n. 21. There is mantion made of Consuetudines and Leges Reg^i nostri
Angliae, quas bonae memoriae Dominus Johannis Rex pater noster de communi
omnium de Hibernia consensu teneri statuit in terra illa. Test Rege apud
Winch. 28 die October.

In the 30th. year of Henry the third, all Laws and Customs of England were
established in Ireland by this Rot. Pat. 30 H. 3. m. 3. Sir John Davis Irish
Rep. p. 37. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 350. 1 Instit. f. 141. b. Mr. St. John's Argument
at Straffords Attainder. p. 55.
Patent. Quia pro communi utilitate terrae Hiberniae, and pro unitats terrarum
Rex vul, et de Communi Consilio Regnt provisum est, quod omnes Leges et
consuetudines quae in regno Angliae tenentur in Hibernia teneantur, et eadem
terra eisdem legibus subjaceat, et per easdem regatur, sicut Johan* Rex cum
ultimo esset in Hibernia statuit et strmiter mandavit: Ideo volumus, quod omnia
Brevia de communi sure quae currunt in Anglia, similiter current in Hibernia
sub vovo sigillo nostro, etc. Test meipso apud Woodstock, 19 die September.

The Patent of King John which this Patent mentions, is that of Rot. Pat. 6
Johan. Regis. m. 6. n. 17. never yet printed. Rex, etc. Justiciariis,
Baronibus, Militibus, et omnibus fidelibus suis etc. sciatis quod dedimus
potestatem Justiciariis nostris Hibernioe, quod brevia sua current per terram
nostram et potestatem Hiberniae, scilicet Breve de Recto, de feodo aimidiae
Militis, et infra; et erit terminus de morte aut post transfretationem Henrici
patris nostri de Hibernia in Angliam. Et Breve de Nova disseisina, et erit
terminus post primam Coronationem nostram apud Cant. Et Breve de Fugitivis et
Nativis, et ejus erit terminus post captionem Dublin. Et Breve de divisis
faciendis inter duas villas, exceptis B^roniis: Et ideo vobis mandamus et
firmiter praecipimus, quod haec it a fieri et firmiter teneri Nota.
per ^otam potest atem nostram Hiberniae faciatis. Test meipso apud Westminster. 2
November.

In the 41 year of his Reign, Claus. 41 H. 3. m. 11. dors. I find this
memorable writ, touching the confirmation and Customs of England settled in
Ireland, by assent of the Prelates and great men thereof: Rex Thesaurario et
Baronibus de Scaccario Dublin salutem. Quia de assensu et vosuntate Praesatorum
and Magnatum terrae Hiberniae dudum fuit provisum et concessum, quod eisdem
legibus uterentur in terra illa quibus homines regni nostri utuntur in regno
illo; et quod eadem Brevia quoad terras and tenementa recuperanda currerent in
terra illa, quae currunt in regno praedicto, sicut nostis: Et dicta provisio
and concessio omnibus retroactis temporibus fuerit obtenta and approbata;
miramur quamplurimum, quod sicut ex insinua^ione venerabilis patris Thomae
Lismor. Episcopi accepimus, emanare permisistis ex Cancellaria Edwardi filii
nostri in Hibernia, contra consuetud inem optentam and formam Brevium in regno
nostro ufitatam, Breve subscriptum contra praefatum Episcopum in hac verba. E.
illustris Regis Angliae primogenitus Vic. Waterford salutem. Precipe Thomae
Lismor. Episcopo, quod just and sine dilatione reddat Waltero: Episcopo
Waterford, Maneria de Archmordeglan, Kilmordri and Motha cum pertinentiis, quae
clamat esse jus Ecclesiae suae, and in quae idem Episcopus non habet ingressum
nisi per Alanum quondam Lismor Episcopum cui Griffinus quondam Lismor.
Episcopus illa demisit, qui in illa se intrusit post mortem Roberti quondam
Lismor. Episcopi, qui inde injuste and sine judicio dissesuit Robertum quondam
Waterford. Episcopum, praedecessorem Episcopi post ultimum reditum, etc. Quia
vero dictum Breve tam dissonum est, et contra leges and consuetudines in Regno
nostro optentas, and formas brevium nostrorum ibidem approbatas, praesertim cum
Breve ingressus non transeat tertiam personam, nec ratione intrusionis in
terram aliquem post mortem alicujus competat actio alicui de terra, illa nisi
illi cui per mortem illam jus debetur in eadem: Nec enim dicitur intrusor, qui
jure haereditario, vel ratione Ecclesiae suae succedit praedecessori sui in
hiis de quibus idem praedecessor fuit seisitus in Dominico suo ut de feodo die
quo obiit: Vobis mandamus, quod si^dictum Breve a Cancellaria praedicta in
forma praedicta emanaverit, executionem ejusdem Brevis supersedeatis;
revocantes sine dilatione quicquid per idem Breve actum fuerit in Curia
praefati filii nostri: Test apud Wynd. 27 die Januar. Eodem modo scribitur
Alano la Such Justic. Hiberniae, and Waleranno de Wellesly, and sociis suis
Justiciariis itinererantibus, ut supra.

In the 5th year of King Edward 3. rot. Pat. 5 E. 3. part 1. memb. 25 It was
enacted in a Parliament that year in England amongst other things. Quod una and
eadem Lex fiat tam Hibernicis quam Anglicis, excepta servitute V^cagiorum penes
Dominos suos, etc. by a Parliament then holden in Ireland.

Yet notwithstanding all these Patents, Charters, Acts, the benefit of the
great Charter, and of the Liberties, Laws and Customs of England, extended not
to all Ireland, and the Irish therein dwelling; but only to such parts of
Ireland as were reduced and divided into Counties, and possessed by the English
Colonies, and to the English men inhabiting in Ireland, and such Irish within
the English Pale as lived in due subjection and obedience to the Kings of
England, or were specially endenized by their Parents to them, not to the Irish
Countries and Colonies which were not reduced into Counties, and under the
obedience of the Kings of England, (amounting to more than two third parts of
Ireland in extent of Ground) who had no benefit of the Laws or Liberties of
England; but by special Grants and Charters of indenization from the Kings of
England, which some Septs of the Irish and others purchased from our Kings, as
Sir John Davis proves at large in his Irish Reports, in the Case of Tanistry,
fol. 37, 38, 39. and the Records there cited: To which I shall add these
following Records not mentioned by him, fully evidencing this Truth. Claus. 37.
H. 3. m. 15. Dors. Rex Justic. Hiberniae salutem. Monstravit nobis Mamorth
Offerthierim, and Rothericus frater ejus, quod Antecessores sui and ipse, licet
Hibernienses fuissent, semper tamen firmiter fuerunt ad fidem and servitium
nostrum and praedecessorum nostrorum Regum Angliae, ad Conquestum una cum
Anglicis faciendum super Hibernienses. Et ideo vobis mandamns, quod si it a
est, ^^^c non permittas ipsos Mamorth and Rodericum repelli^^^ quin possint*
terras vendicare in quibus jus habent, stcut quilibet Anglicus. Quia si ipsi
and Antecessores sui sic se habu^runt cum Anglicis, quamvis Hibernienses,
injustum est, licet Hibernienses sint, quod exceptione qua repelluntur
Ibernenses a vendicatione terrarum and aliis repellantur. T^ste. etc.

By this Record it is apparent, that all Irishmen but those whose Ancestors
joined with our Kings in the conquest of Ireland, and were loyal Subjects to
our Kings, had no benefit of the Kings Writs and Laws to claim or recover Lands
in Ireland, in 37 H. 3.

Hereupon diverse native Irish men purchased several Patents from our Kings,
granted out of special grace to enable themselves and their Posterity to enjoy
the benefit of the English Laws in Ireland, for which I shall cire these few
ensuing Presidents instead of many of like nature. Pat 17. Johan. Reg. memb.
15. together with

Pat. 12. E. 1. m. 11. Pro diversis in Hibernia, quod uti possint Legibus
Angliae in Hibernia. Rex omnibus ballivis and fidelibus suis Hiberniae ad quos,
etc. salutem. Vol^ntes Giraldo fill. Johannis Hibernico, gratiam facere
specialem, concedimus pro nobis and Haeredibus no^tris, quod idem Geraldus and
liberi sui quos legitime procreaverit, hanc habeant libertatem, quod ipsi de
caete^o in Hibernia utantur legibus Anglicanis, and firmiter inhibemus, ne quis
^os contra hanc concessionem nostram vexet in aliquo, vel perturbet. In cujus
etc. T. Rege apud Carnarvan, 30 die Maij, Consimiles literae habet Margeria de
Lessan, Henricus de Lessan, Petrus de Lessan, Andreas de Lessan, Been dictus
fill. Johannis, Ardmagh, Willielmus Heuke, Hibernici. In cujus, etc. Test ut
supra.

Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 24. Rex omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis in Hibernia, ad
quos, etc. salutem. Volentes Isamaiae filiae Oragilig* and Matildae fill.
Oragilig, Hibernicis, graciam facere specialem, concedimus pro nobis and
haereaibus nostris, quod eadem Isamaia and Matilda ad totam vitam suam hanc
habeant libertatem, videlicit, quod ipsae de caetero in Hibernia utantur
legibus Anglicanis: and fi^miter inhibemus, ne quis eas contra ^anc
concessionem nostram vexet in aliquo vel perturbet: In cujus, etc. T. Rege apud
Westminster. 12 die Junii, per ipsum Regem.

Pat. 19. E. 1. m. 20. Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod de
gratia nostra speciali, concessimus Willielmo filio Carmok. Clerico* quod ipse
and omnes posteri sui imperpetuum Lege and consuetudine Anglicana utantur in
terra nostra Hiberniae, i^a quod ipsi per alias leges and consuetudines, p^r
nos and ministros nostros quoscunque de caetero non deducantur contra
voluntatem suam, sed quod ipsi, in vita sua and morte de caetero liberate
gaudeant Anglicana, In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Ashermg. 22 die Jan.

The like Patent is granted Mauricio de Bre. Hibernico, Pat. 24. E. 1. m. 3.
These Records, with Claus. 2. E. 3. m. 17. Rex dilecto and fideli suo Johanni
Darcy, de Nevien, Justiciario suo Hiberniae, salutem. Exparte quorundam hominnm
de Hibernia extitit supplicatum Ut per statutum inde faciendum concedere
velimus, quod omnes Hibernici qui voluerint legibus utantur Anglicanis, it a
quod necesse non habeant super has chartas aliquas a nobis impetrare. Nos
igitur certior ari volentes, si sine alieno prae^^d^cio praemissis annuer
^valeamus, vobis mandamus* quod voluntatem magnatum terrae illius in proximo
Parliamento ibidem tenendo; super hoc cum ailigentia pers^rutari faciatis, and
de eo quod inveneritis, una cum vestro consilio and ad visam^nto nos distinct
and aperte cum celeritate qua potestis, certificetis, hoc breve nostrum nobis
remittentes: which compared with Claus. 5. E. 3. part 1. m. 25. Pro
hominibust^rrae Hiberniae de Lege ANGLIAE UTENDA in custodiis recuper andis,
etc. are an unanswerable evidence beyond contradiction, That the great Charter,
Liberties, Customs and Laws of England, granted to those of Ireland by King
John, Henry the third, Edward the first and third, extended only to the English
Subjects inhabiting Ireland, and to such Irish who lived in English Counties in
due subjection to the Kings of England, or were by special Charters of
indenization enabled to enjoy the benefit of them; who were but few in
consideration of the rest of the Irish Nobility, Gentry and Commons, retaining
their ancient Brehon Laws, and would not submit to the Laws of England, nor
Government of our Kings, against whom they frequently rebelled, being reputed
rather Enemies than Rebels, and usually so styled in the Statutes of Ireland,
till the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 9. as appears by the Statutes of 18 H. 6. c. 3.
25 H. 6. c. 4, 5. 28 H. 6. c. 1. 3 E. 4. c. 2. 5 E. 4. c. 6. 18 E. 4. c. 2. 10
H. 7. c. 9, 10, 17, 19. 28 H. 8. c. 11. and by Sir John Davis Irish Reports in
the Case of Tanistry, fol. 39. the common Laws and Statutes of England being
not universally received or established throughout the whole Realm of Ireland,
till after the Statutes of 3 and 4 Phil. and Mar. c. 3. 11 Eliz. c. 9. and King
James his Proclamation in the third year of his reign: or at leastwise till the
Statutes of 8 E. 4. c. 1. or 10 H. 7. c. 22. which established all the Statutes
made in England concerning or belonging to the good of the same, only as to the
Englishry, or English Pale and Counties, not to the Irishery, as the Statutes
of 17 H. 7. c. 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 17, 19. 35 H. 6. c. 3. 5 Ed. 4. c. 3, 4, 5. 13
H. 8. c. 3. 28 H. 8. c. 15. made in Ireland, with other Acts resolve, which the
Lord Magwire confesses in his Plea, and his Council cannot deny. Now the Lord
Magwire being none of the English Pale, or Irish Sept, Liege Subjects to our
Kings, but of the Irishry, and professed Enemies to our Kings, as the Irish
Annals and Statutes inform us; the Statute of Magna Charta, and the Laws,
Liberties and Customs of England, granted to the English and loyal Irish
Subjects in Ireland* and so this trial by Peers, could not extend to his
ancestors till after the Statutes of 8 E. 4. or 10 H. 7. and of 35 H. 8. c. 1.
yea after the Statutes of 3 and 4 Ph. and Ma. c. 3. and 11 Eliz. c. 9. for
reducing the Irishry into Counties, and under the Laws and Statutes of England
to which they were not formerly subject. And from these Patents of King John
and Henry the third forecited, and the Statutes of 8 E 4. and 10 H. 7. till 35
H. 8. chap. 1. No one president of any one Irish Peers trial by his Peers in
Ireland in any case whatsoever, can be produced. Therefore certainly there was
no such trial known or in use in Ireland, before 35 H. 8. nor any president of
it since till one of late; and una Hirundo non facit Ver.

If then the Peers of Ireland before the making of this Act of 35 H. 8. were
never actually tried by their Peers for any treason done in Ireland, for ought
can be proved, and there be no express Act for any trial by Peers there, for
any Treason, but only the Act of 2 Eliz. c. 1. and 6. and that only for special
Treasons within those Laws, which are none of those for which the Prisoner
stands here indicted; I may safely conclude, That this Law of 35 H. 8. never
intended to preserve to Irish Peers a trial by their Peers in Ireland, which
kind of trial was never before had, used or practiced in that Realm* and
therefore the Prisoner shall be tried by an ordinary Jury at this Bar, not by
his Irish Peers; because, if he were in Ireland, (for ought appears yet to me
he should not be tried by his Peers there; and in both these points, the Book
in Dyer, (the only Authoriry which seems to be strongest against, is for me)
the words whereof are these in English. The grand Chancellor of Ireland moved
this question to the Queens council, If an Earl or Lord of Ireland, who commits
Treason in Ireland by rebellion, shall be arraigned and put to his trial in
England for this offense by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. 32 H. 8. c. 4. 35
H. 8. 2 or 3 E. 6. And it was held by Wrey, Dyer and Gerrard Attorney General,
That he could not. Mark now their reasons; for he cannot have his trial here by
his Peers. (which is a full resolution in point of my third Question, agreeing
with what I have endeavored with Arguments to prove, and is an unquestionable
Truth, which I submit to:) Then it follows, Nor can he be tried here by any
Jury of twelve; (mark the reason, Not because he is a Peer of Ireland, and
therefore ought to be tried by his Peers, and not by a Jury; for that had been
full against me, and it is now the only knot in que^tion) but because he is not
a subject of England, but of Ireland, and therefore he shall be tried there:
which reason (extending as well to an Irish Commoner as Peer) has been since
adjudged directly false, absurd, and against the Law, both in Orourks Case, and
in Sir John Parrets Case, and since in Mac-mahons Case: and Sir Ed. Cook
informs us in his Institutes on Lit. f. 261, that Wray himself in Orourks Case
(where this Opinion of his was vouched) did openly disclaim, that ever he
delivered any such opinion as this, but ever held the contrary to it; and so it
is a misreport in this particular: After which the Book concludes thus, And it
is said, that the usage (to wit in Ireland) to attaint a Peer, Is by Parliament
and not by Peers; which comes full in terminis to what I have last insisted on,
and I am certain cannot be disproved. Wherefore this authority in Dyer, as to
all that is truth and Law in it, is wholly for me in the reason of the Law; and
against me only in what has been since adjudged to be no Law. I shall close up
all with a stronger Case and authority than this in question, which will
overruled this case, and that was in Mr. St. John's argument at Straffords
Attainder, p. 37, 53.
Trinity Term An. 33 H. 8. in the Kings Bench. Edward Lord Gray immediately
before having been Lord Deputy in Ireland, was endicted, arraigned, and
attainted of High Treason by an ordinary Jurie in the Kings Bench in England,
for letting diverse Rebels out of the Castle of Dublin, and discharging Irish
hostages and pledges that had been given for the securing the peace of Ireland;
and for not punishing one who said, the King was an Heretic, whilst he was
Lord Deputy in Ireland: For these Treasons (all acted and committed in Ireland)
through an English Peer, he was tried by an ordinary Jury in England by the
Statute of 26 H. 8. c. 13. ratified in Ireland by 28 H. 8. c. 7. forecited;
which secluded him from his trial by Peers, being not saved by these Acts.
Therefore a Fortiori shall these Statutes and this of 35 H 8. c. 2. and 5 E. 6.
cap. 1. made since his judgment, exclude this Irish Lord being no English
Peer, from any trial by his Peers.

Finally, the Prologue of this Statute coupled with the body thereof puts a
period to this question beyond all doubt or dispute. For as much as some doubts
and questions have been moved, that certain kinds of Treasons etc. committed
out of the Kings Majesty's Realm of England, cannot, nor may by the Common laws
of this Realm be inquired, heard and determined within this his said Realm of
England. For a plain remedy, order, and declaration therein to be had and made,
be it enacted, etc. that all manner of Treasons, etc. committed by any person
o^ persons ^out of this Realm of England shall be from henceforth inquired of,
heard, and determined by the Kings Justices of his Bench, etc. by good and
lawful men of the same Shire, where the said Bench shall sit and be kept, in
like manner and form to all intents and purposes as if such Treasons had been
done within the same Shire, where they shall be so inquired of, heard and
determined. The sole scope, end, purpose then of the King and Parliament in
this Act, being to take away all doubts and questions formerly moved in point
of Law, touching the trial of treasons done out of the Realm, before the Kings
Justices of his Bench and Commissioners in England by a Jury, and to make and
enact a plain remedy and declaration therein for the future, in manner
aforesaid, I humbly apprehend, there can be no doubt nor question now moved;
whether this Prisoner ought to be tried by his Peers in Ireland or England for
this his most horrid Treason committed out of the Realm of England, since this
Statute so clearly declares and resolves the contrary in most plain and
positive words. The rather, because the Kings Patent creating him Baron of
Ineskellin under the great Seal of Ireland, makes him only a Peer in Ireland,
and gives him only a Place and Voice among Here p. 2.
the Peers and Nobles of Ireland, in the Parliaments of Ireland, not in
England, as he sets forth in his own Rot. pat. 8 E. 4. in Cancel. Hiberniae;
Mr. Seldens titles of Honor. Book 2. c. 6. (...) 841.
Plea in precise terms; as the Patent made by King Edward the 4th. to Robert
Bold created him Baron of Rathtauth in Ireland, and constituted him, Unum
Dominum and Baronem omnium and singulorum Parliamentorum and magnorum
Conciliorum nostrorum in terra nostra Hiberniae tenendorum: habendum, tenendum
una cum stilo, titulo, nomine, honor, loco et sessione inde sibi et haeredibus
suis masculis imperpetuum. And as King Henry 8. made Thomas * Pat. 21 H. 8.
pars 2. 8 December.
Viscount Rochford by the self-same Patent both Earl of Wiltshire, infra regnum
nostrum Angliae; and Earl of Ormond in terra et dominio nostro Hiberniae only,
with several clauses of investitures; several Habendums, and several
Creation-monies for each Title and Kingdom: And as the Patents of all other
Irish Earls, Viscounts, Lords, and Barons in Ireland, create and make them
Peers only in Ireland, not in England, as Titles of Honor, Book 2. c. 6, 7.
learned Mr. Seldom informs us, and their very Patents resolve in terminis. And
therefore quite exclude the Prisoner and all other Peers of Ireland from any
trial by their Peers in England, either by the Proviso or body of this Statute,
or their Patents which are point-blanck against it.

And now, I hope, I have fully made good the point in question, with all the
several branches of it, That this Act extends to Treason committed in Ireland;
Yea to Irish Peers as well as to Irish Commoners, and that there can be no
trial at all upon it here of an Irish Peer by Irish Peers, nor in any place
else within England; and that only (as the Prisoners case is) by a Middlesex
Jury. And so I have finished my assertive part.

The first and grand objection is, that which I meet Object. 1.
with in the beginning of this Prisoners plea; The Statute of Magna Charta, c.
29. That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or disseised of his Freehold,
etc. nor will we pass upon ^or condemn him, but by the lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the law of the land: which Law and Statute is among others,
established for a Law in the Kingdom of Ireland, there to be put in ure at all
times when need is, by the Statute made in the Parliament held at Droghedah in
Ireland, in the 10th year of King H. 7. c. 22. and by virtue of these two Laws
he ought to be tried by his Peers in, or of Ireland, in this suit against him
by and for the King.

To which I shall give these satisfactory Answers.

1. That the Statute of Magna Charta in its original Answ.
creation and confirmation, was made, granted to the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Towns, and to all the Freemen of this our Realm
of England, and to them only, to be kept in our Kingdom of England for ever,
whence it is entitled, The great Charter of the Liberties of England, as the
prologue of it resolves. The first Chapter thereof is peculiar to the Church of
England, viz. That the Church of England shall be free and enjoy all her rights
and liberties inviolable. We have also granted to our Freemen of our Realm of
England these liberties underwritten, to have and to hold to them and their
Heirs, of us and our heirs for ever: So cap. 12. The City of London shall have
all her old Liberties and Customs, and all other Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and
the Barons of the Cinqueports, and all other ports shall have all their
Liberties and their Customs. Cap. 35. One measure of wine, etc. shall be
throughout our Realm. Chapter 32. All Merchants (if they were not openly prohibited
before) shall have safe and sure conduct to depart out of England, to come into
England, and to tarry in England, as well by Land as by water, etc. In Cap. 23.
All Weeres shall be utterly put down between Thames and Medway, and throughout
all England: and the conclusion, C. 37. concerns the Realm of England, and
Englishmen only. Neither does the Here p. 32, 33, 34.
Charter of King John, nor that of the 11 of H, 3. nor 18 H. 3. m. 17. nu. 21.
nor of 30 H. 3. nor yet of 13 E. 1. cited in Co. 4 Institutes, p. 349, and 350.
and in his Institut. on Littleton, f. 141. establish Mag. Char. at least in
relation to all the Native Irish but English alone, it being made particularly
for the Realm of England and English men: and therefore the Prisoner pleads, it
was settled there only as a Law to be received and put in use (in respect of the
Irish then living only in the English pale and the Kings loyal Subjects, not of
any Irish enemies in hostility) by the Statute of 10 H. 7. c. 22. but not
before: and so is Sir Ed. Cooks opinion in express terms in his 4 Institut.
page 35^.

By which it is most clear, That from King Henry the seconds days, (who first
subdued Ireland, An. 1171.) there were no trials in Ireland, of any English or
Irish Peers Subjects to our Kings, for Treason by their Irish Peers by virtue
of Magna Charta, till after the Statute of 10 H. 7. which was made but forty
six years before the Statute of 35 H. 8. between which, and this later Law we
read not of one trial of any Irish Peer for treason there by his Peers, nor yet
since, that I can find (but only one of late by 2 El. c. 1, 6.) till this very
day: By which it is most apparent, that this trial by Peers in Ireland a
privilege now inficted on) was never actually claimed or enjoyed by any Peer of
Ireland, especially by those in ancient emnity and rebellion against our Kings,
styled Here p. 3*
enemies in the Irish Statutes, and English Records before the Statute of 35 H.
8. and so it can be no prejudice nor injustice at all, nor breach of Magna
Charta, to out the Prisoner of it.

2ly. It may be questioned upon very good Reasons, whether the Statute of 10 H.
7. chapter 22. does consirm this Statute of Magna Charta in Ireland or not? at
least as to Irish Peers, especially those of the old Irish Blood (to whom it
relates not, as I have proved in the point of trial by Peers,) and that upon
these Grounds.

First, because the words of that Statute are not, That all Laws made in
England shall be confirmed, received and executed in Ireland in all points:
but, That all Statutes late made within the Realm of England, concerning or
belonging to the Commonweal (not Peers) of the same, shall henceforth be deemed
good and effectual in Law, and received and executed in this Realm of Ireland.
Now Magna Charta, being no Law then late made within this Realm, but made at
least 271 years before it, can hardly (without much straining of the words
beyond their proper meaning) be brought within the compass of this Act, though
Sir Ed. Cook in his fourth Institutes, page 351. informs us, That Hill. 10 Jac.
it was resolved by the two chief Justices and chief Baron, that this word LATE
in this Act, has the sense of BEFORE, and shall not be taken in its proper
sense or meaning: so that the Act by this construction, against the sense of
the words, extends to Magna Charta, and to all the Acts of Parliament made in
England, not only late, but even long before; yea, many hundred years before
this Act; which for my part (under the favor of those Reverend Judges who thus
interpret it) I hold still disputeable, yea, erroneous, and no Law at all,
especially for these two Reasons.

1. Because if any Law introduced and confirmed Magna Charta and the other Laws
of England in Ireland, it is the Statute of 8 E. 4. c. 1. which confirms the
Statute made in England in the Parliament of 6 R. 2. chapter 6. concerning Rapes,
of which there was some doubt made whether it extended to Ireland? and then
concludes thus: In avoiding of all inconvenience that might happen, because of
the ambiguity of the said Statute, Be it enacted, confirmed and ratified by
authority of the said Parliament, that the said Statute be adjudged and
approved in force and strength, and may be of force in this Land, from the 6th
day of March last past; and that from henceforth, the said Act, and all other
Statutes and Acts made by Authority of Parliament within the Realm of England,
be ratified, confirmed and adjudged by Authority of this Parliament in their
force and strength, from the said 6th day of March. So that this Law, if any at
all, confirmed Magna Charta, and all the Statutes made by Authority of
Parliament in England, to be in force and use in Ireland, (yet only as to the
English and Irish Subjects under the Kings obedience, and none else, as I have
proved,) and this Statute of 10 H. 7. which confirms only the Statutes lately
made, must and does in truth and reason relate only to the Laws made in England
since that Statute of 8 E. 4. c. 1. not formerly there confirmed by that Act:
so that the Prisoners Plea, That Magna Charta was confirmed by 10 H. 7. is but
a mere mistake and a void Plea: neither are the Judges here bound to take
notice of this Irish Act of 8 E. 4. c. 1. unless pleaded by the Prisoner, being
no Law of this Kingdom and not binding here.

2. Because the forementioned Charters of Here p. 32, 33, 34.
6 Joh. 12. and 30 H. 3. etc. confirming the use of the Laws of the Realm of
England in Ireland, did not extend to settle Magna Charta there, (at least wise
not as to the benefit of the natural Irish, but to the English and the Irish
within the English Pale alone) as is agreed by Sir Ed. Cook, and in a manner
resolved by this Act of 10 H. 7. as the words thereof, From henceforth be
deemed good and effectual in the Law, and over that be used, accepted and
executed within the Land of Ireland, in all points, at all times requisite,
import. And if those Charters extended not to Magna Charta, which are fuller
then this Act, I doubt this Law will hardly do it.

3ly. Admit the Law of 10 H. 7. extends to Magna Charta in some particulars
thereof formerly used in Ireland, yet it reaches not to the trying of Irish
Peers by their Peers now in question, for these ensuing Reasons.

1. Because trial of Irish Peers, by their Peers in Ireland was never used nor
heard of, nor is there any one instance to be found before or since Magna
Charta, till 10 H. 7. which there settled that great Charter for a Law, nor from
10 H. 7. till 35 H. 8. nor since that, but of late in one case only about
twenty years since, till this instant. Now what Littleton notes of the Statute
of Merton, See Cook ibid.
Sect. 108. That no action can be brought upon that Statute for a
disparagement, for that since the making of it, it was never seen nor heard,
that any such Action was brought upon it against the Guardian: and if any
Action might have been brought upon this matter, it will be intended that
sometime it would have been put in ure. The like shall I say concerning Magna
Charta, and the trial of Irish Peers by their Peers in Ireland, That if the
trying of Irish Peers by their Peers had been the common Law of Ireland, or if
Magna Charta and 10 H. 7. had established it there for a Law, it would some
time or other have been there put in ^re, and some Peers there would have
claimed and enjoyed this their privilege in point of Trial: but since it was
never yet in use there, for ought I find, nor any one can prove, before 35 H.
8. I cannot deem it the common Law, nor Privilege of the Peers of Ireland, but
the peculiar Privilege of our English Peers, both by the common, Statute Law,
and great-Charter of England, and no trial of right incident to Irish Peers as
it is to English. Therefore this kind of Trial neither is confirmed to, nor
intended to be conferred on Irish Peers by Magna Charta, which is but a
confirmation only of our Co. 2 Instit. Proem.
common Laws of England, and no introduction of any new Law here; and so should
introduce no new Law there, but confirm the common Laws and Customs there
formerly used and so the Trial by Peers is not there settled in respect of the
Irish Peers, by the Statute of 10 H. 7. Now that which principally confirms me
in this opinion is the two special Acts of Parliament, made in Ireland in 2
Eliz. c. 1. and 6. Page 30.
already cited, which create a special form of trial of Irish Peers, not by
their Peers there of Irish blood, but by their Peers of that Realm of the
English blood alone, only in the new Treasons and Premunires specified in and
created by those two Acts; but in no other Treasons: Which clauses had been
merely nugatory and superfluous had the Trial of Irish Peers in Ireland by
Irish Peers been the birthright and known priprivilege of Irish Peers, either
by the Common law there used, or by the Custom of Ireland, or by Magna Charta,
with this Act of 10 H. 7. confirming it; It therefore never being the intent of
this Act, nor of Magna Charta, to grant any new privilege or form of Trial to
Irish Peers, which they never formerly enjoyed, neither the one nor other will
sufficiently support the Prisosoners plea; nor indulge him any trial here or
there by his Peers of Ireland (at least of Irish blood) for so horrid a Treason
as this; Which I hope is a satisfactory answer to this objection, since Custom
is the best Expositer of all ancient Laws, as Sir Edw. Cook declares in his
Commentary on Littleton, sect. 108. f. 81. b.

4ly. Admit the Objection true, That Magna Charta extends to Ireland, by virtue
of this Act of 10 H. 7. so far as to give Irish Peers in Ireland, (though not
of the English Pale) a trial by their Peers, which they had not before its
confirmation there; yet then I answer, That this Statute of 35 H. 8. chapter 2,
upon which the Prisoner is arraigned, by making all Treasons done and
perpetrated in Ireland, triable in England, when there is just occasion, (as
now there is in this time of a universal horrid Rebellion, and in sundry other
forementioned respects) repeals this Clause of Magna Charta, and deprives the
Prisoner of the benefit of his Peerage, if at all conferred on him by it, and
the Act of 10 H. 7. Since it is most certain, that Statutes made in the
Parliaments of England, (being the supreme Kingdom and Court, to which Ireland
and its Courts are subordinate, and whose erroneous judgments in their High
Courts and Parliaments there, were only reversible here in England in the Kings
Bench and Parliament of England as is evident by Claus. 7. H. 3. par. 2. m. 10.
and Claus. 29. E. 3. m. 12. 8 H. 6. rot. Parl. ^. 69. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 356.
Mr. St. John's Argument at Law at Straffords Attainder, p. 58, 61. K^ilway, f.
202. b. Br. Error, 127. Fitz. Not. Bre. f. 24. Co. 7 Rep. f. 18. a Calvin's
Case) do oblige those of Ireland, not only before but ever since 10 H. 7. when
Ireland is either particularly named, or generally included, as is agreed by
Rastals Abri^gement, title Ireland, 11 E. 3. chap. 2. and 10 E. 3. chap. 8. 4
E. 4. chap. 1. 3 H. 7. chap. 8. 14 H. 4. Rastal Parceners 2. 27 E. 3. of the
Staple, chap. 1. 18 14 Eliz. chap. 5. 1 H. 7. ass. 3. 3 H. 7. fol. 10. 2 R. 3.
f. 12. and Cooks 7 Report. Calvin's Case, f. 17, 22, 23. 4 Instit. p. 35. it
being so resolved as to this purpose by all the Judges of England in Orourks
and Sir John Parrets Cases, cited in Calvin's Case, and adjudged in Mac-mahons
Case tried at this Bar the last Term, that this Act of 35 H. 8. ^. 2. binds
those of Ireland for Treasons there committed, and makes them subject to a
trial here, whether Peers or Commoners, as I have already proved.

5ly. It is unquestionable, That every Commoner of Ireland, has as large, as
full an interest in Magna Charta, the Laws and Privileges of England and
Ireland, and as much right to be tried in Ireland for Treason there committed
by an Irish Jury, as any Peer in Ireland has in or by them to be tried there
by his Peers, these Laws being no respecters of persons, and every man's birth
right alike, of Commons as much as of Peers, as the Laws and great Charter of
England are; Magna Charta, being as largly made and as amply granted to the
meanest Freeman as to the greatest Peers of England and Ireland, as the
Prologue and 9, 14, 15 19, 21, 22, 26, 27, 29* Chapters thereof resolve.

Since then this Act of 35 H. 8. chap. 2. does without all controversy (as
has been resolved in the forecited Case) deprive the Commoners of Ireland of a
Trial in Ireland by Irish Commoners, and subjects them to a trial by an English
Jury here for Treasons there committed; for which by the common Law, the
Customs of Ireland and Magna Charta, before the Statute of 26 H. 8. and this
Act of 35 H. 8. they could be no where tried but only in Ireland, not in
England, as is collected from the Case of Sir Elias Ashburnam, Tr. 18 E. 3.
coram Rege, Rot. 14. cited by Sir Edward Cook in his 4 Instit. p. 356. (the
principal case that can be objected against me, which makes nothing to the
purpose, being long before these Statutes were made:) Therefore by the self
same reason it shall take away the trial of Irish Peers in Ireland and England
by Irish or English Peers, for Treasons perpetrated by them in Ireland, and
subject them to a trial by an ordinary English Jury at this Bar, or before
Commissioners in any County of England, as I have already proved; which Jury
here are in truth Peers to all Irish Peers, being here no Peers at all, but
only Commoners.

If it be objected, That this Law of 35 H. 8. chap. 2. Object.
cannot abrogate Magna Charta; all Acts and Judgments against Magna Charta
being declared void: by 25 E. 1. chapter 1. 2, 4. 28 E. 1. chapter 1. and 42 E. 3. chapter
1. Therefore it shall not take away the trial by Peerage from Irish Peers.

I answer 1. That you may by like reason object, that Answ.
it cannot take away a Trial in Ireland by an Irish Jury from Irish Commoners,
seeing it cannot repeal Magna Charta and the Common Law; But this objection is
yielded, and adjudged idle in case of an Irish Commoner; therefore it is, and
must be so in case of an Irish Peer.

2ly. The objected Statutes do make void and null all Acts and Statutes made
against Magna Charta before the Parliaments wherein they were made; but they
extend not at all to future real Parliaments and their Acts, subsequent
Parliaments having always had power to control, alter, abrogate precedent
Acts; yea the very Commonlaw and Great Charter it self, when inconvenient or
defective, as all our Books accord: Therefore Sir Edward Cook in his 4
Institutes p. 42. resolves and proves at large, by 11 R. 2. c. 3. 5 ro^. Parl.
n. 22. 48, 49. 1 H. 4. c. 3. 2 H. 4. c. 22. 21 R. 2. c. ^6. 1 H. 4. n. 48. 70.
144. 21 R. 2. n. 20, 21. 36, 37, 85, 86, 89, 90. that Acts (yea and Oaths)
against the lawful power of subsequent Parliaments, that they shall not repeal
such and such Laws (though mischievous or unjust) bind not at all, and are
merely idle; For ^odem modo quo quid constituitur, dissolvitur; those who have
power to make any Laws, having as great, as full a power to control, alter, or
repeal them when they see cause and necessity for it as you may read in Rastals
and Poultons Abridgements of Statutes, and the Statutes at large, repealing
former Acts: and how often Magna Charta has been altered, supplied, or See
Horns M^r^our of Justices, p. 314, 315.
repealed in some particulars, in and by our Parliaments since its making, by
subsequent Acts both by prescribing creating new imprisonments, forfeitures,
corporal punishments, fines, executions treasons, capital offenses and customs,
imposts, not then known, or different ways or places of trial not then in use,
in Cases of foreign Treasons and the like, by a Jury in England not then usual,
but since confirmed by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. c. 13. 28 H. 8. c. 25. 33 H. 8.
c. 27. 35 H. 8. c. 2. 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 11. contrary to, or See an exact
Abrigement of the Records p. 372, 379, 380.
different from Magna Charta, and the Common law, 2 E. 6. c. 24. is so well
known to all Lawyers that I will not spend breath to prove it.

3ly. I answer, that this Act of 35 H. 8. does both alter and in some sort
repeal Magna Charta, and the Common Law, as to the point and place of trying
foreign Treasons in England it self, as to English, Peers and Commoners, to whom
alone the great Charter was first granted, they being not tryable in England by
Jury or Peers, for any foreign treasons by the Common Law, or great Charter.
Therefore a Fortiori it must both alter and repeal the Common Law and great
Charter as to Irish Subjects, for whom the great Charter was never originally
made, not yet directly confirmed to them by 10 H. 7. but only implicitly and
doubtfully at most, as I have proved.

4ly. I answer, that this Act of 35 H. 8. does no ways abrogate or alter Magna
Charta in truth or reality, but rather ratify and confirm it, in the form and
manner of this Trial, though not in the place. For Magwire being only a Peer in
Ireland, but not in England; Every Freeman of England that shall be impanneled
to try him, is in truth and law his Peer here: And this Act, enacting that he
shall be tried, not by Marshal-law, or the Judges themselves, but by good and
lawful men of the Shyre, where the Kings Bench shall sit, who are his equals
and Peers in England, and saving the Trial by Peers to every Peer of this Realm
after his indictment found by Jury: This way and form of trial by Jury in
England being then and now the Law of the Land, is no contradiction or repeal
at all, but a direct pursuit and confirmation thereof, according to its letter
and meaning. And so much in answer to this grand objection, wherein I have been
over tedious, but shall recompense it with brevity in the remainder.

The second Objection (a mere branch of the former) Object. 2.
is this.

That if Irish Peers should be tryable by an ordinary Jury Argument 2.
within this Law for Treasons done in Ireland, this might prejudice the whole
Nobility of Ireland, who by color of this Act, might be sent for out of
Ireland and tried here for Treasons, Misprisions, and concealments of Treasons
there committed, and so quite deprived of their birthright of trial by their
Peers, which would be of dangerous consequence.

I answer 1. That I have manifested, that this trial Answer.
by Peers was never deemed, claimed, nor enjoyed in Ireland, as a privilege by
Irish Peers, nor ever used or practiced in that land before this Act, and but
once claimed since, and that in Ireland. Therefore it cannot be intended that
this Statute or the makers of it ever imagined to save this manner of Trial by
Peers only to Irish Peers, which they never enjoyed, nor so much as once
claimed or possessed before the making of it. Neither can it be any injury or
injustice to deprive them of that now they never heretofore claimed, used,
enjoyed, as their privilege, and birthright, being not indubitably settled on
them by any Law that I have seen; but only in some special Cases of Treason
since 35 H. 8. whereof this is none by the late Acts of 2 El. z. c. 1. and 6.
when as this privilege is taken from them, not by a bare strained exposition,
or implication, but by this express Act of Parliament made long since for the
Common good and safety of England and Ireland, not yet repealed.

2ly. This Objection with as great or greater strength color, might be made
for all the Commons of Ireland (far more numerous and considerable than their
Peers) they being deprived by it of trials by Irish Juries in their native
Country, than for Irish Peers alone; which Trial here against Irish Commons was
never of late excepted against, this Law having been so often adjudged to reach
to them; Therefore there is no color, to exempt Irish Peers out of it.

3ly. This pretended prejudice to Irish Peers in point of Trial by their Peers,
is soly in cases of High Treasons, or Misprision and concealments of it, and no
other, the Statute extending to no crimes, but these alone. Therefore the
mischief is not great in general; and no Irish Peers (I presume) but such who
have traiterous or disloyal hearts, will deem it a disparagement or injustice
to them, to be secluded of a Trial by their Peers only in these Cases of High
Treason: And if others who are professed Rebels and Traitors murmur at it (as
none else will) we need not much regard it, nor prefer their pretended
privilege, before our own Kings, Kingdoms, Religions, yea Irelands safety and
welfare, in bringing them to a speedy trial and condign punishments for their
Treasons here in England by virtue of this Law.

3ly. Even by the very Common law before this Act, Treasons committed in
Ireland by Peers or Commons, were tryable before the Marshall of England, in
England it self, as is evident by the Parliament Roll of 2 H. 6. ^. 9. See an
exact Abridgement p. 567, 568. Cooks 4 Instit. p. 123, 124.
Where John Lord Talbot, being the Kings Lieutenant in Ireland, accused James
Bottiler Earl of Ormond, of certain Treasons (there particularly recited) by
him committed in Ireland, before John Duke of Bedford Constable of England, in
his Marshals Court; Which accusations the King, by the advice of his
Parliament, did discharge and abolish, to appease the differences between them:
Upon which else he might have been proceeded against, though an Irish Peer,
without any trial by his Peers (See Cooks 4 Instit, p. 123, 124.) Therefore a
fortiori this special Act of Parliament may subject Irish Peers to a trial by a
substantial English Jury in England for Treasons done in Ireland, since tryable
for them here before its making even in the Marshals Court.

5ly. This Statute does not simply take away the trial of all Treasons
committed in Ireland, from thence; only it makes them all tryable here, when
the King* State and Parliament shall see just cause or occasion for trial of
them here, as now they do in these times of general rebellion there, when the
Rebels are so predominant, and the times such, that no safe, fair, or
indifferent trial of this Traitor can be there had or expected. And seeing the
Law and common reason will inform every man, that the King and State will never
be at the cost and trouble to send for Traitors and Witnesses out of Ireland to
try them here, but upon a most just occasion and urgent necessity, to prevent
either a faiter or delay of Justice in case of horrid Treasons and Rebellions;
And no Irish Peer who has any loyalty in his heart, or reason in his head,
will deem it a dishonor, or prejudice to the whole Irish Peerage in general, or
the traiterous Peers sent hither to be tried in particular, to be outed of a
trial by Irish Peers in such Cases of necessity, and expediency only; it being
better and safer for this Realm and Ireland too, that these native Irish Peers,
who have been proved to break out into actual Rebellion in all ages (as this
Prisoners Ancestors have done as much or more than any, his Cambdens Ireland,
p. 111, 120, 121, 199.
Grandfather being the first man that broke forth in Tyrones Rebellion) should
be subject to trials for the same by ordinary English Juries here, and outed of
their Peerage, then that such Arch-Traytors and Rebels as the Prisoner and his
Confederates are, (guilty of the effusion of many thousands of Protestants and
English men's bloods) should escape uncondemned, or be executed by Martial law.
And our Law in this Case, which concerns the safety of 2 Kingdoms at once, will
rather suffer a particular mischief, especially to rebellious Peers, than a
general inconvenience to both Realms, and all loyal Subjects in both.

6ly. Though the trial of all English and Irish Peers by a legal indictment,
presentment, and Jury of their Peers alone, and not by Martial-law or
Commissioners themselves alone, be an essential fundamental Right and Privilege
for the security of their lives and estates, which our Parliaments in all ages
have been very curious to preserve, and not to alter; yet the Trial of Peers by
Peers alone (not by a Jury of other Freemen) for the most part (if rightly
considered) is rather a mere punctilio of honor, than matter of real privilege
or benefit to Peers; and by intendment of Law and common experienc, a fair and
legal trial by the oaths of 12 honest, substantial, indifferent English
Gentlemen or Freeholders, to whom the Prisoner may take all See Stamf. l. 3. c.
7. 7 H. 7. 12. Brook Challenge 217. Fitzh. Stathams and Brooks Abridgements,
and Ashes Table, title Challenge,
sorts of lawful challenges by Law, which shall be allowed, if there be any
just cause of suspicion of partiality, injustice, consanguinity, etc. besides
his peremptory challenge of 35 Jurors without cause (which challenges Cooks 3
Institutes, p. 27.
Cook affirms, shall not be admitted or granted in case of trial by Peers) it
being the usual ancient See Fitzh. Brook, Ash. Title Jurors, Trial, Enquest.
trial in all Cases between the King and ordinary Subjects, between man and
man, Peers and Commoners, both in all civil and criminal causes whatsoever, it
is and will be every way as just, as beneficial to a Peer in point of Law as a
Trial by twelve Peers, upon their Honors only, 1 H. 4. 2. 27 H. 8. 22. and 13
H. 8. 11, 12. Brook Treason 29, 33. 10 E. 4, 6. Cooks 3 Inst. p. 28, 29. 2
Inst. p. 49.
without oath. And the exchange only of the form of Trial, by twelve
indifferent English Gentlemen of quallity, upon their oaths, for twelve Irish
Peers of English blood, nominated and appointed only by the King, or his 2
Eliz. c. 1. and 6.
Lord Deputy of Ireland, upon their Honors without oath, in this case of
necessity, can be no injustice, injury, or prejudice to the Irish Peers in
general, nor yet to the Prisoner in particular: The rather, if we consider,

First, That every Indictment by which an English or Irish Peer is or can be
tried, must first be proved before a grand Jury of Commons (as this very
Statute prescribes) and found by them upon Oath, not by a Jurie of Peers: which
is a kind of preparatory trial of a Peer by Jury, without which there can be no
proper trial by Peers, as is resolved Cooks 3 Institutes, p. 28, 30, 31, 32.
and 1 H 4. 1.

2ly. That in Cases of Appeal brought by a common person ^or murder, rape,
robbery, or the like, and likewise in case of a Praemunire against an English
Peer, where his life is not brought into question; he shall not be tried by his
Peers, but by an ordinary Jury as other men; Trial of Peers by Peers being
only in cases of Indictments for Treasons or Felonies at the Kings suit, and
no other, as is clear by the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 29. Neither will we
pass upon him, or condemn him, without the lawful judgment of his Peers, etc.
the words only of the King not of the Commons; In this our Books are express
in point, all cited in Sir Edw. Cooks 2 Institutes on this very Chapter of
Magna Charta cap. 29. in his pleas of the Crown, or 3 Instit. c. 2. p. 30, 31.
and 20 Ed. 4. 6. b. Now this case in question concerning not only the King,
but the whole Kingdom of England and Ireland, and those many thousands of
Common persons whose innocent blood has been, shed in Ireland by him and his
Confederate Rebels crying out for vengeance and Justice against him without
delay; he may thereupon be justly tried by an ordinary Jurie of Commons, as
well as in Case of an Appeal of murder brought by a common person.

3ly. Peers of Parliament, even of this Realm, not by inherent Nobility and
Birth right, but only in right of their Baronies, which they hold in auter
Droit, as Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors and the like, shall not be
tried by their Peers for treasons or felonies at the Kings suit, but only by
an ordinary Jurie, as Archbishop Scroope of York, Cramner Archbishop of
Canterbury, Godwins Catalogue of Bishops, p. 605, 606, 232, 233.
Adam de Orlton or Tarlton Bishop of Hereford, Mark Bishop of Carlisle, Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, and others were tried 3 Ed. 3. f. 6. Kelwaies Reports, f.
184. Stamfords Pleas of the Crown, f. 135. Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f.
12. 19. Hall^ Chron, 6 H. 4. f. 25. Coo. 3 Instit. f. 36. Now if these very
English Peers to whom Magna Charta was immediately granted by name of
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, (being the first persons mentioned in the
Prologue and chapter 1. and 29 of this Charter,) shall be outed of their peerage,
in these Cases of Indictment at the Kings suit, though within the very letter
of Magna Charta, because they are no Peers of England by blood or birthright,
but in right of their Churches, then a fortiori Irish Peers shall be deprived
of their Peerage by this special Act, who are not within the letter or intent
of Magna Charta, never made for them, but for English Noble blood. And if it be
neither injustice, nor injury, nor inconvenience, to deprive these
Ecclesiastical English Peers of a trial by Peers in cases of Treason or felony
at the Kings suit though within the letter of Magna Charta, and to try them by
an indifferent Jurie of Freeholders; It cannot be reputed any injustice,
injury, rejudice, or inconvenience at all now to out this Irish Peer of his
Peerage here, where he is no native Peer, for such an horrid Treason as this.

4ly. Irish Peers are no Peers at all in England, upon which account and reason
if they commit Treason herein they shall be tried by an ordinary Jury;
Therefore to try them only by Freeholders, no^ by Peers in England, can be no
injury nor dishonor to their Peerage, unless it were in Ireland where they
are Peers; and yet have been seldom or never hitherto tried there by their
Peers, as I have proved.

5ly. The very Statutes of Ireland it self made by the Peers and Commons
thereof to prevent many mischiefs by Thieves, Murderers, and Rebels in that
Realm, do deprive both the Lords and Commons there of any legal trial at all
both for their lives and estates too, witness the Statutes of 28 H. 6. c. 1. 3
and 5 E. 4. c. 2. and expose them to the judgment, slaughter, plunder of
particular men in some cases, authorizing all manner of men that find any
thieves robbing, breaking up houses, by day or night, or going or coming to
rob or steal, having no faithful man of good name and fame in their company,
in English apparel, to take and kill those Though Peers.
Thieves, and cut off their heads, (without endictment or Jury) and seize their
Goods, without any impeachment of the King, his Heirs, Officers, or any other,
for which they are to receive a sum of money from every Plow-land, and person of
estate within the Barony where they shall slay and behead such Thieves. And 25
H. 6. c. 4 and 5. If any English men shall have any hair or beard upon his
upper lip like the Irish, it shall be lawful for every man to take their
Goods, as Irish Enemies, and to ransom them as Enemies; And if any Irish Enemy
received to the Kings allegiance shall afterward rob, spoil, and destroy the
Kings Liege people, it shall be lawful for every Liege-man that may meet with
him afterward, to do with him, and his Goods and Chattels as to Enemies who
were never Liege, and to ransom them at their free will, without any
impeachment of the Law. And Chapter 6. If any men, except Knights and Prelates
shall wear gilded Bridle, Pestrels, or other harneys, that it shall be lawful
to every man that will, to take the said man his horse and harness, and to
possess the same as his own Goods, without endictment or legal trial. All which
would be monstrous in England. Therefore it is much more legal and just, and no
injury at all to try the Prisoner, an Arch-Rebel in England, in this time of
war and combustion in Ireland, for his Treasons there perpetrated, by an
indifferent, honest, lawful English Jury, upon an endictment found by the
grand Inquest, than thus to kill, behead such Malefactors in Ireland, and seize
both them and their Goods as Enemies, and ransom them at pleasure without
Trial, Jury, or Endictment, and not only to indemnifie but reward those that do
it, by Laws there made by the English, and Irish themselves: which will answer
all Objections, and wipe off the least shadow of Injustice in this Case, and
trial.

The third Objection is this, That if Irish Peers had been within this Law,
there being so many rebellions Object. 3.
in Ireland since its enacting, we should have had some Presidents of Irish
Peers here tried by Jurie, ere this; But there is no such President extant;
therefore certainly Irish Peers for Treasons perpetrated in Ireland are out of
this Act.

To this I answer, 1. That no Irish Peers have been tried by their Peers in
Ireland for treasons since this Act; ergo they are within i^.

2. That this Argument is merely fallacious and non concludant: for the reason
why no Irish Peers have been tried here since this Law by virtue of it, is not
because they were not deemed within it, but for other reasons.

1. Because most of the Irish Peers* who have been in actual rebellion since
this Law, were See the Annals of Ireland, and Mr. Camb. in Ireland, p. 121 to
200.
either actually slain in the wars, or fled the Kingdom, or else were received
into grace, and pardoned before trial upon their submissions; or else attainted
and executed by Act of Parliament, or by Martial-law in Ireland. And by these
means only avoided their Trials here.

2ly. Because some Irish Rebels, as great as Magwire, or any of their Peers in
power and estate, have been heretofore tried and executed for Treason in
England by virtue of this Law; though brought over hither from Ireland against
their wills; as Orourke and Sir John Parrot of old, and Mac-Mahon the last
Term* and the Trials of these three here are direct Presidents in point, and
good warrant by this very Act for the Trial also of this Irish Peer, as I have
proved.

3ly. This Statute is not very ancient, yet still in as full force as ever, and
if this be the first President of an Irish Peer that came judicially in
question here in England, to be tried upon it since its making, it is no
Argument he is out of this Law, but rather an Inducement to make him a leading
President to those rebellious Peers of that Nation, who have been the
Ringleaders of the ordinary Commons there in this grand Rebellion, there being
no President, Judgment, nor foild season against it; Yea ^ome Judgments in
case of Irish Commons, and many unanswerable reasons for it.

The fourth Objection is, the opinion of the Book in Object. 4.
Dyer, f. 360. ^^. forecited, recited in Cromptons Jurisdiction of Courts, f.
23. a. and Mr. St. John's Argument at Law at Straffords Attainder, p. 63. That
an Irish Peer cannot be tried here in England for Treason done in Ireland,
neither by his Peers, nor by a Jury, because he is no Subject of England.

To this I have Here p. 40, 41.
already given an Answer, and shall Answer.
here only add. 1. That the only reason given in the Book has been since
several times adjudged to be no reason at all nor Law, by all the Judges of
England, a Subject of Ireland being a See here p. 32, to 42.
Subject to the King of England in all places, as is adjudged in Calvin's Case,
and that Wrey disclaimed any such opinion delivered by him as is there
reported. Therefore the reason of this opinion being adjudged erroneous and no
Law, the opinion it self grounded on it, must needs be so too. The rather,
because the opinion there cited was upon a Case casually put and moved out of
Court by way of discourse, without study or argument, and suddenly delivered
only by Dyer and Gerrard (since Wrey disclaimed it) but not given upon any
cause actually depending or debated and argued in Court. 2ly. That it is a full
authority for me, both because it determines, there can be no Trial of an Irish
Peer by his Peers in England but only by a Jury; and that in Ireland it self,
Peers are not used to be tried by Peers, but attainted by Act of Parliament;
Therefore an authority point blank against the Prisoners plea.

The 5th Objection is Orourks Case; which in Judge Object. 5.
Andersons own Book of Reports, is put thus, Whether Orourk an Irish Subject
(and no Peer nor Baron of Ireland) might be tried by this Act here in England,
for Treasons committed in Ireland? which words ( nient esteant, un Peer ou
Baron de Ireland) in the putting of the Case seems to intimate, that in that
Case the opinion of the Judges was, that an Irish Peer was not within this Act.

To which I shall return this brief Answer, That Answ.
this clause, not being a Peer or Baron in Ireland, in the putting of that
Case, was only a description of the quality of his person, he being no Peer or
Baron of that Realm, not any point in or part of the Case, there being not one
syllable in the whole debate or Argument of it, by way of admission or
otherwise, that an Irish Peer was not within this Act; And in this very Case
the Judges resolved the Book in Dyer to be no Law, and Wrey disclaimed any such
opinion of his therein reported, as Sir Edward Cooks Institutes on Littleton,
fol. 261. b. records.

The 6th. Objection is this, (intimated in an Order Object. 6.
of the Lords House) That this may much concern the Peers of England; For this
Law for trying foreign Treasons is enacted in Ireland; and so by color of it
English Peers may be sent over into Ireland to be tried there by a Jury of
Irish Commoners, for Treasons done in England, as well as Irish Peers sent
thence to be tried by ordinary Juries here in England for Treasons committed
in Ireland.

I answer, 1. That there is no such Law extant in Answer.
Ireland, that I can fi^d, among all their printed Statutes, so as this is a
vain surmise.

But 2ly. if there were any such Law there, yet England being the supreme Realm
to Ireland, may make Laws in the Parliament here to bind the Irish Peers and
Commons, but the Parliament in Ireland being a See Crokes Rep. p. 264 511, 512.
subordinate Realm to England, never yet did nor can make any Laws at all to
bind any English Peers or Commons for things done in England, (until the
Rebels there shall be able to conquer England, which I hope they never shall)
as we have conquered them. Therefore we need not fear any such obliging Laws of
theirs, or the trial of English Peers in Ireland. So as this vain fancy is
quite out of Doors, and the Lords themselves upon conference with the Commons,
have been fully satisfied that this Case no ways concerns the Peers of
England, whose Trial by their Peers is by direct proviso saved to them in this
Act, and therefore cannot come in question, or be taken from them by pretense
of any such Law established in Ireland; Whereupon they have revensed their
Order, which seemed to give some color for this Objection.

Pat. 48H. 3. pars. 1. m. 8. I find this memorable Record. Rex, etc. omnibus
salutem. Cum secundum consuetudinem hactenus in Hibernia obtentam, Utlagati in
Regno nostro Angliae pro Utlagatis in Hibernia haberi non consueverunt, and
Gregorius le Somner, ratione Utlagariae in ipsum promulgatae in Regno nostro
Angliae ^uper captus fuit in Hibernia and in Angliam reductus and imprisonatus;
Nolumus quod fidelibus nostris Hiberniae aliquod praejudicium ex hoc in
posterum gravetur. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Turrim London. 26 die Junii^.
If Englishmen outlawed in England could not by the Law and Custom of Ireland,
be taken upon a C^pias Utlagatum in Ireland, or reputed as outlawed persons
there, as this Patent resolves, much less can they there be tried for any
Treasons acted in England by color of this Law, nor can our English Peers be
there tried for Treasons here by an Irish Jury.

A seventh Objection, which I have heard made Object. 7.
by some, is as vain and absurd as the former, That if Irish Peers be within
this Act for Treasons done in Ireland, then by the same reason Peers in
Scotland might be sent for and brought into England, and there tried by an
ordinary Jury by virtue of this Law, for Treasons done in Scotland; which would
be a great prejudice to the Peers of Scotland, and the privileges of that
Kingdom.

I answer, 1. That this Act extends not to any Answer.
Treasons of Scots Lords or Commons committed or acted in Scotland, and tryable
there, though it reaches to Irish Lords and Ireland.

1. Because this Act was made long before the union betwixt England and
Scotland, by 1 Iac. c. 2, 3. Iac. c. 3, 4 Iac. c. 1. and 16 Caroli: whiles that
Scotland was under the absolute and immediate power of its own Kings, and not
of the Kings of England, and so it cannot extend to them.

2ly. Scotland, although the Sea Hov. p. 545, 546, 550. Walsingham. Hist. Angl.
p. 48 to 56. Mat. Paris Hist. Ang. p. 417, 433, 666, 667, 29 E. 1. Ro^. Claus.
dors. 10. Claus. 33 E. 1. dors. 13. scedula claus. 34 E. 1. dots. 10. claus. 10
E. 3. dors. 9.
Kings of it have often done homage to the Kings of England, in ancient times,
as their Sovereign Lords) was still an absolute independent Kingdom in this
respect of being subject only to and governed by its own Parliaments, and Laws.
But not subordinate to nor governed by the Laws or Parliaments of England,
which never bound them heretofore, nor now, as they did and do Ireland; their
Laws and Statutes and ours still continuing different. Therefore this Act
neither did nor could bind the Scots Peers or Commons in point of Trial here
for Treasons committed in Scotland, as it binds the Irish (still subject to our
Laws and Parliaments) for Treasons done in Ireland.

3ly. The very Acts of Pacification between both Kingdoms * 1 Jac. c. 2. 3 lac.
c. 3. 4 lac. 1.
and the solemn League and Covenant passed this Parl. here and in Scotland too,
which do specially reserve the Trials of all Traitors and Delinquents of either
Kingdom, to the Trial and Judicatory only of their own Parliaments and Realms)
have for ever provided against this vain pretense, and secured not only all
Scottish Peers but Commoners too against any Trials here by virtue of this Act
for Treasons done in Ireland; Therefore I shall give it no further Answer.

The last Objection I can think of is this, That in Object. 8.
every Case of Treason or Felony new made by Statute, the Lords of Parliament
in England shall have their Trial by their Peers saved, not withstanding the
Statute provides not for it by express words; so that provisoes of Trial by
their Peers inserted into them in such Cases, are but idle, and ex abundanti,
because it is provided for both by the Common law and by Magna Charta it self,
c. 29. and so was it adjudged in the case of the Lord Hungerford heretofore,
and in the Earl of Castlehavens Case of late for Buggery, upon the Statute of
25 H. 8. c. 6. Stamfords Pleas of the Crown f. 152, 153 and Cromptons
Jurisdiction of Courts f. ^9. Therefore the Tryof Irish Peers by their Peers
shall be likewise saved to them within this Act, though it be not expressed, as
well as the Trial by Peers is to English Peeers by express Provisoe.

I answer, First, that this rule holds generally Answ.
true in all Cases of new Treasons and Felonies where the offenses only are
made capital, or punishable according to the ancient, usual, and ordinary
proceedings of Law, and the manner of the Trial of them left at large and not
preciselie limited how and by whom they shall be tried; As they are in the
objected Cases upon the Statutes of 25 H. 8. c. 6. and 5 Eliz. cap. 17.
concerning Buggery: where the words are, That this Vice shall be adjudged
Felony, and that such order and form of Process shall thereupon be used against
the Offenders, as in Cases of Felony at the Common law, and that the Offenders
being thereof convicted by verdict, confession, or Outlawry, shall suffer pain
of death, etc. which words without the least contradiction, stand as well with
Trial of Peers who are guilty of it by their Peers alone, as of Commons by a
Jury, they being both according to the order of our Common law, and a verdict
by Peers is as properly styled a verdict in Law, as a verdict by Jurie,
witness 1 H. 4. 1. and Cooks 3 Institut. chapter 2. p. 30. But in the Statute of
35 H. 8. there is no creation or introduction at all of any New Treasons, but
only an introduction of a new form and way of Trial for Treasons formerly made
and declared such, then done, or hereafter to be committed out of this Realm,
and that new form of Trial precisely limited in all particulars, and especially
enacted to be by an ordinary Jury, except only in Case of our English Peers;
Therefore this Statute comes not at all within the Objection, because it
particularly defines the place where, the Judges before whom, the Juries by
whom, with the whole form and manner how, such foreign Treasons shall be tried,
with all other circumstances of the Trial, and expressly prescribes; That all
but English Peers indicted for foreign Treasons, shall be tried by good and
lawful men of the Shire where the Kings Bench or Commissioners sit. Therefore
to alter this form of Trial precisely prescribed by this Statute, by
introducing a new Trial by Irish Peers, is to run quite cross against, and
elude, repeal this Sta^ute, as I have argued and proved at large.

I have now quite done with my Argument of this new untroden Case, and I hope
therein sufficiently manifested, that this Plea of the Prisoner is invalid, and
such as ought to be overruled in point of Law: And therefore as he has been
sent for over from Ireland by the wisdom and Justice of our Parliament, and by
the Lords, Justices, and Council there transmitted hither to receive a just,
and speedy Trial at this Bar for his bloody Treasons, which there (in respect
of the Rebels power, Tumults in that Realm) he could not conveniently undergo:
So I humbly pray on the behalf of the King, Kingdom, Parliament, and our whole
English Nation, to all which he has been such a capital Traitor and Enemy,
that this Plea of his may presently be overruled, and himself brought to his
speedy Trial, Judgment and execution for his unparalled Treasons, and the
blood of those many thousands of innocent English Protestants shed in Ireland
upon this occasion, which cries for Justice and Execution against him without
further delay. The rather, because nulli differemus Justiciam, is one clause of
that very Act of Magna Charta, ca. 29. which he has pleaded in bar of his
Trial, of which I pray both he and the whole Kingdom may now enjoy the benefit,
by his undelayed Trial and execution too, in Case he shall be found guilty of
the Treasons for which he stands indicted; of which there is little doubt,
since so fully confessed by himself in a writing under his own hand, and we are
ready to make them good against him, as we have already done against his
Confederate Mac-Mahon, by the Testimony of a clowd of honorable pregnant
witnesses, in case he shall deny it.

After two Arguments at the Bar on both sides of this Case, Justice Bacon
argued it himself, and delivered his opinion and judgment against the
Prisoners plea: that though he be a Baron of Ireland, yet he was triable for
his Treason by a Middlesex Jury in the Kings Bench, and outed of his Peerage,
by 35 H. 8. c. 2. Which Judgment was approved by this Order of both Houses of
Parliament.

Die Lunae 10 Febr. 1644.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the said Houses
do approve of the judgment given by Master Justice Bacon, in overruling the
Plea of the Lord Magwire, and of the manner of the Trial by the Indictment of
High Treason in the Kings Bench: And the Judge is hereby required to proceed
speedily thereupon according to Law and Justice.

John Brown Cler. Parl.
Henry Elsing Cler. Parl. D. C.

Upon which on Monday Febr. 10. 1644. he was brought from the Tower of London
to the Kings Bench Bar, and there arraigned; where putting himself upon his
trial he challenged 23 of the Jury which appeared peremptorily; Whereupon a
Distring as was awarded to the Sheriff of Middlesex to retorn Quadrag^nta Tales
the next day; of whom he challenged 12 more peremptorily: And being tried by
twelve of the residue returned (against whom he had no legal exception nor
challenge) he was upon his own Confessions and pregnant evidence of 15
Witnesses (Persons of Quality) found guilty of the Treasons, for which he was
indicted; and thereupon Febr. 11. was adjudged tobe drawn to Tyburn, and there
hanged by the Neck, and cut down alive, and then his Bowels to be taken out,
and there burnt before his Face, his Head to be cut off, and his body to be
divided into four Quarters, and then to be disposed as the Parliament shall
appoint: Which was accordingly executed the 20th. of Febr. Even so let all such
perfidious bloody Traitors perish.

TO fill up the vacant pages of this Sheet, I shall annex this one Record, and
also one Irish Act, being both very pertinent to my Argument.

Pat. 1 E. 1. m. 20. Hibernia.
Venerabili in Christo Patri eadem gratia Midden Episcopo, and Dilectis and
fidelibus suis Mauricio filio* Mauricii, Justiciario suo Hibern* et Magistro
Johanni de Saumford Escaetori suo Hibern. salutem. Cum de^uncto jam celebris
memoriae Domino H. Rege pa^re nostro (cujus animae propicietur altissimus) ad
nos Regni Angliae gubernacu^* et terrae Hibern. Dominium per^ineant, ob quod
Praelati* Comites, and Pro^eres, as Communit^s Regni nostri nobis tanquam
Domino suo ligio et Regi fidelitat^s Juramentum and omnia alia quae nobis
rations Coronae and dignitatis Regiae ab ipsis fieri and praestari nobis, in
absentia nostra, poterunt plenarie and sine omissione aliqua prompto and
liben^i animo praestiter int: Ac Archiepiscopi Episcopi, Abbates, Priores,
Comites, Barons, Milites, libere tenentes, ac tota Communi as terrae nostrae
Hiberniae nobis tanquam Not ^.
Regi and Domino suo ligio consimile sacramentum fidelitatis praest are
teneantur. Dedimus vobis potestatem recipiendi nomine nostro fidelitatem
ipsorum. Ita tamen quod si vos omnes interesse nequiveritis, tune duo vel unus
^estrum qui praesens suerit nichilominus plenariam habeat potestatem rec^p^endi
nomine nostr^ fidelitatem ipsorum in forma praedict^. Et ideo vobis mandamus
quod fidelitatem praedictam nomine nostro recipiatis, prout melius videbitis
expedire. In cuju^, etc. Dat. per manum W. de Merton C^nc. apud Westminster. VII die
Decembris.

33 H. 8. c. 1. made in Ireland. The Star. of Ireland, prin-Dublin 1621. p. 183.

An Act that the King and his Successors, to be Kings of IRELAND.
FOrasmuch as the King our most gracious dread sovereign Lord, and his Graces
mostnoble progenitors Kings of England, have been Lords of this Land of
Ireland, having all manner kingly jurisdiction, power, preeminences and
authority royal belonging or appertaining to the royal Estate and Majesty of a
King, by the name of Lord of Ireland, where the Kings Majesty, and his noble
Progenitors, justly and rightfully were, and of right ought to be Kings of
Ireland, and so to be reputed, taken, named and called, and for lack of naming
the Kings Majesty and his noble Progenitors Kings of Ireland according to their
said true and just Title, Style and Name, therein has been great occasion that
the Irishmen and Inhabit ants within this Realm of Ireland have not been so
obedient to the Kings Highness and his most noble Progenitors, and to their
Laws, as they of right and according to their allegiance and bounden duties
ought to have been. Wherefore at the humble pursuit, petition, and request of
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and other the Kings loving, faithful and
obedient Subjects of this Land of Ireland, and by their full assents, Be it
enacted, ordained, and esta blished by this present Parliament^ That the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors Kings of England, be always Kings of this
Land of Ireland, and that his Majesty his heirs and Successors, have the name,
style, title and honor of King of this Land of Ireland, with all manner of
honors, preheminences, prerogatives, dignities, and other things whatsoever
they be, to the Estate, and Majesty of a KING appertaining or belonging: and
that his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors be from henceforth named, called,
accepted, reputed and taken to be Kings of the Land of Ireland: to have, hold
and enjoy the said style, title, majesty and honors of the King of Ireland,
with all manner pre-eminence, prerogative, dignities, and all other the
premises, unto the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors for ever, as
united and knit to the Imperial Crown of England. And be it further enacted by
authority aforesaid, That on this side the first day of July next coming,
proclamation shall be made in all Shires within this Land of Ireland, of the
tenor and sentences of this Act. And if any person and persons, of what
estate, dignity or condition soever they or he be, subject or resiant within
this Land of Ireland, after the said first day of July by writing or
imprinting, or by any exterior Act or Deed, maliciously procure or do, or
cause to be procured or done, any thing or things to the peril of the Kings
Majesty's most royal person, or maliciously give occasion by writing, deed,
print, or act, whereby the Kings Majesty his Heirs or Successors, or any of
them might be disturbed or interrupted of the Crown of this Realm of Ireland,
or of the name, style, or title thereof, or by writing, deed, print or act,
procure or do, or cause to be procured or done any thing or things to the
prejudice, slander, disturbance, or derogation of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs
or Successors, in* of, or for the Crown of this Realm of Ireland, or in, of, or
for the name, title, or style thereof, whereby his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or any of them might be disturbed or interrupted in body, name,
style, or title of Inheritance, of, in, or to the Crown of this Land of
Ireland, or of the name, style, title, or dignity of the same; that then every
such person and persons, of what estate, degree or condition they be, subject
or restants within the said Land of Ireland, and their Aydors, Counselors,
Maintainers, and Abbetters therein, and every of them, for every such offense,
shall be adjudged High Traitors, and every such offense shall be adjudged and
deemed High Treason, and the Offenders, their Aydors, Counselors, Maintainors
and Abbettors therein, land every of them being lawfully convicted of any such
offense by presentment, verdict, confession, or proofs, according to the
customs and Laws of this said Land of Ireland, shall suffer pains of death, as
in cases of High Treason, and also shall lose and forfeit unto the Kings
Highness, and to his Heirs Kings of this Realm of Ireland, all ^such his
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Annuities, and Hereditaments
which they had in possession as owner, and were sole seized of in their own
right, of, by, or in any title or means, or in any other person or petsons had
to their use of any estate of inheritance at the day of any such Treason and
offenses by them committed and done* And that also every such Offender shall
lose and forfeit to the Kings Highness and to his said Heirs* as well all such
estates of freehold, and interest for years, of lands and rents, as all the
Goods* Cattels and Debts, which they or any of them had at the time of their
conviction or attaindour, of or for any such offense: saving always to every
person and persons, and bodies Politic, their Heirs, Successors, and Assigns,
and to every of them, other than such persons as shall be so convicted or
attainted, their Heirs and Successors, and all other claiming to their use, all
such right, title, use, interest, possession, condition, rents, fees, offices,
annuities, commons and profits, which they or any of them shall happen to have,
in, to, or upon any such Manors, Lands* Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
Services, Annuities and Hereditaments, which so shall happen to be lost and
forfeited by reason and occasion of any of the Treasons or Offenses above
rehearsed any time before the said Treasons or Offenses committed or done.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 20. l. 4. r. either. p. 33. l. 15. r. it, or rather that of Pat. 6.
Johan. Reg. m. 6. l. 33. r. statuatur. l. 35. dele de p. 39 l. 33. and 38. c.
1. r. 2. p. 58. l. 23 should come in l. 25. before authorizing. p. 59. l. 8. r.
Peytr^ls. p. 64. l. 25, Ireland r. Scotland.


