Seven Additional Quaeres in behalf of the secluded Members, propounded to the
twice-broken Rump now sitting, the Cities of Westminster, London, County of
Middlesex, all other Counties, Cities, Boroughs, in England Wales, and all
English Freemen, whose members are secluded: and also to Scotland and Ireland.
1 WHether their inhuman, uncivil, unchristian, and injurious forcible
exclusion of the 22. worthy eminent Members of the House, who on the 27 of
December. last resorted thither to claim their own, the other Members, and
Peoples Rights, and discharge their Trusts for the Peace and Settlement of our
Churches and Kingdoms, miserably rent, and almost irrecoverably ruined by their
exorbitant Jesuitical Usurpations, Innovations, and Councils; giving express
Orders both to their Sergeant, Doorkeepers, and Military Gards, to keep all the
old secured, or secluded Members, (being above 200. yet living, had they been
all present with those 22. repairing suddenly thither, upon the rumor of their
clandestine sitting, concealed from all but their engaged Confederates:) not
only out of the House it self, but the ^^ry Lobby, into which the meanest
Commoner, Waterman of England, and all others have, and then had free access;
and shutting them out of both, by loc^^^g and bolting the Doors against them,
and sending them all thence with highest neglect, after two hours att^ndance,
without deigning to take the least notice of them (as * they have at large
rela^ed,) paralle^'d with their former seclusions in May 7th* and ^th. last, by
force of Arms, and levying war against (...) elsewhere, as Traitors, only for
raising (...) again, by their command^ (...) all the old Members; be not a more
direct, professed levying war against the Parliament, far higher Treason, and
more transcendent breach of Privilege and Trust, than ever the late King* the
Lord Capel, or other Persons beheaded or sequestered by them were guilty of, in
levying War against the Parliament and their forces only at a great distance
from the House, not at the House doors against their Members: or the Exact
Collection, P. 37, to 78.
Kings coming in Person to the Commons House, with his Guard and Attendants
armed only with Halberts, Swords, and Pistols, (not with armed Troops of Horse
and Bands of Foot as they) Jan. 4. 1641. and placing them in the Lobby, soly to
demand 5. Members impeached by him of High Treason three days before, without
seizing or secluding them, or any other Members; expiated by his subsequent
acknowledgement and Retractation of this his breach of Privilege, only through
mistake, by two special Messages, January the 13th. and 14th. by giving
satisfaction for it to both Houses; and promising assurance to the Parliament,
and both Houses, to be for the future, as careful of their Privileges, as of
his Life, or his Crown; They having even after this his ingenuous Satisfaction,
the Apprentices transitory unarmed force, July 26. 1647. which they voted
Treason; and Cromwels, and Lamberts successive forcible excluding of themselves
April 20* 1653* and October 13. last, which they branded to be Treasonable, and
Tyrannical, outstripped them all, by their special Orders to their Guards, and
Officers, to exclude all old secluded Members, and avowing it, when acted and
complained of by the Members, without the least Retractation, Redress, or
Notice taken of this, or any former forcible Exclusion^, Imprisonments, and
Restraints of above 200* Members at once, besides the whole house of Peers,
when themselves are not yet above 43* in Number, and 7. of those no legal
Members of the old Commons House. And whether this does not render them Enemies
to the Commonwealth, and to the Peace and State of this Kingdom, by the House
of Commons express Declaration, Jan. 5 1641?

2. Whether it be not a most impudent and insolent Presumption in them, to
raise the Militia of Westminster, and Middlesex to guard themselves in the
House, and yet forcibly to keep out Serjant Glyn, and Mr. Bell, their own two
Burgesses for Westmi^ster, and Sr. Gilbert Gerard, the sole surviving Knight of
the S^ier for Middlesex, and the Militiaes of 2 of whose 3. Citizens, Sir
Thomas Some, and Mr. Vassal are forcibly* secluded, as are both the Knights of
He^tfordshire, Surry. Glocestershire, Northamptonshire, and most other Counti^^*
London, and most other Cities, Boroughs, and Counties of England, to exclude
their own Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the old Parliament out of the
House, that they may Tax, Oppress and Domineer over them, at their Pleasure;
And a Treachery, beyond all President, for them to employ the Army, first
Raised, Commissioned, Entrusted, Engaged by their Commissions, Parliament
Ordinances, Votes, Declarations, the Protestation^, League and Covenant, to
defend and protect the Members and Privileges of Parliament, from all force and
violence whatsoever, to sit and Act fr^ely in the Houses, without disturbance:
to keep three Parts of four of their fellow Members out of the Hou^^ and the
whole House of Peers, by mere force and will, without any hearing or
impeachment; and to impose intolerable uncessant Taxes, both on the Lords, and
secluded Members, and all Counties, Cities Boroughs, for which they serve; only
to keep themselves in forcible posession within the House; and seclude them
forcibly out of it? Whether it be not a most Sottish, Brutish Servility,
Baseness, Treachery, Infatuation for these Counties, Cities, Boroughs Militias
and Mercinary forces, thus to Guard this Traiterous, (and now Infamous, Odious)
Rump, to domineer over themselves, and the Majority of the excluded Members and
Lords in the House, and to keep them by their Treasonable armed force, and Void
Orders, out of it? Whether it be not both their Duty, Honor, Honesty,
Interest, and only means of Ease, Peace, Settlement, Revival of Trade, and
restoring the lost Honor of our Nation, Religion, and the Rights, Freedom,
Privileges, Liberties of our Parliaments, and Kingdom; Now to join all their
Forces and Endeavors, to restore all the secluded Members, Dishouse these
Forcible Usurpers, and bring them to public Justice* for their present and
past high Treasons, since they obstinately persevere in them, without the least
Shadow of Repentance or Satisfaction to the People, or the secluded Members:
witness their new Oath of Abjuration, Jan. 2. And to obey the secluded Lords
and Members, Orders, and desires, being the Parliament) rather than their
treasonable and illegal Votes?

3. Whether all the secluded Members for this their last forcible contemptuous
seclusion, without any Answer or Reparations from the sitting Rump, have not a
juster cause, and more reason now to adjorn themselves, into the City of
London, and to sit there as a Committee or House by the Cities invitation,
Guarded by their Militia and the Militiaes of Westminster, Middlesex,
Herfordshire, Essex, and other Counties, whose Knights and Burgesses, are now
forcibly excluded; til this higher force, and breach of their Privileges than
in any age be redressed by public Declarations against it, and exemplary
punishments, the fo^ce at Westminster. quite removed, and they enabled to sit and act
there in Exact collection, p. 37* 38, etc.
Peace and safety; then both Hauses had to adjourn into London by the Cities
invitation * Jan. 5. 1641. upon the Kings coming to the Houses to demand the 5.
Impeached Mmbers, and Lord Kymbolton, without s^izing them, or secluding
others, a small breach of Privilege in respect of theirs? And whether Sr.
Arthur Haslerig (one of the 5. impeached Members then, Ringleader of the Rump,
and their forces now) can in Justice, Honor, or Conscience, oppose them and
Denzil Hollis (another of the impeached and secluded Members) therein now; it
being warranted by the president of both Houses then, as an incumbent duty on
them and the City too (who gained much honor and respect from the Parliament
and Kingdom thereby;) pointed out unto them by their own Vote December 27. To
take into Consideration the case of all absent Members, on the 5th. day of
January next, being the very day of the Month both Houses 1641. upon the Kings
breach of their Privileges in demanding the Impeached Members, made a
Particular Declaraeion against it as a high breach of the Rights and Privileges
of Parliament, and Inconsistent with the Freedom and Liberty thereof; and
thereupon adjourned themselves into the Guild Hall in London, to sit and act as
a Committee, which they did till both the breach of their Privileges was fully
vindicated, their Members repaired, and brought back to the House by the City
and Watermen, in Triumph, to sit in Safety, without securing, or secluding
afterward. This their Vote by a Miraculous providence referring to this very
day, and occasion, full 18 years after it, and the Remonstrance on it,
declaring them Public Enemies, and to be proceeded against as such for this
high breach of Privilege.

4. Whether it be not the extremity of Tyranny, Injustice, and Violation of
Parliament Rights and Privileges, for a few guilty Members who have violated
all Oaths, Protestations, Covenants, Vows, Declarations, Trusts, Privileges in
the superlative degree, by mere armed force and will, to exclude above 3* times
their number of untainted Members, before the least legal accusation,
impeachment, bearing, trial, evidence, or calling them into the House, or to
the Bar thereof, to hear or answer any Charge against them? When as by the Laws
of God, Nature, Nations, the Great Charter, the fundamental Laws of the Land,
the usual course of Justice in every Judicature whatsoever, and the Law and
Custom* of Parliament, no person whatsoever, much less any Member of
Parliament, least of all the Majority of the Members, may or ought to be tried,
conviccted, judged, sentenced, disfranchised, or deprived of his persor al,
much less his public Parliamentary Franchise, Liberty and Privilege, without a
lawful Summons, Accusation, Indictment, Impeachment, Trial, hearing,
Conviction, by his own confession or evidence, upon his Personal appearance in
Court, or at the Bar of the House: It being resolved in the Parliaments of 28
E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 7, etc. and 29 E. 3. n. 29. that the Judgment given
against Roger Mortymer in the Parliament of 4 E. 3. n. 1. upon 14. particular
Articles of Impeachment of High Treason in murdering King Edward the 2d. after
his deposing, forcing the Parliament at Salisbury, driving away some Lords from
thence, and other Great Crimes, was erroneous and illegal, and thereupon nulled
and reversed; because, though the Articles were true and notorious, yet he
himself was never brought personally to the Bar to answer them, nor heard
before or when they gave judgment against him. Therefore much less ought so
many innocent, eminent Members to be forcibly secluded, and kept out of the
House before any Articles exhibited, hearing, or trial in the House, by a few
guilty Members, thus prejudging and excluding them, and the whole House of
Peers, (over whom they have no color of Jurisdiction) for sear of being
legally impeached by them if admitted, for their enormous Crimes?

5. Whether these peccant Members high Treasons, in usurping and engrossing to
themselves alone the divided and united Supreme Authority of the King, Lords,
and whole Commons House assembled in Parliament, in voting down, secluding, and
engaging against the King, and house of Lords, contrary to the express tenor of
the Kings Writs, Indentures, Oaths, and the Act of 17 Car. by which they
pretend to sit; and their former and late levying war against the secluded
Membets and Lords House, in imprisoning some, and keeping others of them out of
the House by armed Gards, against their Rights, Privileges, and the Declaration
of the whole House, 5 January 1641. upon the Kings demanding the 5. impeached
Members, and their own votes, in the case of their own Seclusions by Cromwell,
Harrison and Lambert, be not the highest breach of their Trusts, and all
Parliments Privileges, Rights, and Freedom, for which in Law, Justice, Reason,
and Conscience too, they have absolutely for feited their Memberships, and
future sitting in the House* from which they may and ought to be perpetually
disfranchised by judgment of the secluded Members, it being against the Duty
of a Citizen, Burgess, and Member of Parliament, to the prejudice and
subversion of the Parliament, House, (yea Cities and Boroughs too,) whereof
they are Members, and to their Oaths, Protestation and Covenant which they took
as Members, according to the Resolutions in James Baggs Case, Cook 11. Rep. f.
98, 99. Littleton, Sect. 378, 379. Cooks 1 Instit. f. 233, 234. and 4 Instit.
p. 23, 43? Whether some for le^ser Treasons and Crimes than these, have not had
their Heads and Quarters set upon the top of the Parliament house, instead of
sitting as Members in it; and the late King lost his head by their own
Judgment for smaller breaches of Privileges, and less dangerous Wars against
the Parliament and Members than themselves are guilty of? Whether it will not
be juster, equaller, and more beneficial to the People and Army, for the
secluded Lords and Members to confiscate and sequester all their real and
personal Estates for discharge of all public Debts and Soldiers Arrears,
which they have contracted, only to keep up and maintain their usurped
Antiparliamentary Conventicles, and exclude the greatest part of the Members
and Lords out of the Parliament by force: than to confiscate and sequester Sir
Geo. Booths, or other Members and Commoners real and personal Estates, for
endeavoring to remove the force which keeps them out; and to impose illegal
Taxes, Excises, Militiaes, Oaths, both on the Lords, the secluded Members, and
all Counties, Cities and Boroughs whom they represent* to exclude them out of
Parliament?

6. Whether the Declaration of August 26. 1647. made upon the Speaker Lenthals,
and other Members clandestine departure to the Army, upon the Apprentices
unarmed tumult, and his leading up the Army, first of all to the House, to
commit a greater force upon it, by driving away, securing, imprisoning and
secluding sundry eminent Members, (for which he deserves to be their present
General) Whereas there was a visible, horrid, insolent and actual force upon
the Houses of Parliament, on Monday the 26. of July last, whereupon the
Speakers, and many Members of both Houses of Parliament, were forced to absent
themselves from the service of the Parliament, and whereas those Members could
not return to sit in safety before Friday the 6. of August: It is therefore
declared, by the Lords and Commons, in Parliament assembled, that the Ordinance
of Monday the said 26. of July, for the repealing and making void the Ordinance
of the 23. of the said July, for the settling of the Militia of the City of
London, being gained by force and violence: and all Votes, Orders, Ordinances,
passed in either, or both Houses of Parliament, since the said Ordinance of the
26. of July, to the said 6 th. of August, are Null and Void, and were so at the
making thereof, and are hereby declared so to be; the Parliament being under a
force, and not free; Does not absolutely declare, adjudge and resolve, all the
Rumps Votes, Acts, Orders, Ordinances, Proceedings touching the Militia of
London, Westminster, and other Counties; Excises, Customs, Monthly
Contributions, Indemnities, Pardons, and all other Matters; or for sec^uding or
suspending any Member, and whole House of Peers from sitting, their Treasonable
perjurious Engagement, and Oath of Abjuration* to be all Null and Void, at the
making thereof; and so no ways obliging the City, Kingdom, Nation, secluded
Peers, or Members in the least degree, since the force upon both Houses,
securing, secluding of above 200. Commons, yet living, continued from Dec. 6.
1648. till Apr. 20. 1653. and from May 7. 1659. till October. 13. and now again
by the Rumps special Order and Command, from Dec. 27. till this instant*

And that upon t hese Considerations, and parallels of the force then, with the
successive forces since upon the House and secluded Members.

1. The Apprentices force July 26. 1647. was without arms: theirs by armed
Gards and Soldiers. 2ly. Transitory, but for 2. or 3. hours: theirs permanent
for sundry whole Months and years. 3ly. That without the privity or approbation
of the House: theirs by the Rumps privity, order and command. 4ly. That upon
just provocation, to repeal an Ordinance, to alter the Militia of London,
gotten by practice and surprise of some Army Officers, without the Cities
privity, to betray and sever it from the Parliament, and reduce both under the
Armies power: Theirs upon mere design and will without provocation, to destroy
the King, Lords, KIngdom, Parliament, alter the Government, and usurp the
perpetual Parliamentary and Supreme Legislative, Civil and Military Power of
our 3. Kingdoms into their own hands. 5ly. They secluded never a Lord, nor
Commoner by force: these not only exclude, but vote down, debar and engage
against the whole House of Lords, and three parts of four of the Commons House
(above 200. of them still living) against their Protestation, Vow, League,
Covenant, former Votes, Orders, Ordinances, the Act of 16 Car. chapter 1. and 17
Car. c. 6. the Writs and Indentures by which they pretend to sit. 6ly. The
Members pretended to be forced away by the Apprentices, were not above 25 or 30
who went not away til 3. days after the force, by an invitation from the
Army Officers, against the House will and privity, the Members forcibly
secluded and then secured 300. and now above 200. besides the Peers, are kept
out against their wills, both by the Rumps privity and command, from
discharging their Duties. 7ly. That force was never reiterated by the
Apprentices: this acted six times actually over and over against the secluded
Members. 8ly. That was accompanied only with a pretended terror in a few
Members: this with an actual forcible seclusion of above 200. an imprisonment
of more than 45. Members sundry weeks, months, and close imprisonment of others
ofthem in remote Castles without hea^ing or trial diverse years: and with
subsequent imprisonments, and close imprisonments since for refusing the
Engagement, and a proclaiming others of them Traitors in all Counties, Cities,
Corporations, Churches and Chapels, only for raising forces to bring in all the
secluded Members, and procure a FREE PARLIAMENT, for which some are now close
Prisoners, and their Estates sequestered. 9ly. The Ordinances, Votes, and
Orders, declared null and void by this Ordinance, were made and passed by near
three hundred Commoners, without any* Gards or Order to keep out the Speakers,
and those fugitive Members who voluntarily repaired to the Army: and ratified
by the House of Lords then sitting without Gards to seclude any Peer or Member;
Their Orders, Votes, Ordinances from December. 26. 1648. till Apr. 20. 1653. and
May, 7 til October. 13. were seldom made by above 40 or 50 Commoners at most
without the House of Peers; and those now sitting under a force to keep out the
secluded Members and Peers, when they made their last Votes, Acts, Orders
December. 26, and 27. were but 43. at most, whereof 7. or 8. were no legal
Members. Therefore upon all these considerations both by the Speakers own
printed Letter, July 29. and this Ordinance, all Votes, Orders, Ordinances* and
Acts of the Rump* (the Parliament being under such a horrid, actual, visible,
reiterated, approved, commanded armed force, and so many Members forcibly
secluded and restrained) must needs be void and null to all intents at their
very making, and no ways to be owned or obeyed (as the secluded House of
Lords, and Majority of the secluded Commons House, have often publicly declare
to our 3. Nations, and the world) and nothing is or can be valid or legal which
they shall order or impose before all the secluded Members be restored, without
any new test or restriction to sit, act, and vote with that ancient freedom and
safety, which of right belongs unto them.

7. Whether their present Speaker, now*a monstrous Plurality, Monopoly, Medly
of sundry inconsistent Greatest Offices of Honor, Power and Trust, being both
sole Lord*Keeper of their Great Seal, sole Lord General of the Armies by Land,
sole Lord Admiral of the Navy by Sea, sole Lord Warden of the Ports, sole
Guardian of the Liberties of England, sole Master of the Rolls, sole Speaker of
the Commons House at first, and of the two Rumps since its dissolution, and
sole visible Head of their Vtopian and Harringtonian projected Commonwealth in
his political, and as strange a Compound in his ethical capacity, though but a
single Person in his natural; be not a suitable Speaker for that monstrous Rump
now sitting, compacted mostly of Members of the Old Parliament, elected and
sitting by virtue of the Kings Writs, for the defense of Him and his Realm of
England, and to do and consent to such things as by the common advice and
council of the Prelates, Lords, and Great men of the Realm should be ordaiued;
and yet destroying, engaging, and now swearing against both King, Kingship,
Kingdom, Peerage, and House of Lords, and secluding all Members engaging not
with them therein: cre^ting and stiling themselves the Supreme Authority of the
Common*wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland too, by what chemistry and Right
is yet unknown, being at fir^^ by the Writs, Indentures and Act by which they
sit, but Members of the Commons house in the Parliament of the King and Realm
of England: Next of some new additional Members, by writs in the name and under
the Seal of the Gardians of their yet unshaped Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland; who piece together with the former, like the feet and
legs of Nebuchadnezzars Image, which were part of Iron, and part of Clay; and
lastly, the rear of this Rump, is made up of the doting old Earl of Salisbury,
and lunatic young Earl of Pembrook, who have degraded themselves of their
Peerage, and become baser than the basest Commoners, to be the Tail of this
strange heterogeneral Monster. Whether their continuing obstinate, and
incorrigible in their Tyrannies, Treasons, Usurpations, forcible Exclusions of
the Lords, and these their fellow Members, notwithstanding all their former and
late Dissipations by the Army Officers, the unsafety of their present
Condition, the General displeasure of the whole Kingdom, secluded Lords,
Commons, and most part of the Officers and Soldiers against them; the
wonderful Providence and Rebukes of God himself from Heaven; the Admonitions,
Entreaties, desires of their friends; the secluded Members, City, Country, and
our 3. Nations, and their adding drunkenness to thirst, in voting a New Oath of
Abjuration Jan. 2. to keep out all the secluded Members, and aggravate their
former forcible seclusion in the highest extremity, instead of repairing, or
repenting it, and deprive them of all possibility of readmission to sit and
vote together with them in freedom and safety, Be not a certain symptom that
they are now ripe for another total and final ejection, by some wonderful
Divine Providence or other, to the deserved ruin of their usurped
Anti-Parliamentary power, Persons, Families, Estates, if not of their very
souls; seeing God himself has spoken, Nay sworn, and will most certainly
perform it; That those who fear not God, nor the King, and are given to Change,
and being often reproved, harden their necks and hearts too, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy: and shall never enter into his rest, Prove.
24. 21, 22. chapter 29. 1. Psalm. 98. 8, 11.

FINIS.

