A PLEA FOR Sr GEORGE BOOTH, And the Cheshire Gentlemen.
BRIEFLY Stated in a Letter to Sir ARTHVR HESILLRIGGE.
By an unbiassed Friend of Truth and Peace.
SIR,
TO drive furiously without fear or wit will never render you a good Statesman,
and partially to distribut^ your acts of justice and of mercy cannot recommend
you to the world as a good Christian: If in both you would approve your self,
you ought seriously to weigh, and as one says, Deliberately taste your words
and designs before you can digest and prepare them for action. And to let you
know that the Country has observed your precipitation in the one, and
partiality in the other; these lines do now salute you. The Act of Indemnity to
the Officers of the Army, and your rigorous proceeding with Sir George Booth,
and his Party, do most visibly demonstrate, that you and your Fellow Members,
have banished all thoughts of justice or consideration in all your resolutions;
and how you will answer it, either at the Court of Heaven, or of the next
ensuing Parliament, is past my weak imaginations to conceive; and therefore
give me leave (according to my usual plaineness) to present you with my
thoughts, in relation to this so unparalleld diversity of your proceedings. And
in the first place let me reflect upon Sir George Booth and his Party, and in
your language admit them Rebels against you; and were not Fleetwood, Lambert,
Desborough, and the rest of the Army Officers so too? And what Logical or
rational Statesman can include those within the predicament of passion, and
exclude these? It Is said that the fear of them, was the overhasty womb, that
gave birth unto their Indemnity, and therefore your power over the other has
made you so severe against them; but how unsuitable is this to a true Roman
spirit, which delights to make chains and fetters, rather then open and
unconquered rebellion, the subject of its mercy. This is the effect of a
timorous cowardly soul, the other the most certain product of every truly
generous and noble nature. But all this I hint supposing the equality of their
crimes, then which nothing can be a more gross and palpable mistake; wherefore
Sir if you would deliberate upon these two actions in their authors, and in
their ends, and in the circumstances of both, you will find the one a Gnat,
the other a Camel, and how you should swallow this and stumble at that, I know
no reason, unless it be that of our Saviors to the Pharisees. However now
let us compare them, and take a short view of their differences. Sir George
Booth and his Party but endeavored and affected to fill up your House with its
own (supposed most Legal) Members; The Army Officers have attempted and
effected the subversion of you; or if you will, the one would destroy the part
of the body to preserve the major part sound, the other would destroy the part,
that we should never hereafter have a whole or part of a Parliament; The one
would have perfected you, and made you complete in all your integrall parts,
the other would not have the least part of a Parliament: In a word, one would
have a Parliament but not the minor part thereof, the other (from their hatred
of the peoples power) abhorred the very name of both; The one were Acted by
their Oaths and Covenants to assert, and defend the freedom and privileges
of Parliaments; And so their actions may seem to be at most the result of an
erring Conscience; The other had no visible impulsive cause, but their own
boundless ambition, and insatiable lust after domination; The one would have
defended and confirmed, the other would have confounded and subverted all our
Laws, Liberties, and Religion; The one were Gentlemen of ancient and
considerable Families, and could not better themselves by a War; the other
upstarted Mushroms, and could not have risen but by a War; The Estates of the
one are the bitter-sweet fruits of cruelty and blood; The Lands of the other
the gifts of peaceable Laws and Justice; The one you had provoked by a forcible
secluding their Members from their Privileges in Parliament, The other (after
your resurrection in May last) you had lately pardoned and after preferred;
these were your slaves and servants, Commissionated by your Authority, paid by
your Treasuries, and therefore obliged at all times, both day and night to be
at your absolute command and obedience, The other free from all such severe
obligation, and strict inducements to subjection; The one did rise 150 miles
distant from you, hoping that you would consider of a mediation, by a present
restoring of them to their most undoubted rights in Parliament, and so have
prevented any further mischief; But the other immediately flew at your very
faces, and had the confidence of some saucy and rebellious Servants, to take
you by the head or throat, and most insolently dragged you out of your own
House, and shut your own doors against you, their Sovereign Lords and
Masters: Lastly, The one were and (I dare say) still are most universally
beloved and esteemed the true (though unfortunate) Patriots, of their
Countries, Laws, and Liberties; The other the very butt or mark against which
all true English men do direct and level the Arrows of their hatred and most
just deserved indignation. Sir, weigh seriously all these but hinted
considerations, and enlarge them in your own more judicious thoughts; And then
let me ask you, whether any prudence, reason, or conscience, can honorably
persuade you, to affront the whole interest of this English Nation, by ruining
their friends and pardoning their enemies: And how shall the people believe,
that you will ever trust the Government in them by succeeding Parliaments, if
thus you heighten and inrage their spirits against you. Sir, Be you confident
that never any kept his interest from sinking by swimming against the stream;
Nor was there any that advantaged himself by a Diametricall opposition to the
general humor or genious of the people: And therefore it has been the
prudence of Antiquity, even in full Parliaments themselves, to sedate and
compose the spirits of the Nation, rather by a favorable compliance with them,
then by an express and open contradiction unto them: Hence it is you have a
Parliament Roll styled Rotulum Contrarientium, The reason whereof was, because
Thomas Earl of Lancaster (a man singularly beloved) taking part with the Barons
against King Edward the second, in hatred of the Spencers: It was not thought
safe for the King, in respect of their power and interest in the affections of
the people, to name them Rebels and Traitors but Contrarientes. True it is, he
that despises the peoples power knows not his own weakness, and therefore by
the neglect of the one and ignorance of the other, suddenly makes himself
obnoxious to the miseries of a popular rage and confusion. To conclude then, if
it be impossible to have any succeeding Parliaments (though the Royalist be
excluded therefrom) that will approve and confirm this your late Act
concerning Sir George Booth and his Party (the possibility or impossibility
whereof I leave to your own thoughts.) Is it not prudence to look before you
leap? and to ground your actions upon the popular interest, and not upon any
particular faction; which (like an Ignis fatuus) the contrary winds of private
Parties, will easily tumble and toss with a perpetual agitation and
inconstancy: Whereas the brightness of a true public interest, will keep its
native splendor and glory, maugre all those clouds and storms of opposition,
which the blustering spirits of private and partial concernments can raise
either to eclipse or weaken it; the undoubted experience whereof, the
revolution of a few months, will I hope demonstrate unto as well your self as
unto

Your Humble Servant W. ^.


