Memorial.
THat in regard Mr. John Albot Register of the Prerogative Office had deserted
his trust, and left London, obscuring himself whilst his Clarks officiated for
him, and in his name at Oxford; and that endeavors were twice used to conveigh
the Books and other Writings of the proceedings in this Office to Oxford, (were
prevented by the Parliaments care) Mr. Abbot sequestered for absenting himself
from taxes, etc. In which time great mischiefs did arise to the Public, by
recourse daily to Oxford, thereupon; which I perceiving, did obtain this Letter
from his Excellency to Mr. Speaker.

Sir, At the request of this Gentleman Mr. Henry Parker (whose good and
preferment I very much desire) I commend to you this enclosed Petition, that it
may be presented to the House by your hand: I can afford him a good testimony
of his faithful and acceptable service to the State, and to my self, ever
since the first forming of the Army: and his parts and abilities, I presume,
are not unknown to the House. It is now therefore my request to you, that you
will communicate my mediation on his behalf, and use your power, and my Name
that he may obtain this Suit, or some other of the like nature, if this fail.
And this is my request to the House the rather, for that (as I am truly
informed) he has not received, nor ever yet moved for any pay, or recompense
from the State since his first attendance; notwithstanding his losses in
Oxfordshire by the Kings Army. I am informed also, that his employment for some
months past has been of little or no benefit to him, and yet he is unwilling
to draw any thing from the public stock, in these distressed times. But for
further satisfaction in these or other particulars, I refer you to his own
Account, and not doubting but that he will be very studious to merit such a
public acknowledgement, and encouragement, as this, if he may obtain it. I
again recommend both him, and his Request to your favor, and rest,

St. Albons, Nov. 16. 1643. Your affectionate Friend, ESSEX.


The Petition enclosed, and presented, was this.

That the now Judge and Register of the Prerogative Court of Cant: (being
Officers of great trust and consequence, who ought to attend and execute the
duty of their places accordingly) have long neglected and abused the said Trust
by deserting their Charge here, whereby the course of Justice is obstructed,
the Rolls and Records of that Court much endangered, much recourse daily unto
Oxford; besides many other inconveniences of great importance to the Parliament
and State.

Your Petitioner, as well out of his humble desire to do faithful service to
the Commonwealth, as in hope of some encouragement and recompense of his
former endeavors and service to this High Court; and the rather being now
stripped and plundered of his whole estate in Oxfordshire by the Army there.

Humbly desires that he may be invested in some employment in one or both of
the said Places, as this Honorable House shall think fit, whereby he may have
some convenient support for himself and his Family, etc.

Order.
Die Sabbati. 18. Nov. 1643.
The humble Petition of Henry Parker Gent: (especially recommended by my Lord
General) was read, and Ordered to be referred to Mr. White, Mr. Seldom, Mr.
Solicitor, Mr. Prideaux, and Mr. Brown, to consider what is fit for this House
to do further upon it, and to report their Opinions.

Ordered, That this House do Declare, that They are sensible of the good
service Mr. Parker has done to the Commonwealth, and they will in this
particular mentioned in his Petition, or in some other thing as advantageous,
consider him for his good services.

H. Elsyng.

By this I was encouraged to solicit the establishment of the Prerogative
Court; and to that purpose I did attend the Referres, presenting some Papers to
them, as motives why the business ought to be hastened, and a form how by
Ordinance it might be passed.

About Midsummer 1644. I understood Mr. Oldsworth would appear my Competitor,
and that he had prepared an Ordinance for the placing himself in Mr. Abbots
room: but the Ordinance being read, the House refused to insert his name
therein, by reason that Sir Henry Vane sen. acquainted them of a former Order
made in my behalf, and so only a Memorandum was entered, that Master Oldsworth
had been mentioned, as aforesaid.

Nevertheless, this competition made me so solicitous, as to procure another
recommendation to Mr. Speaker.

The substance of the Petition was for an accomplishment of the Order of
November: 18. 1643.

Immediately after the House committed the manner of settling the Prerogative
Court to Doctor Eden and Mr. Maynard, to both whom I presented a form of my
draught; but the business long hung in their hands, and now that Ordinance is
past, and Sir Not. Brent is settled Judge, and now I again renew my old suit,
and procured from his Excellency a new revivall of his former recommendation in
this manner.

SIR, About a year since by my Letter to you directed, I did recommend Mr.
Parkers Petition to the House of Commons, and use my mediation in his behalf,
That acceptance which he then found for my sake I do now with thankfulness
acknowledge: but because his expectation remains still engaged in the same
business, I make it my suit with earnesse once more, That they would continue
their good intentions toward him, and accomplish now that which in expressions
of so much grace was formerly condiscended to. The Gentleman has been active
and passive in this Cause, and though he be made obnoxious to the other side by
his service to the Committee of Safety and my self, and by his ingenious
endeavors otherwise, yet he has hitherto received no satisfaction at all
either as gratuitous, or as due. This makes him the more hopeful of
encouragement in this particular, and this makes me the more earnest
intercessour for him: and this I pray represent to the House from him who is

Essex house, Nov. 4. 1644. Your very affectionate friend, ESSEX.


This Letter has not been read in the House, because Mr. Oldsworth moved in the
morning before it came to the House, and the Petition accompanying it was thus:

That your Petitioner in November. 1643. did exhibit a Petition to this
honorable House for the Registers place in the Prerogative Court (at that time
sequestered) and did obtain a very gracious Answer therein.

That the only cause of delay then was the new settling and altring of that
Court, because it was to be dis-annexed from Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and
that would require some time, and debate; especially as the troubles and
diversions, and throngs of other important business did then intervene.

That your Petitioner did take pains to solicit and facilitate that
alteration, and for diverse months together met with no competition, or
opposition.

That when the business was grown near to perfection, and the House began to
hasten the speeding thereof, Mr. Abbot appeared out of his retirement, and Mr.
Oldsworth by his power interposed.

His most humble prayer therefore is, that forasmuch as Mr. Abbot has
neglected his charge, to the damage of the State, and has lien under
sequestration, and only cast in his private case amongst the various, high,
important affairs of this Honorable House to avoid expedition, as may be
conceived: and forasmuch as Mr. Oldsworth suit was subsequent in time to the
Petitioners, and was not commenced till the favorable Order of the House had
fixed the hopes of the Petitioner upon this solicitation, and dis-ingaged him
from other applications: His most humble prayer is that he may be admitted into
the execution and possession of the said Registers place.

And your Petitioner shall ever, etc.

This Petition for the cause aforesaid was not presented.

If it be objected, that the Petitioner did not make suit for the Registers
place in Terminis. I answer. It had been presumption to limit the House, or to
particularize too far, but in the opening of the Petition it was so represented
to the House, and the House so understood it; and the Judges place being
granted away since, the Order can now take place no otherwise; unless it be
supposed, that I used his Excellencies recommendation; and made all this suit
for some inferior service under the Register.

If it be objected, that the Order refers to something else as advantageous. I
answer. That was added in favor of me, in case this might fail by Mr. Abbots
justification or otherwise; and so the words are in his Excellencies Letter.
That addition was not intended to frustrate my suit, or to prolong my
attendance, or to put me upon endless enquiries: Any thing else for the
present, though less advantageous shall satisfy me; but there is no certainty
how the Order of the House can be ever satisfied, if I am left to another
discovery; for either I may not live, or not discover; or else I am still in
the same predicament, and only capable of the same answer, in infinitum.

If it be objected that Mr. Oldsworths merit is greater then mine. I answer. In
suits merely honorary, I will be no competitor with Mr. Oldsworth; but in suits
of a pecuniary nature, I conceive I have this advantage: whereas he serves
immediately for such a Borough, and the old use and Law was, that Shires,
Buroughs, or Cities, should maintain their own Representants; I have served
the Lords and Commons immediately in a place of Eminence, and so for my
ordinary attendance and Travail may pretend to a due entertainment or pay. And
yet more then this, I have done extraordinary Offices also to the whole State,
which have not been altogether unacceptable; and which I hope, were in part
pointed in the Houses Order; I shall without immodesty say this, if Mr.
Oldsworth have made himself more odious to the other side then I have done. I
desire he may be more gracious to this.

If it be objected, that I have already enjoyed a place of great profit. I
answer. It Is known to all that ever had business with me, that I never demanded
(nor suffered to be by my Servants) any thing of any as a due, or as a
gratuity; and it is known to my self what I have given away, and what I have
lent, and what I have lost by Plunder and otherwise; and I wish I may fail in
this suit, if I am not solicitous in it that I may be enabled thereby for that
public service, which hitherto mere indigence has hindered me from: If the
gaining of a new Office could as much conduce to Mr. Oldsworths attendance in
Parliament, as it may to my other studies and endeavors I would not be his
concurrent.

If it be objected, that the Place is of vast advantage. I answer. For that I
shall not insist upon, those words in the Order: I leave that to the Houses own
interpretation, and to consider as well what is fit for them to give, as for me
to receive; if this also may be a president for other Officers either to
moderate fees, or to assist the public by them, I shall rejoice to see it:
nevertheless Master Kilvert (who is Mr. Oldsworths friend, and my enemy) will
not cantonize the place (it is his own words) if Master Oldsworth may enjoy it,
but rather then I shall enjoy it, he will be so good a Patriot, as to cut it
into parts.

My suit therefore now is, that since the House did first intend me this place,
or something else as advantageous, in case this proved not feasible, and did
add a clause for my benefit in their Order, not because I should be put off
upon further attendance or expectation. And forasmuch as Mr. Oldsworth is not
only barred by the self denying Ordinance, of the third of April, 1645. and
resolutions of the House the tenth of June, 1647. but was also a Competitor
subsequent in time as is before expressed, that he made no request to the House
for this place (nor acquainted them withal how far the House had condescended
before, about the same in giving it to me) but proceeded directly by way of
Ordinance, for possessing himself of that place: All the premises considered;
That I may be made capable of that favor which the Honorable Houses Order
first intended me.

My friends may also urge in my behalf: 1. That I never sought for any stipend
from the State, nor ever received penny under that name; but did disburse some
Moneys for the State, upon special command and order; all which is not yet
paid. 2. That though I was once for a short time placed so, as that I might
have reaped much benefit by it, if I would have exacted upon poor Soldiers;
yet I was so far from that, that I would never strictly demand any thing as
due, nor suffer my Clerks; but did instead of gaining, sometimes lose by some
Officers that were in want. 3. That when I left this Kingdom, and betook my
self to serve the Merchants at Hamburgh, I was driven thereunto by necessity;
and because I was loft to press upon the State for a subsistence, and not out
of any want of zeal: and this I presented in, in humble Petition at my
departure, though I could not procure the same to be read. 4. That my
attendance upon this business of the Registers Office so many years, has not
only put me to trouble and pains, but after to some charge and difficulty; I
keeping a man in weekly pay in London in my absence to attend this business, who
did little by reason of the many troubles of this Kingdom. And when he was
dead, sent my own servant from Hamburgh to attend the same. I humbly offer
these things to those who are my Judges, and I hope without respect to persons,
or pre-ingagements, will with an equal eye look upon our several pretenses.


HENRY PARKER.


