THE LORDS SUPPER BRIEFLY VINDICATED; AND Clearly demonstrated by Scripture and
other Authorities, to be a GRACE-BEGETTING, SOUL-CONVERTING, (as well as
confirming) ORDINANCE; against all false, vain, absurd, irreligious Cavils,
Objections, Whimsies, Delusions of those Novellists, who have lately
contradicted it, both in Press and Pulpit: here satisfactorily refuted,
retorted, dissipated.

By William Prynne of Swainswick Esquire; a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ? Synodus Senonensis: 1528. apud Laur. Bochellum, Decret. Eccles.
Gallicanae. l. 2. Tit. 1. c. 34. p. 153. Quis autem Vivificum esse neget
Eucharistiae Sacramentum quod tam apertis testimoniis Scripturae comprobatur?
Calix enim Benedictionis, cui benedicimus, nonne Communicatio Sanguinis Christi
est? etc. Quibus luce clarius constat, Eucharistiae Sacramentum Gratiam
confer. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Edward Thomas in Green Arbor,
1658

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, I here present thee with a Brief (yet full, Satisfactory)
Vindication, and clear Demonstrations from Scripture and other Authorities,
That the Lords Supper, is not only a mere confirming, but likewise a
Grace-begetting, Soulconverting Ordinance: Wherein I have truly propounded,
satisfactorily refuted, retorted, and (I hope) for ever dissipated, all the
false, vain, absurd, irreligious Objections, Cavils, Whimsies, Delusions of
those Novellists, who have lately contradicted it both in Press and Pulpit; and
upon this false Account, most irreligiously, if not antichristianly refused to
administer it to their people for sundry years together, and that by a secret
Combination, to carry on their own Self-interests, against the very Interest
and Institution of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Occasion of penning this
Publication, was a late Act-Question, and a Sermon which I heard this last
Vacation; The principal motive exciting me thereunto, was this sad Observation,
That though sundry Ministers in most parts of England have most audaciously,
frequently, earnestly in their Pulpits and Publications decried, impugned the
Grace-ingendring, Soul-inlivening power of the Lords Supper, (and other
Sacraments) against the sacred Scipture, the resolutions of Fathers, Councils,
Schoolmen, Protestant Divines, the Articles, Chief Writers of our Church, and
the Directory it self, to justify their debarring the people from it year
after year; yet few or none of our Ministers, of a contrary judgment, (Mr.
Humfryes with some one or two more excepted) have dared openl, to refute, write
or preach against this their most dangerous spreading Error, and disusage of
this Sacrament grounded on it, to reclaim them from it, or undeceive their
seduced Auditors, Readers; such being their general luke warmness, or rather
key-coldness in this common cause, for fear of discontenting those their
over-rigid Presbyterian and Independent Brethren; or impairing that now
Classical Jurisdiction which they have long attempted to erect, often suspending
their Parishioners from the Lords Supper at their pleasures; that unless some
Laymen ( as John Timson, Mr. Morris, and my Self) had publicly opposed,
refuted them in printed Discourses (having no command of their Pulpits) this
their Anti-Sacramental, absurd, impious Paradox had passed for Orthodox truth,
without control; and totally deprived the people in all or most places, both
of the frequent use of the Lords Supper, and of their Christian liberty and
free access thereto in any place, unless they first submitted their necks to a
Classical examination both of their knowledge, lives, and saving Graces; or
new-modelled themselves into an Independent, or Anabaptistical congregation:
Which mischiefs though our Books (through Gods blessing on them) have in a
great measure prevented; yea converted some, and quite silenced others of the
Opposite party, yet such is their obstinacy, such their unchristian,
uncharitable deportment toward us, that the generality of the Presbyterial and
Independent Ministers secretly backbite, malign, and some of them openly
revile us for our pains, as crossing their self-designs, though they cannot
refute, nor deny those Truths we have defended, out of mere zeal to Gods Glory,
Christ's Sacraments, and the peoples Christian liberty, Conversion, Edification,
Consolation, Salvation: Now the Lord convince them all thoroughly of, and
convert them from this their sin, error, by his effectual blessing on our
former Labors, and particularly on this Brief Vindication; from which if thou
shall receive any Spiritual benefit or satisfaction in the points therein
debated, give God the whole Glory of it, and me only a share in thy daily
Prayers.

William Prynne.
Swainswick, 24 August 1657.
The LORDS SUPPER a Grace-begetting, Soul-converting Ordinance.
MEeting lately with a Printed Question in the Country, professedly asserting
(in the public Schools of my Quondam nursing Mother, the famous University of
Oxford, the last Act there held,) The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be no
Grace-engendring, Soul-converting, but only a confirming Ordinance, or
prae-existent Grace: And having soon after heard the same with much confidence
vehemently affirmed, in the Pulpit of an eminent City, where the Inhabitants
(upon this mistake) have for diverse whole years been deprived by their Minister
of the inestimable Soul-refreshing Benefits of this heavenly banquet, to their
greatest grief; I thereupon conceived my self obliged in point of Conscience,
Duty both to God and Men, (having formerly oppugned this Mat. 16.6.12.
Pharisaical spreading leven both in its rise and progress) to apply a fresh
Emplaster to so dangerous a Gangraena, and new prodigious Error; which the
Anabaptists, and Independents strenuously assert on the one hand; to withdraw
the people from our mixed Parochial Congregations, to their select Separated
Conventicles (consisting only of the most refined sublimated Saints, as they
deem themselves: and the over-rigid Presbyterians cry up on the other hand, to
lure the people to submit their necks, consciences to their new Presbyterial
Trials, and Suspensions from this Sacrament, till adjudged worthy by their
Classical Sentences to receive it: which these different politic Psalm. 58.5.
Charmers hope to effect by this late-invented false Charm, so frequently
sounded by them in all places into the ears of their Auditors for these by ends
alone, (not out of any real love to truth, or their peoples Spiritual welfare)
without opposition.

This absurd irreligious Paradox I have heretofore at large refuted by
Scriptures, Reasons, Experience, Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, Protestant
Divines of our own and other reformed Churches; and by the Homilies, Articles
of the Church of England (ratified by Parliament, and the Subscriptions of all
our Ministers to them) in my Vindication of 4. Serious Questions printed 1645.
p. 39. to 48. my Suspension suspended, published 1646. p. 18. to 39. and
briefly touched in my Seasonable Vindication, p. 28, 29. Since which I have
herein been seconded by Mr. John Humfrey in his acute and solid Rejoinder to
Mr. Drake, printed 1654. p. 216. to 241. in his Second Vindication of
Free-admission to the Lords Supper, 1656. p. 32. etc. and by that learned
Gentleman Mr. William Morris of Werrington Esquire, in his irrefragable
Diatribe, in answer to Mr. Saunders, 1657. p. 218, 219, etc. to whom I shall
referr all such who desire fuller Satisfaction in this Controversy, which they
have so solidly, and amply debated, that there is little remaining to be
superadded by me, but some few Gleanings after these fuller Crops; which I
hope, through Gods blessing, will silence, convince all future Antagonists, and
presume will be neither unacceptable, nor contemptible, nor superfluous, to
sincere unbiassed Christians, who only study, seek, Zech. 8.19.
love the Truth and Peace; for whose benefit I have made them public.

Our See Dr. Drakes Boundary to the Holy Mount, p. 154. to 176. 120, 121, etc.
Mr. Collins, Mr. Saunders Books, and others of them who have written of this
subject.
Antagonists destitute of all Scripture proofs, to evidence the Lords Supper to
be no Soul-converting, Grace-producing, but only a Grace-confirming Ordinance,
do bottom their opinions upon these 7. sandy Foundations or Objections.

That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Seal not only of the Covenant of
Grace but also of the truth of saving Faith and Grace in the hearts of the
Receivers. Therefore it is only a confirming, but no soul-converting,
faith-begetting Ordinance.

I shall concisely examine, dissipate, overturn this rotten Foundation whereon
this Error is principally grounded, and display its vanity, absurdity 2 Cor.
4.2.
to every man's conscience in the sight of God. To this end take special notice
in the first place;

1. That the Lords Supper is never so much as once styled in Scripture, a Seal,
or Seal of the Covenant of Grace: much less a Seal of saving Faith, or of the
truth of saving Grace in men's hearts; but only, the Mat. 26.26,27. Lu.
22.18,19,20. 1 Cor. 10.16,17.21. c.11.20. to 30. Gal. 3.1.
Lords Supper, Table, Bread, Cup, Body, Blood; or the Remembrance, Figure,
Sign, Representation of his death and passion; which have no analogy at all
with a Seal: By what rule then of faith or right reason can they justly affirm,
prove it, to be any Seal at all, or such a Seal as this? If rherefore it be no
Seal by divine appellation or institution, then all their consequences built on
this false foundation, fall to the ground together. If they allege, that
Circumcision is directly styled, A sign, and Seal of the righteousness of the
faith, Romans 4.11. Ergo, the Lords Supper is likewise such a Seal, and may
properly be styled a Seal. Though many learned See Dr. Ames Bellarm. Enerv.
Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 1. p. 9. to 15.
Protestants and some Papists, be of this opinion; yet under correction I deny
the consequence, upon these grounds. 1. Because God himself gives this Title to
Circumcision only, and that but once; but never to the Passover, Lords Supper,
Baptism, or any other Ordinance: Therefore his Ministers, Servants, must
conform themselves to his pattern and language herein. 2. Circumcision was a
v^sible mark set by Gods command upon the flesh or persons of all who were
circumcised; Therefore it might properly be styled, a Sign, Seal, and Covenant
of God in their flesh, (upon which is left a perpetual impression) Genesis
17.10,11,12,13,14. Romans 2.28. c.4.11. But the Lords Supper, Baptism, and the
Passover, leave no such visible marks or impressions on the persons, or flesh
of those who receive them; Therefore God never styled any of them Marks or
Seals, as he did Circumcision, neither may we without his warrant, against his
president and sacred language, style them so. 3. The Lords Supper, succeeded
not Circumcision, but the Mat. 26.17. to 31. 1 Cor. 5.7,8. c.10.3,4.
Passover; never called a Seal in sacred Writ: Therefore this style
appropriated to Circumcision, cannot be rationally given to it: the rather,
because the Holy Ghost never gives it to Baptism, which succeeded Circumcision.
4. Circumcision is only styled, A Seal of the righteousness of the faith which
Abraham had being uncircumcised; See Calvin, Peter Martyr, Aretius, Fayus,
Paraeus, willet, wilson, and others on Romans 4.
That is, a token of the Covenant between God and Abraham, and his seed, made
to him by God, and believed by Abraham, before he was circumcised; as is
evident by Genesis 17.1. to 15. compared with, 15.1. to 8. and Romans 4.9. to 23.
But the Lords Supper is not such a Seal, token, but instituted for other ends,
to represent unto us the breaking of Christ's body, and shedding of his blood on
the Cross for our sins; to show forth his death till he come, etc. Whence it is
styled, The new Testament in his blood, Mat. 26.26,27,28. Lu. 22.19. 1 Cor
11.24,25,26. c.10.16,21. etc. Therefore Gods stiling Circumcision a Seal, is no
warrant for us to style the Lords Supper so. That the Lords Supper may properly
be styled a Seal, because it does confirm, which is their only reason: I deny
the consequence: for then by this reason, an Oath should be a Seal, because it
is for confirmation, Hebr. 6.16,17. Miracles and Signs done by the Apostles,
should be Seals, because they confirmed the words and Gospel they preached,
Mar. 16.20. The hu^bands Silence should be a Seal, which confirmed all his
wives vows and bonds, Number. 30.14. The plucking off the shoe and giving it to a
neighbor, should be a Seal, because it confirmed all things concerning
redeeming and changing Lands in Israel, Ruth 4.7. Every Decree should be a
Seal, because it confirms the things decreed, Esther 9.29,32. Yea, the
Apostles, Ministers, and Word preached should be Seals too, because they
confirmed the Souls of the Disciples, the Churches of Christ, and testimony of
Christ in men, Acts 15.32,41. c.14.22. 1 Cor. 1.6. Heb. 2.3. Phil. 1.7. And
Christ himself a Seal too, who shall confirm us unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8.5. The
Scripture makes mention only of 2. sorts of Seals: The 1. material; affixed to
Writings, Deeds, Books, Letters, and other material things, for their
confirmation, securing, or secrecy, Neh. 9.38. c.10.1. Esth. 3.12. c.8.8.10.
Job 41.15. c.14.17. Deuteronomy. 32.43. Isay 29.11. Cant. 4.12. Jer. 32.10,11,14,44.
Dan. 6.16. c.12.9. Mat. 17. Tim. 6.6. Rev. 5.1. c.8.1. c.10.4. c.22.10. The 2.
immaterial and invisible, set by the Spirit of God, or his Angels, on the souls
or forheads of his chosen Saints; who are said, to be sealed by and with the
holy Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. c.4.30. 2 Timothy 2.19. or, to be sealed with
the seal of God in their foreheads, Rev. 7.2. to 9. But the Lords Supper is no
material Seal visibly affixed to any material Writing, Deed, Letter, Book,
thing; the visible Elements of it being instituted, consecrated Mat.
26.27.27,28. 1 Cor. 11.24. to 30. c.10.16,17,21.
only to be eaten and drunken by us (like other bread, meat, drink, which may
be as properly styled Seals, as the consecrated bread and wine) not to remain
as Seals upon us; and the invisible body, blood, benefits of our Saviors death
they represent and convey unto our Souls for their spiritual nourishment, are
received only as spiritual food, not Seals; neither are our bodies or souls in
any Scripture said to be visibl or invisibly, inwardly or outwardly sealed, but
only to be fed and nourished by this Sacrament: Therefore it is as improper a
speech to call it a Seal, as to style our meat and drink a Seal: or to averr,
that men's persons, faith, or the Covenant of Grace are sealed by the Lords
Supper, as that their persons or Evidences of their Lands, Charters, Bonds, are
sealed by their Ordinary Suppers; there being no Analogy at all between Meat,
Drink, and a Seal, or between feeding and sealing; as these new Doctors affirm,
with as much sense and reason, as the Council. Trident. Sessio. 21. c. 3.
Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Bish. Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 72. etc. Ames
Bellarminus Enervatus, Tom. 3. lib. 4. c. 7. p. 179. etc.
Popish Councils, Doctors assert, That the Lay-Communicants actually drink
Christ's blood in the Eucharist by way of Concomitancy, only in and by their
eating the consecrated dry bread. 6. Admit the Lords Supper might in some
strained, secondary, improper sense be styled, A Seal of the new Testament or
Covenant of Grace, recorded in the Scripture, and ratified by Christ's death;
yet with what propriety of speech can they style it, a Seal affixed to the
Grace of faith, or saving Graces in the hearts of worthy Communicants? Can the
visible, material, consecrated Elements (which they refuse to administer to
those they repute not real Saints, for fear of setting a Seal to a blank) be
affixed by them to invisible immaterial Graces? If yea; then Bellarminus
Enervatus, Tom. 3. c. 3. P. 37.
Dr. Ames and other Protestants main Argument against the Papists, that the
Sacraments convey not grace ex opere operato, as physical instruments unto the
receivers of them, (Fieri n: non potest, ut Sacramenta, quae sunt res crassae
et materiales ad animam penetrent, et ibi quasi creando ingenerent divinam ac
supernaturalem virtutem, idque in momento, quia proportionem nullam habent ad
objectum in quod agunt:) must be both false, and disclaimed by them as absurd
for the future. If no; then this foundation and chief cornerstone of our
Opposites structure, against the Lords Suppers Soul-converting, Grace-producing
efficacy; That it is a Seal both of the Covenant and truth of saving faith and
Grace in the hearts of the receivers; must be henceforth disclaimed, recanted,
renounced by them, as a false, unproper, unscriptural Paradox and Expression,
though embraced by them as an unquestionable principle; which having Suspension
suspended, p. 19, 20.
elsewhere more fully refuted in another method, I shall here no further
prosecute, but only request them for the future to confine themselves wholly to
the Scripture language, and then this Controversy will soon be ended.

That Sacramental seals serve only to confirm, ratify prae-existent, not to
convey or effect non-existent Grace, the proper office of a Seal being to
confirm, not convey: Therefore the Lords Supper being a Seal, cannot possibly
beget or convey Grace where it is not, but only corroborate it where already
wrought.

This Position of theirs has neither Scripture nor reason to support it, being
an apparent untruth, and gross Solecism both in Divinity and Law: For,
Scripture, Law, and common experience might have instructed these Opposites,
that there are several properties and uses of Seals. The 1. is, to conceal and
seal up things from public view, as they usually seal up Letters, Books, Bags
of money, and what else they would keep private; for which peruse, Isa. 29.11.
Cant. 4.12. Job 41.15. Rev. 5.1. c.6.1. c.10.4. c.22.10. 2ly, To secure and
keep things safe from being embezelled: attested by Deuteronomy. 32.43. Job 34.16.
c.14.17. Dan. 6.17. Mat. 27.66. 3ly, To appropriate and mark persons or things
for our own, and to distinguish them from others, Rev. 7.2. to 9. c.9.10. 2 Timothy 2.19. 2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.13. c.4.30. 4ly, To commission or authorize
Officers and others to exercise their Offices, or execute their commands, Esth.
3.12. c. 8.10,11. John 6.26. Hence all Judges, Justices Commissions, Officers
Patents, and Writs to Sheriffs, are and must be sealed. 5. To confirm or
ratify Writings, and make them valid, and irrevocable in Law, Esth. 8.8. Neh.
9.38. c.10.1. Jer. 32.10.14.44. Isa. 8.16. Now these writing are of several
sorts and Natures, 1. Charters, Feoffments, Grants, Covenants, Gifts, Wills,
Bequests, giving, granting, transferring, and newly conveying Lands, Goods,
Honors, Annuities, Rights, Titles, Interests, Offices, Powers, Privileges,
Advantages, etc. from the King, or from one person to another, in which they
never had any right or interest before, being conveyed to them only by these
new sealed writings. 2. Deeds or Charters of confirmation, corroboration or
release, confirming or enlarging men's former rights, interests, estates in
Lands, or other things wherein they had a precedent interest or possession by
former conveyances. Seeing then there are several other properties, uses of
Seals besides confirmation; and the primary, original, most usual end of Seals
and sealed writings is, to convey, transferr new rights, titles, interests,
privileges, estates, possessions, and but the secondary end of them, to
confirm, corroborate or enlarge estates formerly conveyed; To argue, that the
Lords Supper is only a Grace-confirming, not a Grace-conveying Ordinance,
because it is a Seal; is as gross an absurdity as to averr, that all Deeds of
mere Feoffment, Grant, Gift, Bequest, are only Confirmations of precedent
interests or estates, not conveyances of new ones, because they are sealed; and
that Seals serve only to corroborate, not convey or transferr. 2. Themselves
assert, that this Sacrament is a Though not immediately affixed to it, as Seals
are to Deeds.
Seal of the New Covenant of Grace; and if so, then it must certainly be rather
a Seal for Conveyance of new Grace where wanting, than a confirmation of
prae-existent Grace, the Sea Olevian, de Substantia Foederis.
Tenor of this new Covenant being thus expressed both in the Old and New
Testament, Jer. 31.31,32. Heb. 8.6. to 13. c.10.16,17. I will put my Laws into
their hearts, and in their minds and hearts will I write them, (both in the
future, not preterperfect tense) And I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people, etc. Thus enlarged, Ezech. 11.18,19,20. c.36.25,26,27. Jer.
32.39. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all
your filthiness, etc. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you (not confirm that old you had before) and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh: And I
will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them, (all in the future tense.) This Covenant
then being all in the future, conveying a New heart, New Spirit, new clensing,
sanctification and obedience, where they were not before; The Lords Supper
being the Seal of this Covenant, by their own concessions must certainly be (in
Gods original intention and divine institution) rather a Grace-conveying,
Faith-ingendring, Soul-converting Ordinance where it found no prae-existent
Grace, than a bare confirming ordinance to corroborate and increase true Grace
only where it was formerly wrought by other Ordinances; wherefore they must
either renounce this Covenant of future Grace, or this Sacrament to be a Seal
thereof: or else abjure this second foundation of their Error.

That those have no right to, nor interest in the Covenant of Grace, who have
no prae-existent saving Grace, and faith within them: Therefore to administer
the Lords Supper to such, is but to set a Seal to a blank, which cannot work
any saving Grace or conversion in them.

I answer, That this Position (an Oracle of their own forging, not of Gods
inditing) is as false as God is true. For 1. There are two sorts of Promises or
Covenants of Grace contained in the Scriptures. 1. Of working, begetting in, or
giving, conferring a New heart, spirit, and all necessary saving Graces, to
those who never had them: 2ly, Of confirming, increasing, renewing,
perpetuating Graces when and where they are already began; commonly thus
distinguished: Promises of Grace, and Promises to Grace. The first of these
Promises and Covenants (being general, universal, indefinite) were made to men,
not only before their calling and conversion, but before their very births and
being in the world; witness Gods Covenant, Promises made to the seed of
Abraham; and for the calling, conversion, salvation of the Gentiles, many
hundred years before their fulfilling, recorded at large, Genesis 17.1. to 17.
Acts 2.38,39. Hos. 1.10. c.2.23. Romans 9.25,26. c. 11.26.30,31.15. c.15.8. to
24. Isa. 52.15. Ephesians. 2.1,2,5,11. to 24. Isa. 42.1.6. c.60.3,4,5, c.62.2.11,12.
c.66.19,20,21. Psalm. 72.4. to 18. Yea the promises and new Covenant
forementioned (of which our Antagonists affirm the Lords Supper to be a Seal)
were made to such, who had no saving Grace, no new heart, spirit. or
sanctification at all in them, but were desperately sinful, graceless,
rebellious, and dead in sins and trespasses, when made unto them, as is evident
by Jer. 31.31,33,34. c.32.37, to 44. Ezech. 11.18,19,20. c.36.25,26,27. Heb.
8.6. to 13. c.10.16,17. Therefore if these Promises and Covenants of Grace were
made to such by God himself, the Seals of the Covenant and these Promises must
also by necessary consequence belong of right unto them; since the accessory
always follows the principal, and the Seals the Covenants to which they are
annexed, even as those who have a right to any human Charters, Deeds,
Feofments, Covenants, Obligations, have a right unto the Seals, as well as to
the parchment and writing. 2ly, Circumcision, Romans 4.11.
the Seal of the Covenant of the righteousnese of faith and Covenant God made
with Abraham and his seed, belonged equally to all Abraham's posterity, whether
regenerate or unregenerate, circumcised or uncircumcised in heart: to Ishmael
as well as to Isaac: whereupon, EVERY MANCHILD whatsoever of the seed of
Abraham, or born in their Houses, was throughout their generations to be
circumcised on the 8. day, under pain of being cut off from his people, for
breaking of Gods Covenant, in case of omission or neglect, Genesis 17.10. to
15.23.36,37. c.21.4. c.34.15.17.22.24. Exodus 12.48. Josh. 5.2. to 10. If then
Circumcision the Seal of the first Covenant, belonged equally to all the
Israelites by Gods own institution, though most of them were uncircumcised in
heart, yea Enemies to God by their wicked works, Jer. 9.25,26. Romans 2.28,29.
Gal. 5.6. 1 Cor. 10.1,2,5,6,7. Romans 10.21. then why not the Lords Supper being
by themselves styled the Seal of the New Testament, and second Covenant, to all
visible Church Members who externally profess the Gospel, though uncircumcised
in heart and unregenerate. 3ly, Most of our Antagonists herein (especially Mr.
Rutherford, Due right of Presbyteries, c. 4. Sect. 5. Mr. Marshals Defense of
Infant Baptism, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Hall of Infant Baptism.
Presbyterians) confess and assert in print, that Baptism (succeeding
Circumcision under the Gospel, which they likewise style a Seal of the Covenant
of Grace,) belongs equally to the infants of all visible baptized Christians,
be they never so ignorant, scandalous, impious unregenerate, carnal, or
actually excommunicated from the Church for their wickedness; and that upon the
account of their parents external right of Church membership and profession of
Christianity; Yea, Acts 8,12,13.21,22,23,36. to 40. c.10.47,48. c.16.15.33.
Simon Magus, and others of ripe years upon their bare profession and external
belief of the Gospel, were baptized by the very Apostles, though continuing
still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, as well as the Eunuch,
Cornelius, the Jailer, and other real Converts; the Apostles commission given
them by Christ himself being this, Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15. Go ye into all the
world, and teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to EVERY CREATURE,
BAPTIZING THEM in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc. By virtue
whereof they were to baptize all Nations, and every creature to whom they
preached, if they only externally embraced the Gospel preached. If then the
Seal of Baptism belongs universally to all infants of Christian parents, and
all who externally receive the Gospel preached, then why not the Seal of the
Lords Supper, since the Apostles and Primitive Christians admitted all they
baptized, yea Infants as well as others to the one, as well as to the other?
Acts 2.44,46. Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 103. 4ly, All circumcised
Persons whatsoever, and the whole Congregation of Israel, whether believers or
unbelievers, carnal or spiritual, children of God, or of Belial, were
peremptorily enjoined by God, duly to eat and celebrate the Passover, under
pain of being cut off from their people, and did all accordingly celebrate it,
none being suspended from it for any moral, but only for ceremonial
uncleanness, Exodus 12.3,4.44,47,48,50. Josh. 5.6,8,10. 2 Chronicles. 30.5.13. to 17.
c.35.1.17,18. Ezr. 6.19,20,21,22. 1 Cor. 10.1,2,3,4. If then all Circumcised
persons whatsoever, and the whole Congregation of Israel that were presenr,
received this Sacramental seal of the Passover under the Law, without
secluding any of them from it for ignorance, scandal or unregeneracie: Then by
like reason and consequence, all baptized Christians ought to receive the
Sacramental Seal of the Lords Supper, without secluding any (but such who are
actually excommunicated from all other Ordinances and Church communion) for
ignorance, scandal, unregeneracie, or want of saving Graces, since Christ
himself at its very institution, admitted all unto it who were admitted to the
Passover, yea Judas himself, though a Devil, Traitor, Murderer, Thief, Son of
perdition, Castaway, Mat. 26.14. to 30. Mar. 14.14. to 26. Luke 22.8. to 23.
John 18.2,3. etc. 28. c.6.70,71. Acts 1.16. to 21. John 17.12. 1 Cor.
11.23,24,25. The rather because the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.1,2,3,4,5. from this
president; That ALL our Fathers were under the cloud; and ALL passed through
the Sea; and were ALL baptized under Moses, and did ALL eat the same spiritual
meat, and did ALL drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the rock
that followed them, and that rock was Christ, Though with many of them God was
not well pleased, etc. Inferrs the universality of all Christians right to, and
actual duty in Communicating together at the Lords Supper, ver. 16, 17. The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For we
being many, are one bread and one body, for we are ALL partakers of that one
bread. To which he subjoyns, Chap. 12. 13. For by one Spirit we are ALL
baptized into one body, (whether we be Jews or Gentiles, tiles, whether bond or
free) and have been ALL maae to drink into one spirit. By which texts, it is
undeniable, that whoever is admitted a visible Member into the mystical Body
or Church of Christ, has a proper right and interest, not only to all the
Covenants and Promises of the Gospel, but likewise to Baptism and the Lords
Supper, (which our Opposites style the Seals of the Gospel;) and ought freely,
constantly to be admitted thereunto, as all the Israelites and seed of Abraham
under the Law had a right, interest, and were all freely admitted to
Circumcision, the Passover, Manna, the water in the Wilderness, which were but
Types of Christ, and the same in substance, with the Sacraments under the
Gospel.

3. Hence it inevitably follows, that these Sacraments were all administered
only as Grace-conveying, Soul-converting ordinances, to those who were
unregenerate wanted saving Grace, since they could not possibly be sealing and
confirming Ordinances unto them in our Antagonists sense or language. 4ly, That
the administering of Circumcision, the Passover, Baptifm, Lords Supper, to
such, who have no saving faith, Graces prae-existent in them, is no setting of
a Seal to a Blank, as these New Dogmatists, and Lord Keepers of the Great Seals
of Heaven (who refuse to set, or distribute these Seals where God has
prescribed them, as more wise, holy, careful of their profanation and Nullity,
than God himself) absurdly affirm; who must now either renounce this their
Cuckoes song they so often inculcate; or else blasphemously charge God himself,
our Savior Jesus Christ, the Patriarks, Priests, Prophets under the Old
Testament, the Apostles, Ministers, Primitive Churches under the new, with
folly, error, mistake, in setting all these sacred seals (as they term them) to
mere blanks; and affirm all his Covenants, Promises to be but Blanks, the truth
whereof are always sealed, ratified, by these Seals when ever administered,
though to unregenerate graceless persons; they being Seals only to the
promises, Covenants of God by divine institution, as they all acknowledge who
style them Seals; not to the persons of those to whom they are exhibited; or at
leastwise but conditional, not absolute Seals to their persons, not graces;
sealing only damnation to them if they receive them unworthily without any
gracious effect, and salvation, grace, life eternal to them, only when they
receive them worthily (as the Mat. 16.16 2 Cor. 2.14,15,16.
Gospel preached does) 1 Cor. 11.25. to 30. This absurdity because I have at
large refuted in my Suspension suspended, p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. and Mr.
Marshal, in his Defense of Infant Baptism, p. 117, 118. Mr. John Humfrey, in
his Rejoinder to Mr. Drake, p. 170. to 202. and Mr. Morris in his Diatribe
have acutely answered, I shall here no further prosecute; being in plain
English, as pure Nonsense in Divinity, as it would be in Law, for any Ignoramus
to assert, that when ever the Great Seal of England, or any other is affixed to
the Charters, Commissions, Writs, Grants, Feoffments, Bonds, Covenants, Pardons
of unregenerate persons, they are set only unto blanks of no validity, because
they are not affixed to their persons, Graces, as well as these to their
Writings.

The Lords Supper necessarily pre-requireth faith and repentance in all
resorting to it, because without these they eat and drink their own damnation;
Therefore it is no Soul-converting, Grace-producing, but only a Confirming
Ordinance, belonging to the regenerate alone.

This Objection being answered at large by my self, Mr. Humfrey, and Mr.
Morris, I shall only retort, That the hearing of the word, reading, prayer,
fasting, Baptism, are all unprofitable unacceptable to God, and work deserve
damnation only, without faith and repentance, as well as the Lords Supper,
witness Heb. 4.2. 2 Cor. 2.15,16. Mar. 16.15,16. 1 Pet. 2.1. to 9. Heb. 11.4.6.
Jam. 1.5. c.5.15. Pro. 15.8. c.28.9. Isa. 1.10. to 20. chap. 66.3. Jer.
6.19,20. c.7.21,22,23,24. Amos 5.21. to 27. Will the Objectors then conclude
from thence: Ergo then all prae-require true faith, repentance and
unregeneracy, and are no Soul-converting, Grace-engendring, but only confirming
ordinances, belonging solely to real converted Saints, not to any unregenerate
persons? No verily: For as these Ordinances require (not always prae-require)
faith, and repentance to make them acceptable to God, and effectual to men, See
Suspenfion suspended, p. 35, 36, 37, 38.
so they likewise work and convey (by the concurrence of Gods spirit) that
faith, repentance, Grace, which is requisite to make them acceptable and
effectual: Isa. 55.3. Gal. 3.2. Romans 1,16,17. c.10.13. to 19. Acts 2.37,38.
c.10.44. to 48. c.9.11,17,18,40,41. c.16.14,15. c.26.17,18. John 5.21,24,25,26.
Ephesians. 2.1. to 22. 1 Timothy 3.16. Jonah 5.3. John 2.22. c.4.39,41. c.7.31.
c.8.30,31,32. c.10.41,42. c.20.29. Acts 8.12. c.18.8.27. c.28.24. 1 John 5.13.
1 Cor. 14.24,25. And so does the Lords Supper likewise, as I shall prove anon.

An Answer to Suspension suspended, p. 24, 25, 26, 27.
That there is no one president in Scripture, to prove it a Soul converting,
Grace-producing Ordinance: Therefore it is not such.

I answer 1. There is no express text or president in Scripture to prove it a
Seal, a sealing or confirming Ordinance, yet they dogmatically conclude it
such, as a principle not once to be questioned or disputed. 2. There is no one
Text, president in Gods word, to prove, warrant the power of Ministers,
Presbyteries, Classes, Triers to examine the Lives, knowledge, faith, Graces,
fitnes, worthiness of Communicants, before they be admitted to the Lords
Supper: their secluding any Churchmembers from it for ignorance, scandal,
unpreparedness, or any other incapacity, not excluding them alike from all
other Ordinances: their peremptory refusal to administer this Sacrament to
whole Parishes, Cities for sundry year: their denying it to visible Saints for
fear others should crowd into it if administered: or their gathering new
selected Conventicles out of old parcchial Congregations, Yet, the Objectors
affirm all these to be of divine institution, agreeable to the will, mind of
Jesus Christ, which they must have only by special revelation, having no
Scripture proof at all to clear it. 3ly, There is no direct president in
Scripture to prove reading of the Scripture, Meditation, Fasting, Prayer,
Singing of Psalms, repetition of Sermons, family duties, converting,
Grace-infusing Ordinances; yet there is sufficient Ground in, and abnndance of
Historical Examples out of Scripture to prove them to be such. 4ly, There is no
express president in sacred writ for the baptism of Infants born of Christian
Parents, but only by way of necessary consequence: The like may be said of the
Lords day Sabbath, Payment of Tithes under the Gospel; Preparation Sermons for
the Lords Supper, and some other particulars; Will they therefore conclude them
not to be divine, necessary, Soul-converting, and to be cast quite aside for so
many years, as some have laid by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as no
converting Ordinance? 5ly, Though there be no express example in Scripture of
any particular person originally converted to God by the Lords Supper, yet
there are many Texts to prove it, a converting, Grace-conveying Ordinance; and
many Authorities, presidents in all ages, asserting, manifesting it to be such.
Mr. Rejoinder to Mr. Drake, p. 239, 240.
Humfrey has recorded one memorable example of late under Mr. Richard
Fairclough his hand, and I doubt not but hundreds more might be produced from
the testimonies, experiences of other Ministers and private Christians.

6. Divine Right of Church Government, p. 523, 524.
Mr. Rutherford, Dr. Drake, Mr. Saunders, and other Opponents confess in print,
and others of the Opponents in their Pulpit Discourses, That the Grace of faith
and true conversion unto God, may be, and some times actually are wrought at
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being forced by arguments and experiences
thereunto. But then to rob this Ordinance both of the efficacy and Honor of
the Work, they subjoyn, 1. That though faith and conversion are and may be
wrought at this Sacrament, yet they are not produced by it, but only by the
word, prayer, and other concomitants that attend it. 2. That this effect is
very rare, extraordinary, and merely accidental; as when faith and conversion
are sometimes wrought by afflictions, temptations, sickness, or other
casualties; But they are not effected by it, as by a proper ordinary means or
instrument, ordained and blessed by Christ to work such effects, as the word
preached is. To which I answer, 1. That if some have, and others may have
saving faith and real conversion wrought in them at the Lords Supper, then with
what face can they deny it, to be a Soul-converting, Grace-procreating
Ordinance? 2ly, With what Hearts, consciences, can they then seclude any unex,
communicated, unregenerate Churchmembers from it, or refuse to administer it
frequently to their parishioners every month or oftener? there being not only a
peradventure, or possibility, but likewise a great probability that they may be
converted at or by it, as well as others, when preaching, catechizing, prayer,
with other public Ordinances will not effectually work upon them, Acts
20.20,21,27,28. 2 Timothy 4,2,3. Ezech. 2.3. to 9. Romans 10.21.
If they must preach the word of God constantly, frequently, in season and out
of season, to all their people, though dull, stupid, obstinate, refractory,
carnal, sensual, devilish, and very unlikely to be wrought upon, 1 Cor.
9.16,17.
because it is their duty, and there is 2 Timothy 2.24,25,26. Acts 26,17,18. 2
Cor. 2.15,16 Acts 16.14. c.28.24.
a possibility, a probability, that some of them, at last, in Gods due time,
may be really converted, and saved by it, though the Romans 10.16.21. Mar.
16.15,16. Romans 11.7,8,9,10. Mat. 10.14,15. c,11.21,22,23,24. John 15.22.
greatest part of them be thereby hardened, their condemnation aggravated, and
made more intolerable than that of Sodom and Gomorrah: then why should they
not as constantly, as frequently administer the Lords Supper to them, because
some of them may possibly, may probably be really reclaimed from their sins,
converted, renewed, saved by it, though the major part do thereby aggravate
their sins, judgments, and 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
eat, drink damnation through their own defaults? 3ly, May not the Objectors
and others of our Ministers justly fear, that their discouraging, debarring
their people from this Sacrament sundry years together, where they might and
should have been instructed, exhorted, comforted, counseled, edified, and at
which by Gods grace they possibly, probably might have been effectually wrought
upon and converted; has been the principal cause of their continued ignorance,
profaneness, contempt of, unprofitableness, unfruitfulness under other
Ordinances, and that so few of them have been really converted; That their
asserting it, to be no Grace-begetting, Soul-converting Ordinance both in Press
and Pulpit, has been one great reason why so few have repaired to, and been
really converted by it of late; seeing they are neither invited, nor yet
admitted to it as a probable lively instrument of begetting saving faith and
conversion in them? And shall not then the Ezech. 33.8,9. Acts 20.26,27,28.
blood, loss of their peoples Souls be exacted by God and Christ at their
hands, for depriving them of this effectual probable means of their conversion,
salvation, which they should have frequently administered to them by Christ's own
command? It is the duty of all careful conscientious Physicians of men's Souls
as well as bodies, to use all 1 Cor. 10.16,17.20,21,23. Acts
20.18,19,20,21,26,27. 2 Timothy 2.25,26. c. 4.2.3.4.5.
possible, all probable means to effect their patients cures, and preserve
their lives from death; and when one medicament will not prevail with them to
use another, or unite many of them together to work their cure. Since then some
(nay many) have in all ages been converted by and at the Lords Supper, it is no
less than a Soul-murdering crime in them wilfully to deprive their people of,
or debarr them sundry years from this Sovereign Balm, Medicine, they earnestly
desire, Which through Gods blessing might both effectually convert and save
their Souls, and for want whereof they still lie dead, yea die in their sins
and trespasses, notwithstanding all their preaching to them. 4. There is joy in
heaven in the presence of God and his Angels over one sinner that repents,
and is converted, Luke 15.7.10. If but one or two sinners then in an age have
been converted and brought to repentance at or by the Lords Supper, should not
this engage all Ministers frequently to administer it even to unconverted
Sinners, because possibly some one of them may be converted by it; and so cause
joy in heaven before the Angels, as well as bring glory to God and this his
Ordinance upon earth. Yea will not this wilful debarring their people from
this their Monthly food and physic, bring perpetual horror, lamentation upon
many Ministers in Hell, and seclude them from eternal joies in Heaven, if any
one soul under their charge shall perish, starve, miscarry for want of this
spiritual food and cordial? 5. It is Gods own resolution, precept, Romans 14.15.
If thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not according to
Charity; Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died. Are there not many
thousands of people now justly grieved with their Ministers, for denying them
this their spiritual meat, physic, year after year, which they daily, monthly
cry for at their hands, and yet cannot receive it? and do not they then as much
as in them is, destroy and starve those for whom Christ died, by denying that
Spiritual Balm, that Soul-saving repast of the body, blood and death of our
Lord Jesus, which should save them from perishing, and feed, preserve their
bodies and Souls unto eternal life? Yea, do they not herein deal most
tyrannically, unchristianly, inhumanly, unconscionably with their people, not
walking according to the rule of charity? Mat. 24.45,46. Lu. 12.42, etc.
And can they then expect the blessing of that just and faithful Servant, whom
the Lord has made ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat
in due season, when as they detain this chief portion of spiritual food and
heavenly Supper from them against his precept? Or can they escape that cutting
assunder, and portion with unbelievers, Christ there threatens to that evil
Servant, who injured his fellow Servants, and deprived them of their due
portion of food? I fear they can do neither, unless they repent of this
Soul-starving cruelty. Thus much in answer only to their concession, That some
are, and may be converted at or by the Lords Supper. I shall now reply to their
evasions.

1. How can these pretending omniscients positively determine, that such who
have been converted at the Lords Supper, were not converted by it, but by the
word or prayers which accompanied it? Since the Spirit breaths where, when
and in, by what ordinance he lists, and they cannot tell by what way he
works, especially in others hearts, whose persons and means of conversion they
are ignorant of, John 3.8. 2ly, The Word of Benediction, Consecration,
Institution used at the Lords Supper, is an essential part of it, without which
it neither is nor can be a Sacrament, as Accedat verbum ad elementum, and fit
Sacramentum, August. Tract. 80. in Joh. Origin in Mat. c. 15. Bishop Jewels
Defense of the Apology, c. 11. divis. 1. p. 211. See Ames. Bellarm. Enervat.
Tom. 3. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Augustine, yea all Divines both Protestants and Papists accord. Therefore to
divide them one from another, as distinct, when God has joined them together
as inseparable, to make up one entire Sacrament, and to attribute conversion to
the word of benediction, consecration or institution only, but not to the
Elements and entire Ordinance, is as great an absurdity as to affirm; that the
Ministers tongue only consecrates, and his hands distribute the Sacramental
Elements, but not the Minister himself; that the Communicants mouths only eat
and drink the bread and wine at the Lords Supper, not their persons; or, thar
the Uses of Sermons convert the Auditors, not the Doctrines, Motives, or entire
Sermons. 3ly, This Sacrament is both a Tho. Beacons Catechism, f. 422, 456.
Bishop Jewels Defense of the Apology, p, 349.
visible and audible word or Sermon, representing the unspeakable love of God,
and Christ in dying for our sins in a most emphatical manner both to our eyes,
ears, and by them unto our hearts and minds at once, by the Word and Elements
combined together, to work, more powerfully, vigorously, convincingly,
affectionately upon men's Souls, to win, attract, and unite them for ever unto
God, in, by and through Jesus Christ, and the powerful influence of his Spirit
cooperating with the Word and Sacred Elements in this Sacrament: Therefore the
Conversion, Grace wrought at, or by it, must be attributed to the incire
Ordinance, as well as the confirmation and augmentation of Graces formerly
began, which they may as probably assert is wrought only by the word, prayer,
and concomitants of the Lords Supper, not by the Elements or Sacrament it self,
as that conversion at this Sacrament is wrought only by them. 4. All the
self-examination, preparation which precedes the Lords Supper, all the
Benedictions, Prayers, Instructions, Exhortations, Admonitions, Praises,
Meditations, Soliloquies, Vows, Resolutions of Newness of life and better
Obedience, that accompany it, are Ames. Bellarm. Enervat. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 2.
The Practice of Piety, Rogers of the Sacrament.
but parts and appurtenances of this holy duty and Ordinance, relating wholly
to it; Therefore the real Grace and conversion wrought at or by it, by any part
of the duties that either necessarily precede, accompany, or follow it, may
and must be ascribed to this Sacrament, as the instrumental cause; not to the
word, prayer, or any other Ordinance alone which necessarily attends it; as the
Victory is chiefly ascribed to the General who commands in chief, not to the
private Soldiers who win the battle under him. 5ly, That this effect of Saving
Grace and conversion, is rarely wrought at or by the Lords Supper, is now a
most certain truth, because the Lords Supper is so rarely administered, yea
quite cast aside for diverse years in many places, and not used, resorted to as
a converting Ordinance, where and when administered: And if the word were now as
seldom preached as the Lords Supper is administered, few or none would or could
be converted by it. But when the Lords Supper was daily, weekly or monthly
administered, as in the Apostles times, the Primitive Church and former days,
then many were ordinarily, frequently converted by it, as well as confirmed,
whereas not one Soul has been either converted or confirmed, by being debarred
from it for diverse years together, but many hindered from conversion,
edification, confirmation, and qui e destroyed. 6ly, Very few have been
converted by the word preached, since this Sacrament has been discontinued and
decried, as we find by sad experience. The raritie therefore of Converts at and
by this Sacrament, proceeds only from the infrequencie and disusage of it as a
Converting, faith-engendring Ordinance; not from its indisposition or
incongruity to work both faith, and conversion. 7ly, That the Lords Supper
effects grace and conversion only extraordinarily, and by accident, as
temptations, afflictions, sicknesses, etc. do, not as a proper instrument or
means ordained, blessed by God for such effects, is a most absurd, unchristian,
untheological, erroneous, if not blafphemous assertion, contrary to Scripture,
Antiquity, the current of all Divines Protestants or Papists, foreign or
domestic, and the very Directory it self, which styles it, A MEANS OF GRACE,
as well as the Word; and to the 26. Article of the Church of England, which
resolves it ORDAINED OF CHRIST, to be AN EFFECTUAL SIGN of Grace and Gods good
will toward us; by which HE DOES WORK INVISIBLY IN US, and does NOT ONLY
QUICKEN but also strengthen and confirm our faith. Hence Cardinal Cajetan in 1
Cor. 10. and Dr. Ames, as well as Bellarmin, in his Bellarminus Enervatus, Tom.
3. c. 4. p. 43. conclude; Haec autem est COMMUNIS THEOLOGORUM DOCTRINA,
Sacramenta CONFER GRATIAM, vel FACIENDO UBI NON INVENIT FACTAM, vel factam
AUGENDO. And that not only as Signa theorica, ad signific andum tantum
instituta, sed practica, ad signifiandum et EFFICIENDUM INSTITUTA: as they
there express themselves, cap. 3. p. 29. To which Dr. Ames adds this, as his
own and all Protestants Opinions, c. 3. p. 24. Nostrae sententia est,
SACRAMENTA OMNEM EFFICIENTIAM HABERE, RESPECTU GRATIAE, quam Signum practicum
potest habere per ullam relationem: non tamen efficere gratiam immediate, sed
MEDIANTE SPIRITU DEI ET FIDE. But of this more largely in answer to their last
Objection against its converting power.

Mr. Drakes Boundary, p. 163. An Answer to Susspension suspended, p. 23, 24.
If the Lords Supper were a converting Ordinance, then it should be administered
to mere Heathens, as well as the Gospel preached to them, to convert them unto
Christ: But mere Heathens are not to be admitted to, but debarred from it:
Therefore it is no converting Ordinance, but confirming only.

Before I answer the Argument, I must premise, that there is a twofold
Conversion mentioned in Scripture, 1. Visible and external; when 1 Thessalonians.
1.8,9,10. Psalm. 22.17. Is. 60.5. Acts 15.3.7.12.14.19. c.2.41. c.8.5. to 18.
c.6,7,8. c.11.1.15 18. c.18.10,11. c.26.17. Romans 10.14. to 21. c.15.16.18. Ephesians.
2.11,12,13, etc. c.3.6. to 12. Gal. 3.1,2. c.2.2.8. 1 Cor. 12.2.28. Col.
1.26,27. 1 Timothy 3.16. 2 Timothy 1.10,11. c.4.17. Mat. 28.19,20 Mar. 16.15. to 19.
mere Heathens, Infidels, Jews, Turks, and Pagan Idolaters, are converted from
their Heatherism, Idolatry, Idols, and Idol-Gods; to the external profession
only of the Gospel of Christ, and visible worship, service of the true and
living God. This kind of conversion (not here controverted) is originally
wrought in an ordinary way, only by the word preached, or the sight of Miracles
accompanying the word, not by the Lords Supper, Baptism, or other public
Ordinances; as the marginal Texts demonstrate; 2. Invisible, Spiritual, Romans
2.28,29, 1 Pet. 1.3,4. Rev. 2 17. Ezech. 36.26,27.
Internal; when unregenerate carnal Christians professing externally the Gospel
of Christ, and worshipping the only true God, are effectually turned from all
their sins, lusts, evil ways, works of darkness, and the power of Satan, to
unfeigned repentance, faith, holiness, newness of life, love, and obedience to
God; as well in their souls, spirits, as outward conversation, doing works meet
for repentance, and what is lawful and just both in the sight of God and men;
Of which Conversion we read, Ps. 19.7. Ps. 51.13. Isa. 6.10. c.59.20. Jer.
3.14. c.25.5. c.26.3. c.31.18. c.44.5. Lam. 3.40. c.5.21. Ezech. 3.13. c.14.6.
c.18.21.30.32. c.33.11. to 20. Hos. 12.6. c.14.2. Joel 2.12,13. Jonah 3.8.
Zech. 1.3. Mat. 13.15. c.18.3. Mar. 4.12.20. John 12.40. Acts 28.27.
c.26.18,20. 2 Cor. 3.16. Jam. 5 20. The first sort of these Conversions is
peculiar only to mere Heathens and Idolaters, never formerly professing the
Gospel. The second is proper to none but visible Christians living within the
pale of the Church; though I willingly acknowledge, that mere Heathens upon the
first preaching of the Gospel to them, may be at the self same time both
inwardly and outwardly converted unto God, even before they are actually
baptized, or externally incorporated into the visible Church of Christ, as is
clear by Acts 2.37,38.41. c.8.12. c.10.44. etc. c.11.15,16,17,18. c.13.47,48.
c.16.14,15.30. to 35. c.26.18,19,20. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9,10. This later Conversion (of
which we only dispute) both may be and usual is as properly, as effectually
wrought in the Souls of Christians by the Lords Supper where duly, frequently,
constantly administered, as by the word preached, it being not only as apt to
beget Saving faith, and assurance, as the naked word alone, but in some
respects more probable to effect them, since 1 Kings 10.6,7,8. Lu. 1.2. Acts
10.40,41. 2 Pet. 1.16.
Eyewitnesses, Evidences, are more persuasive, and apter to beget belief,
assurance then Ear-witnesses; and Deuteronomy. 17.6. c.19.17. Mat. 18.16.
two witnesses, than one alone; and an Oath or Seal annexed to Promises,
Covenants, more strong, powerful to assure, resolve, comfort, work faith of
adhaesion in our doubting spirits, than naked Promises or Covenants without
them, Hebr. 6.17,18. Psalm. 89.3.33,34,35. Psalm. 110.4. This distinction
premised,

I answer, 1. That the sequel of the Major is false: 1. Because the Lords
Supper belongs not to mere unconverted Heathens and Idolaters, (being not
instituted by Christ for such, to convert them from Paganism to Christianity)
but only to baptized Christians and Members of the visible Church; as is
evident by Mat. 26.17. to 33. Mat. 14.12. to 28. Lu. 22.8. to 31. c.24.30,31.
Acts 2.41,42,46. c.20.7.11. 1 Cor. 10.16,17.21. c.11.20. to the end; even as
the Passover belonged to none who were uncircumcised, but to the circumcised
alone, Exodus 12.43. to 50. and the Sacrament of Baptism was to be administered
to no mere Pagans, but only to such who embraced the Gospel first preached to
them, and professed their belief thereof before they we^re actually baptized,
Mat. 28.19. Mat. 16.15,16. Acts 2.41,42. c.8.12,13,36,37. c.10.47,48.
c.16,14,15.31,32,33,34. Now the reason why neither the Lords Supper nor Baptism
might be administered to mere Infidels before their embracing of the Gospel, is
not because they are no really converting Ordinances in the sense
forementioned, (as I have proved the Lords Supper to be, and the Sea Bochellus
Decr. Eccl. Gal. l. 2. Tit. 3. de Baptismo. Jewels Reply to Harding, p. 21. 27.
242, 249, 250, 458. Ames. Bellarm. Enervat. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 3.
Fathers with others assert Baptism to be, from Mat. 3.11. John 1.26. Romans
6.34. Gal. 3.27. 1 Pet. 3.21. Ephesians. 5.^26.27. Tit. 3.5.) but because they are
badges of our Christianity, to distinguish us from Pagans and all other false
Religions; the means, signs, Bonds of our actual incorporation, and mystical
union into the visible Church of Christ; the Memorials of the death of Jesus
Christ, whereby we show forth his death till be come; and Evidences of our
Christians Communion and mutual agreement in faith and brotherly Christian love
one toward another, as members of the selfsame body, as 1 Cor. 10.16,17.21.
c.11.23,24,25,26. c.12.12.13,14. the 25. and 28 Articles of the Church of
England, the Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and all who have
written of them, define them to be. 2ly, Because there are express commands,
presidents in Scripture, to preach the Gospel to mere Gentiles and Idolaters,
before their conversion to Christianity, Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15,16. Acts c. 8.
and 10. and 13. and 16. Romans 15.16. to 22. Ephesians. 3.5. to 13. But there is
neither precept nor president to administer the Lords Supper or Baptism to
such, before they embrace and believe the Gospel preached. 3ly, Because
competent knowledge, and an historical belief at least of the death, passion,
merits of Christ, and of the matter, ends of the Lords Supper (as the Objectors
and See the Practice of Piety, Rogers, and others of the Sacrament.
all Divines assert) are prae required of all such who are admitted thereunto;
without whirth they can neither examine their own estate, nor discern the Lords
body, as all Communicants ought to do, 1 Cor. 11.28,29. But these are not
necessarily prae-required of all such Infidels to whom the Gospel is preached:
Therefore the Lords Supper may not be administered to such, (no more than to See
M. Drakes Boundary.
Infants or distracted persons, as our Opposites grant) though the Gospel may
and must be preached unto such, to acquaint them with and instruct them in the
mysteries of the Gospel, in order to their external and internal conversion
unto Christ, and admission to these Sacraments.

2ly, I answer, that though the Lords Supper may not be given to mere Pagans to
convert them to the Christian faith; yet after their external profession of the
Gospel, and Baptism, it may and must be duly administered to them, for their
further edification, and real internal conversion to the saving Grace of faith
in Christ, and that immediately upon their baptism and profession of the
Gospel, Acts 2.41,42,46. Whence the Apostles and Fathers in the primitive
Church administered this Sacrament in both kinds to all they baptized,
immediately after their Baptism, as Reply to Harding, art. 2. div. 25. p. 103,
104.
Bishop Jewel proves at large out of Cyprian, Hierom, Augustine, and other old
Writers, and I have A Seasonable Vindication of Free-admission.
elsewhere manifested.: Therefore it should now be duly administered to all
unregenerate Christians as a converting Ordinance, and not detained from them
year after year.

3ly, Antiquaeries, Preface, and p. 6. Boundary, p. 160, 161.
Dr. Drake (the chief Objector) asserts that mere Heathens (as well as
unregenerate scandalous Christians) may be present at the Lords Supper and all
Sacramental actions, with a great deal of profit; and attain the fruit of the
visible and audible word by bare presence, without receiving. And if so, then
it may be likewise administered to them with much more profit and fruit for
their external and internal conversion; the Sea Tho. Beacons Catechism, f. 462.
chief fruit of it, consisting only in its eating and drinking; according to
Christ's command, and not in gazing only upon it without receiving.

See Dr. Drakes Boundary, p. 157, 158.
The Lords Supper has no special Covenant or promise of God annexed to it in
the Scripture, to make it a Grace-effecting, Soul-converting Ordinance as the
word preached has: Therefore it neither is, nor can be adminstred or received
in faith as an instrument of working saving Grace or Conversion in men's Souls,
nor is it a converting Ordinance.

I answer: 1. All oor Antagonists, and other Divines, Fathers, Councils,
Writers generally assert, That the Lords Supper is a true and real Sacrament,
instituted by Christ himself: Now Ames. Bellarm. Enervat. Tom. 3. cap. 2.
Boehellus, Decret. Eccl. Gal. l. 2. tit. 1. De Sacramentis, c. 32. Summa
Angelica and Rosella, Tit. Sacramentum, and all who write of Sacraments. Bishop
Jewels Defense of the Apology, par. 2. c. 7. div. 1. p. 151.
every Sacrament consists of a word of promise, blessing, and an element, (as
the Fathers, Schoolmen, all Protestant, Popish Divines assert; and the Synod of
Paris, Anno 1557. thus defines it; Sacramentum, Verbo constat et Elemento:
Verbum est nota quaedam EVANGELICAM PROMISSIONEM praese ferens, nos de
voluntate et Gratia Dei erga nos admonens: Therefore the Lords Supper must
likewise consist of a Word and Evangelical promises of Gods good will and grace
toward us, as well as other Sacraments; since neutrum sine altero totam
Sacramenti complet substantiam, as they resolve: 2ly, If it be a real
Sacrament, then it must necessarily be a Grace-conveying, begetting, effecting,
Soul-converting and sanctifying Ordinance, for as the Bochellus, Decr. Eccles.
Gal. l. 2. Tit. 1. c. 32. p. 148, 149.
Synod of Paris Anno 1557. defines: A Sacrament, according to the Etymology of
its name, signifies that wherewith a thing is sanctified or made holy: a
sacrando namque dicitur, sicut ornamentum ab ornando, velamentum a velando: Et
Sacramenta veteres appellabant solennes quosdam ritus, quibus in sacrando
utebantur. With this Title the Evangelical Rites are adorned, which we call,
the Sacraments of the new Law, because (as Augustine says) with the true and
living image of the good things they present, tam in conscientia quam in carne,
SACRENT NOS ET SANCTOS REDDANT, they might sanctify and make us holy, as well
in conscience as in the flesh. Whence it may be collected, that to those who
receive them worthily, Sanctificationem et salutem parari, they procure both
sanctification and salvation. A Sacrament therefore, from the custom of the
Catholic Church, is called, An external and sensible sign of a sacred thing,
with an effectual signification, insinuating or conveying (as instrumental
causes, through the efficacy of the holy Spirit, working powerfully with, in,
and by the Word and Elements) the internal invisible Grace of God, or gracious
free effect, destinated BY DIVINE INSTITUTION TO THE SALVATION OF MEN. These
Sacraments were instituted by Christ for the remedy and cure of the diseases of
the Soul, whose efficacy is such, That THEY MAKE THOSE SACRED AND HOLY who
worthily receive them; they being not only Signs of Grace, sed etiam ipsius
causa, but LIKEWISE THE CAUSE THEREOF. By these Christ would bestow Holiness
upon us, not only by obsignation, or representation, sed and efficiendo, but
also BY EFFECTING IT; they both really working and truly bestowing that whereof
they are notes and signs: The Sacraments being principally instituted for this
cause, that they might not only signify but likewise SANCTIFY AND CONFER THE
INVISIBLE GRACE OF GOD; not by any proper force of the external Elements, or
merit of the Minister, sed Domini secrecius operantis quod instituit; but of
the Lord himself secretly working that which he has instituted. So this Synod.
The Bochellus, ibid. p. 153.
Synod of Sennes, Ann. 1528. defines the like; and from 1 Cor. 10.26,27.
c.11.23,24,25.29. John 6.51. concludes thus, "Who can deny the Sacrament of the
Eucharist to be Converting, or Vivifical, which is proved by so many clear
Testimonies of Scripture? by which it is more clear than the light, that this
holy Sacrament CONFERS GRACE." Laur. Bochellus, ibid. p. 142, 148, 357.
Concilium Burdigale, Ann. 1582. Concilium Bituricense, Anno 2584. Synodus
Lingonensis, Anno 1404. all Decree, "That the Lords Supper does both sanctify,
cause, conferr true saving Grace, and Spiritual life to those who worthily
receive it; as well as confirm and increase Grace, being instituted by the Lord
Christ, Salutis nostrae causa, to cause or effect our salvation, and deriving
their force from his most precious blood, as Bochellus, ibid. 144.
Synodus Aquensis, Anno 1583. determines." Hence the Bochellus, Decr. Eccl. Ga.
l l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 105. p. 376.
Council of Rhemes Anno 1583. resolves, "That Christian religion has nothing
more excellent and honorable than the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and NOTHING
MORE EFFECTUAL to convert men to live holily and unblameably than its most
frequent participation. And thereupon prescribes all Parish Priests, Preachers,
to excite the people to the frequent participation thereof, by informing them
of the wonderful fruits and benefit thereof." Alexander Alensis in his Summa
Theolog. pars 4. qu. 5. m. 3. ar. 5. sect. 3. determines, "That the Sacraments
dispose and make men more fit for the reception of Grace; unde sunt causae
gratiae, non quantum ad esse, sed quantum ad IN-ESSE: whereupon they are THE
CAUSES OF GRACE, not as to its being, but AS TO ITS IN-BEING." Bonaventure in
Distinct. 4. qu. 4. affirms it to be the opinion of many great Divines, "That
the Sacraments are said to have virtue, to be a cause of, and to work Grace
according to the common manner of speaking, by reason of the efficacious
ordination and assistance of divine virtue; as when any thing has an effectual
ordination to another thing, it is said to have a virtue in respect thereof;"
as the Kings Letters sealed with the Kings Seal, etc. It is the resolution of
the Council of Trent, Sessio 7. Can. 5, 6, 7, 8. Yea of See my Suspension
suspended, p. 28. Amesius Bellarm: Enervatus, Tom. 3. l. 1. cap. 3.
most Popish Schoolmen, and Bellarmine himself, "That the Sacraments work,
beget, and conferr even the very first Grace of Conversion and Justification,
not only as moral causes, but likewise physically, and immediately ex opere
operato; being instituted by God to this very end." Which though the
Protestants justly deny and refute; yet they grant, "That they work
regeneration, sanctification and saving Grace as moral causes or instruments by
Gods co-working with and by them, according to their signification and
obsignation; per efficacem ordinationem and assistentiam Dei, but yet not
immediately, nor by their proper virtue." Nec Christus suam virtutem proprie
dat Sacramentis, sed nobis communicate per ea. Hoc autem facit mortis merito,
and spiritus assistentia; in quorum dispensatione, necessario requiritur ut
Deus sit agens principalis. So Ames ( Bellarminus Enervatus, Tom. 3. l. 1. c.
3.) determines. The 26. Article of the Church of England, (first compiled,
ratified Anno 1553. in King K. Edward the 6. time, and confirmed by Parliament
and all our Ministers subscriptions, Anno 1562. in Qu. Elizabeth's reign)
resolves, "That Sacraments ordained of Christ, are not only badges and tokens
of Christian men's profession; but rather, they be sure witnesses, and effectual
signs of Grace, etc. by which he does work invisibly in us, and does not only
QUICKEN, but also STRENGTHEN AND CONFIRM OUR FAITH IN HIM." And incomparable
Bishop Jewel, in his Apology of the Church of England, and Defense thereof,
chap. 1^. divis. 1. p. 209. lays down this as the express Doctrine thereof.
"We do EXPRESSLY pronounce, that in the Lords Supper there is truly given unto
the believing the body and blood of our Lord, the flesh of the Son of God
WHICH QUICKENS OUR SOULS; the meat that comes from above, the food of
Immortality, of GRACE, Truth and LIFE: And that the same Supper is the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ; BY THE PARTAKING WHEREOF WE BE
REVIVED, STRENGTHENED AND FED UNTO IMMORTALITY, AND WHEREBY WE ARE JOINED AND
INCORPORATED UNTO CHRIST, that we MAY ABIDE IN HIM AND HE IN US. He adds: Thus
the holy Fathers say, The Sacraments of the new Law WORK SALVATION, because
they teach us that our Salvation is already wrought: Thus the GRACE OF GOD IS
GIVEN TO US IN THE SACRAMENTS, because it is represented and laid before us in
the Sacraments. Reply to Harding, artic. 8. p. 282, 283. ^ and art. 10. p. 318.
We do hoth think and speak soberly and reverently of Christ's Sacraments, as
knowing them to be, the Testimonies of Gods Promises, and THE INSTRUMENTS OF
THE HOLY GHOST. They are a perfect Seal, and a sufficient warrant of Gods
promises, whereby God binds himself unto us, and we likewise stand bounden
unto God, so as God is our God, and we are his people. The Sacraments of
Christ, notwithstanding they be Signs and Figures, as they be commonly called
by the old Fathers, yet are they not therefore bare and naked: Ibid. Artic. 5.
p. 241.
For God BY THEM, LIKE AS ALSO BY HIS HOLY WORD, WORKS MIGHTILY AND
EFFECTUALLY IN THE HEARTS OF THE FAITHFUL. Raban. Maurus, l. 1. c. 31.
Rabanus Maurus says, By virtue of the Sacrament the inner man IS REPAIRED; by
the virtue of the Sacrament we GET EVERLASTING LIFE. And August. in Johan.
tract. 26.
St. Augustine says, The Sacrament is received from the Lords Table, of some
UNTO LIFE, of some unto destruction: But the thing it self whereof it is a
Sacrament (that is the body of Christ) is received of every man UNTO LIFE, and
of no man to destruction, whosoever be partaker of it:" Many like passuges of
the Ibid. Artic. 10. p. 331, 332. Defense of the Apology, part. 3 c. 5. div. 1.
p. 327, 328.
Fathers he recites, which I pretermit, concluding with his own words, "
Defense of the Apology, par. 2. c. 15. divis. 2. p. 284.
The Merits of Christ's death are conveyed unto us by God, and received by us:
God conveigheth them to us, Only of his Mercy, and we receive them Only by
Faith: But the ways either to procure Gods Mercy, or TO ENKINDLE OUR FAITH,
are many and sundry. Gods Mercy is procured sometimes by Prayer, sometime by
other means: But TO BREED or INCREASE FAITH IN US, THERE ARE MANY MORE WAYS
THAN CAN BE RECKONED. Some men are moved only by hearing Gods word. Some
others by weighing and beholding Gods Miracles. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8.
Just in the Martyr, was first allured to the faith by the cruelty of the
Tyrants, and by the constancy and patience of Gods Saints." Cypr. de laud
Martyrii.
S. Cyprian says, "So great is the power of Martyrdom, that, thereby he is
even Aug. Conf. l. 3. c. 4.
forced to believe, that would kill thee." S. Augustine says, "That he was
stirred up to come to Christ by reading a Heathen book written by Cicero,
called Hortensius: Thus he says, That (heathen) Book changed my mind, and
turned my prayer, O Lord, unto thee." Among OTHER CAUSES, THE SACRAMENTS SERVE
SPECIALLY TO DIRECT, AND TO AID OUR FAITH: "For they are (as Aug. cont.
Faustum, l. 19. c. 16.
) Saint Augustine called them, VISIBLE WORDS, and Seals and Testimonies of the
Gospel; Defense of the Apology, part. 2. c. 7. divis. 1. p. 150.
For the word of God is the substance and life of all Sacraments, and without
the same, all Sacraments whatsoever, are no Sacraments, etc." All which
abundantly evidence the Sacraments to be Grace-begetting, Faith-quickning,
Soul-converting, Life-conveying Ordinances, having promises and the word
annexed to them, as well as preaching; and that this is the express Doctrine of
the Church of England, though now contradicted by a Generation of Novellers,
upon mere whimsies, Crochets of their own, out of Self-interest and respects:
What other Protestant Divines have asserted to the same effect, you may read at
large in My Suspension Suspended, p. 28. to 35. and in Mr. Morris his
laborious Diatribe, p. 29. etc. The Lords Supper therefore being a Sacrament,
must thereupon consequently be a Soul-converting, Grace-producing, Regenerating
Ordinance, instituted for this very end, as well as the word preached, and
have promises of Grace annexed to it, as all these resolve. 3ly, All the
Objectors and See Jewels Defense of the Apology, c. 10. divis. 1. p. 205, etc.
others unanimouslie assert; That the Lords Supper is a Seal of the New
Testament and Covenant of Grace, the tenor whereof is thus expressed both in
the Old and New Testament, Jer. 31.31,32. c.32.38,39,40. Ezech. 11.19,20.
c.36.25. to 31. Heb. 8.6. to 13. c.10.16,17. After those days, says the Lord,
I will put my Laws into their minds, and in their hearts will I write them:
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your
filthiness, and from all our Idols will I cleanse you: A new heart also will I
give you, and a New spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh: and I will put
my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; and ye shall keep
my Judgments and do them; and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people:
And I will give you one heart and one way that you may fear me for ever, for
the good of you and your children after you: And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, that I will not turn away my face from doing you good, but I
will put my fear into your hearts, and ye shall not depart from me. And I will
rejoice over you to do you good, And I will also save you from all your
uncleanness, etc. Then shall you remember your own ways and your doings that
were not good, and you shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities, and for your abominations, and you shall all know me, from the
greatest unto the least, for I will forgive your Iniquities, and will remember
your sins no more. If then the Lords Supper be a Seal annexed to all these
Covenants and Promises of Grace (all in the Future Tense, made to such who were
unregenerate, void of Grace, and the spirit of God; having old stony hearts,
and wanting new, as I have formerly touched) it must needs be a regenerating,
Grace-conveying, Soul-converting Ordinance by divine institution, by effecting
and putting them into actual execution at this Sacrament; and these Promises
must be all annexed to it, as Writings, Covenants are to their Seals, as well
as their Seals to them. Hence Dr. Ames thus taxes Bellarmin, Tom. 3. c. 1. q.
3. "De Promissione Sacramentorum: Male disjungit, quae sunt conjungenda;
promissionem de efficacia Sacramenti, et promissionem praecedentem a Sacramento
obsignandam: Nam promissio illa pertinet ad institutionem, ut causa efficiens
Sacramenti, and obsignatio ipsa est efficacia promissa. Promissionem etiam
obsignandam sua natura antecedere Sacramentum, ex eo liquet, quod foedus
antecedit, cujus Sacramentum ita et signum, ut inde foederis nomen sortiatur,
Genesis 17." The Objectors therefore must either renounce the Lords Supper to be
the Seal of these promises and Covenants, as they positively define it, or
abjure this objection, that there are no promises of Conversion, or begetting
saving Grace and Regeneration made unto it, as there are to the preaching of
the word.

4ly, Our Lord Jesus Christ in the very institution of his Supper, Mat.
26.26,27. Mar. 14 22,23. Lu. 22.19,20. 1 Cor. 10.16,17.21. c.11.23. to 30.
Took bread, blessed, brake, and gave it to his Disciples, saying; Take, eat,
this is my body which is given for you; this do in remembrance of me. After
which he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying; Drink ye
all of it, for this is my blood of THE NEW TESAMENT (or Covenant) as one; Or^,
This Cup IS THE NEW TESTAMENT IN MY BLOOD, (thereupon twice styled, The BLOOD
OF THE COVENANT, and of the EVERLASTING COVENANT, Heb. 10.29. c.13.20.) as
another Evangelist records it: WHICH IS SHED FOR YOU, and FOR MANY, FOR THE
REMISSION OF SINS: this do ye as often as ye drink it, INREMEMBRANCE OF ME. For
as often as ye eat this bread and drink this Cup YE DO SHOW (or, show ye) THE
LORDS DEATH TIL HE COME. From which words of institution, compared with Hebr.
13.20. Now the God of Peace which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great shepherd of the sheep, BY THE BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT
(represented, communicated, and spiritually received, applied by every worthy
Communicant, in and by the Lords Supper) MAKE YOU PERFECT in every good work,
TO DO HIS WILL, WORKING IN YOU THAT WHICH IS WELL-PLEASING IN HIS SIGHT THROUGH
JESUS CHRIST: It is most apparent, that the Lords Supper was specially
instituted, blessed by Christ himself, not only to commemorate and represent,
but also really, effectually to communicate and convey to all worthy receivers
all the benefits of his death, blood, merits; to make them perfect in every
good work to do his will, to work in them that is well pleasing in Gods sight
through Jesus Christ: and that the New Testament or Covenant is thereby
ratified, applied, made effectual to and upon their Souls, in the remission of
sins, and all its forementioned branches.

5ly, The Scriptures resolve, That Romans 5.9.
we are justified by the blood of Christ; That Ephesians. 1.5.
we have redemption through his blood; That Ephesians. 2.13,14.
those who were afar off are made nigh by his blood, etc. That Col. 1.20.
he has made peace and reconciliation between his Father and us by the blood
of his Cross; That Hebr. 9.14,15.
the blood of Christ purges our consciences from dead works to serve the
living God; For which cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of death for the redemption of Transgressions under the first Testament,
they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance; That
Heb. 10.19,29. c.12.24.
we have Liberty to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, it being THE
BLOOD OE THE COVENANT WHEREWITH WE ARE SANCTIFIED: and the blood of sprinkling,
which speaks better things than the blood of Abel; That Heb. 13.20.
Christ suffered without the gate that he might sanctify the people with his
blood; That 1 Pet. 1.18,19.
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant God makes us perfect in every
good work to do his will; That 1 John 1.7.
we were redeemed from our vain conversation with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish; That Rev. 1.5,6. c.5.9,10.
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; That ( z) he has loved
us and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and made us Kings and Priests
unto God his Father; and has redeemed us unto God by his blood: Now all this
is most lively, visibly, effectually, emphatically held forth, represented,
assured to our eyes, ears, and by them unto our Souls in the Lords Supper, the
Mat. 26.27 Lu. 22.19. 1 Cor. 10.16. c.11.24.
New Testament in Christ's blood; and that more demonstratively, energetically,
then in the preaching of the word alone not coupled with the Sacramental
Elements: Therefore it must needs be a most prevailing Soul-converting,
Sin-cleansing, Grace effecting Ordinance, applying, assuring all these Gospel
Texts and promises to penitent, humbled, dejected, hungring, gasping souls
resorting thereunto. Hence Hist. Angliae, p. 1. Contin. Mat. Paris, p. 977.
Thomas of Walsingham, Rishanger, and others record of our devout King Henry
the 3d, "That he was wont to hear three Masses every day with special
devotion, and desiring to hear more, he daily assisted those who celebrated
private Masses, and when the Priest elevated the Lords body, he used to hold
and kiss the Priests hand." Whereupon St. Jews King of France, conferring with
him concerning it; and saying, "That he should not always addict himself to
Masses, but more frequently hear Sermons than Masses:" King Henry thereunto
replied with a facetious urbanitie; Se malle amicum suum saepius videre, quam
de eo loquentem, licet bona dicentem audire: That he would rather see his
friend often, than hear one only speaking of him, although well; thereby
intimating, that Christ visibly represented to the eye in the Sacrament every
day, does more effectually affect the Soul, and work upon men's hearts, than the
bare hearing of him by the ear in the word preached.

6ly, The Holy Ghost assures us, 2 Cor. 1.20. That all the promises of God are
in Jesus Christ Yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us: especially
as they are Heb 9.15,16,17. to 24.
all confirmed, ratified in and by his blood, death, represented to us in his
Supper; 1 Cor. 11.23,24,25.
instituted for its memorial: And the Church of England in her ancient Liturgy
(established by sundry Acts of Parliament) at the celebration of the
Eucharist, particularly annexeth these comfortable Gospel promises thereunto,
for the comfort, encouragement of all the Communicants resorting to the same
Matt. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
refresh you: John 3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance,
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. 1
John 2.1,2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous and he is the Propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world: Therefore all the promises of God in
general, and these in particular, belong unto, and are effectually applied by
this Sacrament to the souls of all worthy receivers, as well as by the word
preached; And by consequence, it must by the cooperation of Gods Spirit and
benediction, not only confirm, but beget true saving faith, repentance, all
spiritual Graces, and eternal life within us, and assure us of the free
remission of all our sins by the blood of Christ, as well as the word it self
preached.

7ly, That Commission and promise of Christ himself soon after the institution
of his Supper, made to his Apostles and their Successors, Mat. 28.19,20. Mar.
16.15,16.
Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe ALL
things that I have commanded you: And lo I AM WITH YOU ALWAYS UNTO THE END OF
THE WORLD, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believes not shall be damned: extends as well to the Lords Supper, as to
Baptism, and the preaching of the word: because the administration of the Lords
Supper, is See my Seasonable Answer of 2. important Questions.
a part of the Ministers office; a visible and audible Word, Sermon, preaching
the Gospel to the eye and ears together, and one of the principal things our
Savior Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23,24,25,26.
commanded his Apostles to do and observe, in remembrance of him, to show forth
his death til he come, having an AS OFTEN AS YE DO IT, annexed to, DO THIS in
remembrance of me: Therefore the selfsame promise of Christ's effectual
presence, blessing made to Baptism and the Word preached, to work faith and
Grace in men's hearts by them, that they may be saved, is likewise made to the
Lords Supper. Wherefore it is doubtless a Faith-begetting, Soul-saving,
Converting Ordinance, as well as the Word preached, or Baptism.

8ly, All these Gospel passages, promises of our Savior, John 6.27.33.48. to
53. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures unto
eternal life, which the Son of man SHALL GIVE UNTO YOU. I am the living bread
that came down from Heaven; if any man eat of this bread he shall live for
ever, and the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last. He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, dwells in me and I in him: He that eats me even he shall live by
me; He that eats this bread shall live for ever, etc. Which some Father, and
most Popish Authors appropriate wholly to the Lords Supper, and all Protestants
equally apply to the Lords Supper, as well as to the Word preached, or any
other Ordinance wherein Christ communicates himself to his people, and seems to
have a more special relation to this Spiritual Repast, though not then
instituted, as the words, shall give, will give, etc. in the future tence,
import: Are an invincible evidence, that Christ does as effectually promise,
and as really convey, exhibit his flesh and blood in a spiritual way, with
eternal life and salvation unto men, and works faith and true conversion in
their Souls, in a proper ordinary way, by his Supper duly administered, as he
does by the Word preached, or any other means of Grace; it being of divine
institution, representing the flesh, body and blood of Christ more lively to
their senses, and by them unto their souls, than any other Gospel Ordinance,
working upon three distinct senses at once, the eye, ear, taste, which no other
Ordinance does.

9ly, That Text of 1 Cor. 10.16,17. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the body of Christ? For we being many, are one Bread and one
Body, and are ALL partakers of that one bread: compared with Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. and that parallel Text, 1 Cor. 12.12,13. For as the body is one, and has
many members, and ALL the Members of that one body being many, are one body; So
also is Christ: for by one Spirit we are ALL baptized into one body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been ALL made to
drink of (or into) one Spirit: afford us these Conclusions, proving the Lords
Supper, a Converting, Grace-begetting, Spirit-infusing Ordinance, as well as
the Word preached: 1. That all visible Churchmembers professing Christ, make^
but one Mystical Body of Christ, into which they all are actually
incorporated, united together by Baptism and the Lords Supper, of both which
Sacraments they did all equally participate, in the Apostles times, without any
restraint, suspension, seclusion; communicating together in the Lords Supper,
and being all made partakers both of the Sacramental Bread and Cup when ever
administered; whether regenerate or unregenerate, ignorant or knowing,
scandalous or unblameable, by virtue of their incorporation into this One
mystical Body. Now the Major part of visible Christians, Church Members, in 1
Cor. 1.2,3. c.6.1. to 8. c.3.1,2,3,4. c.6.18,19. c.7.10,11. c.8.1,2,7,8.
c.10.8.22,23,28. to 34. c.11.30. to 34. c.14.
Corinth, and other (hurches in all ages, admitted to Baptism and the Lords
Supper, have been unregenerate, ignorant, void of saving Faith and Graces, so
as the Lords Supper could be no confirming Ordinance (in the Objectors sense,
to wit, of their several Graces) unto them: Therefore it was administered to
them, only as a converting Ordinance, upon that reason which Chrysostom, In
Marc. c. 14.
Victor Antiochenus, Summa Theol. pars 4. qu. 11. Art. 1. Sect. 3.
Alexander Alensis and others render, why our Savior himself administered it to
Judas, at its primitive institution, "That he might leave no means unattempted
to convert, reduce him to a sound mind, and reclaim him from his wickedness."
2ly, That the Lords Supper worthily received does really communicate the body
and blood of Christ, with all the benefits of his death and passion, to those
who receive it, yea make them all partakers of that one bread of life, to their
eternal Salvation; and to drink into one spirit; Whence judicious ^n. 1 Cor.
12.
Calvin expounds this phrase of the Sacramental Cup (to which doubtless it
referrs) thus, Participationem Calicis huc spectare, ut unum Spiritum
accipiamus. Learned Gerhard thus, Ex uno. Calice. bibimus (in the Lords Supper)
ut unum spiritum (sanctum) recipiamus: Whom the French Divines in their Theses
Salmur. pars 3. p. 40. back, asserting: "That the Spirit of comfort and
sanctification does much rather follow the lawful celebration of the
Sacraments, than the hearing of the Word, since that is not slightly to be
passed by which St: Paul has said, And have all been made to drink into one
spirit; (to wit, in the Lords Supper) whereas he never uttered any like thing,
when as he spoke of the preaching of the word;" as learned Mr. Morris has
also noted to my hands in his Diatribe. 3ly, That all worthy Communicants of
the Lords Supper, are there really incorporated into the invisible body and
Church of Christ, and made bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, spirit of his
spirit, as visible Church Members, are thereby actually incorporated into his
visible mystical body, as these Texts, compared with Ephesians. 1.22,23. c,2.18. to
the end, c.4.12. to 17. c.5.25. to 33. Col.1.18. c.2.19. resolve: 4ly, That
this Sacrament is a See Articles of Engl. c. 26. Harmony of Confessions, Sect.
14. Bishop Jewels Reply to Harding. p. 20, 21. 93. 112.
"special means to unite both the visible and invisible Church and their
members together, and to prevent all Scismes in these bodies, being both the
bond and badge of their union and communion one with another." A prevailing
motive in these sad times of Scisms and Divisions in all places, to restore the
frequent constant use of this holy Ordinance, the disusage whereof has been
the principal cause of the Growth and continuance of these manifold Sects and
Differences which Mat. 12.25.
threaten desolation to our Church and State.

10ly, The Scripture positively resolves, Romans 1.16. and all our Opposites
assert, "That the Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto Salvation to every
one that believes; to the Jew first and also to the Greek; for therein is the
righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith; as it is written, The just
shall live by faith:" Now the principal part and sum of the Gospel, recorded
in sacred Writ and preached by the Apostles, to beget or increase faith,
convert, win, bring men to salvation, is this; 1 Cor. 15.1,2,3,4. Isay 53.4,5,
etc. Acts 2.22. to 40. c.3,4. to 20. c.4.10. c.5.30,31. c.8,5.35. c.10.36. to
42. c.13.19,30. Romans 1.2,3,4. c.4.24,25. c.5.6,7,8,9. Gal. 3.1.
That Jesus Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, when we were
yet sinners and his professed Enemies, to reconcile us unto God, to cleanse,
heal, save us from our sins to make us his adopted sons, and preserve us to his
heavenly kingdom. Hence* i^ that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.23. But we preach
Christ crucified: and chap. 2. 2. I determined not to know any thing amongst
you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified: as being the marrow and substance of
the Gospel; whereupon the preaching of the Gospel is styled, 1 Cor. 1.17,18.
The preaching of the Cross. This transcendent love of Christ in dying,
suffering for such wretched sinners, Enemies as we; in washing us from our sins
in his own most precious blood, and redeeming us from Gods wrath, Hell, eternal
damnation out of the freeness, fullness, and riches of his grace; is 2 Cor.
5.14,15,19,20,21. c.7.1. Romans 5.5.6,7,8,10,21. John 3.16. c.6.44. c.10.11.15.
c.15.13. Gal. 2.20. c.3.1. Ephesians. 5.2.25,26. c.1.6,7. c.2.4. to 20. 1 Pet.
1.3.8.18,19. Romans 14.7,8,9. 1 John 1.1.2,7. c.2.2. c.3.16. c.4.9,10,11. Rev.
1.5 ^ 5.9,10. 1 Timothy 1.15. Isay 53.4. to 12. Acts 2.22. to 40.
set forth and recorded in sacred Writ, as the most powerful, attractive,
persuasive, overcoming, constraining Argument, motive, consideration of all
other, to work true conversion in men's hearts, to turn them from all their
sinful courses unto God, to allure, attract, unite, espouse, marry their souls
for ever unto Christ, and to inflame, ravish the^ with his surpassing love: Now
it must be granted by all, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a part of
this Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believes, since instituted, recorded, commanded by Christ in the Gospel,
being likewise both an audible, visible, sensible Gospel, as the Fathers with
others usually style it. Moreover, it most lively, powerfully, flexanimously*
graphically represents, holds forth, yea preaches to our eyes, ears, taste,
and by them unto our minds, hearts, souls, spirits, the c^ucifixion, death,
passion of our Savior, and his transcendent love in dying for our sins; the
most powerful, attractive, persuasive, overcoming, conuraining argument,
motive, considera. ion of all others in the Gospel, to work true conversion in
men's hearts, to Acts 26.17,18.
turn them from the^ power of Sin, Satan, unto God; to allure, attract, Hos.
2.19,20,23.
espouse, unite receivers souls for ever unto Christ; to inflame, ravish them
with his transcendent love; and cause them 2 Cor. 5.15.
from hence forth no longer to live unto themselves but unto him which died for
them, and rose again. Therefore all must of necessity grant it to be the power
of God unto Salvation, a most effectual, Eodem modo justificant verbum Dei et
Sacramenta, ae que enim tribuitur. Justificatio verbo and Sacramentis, Ames.
Bellarm. Enervat. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 3. p. 36.
justifying, a Soul-converting, Faith-engendring, Faih-increasing Ordinance, as
well as the Gospel preached; yea, a powerful means of working that belief and
saving faith in the souls of those, who in obedience to Christ's command
constantly resort unto it, which is required in worthy Communicants, to make
both it (and the Gospel too) the power of God to their Salvation; even as the
Gospel read, heard, preached, begets that faith or belief which God requires to
make it saving und converting, Romans 10.14,15,17. In Brief, There is not any
means of, or motive to faith or conversion in the Gospel preached, which is not
included in the Lords Supper, and pressed with the selfsame, yea greater force
and advantage upon men's Souls in this Sacrament: both by the prayers,
confessions, meditations, exhortations that accompany it, and by the very
breaking of the bread, pouring out of the wine, with other Sacramental actions;
then they are or can be in any Sermon. Bellarm. Enervat. Tom. 3. c. 1. p. 9.
Non debent hic inter se comparari verbum, et Sacramentum ut realiter a verbo
distinctum, sed verbum nudum, and verbum Sacramento vestitum, Hoc autem majus
et efficacius dici potest quoad nos, quia before and pluribus sensibus test
atur, et magis accommodatur ad animos nostros efficiendos. So Dr. Ames in
answer to Bellarmines Objection, Nihil fingi potest majus aut efficacius verbo
Dei. Therefore orr Opposites must either grant the Lords Supper a
Soulconverting* Faith-begetting Ordinance, as well as preaching, or disclaim
preaching to be such, and cast that aside too as unconverting, as they have
most impiously done this Sacrament for sundry years in too many places.

11ly, The principal end of instituting the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.25,26,
"was, to show forth the power, efficacy, principal ends, fruits, effects of
our Saviors death till he come, " not only in bare representation, but by
practical, efficacious operations, and applieations for the spiritual benefit,
conversion, consolation of the receivers souls. Now what are the ends, fruits,
effects of our Saviors death therein held forth, is evident by these Gospel
Texts. Isay 53.5. 1 Cor. 15.3. 1 Pet. 2.24. "He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was btuised for our iniquities, he died for our sins, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes are we healed: Who
his own self bare sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin,
should live unto righteousness; Luke 1.74 75. That we being delivered from the
hands of our Enemies should serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life. 1 These. 5.9,10,11. For God
has not appointed us unto wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ: who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep we should live together
with him: wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, Romans
4.25. c.5.8,9,10. Who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification. But God commends his love unto us, that whiles we were yet
sinners Christ died for us: much more then being now justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath by him: For if when we were Enemies we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we
shall be saved by his life, Romans 6.1. to 11. Shall we continue in sin that
Grace may abound? God forbid: How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer
therein? Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him in baptism, that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead, even so we also should walk in
newness of life: For if we have been planted together in the likness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: knowing this, that
our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve-sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him: knowing that Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, etc. Likewise
reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God
through Jesus Christ our Lord: Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal
bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof, etc." Romans 11.7,8,9. "For
none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself: For whether we live,
we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lords; For TO THIS END Christ both died, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord both of quick and dead. Gal. 2.19.20. I am
dead to the Law, that I might live unto God, I am crucified with Christ;
Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life I now
live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me, Phil. 3.10. That I might know him, and the power of his
refurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
him. Heb. 2.14,15. That Christ through death might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them, who through fear of
death, were all their life time subject to bondage, 2 Cor. 5.15. Christ died
for all, that they which live should not live unto themselves, but unto him who
died for them and rose again: For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. Ephesians.
5.25,26,27. Husbands love your wives even as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of
water, by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish." Now all these being the ends, scope, fruits, effects of our
Saviors death most lively represented to, showed forth, remembered by, and
applied to us in the Lords Supper, to accomplish them all in us: it must needs
be a most effectual, lively, powerful Grace-begetting, Soul-inlivening,
regenerating, sanctifying, Sin-destroying, Soul-saving Ordinance (as well as
the word preached) and that by divine institution.

12ly, It is most evident, both by Scripture and experience, that the seeing,
beholding of things with our eyes, does more immediately, deeply, powerfully
affect and work upon our Spirits, Souls, affections, than what we are informed
of at second hand only by others relations; because the species of what we see,
are more operative, impressive on our minds and memories than any thing we
hear. This the two known Adages evince, Horace.
Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures, quam quae sunt oculis subdita
fidelibus. Plautis: Tinculentus.
Plus valet ocularis testis unus quam aurieti december; Cicero ad Torquatum.
Acerbius est videri quam audiri. Which the Scripture thus seconds, Lam. 3.51.
Mine eye affects my soul; Job 42.5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the ear, but now mine eyes sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dusi and ashes, Isay 6.5. Woe is me for I am undon, because I am a man of
unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Lu. 2.29,30.
Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation: Zech. 12.10. And they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his
only Son, etc. Luke 23.48. All the people that came together to that sight
beholding the things that were done, smote their breasts and returned. Lu.
19.41. He beheld the City and wept over it. 1 Kings 10.45. And when the Queen
of Sheba had seen all Solomon's wisdom, she had no more spirit in her, etc. 1
Kings 18. 39. When all the people saw it, they fell on their faces, and said,
The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God, Psalm. 48.5. They saw it, and so they
marvelled, they were troubled and hasted away. Psa. 97.4. The Sea saw it and
fled, Jordan was driven back. Psa. 40.3. Many shall see it and fear, and shall
trust in the Lord. Genesis 3.5. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great
in the earth, etc. and it repented the Lord that he had made man, and it
grieved him at the heart. Exodus 3.7. And the Lord said, I have surely seen the
affliction of my people. Lam. 1.9.12. O Lord behold my affliction: Behold and
see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. Lam. 2. 20. Behold O Lord, and
consider to whom thou have done thus, Isa. 63.15. Look down from heaven and
behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory; where is thy zeal
and thy strength; the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward us?
These with sundry other Texts, evince; that the eyes, sight and beholding of
things seen, do more deeply, passionately affect, move, work upon the hearts,
souls and affections of men, and on God himself, than the ears or what they
barely hear. For the certainty, assurance, belief of what we see with our
eyes, above that we only hear of with our ears, it is sufficiently evidenced by
that of Job 42.3. Of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, 1 Kings 10.6,7. It was a
true relation that I heard in mine own land of thy acts, and of thy wisdom,
Howbeit, I believed not the words UNTIL I CAME, AND MINE EYES HAD SEEN; and
behold the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame
which I heard. 1 John 1.1,2. That which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life, declare we unto you: for the life was manifested, and we have seen it and
bear witness. 2 Pet. 1.16. We have not followed cunningly devised ^bles, when
we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his glory. Acts 10.40,41. Him God raised up the third day and
showed openly, not unto all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of
God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.
John 20.8. And he saw and believed: And v. 25. 29. The other Disciples said
unto Thomas, we have seen the Lord: but he said unto them; Except I shall see
in his hands the print of the nails, etc. I will not believe; which when he had
seen, and thereupon believed, Jesus said unto him, Thomas, because thou have
seen thou have believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed: compared with Genesis 45.12. Behold you eyes see, and the eyes of my
brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaks unto you: and Lu. 1.1,2,4.
John 4.42. Psa. 48.8. Psa. 35.21,22. 1 Cor. 15.5,6,7,8. If then what we see and
behold with our eyes, does more powerfully affect, impress, operate upon the
soul, mind, affections, and be sooner, yea more certainly assuredly believed,
than that we only hear with our ears; it necessarily follows, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Mat. 26.26,27. Lu. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23. to 29.
Gal. 3.1.
representing visibly to our eyes, sight in and by the Elements, the body,
blood, death, passion of our Savior, by his divine Institution, and at the
self-same time inculcating them into our ears by the words of consecration, and
other ordinances accompanying it, as darts or appurtenances of this service;
and presenting them to Psalm. 34.8. 1. John 1.1.
our taste, feeling too by the Sacramental elements received; should be a more
powerful, operative soul-affecting, soul-convertirg Ordinance, than the Word
alone, when preached only to men's ears, unless our Opposites will assert, one
single witness to be as credible, as firm, and apt to beget belief as two, or
three, against Number. 35.30. Deuteronomy. 17.6. c.19.15. Mat. 18.16. John 8.1. and 2
Cor. 13.1. Heb. 10.28. 1 John 5.7,8,9: Or that Gods Covenant alone brings as
much assurance and strong consolation, as his Covenant, Oath, and united
together, against Hebr. 6.17,18. Or peremptorily deny the eyes to be the
Organs, or what is conveyed to the soul by them, to be instruments of
Conversion and believing as well as the ears. The last of which if gainsaid, I
shall unanswerably evidence, by Job 42.5. Isay 6.5. Zech. 10.42.13. John
20.25.29. 1 Kings 18.39. forecited: and by these ensuing Scriptures, Isay
45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth. Psalm. 34.58.
They looked unto him and were lightened, etc. O taste and see that the Lord is
good, blessed is he that trusts in him. Isay 56.1. I said; behold me, behold
me, to a Nation that was not called by my name. Ps. 27.4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
inquire in his Temple. Psa. 48.8. As we have heard, so have we seen in the City
of our God. Can. 8.14. Let me see thy countenance, for it is lovely. Mich. 6.
9. The man of wisdom shall see my name. Mat. 5.16,17.13.15. Their eyes they
have closed, etc. Lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and SHOULD BE CONVERTED,
Nota.
and I should heal them: (an unanswerable text, ascribing conversion to the
eye, and that in the first place, as well as to the ear) But BLESSED ARE YOUR
EYES FOR THEY SEE, and your ears for they hear: For verily I say unto you, that
many Prophets and righteous men have desired TO SEE THOSE THINGS WHICH YE SEE,
and have not seen them: and to hear those things that ye hear, and have not
heard them. Mar. 15.32. Let Christ the King of Israel descend now, that WE MAY
SEE AND BELIEVE. John 20.8. And HE SAW AND BELIEVED. John 2.23. Many believed
in his name when they saw the miracles which he did. John 6.30. What sign do
thou, that we MAY SEE AND BELIEVE THEE? John 11.45. Then many of the Jews which
had seen the things which Jesus did, believed on him. So John 2.11. c.12.11.
Mat. 15.31. Acts 8.6.13. c.13.12. John 6.14. Sundry BELIEVED, and were
converted BY SEEING the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles: So Eusebius.
^l. 4 c. 8. Bish. Jewels Desence, etc. p. 284.
Justin the Martyr was converted, by beholding the cruelty of the Persecutors,
and constancy of the Martyrs. Much more then may Communicants be converted, by
beholding Jesus Christ evidently set forth and crucified before their eyes for
their sins in the Lords Supper, and by looking upon him therein whom they have
pierced, as Isay 45.22. Zech. 10.12,13. Lu. 2.23.30. Job 42.5. Isay 6.5. Lu.
5.8. Heb. 12.12. Psalm. 48.9. and other forecited Texts will evince. The eyes,
as well as 1 Cor. 15.33. Isay 33.15.
ears are usually the principal Organs the Devil uses to convey sin and lust
into the soul, Genesis 3.6,7. Hence we read, of an evil eye, Prove. 23.6. Of the
lust of the eyes. 1 John 2.16. Of eyes full of adultery, and which cannot cease
from sin. 2 Pet. 2.14. Of Uritque videndo Foeminam, Virgil. Georg. lib 1. Oculi
sunt in amore duces, Propertius.
looking upon a woman to lust after her, resolved to be a committing adultery
in the heart. Mat. 5.28.32. Of David's adultery occasioned by his eye and sight
of Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11.2,3,4. Of Ammons incest with Tamar, caused by the sight
of her beauty, 2 Samuel 13.1,2, etc. Upon which consideration, holy Job made a
covenant with his eyes, that he might not think upon a maid, and that his heart
might not walk after his eyes, Job 31.1.9. Hence Solomon advises, not to lust
after the beauty of an evil woman; neither let her take thee with her eyelids,
Prove. 6. 25. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his
color in the Cup, for at last it biteth like a Serpent: Thine eyes shall
behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things: He adds,
Prove. 23.5. Will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is not? to wit,
on riches; A chans sight of the Babylonish garment, wedge of gold, and shekels
of silver among the spoils of Jericho, made him sinfully to covet and hide them
against Gods command, to the Israelites slaughter, and his own sin and ruin,
Josh. 7.18,19,20. etc. As therefore Vitiis nostris in animum per oculos via
est. Quint. Declam.
sins and lusts of all sorts are conveyed by the eyes into Men's souls more
frequently, powerfully, than by any other sense; So by like reason may saving
Grace and conversion in and by the Lords Supper. The Provincial Assembly of
London themselves asserting in their Vindication, p. 203. As Christ in the
Ministry of his word preaches to the ear, and by the ear conveyeth himself to
the heart: So in the Sacrament he preaches to the eye (yea ear too) and
conveyeth himself into the heart: and therefore it is well styled, a Visible
word; which Thomas Beacon in his Catechism, Mr. Calvin in his Institutions, l.
4. c. 14. Sect. 16, 17. with others affirm. By all which premises it is most
clearly demonstrated beyond contradiction, to be a Soul-converting,
Grace-conveying Ordinance, as well as the Word preached, to all who worthily,
sincerely approach unto it.

13. If in every Sacrament there be required a word of promise, as Bellarm.
Ener. Tom. 3. l. l. 1. c. 1. p. 7. c. 3. p. 34.
Dr. Ames, with others assert, and our Opposites object: I may safely answer,
that these general promises of the Gospel, Jam. 4.8. "Draw near unto God and
he will draw near unto you. Mat. 16.19,20. Where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Mat. 6.6. Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled, Mat.
7.7. c.21.22. Lu. 11.9. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. John 6.37. Him that comes unto me
I will in no wise cast out. With those antienter of Isay 64.5. Thou meetest
those that remember thee in thy ways. Prove. 8.34,35. Blessed is the man that
hears me watching daily at my gates, watching daily at the posts of my house;
For whosoever finds me finds life. Psalm. 69.32. Your heart shall live that seek
the Lord. Prove. 8.17. Deuteronomy. 4.29. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Ames 5.4,6.
Isay 47.13. If you seek me early with the whole heart, ye shall find me: Seek
the Lord and ye shall live; I said unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain?
With that of Heb. 5.8. The earth that drinks in the rain that raineth often
upon it, etc. is blessed," and Mat. 11.28. c.28.15,16. forecited; do all telate
to our drawing near to God, assembling together, hungring, thirsting after,
asking, seeking, knocking, approaching, coming to him, watching at his gates;
remembering him in his ways, seeking him, and drinking in the rain of his Grace
in the Lords Supper, as well as in prayer, fasting, preaching, reading,
meditating, baptism, or any holy Ordinance else in particular: Therefore we
may, must, ought to expect Gods drawing near to us, his presence with us, our
finding all Graces, Benefits we ask, seek, knock, thirst after, entertainment
by, yea meeting with God, finding of God, Spiritual life to our Souls and all
other blessings, we need for our conversion, edification, or salvation, in, by,
and through the conscionable, constant use of this discontinued Sacrament, as
well as in or by any other Ordinance whatsoever; and Heb. 4.16. Jam. 1.5,6.
we may boldly resort unto it in the concurrent strength of all these promises,
as to a Soul-converting, Grace-begetting, as well as Grace corroborating
Ordinance, let our Antagonists, out of their own whimsical brains, suggest what
evasions they can to the contrary. Mr. Drake himself confessing in his
Boundary, p. 147. What the Word applied by one sense, the Sacraments does BY
ALL SENSES, (he should have excepted smelling) therefore it is a powe^full
means of assurance; and by consequence of conversion too, by virtue of all
these concurrent Promises.

14. That prophecy and promise of Zech. 12.10,11. ch.13.1,2. "I will power upon
the house of David, etc. the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication; and they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one is in
bitterness for his firstborn, etc. (applied particularly to our Saviors
passion, John 19.37. and to the Jews penitential monrning for crucifying him,
Acts 2.37. etc.) And in that day there shall be a fountain opened for the house
of David and for the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in for sin and for
uncleanness, and I will cause the unclean Spirit to pass out of the Land, etc."
seems more particularly and specifically to relate to the fountain of Mat.
26.26,27. Lu. 23.19. 1 Cor. 10.16. c.11.23,24,25,26. Tit. 3.5,6. Rev. 1.5,6.
"Christ's blood of the New Testament shed for many for the remission of sins,
and the Communion of his blood," represented to us in the Lords Supper, rhan to
the word preached, or any other Ordinance, except 1 Pet. 3.21. Ephesians. 5.26,27.
Baptism. Therefore we may with much faith and confidence repair to it, (had we
no other promise but this) as to a regenerating, Soul-humbling, sin-clensing,
sanctifying Ordinance, as well as a confirming.

15. The Apostle affirms, and our Opposites much insist on it in this
Controversy, That 1 Cor. 11.27,29.
those who eat and drink the Lords Supper unworthily, eat and drink judgment
and damnation to them selves, not discerning the Lords body, and are guilty of
the blood of the Lord: Therefore Synodus Galonis. etc. Bochellus Decret.
Eccles. Gal. l. 2. Tit. 1. c. 33. p. 152.
by the rule of contraries, those who receive it worthily shall eat and drink
salvation and mercy to themselves, be made partakers of all the benefits of
Christ's body and blood, and absolved from all their sins and guiltiness: it
being just like the word preached, a savor of life unto life, as well as of
death unto death; 2 Cor. 2.15,16. Mar. 16.16.

16. That of John 1.12,13. But as many as received him, to them gave he
privilege, or right, to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
his Name, which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of
God: is applicable as well to our receiving of Christ in and by this Sacrament,
as by the word preached; Christ being received in both alike by faith, wrought
at and by them; and men born again by God instrumentally through the use of
them: Therefore they are both alike regenerating, converting Ordinances.

17. The Ministry, Word, Sacraments, and all other Ordinances of the Gospel
were instituted by Christ, for the conversion, quickening of those who were dead
in trespasses and sins; the perfecting of the Saints, the edifying of the body
of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of
the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; That we may grow up in all things into him which is the
head, even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth, according to THE EFFECTUAL WORKING IN THE
MEASURE OF EVERY PART makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self
in love: Yea, those Ordinances of God which serve to increase, or nourish
saving faith and Graces, do likewise work and beget them by the corporation of
Gods Spirit; as is evident by Ephesians. 2.1,5,6.13. to 21. c.4.11. to 17. 1 Cor.
10.16,17. c.12.14. to 31. c.14.4,5,12,13,14.24,25,26. 1 These. 5.11. Acts 20.32.
Col. 2.7,10,11,12,13. 1 Cor. 3.9,10,11. Jude 20. 1 Pet. 2.2. to 8. compared
together, being express in point. Therefore all Gospel Ordinances are
Soul-converting, Regenerating, Grace-begetting, Edifying, as well as
confirming: yea, to assert any Gospel Ordinance or Sacrament, to be
unconverting, is a mere untheological, if not atheistical Paradox and
Contradiction in it self, denying it to be any Ordinance or Sacrament at all
of Divine institution; a vilifying, Heb. 10.29.
trampling it under feet as an unholy thing; yea, a mere diabolical invention
(in the event, though not in the intention of those who generally style them
so) to bring it into contempt and neglect amongst the people, as a mere
useless, ineffectual Institution, which can neither mortify their corruptions,
nor regenerate their Natures, nor sanctify their souls, nor beget any
spiritual life, Grace within them, and only serve to increase their damnation,
without prae-existent Grace, which it cannot work within them, as these
Novellers dogmatize.

18. I shall desire the Objectors and all Christians seriously to read over all
the ends of instituting the Lords Supper by our Savior, expressed in the
Practice of Piety, so highly applauded by most men: and there is scarce one of
them (but especially the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.) but will prove it to be, a
Soul-converting Ordinance, working in us (as well as being an assured pledge
unto us) a most near and effectual Communion with Christ; whereby there flows
from Christ's nature into our natures united to him, the lively Spiris and
breath of Grace which renueth us to a spiritual life, and so sanctifies our
minds, wills and affections, that we daily grow more and more conformable to
the image of Christ; who bestows upon us (in the use of this Sacrament) ALL
SAVING GRACE NECESSARY TO ATTAIN ETERNAL LIFE, as is therein more at large
expressed. And it concludes the 6. end of the Lords Supper thus. The leaves of
this tree heal the Nations of believers, and it yields EVERY MONTH a new manner
of fruit, WHICH NOURISHES THEM TO EVERLASTING LIFE. Oh BLESSED ARE THEY WHO
OFTEN EAT OF THIS SACRAMENT, AT LEAST ONCE EVERY MONTH, taste a new of this
renewing fruit which Christ has prepared for us at his Table TO HEAL OUR
INFIRMITIES, and to confirm our belief of life everlasting. How Sacrilegiously
impious and injurious then are those Ministers to their peoples souls, who for
sundry years together deprive them of, deterr, debarr them from this
Sacrament, this tree of life, which they should receive every Month at least,
both as a Converting and confirming Ordinance? And how unhappy are those people
who live under such perverse and obstinate Ministers who will neither suffer
them to be converted or confirmed by it, and cast it quite aside?

19ly, The Objectors have no Scripture, text, disproving the Lords Supper to be
a Soul-converting, nor yet affirming it to be only a Grace-confirming
Ordinance. Therefore this distinction not being founded in Gods word, nor
extant in any Father, any ancient Writers, or Schoolmen; must be exploded as a
New upstart Fancy and Delusion; Like the newfangled words, Really, Corporally,
Substantially (never used by any one of the Old Fathers) invented by the
Papists, (for which our learned Reply to Harding, Art. 5. p. 238.
Jewel justly taxes them) to maintain their Absurdity or Transubstantiation,
which first introduced, that Bochellus Decret. Eccl. Gal. l. 3. Tit. 1. c. 70,
72, 73, 93, 105, 106, 107.
prae-examination, or Confession to the Priest, and Suspension from the Lords
Supper, which some would bring in again into our Churches by this New
Distinction, and Nonsense Expression, of setting a Seal to a Blank, (which they
couple together with it, like whelps of the same litter.) I shall therefore now
desire, adjure our Antagonists in this Controversy, and other Ministers, no
longer to delude themselves, or others, with such fond, absurd, erroneous
distinctions, uncouth expressions, and fallacious Arguments against the
Soul-converting, Grace-begetting efficacy of the Lords Supper, nor to bring a
perpetual, scandalous, impious, blasphemous, false report upon it, by denying
it both in Press and Pulpit, to be either iustituted by Christ or made use of
by the Spirit, as a proper instrumental means to work conversion, faith,
repentance, or other saving Graces originally in men's Souls; but utterly to
renounce and publicly to retract them, upon this fresh conviction and trial by
the word of God, (which has Rev. 2.2.
found them, not to have been Apostles in these particulars (as they formerly
deemed themselves) but Liars and Impostors; as, I hope, their own Judgments,
Consciences will (upon their serious perusal of the Premises) effectually
convince them. In which condition if they shall still wilfully persist without
reformation, and upon these, or other new brainsick Notions, obstinately
continue (as too many Ministers, rather out of Confederacy than Conscience
have done) most sacrilegiously to rob their people year after year of this
blessed Sacrament (which they should at least monthly administer to them, for
the more effectual conversion, sanctification, consolation, edification, and
the generation, corroboration, nutrition, augmentation of all saving Graces in
their souls) not only to the apparent hindering of their conversion,
edification, spiritual growth in Grace, but also to the very murdering,
starving, Romans 14.15 1 Cor. 8.11,12.
destroying of their most precious souls, as much as in them is; administering
it neither as a converting Ordinance to those they deem unregenerate; nor as an
instructing Ordinance to the ignorant, nor as a reforming Ordinance to the
vicious, nor as a comforting and corroborating Ordinance to those they deem
truly gracious, though they importunately crave it at their hands; they may
justly fear, expect, for this their impiou^, injurious seclusion of their
flocks as So they style them from Mat. 7.6.
Dogs; from the Lords Table (against his express command, and the practice of
the Apostles, Primitive and Protestant Churches in all former ages) to be for
ever secluded by Christ himself out of the New Jerusalem; and to receive their
portion amongst those Rev. 22.15.
Dogs, Murderers, Sorcerers, Lovers and Makers of Lies, who shall never be
admitted into heaven: Yea, to have this fatal doom denounced against them by
Christ's own mouth at the great day of Judgment; Mat. 25.41,42,45,46.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; For, I was an hungry, and ye GAVE NE NO MEAT; I was thirsty, and ye
GAVE ME NO DRINK, (no not at my own sacred Table, against my express command)
Verily I say unto you, in so much as ye did it not TO ONE OF THESE, ye did it
not to me. And then shall ye go away into everlasting punishment. I beseech you
sadly to ruminate upon this Text, Doom, and what else I have here presented to
you, for your conviction, conversion from this Soul murdering Cruelty,
Injustice to your people and selves too; and the Lord give you unfeigned
repentance and 2 Timothy 2.7.
understanding in all things, that so you may speedily recant, reform whatever
you have written, spoken, preached, or done amiss in relation to this blessed
Ordinance, and your peoples Spiritual welfare by the inestimable benefits
thereof, detained from them for so many years. It was the sad lamentation of
the Prophet Jeremy, Lam. 1.11. and 4.4,5. All her people sigh, they seek bread
to relieve their Soul: The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of
his mouth for thirst; the young children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto
them; They that did feed delicately are desolate in the street: See O Lord and
consider; And is not this the sadder complaint, lamentation of many whole
parishes, and some Cities in England, who for sundry years last past have been
deprived of the Sacramental bread and wine in the Lords own Supper for the
spiritual conversion, consolation of their Souls, by their uncharitable,
obstinate, domineering Ministers, though frequently pressed with prayers,
sighs, tears, to break and distribute it unto them, and often contesting with
them for detaining from them this spititual bread, and sweet blood of life, to
their gasping Souls? And will not there be a See, O Lord, and consider, with a
witness, for this Soul-murdering Tyranny? since the Apostle resolves, 1 C^r.
8,11,12.
When ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak consciences, ye sin
against Christ, and cause the weak brother to perish for whom Christ died. I
shall admonish such Ministers in the Apostles words to the Elders of Ephesus,
Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flocks, over
which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood; even with his precious body and blood at
his Table, according to his own command: Do this as often as ye do it in
remembrance of me, show ye forth the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor.
11.24,25,26. Lest else he repute you amongst the number of those GRIEVOUS
WOLVES, not sparing the flock, and men speaking perverse things to draw away
disciples after them, prophesied of in these later times, Acts 20.29,30. not
those good Shepherds who came to give life to their sheep, and that they might
have it more abundantly than before, John 10.10.

To close up this Controversy: Not only sound Problem^ Theolog. locus, 77.
Sect. 7.
Aretius, asserts. Deus alias ante Coenam, alias post, alias IN ILLA CONVERTIT
AD VERAM PAENITENTIAM: Which Harm. Evangel. in Lu, c. 1.
Chemnitius thus seconds; Deus Spiritu suo Per Verbum ET SACRAMENTA FIDEM IN
NOBIS EFFICIT, qua Christum recipimus per quem regeneramur. And Tom. 4. l. 2.
c. 4. Sect. 16. P. 31.
Chamier thus thirds: Quicquid movet intellectum ad assentiendum veritati
divinae GENERAT FOVET QUE FIDEM. At SACRAMENTA movent intellectum ad
assentiendum veritati divinae: Ergo, etc. But even Divine Right of Church
government, p. 523, 524.
Mr. Rutherford himself, (one of the first broachers of this Controversy,)
thus prints: Mr. Prynne might have spared his pains, That the Lords Supper is a
Converting Ordinance: WE GRANT IT TO BE A CONVERTING, QUICKENING AND LIVELY
APPLICATORY ORDINANCE: though he adds a, But how? etc. to it: And Mr. Drake
(the fiercest Champion against it) not only grants; that faith and conversion
may sometimes be wrought at the Sacrament, if not by it: but further asserts,
Boundarie, p. 160, 161, etc
That scandalous persons, yea HE ATHENS (to whom Mat. 26.26.27. 2 Cor.
10.16,17,21, c.11.23. to 30. Acts 2.41.46, c.8.36,37,38.
it belongs not before their admission into the visible Church) may be present
at the Lords Supper, and all the Sacramental actions, with a great deal of
profit; and there attain THE FRUIT OF THE VISIBLE AND AUDIBLE WORD BY BARE
PRESENCE (yet not admitted to receive it upon any terms;) When as Bell. Ener.
Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 4 p. 45.
Dr. Ames will inform him, Sacramenta proprie consistunt in eorum usu, ita ut
Sacramentum non sit Sacramentum, nisi in ejus perceptione Sacramentali; and
Reply to Harding, p. 365. etc.
Bishop Jewel, Catechism, f. 426, 427.
Thomas Beacon, with the 25. Article of the Church of England instruct him,
that this is a mere Popish whimsy. Seeing then the Lords Supper is granted on
all hands to be a converting, quickening, lively applicatory Ordinance: that
some may possibly be really converted at or by it; and that ignorant,
scandalous persons, nay Heathens may receive a great deal of profit by it and
the fruits thereof, by their bare presence at it (if Mr. Drakes Divinity be
Orthodox) and without all peradventure, the souls, faith, Graces of all
regenerate Christians, may be much more comforted, edified, confirmed,
strengthened, increased by its frequent reception; but not so much as one soul
converted, confirmed, edified, comforted, yet thousands destroyed, starved,
dejected by its disusage or rare administration. And since the faith of the
strongest Christians ( as Instit. c. 16. Sect. 3.
Mr. Calvin, Defense of the Apology, part. 2. chapter ^. div. 2. p. 154.
Bishop Jewel, Catec^ f. 425, 426 461, 462, 463
Beacon, and others write) is so small and weak, that it needs the help of
outward Sacraments; and unless it be propped up on every side, and maintained
by them and all other Ordinances, it w^ll presently be shaken, waver, and
likely to fall. Let this now at last prevail with all our hard-hearted
Ministers, immediately to lay aside all combinations, self-interests, and
by-respects whatsoever which have induced them to discontinue the use of the
Lords Supper for sundry years; and for time to come engage them with
conscience, diligence, most frequently, constantly to administer it to all
their Congregations, without suspending any but excommunicated persons
(secluded from all other Ordinances) from its reception; to exhort all their
people to a conscientious, due, frequent participation of it, according to the
practice of the Primitive Church and Christians, ^ Tho. Bea^ Catechism, p. 462,
463. My Suspension suspended, p. 24, 25. My Seasonable Vindication, p. 5. to 31.
who communicated every day, week or month at least) and to invite them to it,
not only as to a mere confirming, but as to a most effectual, powerful,
Soul-converting, Grace-engendring Ordinance by Christ's own institution; as; I
trust, I have here demonstrated it to be, beyond all future Contradiction, out
of mere zeal to truth, Gods glory, this Sacraments due ends, honor, and
salvation of peoples Souls so long debarred from it, against all Laws of God
and Man. And if any of our Ministers whatsoever, whether Presbyterial,
Independent, Anabaptistical, or other: shall henceforth peremptorily refuse to
do their pastoral duties herein, I trust all those who now bear the Name of
Civil Magistrates, Judges, Justices, upon their peoples just complaints, will
by those Legal means I have A Legal Resolution of 2. Important Quaerics. A New
Discovery of Bomish Emissaries, and a Seasonable Vindication.
elsewhere insisted on, most zealously and resolutely compel them to a
constant frequent administration of this Sacrament, to all theit
unexcommunicated Churchmembers, who humbly desire it at their hands, or else
eject them out of their Benefices, as Scandalous to our Region, disturbers of
our Churches Peace, domineering Tyrants over their peoples consciences, Enemies
to the conversion, edification, consolation of their precious Souls, renouncers
of one Chief part of their Ministerial function, and professed Apostates both
from the Doctrine, Practice of Christ, his Apostles, the Primitive Fathers,
Churches, Christians, the Church of England, and all true Churches, Ministers
of Christ throughout the world in former ages, out of mere self ends and
interest, having now no real or pretended grounds of conscience left them to
palliate or excuse their obstinacy in this their Antichristian and
Anti-Sacramental practice. In the mean time, that which was the usual public
Prayer used at all our Communions, by the prescription of our Old Book of
Common Prayer, (never so necessary to be revived as now) shall be my private
Prayer, for these refractorie Non-communicating Ministers, and all others: Give
grace (O heavenly Father) to all Bishops, Pastors and Curates, that they may
both by their life and Doctrine, set forth thy true and lively word, and
RIGHTLY AND DULY ADMINISTER THY HOLY SACRAMENTS, Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. l. 3. then, r. they; p. 45. l. 26. auriti; p. 47. l. 27. r. parts; l.
37. r. and votes; p. 48. l. 18. Mat. 5. r. 13. p. 55. l. 2. or, r. of.

FINIS.

