SIX IMPORTANT QUAERES, PROPOUNDED To the Re-sitting Rump of the long
Parliament, fit to be satisfactorily resolved by them upon the Question, before
they presume to Act any further, or expect the least Obedience from the
Freeborn English Nation, after so many years Wars and Contests for the
Privileges, Rights, and Freedom of Parliaments, and their own Liberties.
1. WHether their sudden stealing into the House by night, on Monday the 26. of
December after their forced Dissolution by Lambert, October. 13. without any new
Summons or notice of their sitting given to any of their Fellow Members, in the
City, or people of the Nation; was not a work of Darkness, rather than of
Light, better beseeming Thieves than Freemen, a Guy Faux with his dark Lanthorn
to blow up a Parliament, than the Honor and Dignity of Members of a real
English Parliament, and a bad Omen of some dark D^signs against their
Fellow Members, and Liberties both of the City and English Nation?

2. Whether their placing armed Gards that Evening at the House, and all
approaches to it and the next Morning too, and giving Colonel Okey, and Colonel
Alured (the Commanders of their Gards) their Sergeant and Door-keepers, strict
special Commands and Orders, not to suffer any of the old secluded Members so
much as to come into the outward Lobby before the House, (whether Footboys,
Apprentices, and other Persons of all sorts had free access,) much less to
enter into the House; and their forcible secluding of Sir Gilbert Gerard, Sir
Anthony Irby, Sir William Waller, Sir John Evelin, Mr. Ansl^y, Sergeant
Maynard, Mr. Prynne, and 15. other Members more on Tuesday morning, December. 27.
out of the very Lobby, in pursuance of their Orders, till they crowded into the
Lobby by degrees against the Door-keepers, and Gards wills, who at first often
shut the Doors against them, though they admitted Apprentices, and others to
pass in and out: And their seclusion of them out of the House when in the
Lobby, by keeping the House door fast locked against them, and ordering the
Doorkeeper and Sergeant not to open it, notwithstanding many demands to open
it, and Messages to them for that purpose, which they slighted; not vouchsafing
to take any notice of, after two full hours attendance by the Members on them
in the Lobby; nor so much as sending any Member, nor their Sergeant out to
them; as they usually do to every ordinary Petitioner, or person attending them
upon public or private occasions; Be not a just ground and provocation for
these and all other secluded Members, (being about 4. times more in number and
interest to those then sitting, and the real House of Commons,) with all the
respective Counties, Cities, Boroughs, Ports for which they serve, with as high
contempt and scorn to neglect them and their illegal Conventicle, (not the
tenth part of a Commons House,) to protest against all their Votes, Proceedings
as null and void to all intents, and not to yield the least obedience to any
Orders, Votes, or Commands of theirs, till all the Members be freely admitted
without any restrictions, to sit and act amongst them; it being both their
Privile^e, Birthright, and Inheritance, and they obliged by their Protestation,
and Solemn League and Covenant, constantly, zealously and cheerfully to defend
the same with their Lives and Estates against all Violations, all the days of
their lives; and therefore now if ever, in this sad posture of public
distractions?

3. Whether this their disdainful, uncivil, unbrotherly Treating of their
Fellow Members (desiring nothing else but a brotherly association with them, to
compose the manifold Distractions, and make up the wide Breaches of our
Sinking, Dying Nations, by their United Councils and Endeavors, and to
Regulate all Exorbitances, occasioned by their heady Councils and Miscariages)
in not allowing them the Privileges of Porters and Footboyes to enter into
their outward Lobby, in taking no notice of them, and putting this fresh
affront upon them, after so many former Indignities, in the midst of their and
our Domestic Confusions and fears from foreign parts, be not an evident
Demonstration; that they intend neither the public Peace, Unity, nor
settlement of our Government, Laws, Liberties, or Nations, but their unjust
support of their own private Interests, Rapines, ambitious Tyrannical
Usurpations and Exercises of Supreme Parliamentary Civil and Military Authority
over our three Nations; to imbroyl them in new Wars and Confusions, to prey
upon the small remainder of their Real and Personal Estates, by the power of
the Sword, now gotten into their hands, out of the Army Officers; who abused it
likewise to the oppressing and enslaving of the people, and created them a
Parliament without the secluded Members, and House of Peers?

4. Whether their disdainful, Injurious forcible seclusion of the Members, by
their own special Orders and Commands to their Gards and Officers now, be not a
shrewd Evidence, that their former seclusions, December. 6. and 7. 1648. and May
7. and 9. 1659. (acted by, and fa^^^red on the Army Officers, and seemingly
disowned by themselves) were secretly procured and countenanced by them, thus
openly owning their last seclusion, by their precedent Orders and subsequent
approbation of it; and that at their very first re-assembling, after their own
late forcible seclusion, by Lamberts and Hewsons Regiments, now Entertained and
Employed in their service, to seclude, and keep out their old honest fellow
Members, of Untainted Integrity and merit? Whether it be not a greater breach
of Privilege, Trust, Duty, Tyranny, Perjury, and Treason in them, against all
former Declarations, the Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, taken and
Subscribed by them, with hands lifted up to the most High God, thus to seclude
their fellow Members; than it was in Cromwell and Harrison, April 20. 1653. or
for Lambert October 13. last to seclude and turn themselves out of doors, after
their declaring and voting it Treason, Perjury and Tyranny in them? Whether
this their secluding of the Members by Col. Okey himself, and others who
appeared most active against their Exclusion by Lambert, will not draw a
self-condemnation on them, as acting by their commands, against their
Consciences; and justify both Cromwels and Lamberts seclusion of themselves?
And justly encourage all their newly reduced Soldiers and others, to shut and
turn themselves out of the House again upon any emergent occasion or
discontent, with greater boldness and impunity than before, since they
justified their last seclusion, by their former underhand encouragements of
them to seclude the Majority of the Members, who over-voted them in December.
1648. and give them Orders to seclude them now again upon the same account in
the same month of December, for fear they should over-vote them if readmitted?

5. Whether their printed Vote, December. 27. To take the business of their absent
Members into debate on the 5. of January next; instead of giving admittance, or
any answer to the 22. secluded Members waiting for an answer in the Lobby above
2. hours, be not a mere dilatory Cheat put upon the secluded Members, the City
of London, and whole Nation; to delay their admission till they have put new
Gards on, and drawn up all their forces to London, to overawe the City, and
hinder their long-delayed Militia for their own security; and settled the
Militia of every County under their own commands, to enslave the whole City and
Nation to their Tyranny and usurped Parliamentary Power; and then they will not
only forcibly keep out all the Members, but absolutely eject them, unless they
will take their new Oath and Engagement: As is evident by their Speakers
prohibiting the Lord Mayor and Common Council on Saturday last to set up their
Chains and settle their Militia; and their Order and Vote on Monday night
against all forces raised without their Order, to hinder the Militia in the
City, when they commanded the Militia in the Suburbs and Westminster to meet
and Act that day: And by some of their discourses (...) secluded Members; That
there was no hopes of their admission, unless they were for a Commonwealth,
would take the Engagement, and confirm what they had done: and thereby become
as guilty, treacherous, perfidious, disloyal, and hurtful to the public as
themselves) which those Members assured them, they would never submit to, being
against the Privilege of Parliament, their Judgments, Consciences,
Protestation, Covenant, former Oaths upon their first admission as Members.

6. Whether the City, or English Nation, can expect the least justice ease or
redress of their insupportable Burdens, Taxes, and Impositions from these new
Tax-masters, who (though they are not yet the Tenth part of a full Commons
House) presumed to pass and print a New Act of Parliament, to continue their
expired Customs and Excises on them, till March next? Whether their
unpresidented presumption* in arrogating to themselves the Title, power and
authority of a Parliament; when all Laws, and Lawbooks resolve, their own
Consciences and the whole Nation infallibly know them to be no Parliament, nor
Commons house, has not brought them within the compass and penalty of this
Clause in their own last Act, before their Dissolution by Lambert, October 11.
entitled, An Act against raising of Money upon the people without their
Consent in Parliament: And be it further enacted, That no person or persons
shall after the 11. of October, 1659. Assess, levy, collect, gather or receive,
any Customs, Imposts, Excise, Assessment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any
sum or sums of money, or other Impositions whatsoever, upon the People of this
Commonwealth, without their consent in Parliament, or as by Law might have been
done before the Third of November, 1640. And be it further enacted and
declared, That every person offending against this Act, (therefore every of
themselves who passed this new Act, December. 27. and those who shall put it in
execution) shall be and are hereby adjudged to be guilty of High Treason, and
shall forfeit and suffer as in case of High Treason. Whether the people of this
Commonwealth (the thousand part whereof knew not of their new sitting) did ever
consent to this sudden extemporary new Act, made the first morning of their
sitting in less than two hours space, when there were but 42. Members in the
House; 22. secluded Members at the door, and near 250. more Members yet living,
(besides the whole House of Lords, who must stand for Ciphers) absent, and not
privy to their Session, or this Act? If not, (as is unquestionable) whether by
this their own Law and Act, they be not adjudged to be guilty of High Treason,
and to forfeit and suffer as in case of High Treason, for this their imposing
and continuing of Customs and Excises on the people; as well as for their
seclusion of their Members; which they voted to be Treason in Lambert? And
whether the Offices and Common Soldiers can upon this acccount expect any pay
from the City or Country, or Indemnity for secluding those Now sitting, if they
offend again in secluding the greatest part of the Members, which are in truth
the only House, which can only really pay and indemaifie them?


