A PROBABLE EXPEDIENT For present and future Public Settlement.

HUMBLY Submitted to the Serious Consideration and Impartial Trutination of all
public English Spirits, cordially affecting, endeavoring the real Peace,
Safety, Tranquillity, Felicity of their Native Country in these times of general
Fears and Distractions;

By a Well-wishing Phylopater.

Prove. 15.22. Without Counsel purposes are disappointed, but in the multitude
of Counselors they are established.

Jer. 30.18, 19, 20, 21. Behold I will bring again the Captivity of Jacobs
tents, and have mercy on his dwelling places, etc. And their Congregation shall
be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them; And their
Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governors shall proceed from the midst
of them.

London, Printed in the year 1658.

A Probable Expedient, for present and future public Settlement.
THere is no more likely or ready Means to compose the deplorable Differences,
unite the sadly divided Interests, and settle the long desired Tranquillity,
and fluctuating Government of the English Nation without new Commotions or
Bloodshed, than a Free Parliament duly summoned and rightly constituted; any
other form of Parliaments being more apt to augment our Divisions, Schisms,
Distempers, than suppress them, and to degenerate into a Disease, in lieu of a
Medicine, as late experiments have sufficiently demonstrated.

How such a Parliament may best be convened in the present posture of our
Affairs? will be the only Question.

Doubtless, what ever others fancy, it cannot probably be effected by pursuing
the late Instrument: 1. Because it was made only by some Private Officers of
the Army, and never since confirmed, but quarrelled with and excepted against,
even by all those Conventions which have been summoned by it, voting diverse
Alterations therein: 2ly, Because it totally excludes all the ancient Peers of
the Realm of their hereditary 5 R. 2. Stat 1. c. 4. Cook 4 Instit. p. 1, 4,
etc. 43, 44.
Birthright, from sitting or voting in any Parliaments as Peers, or in any
other capacity, unless they will Un-Peer themselves, and become mere
Commoners, if the people incline to elect any of them Knights, Citizens, or
Burgesses. 3ly, For that it debarres a Great multitude of Freeholders of their
hereditary liberty and votes in elections, ratified by 3 E. 1. c. 5. 7 H. 4. c.
14. 1 H. 5. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 10 H. 6. c. 2. 32 H. 6.15. 35 H. 3. c. 112
sundry Acts of Parliament and Prescription; and enables many who are no
Freeholders to have voices in Elections, against all former Acts and usage
disabling them to be Electors. 4ly, Because i^ suppresseth many ancient
Buroughs, Ports, and deprives them of their ancient Rights Magna Charta, c. 4.
5 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 4. 32 H. 6. c. 15. Artic. super Chart. 28 E. 1. c. 7. 42 E.
3. c. 1. Cook 4 Instir. p. 7.43. 1 Instir. f. 109, 110.
( confirmed by the Great Charter, and sundry Acts of Parliament, as well as
Charters, and prescription) of sending Burgesses and Barons to Parliaments:
5ly, For that it incorporates and calls into the Parliament of England, both
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses out of Scotland and Ireland, as Members,
Voters, Legislators jointly with the English; and constitutes any 60. of them a
Parliament to impose Laws and Taxes on all English Freemen, though all or most
of the English Knights, Citizens, Burgesses be secluded; when as by Cooks
Instit. c. 1. R. 2. c. 4. and words of all old writs of Summons, PEERS,
Cities, Buroughs, Charters and Patents in England, Scotland, and Ireland.
the Laws, Charters, Privileges of the English Nation, no Irish or Scottish
Peers, Knights, Citizens or Burgesses may, can, or ought to sit or vote in
English Parliaments, qua tales, but the English only: 6ly, Because it is
totally repealed and set aside (if ever Obligatory to the Nation in any kind)
by the la^e Petition and Advice, erecting another House, and a New Model of
Parliaments and Provisoes touching Elections, inconsistent with this
Instrument, now as much out of date, as tune.

Neither is there any probability of summoning such a Parliam nt according to
the late Petition and Advice, as for the 3d, 4th and 5th precedent, so likewise
for these ensuing reasons. 1. For that it was made in and by an unfree, and
unfull Convention, from which many of the most considerable Members freely and
duly elected by the people, were forcibly secluded, and many unduly, or not at
all elected, though returned, admitted to sit and vote in the framing thereof:
Upon which Grounds sundry thus secluded refused to sit and vote in the second
Session, though invited, because thus unjustly excluded from the first; their
free admission at the second meeting if they pleased, being an infallible
argument they were injuriously and causelessly excluded at the first, as well as
their printed Protestations against it. 2ly, For that it imposes such an Oath
upon all Members before their admission (inconsistent with the Petition of
Right, 3 Caroli: 1 Eliz. c. 2. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4. 7 Jac. c. 6. and
other Acts) which some of those who sat in the first Session refused to take
at the second; and many first secluded protested they would not take: which
will cause a great animosity and rent if imposed for the future, till approved,
ratified by a full and free Convention. 3ly. Because the other House
constituted by it, when summoned, was totally disowned 1. By the Commons
themselves who created it by this Petition and Advice; yet would not
acknowledged, but disclaimed it when erected: And if these Creators would not
own this their mungrell ill-compacted new creeture, there is no probability,
that any future Knights, Citizens or Burgesses will approve or submit unto it:
2ly, By the ancient Peers, and most Gentlemen of Estate and Interest summoned
to this other House, who refused to sit, or own it at the first, upon such
terms as will engage them to disown it for the future, and not to appear
therein though summoned. 3ly, By the gener lity of the people, who disrelished,
and made no addresses to it upon any occasion. 4ly, This House. and last
Convention were thereupon suddenly dissolved by him that called and constituted
them, as seeing no hopes nor possibilities of reconciling or uniting them:
Therefore none else can Mar. 2.21, 22. Luke 5. 36, 37, 39.
possibly hope to piece or unite them in any New Convention summoned according
to this Petition and Advice.

The only probable, hopeful means then of summoning a lawful healing, uniting
English Parliament, for present and future settlement, is now to pursue and put
in use, the late Act for Triennial Parliaments, made Anno 16 Caroli; at the
motion, prosecution of the best affected Lords and Commons the last long
Parliament, yea of those Lawyers now sitting at the Helm of Justice, and of
other Members in greatest subordinate present power, who were employed in the
penning and passing thereof, extolling it, (and that deservedly) as most
necessary, Exact collection, p. 14, 15, 16.
beneficial to the Nation; and therefore cannot but approve it as most suitable
and seasonable at this instant. This Act authorizeth any 12. or more of the
ancient Peers (the Hereditary Council, and Counselors of the Realm in all
former ages) to meet together in the Lords House at Westminster, on the 3.
Monday of November, and on and before the last Monday of the said November,
without other warrant, to issue out writs under their hands and Seals, in usual
form to the several and resp^ctive Sheriffs of the respective Counties C^ties
and Buroughs of England and Wales, and to the Constable of the Castle of
Dover, Lord Warden of the Cinque ports, or his Lieutenant for the time being,
and all other Officers to whom writs have been usually directed for the
electing of Knights, Citizens, Barons and Burgesses (which writs they are
obliged to execute under strictest penalties) to meet in Parliament in the
usual place at Westminster, on the third Monday in January next ensuing. And in
case there shall no such Parliament be thus summoned, held and assembled,
besore the 23. of January, that then the several and respective Sheriffs and
chief Officers of every respective County, City and Borough of England and
Wales, shall issue out precepts for elections, and at their several and
respective Courts and Places held next after the said 23. of January, cause
such Knights, Citizens and Burgesses for their respective Counties, Cities and
Buroughs to be elected before the last day of February by such persons, and in
such manner, as if several writs of Summons to Parliament under the Great Seal
of England had been issued to them; who are to assemble in Parliament at
Westminster on the second Tuesday of March next following. And in case no such
Precepts shall issue, nor elections be made thereon before the last day of
February then next ensuing, that then the Freeholders, Burgesses, Citizens, and
other persons that ought to elect and send Knights, Citizens, Barons and
Burgesses, at their said several and respective Courts forthwith (and the
Cities, Ports and Buroughs to whom no Precept shall come on the first Tuesday
in March next ensuing the said last day of February) shall proceed without
further warrant, to the election of such Knights, Citizens, Barons and
Burgesses, in such manner as is usual in case of writs of Summons issued and
awarded; Which Knights, Citizens, Barons and Burgesses so chosen, shall appear
and serve in Parliament at the time and place aforesaid, and be liable to such
pains and censures for their not appearing, as if he and they had been elected
by a writ under the Great Seal of England, Note.
and be subject to such further Censures, as he or they shall be adjudged unto
by the rest there assembling. And in case any person whatsoever shall be so
hardy, as to put in execution any Writ, Proclamation, Edict, Act, Restraint,
Inhibition, or Warrant to the contrary; he is thereby subjected to a
Praemunire, and disabled during his life to sue or implead any person in any
action real or personal, or to make any Gift, Grant, Conveyance, or other
disposition of any of his Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels,
by Act executed, will or otherwise; or to take any Gift, or benefit of any
Gift, Cenveyance, or Legacy to his own use: And every Sheriff, not performing
his duty enjoined by this Act, is to foreit 1000 l. and every City 1000 l. and
every City that is no County 200 l. and every Borough and Port 100 l. to be
recovered, as this Act prescribes. If those then in present power will for
their own and the publke safety, tranquillity, vouchsafe to send for, and
confer with 12. or more of the ablest wellaffected ancient Peers of the
Realm, (the Hereditary Great Council of the Nation, in all times of Difficulty,
danger, or Interregnums) and other Gentlemen of estates, interest, quality, who
had a chief hand in passing this Act, and by good advice, and common assent,
frame such a Writ of Summons bearing Test under their hands and Seals, as may
be warranted by the Letter or equity thereof, and issue it out on the 3d.
Monday of Nav. next: Or else permit, command the Freeholders, Citizens,
Burgesses in each Courty, City, Borough to make such elections of their
Knights, Citizens, Burgesses in Jan. next, as this Act appoints, and permit or
command the Lords to meet them at the time, place thereby prescribed, according
to the true intention of this Act, and ancient forms of English Parliaments:
this Summons will be both very legal, and also take in, reconcile all
dissenting interests, and no Lord nor Commoner whatsoever will scruple, refuse
or neglect to meet in such a Parliament, warranted by so good and late an Act
of Parliament as this. And when they are all thus legally assembled, such
Proposal, Votes, Acts may then be made and passed by their joint deliberations
and assents, as through Gods blessing may secure, unite all I^terests, and
procure a well-grounded Settlement, Government both in Church and State.

This will be more effectually and successfully accomplished, if the Contrivers
of the New writs of Summons upon this Act, shall insert these ancient Clauses
of direction to Freeholders, Citizens Burgesses, Sheriffs and other Officers
employed in Elections, what manner of persons they ought to elect for Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses and Barons of the Ports to serve in the next and all
succeeding Parliaments, which Limitations are frequently found in Claus. 49 H.
3. d. 11. cl. 22 E. 3. pars 2. d. 32. 24 E. 3. pars 2. d. 3. 25 E. 3. pars 1.
d. 5. 28 E. 3. d. 26. 29 E. 3. d. 8.
ancient Writs for Parliamentary Elections: Namely, that they should elect or
cause to be elected two Knights out of every County, two Citizens out of every
City, two Burgesses out of every Borough, and two Barons out of every Cinque
por, (De Legalioribus, probioribus, discretioribus, provectioribus, melioribus,
valedioribus, aptioribus, magis idoneis, magis sufficientibus, magis
circumspectis, et fide dignis Militibus, Civibus, Burgensibus et Baronibus
Comitatuum, Civitatum, Burgorum, et Portuum praedictorum et ad laborandum
potentioribus qui non sunt quaerelarum manutentores, aut ex hujusmodi quaestu
viventes, sed homines valentes, et bonae fidei and Publicum commodum
diligentes, et non alios, vel alterius conditionis quam superius specificatur):
Of the legallest, honestest, discreetest, antientest, best, ablest, fittest,
most convenient, most sufficient, most circumspect and trusty Knights,
Citizens, Burge^^es and Barons of the said Counties, Cities, Buroughs and
Ports, and most able to take pains (in attending, promoting the public affairs
in Parliament) who are no maintainers of quarrels, or parties, nor living by
dishonest gain, (or the plunder, oppression, or contributions of the people)
but men of ability and good credit, and such who love THE PVBLIKE WEAL: and
that they should not by any means elect others, nor persons of any other
condition than such as are formerly specified. What happy effects a Parliament
of persons thus qualified, and duly, freely elected by the people according to
these qualifications (which do not impeach the freedom, but only prevent the
exorbitances of unfit elections if carefully pursued) is likely to produce for
our settlement and establishment through Gods blessing on their endeavors, all
intelligent persons may easily conjecture.

When both the Nobles and people of England had been much discontented,
impoverished, oppressed by heavy, frequent Ayds, Taxes, to maintain the wars
with France under King Edward the 3d. (who summoned sundry Parliaments only or
principally to demand money, and impose new burdens, payments on his people,
though no ways comparable to the heavy Taxes, Exciles, Customs of late times
exacted, for quantity, frequency or duratition) the King to regain their lost
affections and hearts, inserted this notable Clause into the lose of all his
Claus. 21 E. 1. pars 1. (...). 6.
writs of Summons to Parliament issued to the Prelates, Nobles, Sheriffs, and
Warden of the Cirque Ports, Anno 21. of his reign: (which would be
extraordinarily 2 Chronicles. 10.4, 7.
grateful to the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry and Commons at this season;) Et
scire vos volumus, quod dictum Parliamentum non ad auxilia seu tallagia a
populo dicti Regni nostri petenda, vel alia onera eidem populo imponenda, set
duntaxat pro Justitia ipsi populo nostro, super dampnis et gravaminibus sibi
illatis facienda, et pro tractatibus super dictis Negotiis (tam Nos et statum
Regni nostri Angliae. quam Communem utilitatem Populi ejusoem Regni nostri
contingentibus) habendis, fecimus summoneri. If God in his All-disposing
Providence shall graciously vouchsafe effectu^^^y to incline the hearts of all
the Nobility, Gentry, Officers C^^izens Burgesses, Freeholders, Commons,
Governors and Sword men of the Nation to pitch upon such a writ Parliament,
probable and hopeful expedient as this for present and future Security, Peace,
Settlement, (since a better can hardly be invented) most likely to reconcile,
unite, secure all the great divided Interests and Parties in the Land who are
any way considerable; we may then comfortably hope, that the effect thereof,
and of a Parliament so righteously summoned convened, Isay 32.17, 18.
will be quietness and assurance for ever; and that the people shall all dwell
in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places.
The sole end of communicating this inoffensive, if not seasonable and useful
Paper, to the consideration and censure of the grave. Judgments, and all
persons most interessed in, or well affected to the Peace, Prosperity, security
of the English Nation.

FINIS.

