IX QVERIES Upon the Printed Charge of the Army against the XI.

MEMBERS And the Papers thereto annexed: Submitted to the Public consideration
of the PARLIAMENT, ARMY, And all Lovers of Justice, Truth, Parliaments, and
their Native COUNTRY.

JER. 9. 4, 5. Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in any
Brother; for each Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbor will walk
with slanders. And they will deceive every man his Neighbor, and will not
speak the Truth; they have taught their tongues to speak Lies; and weary
themselves to commit Iniquity.

LUKE 3. 14. And the Soldiers demanded of John, saying; And what shall we do?
And he said unto them; Do violence to no man (or, put no man in fear, much less
a whole Parliament, City, Kingdom) neither ACCVSE ANY MAN FALSELY; and be
content with your wages.

London, Printed in the Year, 1647.

Nine QUERIES upon the Printed CHARGE of the Army against the MEMBERS, and the
Papers thereto annexed: Submitted to the public Consideration of the ARMY, and
all Lovers of Justice, Truth, Parliaments and their native Country.
1. BY what Law, Commission or Authority, the General, Officers and Soldiers of
the Army can order, not only their Letters and Declarations (of dangerous
consequence), but their very Charge against the Members of the Commons House,
to be printed and published, without the Privity or Order of the House? And
whether this be not an encroachment of a transcendent Arbitrary power (which
themselves condemn in others) and an high Breach of the Houses Privileges;
whereof the House and whole Kingdom (whom they represent) ought to be deeply
sensible, and have more just cause to complain against the Army, then they
against the accused Members?

2. Whether this Charge delivered into the House against these eminent Members,
in the name of the whole Army (the greatest part whereof do neither know the
persons impeached, much less their guiltiness of the crimes whereof they accuse
them; without the names of any particular persons thereto subscribed
undertaking to make good this charge at their utmost peril, or else to suffer
and make them and the House full reparation for their false Impeachment, be
warrantable or receivable by any Law of God, or of the Land, or former
Presidents; and of a more arbitrary, dangerous and unjust constitution, and
direful consequence, then any these new Pretenders to public Justice, and
Declaimers against Arbitrary power, complain of in their Charge or
Remonstrances? and directly contrary to the Sea Rastal Accusation.
Statutes of 25. E. 3. c. 4. 27. E. 3. c. 18. 38. E. 3. c. 9. 17. R. 2. c. 6.
15. H. 6. c. 4. And whether this Charge, delivered in by an whole mutinous
Army, in their name alone, be not expressly made void and null by the Statute of
31. H. 6. c. 1. concerning Jack Cade and his Rebellious popular Army; which
Enacts; That all Inditements (or Charges) and all things depending thereof, had
and made, under the Power and Tyranny of Cade and his Army; during their
Rebellion and Insurrection, UNDER COLOVR OF JUSTICE for Reformation of the Laws
(who gather the people together in great number by false subtle imagined
language) shall be void, adnulled, repealed and holden for none: And that ALL
INDITEMENTS (or Charges) IN TIME COMING IN LIKE CASE, UNDER POWER OF TYRANNY,
REB^LLION AND STIRRING HAD, SHALL BE OF NO RECORD NOR EFFECT, BUT VOID IN LAW.
And so not to be received by the Parliament, till the Army be disbanded; whose
Proceedings, Remonstrances, and Pretenses now, are very like that of Cades, and
his party then; and may warn the Parliament and London to stand upon their
guard; and not to let in the Army now, without resistance, as they did then,
upon Speed. Chron. P. 849, 850. Grafion p. 610. etc. worthy the reading.
fair promises, and a prohibition of murder, rape or robbery (which allured
the hearts of the common people): Whereupon being let in, they apprehended and
beheaded the Lord Say, Treasurer of England, James Cromer his son in law and
others, and rifled or fined diverse of the Aldermen and other Citizens, and
threatened the rest; who at last repenting of their folly, when it was almost to
late, for the preservation of their lives and goods, raised and drew in forces;
expulsed Cade, with his ungracious company; and by that means dissipated his
tumultuous Army: A story worthy both the Parliaments, Cities and Kingdoms
present consideration.

3. Whether a general Charge in ambiguous Terms against XI. eminent Members at
once (most of which have not only suffered, but done gallant service in the
field for the Parliaments Privileges and Peoples Liberties) in general,
ambiguous and uncertain terms, without descending to particulars of fact,
persons, time, place, or other circumstance, to which by Law they are bound to
answer, and cannot possibly make defense; and their not determining or
specifying which of them are guilty of all the Charge, which only of one or
more (themselves confessing that some of them are only guilty of one Head, in
the same paper) be not a most illegal, injurious, arbitrary Accusation and
Proceeding, contrary to all Rules of Justice and Equity; and a greater
invading, infringing, and endeavoring to overturn the Rights and Liberties of
the Subjects of this Kingdom (and of Parliaments too) in arbitrary, violent and
oppressive ways, then any chargeable against all or any of the XI. Members in
the first Article? which they may now justly recharge against the Army, by way
of recrimination, whose Proceedings give the Lie to their Pretenses, as the Sea
Master Rheymes his Narration.
King himself has done to some of their Declarations, touching his willingness
to remove from Holdenby; and this very Charge does too: which makes no mention
of any Plot or Conspiracy by these Members to remove the King from Holdenby,
etc. Or of Joyce his pretenses why his person was seized by the Army: which
hereby appears to be a mere figment and unjust pretext, to color that
Treasonable Action; and make wise men suspect, their other fair proposals to
the Parliament for Peace and public Justice (contradicted by subsequent
Proceedings) are mere Fictions too, to effect some worse designs without
opposition.

4, With what color or shadow of Religion, Justice or Conscience can an Army,
professing and stiling themselves Saints, grow so unchristianly impatient,
outrageous, and unlike their Savior, as upon a pretense of some falls
informations, misrepresentations and scandalous suggestions made against them
to the House, concerning a Petition, and engaging the House by surprise to pass
a Vote against them, since recalled; in stead of passing by, forgetting and
putting up such an injury (after competent satisfaction) to fall into such
distempers, as to be disobliged and discouraged from any further engagement in
the Parliaments service or Irelands preservation, (as they unchristianly and
ungratefully profess in their 2, 3, and 4. Articles of Charge) and in stead
thereof to march up against the Parliament, seize the King; impeach Members;
demand all arrears before disbanding, endanger the Parliament, Kingdom;
scandalize Religion, rejoice Malignants, sad the hearts of all good men; and
forfeit their own honor and reputation, though better paid, rewarded, and dealt
with by the Parliament, and less injured then any other Armies, Officers,
Soldiers, employed by them, who never manifested such high contemptuous
carriages against the Houses though never so deboyst or irreligious: Is this
Conscience? this Religion? this your piety, and humility, after all your
experiences of Gods presence? Is God with you, or before your eyes in such
impatience or miscarriages? Or is M. Peter's with you to mind you of what he often
protested in the Pulpit in your names, Your readiness to lay down your Necks,
Lives, and to live under Rocks and Caves in America, rather then not to disband
at the least intimation of the Parliament, or to do any act impeaching their
privileges or proceedings? And was he then, or will ye presume now to make him
a Liar, to blast your own and his reputation with God and men? Consider this in
cold blood when you are upon your beds, and desist with remorse and shame from
such unchristian ways and tumults, which will render you more odious and
execrable then the Gunpowder-Traytors, and set all men's hearts, hands, tongues
against you.

5. Whether the Army by such general and uncertain Charges as these might not
impeach the whole House it self, as well as these XI. Members? Whether their
demand, that the House should forthwith suspend them, without the least shadow
of proof upon such an illegal charge to which no certain answer can be made, be
not an equalling, justifying and exceeding the Kings and his armed parties
demands against the five Members only upon more particular Articles then these;
which seem at first a mere plot to take away their Votes for the present (and
after that the Votes of others both in Houses reserved for a future list) that
their Independent party only may sway and Vote what they please in both; and
their Officers in the Army that are Members* be both parties, accusers,
witnesses and judges against these now accused, contrary to all Law and
Justice, and so they will be sure to suffer what ever their innocence be? or will
not the Army be more incensed with their just acquittal, which will much redound
to dishonor and heighten their discontents? And will not this be arbitrary and
tyrannical Justice in the superlative degree?

6. Whether the Armies silence in not propounding their public demands for
justice in their own and peoples behalf, or not impeaching any of the accused
members, til they were voted to disband, or go for Ireland; and their charge
against them in their 2. 3. and 4. Articles, to break the Army, and pull it in
pieces, by authority of Parliament (when there was no further use of its
service here,) amounting in plain English to no more; but that they endeavored
and caused the Houses to vote the Armies disbanding, and send some of them into
Ireland, under Major General Skippons and Massyes commands, (which no rational
man can deem a crime, the war being ended and the people eaten out with Taxes
and freequartring of the Army, and Ireland in distress) be nor a clear
demonstration to all the world; that this charge against the members, and
quarrel against the Houses votes, is but a mere pretense to keep the Army from
disbanding; til they have by its overawing power brought other designs to pass
both in the Parliament, City, kingdom? one whereof is clearly intimated in
their charge and other Papers; namely to suspend and throw out of the House all
old, and new elected members (how duly soever chosen or returned) who are not
of their party, or likely to oppose their Projects, to fill up their places with
New members of their own godly party; and to dispose of all places of Power and
Judicature, to members of their own: (and then to effect what changes they
please in Church and state) as their exceptions against these eminent Members,
their desire actually to suspend them the House, upon this general, uncertain,
frivolous Charge, before any the least proof or Conviction; their exception to
the Elections in Cornwall, (though all very fair) Wales, and elsewhere; and
their indirect forcible practices to bring in Members and Officers of their own
in all places, when this Army or their party had any power (of which there are
many sad complaints) with their exceptions to the Parliaments Judges,
unanswerably demonstrate to the eye of all the world, besides other
particulars, which may shortly see the light, with many late printed Pamphlets
(especially Englands Birthright,) and their late Propositions concerning the
Change of Parliament Members etc. and Coronet Joyce his printed Relation, which
accuses two other Members not mentioned to this list, (reserved with many
others of both Houses for a second) which evidence the same. A design so
dangerous and destructive, as may awaken the Parliament, and all honest men in
time to endeavor its prevention, which without Gods mercy and their utmost
activity, is else unavoydably like to fall upon us in a moment.

7. Whether the Armies refusal to disband or march more remote from London
according to the Houses Votes; their surprising and removing the Kings Person,
and Commissioners of both Houses against their wills and Protestations, upon
false pretenses without and against the Parliaments privity; their removing the
Artillery from Oxford (throwing up their hats and crying out, hay for London
etc. as they marched thence;) and advancing so near to London, as to seize upon
most passages near it, search many passengers repairing to it, and threatening
to march up even to the Parliaments doors, (to which they make nearer
approaches every day) in a tumultuous, violent and warlike manner, to impeach,
affright and assault the Members of Parliament, in or near the Houses, and by
violence outrage and threats, to awe and incense the Parliament to retract
their Votes, suspend their Members, grant them all their unreasonable demands
before any expressions of their obedience to them, and to impose what
conditions they please upon them; with their Letters and Remonstrances to the
City and people to engage them against, and disingage them from the Parliament
to side with them, (in some whereof they court the very Malignants once in
arms, complaining of the breach of Articles and craving reparation for their
wrongs etc.) their seizing of Col. Birch a member, and removing his and other
forces sent for Irelands relief, etc. ought not more justly to be charged
against some Officers and Soldiers in the Army (who have most appeared in
these mutinous ways) by the accused Members, their Officers, Commanders, both
Houses and the Kingdom, (being still persisted in) then the Officers and Armies
may or can charge the accused Members for inviting, encouraging, abetting, or
Countenancing, diverse Reformadoes and other Officers and Soldiers
tumultuously, and violently to gather together at Westminster to affright and
assault the Members etc. As they do in their fifth Article: which tumult was
soon quieted; and being an Injury only to the House not Army, since the tumults
in the Army, and no ways relating to the Army (who still act the same themselves
or worse which they thus heavily Charge on others) is a very foreign Charge
with reference to the Members; and no other (by an overruling divine hand of
providence) but a Charge and Impeachment against themselves by way of just
recrimination; for which they ought to yield up their Officers and principal
Mutiners to the Parliaments and Kingdoms Justice, by the same Law (and far more
equity) as they demand the Members In which regard that divine text (aptly
characterizing these Accusers) may justly be applied to them, Romans 2. 17. etc.
Behold thou make thy boast of God; and art confident, that thou thy self art
a guide to the bl^nd a light to them which are in darkness, etc. Thou therefore
that teach (impeachest) another, teach (impeachest) thou not thy self?
etc. Thou that make thy boast of the Law; through breaking the Law (yea
Privileges of Parliament in an higher degree then those thou accusest)
dishonorest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed omong the Gentiles
(among Papists, Malignants, Prelatical, profane and carnal persons) through
you, by these your Antiparliamentary and Mutinous Proceedings, which have
opened their months wide against you, and made them to upbraid the Parliament
and your dearest Friends with this taunting language, to the very piercing of
their souls: Lo these are Your Saints, Your Religious godly Party, and Army;
Your Saviors and Protectors, who now rise up in arms against you to ruin the
Parliament and Kingdom, and trample on you at their pleasure? Did ever the
prophanest Officers or Soldiers under deceased Essex, Waller, Massey,
Manchester, the Scots or any other Comander requite and use you thus, though
more provoked by some Independents of the House with il language, casheering,
jealousies, false aspersions and want of pay, then these devout and mortified
Saints? etc. O consider now at last of these true ^s! and say with the Poet,
Pudet haec opprobria Nobis and dici potuisse, and non potmisse refelli.

8. With what coulor of Conscience, Modesty or Justice can the Army demand of
the Parliament, not only one months pay (though many of them have been lately
listed since the wars without the Houses privity, and therefore can in Justice
claim no wages from them) when they stand in such high terms of contempt and
breach of their Privileges and Authority; but to receive equal pay with those
who obey their commands in disbanding and lifting themselves for Ireland? or
that they shall have no more Areares paid them, til the rest be paid their
Areares? and that pending the debates and transactions betwixt the Parliament
and the Army, the Parliament would not suffer any new forces to be raised
within this Kingdom, for their own defense? when as themselves without any
order have recruted the Army, made new praparation for war, and block up London
more and more daily; as if they intended a new war against the Parliament and
City; and yet prohibit them to defend themselves, that so they may at their
pleasure, (if they grant them not all their unreasonable (if not endless
demands, now every day multiplied) surprise and pillage them at their
pleasures, as the Sleidan. Com l. 10. Chytraeus. Genebrand.
Anabaptists in Germany did the City and Magistrates of Munster under a
pretense of peace, contrary to their faith, to the Prince, City and Country, as
soon as by their fair promises, they had persuaded them to retire home and lay
down their arms; whose extraordinary sufferings for such over-credulus folly
should teach the Parliament and City wisdom, now to stand upon their guard,
and not to expose themselves to the mercy of a boisterous discontented Army
whose demands grow higher every day; and tend only to engage all others to
their party, and disingage them from the Parliament; whose privileges they
pretend to support, whiles they thus infringe them, formerly refusing to have
the solemn league and Covenant imposed on them: which would have engaged them,
(as well as others) with sincerity, reality and CONSTANCY, to endeavor with
their estates and lives to preserve the rights and privileges of the
Parliament; and not suffer themselves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this
Covenant, etc. which how well some members of the House and Army with oth^ who
have (...) it now perform, let their own con^, the would, and that high God to
whom they have lifted up their (...), when they solemnly swore this Covenant,
judge; and either excite them to a strenuous and real performance of it, or
require the woeful breach of it at their perjured hands.

9. whether any motions of the Army to the Parliament ought to be heard or
granted by the rules of justice, whilst they continue in contempt against it?
Whether an Army who profess this to be their principle, that no man's judgment
or conscience ought to be forced, by any external violence, but left free; can
by any coulor of justice or conscience, endeavor to enforce by menaces or
violence, the judgment, and conscience of the whole Parliament, whose Rights,
Privileges and freedom they are bound in duty, and raised to (...)? Whether
every member of the Houses, who though sordid fear of any humane power, or
compli^ncy with the Army, shall desert or betray the freedom, Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, which himself has solemnly sworn, Covenanted,
and engaged to maintain, to the uttermost, with his life and estate etc. Ought
not in justice to be thrust out of the House by his fellow Members with
contempt and scorn, as unworthy ever to set there more, and a most treacherous
perjured person, betraying his trust to Parliament and Kingdom? And whether all
members ought not in their greatest exigencies, rather cheerfully to lay down
their lives, then the Houses freedom, Rights and Privileges (wherewith the
whole Kingdom has entrusted them, for the present Common good, and ought to be
entirely presented and transmitted to posterity for the kingdoms future safety)
infringed? And to take up David's magnanimous resolution in their present
straits: Psa. 3. 6. and 27. 1, 3. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of
people who have set themselves against me round about. Though an host should
encamp against me; my heart shall not fear: though war should rise up against
me, in this will I be confident. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom
shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?
That member who cannot raise up his spirit in the worst of magnanimous
resolution in their present straits: Psa. 3. 6, and 27. 1, 3. I will not be
afraid of ten thousands of people who have set themselves against me round
about. Though an host should encamp against me; my heart shall not fear: though
war should rise up against me, in this will I be confident. The Lord is my
light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life,
of whom shall I be afraid? That member who cannot raise up his spirit in the
worst of times to such an heroic Christian Resolution, preferring his own
personal safety, life or wealth before his Countries, is scarce worthy ever to
enter more within the Houses doors; and that true-bred Englishman unworthy to
live, who will not die at he Houses feet in maintaining of their just Freedom,
Rights, and Liberties, though in some things they may have formerly failed in
their duties; since if Parliaments be once trampled upon and made contemptible
by any (especially by that Army which was raised by them, and has hitherto
fought for their defense, or any friends to Parliaments) the Kingdom and people
(who have subsisted by Parliaments) will be eternally lost and ruined. Which
engaged both City and Kingdom to adhere so fast to the Parliament against the
King and his Cavaliers heretofore, whom they cannot in Justice or honor now
desert, without infinite ingratitude, scandal and disgrace, nor any officers or
soldiers in the Army openly oppose or enforce without this guilt of Treason
and Rebellion; the breach of Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. and condemnation of all their
former faithful services for its defense.

FINIS.

