New Presbyterian Light springing out of Independent Darkness. or VI. important
new QVERIES proposed to the ARMY, And their Friends and Party of the Houses;
concerning the late Ordinance for Repeal of the New Militia of London, settled
by an Ordinance of both Houses, when full and free, for an whole year, (not yet
one Quarter expired;) and other late Repeals of Ordinances and Votes; and the
high Declaration against the intended Petition and Engagement of the Londoners
and others, For the speedy settlement of the Kingdoms Peace: occasioned by the
Debates thereof in the Common Council in the Guildhal on Saturday last, the 24
of this instant July.

Discovering the dangerous consequences of repealing Ordinances and Votes, and
the Independents, Sectaries, and Armies PLOTS, to blast the Honor, Justice,
and reputation of this Parliament, thereby to dissolve it and all others in in
their false pretenses of Peace, when they intend naught less; and their
strange Injustice and malice against Presbyterians, which will end in their own
dishonor and downfall.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 164^

NEW PRESBYTERIAN LIGHT springing out of INDEPENDENT DARKNESS OR Six important
new Queries, proposed to the Army and their friends and Humble servants of the
Houses; concerning the late Ordinance for Repeal of the New Militia of London,
settled by an Ordinance of both Houses, when full and free, for an whole year
(not yet one quarter expired) and other late Repeals of Ordinances and Votes;
and the high Declaration against the intended Petition and engagement of the
Londoners and others; for the speedy settlement of the Kingdoms Peace, etc.
IT is a common Observation, that New Laws ever beget new doubts and Questions:
so have some New Ordinances and Declarations concerning the Militia, Petition
and Engagement of London, in the Common Counsel an Saturday last; reducible to
the ensuing six Queries.

1. Whether Ordinances and Votes of both Houses, passed with mature
deliberation in a full and free Parliament, overawed by no armed power, may or
can in point of Honor, Law, or Justice, be retracted or repealed on a sudden,
upon the request or demand of a mutinous Army, by any contrary Ordinances or
Votes, made upon less debate or consideration; when the Houses were neither so
sul nor free as before, and divided in the later, but not in the former
Ordinances and votes, and that in the same session of Parliament? And whether
the Armics and Independents end in putting the Houses now upon such repealing
Ordinances and Votes, (for which they have sufficiently jeered and abused them
in print, and manifested the dishonor and prejudice of it, in their Humble
Remonstrance of June 23. P. 8. 9.) is not to render Parliaments vile and odious
to the people; and thereupon to abolish them, and change the whole frame of
Government of this Kingdom, into a Council of war, and Agitators for the
present, and a popular Anarchy for the future? But we trust all well-affected
intelligent people will be so discreet, as to turn the blame and odium only upon
the chief plotters, and drivers on of this design; and never grow weary of
Parliaments, but of that factious Army and their confederates, who thus pervert
and abuse them, and deserve exemplary punishment for it.

2. Whether such a manner of revoking Ordinances, and eating or repealing
former Votes, will not render all Ordinances and Votes contemptible, ridiculous,
and of little or no validity; and shake all the Ordinances and Votes of both
Houses, either for the Soldiers and others Indemnity, in acting for the
Parliament, upon any Ordinances; or for the security of moneys advanced for the
Public service, upon the Excise, Goldsmiths Hall, Sale of Bishops Lands etc.
and make all such security invalid, since revokable at pleasure, if the Army or
Independents shall but propound it? And then in what sad condition are the poor
Presbyterians, who have engaged all their Estates upon the faith of such
Ordinances and Votes, to raise, maintain, and gratify Independent forces,
Officers, Members (who have contributed least of any, and received most) who
may dash and null all their securities in a moment, if they comply not with
them? And whether the City, Common Counsel, and all others who have advanced
moneys, or acted upon any Ordinances, have not just cause to question the
validity of such repealing Ordinances and Votes, which may endanger their very
lives, Liberties and Estates, and expose them to all kind of extremities;
notwithstanding their often promised protection and indemnity?

3. Whether the sudden repeal of the Ordinance of Parliament, of the 4 of May
1647, for the Militia of London, settled by unanimous consent of the
Common Counsel* and both Houses when full and free, to continue for a full year
(at least) upon a bare motion from the Army (whom it no ways concerned, and who
never motioned it to the City or their Commissioners, in any of their Letters
or Treaties with their Commissioners, for ought appears) only to the Commons
House, without any grounds or satisfactory reasons alleged for this sudden
change, or once hearing or conferring with the City or Militia (as they have
usually done upon all other occasions of far less consequence then this) by an
Ordinance of 23. July 1647. (before three months of the time expired) which
renders no reason at all of the alteration; be not a Jesuitical device of some
swaying Sectaries and Independents; partly for to alienate and divide the City
from the Parliament (who cannot but resent it as an high discourtesie and
affront, and a very ill requital of all their former services and fidelity to
the Parliament, which has been so often supplied by their bounty, and preserved
by their valor, when few or none else stood by them to the effusion of their
blood, and advanced no less then 80000. l* at once for the new-modeling and
raising of this very ungratful Army, which now thus unworthily puts such an
insufferable disgrace upon them.) but principally to gain the Tower of London
and Magazines in it, into the Independents and Armies custody, to inslave and
Command the City at their pleasure; they having formerly plotted to surprise it
by stratagem, which would have rendered them very odious; and this being a far
more plausible way to gain its possession, by color of an Ordinance of both
Houses, who must bear all the blame, and envy, whiles the Contrivers of it go
Scot-free.

4. Whether this President at the Armies instance, of repealing the old
Ordinance of the Militia by a new; may not prove a dangerous leading case for
the Houses suddenly to repeal Sir Thomas This Lilburne affirms in his
Epistles p. 13*
Fairfax and all his Officers Commissions, which are but durante beneplacito:
and quamdiu se been gesserint; (and therefore all * forfeited by their mutinies
and disobedience:) and the late Votes for putting all the forces in pay within
the Kingdom under his command, and for the continuance, pay and establishment
of the ARMY: with all other late Votes passed in their favor and at their
desires, and their very Act of Indemnity? And then what will become of their
Worships? Have they not then made a rod for their own tails; and a halter for
their own necks, in stead of the Cities by this new Ordinance of repeal, made
with more have then good speed?

5. Whether the House of Lords and Commons have not by their Ordinance for the
taking of the Solemn League and Covenant, authorized, obliged, and engaged all
well-affected Citizens, Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Subjects of the Kingdom, who
have taken it, solemnly to unite their heads, hearts and forces together at
this present (and upon all other just occasions) for the preservation of
Religion and Uniformity in Church Government against Heresy, Error, Blasphemy
and Schism; the safety of the Kings person and authority; the defense of the
just Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and of their own Lives, Estates,
Liberties; (all now endangered by a Schismatical mutinous party in the Army and
their Confederates) the present effectual relief of distressed Ireland, and
bringing his Majesty to or near his Parliament, in an honorable and just way,
for the speedy settlement of a firm and happy peace, after all our expensive
and bloody* Wars, so long delayed since the War has ceased, to their great
grief and damage? If not, then they and others are all mistaken in the words
and tenor of the League and Covenant, engaging them thereunto in positive
terms under pain and censure of detestable perjury, apostasy; neutrality; and
that they shall not suffer themselves directly or indirectly by WHATSOEVER
COMBINATION PERSUASION OR TERROR (be it of an whole revolting Army or a
Declaration of high Treason either from his Majesty or any Independent Members
of either House, or any Sectaries who have either not taken, forgotten, or
abjured the Covenant) to be divided or withdrawn from this blessed Union and
Conjunction, either to make defection to the contrary (Prelatical, Sectarian or
Independent) Part, or to give themselves to a detestable indifferency and
neutrality in this cause which so much concerns the glory of God, the good and
peace of the Kingdoms and honor of the King: But shall ALL THE DAYS OF THEIR
LIVES ZEALOVSLY AND CONSTANTLY CONTINVE THEREIN AGAINST ALL OPPOSITION, AND
PROMOTE THE SAME, ACCORDING TO THEIR POWER AGAINST ALL LETS AND IMPEDIMENTS; be
it from the Army or any other? If yea, as is irrefragable; then with what
conscience, face or Justice can such be declared Traitors, or guilty of
Treason, who shall now re-engage themselves to make good this League and
Covenant, and that by those very Houses (perchance not persons) who formerly
enjoined and earnestly pressed them to take it, and proclaimed them treacherous
and perjured if they brake it? Was ever such a strange contradiction as this,
heard of in the world before? The King proclaimed those Traitors heretofore,
who should adventure to take it by the Houses command; and the Independents in
the Houses must now declare those, who have taken it by their order, Traitors,
because they conscionably keep it against a perfidious Armies mind, who have
highly violated it in every particular branch. But to requite their kindness,
those honest Covenanters will enforce them and make it good at their utmost
perils before all the world: That those who wilfully and treacherously break
this League and Covenant, are Traitors; not those who zealously and constantly
continue therein: and if their decryed Petition and engagement be Treason; the
Armies seditious, mutinous Petitions, Declarations, Demands and Letters, and
seizing and detaining of the King from the Parliament against their Votes and
Covenant, is much more Treason: And therefore this strange subitane Declaration
of their Friends and Party serves only for this good use, implicitly and by
way of necessary sequel; to proclaim the Generals, Officers, Agitators and
Armies Declarations, Proceedings and Demands High Treason at the least; seeing
they resolve and declare (by what Law is questionable) the very signing of this
new harmless engagement, (warranted by the Solemn League and Covenant) to be
such; which they had neither justice nor courage to do before in direct and
positive terms, as they ought and should have done: which Declaration is as
justly revocable no doubt as that, and may be more reasonably excepted against,
then that against the Armies See Lilburns Letters to Cromwell, and the Armies
Solemn Engagement.
seditious Petition, and Engagement, the* seminary and groundwork of all their
undutiful and treasonable proceedings since, against the King, Parliament, and
poor dying Ireland.

6. What Reason or justice is there, that Sir Thomas Fairfax, Cromwels, Cornet
Joyce, the Agitators and Armies confederacy Of June 8. 14. 20* 23.
and * solemn Engagements to seize the Kings person; march up to London to
enforce the Houses, impeach and demand XI. eminent Members at once, without
just cause; subvert the Rights and freedom of Parliaments; propose very high
and unreasonable demands, to which they must receive a present answer, or else
be enforced to take extraordinary courses; draw all other forces in the
Kingdom, and those designed for Ireland to combine with them against the
Parliament; their seizing of General Poyntz, and sending him to the Army to be
tried by a Council of War for his life, only for dissuading his Officers to
join with the Agitators and Army in these Treasons; should never be declared
nor proclaimed Treason by the Houses all this while; and yet the poor faithful
Citizens (to whom the Houses owe their lives and preservation more then to the
Army) be suddenly declared Traitors by them, only for reingageing themselves
according to their Covenant, to defend the King, Parliament, and City, against
these revolters, and to endeavor a safe and speedy Peace; which the world will
believe the Army and their friends in the Houses never cordialy intended, but
pretended, only to delude the people; because they declare the Citizens desire
and engagement Yea high treason, punishable with the forfaiture of life and
estate, so are the words of the Declaration.
to effect it, to be no less then * Treason, and a very dangerous design,
discovered to the Speaker, in a Letter by Col. Harvey, with the names of the
chief Conspirators, from his Bishopric of Fulham, the purchase whereof, and
something else has made him lately Independentish: And why was H. M. that
Chaste and Saint-like Independent, (who has so much honesty as never in two
years space, after diverse summons, to give an Account of the States money he
received, and so much piety, as to plead for that most damnable Heretic and
Blasphemour, Best and his Books) employed to draw up this Declaration against
the Citizens Petition and Engagement; who pleaded so violently for the
revocation of the Declaration against the Armies Petition, as an high Breach of
the Subjects Priviledg^ and Birthright, fit to be revoked? Surely it seems it
is either because some Independent Grandees of the Houses were privy and
consenting to all these Traiterous Actions and Proceedings of the Army and so
would not declare against them* for fear of proclaiming themselves Traitors, as
well as Joyce and the Army; or because the times are now so metamorphosed, and
the Independent party become so strong by the Impeachment and d^iving away of
the Presbyterian Members; that High Treason in an Independent and Sectary, is
become a commendable virtue, at least an irreprehensible offense, and a
Presbyterians mere performance of his Solemn League and Covenant (which this
Declaration, it seems, would utterly repeal) become no less then Treason; so
much are Presbyterians down the wind, and such is the Independents and
Sectaries brotherly affection and Liberty of conscience toward them, even for
doing their conscience. What may they expect from them hereafter, who are so
injurious and harsh toward them already? The Independent and Sectarian party
now are grown so confident, that they think the whole Kingdom and both Houses
theirs, and the Presbyterians quite defunct: And thereupon have newly published
a Libel with this Title: The last Will and Testament of Sir John Presbyter; who
dyed of a new disease, called, The Particular Charge of the ARMY, etc. With his
Life, DEATH and BVRIAL; also his Epitaph: (discovering their mortal hatred to
Presbyterians, and the Armies design to kill and bury them,) which they presume
already done by the Armies Charge: But, Gentlemen, be not over hasty: Sir John
Presbyter, though he has silently slept a while, is now awaked; and neither
dead nor buried, but alive, and alive will be, when King John of Leyden, the
Anabaptist, and Saint Ignatius Loyola, the Jesuited Independent may be
strangled at Tyburn, or lose their Pates on Towerhil for their sacred
Treacheries; the whole series and History whereof, with the names, places of
meeting, Debates, Letters and Resolutions of the chief Heads of the Faction
from time to time, and those who have Treacherously revolted to them for base
private ends, he will speedily publish to the world to their eternal Infamy, to
show he is still alive and unburied, and privy to their deepest secrets; which
he will not only charge but make good against them, in a more honorable and
Parliamentary manner, then the ARMY did, or can make good their Charge against
the MEMBERS they impeached; who dare try their Innocence by Battle in the open
field (so many to so many and one to Boot) against the Gallant General and
Lievt. General, and any 9. or ten Officers of the Army more, that are Gentlemen
born, to end the Controversy and Wars without more expense of blood, as well as
answer them at the Commons Bar; and will prove themselves more faithful to the
state, then any of their greatest Accusers, if both sides may come to a free
and fair Trial. In the mean time he will pray; that the Armies, Sectaries, and
Independents private ends, and self-seeking Designs; may never be able to
obstruct the speedy settlement of our Public Peace in England, or releif of
desperate Ireland, now gasping out it is last breath; whose loss and blood must
only rest on their score. Whom their great Friend and Patron John Lilburn in
his new-printed Epistles to Cromwell thus paints out in their Saint-like
colors; p. 9, 10. You have robbed by your unjust subtilty and shifting tricks
the honest and gallant Agitators of a^l their power and authority, and solely
placed it in a thing called a Council of War or rather a Cabinet Juncto of 7 or
8 proud self-end d fellows, that so you may without control make up your own
ends: The chiefest of them are as base as base may be; and will sell Christ,
their Country, Friends, Relations, and a good Conscience for a little money or
worldly riches. And are such Saints to be trusted by Parliament or King?

In fine, if Parliament Members out of by-ends, or fear of, or compliance with
any particular Party whatsoever, will pass any unjust, dishonorable or
inconsiderate Votes or Ordinances; it is a just judgment of God upon them, that
they should be enforced and induced publicly to retract them with shame and
dishonor, even by the meanest of the people: whose late tumultuous proce^dings,
though no ways justifiable or excusable, but deserving exemplary Censure, and
carefully to be prevented, suppressed on all hands by the Militia and other
Officers appointed for that purpose, for the future: yet they must be looked
upon by all wise conscientious people, as fruits of the Armies pernicious
disobedience and exorbitancies, and permitted, ordered by Gods providence to
punish and correct, if not reform, the obliquity and iniquity of such timorous*
self-seeking, or time-serving warping Members, who out of fear, self-interests,
or to please a prevailing party or Army, care not what they pass or Vote, to
the Parliaments dishonor, and the public prejudice, or hurt of those who side
not with them; the late sad effects and dangerous consequences whereof, may
(through Gods blessing) convince them of their former Errors in this kind, and
engage them to vote and act with more syncerity and public generous spirits
for the future; aiming only at the Common good, Peace and speedy settlement of
our distracted and almost ruined Kingdoms.

A Postscript.
JOhn Lilburn, the Armies Champion, chief Advocate, and Councellor in his
Letters to Leivt. General Cromwell; p. 13. has this notable passage, which
proclaims them a mere unlawful rout of Rebellious Mutiners, acting without a
Commission from the King or Houses, whose orders and Commands they positively
disobey and protest against: and therefore all Wel-willers to the Parliament
are bound by their Covenant to withstand and protest against them and their
proceedings, and endeavor their present disbanding, for the peoples ease, and
settlement of the Kingdoms Peace.

The Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax, IS NOT NOW AN ARMY ACTING BY A COMMISSION
from the King, OR THE TWO HOUSES; for although they were raised by an Ordinance
of the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, for the defense of the King
and Parliament, the true Protestant Religion (not the Scotch, Jewish,
Antichristian, inslaving Presbytery) and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom
(not the Arbitrary wills of the Houses* as appears by the Ordinance, 15. Feb.
1644. 2. part, book, declar. fol. 599. which possitively Commands Sir Thomas
Fairfax, from time to time, to submit to, and obey all such Orders and
Directions as he shall receive from both Houses of Parliament, or from the
Committee of both Kingdoms. Yet now he and his Army apprehending and beleiving,
that the wicked and swaying faction in both Houses, would destroy them, and
inslave the whole Kingdom, DO NOT ONLY DISPVTE THE TWO HOUSES ORDERS and
COMMANDS, BUT ALSO POSSITIVELY DISOBEY THEM, AS VNJVST, TYRANNICAL,
VNRIGHTEOVS: And being now thereby dissolved into the Original Law of Nature,
hold their swords in their hands for their own preservation and safety, which
both Nature, and the two Honses practices and Declarations teaches them to do;
and justifies them, in and now act according to the principles of safety,
flowing from Nature, Reason, and Justice, agreed on by common consent and
mutual agreement amongst themselves, in which every individual private
Soldier, whether Horse or Foot, ought freely to have their Vote, to choose the
transactors of their affairs, or else in the sight of God, and all rotional men
are discharged from obeying, stooping, or submitting, to what is done by them.

And p. 4. in his Letter to Cromwell March 25. 1647. he lays down this as a
ground, Why the Army should not lay down their Arms upon any conditions in the
world, before they see the Laws and universal wel-known Liberties of England
settled: seeing I will undertake publicly, and hope shortly to prove, the
Parliament Tyrannizeth ten times more over Us, then ever the King did; and I
will maintain that by the Law of this Kingdom, it is ten times easier to prove
it lawful for us to take up Arms against them in the ways they now go; then it
was for them to take up Arms, when they did, against the King. And I profess I
would do it, if I were rationally able to morrow.

For this good Antiparliamentary Doctrine the Army in their late Demands
require the enlargement of this Arch-traytor, who by his own confession in his
printed Letters was the Principal instrument to instigate Cromwell and them to
their present Rebellion against the Houses, their Members and proceedings, as
arbitrary and Tyrannical, to subvert both King and Parliament. And therefore it
is high time for the City and Kingdom to take up Arms to withstand them in
defense of the Parliament, King, Kingdom, according to their Covenant.

FINIS.

