The Purchasers of Bishops and Deans and Chapters Lands, By their Petition
offered to this Honorable House Humbly show,
THat notwithstanding his Majesty's gracious Declaration from Breda concerning
Sales: The Declaration of this Honorable House of the 8th of May last. His
Majesty's Proclamation of the 6. of June for quieting Possessions: And Your
Honors Order of the 6. of August last, restraining Ecclesiastics from
granting Leases of any of the said Lands; Yet so it is, That diverse Leases are
granted over the Purchasers head; they disquieted in their Possessions,
forcible Entries made upon their Estates, Actions at Law brought against them,
Court kept upon their Manors, their Court Rolls seized their Rents received by
the said Ecclesiastics, or stayed in the hands of the under-Tenants; Whereby
they are reduced to great straits, and ruined in their Credits.

And therefore Pray, First, That the Act mentioned in Your Declaration of the
8th of May last for confirmation of Sales may be taken into speedy
Consideration; And the Petitioners have their Purchases confirmed to them in
such manner as to Your Great Wisdoms shall seem meet.

Secondly, That in the mean time their Possessions may be quieted, and their
Tenants ordered to pay them their Rent, together with the Arrears thereof; And
that all Proceedings at Law against the Purchasers may be stayed.

Thirdly, That all Leases of any of the Purchased Lands made to any other then
the Purchasers or their Assigns, may be voided: And the Ecclesiastics
restrained, according to Your said Order of August last, from making Leases or
other Estates of the Premises, until the said Act for Confirmation be
Determined.

Lastly, That Your Petitioners may by the Favor of this Honorable House be
heard before they be concluded against; Hoping they may offer something to
Consideration satisfactory to all Interests.


