THE LIFE OF THAT Incomparable Man, Faustus Socinus Senensis, Described by a
POLONIAN Knight. Whereunto is added.

An Excellent Discourse, which the same Author would have had premised to the
Works OF SOCINUS;

Together with a Catalogue of those WORKS.

London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Church yard,
near the great North-doore. 1653.

TO THE READER.
THe Life of Socinus is here exposed to thy view, that by the perusal there of
thou may receive certain information concerning the man, whom Ministers and
others traduce by custom, having (for the most part) never heard any thing of
his conversation, nor seen any of his works, or if they have, they were either
unable or unwilling to make a through scrutiny into them, and so no marvel if
they speak evil of him. To say any thing of him here by way Elogy, as that he
was one of the most pregnant wits that the world has produced; that none since
the Apostles has deserved better of our Religion, in that the Lord Christ has
chiefly made use of his Ministry to retrive so many precious truths of the
Gospel, which had a long time been hidden from the eyes of men by the artifice
of Satan; that he showed the world a more accurate way to discuss controversies
in Religion, and to fetch out the very marrow of the Holy Scripture, so that a
man may more avail himself by reading his works, then perhaps by perusing all
the Fathers, together with the writings of more modern Authors; that the
virtues of his will were not inferior unto those of his understanding, he being
every way furnished to the work of the Lord; that he opened the right way to
bring Christians to the unity of the faith and acknowledgement of the Son of
God; that he took the same course to propagate the Gospel, that Christ and the
Apostles had done before him, forsaking his estate, and his nearest relations,
and undergoing all manner of labors and hazards, to draw men to the knowledge
of the truth; that he had no other end of all his undertakings, then the Glory
of God and Christ, and the salvation of himself and others, it being impossible
for Calumny it self with any color to asperse him with the least suspicion of
worldly interest; that he of all Interpreters explaineth the precepts of Christ
in the strictest manner, and windeth up the lives of men to the highest strain
of holiness: to say these and other the like things (though in themselves true
and certain) would notwithstanding here be impertinent, in that it would
forestall what the Polonian Knight has written on this subject. To him
therefore I refer thee, desiring thee to read his words without prejudice, and
then the works of Socinus himself; and though thou be not thereby convinced
that all which Socinus taught is true (for neither am I my self of that belief,
as having discovered that in some lesser things Socinus, as a man, went awry,
however in the main he hit the truth) yet for so much of Christ as thou must
needs confess appears in him, begin to have more favorable thoughts of him
and his Followers.

I. B.

THE LIFE OF Faustus Socinus Senensis.
TO pursue the Life of Faustus Socinus in a brief and perfunctory manner, would
be below the dignity of so great a man; but to do it fully and elaborately,
would perhaps be above our strength. For to relate the praises of renowned men
by snatches, and in a negligent fashion, is an injury to virtue: and if there
was ever any, certainly this is the man who deserves to be described not only
with care, but also with wit. Yet since it is better that excellent endowments
should be commended below their merit; then wholly passed-over in silence: it
is unreasonable, either that the meanness of the Relators should prove
prejudicial to famous men, or the greatness of those who are celebrated be any
prejudice to the wit of the Writers. But as for my self, pardon is due to me
upon another account, being cumbred with many cares, and hurrying my discourse
within the limits prefixed to a pittance of time.

Socinus was born in Seen, a most famous City of Tuscany. The Nobility of his
stock was ancient, and the splendour of his Alliances exceeding the condition of
a private man. His father, besides the honors of his own Family, was on his
mothers side further ennobled by the Salvetti. Which family sometimes
flourished with so great power amongst the Florentines, that Pandulphus
Petruccius being expelled out of Seen, was chiefly beholding to the assistance
and wealth of Paulus Salvettus for the restitution of his Country, and shortly
after of his Princedome. By which benefit being obliged, he conferred on him
the freedom of the City, and persuaded him to leave his country and dwell at
Seen. This Paulus was father to Camilla, who being married to Marianus the
younger, was mother to Alexander and Laelius Socinus, and grandmother to
Faustus. His mother, born to the hope of more then a private fortune, was
daughter to Burgesius Petruccius (sometimes Prince of the Commonwealth of Seen)
and to Victoria Piccolominea, who being the daughter of Andreas Piccolomineus,
Lord of Castilio and Piscaria, and Niece to Pope Pius the second and third of
that name, and either Sister or Kinswoman to Cardinal John Piccolomineus, to
the Dukes of the Amalphitani, to the Marquisses of Capistranum, to the Earls
of Calanum, and many other Italian Princes, married into the house of the
Petruccii, which then held the Fortune of the Princedome of Seen. But Burgesius
succeeding his father Pandulphus, and not long after by a fatal change expelled
out of his country, did not long survive his dignity. Nevertheless Cardinal
Raphael Petruccius was his successor in the Government of his country, and
held for a while the helm of that Commonwealth. But Victoria, being left a
widow, suffered not her mind, which in the splendour of her former height she
had never lifted-up, to be quailed with so disastrous a vicissitude of things.
So that for the space of fifty six years, wherein she survived the life and
common fortune of her husband, she did with singular modesty, and approved
integrity and chastity, endure the solitary condition of widowhood. Her
daughter Agnes, whom according to the dignity of so great a family, she had
trained up in most holy manners, she gave in marriage to Alexander Socinus, a
young man of noble extraction, but private condition. He was the Father of our
Faustus, and born in such a family as had for a long time, not by Arms and
Power, but by wit and Scholarship, seemed to hold a kind of Princedome in one
sort of learning. For this very Alexander was called the master of subtilties;
and his Father Marianus the younger, the Prince of Lawyers; and Bartholmew the
Un^kle of Marianus the younger, was by Angelus Politianus styled the Papinian
of his age; finally Marianus the elder, Bartholmews father, a most grave
Lawyer, is by Aeneas Sylvius so highly extolled, that that the narration almost
exceeds belief.

The son of this Marianus was Alexander the elder; the grandchild, Marianus the
younger; the Great-grandchildren, Alexander and Laelius, the one, (as we said)
the father; the other, the Uncle of our Faustus. Both of them for greatness of
wit, and endowments of Learning, exceeding famous, but to whom that of the Poet
may justly be applied,

These to the earth the Fates will only show,
Causing them presently away to go.
For Alexander, having a mavelous sharpness of wit, together with a Divine
memory and excellent Eloquence, had scarce fulfilled the one and thirtieth year
of his age, but he was suddenly snatched away, to the great grief of all Italy.
And Laelius having in a short race of life performed very great matters,
exceeded not the seven and thirtieth year of his age.

The memory of this man I judge worthy to be exceedingly admired by posterity,
who in so short a space as he lived, not only smelt-out so many grievous
errors, which had privily crept into the Church; but pulling them out of their
very holes, first showed the way how to kill them. He being by his Father
Marianus put upon that study which was hereditary to his name, thought that the
knowledge of humane Laws was to be setched out of the very fountains of Gods
Law. To which purpose whilst he diligently turned-over the sacred volumes, he
without difficulty found that very many of those Doctrines of the Church, which
are commonly received, are quite opposite to the Divine Testimonies. And that
so much the more easily, because most of them are also repugnant to Reason, and
such principles, as Nature it self has implanted in us. Inasmuch therefore as
the height of his excellent wit and sharpness of his judgment was accompanied
with a singular probity of mind, having detected the errors of the Church, he
did not (as the greatest part do) abuse them to the contempt of the Scripture
and Religion; but rather used the authority of the Scripture and of the
Christian Religion to heal the diseases of the Church, which could not be
cured, unless the errors were detected. Wherefore in that study, to which his
sublime and pious mind was carried with inflamed speed, a great light, not
without the Divine Assistance, suddenly brake out unto him, especially because
to fetch out the senses of the Scripture, he brought with him the knowledge of
the Oriental Tongues, the Hebrew and Greek chiefly, and also the Arabic.
Whether therefore it were for fear of danger, (as it is likely) or that he
might more exactly study purer Divinity and the Tongues, he soon passed out of
Italy into Switzerland and Germany.

He left his country very young, not being above one and twenty yeeers old. In
the next four years, having traveled over France, Britanny, Belgium, all
Germany and Poland, he took up his dwelling at Zurich. Whereupon, although he
were often drawn away with public and private affairs, yet did he spend the
chiefest part of his exile there, being endeared to sundry Princes in all
parts, and favored also by certain Kings.

There was not a noted Scholar in that time, (then which none ever abounded
more with learned men,) but he had by his carriage won not only his
friendship, but his samiliarity also. Whereby it came to pass, that the inbred
goodness of his judgment was accompanied with a singular prudence and
sweetness of behavior. Which endowments are acknowledged in him as by very
many other famous men, so chiefly by Philip Melanchton in his commendatory
Letters which he wrote to him as he was departing. And indeed what
correspondence was between him and the most renowned men of that age, chiefly
Calvin, Melanchthon, Bullinger, Brentius, Musculus, Munster, Zanchius,
Vergerius, Castellio, Beza, Martyr, Ochinus, Coeleus, and sundry others, their
frequent Letters unto him do testify, the coppies whereof in a great number
have come to our hands. He did not more desire to enjoy their friendship for
the safeguard of his fortune, then to make use of the same to the benefit of
the Church. Wherefore he did by his questions much urge and exercise those
redoubted Doctors of then-flourishing Divinty. I have a Letter written with
Calvin's own hand, wherein he openly professes that he was put into choler by
him, and in stead of an answer sends him back a check and threatening.

It is not fit, says he, that you should expect until I answer those
portentous questions which you object. If you are disposed to fly through those
aerie speculations, I beseech you, suffer me, an bumble Disciple of Christ, to
meditate on such things, as tend to the edification of my faith. And indeed I
will by my silence gain what I desire, nam^ly that you be not henceforth
troublesome to me. Now that so gallant a wit, as the Lord has bestowed on you,
should not only be unprofitably taken-up with slight matters, but also
corrupted with pernicious figments, is a very great grief. What I not long
since testified, I again seriously warn you of: that if you do not timously
correct this itch of enquiring, it is to be feared, you will draw on your self
great torments. Should I under a show of indulgence cherish such a vice as I
know to be very hurtful, I should be perfidious and cruel toward you.
Wherefore I had either you should be a little offended with my roughness, then
be drawn away with the sweet allurements of curiosity beyond all recovery. The
time will come, I hope, when you will rejoice that you were so boisterously
awakened.

Jan. 1. 1552.

Yours, John Calvin.

Neither was the truth of his threatening either uncertain or contemptible: For
in the month of October the next year Servetus was burned at Geneva.
Nevertheless the gravity of Laelius, and his incredible modesty in the greatest
endowments of learning and wit, together with his dexterity of carriage, had so
disarmed the anger of those that were in a chafe, that they did not endure to
hate the man, although otherwise they could not brook his freedom. Which thing
may teach them, whom overmuch freedom of truth betrayeth into needless
dangers, that that very Truth which they maintain, is more secured by the
circumspect mildness of prudence, then by unbridled zeal. So that they who of
their own accord meet dangers, seem to make greater have to their own praise,
then to the advancement of the public good. And certainly if there be any,
this is the place where the simplicity of the Dove is to be mingled with the
subtilty of the Serpent: unless we suspect the counsel of our Savior
condemning their unadvised rashness, who oftentimes have very bad success in
casting-down their pearls where they cannot be estimated according to their
worth. The truth is, Laelius remained entire and inviolate amongst the capital
enemies of his opinion. Yet did he not suffer the sense of his judgment to
perish within the closet of his conscience. Wherefore to those whom he liked,
he feared not to entrust the things that had been discovered to him by God. But
chiefly he instructed his contrymen the Italians, who by a pious and
voluntary exile were scattered through several regions of Germany and Poland. I
find in the commentaries of the Polonian Churches, that he came twice into our
country. First, about the year 1551. when he was six and twenty years old. At
what time he is said not without great success to have conversed with very many
of the Polonian Nobility; and to have caused Francis Lismaninus the Corcyraean,
confessor to Bona Sforzia the Queen, and who was then (if I be not mistaken)
the provincial of the Minorites, and first lifted up an ensign of revolt from
the ^ope in this kingdom, to cast away his Cowle. But then in a few months
space departing into Moravia, he reti^^d thence to the Switzers. His second
coming into Poland I find to have happened after the death of his father
Marianus, who dyed at Bononia in the year 1556. For not long after, about the
years 1558 and 1559 he desired letters of recommendation from the Kings of
Poland and Bohemia, that he might the more securely treat with his friends in
Venice concerning his Patrimony. Then indeed it appeared to the greatest part
of the German and Polonian Nobility in what favor he was. For in his case
there was very great canvassing both with Lud^vicus Priulus the Doge of Venice,
and Cosmus the grand Duke of Tuscany. Almost about the same time a grievous
storm arising upon a suspicion of Heresy, did with a perilous gust shake the
whole House of the Socini. After the death of Alexander, Laelius had three
brethren surviving: of whom Celsus lived at Bononia, Cornelius and Camillus
together with Faustus, son to his brother Alexander, dwelt at Seen. Amongst
these also Laelius, a mavelous Artist in suggesting the truth, had scattered
the seeds thereof, and though he were separated by the remote distances of
countries, yet did he by effectual industry so cherish them, that being unknown
as yet, and absent, he drew the wives of some to his party. Nor were there
wanting amongst his other familiars and friends, such as were either partners
in the same design, or privy thereunto. But the fair hope of that crop was
blasted in the very blade, Cornelius being taken, and the rest either
scattered, or chased away. This fear drove Faustus also, then very young, not
only out of his native City, but out of Italy, it self. Who having lived a
while at Lions in France, Laelius was in the mean time, ^xtinguished by an
untimely death at Zurich. Faustus being certified of his death by the letters
of Marius Besozzus, had much ado to prevent the snares laid for his papers, yet
got the possession thereof, having been already by him informed of very many
things, which he afterward in long progress of time did by his sharp wit and
indefatigable study polish. The death of Laelius happened on the third day
after the Ides of May 1562 and in the thirty seventh year of his age. That so
great a wit was not long-lived, will not seem strange to him who shall consider
how soon it was ripe. He had hardly past the age of a stripling when he left
Italy. Within the six and twentieth year of his life, having traveled almost
through all the regions of the West, he was by his great renown made known to
most of the chief Nobility in sundry parts, and perhaps to all learned men
everywhere. It was well-nigh fifteen years that he was absent from his
country. Out of so small a space of life far journeys challenge a great part,
by means of which his exile became profitable to many in sundry coasts of
Europe. Add his perpetual commerce with so many great men, together with his
continual intercourse of letters, and when you have subtracted these things,
how small a pittance of time (I pray you) was left for his studyes? And now
being amazed, we must enquire, what was that so profound leisure? what so
vigorous industry? what so ready wit? what so vast understanding, as was
sufficient to master so many tongues, so many sciences, and withal to
recollect the mind to it self, and manage the greatest affairs? To premise
these things touching Laelius, had I not listed of my own accord, necessity it
self did require. For he it was who by his guidance and counsel drew Faustus
himself and others to enter into that way, which they afterward followed.

Now I return to Faustus, intending in the first place to relate in brief the
course and chief occurrences of his life; then to comprise his chief actions;
and lastly to add a few words concerning the habit of his mind and body, as far
as I have by a cursory enquiry attained the knowledge thereof.

He was born two hours and almost three quarters before Sunrising on the Nones
of December, 1539, well-nigh fourteen years younger then his Uncle Laelius. He
dyed in the year 1604, a little before the beginning of the spring, being sixty
five years old.

He first spent twenty, and a little after twelve years of his age in his
country; about three in his retirement at Lions; the other thirty in voluntary
exile. He seems to have lost his parents at that age, which is most apt for
the improvement of learning and wit. For he complains how he employed his
labor in the studys of good arts very slightly, and without the guidance of a
teacher. And elsewhere, how he had not learnt Philosophy, nor ever was
acquainted with School Divinity; and confesses that in Logic it self he never
tasted but only certain rudiments, and that very late.

It was a bassle to that proud age, to be taught by so notable an instance,
that even without those helps (which we, though not without cause, yet
oftentimes without measure do admire) there may be great men, and such as will
perform rare feats. Perhaps also it was expedient, that a wit born to take
cognizance of the Opinions of the world, should be tainted with no prejudices;
lest it should admit some string of those errors, for the rooting out of which
it grew up. For Divinity being full of errors, infected also Philosophy it
self, and almost all good arts. And therefore not only in the cradle, but also
in the very rudiments of the first learning the infancy of the world has now
for a long time been deceived, and sucked in opinions as true, before it was
able to judge whether they were false. Whereby it comes to pass, that
oftentimes it is better to be seasoned with none, then with perverse doctrines:
nor is it a wonder that sometimes learned men dote more shamefully, and the
rude multitude judges more sincerely. Which I would not have so taken, as if I
would condemn learning, but only the abuse thereof; nor give a check, but a
caution to it. With such a slight tincture of learning, and (as I suppose) with
the study of the Civil law, the first age of Socinus was takenup, until the
three and twentieth year. Yet had he before sucked-in the principles of Divine
Truth, partly by his own sharp wit, partly by the instruction of his Uncle
Laelius, especially when upon the rising of a sudden tempest, he, as we before
hinted, betook himself into France. Although Laelius, confiding in the wit of
his Nephew, did intimate more to his guess, then deliver to his understanding;
concealing also some things from the young man for the trial of his judgment,
and openly presaging amongst his friends, that these things should more fully
and happily by Faustus be discovered to the world. But when after the death of
Laelius he was returned into Italy, in that unsteddy age of his life, his youth
floating like a ship without a Pilot, and carried away with I know not what
winds, almost grew old amongst the Sirens of the Court. For being admitted into
the Palace of Francis the grand Duk of Tuscany, and very much endeared to him
by honorable employments, whilst he there flourished in highest favor and
dignity, he spent whole twelve years in the Court of Florence. Then did he lose
(as he with perpetual groans complained) the most flourishing part of his life;
if at least that time is to be accounted lost, wherein his sublime judgment
was formed, not with the shadowy precepts of Learning, but with the substantial
experiments of Life; wherein also that youthful heat of his evaporated, which
for the most part hurryeth great wits to great falls. And indeed, were we not
otherwise assured of it, yet from the very force of his wit we might conjecture
with how vehement motions that nature of his was sometimes agitated. About the
close of that time his heart was touched with a serious deliberation concerning
the choice of good things; which he performed with such greatness of mind,
that he determined for the hope of heavenly things to trample under foot all
the commodityes of earthly wishes; wherefore without delay, despairing to
obtain from the extremely unwilling Princes leave to depart, he of his own
accord forsook his country, friends, hopes and riches, that he might the more
freely employ himself about his own and other men's salvation. That his service
had not been ungrateful to the Grand Duke, the longing after him being now
absent and in exile, showed. For sundry times by letters and messengers,
chiefly at the motion of Paulus Jordanus Vrsinus a noble man, who had married
the Grand Dukes sister, he solicited Socinus to return, which he with usual
modesty, but resolute mind did refuse. It was the year of our Lord 1574, and
the five and thirtieth of his age, when he retired out of Italy into Germany.
At his coming he was entertained by Basile, that courteous receiver of Christ's
exiles, which had long since learned to cherish in her lap endangered
Innocence. Where he studied Divinity full three years and upwards, being
chiefly intent upon the Sacred Scriptures, to the sincere understanding whereof
whilst he aspired with daily vows and prayers, he was much helped with a very
few writings of his Uncle Laelius, and sundry scattered notes left by him.
Which thing, though it was in his power to suppress it, yet did he always
ingenuously own and profess. As he lived at Basile until the year 1575, he
detained not within the closet of his private breast, the truth that had been
deposited with him. And therefore whilst he endeavors to propagate unto
others the light that was risen to himself, he proceeded by degrees from
reasoning with his friends to discourse with strangers, and having begun his
disputation concerning Jesus Christ the Savior by word of mouth, he afterward
comprised it in writing. Which ere he could finish, being first excluded by
sickness from his studyes, then by the pestilence from his books left at
Basile, he in the mean time dispatched at Zurich, in the beginning of the year
1578 another Disputation with Franciscus Puccius; and afterward in the same
year being returned to Basile, he put the last hand to his book concerning the
Savior. At that time the Transyivanian Churches were extremely infested with
the opinion of Franciscus Davidis and others touching the Honor and Power of
Christ. To remedy which mischief, Georgius Bl^ndra^a (a man very powerful in
those Churche^, and with the Bath^rrea^ Princes who then ruled the Nation) in
that very year of the Lord invited Socinus from Basile, to the end he might
draw the Ringleader of the Faction, Franciscus Davidis, from so gross and
pernicious an error. Which that it might the more commodiously be effected,
having at a great rate hired a lodging for Socinus, with Franciscus Davidis, he
would have them both for above the space of four months to use the same house
and table. But the said Franciscus took far greater care how to retain his
credit amongst those of his party, then how to seek after the truth. Whereupon
adventuring not only to spread his error in private, but publicly to proclaim
it in the Pulpit, lie drew present danger on himself, being soon cast into
prison by the command of the Prince of Transylvania, where he shortly after
ended his life. Of whose death though Socinus was altogether guiltless, yet did
he not escape blame. As if he were not able to vanquish the said Franciscus
with other weapons, when notwithstanding the disputations of both are
published: or that Magistrate was so addicted to the cause of Socinus, as to
employ the weapons of his authority for him or any one of his party. But if
perhaps some person, who savored the cause of Socinus, did incite the Prince to
deal roughly with the said Franciscus, (whereof nevertheless I am not certain,)
yet let not Socinus be blamed for him, inasmuch as he could neither know his
counsel, nor approve his deed. For to omit sundry other considerations, there
could not happen any thing more contrary to the mind of Socinus, then that such
a doctrine, as could not be defended with the words and wit of the said
Franciscus whilst he lived, should seem to be confirmed by the mute, but
efficacious testimony of his death: especially because, carrying the face of a
Martyrdom, it presently turned the eyes of all men to it. The Disputation of
Secinus with him, though written whilst the said Franciscus was alive, could
notwithstanding hardly come to light fifteen years after. When this Disputation
was finished in May, anno 1579, and presented to the Transylvanian Churches,
Socinus could not long tarry there, by reason of a Disease then raging, which
they commonly call the Colic. Wherefore in the same year, being now forty
years old, he traveled into Poland, where he made suit publicly to be united
to the Polonian Churches, which acknowledge none but the Father of the Lord
Jesus Christ to be the most High God: but not concealing his dissent in certain
doctrines, here suffered a repulse very roughly and for a long time.

Nevertheless he, being composed unto patience not so much by his natural
inclination, as by the resolution of his mind, was no whit enraged with this
disgrace, nor ever gave any signs of a disaffected mind; But rather undertook
to repel with his wit the incursion of diverse Adversaryes, who then infested
those Churches. And first of all he received the charge of Andreas Volanus, by
refelling his Paraenesis; and upon the same occasion, at the request of
Niemojevius the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans was explained.
Afterward it pleased him to assail Jacobus Palaeologus, whose reputation and
Authority did at that time cherish the relics of pernicious errors in men
otherwise well-minded. Him being somewhat roughly handled, not out of hatred,
but advice, he always excused. A little after, when Volanus had renewed the
fight, he was again encountered, and withal an Answer made to the Positions of
the College of Ponsa. Whilst Socinus undergoeth so much fighting and hatred
for the patronage of the truth, amongst so many enemies there wanted not some
Calumniators. Stephanus was then King of Poland. A Pickthank blows his ears
with the report of a book written against the Magistrate; adding that it would
be a very dishonorable thing to suffer a wandering Italian exile to escape
scotfree with so bold an enterprise. He hinted at the book against Palaeologus.
Which though it required no other testimony of its innocence, then the reading,
yet did he think good to decline the danger.

Whereupon he departed from Cracovia, where he had now lived four years, to a
Noble man, named Christophorus Morstinus, Lord of Pawlicovia, in which place he
defended his innocence not so much by skulking, as by the Privilege of Nobility
in our Nation. For that suburb-farm is a few miles distant from Cracovia. It
seemed a wiser course to clear himself from the crimes laid to his charge,
rather out of that place, then out of prison. Nor was he entertained in that
hospitable house for that nick of time only, but there cherished for above
three years. And to the end that the courtesy showed to an exile and stranger
might be more abundant, a little while after the daughter of the family, a
noble Virgin, was at his suit given him in marriage; so that being of a
stranger become a son-in-law, he seemed to have established his security in
those places by affinities and friendships. Whilst he lived in the country,
he wrote many notable pieces, and chiefly that against Eutropius, constantly
defending the fame and cause of that Church, which had with most unjust
prejudice condemned him, and caused him, though innocent, continually to suffer
many indignityes. His daughter Agnes was born to him in the year of our Lord
1587, and forty eighth of his age, of whom, being after her fathers death
married to Stanislaus Wiszowatius a Polonian Knight, there are as yet remaining
nephews and nieces. In September the same year he lost his wife Elizabeth,
which sad and disastrous chance was followed with a grievour fit of bodily
sickness, so obstinate, that for certain months it caused the use of his
studyes to cease. And that no kind of calamity might be wanting, almost about
the same time, by the death of Franciscus the Grand Duke of Tuscany, the
revenues of his estate, which he received yearly out of Italy, were quite taken
away from him. Indeed a little before, by the bitterness of Accusers, and
threats of Popes, his estate came into danger. But by the strenuous endeavor
of Isabella Medicea the Grand Dukes sister, (who was married to the aforesaid
Paulus Jordanus Vrsinus,) whilst she lived, and afterward by the favor of
Franciscus the Grand Duke, it came to pass that during his life Socinus
received the yearly income of his estate. For indeed his old deserts were still
so fresh in memory, that those Princes though long since forsaken, and
oftentimes rejected, did yet in a most difficult matter gratify the letters
and prayers of a condemned and exiled person. Yea letters full of courtesy were
sent unto him, and he bidden to be of good cheer for the future, as long as
they lived, so that in setting forth books he suffered not his name to appear.
But those Princes were then taken away by a destiny disastrous to Socinus. And
that all things might seem to have conspired to the perplexity of the man,
being a widower, sick, and stripped of all his fortunes, he was molested with
the very times of our Commonwealth, which were then exceeding turbulent,
because diverse did contend who should be the King of Poland; so that the
adversaryes thereupon took greater license to themselves. Socinus was now
returned to Cracovia, and sought solace in the midst of so many evils from the
employment which God had imposed on him, to purge the Church of such errors, as
were then rife in her. Wherefore although he had been formerly accustomed to
frequent Ecclesiastical Assemblies, yet in the year 1588 in the Synod of Breast
(which is a Town on the borders of Lituania) he disputed with greater
earnestness and fruit then before touching the death and Sacrifice of Christ,
touching our Justification, touching the Corrupted Nature of Man, and finally
with the Davidians and Budneists touching the Invocation of Jesus Christ. This
was the year wherein the care and charge of the Church at Luclavicia was
committed to Petrus Sto^nius, son to Petrus Statoriu^ of Tho^^ville, whose
family having heretofore been naturalised into the Nobili-of our Nation, has
even at this day some men surviving who have been invested with great Honors in
our country. He being no less sharp in judgment, then ready in speech, being
once admitted into the friendship of Socinus, yielded willingly to his Opinion.
A little before also he had privately drawn many of the chief ones into his
Opinion, and there was daily an accession made of such men as complied with
them. Nevertheless certain men of very great authority still stood off, as
Niemojevius, and Czechovicius, together with the greatest part of the ancient
Ministers. The report is that Securinius was the first that adventured openly
to maintain the Tenets of Socinus, to which he had assented. Not long after
others followed. Which party was exceedingly strengthened by the accession of
the three Lubjenecii, Andreas, Stanislaus, and Christophorus, who being
brethren of noble descent, and born to very great hopes, and brought up partly
in the Kings Court, partly in the society of the greatest Peers, were by a
sacred instinct transported from the midst of the allurements of this life to
the care of Religion. These men, as they had by a most enflamed zeal trodden
under foot all the impediments of piety, so with an equal candor and greatness
of mind they subscribed to the known Truth.

And now others of the pastors came-in a vye to the party, especially the
juniors, who were less retarded with the prejudice of inveterate opinion and
authority, and that by reason of an accident very notable for the newness
thereof, which gave a memorable proof how great the force of the Truth is.
Amidst a great jarring of Opinions this was a laudable agreement of that
Church, that those men contended only with arguments and not with hatred. And
though they detested one another opinions, yet did they not condemn one
another. And therefore keeping mutual tolerance entire, they oftentimes
disputed very eagerly, and this was the chief work of their Synods.

Wherefore anno 1585 in the Synod of Lublin, the opinion of Socinus touching
the seventh Chap. of the Romans was exceedingly agitated. There were some that
defended it; but as great a number of Pastors that opposed it. One whereof,
named Nicolaus Zilinius, being willed by others of the same party to explain
that Chapter contrary to the mind of Socinus, and having to that purpose
stoutly managed the matter, falling in his discourse upon those words,
wherewith the Apostle gives thanks to God for his freedom, stood like a man
amazed. And by and by, what is that freedom? says he. What is that benefit,
which drew from the Apostle so great thanks? was it, that he was of necessity
detained in so great a servitude of sin? Certainly such a thing as this can at
no hand gain approbation with me. I therefore (says he) in like manner give
very great thanks to the Father of lights, in that he would have the light of
his truth arise unto me, who am now freed from error. Afterward entering upon
a contrary way of explaining, he accurately disputed for the Orthodox Opinion.
When they, whose cause he had undertaken, being amazed did rebuke him, his
answer was, that he could not resist the judgment of a convinced mind. This
business was of great moment for the propagation of the Truth; nor did their
endeavors less conduce thereunto, who had lifted up the standard unto others
to embrace it. Amongst them the Eloquence of the foresaid Petrus Stoinius did
excel. That Elegant Tongue only had God bestowed on those Churches equal to
the wit of Socinus and able to deliver in a popular manner his subtle senses
that were above the capacity of the ruder sort, and to commend them unto all by
the genius of his flexanimous speech. Him therefore, as the chief Interpreter
of his mind, did Socinus make use of, to the notable advantage of Gods Church.
And indeed certain things happened, which did enforce a stricter union with
him. Socinus sojourning at Cracovia began long since to be environed with such
dangers on every side, as are for the most part wont to accompany the faithful
servants of Christ. How great an Indignity was there offered to him by that
insolent soldier Vernecus, he himself signifies in a certain letter. But above
all, after the printing of his book touching the Savior, the Adversaryes again
began to show the rancor of their hatred. Whereupon in the year 1598 the
Scholars, having stirred up the dregs of the rabble, took Socinus being then
sick and minding the recovery of his health, and pulling him out of his chamber
half-naked, drag him in a contumelious manner through the market and the the
most noted streets, the greatest part in the mean time crying out to have him
brought to execution. At length having been grievously handled in that furious
rout, he was with much ado rescued out of the hands of the raging multitude by
Martinus Vadovita Professor of Cracovia. The plundering of his goods and
household stuff, together with other things liable to spoil, did not so much
grieve him, as the irreparable loss of certain writings, concerning which he
often did profess that he would redeem it with the expense of his life. Then
perished together a notable labor of his against Atheists, which he had
undertaken to refute the ingenious Devices of a certain Great Man. But when to
so barbarous an example of cruelty threats were also added, he departed from
Cracovia to Luclavicia, unto a certain village famous for his last habitation
and death, and distant about nine miles from Cracovia; where having for certain
years used the table and house of a Noble Man, named Abrahamus Blonscius, he
lived a neighbor to Sto^nius. Both therefore affording mutual help near at hand
in chasing away the relics of errors, had now brought almost that whole Church
to an unanimous consent in all opinions: for even Niemojevius himself having in
most things already given assent to Socinus, condemned his own mistakes with
such ingenuity as can never sufficiently be extolled.

Czechovicius only could not be removed from his opinion. Who, as the better
part prevailed, conniving, though with much ado, at other things, a little
after began to make a stir about the opinion concerning Baptism, which
nevertheless being suddenly according to the wish of Socinus laid asleep, did
afterward vanish of its own accord. Having thus fully purged the Church from
errors, as if his life had been prolonged hitherto for this purpose only, he
was at the end of winter, in the sixty fifth year of his age taken away at
Luclavicia, by a death not so untimely to himself, as sad to his followers. His
last words at his death were these, namely that he no less full of envy and
troubles then of days, did with a joyful and undanted hope incline to the
period of his appointed time, which showed to him both a discharge from his
sorrows and a reward of his labors.

Petrus Stoinius who had been the associate of his life and labors, was also
the Praiser, and in the year following the companion of his funeral. For as if
he had already ended the appointed task of his life, he followed Socinus being
hardly forty years old.

Having passed over the race of Socinus life, through which we have made a
short cut, it remains that we stop a while in considering what he did, and
performed.

No man in our memory did better deserve of all the Christian world, but
chiefly of the Polonian Churches. For first, by setting out so many works, he
opened the genuine meaning of the Holy Scriptures in innumerable places.

Next, he only showed how to confirm with solid arguments, and skilfully to
defend from subtle cavills and sophisms, those opinions touching the Person of
God and Christ, which he found already rife in Poland. After that he happily
extinguished some impious, other profane opinions, whose deadly poison did by
stealth insinuate it self into the bosom of the Church. No man did more
vigorously quell Judaizers: he also exploded the opinion of the Chiliasts, and
many other fanatic dreams besides. As for the errors, received from the
Reformed Churches, which did in a great number as yet reign in that Church, he
did with a mavelous felicity root them out. Such were that of Justification,
that of Appeasing the wrath of God, that of Predestination, that of the
Servitude of the Will, that of Original Sin, that of the Lords Supper and
Baptism, together with other misconstrued Doctrines. Finally, having taken-away
pernicious errors, that he might not also leave any fopperyes in the Church, he
exterminated very many superstitions about indifferent things. Of which sort
was the overmuch affectation of mean clothing, and the eschewing of
Magistracy, and refusing to prosecute ones own right even without a desire of
revenge, and what other like spots there were, caused by the inconsiderate zeal
of their first servor.

Having explained the order of his life, and his actions, it remains that we
add a few things concerning the habit of his Mind and Body. To relate the
praises of his wit and judgment, is a superfluous labor, inasmuch as there
are so many monuments thereof extant. As for his learning, the more
pertinaciously he hid it, the more impatiently it breaketh-out. It was somewhat
late, but more solid. Nor are there wanting in his writings the footsteps of a
happy memory also. I cannot pass-by one proof thereof, which he gave in his
disputation with Christianus Francken. This fellow in the Session of the Synod
of Chmelnica, desiring to show a proof of his learning and wit, did in a more
arrogant manner then was meet, challenge those Pastors to dispute, slighting
the mean learning of every one. And that he might with very plenty puzzle and
overwhelm him that was to dispute, having beforehand provided himself, he
together proposed fifty agruments against the Adoration of Christ. This matter
troubled some, and they, though the Church had so often rejected Socinus, did
yet enjoyne him to make an answer. He attentively hearing the man, who had on a
sudden entered upon an unjust way of arguing, and did with one breath almost,
pour out so many prepared shafts, was admonished to take in writing at least
the heads of the reasons to which an answer was to be returned. But he in
confidence of his memory, slighted the assistance of his pen, and patiently
heard the man uttering those reasons of his as long as he pleased; and by and
by in the same order repeating the long series of his arguments, gave such a
solid answer to each of them, that the Adversary had hardly any thing to mutter
against him. Whereupon having professed that he was unskilled and unprepared,
he went away confounded, to the admiration of all. And because we have touched
the endowments of his nature, if any man be curious to know the figure of his
body also, let him know that he wanted not a form answerable to his
disposition, being of such a stature as exceeded not the just size, yet was
nearer to tallness. The habit of his body was somewhat slender, yet within
measure. In his countenance the dignity of his high forhead, and Masculine
beauty of his eyes did cast a glance. Nor did the comeliness and grace of his
look diminish the vigor and majesty thereof. He was somewhat sparing of meat
and sleep, and abstinent of all pleasures without affectation, only in the
conservation of his health he seemed scrupulous, and oftentimes over-diligent.
Yet was he for the most part of a prosperous health, but that he was sometimes
troubled with the pains of the stone, and with the colic. Moreover, being
grown somewhat old, he complained of the dimness of his sight, contracted with
overmuch watching. The genius of his life was gentle and innocent. There was a
mavelous simplicity in his manners, which was so tempered with gravity, that
he was free from all superciliousness. Whence it came to pass that you would
sooner reverence him then you could fear him. He was very affable, giving honor
to every one exceedingly; and would you desire to reprove any thing in him,
there was nothing nearer to discommendation, then the overmuch debasement of
himself.

The clothing of his body was modest, but yet neat and spruce; and though he
was at a remote distance from bravery, yet was he less averse from slight
ornaments. He was officious toward his friends, and diligent in all parts of
his life. He had so won the affection of the Princes, in whose service he spent
part of his life, that neither could long absence extinguish the desire of him,
nor manifest offense obliterate the favor to him. Having showed all manner of
officiousness toward his Unkles, brethren, and male-kindred, he chiefly
regarded and reverenced Laelius. Amongst his female-kindred, besides his
Grandmother Camilla, a most choice Matron, he exceedingly loved his Aunt
Portia, and his Sister Phyllis, and that according to their deserts. The former
of which twain, being whilst she lived, an example of most commendable
chastity, did by her discretion and incredible gentleness of manners so gain
the affection of her husband Laelius Beccius, a man of rank and quality, that
he would often say with tears that he was unworthy of such and so great a wife.
The latter by the sanctity of her manners and discipline in governing the house,
had so approved her self to her husband Cornelius Marsilius a great Noble man,
that at her death she left behind her an immortal desire of her company. And
forasmuch as we are long since slipped from the endowments of nature to those
which he acquired by his own industry, we must not passover in silence some of
his virtues, whereby he was eminent above many. I cannot easily say whether
there was more fire or wit in so vehement a disposition, so prone to choler had
nature framed him, before he had allayed those violent motions with reason.
Nevertheless he did so break and tame his choleric temper, that the mildness
which afterward shined-forth in him, seemed to very many to be the praise of
nature, not of industry. The commendation of his patience likewise is enhanced
as by the indignity of his fortune and injuries, so also by his delicate and
consequently touchy disposition. No evil is wont to happen unto such persons
without an exquisite resentment; nor is it so much to be wondered at, that
oftentimes a larger wit is capable of more sorrow.

But he in this fight also appeared conqueror of his fortune and nature, after
he had with a Christian greatness of mind born and undergone so many calamityes
from strangers, so many injuries from his countrymen, perils from enemies,
ingratitude from friends, envy from the learned, hatred from the ignorant,
infamy from all, poverty from fortune, in fine a continual repulse, not without
ignominy, from that very Church, which he had chiefly beautified. I have almost
done an injury to fortune, in seeming to have ascribed unto her the cause of
his poverty. But I have not now accused her fault, but intimated her condition:
which Socinus might perhaps by Fortune's means have escaped, would either his
conscience or a certain generosity of mind have permitted him. Certainly he
never sought after the same of holiness by beggary. Nevertheless as often as he
was able to sustain his condition with the smallest means, he could not be
brought to take such gifts as were freely offered him. Yea he did of his own
accord expend his means on the poor. Nor was he only conversant in every kind
of alms, but in every kind of liberality also: so as you may thereby understand
that his charity was enflamed with the promiscuous love of all men. Likewise he
published certain books at his own charges; that he might omit nothing for the
accomplishment of his ardent Zeal to promote Divine Truth, which he had
undertaken to propagate, what with so many writings, what with so many letters,
what with so many private and public disputations, what with so many
informations of them who were in all places the Interpreters of his mind, what
with so many long journeys, most of them from the utmost border of Silesia to
the midst of Lituania, what with the loss of health, fame, and fortunes, what
finally with the hazard of his life. That very thing which had been the only
solace to sustain him in the midst of so great labors and perils, did he
continually inculcate to the whole Church, as the only remedy to lead a holy
life, namely a continual hope of Immortality, which he thought was to be
carefully and delicately cherished. So that when a certain old man showed a
tomb built for himself in token of piety, saying that he did perpetually
meditate on death: Socinus replied, that he would do more rightly, if he did
meditate on the reason of the Resurrection. Certainly his prudence shined-forth
in all the parts of his life, but chiefly in his judgment of spiritual things,
and was as it were a certain fruit of his humility and his modesty, a virtue so
inbred and peculiar to his nature, that in other virtues he may seem to have
vyed with others; in this, with himself. He never despised any man; never
attempted any thing but with advice and circumspection. In his very studyes
also he was so far from all self-confidence, that he never assayed to write any
thing, but what had been concocted with long and mature meditation. And this
may easily be discerned in his works. How often did he go very gingerly through
those rough ways which others would have securely trodden? So that no man
seems to have distrusted another wit, as he did his own. Which, as we have
said, was then the reward, and now the token of his singular modesty. But
especially his faith did much shine-forth amongst other praises. None in the
memory of men was better furnished with all helps whereby we ascend to fame,
and wealth, and the highest pitch of this life: nature, fortune, and finally
industry, had emulously accumulated nobility of stock, splendour of friendships,
grace of Princes, liberal means, health, wit, eloquence, learning, and a
natural reach capable of the greatest matters. Obedience to the call of God,
and the pledge of truth entrusted to him, cost him the loss of so great
privileges. It was a small matter to have forsaken so many pledges of the
greatest hope, had he not also, as a sacrifice devoted to the public hatred,
wittingly and willingly exposed himself to infinite miseryes, want, hazards,
enmityes, universal contempt, reproaches, contumelyes, and to an execrable
memory of his name in all places. Nor indeed looked he for anyother reward at
present, or shortly after. His wishes reached beyond the bounds of his life,
yea beyond the race of the present age; and his hope was so truly erected
toward heaven, that it rested on no prop of earthly solace. I detract not from
the praises due to the merits of other men: each of them has his proper honor.
Yet will I by their good leave say, that some famous men have perhaps made an
attempt at so sublime a proof of faith, but I cannot tell whether any one has
reached it. For the greatest part wanted not helps whereby their virtue was
soon relieved, so that they were not long God's creditors. The magnanimity of
Luther and others was quickly entertained with the applause and affections of
Princes and peoples. How many others, otherwise poor and obscure, were by the
maintenance of God's cause advanced to riches and power? whom nevertheless this
vicissitude does not exclude from the praise of faith, if that which was the
cause of their advancement, did grow up to maturity together with them.

But they cannot easily be admitted into this number, who even with the great
detriment of their estates espouse the cause of God (whether truly such, or
pretended) being now in a flourishing condition, and come to maturity. For they
have what to hope-for on the earth, even without respect to heaven; and in the
expectation of such present rewards you cannot always easily discern, whether
they repose greater confidence in God, then in their own industry.

But Laelius and Faustus, men of so great judgment, and so great knowledge and
experience of the age wherein they lived, what solace could they promise
themselves in the earth whilst they lived, yea in the next ensuing age, for so
many labors and dangers, having professed such tenets as were set-off with no
pomp of authority, no engagement of parties, no connivency at a more dissolute
life, yea no other blandishment whatsoever; but were rather distastful and
odious unto all by reason of their austerity? Certainly I can here espy no
crevice of earthly hope, which may detract a whit from the praise of a most
noble faith, which how great soever it was, being excluded out of all the
earth, was mounted up to heaven, and there conversed with the clemency of God
alone.

Ignatius also, that I may omit others, in the memory of our fathers, contemned
his country, kindred, wealth, honors, and other allurements, and also
underwent many labors and dangers of his own accord, having professed a zeal
to Gods glory, and the warfare of faith. I slight not the greatness of mind,
which showed it self in him or some like to him. For neither did they hasten
unto glory through such a way as was altogether pleasant. Nevertheless I do not
yet here behold that difficult proof of a more noble faith, which we seek for.
I assume not so much to my self, nor is it at present very material, as to
pronounce sentence concerning the purpose of any ones mind, which will at
length be performed by an infallible Judge. Wherefore I regard not what
Ignatius had in his mind, since for the present business it is sufficient, what
he might have. It Is true, he saw the Popes affairs in some provinces afflicted,
but could not be ignorant, that in most, or at least in the more powerful ones,
and consequently in his country, and where he intended to fix his abode, they
were well established and flourishing. Who would affirm that the immense
rewards, which that Church presently repayeth to her defenders, were unknown to
Ignatius? Certainly the spur of glory is very sharp in generous minds.
Wheresoever an illustrious field of glory is opened, not only pleasures and
riches become sordid in comparison thereof, but very life it self is vilifyed.
And therefore even Martyrdomes are easily undergone for a prosperous and rich
Church, without a more noble proof of religious faith, nor consequently can
they deserve more admiration, then those brave Lads of Canna and Trebia, who
were born for the Punick times; or if you like not the common soldiery, then
Codrus, who feared not to dye for his country. Indeed whosoever has sought
after Eternity of name in the Church of Rome, did wisely choose a race for his
glory. For the Roman, Commonwealth heretofore (although she grew great by this
means chiefly) did never propose so many and so great rewards to dangers
undertaken for her sake, as the Roman Church does hold-forth. For those
sumptuous beds and altars were a late invention of the Commonwealth, and that
to gratify the Emperors only. Whereas the Church does confer upon her
benefactors not only everlasting veneration of name, but also temples, and
Orders, and an honorable place amongst the canonized Saints. What higher thing
can the most ardent thirst of glory aspire unto? Wherefore when so large
offer's are proposed, and almost grasped with the hand, whosoever, though with
some loss of his estate, entered into that warfare, has no great reason to
boast of his faith before God. Whilst the Riches of the Roman Church, the
power of so many Princes, and the hugeness of the Spanish Empire dispersed over
the world came-in to his aid, it was an easy matter even in the greatest
danger to run before the Ensigns. That was an essay of a humane and military
fortitude, not rising up to the more sacred glory of the Martyrs or Confessors
of the Primitive Church. For they did so sincerely mind heaven, that they had
nothing left them to be hoped-for in the earth. After their example Laelius and
Faustus did so trust God with those things which they lost for his sake, that
they received hardly any earthly pledges of the Reward to come, no humane
security for the Divine Hope, no solace. They followed the faith and clemency
of God alone, in expectation to receive the same a long time after their
decease. And having been through the course of their lives perpetually
despised, and inglorious, and only famous for the hatred conceived against
them, they did not so much as at their death receive a taste of a more honorable
report. Nevertheless the beneficence of the most faithful God did never turn
bankrupt to any one that had trusted him. Nor would he have that noble pair of
his servants be buried in perpetual oblivion, but showed them to the world on
that side of them where they might be gloriously known, having brought to light
so many famous monuments of their wits.

And although the full wages of their warfare consisted not in this reward, yet
nevertheless he has begun so bountifully to assert the very honor of their
name amongst men, that it is perhaps more to be feared lest posterity should
confer on them too-much dignity, then none at all.

FINIS.
An Excellent DISCOURSE Which the same POLONIAN Knight Would have had Premised
TO THE WORKS OF SOCINUS.

London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-doore. 1653.

AN Excellent Discourse.
THE wit of man was heretofore much turmoiled in seeking-out the way of
Happiness: but no contention, no industry of mortals could find out that, for
which we ought to be indebted merely to the favor of the Immortal God.
Wherefore a great part of Mankind was enveigled with the fawning allurements of
pleasure. Nor were fewer overcome with the glistering of Gold, and enslaved
with the commodity of riches. Certainly on this lime-twig almost all the rabble
of mortals have sticked; although the more noble Wits did justly condemn so
bad and sordid an image of Happiness. They therefore thought Glory, Empire,
Power, and other like things, to be more worthy of that height. But the wiser
sort of men did very justly despise these vain and fleeting Gifts of fortune
also. Likewise those things which are at first the blandishments, and
afterward the spoils of this transitory life, as beauty and strength of body,
happy marriage, numerous offspring, and the vivacity of a long old age, seemed
liable to the same disdain with the former things. There remained the honor and
integrity of a life guided by virtue, wherein the best of men placed the top of
our felicity. And I ingenuously confess that there is nothing amongst humane
matters which rises up higher and nearer to that pitch: but how our mind
should rest there, I cannot yet discern. For if you remove the other solaces
and contentments of humane life, I see no other fruit in virtue worthy of
felicity, then that of a good conscience. Nor indeed do I think that that joy
of the mind congratulating it self is to be slighted. But how it is able to
secure us from the incident miseries that do infest the life of man, or ^^ll-up
the numbers of just happiness, I cannot apprehend. For our mind, in the
felicity which it sueth after, does not only seek the solace, but vacuity of
evils; nor desire to be happyer then the most miserable, but to be void of all
misery. For not to call them evils and miseries, which are irksome to the body
or life of man, savoureth of a proud style, and such as thwarteth humane
capacity. Let us leave it to Homer, who only durst to speak in the language of
the Gods, and that of right, inasmuch as he was not a Painter, but a Poet.

Men (says he touching a certain bird) call it Chal^is, the Gods Cymindis.

We, as long as we are liable to the casualties of body and fortune, will be
enforced to impose the names of good and evil, rather according to the sense of
Humanity, then suitably to the ambition of Philosophy. Wherefore we are of
opinion that calamitous virtue falls (...) mo^^ of happiness, and that a
conscience of good works, though worthy of prosperity, is yet oftentimes nearer
to pity, then envy. Nor was this unknown to the more acute Philosophers, who
not content to have placed happiness in the action of virtue, added the
condition of a prosperous life and of outward goods. Upon which account those
prime men are undeservedly traduced. For nothing is more ridiculous, then to
circumscribe the reason of happiness, which consists in the solid affluence
of things, within the limits of a cheerful, but naked and barren cogitation.
By this accoun^ Felicity is poor and needy, if virtue serve her at her own
charges, nor has other rewards of dangers, then the remembrance of them.
Nevertheless I do not conceive that her chief reward is prosperity and success
in this life; nor imagine that the Prince of Philosophers thought so. Howbeit
it is a wretched condition, and unworthy of virtue, that she being innocent
should be punished with great misfortunes, or having very well deserved, be
lurched of the chief, yea necessary commodities and comforts of life. Therefore
it was fitting, that that, whatsoever it be, without which the life of men is
bitter and calamitous, should be annexed to that happiness, to which we ascend
by virtue. Neither again without ground was this kind of happiness disl^ked.
For if it consists not without outward prosperity, which can neither be at
first gotten, nor aftewards retained at our pleasure, what hope or stress is to
be placed therein, since it cannot happen to us upon our endeavor, and may be
taken from us against our will?

Howbeit you may more justly here bewail the condition of our mortality, then
reprove the judgment of the most acute philosopher. He did what he was able,
and drew the lineaments of happness, how great soever might heretofore be
hoped-for in this life. What is he to blame, if it be not attainable by every
ones industry? If there be something in it, which you suppose to be neither
firm, nor stable? In short, if it do not satiate the greediness of man's mind?
For whatsoever that felicity was, which might be hoped for in this life, it
labored with great and manifold defect. For first, in that there was no
passage to it, but by virtue, and it had not a certain reward, and such as was
worthy of it, those complexions that were unhappily disposed by nature, were
quite excluded therefrom. And for the same cause even nobler dispositions could
not aspire to the highest pitch of virtue. Again, if any man had by a more
happy genius arrived through much difficulty to some praise of virtue, Good
Fortune, which was no less a deaf then blind Goddess, was to be entreated, that
she would either become, or remain propitious: without whose most uncertain
help none could by mere virtue maintain the state of his happiness. Finally,
though some man were so highly favored both by Virtue and Fortune, that they
conspired together to make him happy even unto envy, nevertheless he could not
be void of trepidation whilst an inevitable necessity of dying hung over his
head. Which was so far from being mitigated with the solace of the felicity
which he enjoyed, that the more happily a man lived, the more unwilling was he
to depart from his happiness: and in the greater affluence of good things, he
had the juster cause of fear and sorrow. How hard therefore was the condition
of mortality, which though advanced to so rare a state as few could wish-for,
was notwithstanding unsecure from so great sorrow and anxiety! To find an
issue of these evils and miseries, and so tend directly toward sincere
happiness, did (as we before hinted) exceed the power of man. That glory was
reserved for the bounty of the Most high God, who only by his Son discovered
that Secret of Eternity, that there was a reward worthy of virtue besides it
self.

He first by exceeding-great promises erected the desires of men to true
Happiness; and gave not only the pleasing overture of so incredible a wish, but
the undoubted pledges of the hope it self. We have the Son for an hostage of
the Father's faithfulness, the purity and holiness of whose Doctrine does
sufficiently plead for it self without Advocates and Patronage: whose innocence
of life confirms his Doctrine; whose stupendous miracles, assert not only his
Doctrine but his innocence also. Whose death as undergone for the testimony of
his Doctrine, argues his sincerity; as overcome, shows the truth of his
undoubted testimony. Whose resurrection from death sets before our eyes a
pattern of his sublime promise; whose exaltation and empire show the certitude
thereof. In a word, are the things which he performed by the Apostles, and the
admirable operations of the Holy Spirit, who without arms subdued the armed
world, and without blandishments allured so many nations to the hardship of
virtue, to be esteemed slight proofs both of his Divine Empire, and our hope?
Is it credible that any men would heretofore in this world have undergone a
huge deal of pains not only without any reward, but with apparent ruin, had
they not been emboldened with a hope of something after this life? Could even a
strong faith, whilst the memory of things was yet fresh, afford so great a
proof of it self, had there been any solid or just ground of distrust?
Wherefore the first attempt was to draw the whole world to the belief of those
things, which a few very simple men had in the beginning seen with their eyes.
So many cities and empires, so many nations and peoples, so many Isles and
utmost borders of the earth, although in other things for the most part at
variance amongst themselves, do yet agree in the belief of those things, which
the Christian Religion holds forth. How happy was mankind, which having been
before drowned in profound darkness, was suddenly environed with so great a
light! How blessed was the condition of men, to whom the way of heaven and
immortality was not only shown in a friendly manner, but levelled and prepared
for them! This is that true felicity which lies open unto every one that
seriously desires it, and cannot be taken away from a man against his will.
Neither fortune, nor the fabulous necessity of fate, nor the silly distaff of
the destinies, has any power over it. As for the right which God himself had
over it, he has resigned the same up to those, who believe his promises in
Christ, and remember the covenant, which he has made with us, whom he bought
with the precious blood of his Son. In the last place, whatsoever things did
heretofore disturb or delay the prosperity of men in this life, are removed far
away from this happiness. So great rewards are in it proposed unto virtue, that
all men have an access to the top thereof: so great helps and supports are
added, that neither an untoward disposition, nor bad education, nor dullness of
wit, nor ignorance of learning, nor weakness of sex, nor meanness of birth, nor
poverty, nor employment of life, nor any other thing, but voluntary wickedness,
can hinder a man from enjoying it. After that the Christian Religion had
drenched so many nations in heavenly cares, no longer was virtue suppliant unto
fortune, that she would not disturb her course with sad disasters, nor
interrupt her solid joys with humane terrors and lamentations. Then did she
begin to despise that blind Goddess without pride, and provoke her without
rashness, being as secure of her own safety as of victory. For God would not
suffer fortune to have greater power over virtue in this present life, then
suited with the indulgence of a kind father toward his children. And though
her threatened blows be not disappointed, yet i^ it serviceable to our glory
and the increase of our happiness, when having surmounted all difficulties we
enjoy the glad and glorious memory of our labors. In short, that very
invincible necessity of dying, which waiting on the rear of our life, did blast
its accumulated joys, afar off with terror, and near at hand with sad
destruction, has long since submitted her conquered neck to virtue and faith.
Nor is it an impeachment hereunto, that this enemy seems not as yet to have
cast away his weapons, for his chiefest blade is dulled, in that death was long
since weakened by the resurrection of Christ. O happy and more then Saturnian
age, wherein so pleasing a glance did first shine-forth to the world! It was an
easy thing for mankind in so saving a light to pass roundly on to immortality,
but I know not by what injury of vicissitude, they could not long sincerely
enjoy so great a happiness. Whether it were some malignant Spirit, or the very
world it self envyed her own fortune, or finally the counsel of almighty God,
that virtue might never want a ^^fficient combat, certain it is that the hope
of so happy a condition, together with the way thereunto, has been for many
ages involved with the greatest difficulties. For first, the very confidence of
our hope (which only is able to set us on the top of true happiness) began to
be undermined and shaken with engines well-nigh planted against it. Next, the
very Religion of Christ, which alone gave assurance of so great a hope to
mankind, was on several accounts called into question. Finally, a great
impediment lay in the way to hinder us not only from conceiving, but also
venturing on this hope. And (which would most of all move you with grief and
indignation) all these things were done by them, who professed themselves
competitors of the felicity hoped for.

For, that we may return unto what was proposed in the first place, what engine
was fitter to undermine our faith, then the difficulty of returning to life?
That life might perhaps be extended to a very great length, would though with
some difficulty be assented unto by reason, but that being once taken away it
should be restored again for ever, was, though not contrary to reason, yet
above belief. In so great a miracle, thwarting the custom of nature, mankind
could hardly believe without an example. And therefore God exposed to the view
of all a certain experiment thereof, having recalled him to life, who did not
at all exceed others as to the condition of mortal nature. This so evident a
prop of our faith is taken from us by the common opinion of Christians: if
Jesus that was raised from the dead be the very most high God, not differing in
essence from the Father. For neither did he really dye (for who would imagine
that the Supreme Power can dye? who would affirm that a person coeternal and
coessential with the Father was killed?) nor when he was dead, did he, like us,
stand in need of another help: so that returning unto life in a glorious
manner, he did by his own strength, and such a power, as was neither taken away
from him, nor laid down by him, rescue himself out of the jaws of death. Tell
me now, what is there in us like hereunto? It is not something added unto us,
but we our selves that dye; and what hope is there in our strength, being
altogether broken and quelled by death? Certainly the Ghosts or persons of the
dead do not watch an opportunity to raise themselves by their own power out of
so profound a sleep. Moreover, as if it had been a small matter to have our
faith so dangerously shaken in a thing of the greatest moment, a very provident
care was also taken, that it might not make use of some other means to erect it
self. For whereas it was the chief duty of a lively faith sincerely to believe
so sublime promises of God; the generality of Christians was made to believe,
that the main business of faith was to believe certain opinions touching the
nature of God, and other the like doctrines. Thus did the Public error wrest
and turn aside the minds of all from the true exercise of faith, to the
affectation of vain opinions. Whereby it came to pass that all disputed
concerning the nature of God, but few believed his promises, and accordingly
not many obeyed his commandments. So that with a little ado faith degenerated
into opinion, religion into Philosophy, virtue into contemplation, zeal into
contention, love into faction. Nor could it be otherwise, when once the manners
of men were slighted, and their wits only began to be improved and examined.

I come now to the second engine wherewith our faith was shaken, and which
struck at our hope through the side of our whole religion. No sect, no
religion, besides the Christian does solidly promise heaven and the stars to
them who have well deserved. The pledge of so great a promise perishes, if the
promise^ himself is called into question. But they have taken the direct way to
make it be condemned of falsehood, or burdened with a very just ground of
suspicion, who deem such doctrines fundamental thereunto, as are false and
repugnant to all reason. Who would not fall a weeping for the miseryes of the
Church, when he considers how much she has degenerated from her primitive
chastity? And in the midst of grief a just indignation sometimes breaketh-out,
to see that those ancient Bishops should in the doctrine touching God not be
ashamed violently to draw the sense of the Holy Scripture to the opinions of
the Greek (shall I say?) or Barbarous Philosophy. The ancient Church heretofore
laughed at the Gnostics, for corrupting profane Philosophy with shreds taken
out of the Christian doctrine, and prodigiously patched together. When in the
mean she her self (forsooth) making a more sober use of Philosophy, had rather
seem to have defiled the Christian Divinity, then the Learning of that age. Did
those Fathers think it so miserable a thing, to be accounted ignorant of those
arts, which were then so ardently affected by the times? But as they, who
desire to sit on two stools, fall from b^th, even so those Bishops did neither
sincerely retain the primitive simplicity of the Sacred Revelation, nor the
conjectures of profane wits. Whereupon the Doctrines of the Church were
stuffed with absurd and contradictions opinions; which, inasmuch they pull-up
by the roots the notions naturally implanted in us, and consequently reason it
self, are obtruded under the pretense of Faith.

Which might notwithstanding be endured, first if they only surpassed the
power of our mind, and did not overthrow it. For there is a wide difference
between nor perceiving the reason of a thing, and seeing the falsehood thereof.
Because the truth is oftentimes so deeply hid, that it can hardly be brought to
light; whereas falsehood can seldom lie so close, but that it may be traced
out. Wherefore I could wish that it were as easy a matter to cure ignorance,
as to convince errors of falsehood. Otherwise to what purpose does our mind
serve, if it shall on any pretense be afraid to condemn that, which implies a
contradiction? Furthermore, that desense of paradoxes under the buckler of
Faith might be endured, did men in very deed fly from the examination of
Reason, to the authority of Divine Testimony. But when the cause begins to
sink under the judgment of Reason, a sudden supply is fetched from Sacred
Revelation. When this very Revelation comes to scanning, we find it (as we
formerly hinted) to be more evidently discovered by Platonic Wits, then by the
Apostolic Writers. Again, if there be any place in the Holy Oracles, which may
seem to prove it, it is so obscure, that we must again return to those flying
and aerie contemplations of man's brain, to have some certainty concerning the
ambiguous sense thereof. In framing which consequences, if the cause begin
again to totter, a ridiculous return is also made again to the belief of the
Heavenly Revelation, as to a known starting-hole. As if it had been long since
granted, that this were a Doctrine delivered by God, and not the very Doctrine
it self were then most called into question. By this means whilst Uncertain
Reason fetches unseasonable help from Suspected Revelation, and Suspected
Revelation from Uncertain Reason, neither of them is found to have any
stability. Last of all, there are in the Scriptures so many and so clear
testimonies of the contrary opinion, that neither can those paradoxes consist
with the safety of them, nor the authority of Holy writ remain safe, if they be
called into question. And therefore no Christian dares to make a scruple
concerning either the certainty or sense of those testimonies: only it is urged
that they are maimed and defective, and consequently have need of something
added to them from abroad for the full knowledge of Divine things. And indeed
let us herein grant their request, so that they abuse not this liberty of
adding, to undermine those things which they promised to supply. But what if
they produce such additions, as quite overthrow the certainty and reason of
those things, to which they are added? This certainly is not to be endured,
inasmuch as they had promised to supply our testimonies, and not to abolish
them.

But they fetch those supplements out of the Sacred Oracles, by whose rule they
would have their other testimonies tried. Truly we deny not that the Scripture
is the most faithful interpreter of it self. But first we must consider, with
what fidelity they draw that from some places of the Scripture, which is
repugnant to the open sense thereof elsewhere. Next we must demand of them,
with what forehead they require that those places, concerning whose meaning (by
reason of the open evidence) they do in a manner agree with the Adversaryes,
should be explained by others, concerning whose exposition there is the
greatest controversy. What perverse and preposterous order of knowledge is
that, to illustrate the light by darkness? As if this were the way to perceive
the most known things, even to be blind in such as are unknown. How great
support therefore in the Divine Oracles those opinions have, which are
otherwise repugnant unto reason, and how justly they implore the help of Faith
is evident from those things which we have discoursed. But to what purpose is
all this, if notwithstanding the greatest part of men are persuaded, that it
very much concerns the Christian Religion, that so incredible things be
believed? Neither is this the only point, wherein the truth of so Divine Faith
is traduced. What should I here mention that sink of most filthy errors,
wherewith the most pure doctrine of the Gospel has been over-flowed? There was
heretofore none so profane an opinion, none so silly a dotage, none so
ridiculous a superstition, which (by the great injustice of men) did not only
find place therein, but also esteem. I omit the portentous opinions touching
Transubstantiation, touching the infinite Power of the Priests and the Pope,
and touching the worship of Images; I omit the fables fetched out of the
Academy, touching Limbus, and Purgatory; I omit so many bug-bear-apparitions,
so many marts of absolutions, and sales of sins, so many strange rites and
foreign ceremonies; and sundry other things, which either the Greek also, or the
Latin Church only has not blushed so long to propose for the main pillars of
the Faith. For whatsoever, either abhorrent from all reason, or repugnant to
the Holy Scripture, has for so many ages been obtruded on the Generality of
Christians, all that has redounded to the disgrace of our Religion and Faith,
since neither could the inbred light of our mind be extinguished by any means,
nor the authority of the Scripture be overthrown as long as our Faith remained
safe. But let that pass for the deplorable calamity of the world fallen in
barbarism; now that the light of a happier age is risen, and the world
begins to come out of that thick darkness, it is a great indignity that
being now awakened and stirring it should again be pothered in the same or a
worse fogge. For whereunto tends the unavoidable condition of Divine
Destination? whereunto, the most unjust necessity of Fate, far more silly and
barbarous then the dreams of the Ancients? which does not prescribe such a law
of life as is equal and common unto all, but a fixed decree concerning the
inmutable state of every particular man; which finally thinks this only
worthy of immense rewards, or direful torments, that men, though they be never
so willing, are not able to resist the will of God. Whereunto, I say, tends
so cruel and sinister an opinion, but to enwrap in fable darkeness the reason
both of Gods Empire, and Man's Obedience? What also means that peculiar
opinion of some touching the pravity of good works? or that other more common
opinion touching our propriety and possession of another holiness? Besides the
darkning of our mind, are we not averted from the study of true piety by the
strange mixture of repugnant things? if when we do never so well we are
frighted with the conscience of our good deeds, and when we live never so ill
we have the confidence of another merit? What should I commemorate the price
properly paid for our free impunity? and that it is enjoined us by the law of a
most equal severity to do impossibilities? and that the will, that is, the
freedom of man, is servile? All these opinions can no more be reconciled with
a sincere endeavor to live piously, then with themselves. For who would, with
the loss of those things that are most dear to him, seek to attain such a
reward, as he thinks to be already purchased at another cost, and without
any pains of his? who would press toward a place through rough and craggy
ways, when in the mean time he is persuaded not only that he cannot get
thither, but also cannot so much as will to go? I know I have touched those
points of the Reformed Doctrine (as they call it) which like the ulcers of a
most delicate part cannot be handled without an exquisite sense of pain.
Wherefore I will add no more; for neither can those things be comprehended in a
compendium of words, whose number cannot easily be reckoned up in the mind.
Besides, I know right well that some one, having read those few words, will
fly-out, and chase, as if he were pricked on a sudden: although I endeavor so
to moderate my style, that none may justly take offense. For the Christian
world sleeps quietly in his sins, being bolstered up with those opinions; so
that if any one attempt to draw away the pillow from his delicate neck, the
inflamed faction of Divines falls presently a raging worse then a tiger robbed
of her whelps, and crying-out that Faith and Religion lie at stake; when in the
mean time only the private credit of certain men, or the public allurement of
sinning is brought into danger. They impute this zeal to the honor and glory
of God and Christ; as if God and Christ liked such Doctrines, as utterly root
out of the minds of men the true worship and observance of his Divine Majesty,
consisting in Obedience. Every one thinks that he ought to endeavor
according to his ability, that no low opinion creep in concerning the Essence,
Person, Benefit, and in a word, the Glory of God and Christ. Nor do I therein
blame them. But tell me, good Sir, why do you give fair titles to foul vices?
Is it your desire truly and magnificently to assert the glory of God? then use
all disigence that the light of your virtues may shine before all men. Which
that you may the more readily perform, discard all portentous opinions, that
may hinder you in the course of true piety. Unless you use such industry about
Divine Things, you must of necessity be very ignorant of them. For it is a most
vain hope of yours, to think to win the favor of God and Christ by flattery,
whereas it is to be acquired only by obedience. Christ will scorn blandishmen^s
and titles, which have been hitherto a cloak for the disobedience of his
commandments. A saving light shined-forth to the world: but men rather loved
darkness, because they are enamoured on their pleasing Wickedness. What wonder
therefore is it, that doctrines so absurd, so contradictious, so distant and
abhorrent from all reason have been obtruded on their heedless minds? All
those tenets crept on them in the dismal time of night and darkness, whilst
men buried in the sweet sleep of their sins, observe not the blind and secret
snares laid for them. But above all, as we formerly hinted, the credit of the
Christian Religion was impeached, when once men began to be persuaded, that it
could not stand without such rotten and weak props. Which are justly excepted
against, not only for suspicion of most evident falsehood, but also because they
pull the stock of virtue out of the hearts of men by the very roots, whereas
our mind, though she turn her self every way, is never able to condemn virtue,
as also other common notions. Thus our Religion being called into question by
means of so many inextricable ways of error, how small a number is there even
of Christians (that I may not speak of others) that has been able to preserve
the confidence of their hope untouched and unstained amidst so many and so
grievous suspicions?

Hence at length it came to pass, according to our third proposal, that after
our faith and hope, which only was able to keep us in the obedience of Christ
had been hindered, the very obedience it self was also hindered, and
consequently the ready way to the felicity hoped-for. For all kinds of crimes
and vices brake into the Church in great throngs. The whole body of the Church
is full of so many corruptions in manners, so many diseases and ulcers, that it
is a tedious work to prosecute every one in particular. Innumerable errors
produced infinite abuses. Wherefore, omitting the rest, which reign everywhere
to the infamy of Religion, I will commemorate but twain, whereof not only the
impurity was permitted, but the impiety also was enjoined. For first of all,
the worship of the Supreme Power being turned aside from a spiritual and
heavenly manner, to ugly rites and ceremonies, a sad and shameful kind of
Idolatry was introduced. And as if there were a danger, lest men, if not
commanded thereunto, should more timerously trample under foot the express
commandments of God, by the public sanctions and decrees of the Church it was
almost in very terms enjoined, that the first and chiefest precept of God
should be violated, and the second be expunged out of the number of the other
ten.

Furthermore, that New and Royal Law of Christ, which amongst others has the
pre-eminence, not only as the complement and top of perfection, but as the
ordinary badge of his peculiar people, the Law, I say, of Love was publicly
abrogated by the vilest customs and institutions. I omit other things, which
are practiced to the prejudice thereof, not by clandestine infirmity, or
private attempt, but by public Advice. That one thing is sufficient, which
has for many ages, to the shameful discredit of the Churches of Christ, been a
received practice; namely that those men, who have entrusted themselves their
hopes and fortunes to Jesus of Nazareth, acknowledged to be the Christ of God,
and who are reckoned in his family, and listed in his service, and whom none
(who thinks not himself exempted from the Laws of Christ) may so much as
hate, should notwithstanding on no other ground, then because they dissent in
something, be by their fellow servants and soldiers not only abused with most
bitter hatred, disgraces, and injuries, but also killed with exquisite
tortures, and with cruel and horrid kinds of punishment, This is not a spot of
private cruelty: so dire and detestable acts as these are perpetrated in the
name of the Church. For many ages since, amongst the people of Christ, a
profane and cruel faction has prevailed, which making havoc of the Church of
Christ with fire and sword, does notwithstanding arrogate ^o her self the name
of the Church, excluding others from the participation thereof. This is she,
which has by the slaughter and wounds of the innocent most infamously polluted
her self with blood; this is she, which has by so many doleful fires and
dismal flames, branded her self with this indeleble mark, with these prints, to
her everlasting infamy; this is she, who quaking and sliding no less in the
dirt of vices, then in the blood of the innocent, is by the Ghosts of the
oppressed drawn to the tribunal of the sovereign Judge; In fine, this is the
faction, which imposed such a Prince on the Commonwealth and the Church, whose
power lately resting on the lap of Europe, made the Christian world groan, and
now puts it in a fright lest it should rest upon 't the second time. For the
most merciful God taking pity on the hardship wherewith we were oppressed, did
cast this yoke from off our necks. And now the darkness of base servitude being
dispelled, a most pleasant light of liberty shined-forth, when on the sudden
tempestuous clouds arising threaten a more dismal night then the former. What
is it, but our ingratitude, that usually causes God to repent of his benefits?
Before the rising of the light, he sent the pleasant glimmering of the morning:
but we contenting our selves with the twilight, have shut our eyes against the
very beams of the Sun, that we might with more modesty sin in the dark. He
began to restore liberty, but we rather chose servitude. For the same
domination that others exercised over us, have we suffered to be exercised over
the weaker sort, to the end it might plainly appear that we were not so much
displeased with our servitude, as with our master. Why therefore should we
accuse God, for thrusting us again into most horrid darkness, when we so basely
do despise the light? Why should we complain, that we are again enslaved to the
Pope, when we by a shameful kind of vassalage perform homage to ignobler
Masters? If we list to become servants, there is some choice in taking a more
honorable master. What then? shall we invite all to take up the yoke again
which they had heretofore thrown off their necks? At no hand. For though the
new servitude be a grief and shame to us, yet do we justly congratulate the
expulsion of Idolatry together with the old Tyranny. We also rejoice that in
many other things the feature of the Church is restored to her. But above all
we acknowledge it for a special gift of God, that the due authority and
reverence of the Holy Scripture is vindicated. So that the foundations of a
very excellent hope are already laid; it remains, that as we have expelled
Idolatry, so we restore charity, which cannot be done but by the banishment not
only of cruelty, but also of all tyranny and iniquity. And let us use the
authority and guidance of the Holy Scripture, which we have asserted, to chase
away the relics of darkness, which have hitherto no less weakened the hope of
salvation, then disfigured the faith and beauty of our Religion. Why do we
linger any longer? why do w^ expect the sharper goads of God to prick us
forward? Certainly in this juncture of time, there is something greater then
the mouth of man that thunders out. We are not now admonished of our duty by a
humane voice, but by the dreadful rebuke of the Divine Judgments. God applies
a sad but wholesome remedy to our sickness. Too much felicity had corrupted us,
and we had openly loosed the reins to our lusts amidst the blandishments of
prosperity. Such of us as have not been carried away with the force of sin or
improbity to a cruel hatred of austere truth, have yet by some love or fear of
earthly things, been detained in their pleasing errors with soft and gentle
fetters. The impiety of the former required punishment, the weakness of the
latter craved help. And therefore Providence dispenses unto both his proper
remedy. Such minds as are overwhelmed with vices, pay for their hatred and
contempt of the truth, by being again involved in darkness. But such hearts as
are honest, yet bound with a teather of earthly things, are by the Divine
Goodness set at liberty. Certainly it had been better in the midst of
prosperity to have embraced the offer of truth. But the most merciful God did
herein also take care for honest hearts, in that he removed the allurements and
encumbrances, wherewith they were kept from the knowledge of truth. Wherefore
God does now openly in the view of the world make trial, with what sincerity
every one of us has departed from the society of Antichrist. If either the
conspiracy of faction, or love of parties, or any other humane consideration
whatsoever has hitherto detained any in the warfare of Christ, they may retire
and betake themselves thither, where there is an offer of greater present
advantage. But ye that have trusted the Captain of your faith with the pay of
your deferred reward, be not discouraged in so great a storm of adverse
fortune. This is the means whereby God exercises and tries them that are his.
Virtue and truth have in all ages been educated with these hardships, and grown
to maturity by these trials. With these evils Christ himself and the Apostles,
as also the Martyrs and Confessors of the Primitive Church have conflicted.
Finally, with these arms the world always rages against good men; by these
mines the Tyranny of Antichrist has now many ages since crept-in; with such
practices as these, a great part of those Fathers, whom ye Idolize, did
drive-on furiously; by these arts were those Councels, which ye as yet adore,
upheld and maintained, whilst in Synods controversies were decided with
violent factions, and authority, and the decrees of Synods ratified by Imperial
power, with fines, disgraces, banishments, and at length with blood it self and
extreme punishments. God would have you taste the equity and nature of such
arts, to the end ye might understand, what ye ought to judge of that authority
which grew and was established by the like means and practices. Wherefore
rejecting those profane and justly-suspected prejudices of ages and
autorities, implore the only aid of the Sacred Oracles, and under their
patronage seek both the way of finding-out the truth, and of defending it being
found. Only bring sincere minds, and such as are desirous of the truth; and
since the whole truth may in a manner cost you no more charge and damage, then
hitherto a portion of it did, be bold to receive it with both your arms,
whilst it is freely offered to you, and without danger. By this means it will
come to pass, that your hope and faith b^ing underset with better props, will
more readily erect it self to the true worship and obedience of God, and abide
more constantly in the same. For facilitating of which work, ye and all the
Church are very much beholding to Socinus, a man ennobled by his parentage,
virtue, and the monuments of his wit; and who, when the heat of envy shall
evaporate together with the ignorance of the age, will be far more ennobled
amongst Posterity. The praises of which man it is better to passover in
silence, then meanly to prosecute: Especially because they are in some measure
attested and blazoned by his Life, perfixed before this Discourse; but
abundantly by the issue of his sublime wit, and the genius of his writings. He
was the man that stretched the sinnews of his most sharp judgment, to remove
from the Church of Christ whatsoever he deemed prejudicial either to the Glory
of God, or to the dignity of Religion, or finally to the sincereness of piety.
So that the Reader shall in his writings find, first most of those Engines
taken away, wherewith the hope of that happiness to which we aspire, was
together with the Honor of Almighty God, undermined. He shall find the dignity
of our whole Religion maintained, and its reputation vindicated and asserted
from those absurd monstrous opinions, which have a long time caused it most
injuriously to be traduced among them that are without. Finally he shall find
all the impediments taken away, wherewith men were let not only from
hoping-for, but also entering on the inheritance of the Heavenly Patrimony, and
which they being weary of the piety enjoined, had procured to themselves. For
not only the study of universal sanctity was extinguished with fawning
pernicious opinions, but also license given to manifest offenses against the
Law of God, or the desire of them enflamed, or also the necessity of them
imposed. These barricadoes being removed, he shall find the way to the utmost
happiness of the largest wish, fitted and prepared by the incredible bounty of
God. Which happiness for many thousand years before the coming of Christ
mankind had still desired, but was still ignorant thereof: which the very
Observers of the Mosaic Law could only sometimes sent-out by a very slender
ghess, but never openly detect: and which finally having been discovered by
Christ and the Apostles, but shortly after covered with the thorns of errors
springing-up, and hidden with a dismal vail of darkness, is now again detected
and restored by the mercy of God, who has cut down the thorny brake of fables,
and caused the light of the truth to arise. For the assenting unto which truth
so bright and shining, the whole Christian world had need only to behold it
once without prejudice: but ere it will be brought thereunto, it must (unless I
be mistaken in the temper of the present age) be rouzed up with the blood of
the innocent, and with new Martyrdomes.

FINIS.
AN ELOGY Of the Writings of SOCINUS Out of BODECHERUS.
THe truth is to be acknowledged everywhere. For neither does she receive her
value from any person, but give it to him. Nor can we in this place forbear to
give this testimony unto Socinus, where he agrees with the Orthodox: let the
Christian world hear, if it please. He disputes with the thrust; grants to
the adversary whatsoever he may without prejudice to the truth, and his cause;
where the adversary is to be pressed, there he makes a stand, and argues the
conscience; contendeth rather with Scriptures then with suppositions; and with
reasons, not with prejudices, as the School of Calvin is for the most part wont
to do; he sheltereth not himself amidst certain nice captions; he seeks not
starting-holes, but hits the very throat of the cause* ^ In him Atheists, Jews,
Gentiles, Papists, find matter of employment, otherwise then in the writings of
the Calvinists.

A CATALOGUE OF THE WORKS OF SOCINUS.
AN Explication of the former part of the first Chapter of John.

Touching the state of the first man before the fall, a Disputation against
Franciscus Puccius.

Touching the Savior, a disputation against Jacobus Covetus.

Touching the Invocation of Christ, a Disputation against Franciscus Davidis.

Touching the Adoration of Christ, a Disputation against Chrstianus Franken,
together with the Fragments of a larger Answer which Socinus did provide
against Franciscus Davidis.

Touching the Existence of the onely-begotten Son of God, a Disputation against
Erasmus Joannis.

Touching the Nature or Essence of Jesus Christ the Son of God, and also
touching the Expiation of sins by him, a Disputation against Andreas Volanus.

Touching the Divinity of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, an Answer to Wuiekus.

Animadversions on the Assertions of the Posnanian College touching the
Trinune God, against the new Samosatenians.

A Defense of those Animadversions, against Gabriel Eutropius.

An Answer to a book of Jacobus Palaeologus, entitled, A Defense of the true
Opinion concerning the Civil Magistrate.

Sacred Lectures, wherein the authority of the Holy Scriptures, especially of
the New Covenant is asserted.

Theological Prelections.

An Explication of the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans.

A Defense of that Explication.

An Exposition of Christ's Sermon in the fifth, sixth, and seventh of Matthew.

Touching the errors of the Gospellers, or Calvinists.

Touching Justification.

The Fragments of two writings touching the Nature of Christ and the Trinity.

Epistles written to sundry friends.

Epistles written to Andreas Dudidithius.

Sophistical Elenchs.

A brief Discourse touching the Cause of Faith.

Touching the Lord's Supper.

Touching Water Baptism, whether a Christian may be without it.

Touching the Church.

An Institution of Christian Religion.

Certain brief Treatises touching diverse subjects pertaining to the Christian
Religion.

FINIS.
printer's or publisher's device In Paul's Church Yard At The

Richard




