A Public PLEA, Opposed to A PRIVATE PROPOSAL, OR, Eight necessary QUERIES
Presented to the Parliament and Armies consideration, in this morning of
Freedom, after a short, but a sharp night of Tyranny and oppression.

By one who hates both Treason and Traitors.

May 28.th. LONDON: Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley.
1659. May 28

A PUBLIC PLEA, Opposed to A Private PROPOSAL. Or, Eight necessary Queries,
etc.
1. WHether it be not a needful Testimony of thankfulness to God, who has
wrought so happy a change in the Commonwealth, and dissolved a new syranny
(become hereditary) so unexpectedly, so speedily, so easily, and without
bloodshed, that the Parliament appointed a solemn Thanksgiving for such a
signal mercy received, both in behalf of the whole people, delivered from so
manifest a slavery against all our fundamental Laws, and also in reference to
themselves, whom God has so highly honored as once more to make them his
chosen instruments, and to put into their hands so great an opportunity to make
this Nation, with the Dominions thereof, a happy, free, and flourishing
Commonwealth?

2. Whether they be not obliged more then ever any other preceding Parliaments
were, to choose and bring into all their Councels, Committees and Offices
(Military and Civil) men of unbiast judgments, and unblameable conversations,
who have not acted arbitrarily under the usurped power of a single person in
despire of Parliaments. And whether it be not proper for this present
Parliament, who changed the Government from a Kingly to a Commonwealth, to
introduce speedily into their steads (who have so shamefully forsaken the Good
Old Cause only) such as would not act in the Councels of Oliver, nor in the
Army, or were otherwise for their fidelity outed of their Commands, nay, most
arbitrarily casheered, imprisoned, banished, and oppressed in their persons and
estates? until such be rewarded and restored (in all respects) who will not
suspect the present power in all their other enterprises, how spacious soever?

3. Whether therefore the present Representative ought not to lay aside in
themselves, and zealously to oppose in any of their Members all perpetuation of
power, ambitious self-seeking designs (how cunningly soever covered, or
contrived) and to have ever in their minds that precept of our Savior given
expressly to such as should be Christian Magistrates in future ages, whereby he
plainly pleads against all Courtly pride and pomp in Christian Governments, as
Heathenish and unholy, forbidding them to be like the Kings of the Gentiles,
exercising Lordship over the people; to be called Benefactors, Protectors, or
by any other such like proud, vainglorious titles? ye shall not be so, but he
that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as
he that does serve, Luke 22. whereby is signified the moderation which ought to
be in Christian Governors, looking more at their burden, and the discharging of
the trust which they have undertaken, then any outward Honors or Commands over
others, which only puff up Aspirers, transforming them into Parasites and
Apostates, Courtiers and Canaanites on the Good Old Cause?

4. And since it has pleased Almighty God of his mercy so highly to honor our
Army (at least the honest Officers and Soldiers in it) as to touch them with a
Remorse for their failings, and backslidings from that Good Old Cause, against
all Monarchy, Tyranny, or usurpation upon spiritual or civil Liberties, to
which God by his continual prospering them, and they by their frequent Vows,
Remonstrances, and Declarations have so often born witness, and now, also has
given them both grace to confess openly, and power to make amends for what
they have through infirmity done amiss, by restoring the Parliament to their
Supreme Authority, from whence they were most audaciously, and lawlesly
expelled; whether it would not be yet their Christian duty, and worthy of so
good beginnings, to examine seriously their own hearts between God and
themselves, how they can hope to make their confession of their backsliding
appear real, sincere, or sufficient in the sight of God or man, so long as they
do not only not confess withal, and lay open the enormous faults and
misdoings, but also extol and magnify the unhappy memory of their Grand
backslider, who either seduced, or compelled them to those errors and sins for
which they now profess to be so truly penitent?

5. Whether any man who truly hates his sin, can love or praise the memory of
him who was not only the Associate, but the Author thereof? especially
considering, that what ever he did worthy of praise, he did before the time of
his breach of faith to his Superiors, and whilst he stood fast and fixed to the
Good Old Cause, wherein God prospered him; he never since having done any thing
from the time of his aspiring to Monarchy against his faith and manifest
judgment, but lived to his own sorrow and perpetual disquiet, day and night;
nay, which is worse, to the sorrow, astonishment, and scandal of all good men,
(who little expected such things from him) and dying disappointed of his utmost
designs, left the State Bankrout of Treasure, Honor or Interest, by
unprofitable Wars without advice of Parliament, and the Commonwealth
impoverished by decay of Trade; and lastly, the Army deprived of many faithful
Officers (yet too honest (for ought we find) to be taken in) reduced to those
Arrears which they themselves complain of in their late Representation, such as
they never felt, nor are like to feel under the liberal pay of a free
Commonwealth, if God in mercy, and men in Justice vouchsafe to make us such?

6. Whether it were not an Act of prudence in the Parliament, becoming true
Statesmen, to look back upon the Records and Examples of former ages, what has
been done heretosore by Nations or Commonwealths delivered from Tytanny, to
their Tyrants living or dead, to their Memory, Posterity, and Relations; to the
Tarquins, to Manlius Capitolinus in Rome, only for affecting Monarchy, though
before he had saved the Capitol and their Gods from the Gauls. What turned
Collatinus further off his Consulship into banishment? fell it not thus forth
in the free State of Florence, with Cosmus the first founder of Tuscan Tyranny?
As the Commonwealth of Greece highly honored such as suffered for their
Country, so did she not (on the contrary) not only deprive such of all place
and power, but also deeply punish all Tyrants and Traitors to the Supreme power
of our Sovereign Lords the people? did they not thus serve Catiline and his
Crew of deceitful Senators? thus Millain served the Swissers: thus the
Hollanders, in the infancy of the Belgic freedom, served their Parasites and
Apostates, striving to strangle their Liberties by conspiracies and complots.
How ^ared Themistocles, Miltiades, Cumillus Coriolanus, etc. for their
over-ingrossing of power? what became of others, whose statues were tumbled
down, and whose bones and dust was tossed into Tyber? and marked with other
ignominies?

7. To do by their example in such a manner, is it not a duty incumbent upon us
(rather then to reward their infamy with our own reproach in their remainders)
so as no ambitious Hireling hereafter may presume upon the like Apostasy, by
hoping that either himself shall escape punishment dead or living, or that his
posterity at last shall go away with good rewards for his Treason and
Treachery, which to this man and his family has for ever blotted out the
memory of his former merits?

8. Lastly, is it not a happy presage of a public spirit, where a people are
zealous and jealous in pursuance of their public Liberties, in not permitting
any such growth of power as may probably or possibly supplant it? And seeing
the least error or male administration of Government, is, or ought not to be
easily forgiven, how stands it us upon for the future to take Tyranny by the
foretop; to consider our Counselors elected, and our good old Martial Officers
rejected? Have not the late practices of notable and abominable memory, taught
us to trace Tyranny forth of one form into another? in this sense ought we not
to eye substances before shadows, lest swerving from the Rules of a free State,
or through ignorance of the principles thereof, we appear unarmed against the
Rapes of old, and up-start Aspirers, or Monsters of mankind, coveting to
consume their Country?

FINIS.

