To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
LONDON in Common Council Assembled; The Humble Petition and Address of the
Seamen, and Watermen, in and about the said City of LONDON.
SHOWS,
THat they cannot without much grief of heart, and consternation of spirit,
consider and bewail the Extraordinary decay of Merchandise, Trade, Religion,
Justice, Piety, and in undation of all sorts of Oppressions Miseries, Rapines
Wars Tumults, Sects, Heresies Blasphemies, Alterations of Government and
destructive Confusions, which have over whelmed our formerly flourishing and
renowned Nations, and this famous City ever since the notorious violations, and
subversions of our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Properties Governments and
Parliaments, by the treachery, and armed violence of ambitious, treacherous
Mercenaries of inconsiderable Fortunes and corrupt Principles usurping a more
arbitrary dominion over Our Lives, Persons, Estates, and Privileges, than the
worst of Our Kingly Governors whose desperate Counsels Practices and
Innovations have made Us the scorn, derision of all the World and plunged Our
Church State Nations, and this famous City, into the very Gulf of inevitable
Ruin; unless speedily and timely prevented by your prudent, unanimous Counsels,
and standing up in the G^p in this day of Our public Calamity, by improving
your power and interest to accomplish these just Desires of Your Petitioners,
and many Thousands of these Nations, which we humbly conceive to be the only
visible means (through Gods blessing on them) to obviate our Dangers, compose
Our Divisions and restore Our pristine Peace, Unity, Trade, Prosperity, and
make Us once more a praise amongst the Kingdoms, Churches, and Nations, whom
the Lord has signally blessed with glorious Deliverances, and transcendent
Mercies.

We shall therefore humbly importune this Honorable Assembly (to whom We can
make Our Addresses) to endeavor,

I. That a Free and Legal Parliament, may with all convenient speed be convened
to sit within the City of London, without any forcible Interruption or
Molestation, to Settle the Government, Redress the Grievances, Restore the
Peace, Merchandise, Trade, and Navigation of this Nation. II. That the Militia
of the City may be presently raised, and put into the hands of such Persons,
whose Principles and Actions have evidenced them to be Well-affected to
Government, Magistracy, Ministry, Laws, Liberties, the Rights and Privileges
of Parliament, and Reformed Religion here Established. That the Guards of the
City may be put into their Hands, and all Obtruded Guards, disturbing the
Peace, obstructing the Trade of, and Threatening Danger to the City, removed.
III. That all such Officers and Soldiers of the Army in and about the City and
elsewhere, who shall obey your Commands, and contribute their Assistance for
the Calling, and Safe-Sitting, of a FREE PARLIAMENT, may be assured and
speedily paid their Arrears; and those, who shall oppose the same, and
Settlement of the Nation, and City, left to public Justice for the Murders
lately Committed, and other Misdemeanors. IV. That the Nobility, and Gentry of
Quality, in and about the City, may be Invited to contribute their Counsels and
assistance for effecting the Premises.
In the prosecution whereof, and Our former Oaths, Protestation* Vow and
Covenant' We shall with Our Estates, Lives and last drop of Our Bloods*
constantly and unanimously assist Your Honors, and all others adhering to You,
to promote and accomplish the Promises and what else Your Wisdom shall think
fit to conduce to the Restitution of the Public Peace, Trade and Welfare of
this City, and Our Three Distracted Nations.

In Witness whereof We hereunto subscribe Our Hands and Hearts.

