A more Exact RELATION OF The Siege laid to the Town of LEICESTER: How it was
maintained, and how lost, and what Quarter was given by the Kings Forces.

Delivered in to the Honorable House of Commons by Sir Robert Pie Governor of
the said Town, and Major James Ennis, June 10. 1645.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by John Field for Laurence Chapman, 1645.

An Exact Relation of the Siege laid to the Town of Leicester.
Upon Tuesday being the 28. of May last past, Major Ennis intended to march to
Nottingham (being then quartered at Humberston a mile from Leicester) with the
Troops then under his command, and so to the Scottish Army, and had drawn his
Troops all to a Rendezvous for this end: In the mean time there came to him an
Express from the Committee of Leicester, signifying that the enemy with a
considerable strength of Horse, had approached their Town of Leicester, and
that they had probable Intelligence, that they intended to reduce that Town to
their obedience, intimating their great necessity for want of horse, and
earnestly desiring the assistance of Major Ennis with his Troops, which he
declined at first, by reason he was upon his march to Nottingham; but after he
had marched a mile from his Quarters, another Messenger did come to him in all
have, desiring his aid, and entreating not to desert them in such an exigence,
declaring publicly before both Officers and Soldiers, that there was quarters
provided in the Innes of the Town for the several Troops, and all
accomodations fitting for horse and men; Whereupon Major Ennis, did draw back
his Troops toward Leicester, and being requested by a Letter from Sir Robert
Pie (written by the advice of the Committee) to join with, and assist the horse
properly belonging to this Garrison under the Command of Captain Babington, who
was then almost engaged with the enemy before the Town, but the enemy having
drawn up above 2000. horse close to the walls, Major Ennis (though with very
great danger in his passage) marched into the Town, and drew off the Troops
belonging to the garrison, after some skirmish wherein some prisoners were
taken, and two killed.

Upon Wednesday the 29. about eight in the morning, the whole body of the
enemies horse drew up before the Town, and surrounded it, and with several
parties of horse were trying all places of advantage for making their
approaches, and considering the confusion and danger like to ensue in waiting
for Orders from the Committee, it was resolved that the chief Command should be
entrusted to one; whereupon the Government of the Town was committed to Sir
Robert Pie, and immediately he taking the same into his care, gave Order to
Major Ennis to sally out with all the horse in Town, which he accordingly did,
and beat all the enemies parties close to their bodies, and hindered them from
making any batteries that day, or any nearer approaches, and afterward drew
his horse near the walls, waiting opportunities of the enemy: In the afternoon
Major Ennis commanded a party to engage some to the enemies horse, under the
command of Lieutenant Davis, who charged the enemy, and caused them retire to
Belgrave Bridge, in the Charge we had several wounded, and two of Major Ennis
Troop were run through with Pikes.

Upon Thursday the 30. The enemies whole Infantry appeared before the Town, and
dividing themselves in three several bodies, they approached the Town at the
South bridge, and St. Sondayes bridge, they were quiet all that day, only some
small skirmishing with horse; toward night they began to work diligently, and
before morning they had a fair battery raised before the South Bridge, and
their Cannon planted: Howbeit we caused the Soldiers give fire upon that place
where they were digging, both with Musket and Canon (it being within Musket
shot of the walls) to hinder their working: At St. Sondayes Bridge the enemy
did lodge themselves in the houses adjacent to the Bridge, and were beginning
to work, which being perceived, twenty of the Troopers under command of Major
Ennis sallied over the Bridge on foot, and with Carbines beat the enemy from
the houses, and burned them down to the ground.

Upon Friday their Batteries being ready, the Enemy shot some Canon and
immediately summoned the Town by a Trumpeter, but the summons being directed to
the Officers, Soldiers and Townsmen of Leicester, it was thought convenient by
the Committees, that the Common Counsel of the Town should be conveened, and
an Answer directed to the Prince, who did sign the Summons; but they being
slow in their appearing to give advise either herein, or assistance at the
walls; Prince Rupert desired again a speedy Answer, and the immediate return of
his Trumpeter: But the Committee and Townsmen being divided, there could no
Answer be made at that time, but a Trumpeter was sent from the Committee with a
Paper, bearing Superscription to the Commander in Chief, with all, desiring a
time for their Answer, and a desisting from any further working: But Prince
Rupert disdaining to receive a Paper with such a Superscription, caused play
very hot upon the Town with Canon and Musket, and suddenly with his great
Canon made a breach in the Newark-wall, which quarter of the Town was assigned
to Major Ennis to defend; but a Counter Line parallel to the stone Wall, was
raised, and with admirable haste was perfected, and to the speedy effectuating
thereof, they caused their Troopers alight from their horses, and dig and work
whilst the Canon was hottest playing upon them; about ten of the clock at
night, all their Canon were shot off at once, which was their sign to storm
upon all Quarters; they did draw the most of their strength to the breach which
they had made in Newark wall; and not thinking of any Work made within that
Breach, they with confidence entered, and beat our Musketeers from the loupholes
of the stone wall: Major Ennis perceiving the Enemy to have entered the Breach,
drew his Horse down toward them, and caused some troopers serve with carbines
on foot, and with the rest of his Horse upon the footgang of the Line, beat the
Enemy back with loss. The Enemy attempted again, and entered the Breach, and
all the Musketeers there run away basely; so that Major Ennis was forced to
maintain that Breach with his Horse, and some he caused quit their Horse and
serve on foot, and with admirable resolution repulsed the Enemy five several
storms, and caused them at last draw quite off; and did conceive no
probability in entering there, for there was a piece of our best Canon drawn
thither, and load with Case-shot, did wonderful execution upon the Enemy; yea,
by their own Relation, there was killed and made unserviceable, near three
hundred men, besides several Officers of Eminency, such as Colonel St. John's,
his Lieutenant Colonel, Major Bullington and others. It is worthy of Relation,
That when our Canoneer at the Breach was killed, a Dutchman under Major Ennis
Command, quit his Horse and discharged the duty of a Canoneer faithfully (being
well experienced therein) and did very good service till he was thrust through
the body with a Pike: Whilst Major Ennis was engaged in this hot dispute, the
Enemy had entered the Town at the other Posts; namely at Belgrave, and were
suffered to scale the Line with three Ladders at St. Margarets, without
discharging a Musket, and thereafter to let down one of the Bridges, which gave
way to all the rest to enter: Sir Robert Pie thinking to repulse the Enemy at
that Bridge, with much courage Marched toward them with some Horse, and most
gallantly caused many of them run, but being much overpowered with multitudes,
was at length taken Prisoner.

Major Ennis having repulsed the Enemy thus from the Breach, and conceiving
that place then tenable with a fewer number, went with intention to view the
rest of the Posts in Town, and left that well beset, under the charge of his
own Lieutenant, and one Captain Hacker, and with the rest of his Horse,
encountered the Enemies Horse at the South gate, where he beat them back to
their foot and Canon, which were advanced as far as the Market place, and
afterward retired to the Newark, which he maintained till he had fair Quarters
granted to him and his Soldiers, which the Enemy performed, but Plundered them
of all they had.

All the Reward we had of the Townsmen for our service in their defense, was,
that after the Town was possessed by the Enemy, and we in their power, they
railed against us, and by incensing the Enemy, endeavored to stir them up to
use us hardly, saying, if it had not been for Sir Robert Pie, and Major Ennis,
with the Scotch men, there had been no blood shed, the Town had been peaceably
Surrendered and not Plundered.

All that we could inform our selves of the Enemies designs, was, that they
had once fully resolved to go Northward, to rescue Chester, march into
Lancashire, raise the Siege of Carlisle, and send an Army into Scotland: But
being prevented, they altered their designs, and we heard His Majesty was
resolved, though it should cost him never so dear, that he would raise the
siege of Oxford; the strength of the Enemy so far as we could learn, was not
ten thousand Horse and Foot, whereof many ill Armed, especially their Horse.

FINIS.

