TEH SPEECH OF Sr George Pudsey Knight. At the Time of his being Sworn RECORDER OF
THE City of Oxford IN The Council Chamger of the same City, on Tuesday the
Eighth day of January 1683/4; where they agreed to the Sealing the Instrument
sent by his Majesty.

Ordered by Act of Council, that Sir GEORGE Pup by Knight, be desired to Print
his Speech.

BAKER.

DVBLIN Reprinted at His Majesty's Printing, ^nse on Ormande Key 1684

The Speech of Sir George Pudsey Knight, at the time of his being sworn Recorder
GENTLEMEN,
FOrtune has at last gratified me in that earnest Desire I have always had to
serve You; And though I despair of making due Acknowledgements, yet you may
believe, that I am very sensible of the Favor you have done me, in so
unanimously choosing me to be your Servant: for such a one your Recorder is:
it is a place of Honor and of Trust, and if I discharge it not as I ought, or
at least as I am able, I am the worst of Men: I value my self much upon it, but
more upon your Friendship. Perhaps sew Recorders for many ages have been so
freely Elected, Therefore Gratitude as well as Oath obliges me to be faithful
to you, Interest also, (a mighty Motive) prompts me to the same; I am your
Neighbor as well as fellow Citizen The little Fortune that I have lies near
you; if Oxford flourish, Elsfield will not fare the worse, Gentlemen, I hope
you will have a favorable opinion of him you have made yours, It Is no
inconsiderable disadvantage to succeed a man of such great abilities as your
last Recorder was, a person who lived long amongst you, and knew the secrets of
your Corporation; yet this I vow, I Will pray the aid of all the Inns of Court
rather than you shall suffer; and indeed why should you in any thing? Have you
not opportunities enough to be happy? Does not the Great and Good Earl of
Abingdon offer his assistance, ready at all times upon his knee to beg his
Majesty's Favor in your behalf? When he appears, make room for Oxford, cries
the Guards, the Town is Loyal grown; when at another time if I may speak it) A
modest Oxford man dare hardly peep in Court. Why then don't we by his vast
Interest let in the Beams of Majesty upon us? Who can live without the Sun?
Have we not a famous University sot our Example? Let her great Loyalty (if it
be possible) be outdone by us. Can we be poisoned at the Fountain head? Where
is Learning, Piety, and Obedience practiced if not in this our English Athens?
Who so ignorant that does not know how eminent this place has been for Loyalty?
How proud it was then Charles the First, that Glorious King, shut himself up
with in our Walls Did not our Citizens follow Bellona's Call, to defend his
Sacred person from Rebels fury? Was not this the Seat of War? With what bravery
and Gallantry did this City assert its Monarch's Right? Surely the Stock of
Loyalty is not worn out. How many are therein this place now that lived in
those days, and played the Soldiers part, therefore I Will not think there is an
ill man amongst us, however it happens that for some miscarriages of ours we
stand not right in Coesars favor: We premise largely, perform poorly, and that
with Grudging too. The Widow's mite, what is it? yet being all, and freely
given, had the largest thanks. Gentlemen, let me advise you to redeem your
selves again: His Majesty, whom the Law styles Head of the Kingdom, Father of
the Country, Master of the whole Family of the Nation, Chief Justice of all
England, and a kind of petty God on Earth, who for the excellency of his
person, by way of resemblance, has Divine Attributes, as immortality, for as
King he never dies, Sovereignty, Majesty, Power, Verity, Justice, and the like:
He is merciful, of a God like temper, as ready to forgive as we to ask, let us
think nothing but good of him and his Government, for fears and jealousies have
been of fatal consequence to this Nation, and still are the greatest enemies to
the peace and tranquillity of it, some times they cry Popery is a breaking in
upon us, when God knows (as it is lately proved) the eight hundredth man is not
papist, unless all are such that are not Dissenters from the Church, for so
indeed they call us, Did not his Majesty for several years live in Popish soil,
yet came over to us as well in Heart as Title, Defender of the Faith His Royal
Highness, Great Britains Mars, its Heir and Glory, has upon all occasions
expressed himself-highly in favor of our Church, has settled the Protestant
Religion upon such sure foundations in Scotland, that its not to be shaken, Are
not his Daughters (after him the present Heirs to the Imperid Crown)
Protestants and, married two such Princes, on design purely for to secure our
Religion, when France it self courted that aliance for its Heir, Are not the
Lords of the Romish Faith excluded the House of Peers? the Laws strictly put in
execution against the Papists? Besides What alteration can there be in Church
or State, without a National consent? if these are signs of Popery then indeed
we are in danger. What think ye Gentlemen? You are men of Reason, live among
the Muses, where Learning is at the height; Though I must confess, if a papist
must not breath common Air. or tread his Native Earth because he is so, it is
hard. who does not think his own oppion best? sometimes again, how do the fears
of arbitrary Power, of loss of Liberty and Property call Crowds together to
consult, who shake the Head, look down cry we are lost, sad times are coming?
when that is the only way to have them come for if a people grow Rebel-ripe, why
should not we believe that Kings who sit at stern that pick and cull the Nation
for the wisest Heads. should not endeavor to preserve their Empire, and
dominion, as well as quit shops and stalls and sly to Coffee houses to examine
every Letter, to see how things are like to go with us, Gentlemen be not
seduced by men of seditious spirits, The first sin of Men and Angels was
Rebellion. Heaven and Paradise were lost by it, believe it is the Kings
interest, as well as Royal inclination to preserve us in our rights and
liberties; for take away property and industry is quickly at an end; where is
the Crowns safety then? the empty travailer laughs at the thief who values his
Countries defense that has nothing in it which he can call his own? In some of
the Eastern Parts (the Garden of the World by Nature) a man may ride some
scores of Miles, and scarcely see a Hut; because no man has any thing but at
the Princes will; With us the prosperity of the people,, is the Monarchs joy,
He always esteems himsel Rich, if they are so.

Gentlemen, I am not altogether a stranger to History, can give a reasonable
account of most Countries, amongst which England has not an equal. Let us see
how matters stood with the Jews in Righteous David's days? Thou and Ziba divide
the Land was David's judgment: against his Masters Son before his offense was
proved. A Semeter or a Bowstring Leaves breathless in a minute the greatest
Subject in three parts of the World, without a Judge and Jury. In our
Neighboring Countries, Racks and Wheels are thought gentle easy ways to find
out truth. the French Kings Sword is his Subjects Charter, The Spanish
Inquisition this Worlds Hell. In Holland it self, that famed Common wealth,
Herring is Excited nine times before it is eat, yet in these places all hush,
and still; No Plots to murder Kings, or Magistrates. Gentlemen, you must pardon
me, if I tell ye, that many times the too great indulgence of a Prince brings
speedy ruin to a Nation. Flutarch in the Life of Lycurgus gives us a Relation
of one Eurytion a Spartan King, who took a course never practiced by his wife
Predecessors, which was to cajole his own Subjects by slackening the Reins of
the Royal Authority; but see what followed, instead of gaining upon them, they
grew so insolent, that at last they brought the Government into contempt, and
soon after the whole Kingdom into Anarchy and confusion, and were never
satisfied, till one of their best Princes was barbarously murdered in the
streets by the Rabble, as he was appeasing a Tumult; How near a Parallel is
this to his late Majesty, who l'le boldly say has done more, except the present
King, to endear the Subject then all the Kings from the Norman to this time,
besides; but what come on it? That Is a Melancholy consideration. Mercy and
Goodness in Princes are too often mistaken, and called necessity and easiness
of Nature: An yielding King shall always find acraving Subject, We are like the
Israelits never satisfied desire to return back into Egypt into our old
Bondage. I have heard, that in the late Rebellion, a Captain and his Company
has made London, that haughty Mistress of our Isle, whom we so much delight to
emitate all in tears, her Citizens Crouching like Spaniels at the frown of a
Traitor, when at the same time they bid defiance to their King.

Are not we turned Mad men and the Devil fool, his invention is l^st, must a
Nation be destroyed, 'twice in half an age by the very same methods; A Juglers
tricks if shown more than once or twice becomes Childrens sport. Popery was the
Topic amongst the Zealous ere since I remember, and is now the only Idol that
supports the Brethrens cause: ^f the word were but forgotten they were Dumb.
its the holding twig. Who would not have sworn three years since that the Popes
Bull was not broken in amongst us? No Popery, No Papist, were the Oxford Cries,
when, on my conscience, the promoters of the Noise are nearer that persuasion
than my self; the man they aimed at. Do they not say that Kings are the peoples
Creatures, made by them, and when the Spirit moves. may be laid aside again?
Our Church abhors such Doctrine, lets hold to that, Julian that cunning arch
Enemy of our Religion encouraged all Opinions and Sects amongst the Christians,
that tend to the rooting out of our Faith. For shame let us grow wise, we are
in safety (if there be such a thing on this side Heaven.) Let the most factious
fellow of them all tell me what is not done to secure the Subject? He is fene'd in
on every side, the Star, Chamber, Court of Wards, High commission court, and
every thing which the people had the least color to call grievous, are
willingly laid aside. What noise has quartering of soldiers made? How are the
Law book filli'd with cases of Imprisonments? To ease us of these fears too,
there is not a soldier looks into a Private house, or enters any Inn, but as a
Traviller; the Landlord makes the Bill; what Offender is not bailed out of
Prison in such a time, if not prosecuted, though Treason threw him in? if such
Acts of Grace as these will not give us grateful souls, or at least keep us in
quiet, nothing but a rod of iron will, Will there be no peace till Shebah's
head is thrown over the wall. Gentlemen, I could wast a day upon this subject,
and Challenge all the World to show me such another Government; therefore if
these be signs of Arbitrary power, of loss of Liberty and property, speak,
Gentlemen, be not silent. Good men will be convinced by reason, and bless their
Maker for their happiness; Ill men must be watched by those that are in Power:
He that grumbles at this Government, with Lucifer would quarrel Heaven,
therefore with him deserves his punishment But suppose the worst, that our
fears were true, that Religion and Allegiance did no ways oblige us, that his
Majesty had as many vices as he has virtues, would Rebelion mend the matter?
No, that a Nation's Ruin is ready to arrest. Has not that happened to us and
much more, which foolish Rehoboam threatened the ten Tribes with, that his
little finger should be heavier upon them than his Father's Loins; that if his
Father whipped them with rods he would beat them with Scorpions? Gentlemen, a
civil War is like a Gaming house where none gets at last but the Box keeper.
Not long after his Majesty's return I was at such a place at a time when a
great Lord had lost no little sum; to cheer his Heart, he calls for a glass of
Wine, and drinks a health to him that had gained by play; amongst fifty
Gentlemen there was not one would lay any title to it at last in comes a little
creeping fellow, and claims the health, protesting that he had never brought
in to the house more than half a Crown at any one time, seldom so much, yet by
his cunning and advantages had heaped many a hundred pound; so in Civil War the
Beggar mounts a horseback, and all above him go a foot; Cobblers and Tinkers
turn Lords, and Lords turn nothing, If Rebellion has success. which to the
discouragement of all Treason (it has had but one this six hundred years in
England) to change it is Government, yet the leading Rebels very rarely dye in
Peace. If the Prince be victorious, which certainly he is, unless when the
Almighty intends to call the Nation to reckoning for her sins, then the People
are at mercy. Which of us would willingly call an Equal or an inferior, Lord?
Where were our English Liberty then? Therefore since all cannot be Kings, let us
be obedient to him that is the best of Kings, think Loyalty our greatest
interest as well as duty; Gentlemen Consider we have watchful Eyes over us,
Esteem not them good Citizens who advise us to wrestle too much with Majesty,
for we shall have the fall. Why then all say with me Long live the King, we will
grant him any thing that he will have, because we are sufficiently assured, he
will ask nothing but what we may freely, and safely give

FINIS

