Sir George Pudsey's Speech to the KING.
Dread Sovereign,
SO vast an Awe and Deference is due to the Majesty of a Crowned Head, that the
most polite Wit ought to have a great presence of mind, that speaks before Him;
therefore one so unworthy of this Honor as my self, humbly implores Your
Majesty's patience, and pardon for his failings.

Great SIR, No sooner Your Majesty ascended the Throne of Your Royal Ancestors,
but You were proclaimed a Favorite of Heaven, the Wicked were taken in their
own Nets, mighty Rebels fell before You, and Your Loyal Subjects rejoiced in
Peace: Answerable to these glorious beginnings has been Your Majesty's
Character to this moment. Thus Virtuous Princes bless their people; Hezekiah's
Holiness saved his Kingdom, when David's Sin cost him 70000 Men. The great
Cyrus was promised by Name, long before his Birth, to give ease and deliverance
to the poor Captive Jews; and my Information fails me, if Your Majesty was not
mentioned more than One Hundred Years ago, by one of Your Royal Predecessors,
to be given us (most unworthy of You) to raise these Nations once again to
Glory; For You, Great Sir, even against our Wills will make us Happy: Your
Royal Breast having treasured up such a Magazine of all Princely Virtues, that
were Your Kingdoms Elective, the Suffrages and Votes of all men of Honor, Sense
and Goodness, would be given You, with humble Supplications to accept the Royal
Diadem. What are not our very Wishes indulged in, under Your most auspicious
Reign? All Fears, but such as attend Women and Children, are removed: Property
and Liberty, those darling Concerns, are so far from being invaded by You, that
common Aids and Supplies to the King are almost forgot by us. Have not we of
the Church of England your Sacred Word (which never failed any yet that relied
on it) to protect her in her Rites and Privileges? As for those of Your
Majesty's Communion, Truth will defend me, If I say, their Sufferings and
Loyalties have been great and eminent, and of late, the first highly injured by
the Oaths of perjured Villains (too much encouraged); They have your Favor,
and deserve a public Reparation. As Your Majesty is, so is Your Mercy, for are
not other Dissenters too as well as them (contrary to the measures of another
Prince) by Your unparalled Clemency freed from the Snares of Penal Laws
relating to Religion, made purely for the Prince's Safety, and concerns no one
else. This high flight of Royal Grace, so like your Great Master's Example,
after so much Disloyalty to the Crown, is such a wonder to the present Age,
that future times will call Romantic. Therefore what Subject, either
concerned, or as a Christian (whose chiefest virtue is Charity) will not give
his humble Thanks?

Thus far Your Majesty has gone by Your undoubted Prerogative; and indeed what
is not the Prerogative of an Absolute Monarch, let the Learned determine. Many
of them say, His Condescension to Laws is rather a politic Mercy, than any
Obligation: But to avoid too nice an Inquiry, common Reason, and the Kingdoms
Interest, obliges me to believe the concurrence of a Parliament to so National
a Good; And that were it moved by them, and the Royal Assent denied, the Writ
de Heretico Comburendo would be feared again. These Scars in Government once
perfectly healed, no more Families will be ruined, Prisons filled, or Pockets
emptied for Consciences sake (the Almighty's Province only.) Then will every
Subject according to Nature's Laws, which no human act can restrain, by the
most ignorant be allowed capable to serve Your Majesty according to his merit.
Then all hands will be at work like Bees carrying to the common Hive; Trade,
the life of every Island, flourish, Your Majesty's Treasure and Your Subjects
Talents increase, whilst You, Great Sir, the common Parent of your Country,
watches for us all. We shall then contract the fullen Brows of other Nations,
who will hate the Lands of their Nativities. Your Majesty, the Great Monopolist
of Wisdom and Experience, knows what measures best to take to attain these
mighty Ends: Your Power is like Your Courage, both invincible; A Princes best
Security. For Sir, as Love and Fear sends Souls to Heaven, so both together
make Monarchs Safe, and Subjects Loyal. Now all Welcome to Caesar to his ever
Loyal City; and all Joy to us, who most humbly and cheerfully offer up our
Hearts and Acclamations to Your Majesty, for this undeserved Honor, in
esteeming us worthy of Your Royal Presence. Our Addresses too for Your Gracious
Promises and Favors lately made, and showed to all Your Subjects, would no
doubt have rendered us more grateful: But Your Majesty, that is not to learn the
Constitution of the meanest Borough within your Empire, understands what
influences this Place. Forgive, Dread Sir, this Stop and loss of time to Your
Sacred Majesty. I am silent when I have said, All Greatness attend the KING,
and long live JAMES the Second.

FINIS.

