REFORMATION IN COURTS, and Cases Testamentary.
BEfore the late abolition of Episcopacie this Nation suffered under too many
Testamentary Jurisdictions: some Counties had no less then 50. or 60.
Peculiars: and in some Counties diverse Lords of Manors, and Corporations had a
privilege to prove Wills, and speed business of that nature upon a Lay account.

The People found themselves diverse ways aggrieved by this multiplicitie of
Jurisdictions: and therefore to give some ease, and redress therein, the
Metropolitans Prerogative Courts were erected about 400. years ago.

In the year 1643. Dr: Merick, Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury,
removed his office to Oxford: and then there was a Committee appointed to
consider of a new settlement of that Court, but nothing was reported thereupon.

In the year 1644. Mr: Maynard brought in an Ordinance for making Sir N: Brent
Judge in Dr: Merricks place: and the same was passed with some other material
alterations in the Prerogative Court.

In the year 1646. All Episcopal Jurisdiction was taken away: since which
there is no true power remaining any where to dispatch Testamentary business
upon the Ecclesiastical score, except that of Sir Na: Brents.

Sir Na: Brents Jurisdiction has two defects, and so is as yet insufficient to
do right to the whole Nation: it wants extesinon of bounds: and a competent
Power of coertion.

For want of Extension it cannot proceed duly within the Province of York, nor
within the ancient Province of Canterbury: but only in some special Causes.
Hereupon occasion has been taken by diverse private man without, and against
Authority of Parliament, not only where the Prerogative has no cognizance, but
also where it has to exercise Testamentary Jurisdiction: and so by these
misproceedings the deceived people is put to much unnecessarie charge, in as
much as they are necessitated to take out Administrations the second time, and
be at the expense of new Probates as often as any Suit arises.

For want also of a sufficient Coercive Power (for a Court without a Coersive
Power is no Court) the present Judge cannot force men to bring in true
Inventories, or submit to order in other points: whereupon a vast license is
taken by many to defraud Creditors, Legatees, and other Interessents: yea the
State it self is often injured hereby, as well as multitudes of private men.

There is now living at Guilford an Executor which refuses to bring in an
Inventory: yet the Testator died under sequestration, owed good sums upon
Bond to the Parliament: and besides the main bulk of his estate, He gave away
in his Will above 900 l. in pety Legacies.

In Order to a Reformation of these things, a Committee of Parliament was
chosen in April 1646. which after 3. years sitting made Report in May: 1649.

The matter of that Report was referred to a new Committee to be formed into a
Bill, and in July following for the better maturing of that business, other
Members were added to that Committee, and a special care thereof was
recommended to Sir Pe: Wentworth, and Mr: Miles Corbet.

Since that time a Bill has been prepared, and twice read in the House, but
notwithstanding so much time is elapsed, it still hangs under a recommitment,
and fails of giving satisfaction.

The reason why the reforming of these things (though the State it self, and
thousands of particular men remain sufferers in the mean time) proves so
dilatory, and difficult, is supposed to be: because most men are possessed with
two contrary extreme opinions: and few there are that pitch upon the middle and
more moderate way.

Some men are wholly for the Civilians, and out of favor to them, they would
have no less then 20. Courts erected, wherein none but of that profession
stould sit as Judges.

Some men are as opposite to Civilians, and they would have that whole
profession removed, and quite eradicated, as well such as have been faithful to
the Parliament during these late troubles, as such as have been Enemies: only
that Testamentary business might be thronged, and obtruded upon the other Courts
at Westminster.

In the mean while there is a third opinion, that mitigates both these
extremes, and thereby declines the inconveniences occurring on both hands.

According to this Third Opinion: if the Court (now called the Prerogative) were
enabled with such a Coercive power, as other Courts of Justice have: if it had
a Jurisdiction in all Causes Testamentary whatsoever, throughout the whole
Land: if it were likewise animated with as many Judges, as use to sit in other
Courts (which the Lord Bacon thought necessary many years ago) and if it were
subordinated to another higher Court, of as many Judges, in all matters worthy
of appeal: it would prove an excellent settlement: and without any further
dangerous Innovations (we take in all other restrictions, and points of
Reformation prescribed to other Courts against delays, excessive fees, and
arbitrary proceedings) would be sufficiently serviceable to those public ends,
we all aim at.

It is remarkable also that the Advantages, and Conveniences, which commend to
us this middle way are many, and very weighty. For,

1. Hereby that admirable light of the Civil Law, approvedly useful in
Monarchies, and yet by some held more useful in Democracies, will be preserved
in our English Horizon, and saved from utter extinction. There is scarce a
State in Christendom, whose highest Councels, and Judicatories are not mainly
swaid by the profound Professors of Civil Law: and as learned Politicians are
generally the ablest servitors to all States; so no other study, or breeding
has more eminently accomplished Learned Politicians, then this of the Civil
Law. Without a competent practice this knowledge will be lost to our Natives:
and this being so lost, we shall be driven, though to our shame, to have
forreiners in p^nsion. Now to reject the service of Englishmen, when we are to
treat with aliens: and not only to trust, but also to gratify with our
English gold men born to a foreign Interest, will be a great discouragement to
our own Students so rejected. Besides Testamentary business is common to us with
other Nations, it never had hitherto any thing peculiarly municipall in it, the
forms and the processes, and proofs of the Civil Law have ever hitherto so
prevailed, that Englishmen might confidently as to Testamentary Interests
demand, and recover their rights abroad, and strangers might do the like in
England. And it is not yet easy to foresee what inconveniences may ensue if in
this infancy of our Republic we presently depart too far from ancient legal
communities and correspondencies with other neighboring Nations.

2. As the study of the Civil Law will be preserved, by the number of Doctors
and Advocates, that will be supported by one Admiralty, and these two
Testamentarie Courts: so the Students of the Civil Law will be hereby the
better reduced. Heretofore, when there were so many Peculiars, and Judicatories
in England, the very number of them was oppressive to the people: and yet there
is not left now the tenth part of business, and employment for Civilians, as was
then. All the cognizance of Decimal cases, and questions about Matrimony,
Incontinence, Canonical obedience, and granting Licenses of many several
sorts is taken away; and therefore it remains, that we must lessen our Courts,
as we have lessned the business appertaining to our Courts, or else our Lawyers
themselves will feel the inconvenience of it, as well as Clients. Country
practice adds little to the skill, and ability of our Gownmen, wherefore when
there is a scarcity of Country Practice too, (as there must needs be, if no
fewer then 20. Courts be established for so little business, as is now remaining)
the very number of Professors will become a burden to the Profession, rendering
them, as indigent, as it does illeterate.

3. This due reducement of Civilians will be for the States ease, as well as for
the commodity of our long-robed Gentlemen. For multiplicity of Jurisdictions,
what by their own clashings, and what by the craft of their Ministers, often
begets multiplicity of needles Suits, and it is possible that more public and
dangerous differences may be occasioned by their disputed limits, and
divisions, and all these will be damageable to the Commonwealth. If we
calculate what the necessary charge will be of maintaining twenty Courts, as
some propose in favor of Civilians: or what will maintain so many Clerks, and
Officers, as there are Counties in England, according to the proposal of the
other side, we shall find, it will amount to no small value.

4. This just apportionment of Civilians to the latitude of their business, by
bringing with it an enlargement of benefit, and subsistence to those few
practisers which remain unreduced, will enable them to serve the State more
beneficially and cheaply then their predecessors have done hitherto. It Is
manifest that the same practice which with moderate fees will creditably and
amply maintain twenty practisers, will not maintain forty, though they be
permitted to exact fees more immoderately. It is proposed therefore in behalf
of this new settlement, that the Judges, and their Dependents above, without
any demand of new fees, shall at their proper cost maintain, and depute
sufficient Officers below in the chief Town, or City of each County, that is
distant above 60, or 70, miles from London: to dispatch all such Testamentary
business there, as is in common form, and may be dispatched by letters: and so
save the greatest number of suitors their travail to London. It is also
undertaken, that the said Deputies shall in favor of the poorer sort do
business gratis, and neither take gratification nor reward where the Inventory
exceeds not 10 l. and in all other dispatches of greater value it shall be the
same Deputies part to transmit all things up to London that deserve registring,
and reserving, without grating upon Clients. Likewise, the same Deputies, if
Authority think fit, which thus intend Testamentary business below, may find
leisure, and opportunity enough to keep authentical entires, and records of
all other contracts, and solemn acts betwixt party, and party, which deserve
to be treasured up for public search. How acceptable therefore such a
settlement would be to the people, when it should speed all men's business so
compendiously, and the poores so gratuitously, and how full of grace it would
appear to the generality, need not be further demonstrated.

5. Hereby the excessive incumbring, and over-charging of our Courts at
Westminster with a surplusage of Testamentary business (not yet foreseen by some
practisers of the Common Law) will be aptly prevented. It will be the wisdom
of the Parliament to provide, that we have neither too many Courts for our
suits, nor too many suits for our Courts: both being attended with great
inconveniences, but the second with far greater, then the first, some would
have in every County a Court, and reduce us to the old manner of Jurisdiction,
which was used in England long before the Norman Conquest, when this was a
cantoniz'd Country, and obeyed several pety Princes: and this is pressed as
very counsellable, by that party, which would cantonize us the second time: but
it is to be feared, if this design prevail, our quarrels, and controversies
will abound, and increase upon us, as fast as our Judicatories do. That fire
which is now kept up in one hearth at Westminster, will be then scatered all
over the House, and so spread its flame much wider then before. Other
objections lie against too many Courts, espescially when they are attended with
more illiterate Judges, and unexpert Counselors: but the intent of this paper
is to show that there is less public prejudice in too many Courts, then in
too few. It Is with the politic, as with the natural body: both find
obstructions more fatal then fluxes, and both receive more torture from a
defect in the expulsive faculty, then from a defect in the relentive faculty.
Too much vexation from many Courts may be compared to a disentery: but want of
expedition by reason of too few Courts is like the nephriticall malady, and
kills us with pangs inexpressible. The Parliament of late has taken away half
our Courts almost at Westminster: and thereby doubtless it has taken away from
amongst us many of our suits, and Law-questions* but it is as far out of doubt
withal, that all the differences that were formerly decided in those abolisht
Courts, are not abolisht together with those Courts. This together with the
calamity of our late broiles, and confusions, has begotten a very great glut of
business at Westminster Hall: and this glut of business has most undeservedly
begot a complaint against Westminster Hal. Every man sees that the Chancery at
present grants not Clients such dispatch as is expected: but every man sees not
the true cause of this: and the plain truth is, the fault is not in the Court,
nor in the Commissioners, nor in the Pleaders: it is too great a confluence of
business that chokes up, and obstructs Chancery proceedings: and twere much
better for the Commonwealth to be at the charge of two Chanceries for too
little business, then to maintain one that's over burdened with too many
Causes. Oh that the Parliament would consider what want of a due hearing, and
redress is in Chancery, and other Courts, yea and within its own walls. The
greatest of our grievances, the grievance of all our grievances at present is;
that our grievances can have no vent, and that our complaints know no place,
where they may effectually disburthen themselves, many thousands at this day
being no where remediable but in Parliament, have woeful petitions to present,
yet can obtain no access at all to the House: and some thousands of those
that obtain access, either waste themselves in a diuturnall frustraneous
attendance, or are at last denied their requests, or are undone for want of a
timely denial.

There is now a Prisoner in Warwick Castle, whose long durance has sunk him
into the deepest of all worldly afflictions, and his languishment is now almost
desperate, because though He has always in other matters deserved well of the
Parliament, and no great ill in this (as He hopes to prove, if He may be
admitted to any Trial) He sees the House which can hear his accusation, yet
cannot find leisure to hear his defense, nor will provide for Him any other
issue out of this miserable condition. I my self in a Case of no mere, private
concernment have attended upon Committees for dispatch at least seven years:
and though that attendance has much broken my Fortunes, and disappointed me of
diverse hopeful preferments, and given me cause to complain against my undoers:
yet am I fain to strangle my griefs in private, lest I should by a new
supplication condemn my self again to the torture of Sisyphus, for seven years
longer. I uttet not this here, because it burns, and festers like a deep
suppuration in my mind: but because I believe there are very many others in my
condition, to whom want of expedition (being like the stoppage of the stone in
the uritories) apears more intolerable, and procures more desperate
disaffections then it does to me. Pardon this Digression, it means no ill: it
would only demonstate, that there is danger, and damage in too many Tribunals,
yet not so great as in too few.

6. Hereby there will be one cettain place for all Suitors to dispatch their
business at, and that place will be London our Metropolis, incomparably the most
commodious of the whole Land for such dispatches: when there are many
Judicatories, and Registries in several Counties, and Provinces to resort
unto, there cannot but follow much uncertainty to Clients; and uncertainty in
matters of this nature is ever the mother of confusion, and distraction. Some
men which look no further then to the ease of Executors and Administrators,
suppose London too far distant from some Counties, and therefore they propose
to have all Wills proved, and Administrations granted where each Testator or
party Intestate dies: but these in the mean time have no regard to the ease of
Creditors, Legatees, and other interessents who often are more in number, and
whose rights are often of more value, then the Executors and Administrators.
Wherefore forasmuch as one that lives in Cornwall, another in London, and a
third in Norfolk, may be concerned in a Will or Administration at Barwick, or
Carlisle, and so by this Proposition must accidentally travail to Barwick or
Carlisle, the most incommodious places of all England: and still there is no
certain place designed to any man beforehand; what a general vexation and
perplexity is this likely to produce in many Cases? Now London as it is a place
always fixed, and pre-determined, so it does for manifold conveniences deserve
that pre-eminence before all other places whatsoever. For, 1. London is the
Common Justice seat for all Suitors to resort unto in all other differences;
and therefore Testamentary Records are most necessary to be there kept, where
they are to be oftnest produced, and where they may be most ready at hand upon
all occasions to be used. 2. All ages can testify, that Testamentaries Records
have there been ever most safely treasured up: whereas if an inquiry be now
made of the Registries below, without doubt it will be a strange account that
will be returned of their Records, and ancient minniments. 3. If suits arise
(as they do most frequently about Wills, Administrations, etc.) No other place
can afford so able Advocates, Sollicitors, etc. as London can. 4. London is so
qualified for correspondence, by reason of the vast concourse of people there
about other business, that any man may write thither, and by writing have
business dispatched there with less trouble and expense, then he can ride twenty
miles any other way: And the greatest part of Testamentary business is
dispatchable by Letters. 5. As the best choice of Able responsall Registers and
other Officers are to be had at London, so if they misdemeane themselves, there
is the readiest remedy to be obtained against them. 6. The dispatch of business
below is not left to the mere care and costs of Interessents far remote from
London, that is in in great part to lie upon the shoulders of such as shall
have Deputations from above as the business is here stated:

Upon the whole matter therefore it may rationally be concluded: 1. That a
speedy settlement of some new Testamentary Jurisdiction is worthy of the
Parliaments serious consideration. 2. That this settlement here proposed, is
the most adequat to our public, national interest of any that has been yet
debated: if every man would know that the general interest comprehends his
particular, as the greater does the less: but not on the contrary: and so the
common and Civil Jurist would not confine their thoughts to what is the
advantage of their profession; Nor the Burgess of such a Town, nor the Lord of
such a Manor, nor the Knight of such a Sheere; restrain themselves within
their own narrower Circles, but would obey the rapture of the highest orb; all
our motions would be far more regular, and concentrick.


