The Virtues and Uses of the Queen of Hungary's Water.
THe Queen of Hungary's Water, being of a hot Nature, and very subtle; it
strengthens the Heart, Brains and Stomach, digests all manner of Crudities,
dissolves Phlegm, and repairs the Dissipations of the Spirits; in so much that
one may use it for all the Indispositions of the Brains and Stomach, which may
proceed from Colds, and to expel Winds and Cholicks.

To use it rightly, you must mingle half a spoonful (more or less, having
respect to the Age or indisposition of the Party that is to take it) either in
a little Broth, or some other Liquor, for to temper its Virtues: it may be
taken several days together, or else two or three times a week.

One may also use it outwardly, for all manner of pains in what part of the
Body soever; for those that are troubled with a weakness in their Sinews, to
fortify the Joints; for the Palsy, Gout, Burnings, Contusions, and in the
decline of an Erezipelus, or Saint Anthony's Fire. It must be used by fomenting
and bathing the parts affected, warming it a little if desired. For a weakness
of Sight, and the Headache, you must rub the Forehead and the Eyes. It is also
very good for Deafness, in dropping it into the Ear, and stopping it with a
little Wool. The Ladies use it for their Fa^es, it makes the skin smooth, and a
fair Complexion, by taking away Scurfs or Witherness; you must wash your self
twice or thrice a week by mingling it with a little Spring Water, especially
those that are of a swarthy Complexion.

Amongst the several Distillers of this Water in Montpellier, where by the
confession of all Men it is best prepared, James Puech Apothecary and Perfumer
dwelling in the said City, does make it with all the exactness and care
imaginable; and is sold here in London by his Son David Puech, living in at the
Sign of the true Perfumer of Montpellier.


