A True and full Relation OF THE Officers and Armies forcible seizing of diverse
Eminent Members Of the Commons House, December. 6. and 7. 1648. As also, A true
Copy of a LETTER lately written by an AGENT for the ARMY in Paris, dated 28 of
November. 1648, to a Member of the said House, a great Creature and Patriot of
the ARMY; Clearly discovering, That their late Remonstrance and Proceedings do
drive on and promote the Jesuits and Papists Designs, to the subversion of
Religion, Parliament, Monarchy, and the fundamental Laws and Government of the
KINGDOM.

London, Printed in the Year 1648.

A true NARRATIVE of the Officers and Armies forcible seizing and suspending of
diverse eminent MEMBERS of the Commons House, December 6, and 7. 1648.
THe Officers and Council of the Army, being discontented with the Votes
passed in the Commons House upon a long and serious Debate (which continued all
Monday, and Monday night last, till Tuesday morning about 9 of the clock) to
this effect, That the Kings person was removed out of the Isle of Wight by the
Generals Command, without the knowledge or consent of the House. And, That the
Kings answers to the Propositions of both Houses upon the Treaty, were a
sufficient ground for the house to proceed to the settlement of a safe and
wel-grounded Peace. On Wednesday, the sixth of this instant December, 1648.
placed strong Guards of the Army (as well Horse as Foot) in the Palace yard,
Westminster Hall, the Court of Requests, and in the stairs and Lobby leading to
the Commons-house, where Col. Pride (who commanded the Guards that day) Sir
Hardresse Waller, and other Officers, violently seized upon diverse Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house in the Parliament stairs and
Lobby, as they were going to the House, to sit and discharge their duties
there, and by plain force thrust and carried them prisoners into the
Queens-Court, notwithstanding their open protestations of breach of Privilege
of Parliament, without having any warrant for such commitment but their Swords,
or assigning any cause at all but their own arbitrary wills: and there kept
them prisoners under a strong Guard, denying them liberty of access to the
House, which they desired. Mr. Edward Stevens and Col. Birch being gotten into
the House before their seizures, were called to the door by feared Messages
sent to them by the Officers, under other men's names, and there seized on, and
violently pulled out of the House, though they cried out to the Speaker to take
notice of the horrid force upon them; and so were haled thence into the Queens
Court; Harry Martin the Horse stealer, though in actual Rebellion against the
House, and formerly ejected out of it, being in the mean time admitted to sit
as a competent Member. The House being informed of this strange violence
offered to their Members by those who professed themselves their Servants and
Protectors, sent the Sergeant of the House to the Queens Court, to demand the
Members there detained, and required their attendance in the House: Which
Message, though delivered, was disobeyed, wherewith he acquainting the House:
Thereupon the House sent the Sergeant forth with the Mace, to fetch away the
imprisoned Members, but the Soldiers and Officers violently kept him back at
the Door, and would not suffer him to execute their command. Hereupon the House
resolved not to proceed till these Members were restored; yet notwithstanding
the Officers still proceeded to seiz more Members, as they came to, or went from
the House, carrying them all Prisoners to the Court aforesaid. About three of
the clock in the afternoon, Hugh Peter with a sword by his side, like a
boisterous Soldier came rushing in to see the Prisoners, and take a list of
their names, by order from the General, as he alleged; where some of the
Prisoners demanding of him, by what authority they were thus imprisoned and
kept from their duty, he answered, By the power of the Sword; and returning
thither soon after, he released Sir Benjamin Ruddier and Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes
(as he said) by the like power of the Sword.

Night drawing on, the Prisoners desired the Capt. who guarded them, to desire
Col. Pride to speak with them, to the end they might know by what authority,
and for what cause they were thus detained by him, being Members. The proud
Colonel returned this Answer, That he had other employment for the present,
that he could not wait upon them. Soon after Hugh Peter and some other Officers
acquainted them, that they should all be removed to Wallingford House, where
they should have all fitting accommodations provided for them, and where the
General and Lieut. Genesis would come and speak with them, and that Coaches were
provided to carry them thither: upon this assurance, the Prisoners went all
from the Queens Court, to take coach at the Lords stairs; where Coaches
attending them, in stead of being carried to Wallingford House as was promised
and expected, they were stayed at the back-gate of Hell, (a common
Victualling-house so called) and there thrust all into the common Dining Room,
and after that translated into two upper Chambers. When it grew late, Sir
Robert Pie and some six more were offered liberty to go to their lodgings
(being near) upon their paroll, to appear before the General the next morning:
who conceiving it inconsistent with the Privilege of Parliament, and a
prejudice to their Cause, refused to give any other paroll, then to appear in
the House the next morning; which being not accepted, they were all enforced to
remain in Hell that night, most of them having no other beds to rest their
heads on (though ancient and infirm, and Gentlemen of Honor) but the floor of
the Room, and Benches and Chairs: yet they patiently underwent this affront and
duresse in Hell it self (culled out of purpose to put a mere signal brand of
contempt and infamy upon them and the Parliament) reading and singing Psalms to
God, spending most of the night in Discourses and walking, without taking one
minutes rest or sleep. It was a very sad spectacle to see so many eminent and
Honorable Members of Parliament so uncivilly and discourteously used by their
domineering Servants, who exceeded all Regal and Prelatical Tyranny in former
times; which afforded convenient lodgings and accommodations to their
Prisoners. The Provost Marshal (under whose custody they were unworthily put as
Malefactors) was so ashamed of this dishonorable usage, that after some
conference concerning it, he repaired to the General to White Hall, to acquaint
him with it, and receive his further Order.

The next morning (being Thursday) the Prisoners expecting the issue, he
returned to them about 11 of the clock, and acquainted them, that it was the
Generals pleasure they should all wait forthwith upon him and his Council of
War at White Hall, where he desired to conferr with them: whereupon, they were
presently put into Coaches and carried to White Hall like Traitors or Felons,
with strong Guards of Horse and Foot attending them, and there brought into the
Kings Lodgings fasting, and tired out with watching the night before: where
arriving about 12 of the clock, they expected a present Answer. But our new
Grandees and great Council of the Army took so much Royal State upon them, as
to make them wait their leisure til it was night before they vouchsafed to send
them any answer; at which time, disdaining to call the imprisoned Members in,
or to honor them with their more them Lordly presence, they sent out 3
Officers to acquaint then with this dilatory answer, That other intervenient
affairs of great concernment were now in agitation before the General and his
Council, so as they could not admit them to their presence that night, as was
expected; and that the General and his Council, for their better accommodation,
had given order that they should be lodged at 2 Inns in the Strand, to wit, the
Swan and the Kings Head, for that night, where they should receive from them
the next morning some Propositions to be considered of. After which, the
Provost Marshal taking the names of those who were to be lodged at the Kings
Head, and a list of those who were to be conducted to the Swan, carried them
all prisoners to the said Inns through the streets in the dirt on foot (except
some 6 or 7 only, who were lame and aged) with a Musketier attending upon
every one of them in particular, and a strong Guard marching before, behind,
and on one side of them, like so many Traitors and capital Malefactors, to the
great admiration and discontent of all persons well affected to the Parliament,
and joy and rejoicing to all Malignants, Papists, and Cavaliers, who, had they
been conquerors of the Parliament, could not have used them with more rigor,
scorn and disdain then these pious Saints and Grandees of the Army have done,
before they have attainted them of any particular crime or breach of trust;
whereof the whole Kingdom can declare all or most of them innocent.

Being brought Prisoners to the said Inns, they had strong Guards set upon
them, and a Sentinel at every chamber door all night. Thus do these new
usurpers of a more then Regal and Tyrannical power, trample upon the Members of
the House of Commons (their former Masters) as if they were no better then the
dirt in the street; and to exasperate the common soldiers against them, have
slandered the imprisoned Members, to be the only detainers of their pay; when
as none of them ever fingered one penny of their moneys: and if any Members be
guilty of such a crime, it must be those who have most relation to the Army,
and profess themselves their greatest friends.

Thursday morning the Officers and Army guarding the House in the same manner
as on Wednesday, some of their Officers standing at the Commons door with a
List of Parliament men's names in their hands, demanded every Members name as he
came to the door to enter the House, and those whose names were in their List,
they forcibly excluded the House, and turned down the stairs, though they
earnestly pressed for entrance: and some of them acquainted the Speaker by
Letter with the high affront and breach of Privilege; but could find no
redress, the Officers admitting only such who were not in the List: About 40
Members were thus forcibly excluded, but not imprisoned; only Mr. Gewen was
seized upon by one of Col. Hewsons Officers, carried prisoner to the Queens
Court, and from thence to White Hall to the rest of the imprisoned Members, who
were there attending upon the General and his Council: This day the Great
Conqueror Lieut. Genesis Cromwell entered the Commons House, and received thanks
for his great services, which had been more Honorable for him to receive in a
full and free House, then in an empty and forced; the House (by reason of the
restrained and excluded Members, with others driven away by this horrid
violence) being not above 80. in Number, having formerly resolved not to
proceed till their Members were restored, and the force upon them removed;
after some debate and opposition, the House was divided upon this Question,
whether they should now proceed or not? which was carried in the affirmative,
50. voting in the affirmative, and 28. or 30. in the negative, that they should
not; who presently left the House, most of them resolving to come no more till
the House and Members were righted; this done, to abuse and mock as well God as
men, they appointed Friday for a solemn Humiliation, to be kept in that House,
not to expiate the Armies open violation of their Privileges, force and breach
of Faith, both to God and the Parliament, which had been commendable, but to
procure a blessing on the forcible and unparliamentall proceedings, for the
subversion of Monarchy, Religion, Laws, Liberties, and three Kingdoms in a
moment: dethroning and beheading the King, and desinheriting his Posterity, and
introducing a popular Anarchy and Tyranny under the power of a perfidious Army,
worse then any slavery under the great Turk: The Lord humble them in good
earnest for these crying sins and treasons, and either convert their hearts, or
confound all their treasonable destructive devices of this kind, which will
render them infamous to the present and all future Generations, and bring them
unto speedy ruin, notwithstanding all their present usurped power. It is
believed by diverse understanding men of great experience, that the Jesuits have
laid this plot, and fomented these distempers in the Army, by the Agitators,
some of them being Jesuits, others Anabaptists, leavened with Jesuiticall
principles; who overreach the honest-minded and plain-hearted Christians in
the Army by their special pretenses of Justice, and speedy settling of the
Commonweal, but in such a way as will bring all to sudden confusion, and
make our three Kingdoms a prey to the Popish party; and our foreign Popish
enemies, who will make Bonefires of joy in Italy, Spain, France, Ireland, and
other foreign parts for this unparaleld force upon the Houses, and the
designs of the Army now in prosecution.

Friday morning the imprisoned Members expected a Message from the General and
his Council, according to promise; but they received none, such is their
dilatoriness and fidelity in point of promise, only one came with a message
from the General to Sir Robert Harley to this effect, that he might go home to
his house, and continue there, so as he would give his word not to oppose the
present actings and proceedings of the House or Army, varying in his
expressions; at which Sir Robert desired time to advise with his fellow
prisoners, being a matter which equally concerned them; the like offer was
since made to Sir John Merrick, by which it is apparent, that all these
prisoners crime is only the discharge of their duty, in opposing the present
designs and actions of the Army, to subvert the fundamental Laws, Liberties
and Government of the Kingdom, and the ancient form of Parliaments; for which
treason Strafford and Canterbury lost their heads by judgment of this very
Parliament.

By all these passages, compared with the Armies late Remonstrance and
Declaration, it is most perspicuous to all the Kingdom,

1. That the Officers and Army have offered far greater violence to the
Privileges, Houses, and Members of Parliament, and acted more toward the
dissolution of this present, and subversion of all future Parliaments, then
ever the King or his Cavaliers, the Gunpowder traitors, Germyn or Percy did; or
the Reformadoes and London Apprentices did, whom yet the Officers and Army
declared against, and prosecuted as Traitors, though they neither imprisoned
nor kept back any Member from the Houses.

2. That they have violated their Covenants, Oaths, Trusts, and solemn
engagements to the Parliament, City, Country and Kingdom, in as high or higher
degree as ever the King and his evil Counselors did, in invading the
privileges, forcing the Houses, imprisoning the Members of Parliament, and
endeavoring by open force to subvert the fundamental Government, Laws,
Liberties and Customs of the Realm, and the Ancient frame and being of
Parliaments, for defense of all which they were raised, and covenanted to fight
for and maintain.

That they have usurped a far greater and more dangerous arbitrary and
tyrannical power, over both Houses of Parliament, and their Members, and over
the persons and estates of their Fellow Subjects, then ever the King, or the
worst of his Counselors did, and that under the feigned pretenses of present
necessity, and common safety, of which they make themselves the only supreme
Judges, not the Parliament, as the King did in the case of Ship Money: and
therefore they must either justify or acquit the King and his party from all
those charges and objections against him in their late Remonstrance, for which
they press the Houses in point of justice, both to depose and execute him as a
Traitor to the Commonwealth, or else incur the self-same crime and guilt, and
subject themselves to the same judgment and execution, which they desire to be
inflicted upon Him and His.

The names of the imprisoned Members.
M. Wheeler. M. Lane. Sir Samuel Luke. Sir Thomas Soame. Sir Benjamin Raddierd.
Sir Richard Anslow. Sir Robert Pie. Sir Anthony Irby. M. Clement Walker. M.
William Prynne. M. Bunkley. Major General Massey. Sir Walter Earl. M. Green.
Colonel Birch. M. Boughton. Colonel Leigh. M. Henry Pe^ham. M. Drake. Sir
William Waller. Sir John Merrick. Sir Martin Lister. Sir Robert Harley. Col.
Ed. Harley. M. Swinfen. M. Crew. M. Ed. Stephens. M. Buller. Sir Gilbert
Gerrard. M. Gerrard, M. Nath. Fines. Sir Simon d' Ewes. Sir William Jews. Sir
John Clotworthy. Lord Wenman. Colonel William Strode. Commissary Copley. M.
Vaughan of Exeter. Sir Harbottle Grimstone. M. Prisley. M. Gewen seized upon
Thursday. Sir Henry Cholmley seized at his lodging, and sent prisoner to the
Crown.
Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. For it was not an enemy that reproached me,
then I could have borne it; neither was it he that hurted me, that did magnify
himself against me, then I could have hid my self from him. But it was thou,
a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. We took sweet counsel
together, and walked unto the house of God in company. Let death seize upon
them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their
dwellings, and amongst them. As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord
shall save me.

A true Copy of a Letter written by an Independent Agent for the Army, from
Paris in France, to an Independent Member of the House of Commons, a great
Creature and Patriot of the Army. Extracted out of the original.
Dear Sir,
I Was exceeding glad to receive the Doctors lines, that intimated your
recovery from that distemper that had seized upon you; I doubt not but it had
this effect upon you, to let you see, what a frail thing our bodies are, and
what need we have to be sure of our building not made with hands, reserved in
heaven for us.

I am at present (praised be God) indifferent well, the place where I am, in
respect of all outward accommodations, very well agreeing with me, and very
much exceeding England, only defective in this, that I cannot find a M.
Westrow, nor Doctor Stanes here, to make a bosomefriend; and yet in that it is
not altogether so barren as I did, and you may well imagine it: I am fallen
into the acquaintance of three or four Catholics of very great ingenuity, and
in their way of much Religion: undoubtedly it is an error to look at all
Papists through the same perspective; for they are more to be differenced then
English Papists can be. I find their opinion of, and dependence upon the Pope,
little, or nothing what we imagine it to be, and better principled to make
members of a Commonwealth, then the most English* Their opposition to the King
is not to be reconciled; their hopes are now upon the Army, to whom they wish
all prosperity, as to the settling of a Representative, being extremely
distasted with Regal hereditary power throughout the world.

It seems my Lord Say has undertaken to procure a Pass from the House for Sir
Kellam Digby to come over to England; he is not, according to your rule, a
Delinquent, but it seems came over into France by the House of Commons License,
acquitted from any crime. Let me desire you when it comes to be moved in your
House, give it the best promotion you can; one would think a business so
reasonable should find no opposition: But to such a constitution as you are of,
no man can tell what is reasonable. He never was in Arms, and I believe, can
easily answer any thing that can be objected (save his Religion) why he should
be from under Sequestration. Let me entreat you to speak to as many of your
acquaintance as you can, that when it comes to be moved, it may not be
repulsed. I could heartily wish you and Mrs. Westrow, and the Doctor had a good
occasion to bring you over into France; (if so) I should not think of returning
into England whilst you stayed. I have no more at present, but my own and
wifes best respects to you and Mrs. Westrow, I remain,

Paris, 28. November. 1648. Your very assured friend, A. B.


By this Letter it is apparent,

That the Jesuited Papists in France are in such opposition to our King for his
compliance with his Houses of Parliament to settle the Kingdom, and extirpate
Mass and Popery, that they are not to be reconciled to him; and therefore
endeavor to depose and bring him to execution, and disinherit his posterity.

That their hopes to effect this their design against, and execute this their
revenge upon the King, are now upon the Army, to whom they wish all prosperity.

That they foment, and prosecute with their prayers and advice, the Armies new
Model for settling of a Representative in Parliament, of purpose to dissolve
this present Parliament, (which has acted so much against them and their
Popish Religion, and is now giving it its final and fatal blow, if they and
the King shall close) and to subvert all Parliaments for the future, for fear
of falling into the like danger by them.

That Independents, and friends of the Army have a far better opinion of Roman
Catholics, then English Protestants; as being better principled to make
members of a free Commonwealth then they: And therefore are more likely to
favor, and close with Roman Catholics, then English Protestants, in carrying
on their new designs, expressed in their late Remonstrance.

That the Jesuits and Roman Catholics are extremely distasted with Regal
hereditary power throughout the world, the only obstacle to their designs, in
subverting the Protestant Religion, and making all Kingdoms mere vassalls to
the Pope and Sea of Rome; and therefore the Officers and Army in prosecuting
their Remonstrance, and new intended Representative, and subverting Regal
hereditary power, do most apparently carry on naught else but the very Jesuits
and Roman Catholics Interests and designs, and accomplish their desires,
either wittingly or willingly, as acting by their principles, if not counsels,
and aiming at their very ends; which is high time for all wise and
well-affected Protestants both in the Army, Parliament and City, and our three
Kingdoms, most seriously to consider and prevent the imminent ruin and
destruction even of our Reformed Religion it self, and our hereditary Monarchy,
the present and all succeeding Parliaments; our Lives, Liberties and Kingdoms,
all now drawing to their fatal period, by the heady violence, treachery and
disobedience of that very Army, which has been raised, cried up, and trusted
upon too much, as their only Saviors, for which God in justice may now make
them their principal and sudden destroyers, unless both they and we repent.

FINIS.

