To the High Court of PARLIAMENT: The humble REMONSTRANCE of the Company of
Stationers, LONDON.
Shows,
THat the Mystery and Art of Printing is of public and great Importance, and
ought to be held worthy of extraordinary regard and consideration, in all
well-governed States. China having had the use of Printing and Guns, long
before they were invented in Europe, makes no doubt to magnify her self, as
seeing with two Eyes; whereas Europe (as she pretends) sees but with one. And
in Europe the more civil and knowing each Country is, the more carefully they
provide for the prosperity of this ingenious Craft, and it were strange if they
should not; for as Learning must needs make us favor Printing, so Printing is
a great means to advance Learning amongst us. But France especially is famous
for the value she sets upon that Profession and Trade of men (whom we in
England incorporate by the name of Stationers) for there they are privileged
above mere Mechanics, and honored with a habitation, as it were, in the
Suburbs of Literature it self. The like reason also which makes Printing, etc.
favored and promoted in generous Countries where Learning is esteemed, renders
it odious amongst Barbarians, where superstition and darkness is affected.
Muscovy professes enmity to Printing, and so does Turkey, for Learning's sake:
And therefore the setting up of a Greek Press at Constantinople, sent thither
out of England, had like to have cost Cyrillus the Patriarch there his Life,
and the Greeks their fatal Ruin, Turk. hist. page 1491. Nevertheless, it is
not mere Printing, but well ordered Printing that merits so much favor and
respect, since in things precious and excellent, the abuse (if not prevented)
is commonly as dangerous, as the use is advantageous. Germany had the happy
Sagacity to invent Presses, Watches, etc. yet now, for want of reglement, her
reputation is lost in those Manufactures, a German Impression, or Watch, eo
nomine, is undervalued. In the United-Provinces also, there are not above three
or four Eminent and rich Printers by reason of ill order, and were it not for
the great Stocks of Moneys which enable those men to print the greater
Volumes, and of more general use, that Trade would there also further yet
decay. And commonly where Printing droops, and Printers grow poor by neglect of
Government, there errors and heresies abound, also by the same neglect as in
Poland, and some parts of the Netherlands is manifest, where the poison of
Socinus and Arminius spreads unregarded. We must in this give Papists their
due; for as well where the Inquisition predominates, as not, regulation is more
strict by far, then it is amongst Protestants; we are not so wise in our
Generation, nor take so much care to preserve the true Religion as they do the
false from alteration: and for that cause not only their Church is the more
fortified, but the Art of Printing thrives, and the Artists grow rich also
beyond any examples amongst us. The first and greatest end of order in the
Press, is the advancement of wholesome knowledge, and this end is merely
public: But that second end which provides for the prosperity of Printing and
Printers, is not merely private, partly because the benefit of so considerable
a Body is of concernment to the whole; and partly because the compassing of the
second end does much conduce to the accomplishing of the first, as is now to be
further explained: For, upon further examination, it must needs clearly appear,
That the late decay of the Stationers (chiefly brought upon them by want of due
and Politic regulation) has been an occasion of emboldning Printers to run
into enormious disorders, and in the like manner the same disorders have been a
further occasion of bringing a decay upon the Company. England was not
heretofore without a regulation in Printing, as well knowing that the public
good was very much concerned in that Art, and that no act did more depend upon
the public Care. Wholesome Ordinances therefore were provided and great
circumspection was used, that those Ordinances might be punctually pursued. In
the 8th and 28th of Qu: Eliz. diverse good Decrees were made; and in the fourth
of Qu: Eliz. such Orders of the same nature as had been before in force, were
revised and approved of by our Reverend Judges Catlyn and Dyer. Also the third
and fourth of Edw. sixth; and the third of King James; and other Statutes need
not now to be instanced in.

1. But as to the first and public aim of regulation in Printing, etc. Viz.
The advancement of Knowledge, etc. The main care is to appoint severe Examiners
for the licensing of things profitable, and suppressing of things harmfull: and
the next Care is, That the endeavors of those Examiners may not be frustrated.
The Star Chamber, and High Commission Court is now removed, and for supply of
that Government which is fallen therewithal, a new Bill is to be passed in
Parliament; and till that Bill can be passed, sundry good temporary Orders have
been made to redress the exorbitancies of the Press. Nevertheless, it is too
apparent, that those Orders have not been so successful as was wished and
expected; and since the want of success therein, cannot be imputed to the
change of Judges, or change of Laws, it must needs be imputed to the change of
prosecutors. The Parliament wants no power to punish Delinquents, the Orders of
the Parliament want no vigor for searching of Printers houses, and seizing,
taking away and defacing the Instruments of Printing, and for punishing and
imprisoning all Delinquents; only those that are the most fit Informers, want
authority and encouragement to discover offenses to the Parliament, or to put
in execution the Orders of Parliament. The Stationers therefore humbly desire
to represent three things to the Parliament: 1. That the Life of all Law
consists in prosecution. 2. That in matters of the Press, no man can so
effectually prosecute, as Stationers themselves. 3. That if Stationers at this
present do not so zealously prosecute as is desired, it is to be understood,
That it is partly for want of full authority, and partly for want of true
encouragement.

2. In the next place also, as to the second aim of regulation, viz. The
flourishing of Printing and Printers; the Stationers further humbly desire,
That their advantage and benefit may be so far only tendered and regarded, as
it co-operates to the due ordering and reforming of the Press; That authority
and encouragement which they seek for, to engage them to activity and alacrity
in this service of the State, if it be not such as is consistent with the
public good, if it be not agreeable to the Discipline of former times, if it
be not vigorous and efficacious for the Reformation of Printing desired, they
shall be no longer Suitors for it. As for matter of power, it is not the desire
of the Stationers to be solely or confusedly entrusted with the Government of
the Press: They desire no authority in order to judgment or punishment, but
only in order to prosecution of Delinquents; and that power also they desire
not to have it committed to the whole Company (though that lately has
expressed a good affection to the Parliament) but to some choice Committee,
nominated by the Company, and further approved and allowed by the Parliament.
Neither is it the Stationers desire that this Committee of the choicest
Stationers should be enabled with too vast a Latitude of making Orders to bind
the whole Company in all cases whatsoever, such limits as other Companies are
confined to, such as preceding Stationers have submitted to, such as are
consistent with the public good, and Laws of the Land (according to their
Charters granted by several Princes) such and no other do they aspire to. But
some abuses there are likely to arise emergently, which without extraordinary
provisions pro re nata, can scarcely be suppressed; and therefore that favor
which they desire, is, That they may not be abridged of all power in this kind.
Within these last four years, the affairs of the Press have grown very
scandalous and enormious, and all redress is almost impossible, if power be
not given by some binding order to reduce Presses and Apprentices to the
proportion of those times which did precede these last four years. This is so
far from an Innovation, that it is the removal of a dangerous Innovation, and
without this removal, the Company of Stationers being like a field overpestred
with too much stock, must needs grow indigent, and indigence must needs make it
run into trespasses, and break out into diverse unlawful shifts; as Cattle use
to do, when their pasture begins wholly to fail. Besides the same disorder
which undoes Stationers by too great multitudes of Presses and Apprentices
amongst themselves, causes also Strangers, as Drapers, Carmen, and others to
break in upon them, and set up Presses in diverse obscure corners of the City,
and Suburbs; so that not only the ruin of the Company is the more hastened by
it, but also the mischief, which the state suffers by the irregularity of all
is the less remediable. A multis quicquid peccatur, inultum est. Where
Delinquents grow too numerous, they grow out of the Eye of government; it is not
possible for the Stationers themselves at this day to discover their own
trespassors, and it is not possible that the State should any way have the
steering of the Press, when Stationers cannot assist them therein.

This is of main consequence; For were there but a modest limited power in the
Stationers to reduce Presses and Apprentices to a convenient number, by advice
amongst themselves, the reformation of the Press, would become a feasible
thing; not only all odious opprobrious Pamphlets of incendiaries, Printed and
invented at London, but penned in the Universities also, and Reprinted at
London would be quashed: by the same means also, the shameful custom of
selling Pamphlets by Sempsters, etc. and dispersing them in the streets by
Emissaries of such base condition; and the abuse of Printing in such despicable
Letters, and base Paper, and many other exorbitances, now offensive to the
whole age, would be rectified.

3. The next thing is matter of privilege or encouragement; As the case now
stands, Stationers are so far from having any encouragement to make them
active and alacrious in the service of the state, that they cannot serve it
without discouragement; and they are so far from enjoying privilege, that
they are abridged of their ancient Right, Propriety of Copies being now almost
taken away and confounded, if one Stationer prefer any Complaint against
another, the Complainant shall be sure to have his Copy Reprinted out of
spite, and so the ruin of himself and family, is made the reward of his zeal
and forwardness. And to instance only in propriety of Copies, that in some
men's understanding, is the same thing as a Monoply: Though it be not so much a
free privilege as a necessary right to Stationers; without which they cannot
at all subsist, Yet some men except against it as a public injury and
grievance. Nevertheless, Justice and Policy depend as much upon propriety of
some things, as upon Community of others; and 'twould as much dissolve the
bonds of humane society, to lay open some benefits of nature, as to enclose
others. Therefore that an orderly preservation of private Interest, and
propriety in Copies is a thing many ways beneficial to the state, and
different in nature from the engrossing, or Monopolizing some other Commodities
into the hands of a few, to the producing scarcity and dearth, amongst the
generality. The Stationers desire leave to offer these considerations.

1. Books (except the sacred Bible) are not of such general use and necessity,
as some staple Commodities are, which feed and cloth us, nor are they so
perishable, or require charge in keeping, some of them being once bought,
remain to Childrens Children, and many of them are rarities only and useful
only to a very few, and of no necessity to any, few men bestow more in Books
then what they can spare out of their superfluities, and the gain of such as
live by selling of Books is not so great, as to raise them to an equality of
riches with many others of more sordid and ignoble professions. And therefore
propriety in Books maintained amongst Stationers, cannot have the same effect,
in order to the public, as it has in other Commodities of more public use and
necessity.

2. A well regulated propriety of Copies amongst Stationers, makes Printing
flourish, and Books more plentiful and cheap; whereas Community (though it
seem not so, at first, to such as look less seriously, and intentively upon
it) brings in confusion, and many other disorders both to the damage of the
State and the Company of Stationers also; and this will many ways be
evidenced. For first, If it be lawful for all men to Print all Copies, At the
same time several men will either enviously, or ignorantly Print the same
thing, and so perhaps undo one another, and bring in a great waste of the
Commodities, whereby the State shall be at loss, and discord, and enmities
will also follow, whereby Christianity it self shall be scandalized. Secondly,
The fear of this confusion will hinder many men from Printing at all, to the
great obstruction of Learning, and suppression of many excellent and worthy
pieces. Doctor Preston, Doctor Sibbs his works, a large Concordance for the
Bible, and very many other Books of singular use and esteem, are now out of
Print, and the age must still be deprived of them, for no man dares, or can
with safety Print them. In other Countries where regulation is strict, the
Tomes and Volumes of Fathers and Schoolmen, and some Books with costly Plates,
are Printed to the honor and benefit of the public many ways, whereas the
Printing of Pamphlets is now the utmost ambition of Stationers in England. And
even in Pamphlets too there is a great hazard, for scarce one book of three
sells well, or proves gainful to the publisher, and therefore the certain
charge of Printing being so great, and the profit so unsure, it is no policy to
venture too far. Thirdly, Confusion or Community of Copies destroys that
Commerce amongst Stationers, whereby by way of Barter and Exchange they furnish
books without money one to another, and are enabled thereby to print with
less hazard, and to sell to other men for less profit. Fourthly, Community as
it discourages Stationers, so it is a great discouragement to the Authors of
Books also; Many men's studies carry no other profit or recompense with them,
but the benefit of their Copies; and if this be taken away, many Pieces of
great worth and excellence will be strangled in the womb, or never conceived at
all for the future. Fifthly, In many cases Community will injustice, as well as
discouragement; for many Families have now their Lively-hoods by Assignments of
Copies, some Orphans and Widows have no other Legacies and Dowries to depend
upon: and there is no reason apparent why the production of the Brain should
not be as assignable, and their interest and possession (being of more rare,
sublime, and public use, demeriting the highest encouragement) held as tender
in Law, as the right of any Goods or Chattells whatsoever. And as these and
many other are the mischiefs of Community, redounding so many several ways to
Authors, Owners, to Printers, to the State, and to the Church, so propriety
produces the contrary effects; for he that is sure of his Copy, though the same
cost 3 or 400^. if he cannot raise his money disbursed at the first Impression,
yet being assured of benefit by after Editions, he may sell cheaper at first
then he buys, to the great ease of other men. Besides, it will be a means to
relieve the poverty of the Company of Stationers, and by that means remedy
those many disorders which necessarily attend poverty; and if any disorders
happen, it will animate and sharpen Stationers to be zealous in detecting them,
and bringing the offenders to condign punishment: And as this may be truly
said in defense of Propriety, as it concerns private men in their Interests, so
much more may be said for Propriety of such Copies as the whole Company have a
Right in, the good of so many hundreds being far more considerable then the
good of any particular (which cannot be reputed a Monopoly, though of common
and universal use, because common to the entire Profession.) For since
Propriety has been confounded, and their Interest lost in those Copies which
anciently belonged to them, the whole Company (whose chief, and almost sole
Revenues and support, was the annual benefit accrewing from their Copies now
Printed from them) has drooped and grown poor. It has no common stock to
provide Magazines of Corn, Arms, etc. for the States necessities, nor to pay
Subsidies, or other frequent Assessements, charged by Parliament; nor to
maintain their poor, being many, and requiring 200^ per annum. And all the
freehold they now have belonging to the Corporation, together with their
Common-seal, lies at this present engaged for 1500^, borrowed lately at
interest for the service of the Parliament. Nor have they so much as a
Common Hall of their own to assemble in; nor can they any longer remain
incorporate, or any way privileged by their Charter, but must immediately
moulder away, and dissolve without some redress of this irregularity.

More of propriety needs not be said, nor of any other domestical Privileges
or Rights belonging to the Stationers. And for foreign abuses, little need to
be alleged. It Is obvious to all, That (if we will establish a just regulation)
foreign Books must be subjected to examination, as well as our own, and that
all such Importation of foreign Books ought to be restrained as tends to the
disadvantage of our native Stationers. By the first of Richard the third,
foreign Books were allowed, the manufacture of Printing being then rude, and
imperfect in England. But by the 25 of Henry 8. the English being then grown
more expert, for their benefit it was repealed. And in France where Printing
eminently flourishes, if any Books be brought from Geneva to Lions, or from
Lions to Paris Printed there, they are seized by the Searchers, and confiscate
without remedy; And nothing conduces more to the flourishing of that
profession there, then this rigid and severe observance of regulation.

Now therefore all these premises considered, and forasmuch as irregular
Printing, has of late been the fuel in some measure of this miserable
Civill-Warre, by deceiving the multitude, and has brought into both Church and
State, sundry other mischiefs and miseries, as well as poverty and desolation
upon the Corporation of Stationers. It is most humbly prayed, That some speedy
course may be taken for such a perfect regulation of the Press, as may procure
the public good of the State, by the private prosperity of the Stationers
Company.

And the whole Company shall ever pray, etc.


