THE Countrey-mans COMPLAINT.

OR A true Account of the Moneys, given, and lent to the PARLIAMENT, since the
year 1640. By William Pryor of Thurning, in the County of Huntington, His Means
being but 17 l. 10 s. a year.

Together with his Losses, Crosses, Vexations, and Imprisonments, by means of
the Commitees, Justices of the County, Lord Mountague of Boudon, and Parson
Wells of Thurning.

Who with their Murdering Practices, have endeavored (as much as in them lies)
the destruction of the said Pryor.

Humbly presented to Parliament for Justice; to be relieved from his Oppressors.

Jere. 21.12. Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that u spoiled
out of the hands of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that
none quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

A true account of the moneys given, and lent to the Parliament, since the year
1640. by William Pryor of Thurning, in the County of Huntington, together with
the losses, crosses, vexations, and imprisonments undergone by the said William
Pryor, by the means of the Committees of Huntington, by Justices of the County;
who with their destructive practices, have endeavored (as much as in them lie)
the destruction of the said Pryor, as will appear by this ensuing Catalogue.
HIs means is worth by estimation, but 17 l. 10 s. per annum.

1. Lent upon the Propositions, in Horse, Money, and Plate, 6 l. paid toward
Horses charged 14 s. 3 d. paid for the Scotch Army 12 s. paid for the British
Army in Ireland 1 l. 1 s. 6 d. paid for the English Army 16 l. 1 s. 6 d. paid
toward the pressing and setting out of Soldiers; and for maimed Soldiers,
Widows, and Orphans, of such as were slain in the Parliament service, 7 s. 4.
d. paid toward Volunteers, and Bulworks making 9 s. paid to the Committees for
fines and amercements, though he himself appeared with Horse, and Arms 1 l. 6
s. 7 d. paid toward the maintenance of the Eastern Garrisons, for disbanding
Foot and Dragoons, and paying them a months pay 12 s. 6 d. for reducing of
Newark 2 s. toward paying the Kingdoms debts 1 l. 7 s. Subsidy 1640 and 1641.
1 l. 4 s. Poll money 3 s. Contribution and Loan for Ireland 9 s. Carriages
taken and impressed 3 s.

II. Losses by the Cavaliers, viz Two Horses worth 18 l. and a Gelding with
Bridles and Saddles, and himself taken prisoner, to his damage 8 l. and a Mare
worth 6 l.

III. Toward the raising of recrute for the Army at Saint Ives 17 l. given at
the said time three Horses for the service, worth 20 l. spent upon five Alarms
at Huntington, 5 l. spent in the service at the Lord Generals first going out
of London, 2 l. spent in seting his son out of prison 3 l.

Sufferings by the Committee of Huntington. IV. Had his Arms seized upon, viz.
A sword and Fowling Piece* with a Pocket Pistol (which was none of his) and was
forced to redeem them out of the Committees Agents hands, and to return the
Pistol home again, he borrowing it only to assist Lieutenant General Cromwell
against Burley, and afterward, the Committee under pretense of sending for
Cavaliers Arms, sent for his; and because the Pistol was wanting, (being none
of his) he going along with them to Huntington, was five days imprisoned by the
Committee, for not delivering up that (which was not his) to his damage (it
being in the midst of Seed time, and he having no body to follow his business)
in his Crop at Harvest 10 l. besides his expense in prison, and in promoting a
Petition to the Earl of Manchester; notwithstanding at the same time, they left
Cavaliers Arms hanging behind the door unseised upon, although they were told
of them.

V. After this, he was summoned before Mr. Castle, one of Committee, and Mr.
Bernard of Huntington, by Warrant, he appearing, it was demanded of him, Why he
would not pay what was due to Mr. Wells, Parson; he answered, He owed him
nothing; and if the Parson thought that he owed him any thing, the Law, and the
ordinary Courts of Justice, were all open, when he should be ready to join
issue with him; to which, the Justices replied, That there was an Ordinance of
Parliament to enforce the payment of Tithes; but he denied that he owed him any
thing. To that Mr. Bernard answered, That Tithes was due by Scripture,
instancing that Scripture, That thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the Corn: To which he replied, He was none of his Ox, neither did
he tred out any of his Corn. Whereupon, the Justices desist at present, and
Parson Wells got a Writ, and arrested the said Pryor; upon which, he offered
the common bayl, which them Bailiff refused, sayjng, They must have two Subsidy
men bound, or else he must to prison; and upon the same, carried him away from
his business (Cattle getting to his Reek of Grain, by reason of his absence) to
his damage 1 l. And being drawn away by Cavaliers Bailiffs, in a most horrid
manner, beating, punching, and dragging him through the dirt to prison, where he
continued fourteen hours, to his damage 1 l. And procuring two men to be bound,
was released, and appeared by his Attorney at the next Term; yet
notwithstanding his bayl was arrested in a most unjust manner, for not appearing
upon which, he was forced to go to London, in Harvest, to search the Records,
whether there was any neglect in his Attorney, which be found contrary, to his
damage 7 l. After this, the Parson lets the suit fall, and goes to the
Committee for a Warrant to distrain; upon which, the two forementioned Justices
grant him a Warrant contrary to their Oaths, contrary to the Liberty of the
Subject, contrary to the 29 Chapter of Magna Charta (the English man's
Birthright) to break open any Doors, or Gates, to seize upon any Goods (as they
that came to distrain, did declare.)

The Bailiffs that came to distrain, was Masser of Luddington, and Wolman of
Oundle, one of Major Butlers Soldiers.

When they first came into the yard, they asked for him. It was replied, He was
gone from home; whereupon they said, He did ow Mr. Wells money, and they came
to distrain; and presently fell to driving away Cattle, and they drove away
eight Cows, and Bullocks, worth 2^. l. but his wife, with those at home,
endeavored to resist, saying, They came like thieves (she demanding their
Warrant, which they refused to produce) the aforesaid Masser run at her with his
sword, swearing he would run her through; upon which, she not stirring, he
striks her, thrusts her into a ditch, calling her whore, and presently drove
the Cattle out of the County, which they ought not to have done by the Statute,
and setting Malignants to prize them, and sold them unto their (and the
Parliaments) utter enemies, within a day or two, when as they should have been
unfold fifteen days, which was to his damage (by going to London, and many
other places in Harvest time. The want of Milk, Butter, and Cheese, for his
Family (besides the worth of the Beasts) 20 l.

Sufferings by the Lord Mountague. First, He demanded Tithes of the said Pryor
for three Acres of Land, which he has in the Lord Mountagues liberties; he
pleaded he owed him none, saying, That which he had formerly practiced, was a
denying Christ to be come in the flesh; in general, denying the three offices
of Christ, in particular, against three Articles of the National Covenant, and
against the Law of the Land; all which particulars, he made appear, That his
Lordship and his Chaplain had little to say. Moreover, He told his Lordship, if
he had offended him he should satisfy himself out of his Land; telling his
Lordship, That if he would demand the Free-simple of one of his Lands, he would
not withstand him; but for Tithes his Conscience bound him to withstand him:
Whereupon his Lordship was pleased to cause him to be arrested forcing him to
put in Bond of 40 l. to appear in person at London, which according to the Law,
he could not demand, keeping him four hours in prison, while he gave in that
Bond, by which they forced him to stay all the Term, at London, at great
expenses, waiting upon his Lordships Declaration, which he did not deliver in
that time, it being co his damage 10 l. And the said Pryor, by reason of the
corruption of the Lawyers, in cleaving to those that have biggest purse, and to
dance after great men's pipes, by reason of whose influenced together with the
Law-Monopolizers, the poor man's cause cannot be heard, nor Lawyers gotten to
plead for him, which was his case: his Lawyer he got neglected his business, so
that his Lordship got Judgment against him; which he hearing of, went up to
London the next Term, and made Affidavit, and so stayed Execution, which was to
his loss by time and money the value of 7 l. And afterward, he committed his
business to a Lawyer of Lincolns Inn, one Mr. Foster, he being not able to stay
at London to follow his business, which Lawyer neglected his business, and so
his Lordship had execution; which he most violently, unreasonably, and
unworthily prosecuted against him, taking away for one years Tithes, more goods
then the Free-simple of the Land is worth; taking away three Beasts, worth 15
l. for one years Tithes of that Land, which is worth but (according to the rate
of that Land lying by it, even three Acres and a half) 11 s. 8 d. per annum.

Neither did his Lordship yet cease his murdering, tyrannical practices,
toward the said Pryor, but caused his Horse to be pounded off his own ground
by his Tenants, locking them to a post up to the Feet-locks in dirt, to destroy
them, forcing him to reprieve them several times, not only to the spoiling his
Horses, but hindering him in his business, in Tilling his Land, to his damage
40 l. Afterward, forcing him to try his Title for his own-ground, the which
being almost brought to a trial in the Country, his Lordship removed it to
London, on purpose to make him to spend money, that if possible, he might
destroy him; yet this cruel tyrant does not rest here, but causes the said
Pryor to be arrested the second time; and least he should find out an honest
Lawyer (which is hard to find) he chooses him one himself, and forces him to
employ him (and many other evils) which if they should be mentioned, it would
be much more labor to relate what the said Pryor has suffered by this Tyrant,
alias Lord.

I shall only mention one thing more, in relation to the Title of the Land,
viz. His Lordship having Agents abroad, to persuade men equally concerned with
the said Pryor, not to join with him, for his Lordship would hot meddle with
them, only he was minded to tire out the said Pryor, witness Parson Wells his
speaking to Thomas Smith of Warmington, and Masser of Luddington to William
Collings of Thurning. His Lordships tyranny, and injustice* toward the said
Pryor, has, and does occasion, and continually encourage Delinquents, and
ill-affected, to Parliament and Army, his Lordship siding with them, That they
make it a matter of nothing to worry his Cattle to death; strike others with
Forks, and break their backs. Sometimes they break up his close Hedges, other
times his Gates, putting in their Cattle, cutting his Horse Ropes in the Field,
to his intolerable prejudice, and vexation. These with many other, are his
daily sufferings, besides his ^ears he receives by his (and the Parliament,
and Armies) enemies, telling him, he will be for the Parliament again, they are
his good Masters, how mightily they protect him! other times, if they can take
him at an advantage, they drag him in to drink the Kings health: It is
impossible to reckon up his losses, crosses, vexations, and imprisonments, that
he has suffered for standing up to maintain the peoples Liberties in
Parliament; besides that, twelve years being in the Commissaries Courts, for
not being subject to some of their Orders, before this Parliament began, being
in continual vexations by the Bishops Declarations, by Summers, Procters,
Informers, and other of that beastly vermin, etc.

Postscript.
GEntle Reader, Thou have here presented unto thee a Catalogue of evils,
undergone by the said William Pryor; by which it does appear (that
notwithstanding the Reformation that is in the Nation, since this Parliament)
there yet remain great and intolerable oppressions, upon some particular
persons, who without the Parliaments great care, to protect, and defend, in
relieving them (according to their promises, being their, and the Kingdoms
faithful Friends) they are like to be destroyed, not only by their, and the
Parliaments enemies, but by pretended friends, as appears by this man, whose
whole Estate was worth by estimation, but 17 1. 10 s. per anuum, as aforesaid:
and out of that small Estate has dis^urst freely by gift and Taxes, 76 l. 6 s.
1 d. and besides that, has had unjustly taken from him, as he is able to
prove, 163 l. 6 s. 7 d. being in all, the just sum of 239 l. 12 s. 8 d. which
is to the full two thirds of his Estate.

FINIS.

