THE COPY OF A LETTER

Written unto Sir EDWARD DERING, lately put out of the House, and committed
unto the Tower, Feb. 2. 1641.

HIS BOOKS CENSURED TO BE burnt by the common Executioner, for his strange
unadvised, and sudden differing from himself, and opposing the whole House.

Which Letter was sent, as is supposed, by a Worthy Member of the House of
Commons, Feb. 4. 1641.

LONDON. Printed for John Tompson. 1641.

The Copy of a Letter written unto Sir Edward Dering lately put out of the
House, and committed unto the Tower, Feb. 2. 1641.
SIR,
I Have heard men no Novices in the world often say, that the falls of the wise
are oftentimes dangerous unto them, if not wholly mortal, with much pain and
toil they rise, and recover themselves, if ever at all. I wish some reason may
be given for it, which will bear good color of probability, if not of
certainty. Envy and admiration attend notable and transcendent abilities, as
well as conspicuous and eminent fortunes, both strike at them, both wound them,
though several, nay almost contrary ways, envy flies at his throat, openly
detracting him, and therefore is so far from hurting a prudent and well
poysed man, that (though little thanks to the esteemed) she makes him more
advised and circumspect: But admiration claspeth with him, and by slights,
better discovered by the fact done, then by the predominacy in doing, betrays
a man to himself, and holds him a slave within his own doors, not permitting
him to walk abroad as formerly, and to behold and view the counsels,
resolutions, proceedings, reasons and concurrences of other men (if not equal
yet may be not much cast behind) with the groundwork and Supporter whereon
they may stand, which kind of treason is the more to be dreaded by how much the
remedy of release is difficult, the party thus enthralled not being contrived
by seducement into a peremptory conceit of the weight of his own sufficiency
or demerits, but absolutely possessed with a tantum non, mates and ties up his
very will from ever inclining to other condition then what he is already in, or
to other freedom then what he shall think to be so, although in the
intellectual eye of all the rest it be most miserable thraldom, and the depth
of slavery, taking no man's dimensions but his own, judging and blaming the
course of the sun of other men's judgment by his own Dial: Sir Edward, Sir
Edward, to leave sentencing, and to come in honest plainness to it: I fear
admiration has been more your foe then envy; the world so doting upon your
accomplishments both innate and acquired, as well it might set you so
Idolatrously above others, that at last you stepped up above your self,
scanning the words and conceptions of others, if not with a diffident
difference, yet with a reserved distance, expecting that what you either voted
or writ, should be taken as authorized, if not enacted; and verily to give you
your due, and not to deprive or deprave you in the least title of what by the
Court of every honest understanding conscience for almost sixteen months
worthy deportment: and unmatchable heedfull travail amongst those Peerlesse
Worthies, for the good both of Israel and Sion Church and state, you may justly
challenge: you behaved your self like a true Nathaniel, in whom was no guile
found or suspected, like another Apollos with the edge of your powerful
Rhetoric, with the hammer of your sound and profound Arguments, wounding and
bruising the notorious, though mighty delinquerts both of Church and State, and
had surely carried that ever flourishing trophee of neverdying praise, and high
commendation of a happy procurer the good and endless welfare of Gods people
here in England, and left it as an honor entayled to your Family, had you but
remembered those words of our Savior endure unto the end. Sir Edward you know
full well, that perseverance is called Regina virtutum. I suppose the reason
may be this, because that though all other virtues may run, strive, and do
masteries, yet only perseverance is crowned. But alas Sir, you have made a
forfeit of that Crown, with more willingness or wilfulness is hard to say,
your own strength becoming the cause of your fall, pray God not of your ruin,
Physicians say that the most dangerous diseases arise from the superfluity of
the best humor, viz. the blood, nay that the much abounding of pure and good
blood is a disease it self, and further, that the corruption of the purest
humor is ever as most perilous, so most noisome, it is often so seen in the
humors. I mean qualities and endowments of the mind, and I wish the world
might not bring in yours for instance, yours Sir Edward, which are turned from
the very best to the very worst by a strange Catastrophe, if any ever was,
rather procuring astonishment then wonderment.

You have given such president, that pu^ting my Lord Digbie aside, I trust in
that Right Honorable, right Worthy and Religious assembly, you shall never
twice be paralleled, that a third should be found amongst them so hypocrising
and deluding the expectation of all right honest men, that not only relied but
wholly confided themselves, as to betray as much as in you both lay, the cause
both of God, the Church and the Country, wheeling and veering about whether
some unexpected glance or Courtly glimmering happily invited you, forgetting
wholly what you were, and not well resolving with your self, what you would be,
only not content with what the Kingdom had appropriated lately unto your
deserts, you were ambitious, that whatsoever came of it you would administer
larger matter of discourse unto them, yea in malam partem, rather then none: is
it possible Sir, that you who were so vehement, yea and the very first so
vehement (in malignam partem) should now after so long personating upon the
Stage, and in the third Act, as the world may judge, acquit them and condemn
your self, is it possible Sir Edward, that you; who showed your self not only
so Real, but also valiant against the Straffordian faction, should be poisoned
with the dregs of that Cup, and you, that abhorred the brim, should now hunt
after the Lees, and show your self for that party (at least for those Tenants)
when that they cannot appear, or at least dare not stir for themselves, did
you, so cordially as it seemed to the whole House, adjudge and condemn the Lord
George Digbie, for counterfeiting, if not disavowing himself, and his own
actions, and are you the next man who is guilty of the same crime, did you, at
the first sitting down of this happy Parliament, so parthetically cry out upon
the Patriarch of Lambeth and his mytred Brethren, protesting that you had
rather, or at least with as much devotion have been subject unto Tybur, as unto
Lambeth; and is the wind come about so suddenly, so unexpectedly, surely then
we must not suddenly hereafter for strong pretenses cry up men, except we may
further guess (which is hard) what lies hid within the buttons.

But you are adjudged for your misdemeanor unworthy to be counted a Member of
that unquestionable Assembly, and held for your trespass (that I may not say
crime) worthy of another place, whom shall we blame for this? the House, or
you, let others judge as they list: but for my part I am of opinion that a drop
may be more easily corrupted then the whole Ocean, and that it is more safe, if
not more wise, to condemn particular persons, then a general State; you that
of late have bin so stiff for supposed vniversals, will give me leave in this
point to cleave unto a true one, Sir not to be longer tedious unto you, let me
crave pardon to tell you what I think of your miscariage, which in honest
terms, I take to be this, the hearkening unto them that had no way to
patronize their own foul facts but by the interposing this of yours, not any
course left to work their own safety, but by the drawing of more Company;
misery purchased by bad deserts is often found malicious, thinking to raise it
self, but by sucking in others, under it, I judge charitably, deeming that your
error sprang first rather from suggestion, then choice, but when you saw your
self so far engaged in it, that the world taking notice of it, you mu^t either
retreat with a Peccavi, or proceed with a Sic Volo, you rather chose utter
shipwreck, then to be voiced to have leaked, Sir, at parting J must tell you
the truth, and you must be content to hear it, by this late unfortunate
carriage of yours, were it in writings, words, or both, you have lost more to
your self and well wishers, then ever I fear you know how to repair, and thus
desiring of God, that he would give you a true sight of it, to acknowledge it,
and in that right Honorable Assembly an inclination, if not totally to remit,
yet compassionatly to mittigare your punishment for it, and to all others yet
standing, an heedfull and diligent observation to take example by it, and with
hearty sorrow, that a Star in all good men's opinion (yea and wise men's also) so
fixed, should at last prove if not a Meteor, yet a Planet, with affectionate
and sympathizing grief J take my leave, and remain yours, wherein with fair
devoyr I may serve you.

Covent Garden Feb. 4. Anno Dom. 1641. I. P.

FINIS.

