Mr. PYM, HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, On Saturday the 19th of February Concerning
the passing of the Bill in the Commons House, for the present Pressing of 15000
men, to be immediately transported for IRELAND.

Which Bill was that Evening sent up to the Lords for their assent, and was by
them also consented unto, and passed accordingly.

L^^^^N, Printed for R. C. 1641.

Mr. PYM, His Speech in Parliament on Saturday the 190 February, concerning the
passing of the Bill in the Commons House, for the present Pressing of 15000.
men for Ireland.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THe endeavors and proceedings of this Honorable House, for the further supply
and aid of Ireland, is now brought to a happy Period and conclusion, His
Majesty's most gracious expressions, containing his Royal and Princely
intentions therein has given much life and vigor to our perfecting the same, I
persuade my self, there is no man of what degree or dignity soever he be of,
but will be ready to spend his life and fortunes in so just and pious a cause,
fighting under the Banners of so indulgent and careful a King, for the welfare
and peace of his good people; The cause being God, and their Prince, Gods
Vicegerent in earth, to vindicate his true Religion, and his own honor and
Royal dignity in subduing such Rebellious and obstinate miscreants, more
cruel and savage in their traitorous and rebellious Actions, then no stories
of the most Heathenish and tiranicall wars in the world, can produce the like
Cruelties against the Saints and servants of God, professing his true and pure
Worship, agreeable to his Word.

Mr. SPEAKER,
I need not now reitterate the causes that have hindered from time to time our
proceedings in these affairs, and the Authors of the same, Prelates and such
persons as are altogether devoted to the Romish Religion; for it is a^ready
made manifest to all men that are not wilfully blind, or obstinately refuse to
take notice thereof, The distractions and distempers by them and their
adherents, produced and raised in this State, has been our chiefest endeavors
to avoid and remove; thereby to secure the King, and this his Kingdom of
England from their malicious plots and designs, daily practiced and agitated
by them against the same; We have happily at last, through the mercy of God,
the wisdom of his Majesty, and of his High Court of Parliament, provided for
the safety and defense of the Kingdom, by the last Act for the settling the
Militia of the Kingdom, and (...) also provided against future lets and
impediments in our proceedings by Prelaticall bishop, and their favorers, in
removing their votes, and sitting in the House of Peers, have provided against
future plots and practices by Papists and Recusants, by passing the Act for
their disarming and confinement to places of safe custody, distant from their
places of habitation, Also endeavored the removal of Popish Lords out of the
House of Peers, by all which distractions of this State, are some what appeased
and quietted, a fair way made for ou^ proceedings to the Trial and punishment
of delinquents, and establishing Religion, and such a Government in the Church,
as may agree with the Word of God ^ And now have ^ime to think and consider of
the distressed estate of the Protestants in Ireland, and to relieve them with
timely aid and assistance before it be too late. To which purpose we have now
happily concluded of the Bill for the Pressing of men, both for sea and land,
for that service.

Mr. SPEAKER,
Sit hence we have so far proceeded in this Business, I conceive it
necessary to protract no further time in Expediting the same, By sending it to
the Lords for their Assert thereunto, and presently put the same in execution;
We see how dangerous delay has proved to that Kingdom, and not only to that,
but this State also; which has been occasioned by the causes before Expressed.

Mr. SPEAKER,
I conceive under favor of this Honorable House, that if about 15000. men for
Hard-service, be presently ^ewied, and transported under Command of able and
experienced Officers, well-affected and grounded in the Protestant Religion,
with a Convenient force likewise of Seamen, well shipped under Command also of
good and Skillful Officers for the Guard of the Irish Seas, and the several
Ports and Havens of that Kingdom, The same may again in short time be reduced
to due obedience and subjection to his Majesty, and the Crown of England, We
see nothing but the sword must decide the Controversy, The unreasonablenesse
and Impudency of their Demands Imports so much, They know the same, nay not
one particular thereof can be granted neither with safety nor honor to his
Majesty and his Kingdoms; therefore must they submit to the King, or
altogether trust to the merits of their cause, which to the conceivance of all
men of sound and right Judgments, well settled in the true Religion, deserves
nothing but shame and Confusion, which God grant accordingly to all such as
shall still persist in their Traitorous and rebellious Actions; and that
victory and prosperity may Crown the head of our Gracious Sovereign, and
peace and tranquillity be evermore to the Kingdoms and Dominions over whom he
is supreme head and Governor.

FINIS.

