A Particular JOURNAL OF Major-Gen. Kirk's Voyage From LEVERPOOLE, To his safe
Arrival at Londonderry.
NOtwithstanding the many false Rumors and Insinuations which have of late
been spread abroad by the Popish Party, to the disadvantage of the Protestant
Interest in general, but more especially of that small Remainder thereof in
Londonderry and Enniskilling; we have now at last such undeniable
Circumstances and Proofs of Colonel Kirk's being arrived, as will convince the
hardest Believers. And because the Curious have much inquired into the reason
of Colonel Kirk's being so long retained on his Voyage, it may not be
unsatisfactory to give a particular Account thereof from the beginning, which
take as follows:

Colonel Kirk having for some time had all things in a readiness to sail the
first fair Wind; at last the Wind came up at N. N. E. a fair Gail on the 31st
of May, and he set sail with the three Regiments under his Command, from
Leverpool, with three Men of War and twenty four Sail of Merchantmen, on which
the Forces and all the Provisions and Ammunition were embarked. But the next
Morning, being Saturday the 1st of June, the Wind changing, he was forced to
put into Ramsey-Bay, in the Isle of Man, where by contrary Winds he was
detained till the 5th; in that time several of the Irish Gentlemen who had fled
hither, offering themselves as Volunteers, were accordingly shipped aboard.

On the 5th, being Wednesday, the Wind coming up fair, they set sail, and the
Wind holding good but twenty four Hours, they were resolved to beat it out at
Sea as well as they could: so that on the Saturday, being the 8th, they got
into Red-Bay in the Island of Rathlin, a small Island about two leagues from
the Continent, and six Leagues from the Mouth of Lough Toil: from thence
Colonel Kirk sent in a small Yatcht to get Advice, who coming up to Culmore
Fort, saw the Greyhound Frigate, who for want of a good Pilot, was left on the
Sand by the Tide, so that she lay exposed to the Cannon of the Castle, which
played upon her, though she were not idle on her part to return their Salutes.
But they having lodged themselves there till the next. Tide, told the Yatcht
what great Dofficulties there were in the Passage, as Bombs and sunk Boats:
Whereas we are certainly informed, that the River is as broad a^ that place as
our River of Thames between Lambeth and Wes^minster, besides forty two ^oot
Water when the Tide was in; so that 'twas impossible to choke up the River; and
this Story was rather to excuse their own Neglect, than otherwise.

However, the ^a^ch^ returned to Col. Kirk with this News, where upon, on the
12th, he wrote a Letter to D -- S --, giving an Account where he was, and how
he would break through all the Difficulties, if it were possible. So on the
13th at night he set sail from that Bay, and on the Morrow, being Friday the
14th, he sailed into Lough Toil, and so away toward the Fort. For farther
confirmation of this, there is one now come to Town, who left Dublin on Sunday
the 16th of this instand, who assirms. That the morning he came away, an
Express was brought, that they saw on the 14th, a Fleet sail into the Lough.
Likewise we have Advice from Glasgow, in Scotland, of the 16th, from Sir
William Gore, a Man of great Reputation, who says, That the Day before, being
the 15th, there came a Yatcht from Colonel Kirk, who left him the 14th in the
Lough, going up the River, for this Yatcht called at a place called
Green-Castle in the said Lough, and came to Greenthe twenty Miles from Glasgow.
He also adds, That two Men came thither that Morning, leaving Londonderry the
14th, and do depose, That that Day the Town's People, having Advice of a design
the Enemy had to Attacque them in three places, did prevent them by a furious
Sally on them; where, after a bloody Engagement, there were about three or four
Thousand of the Enemy left on the spot; and amongst them Lieutenant Colonel
Barker, who was Lieutenant Colonel of the Royal Regiment of Foot. The People
being encouraged thereto by the approaching Succors which they spied from their
Towers.

On the 15th also, there was sent from Glasgow, two Ship laden with Provisions,
for Londonderry, having on board three Thousand Barrels of Oat-Meal and other
Provision, under the Convoy of the Gersey Frigate: on which embarked a Hundred
Gentlemen of Ireland as Volunteers, encouraged by the joyful News they had
received from thence of Major General Kirk's being there safely arrived at
Londonderry, and all things in so happy a State.

FINIS.
London: Printed for George Meade. 1689.


