The Famous HISTORY OF That most Renowned Christian Worthy ARTHVR King of the
Britains, And his famous Knights of the ROVND TABLE.

depiction of King Arthur

To all all those noble spirits, who after antiquity joined with truth.
WOrthy Country men or women, by what name, age, title or quality soever you
are distinguished, I present you here with a piece of that huge volume of
antiquity; wherewith our ancestors were (for the most part contentedly)
furnished. Love to the party oftentimes causes partiality in publishing of
praiseworthy deeds; this was the notion that the Zelots (of that age so far
superabounded in their historical relations of this (indeed) matchless mirror
of Monarcks, and example of heroical Actors; insomuch, that proposing
improbabilities they have (in some sort) drowned realities: to be brief (where
brevity is aimed at) Geofry of Monmouth (and other Clarks of that time) have so
fabulously written of King Arthur (and his Knights of the Round Table) that
diverse by these Hyperbolical discourses, have been pusselled with ambiguity
whether any such story were essential or no, which to doubt were no less the
nto question, whether Will. (the Son of Robert) Duke of Normandy was ever King
of England. King Arthur is (and has been ever since his life and death)
accounted for one of the 3. Christian Worthies, whereof not only our own
Countrymen, but also others of foreign Nations have (interchangably) written:
This have the French in as glorious a style, as they have done of their own
Charles Maine, or Godfrey of Bullaine; therefore to explode one is to hiss all
the rest from the stage of Christianity; which I being confident you will not
refer to what follows truly collected by a lover of truth,

With antiquity, M.P.

The Contents of the several Chapters in this following History.
Chap. 1. HOw King Vter (surnamed Pendragon) slew in batel Coisen the proud
Duke of Cornwall (that rebelled against him) and took his widow fair Igren to
wife, of whom he begot our renowned Arthur. Chap. 2. How the learned Merlin
(who flourished in those days) had the tuition of the young Prince Arthur
committed unto him, and how he tutured him. Chap. 3. The death of King Vter
Pendragon, and how Prince Arthur at the age of 18. years was crowned King of
Britain by common consent. Chap. 4. Of the great triumphs, tilts, and
tournaments used in his Court at the beginning of his reign, and the wonderful
resort of gallant warriers. Chap. 5. Of his war with the Saxons, and how he
victoriously overcame them in 12. several set battles to the uter subduing of
their pride, and preventing the progress of their conquests, during his own and
his next successors reign. Chap. 6. How King Arthur crossed the Seas, and subdued
Denmark and Norway unto him, in which voyage many admirable occurances happened
well worth observation. Chap. 7. How King Arthur instituted the order of the
Round Table, and graced it with a 150. Knights, and the reason of its
institution to maintain concord with the names of the first Knights of the
Order; so in all none under the degree of Paron. Chap. 8. How King Arthur
fought against the Picks, Scots, Irish, and Saxons in one battle, and slew
Colgrim King of the Saxons, Bladust his Brother, and Childrick a Prince of
Germany, who came to their aid, and how he forced Guillamore King of Ireland
to become tributary unto him. Chap. 9. How King Arthur sailed to subdue
Ireland, which he performed with great honor, converting that People, and all
the adjacent Lands to Christianity, and obedience to him and the British
Monarchy. Chap. 10. How King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table, went
into Palestine to fight against the Pagan Infidels, where they performed
wonderful feats of Arms, to the honor of Christ and Christendom, converting
or confounding all where ever they came, and how in the intrim the traitor
Mordred nephew to King Arthur, whom (as Viceroy) he had left to govern the Land
in his absence, usurped the Crown; which King Arthur heating of, made have to
come home; and in his march through France, encountered and overcame Lucius the
Roman Consul, and many Princes of great birth and valor. Chap. 11. How King
Arthur returned into England. He and Mordred were both slain in battle, and how
noble King Arthur was buried at Glasenbury in Summerset-Shire,
The History of Arthur King of Britain.
CHAP. I. How King Uter surnamed Pendragon slew in battle Coisen the proud
Duke of Cornwall (that rebelled against him) and took his widow (fair Igren) to
wife, of whom he begat one renowned King Arthur.
THe Britains having drawn their necks out of the Roman yoke, which they had
borne almost 500. years (from Julius Caesar who conquered Casibelan King of
Britain) unto Gratian the last Roman governor here, who ended his life (and
with him the domination over this Island) in Anno domini, 376. After this
Vortiger of the Race Royal of Britain, dio by murder and usurpation possess
the Diadem and jurisdiction over this noble Kingdom; but by hi sexecrable
life, and wicked government, gowing hateful in the Subjects eyes; he (fearing
their justly instigated arming against him) sends over into Germany to a Noble
and warlike Nation, there called the Saxons (of Saxony) to intrent their aid
against his Natives (whom he called Subjects.) The Saxons under the conduct of
their two Princely Leaders, Hengist and Horsus, having gotten an invitative
entrance into this Land (which pleased them so well) they never loit of
proceeding their warlike policy, until they became in fine sole Masters of the
Field; chasing the Britains (by degrees) into that mountanous County now
called Wales (then Cambria which happened about the year 590 under Careticus) the
Britains deposing usurping Votiger, put Vortimer his Son into his stead, who
being poisoned by Vortigers wife (who was Hergists Daughter) Vortiger reassumes
the dominion raigns with much vexation 19. year, and then both he and Rowan
(his Saxon wife) are burnt in their Castle by Aurelius Ambrose of the lineage of
Constance, whom Vortiger (to get the Croven) had murdered: To this Aurelius
Ambrose (after 32. years reign) succeeded Uter Pendragon his Brother: (All the
premises are as so many steps ascendant to our story) this Uter was the Father
of our renowned Christian, worthy King Arthur the great of Great Britain, King
and Emperor, (the noble subject of this Kingly and most Heroic History) in the
beginning of King Uters reign, the great Duke of Cornwall named Coisen,
prompted by ambition, avarice, and oppulency (three strong cords to draw an
evil disposed man to destruction) raised an open Rebellion against his
Sovereign; in which lawless enterprise he was slain, and his Wise Igren (the
mirror of Ladies for her beauty and virtue) became as lawful prise to King
Uter; and although the death of Coisen her late Husband might seem to besome
obstract, yet the justness of his death, the Kings cause and request,
overcomming all niceties to the increase of her joy and dignity, by the
marriage of the King, she became Queen of Britain: Of this gallant Lady (Queen
Igren) our worthy Arthur was begotten and born, of whose matchless achievments,
for the honor of God and his Nation, and the terror of his enemies; this
following epitomy or abstract of his History, gives a brief and real notion;
this first Chapter serving as a proeme to what follows in order according to
the Rule of Chronography or History.

CHAP. 2. How the learned Merlin (who flourished in those days) had the
tuition of Prince Arthur committed unto him, and how he tutored him.
IN those days lived (and flourished) that learned Clark Mrlin (by some
accounted a Negromancer, by all a Prophet) of whose predictions a Prophecies,
so much talk is at this day (especially among the Welsh) who being in great
favor, with King Uter (as one by whose counsel he was chiefly governed in all
his actions) to him was committed the tuition and education of the young
Prince, whose advice gave him his name Arthur, for some cause which he
propounded. Merlin having gotten himself to be entrusted with the government
of this Child (of whom he Prophesied great and admirable deeds to be done)
applied all his best of skill and industry, to continue and augment the good
opinion which both the King and his People conceived of his Learning, Wisdom,
Gravity, and Fidelity to his Nation and his Sovereign; so that he nurtured the
Prince in his minority in rudiments suitable to his age and proclinity, and as
he grew and increased in years, so Art. Learning, and Virtue grew and increased
in him; insomuch that in him appeared all that might promise a future
greatness and goodness? his mind and study above all things earthly, he
dedicate to divine documents, and next unto that his discourses were all
military, and his deeds answerable (exceeding the compass of his age), briefly,
what may be possibly expected in a Prince every way pointed out (or set apar^)
for God and his Country, honor (and service) in our Arthur, was so
conspicuous, and visible, that the whole world made him the several objects of
both envy and hope: Thus much concerning his education under Merlin; in the
next Chapter we will bring his to Father his Sepulcher and him to his Throne.

CHAP. III. Of the death of King Vter Pendragon, and how Prince Arthur at the
age of 18. years was crowned King of Britain by common consent.
KIng Uter having royally and lovingly both governed, and nourished the sickly
estate of Britain, for the space of 28. years, in which time he had gotten many
fortunate battles against the Saxons; then being a prevailing party here, at
last to verify our now common saying, too much familiarity breeds contempt)
growing too much familiar with a Saxon Prince called Enerinus, he was by him
(or his appointment) poisoned at a great feast held in the Town of Salop;
leaving his noble Son Prince Arthur the expectation of England, and the just
revenger of his Fathers death, who immediately seconded his exit, with his own
entrance upon the stage of majesty; he was at that time but a strippling in
age, having past over but 18. Winters, and as many Summers, but in Statute,
Strength, Wisoome, and Valor he passed thousands that doubled his days. Such
majesty in his eyes, such gravity in his gesture and countenance, such
mediocrity and modesty in his behavior, and comportment joined with subtle
wisdom, prudence and temperance in his words, that justice and fortitude in
his actions were void of doubt or question, so that his wise and cunning Tutor
presenting his Pupil so exquisitly qualified, gained the lasting love of the
Commen-Wealth, for his so artificially yoaking grace and nature, to draw on the
Chariot of Britains honor and happiness; The same night that his Father was
poisoned, Prince Authur in a dream saw a vision (in this manner) a huge
spreading Vine, with great ripe clusters showed themselves red and ready to be
crushed: From the roof of this Vine issued a venomous Viper, which Viper was
seconded with a great Snake; between the Viper and the Snake was a cruel
Combat, the Snake for her advantage wound her self about the body of the
Vine, and from thence parlied with her enemy, the Viper breathing out
threatenings against the Snake instead of hurting her (with his venomous breath)
poisoned the grapes which a man in sad sable habit, coming after to taste of
died immediately: Soon aftar all this came in a lusty raging Lion, that with
his roaring scared away both the Viper and the Snake, and also awaked Prince
Arthur. This dream and vision Merlin disected in these (or the like words) most
noble branch of British Royalty, whom my prophetic spirit dares in the present
tense (regarding of the future) call the sole and absolute Monarch of all
Christendom; this last night thy royal Father has by late reconciled enemies
(whom we are forbidden to trust) been invited to a supper, and though as yet
fame has not sounded the trumpet of his death; neither do I know any (thing by
the voice of the People) but that he is very well and in perfect good health:
yet (worthy Prince) my genius (conspiring with your highness dream and vision)
dictats to my thoughts that he is by this time (to our great sorrow) dead,
being poisoned by Remon at the appointment of Querinus, the Saxon Prince; who
was lately of a fierce foe transformed into the shape of a feined friend. This
I tell you and this you will find true; these are the Viper and the Snake (for
they were at variance before, but agreed for the poisoning of Vter) which have
between them poisoned the Vine (intimated by the grapes) which your Father
signified by the man in a sable habit (a fit emblem of death) tasted and dyed
thereof; well what (renowned Prince) remains now, but that you must he that
raging, fierce, revenging, and roaring Lion, who with your powerful and
frightfull voice of command shall make this Snake and this Viper, this Remon
and this Querinus with all the rest of that hellish rabble of heathenish
Pagans; these miscreant Saxons to fly away and hide themselves from your ( Lion
like) fury. No sooner were these speeches by learned Merlin uttered, but
presently a Post came in all have to give information of the business,
signifying that King Uter Pendragon was poisoned: the Saxons had possessed
themselves of the Town of Salop, having most treacherously butchered man,
woman, and child that were therein; first ravishing both Wives and Virgins
before their Husbands and Parents faces, and then made a general massacre of
all together: When Prince Arthur heard this sad, (and horrible) report (after
sundry short ejaculations invoking divine assistance,) he furning to his Tutor
(Merlin) said thus; learned Sir your words are oracles, and so I shall ever
esteem of the same, during my mortal life, when I swerve from your counsel, I
can expect nothing but destruction to my self and my people; and if Alexander
estermed so much a dead Homers works, what shall I Arthur deem of a learned
Merlins voice, the noblest Barrons, Prelates, and commen people of the Kingdom,
when they had notice of this Royal Tragedy made have both to have a King to
govern them, and a revenging scourge for their enemies, so with a unanimous
consent they chose Prince Arthur for their Sovereign.

CHAP. IV. Of the great Triumphs, Tilts and Tournaments used in his Court in the
beginning of his reign, and the wonderful resort of galliant warriers.
THe barbarous Saxons having performed that treasonable practice in the
poisoning of King Uter (as you heard in the precedent chapter) though they had
made sure work for the total extirpation of the British blood, not thinking
this our Arthur to be his successor: though the hearts of the Britains (in this
exigent) were set upon the consideration of his promising virtues, which were
the step by which he principally ascended the Throne. For although I do not,
many then did question his legitamacy of knowing that the love which King Uter
professed to f^ir Igren (for her beauty and virtue) caused the jarre between
him and her husband; but that's not pertinent to our story. Arthur is crowned
King of Britain, and that the Saxons shall soon know to their cost. At his
first initiation into the government, he proclaimed a general Turnament for
all comers, at the City of Rerulam (long since buried in ruin and oblivion)
near to St Albons) King Authur was crowned (by the hands of William Bishop of
London) to this Triumphant Tilt, and Turnament: it is wonderful to relate what
resort there was of gallant warriers from all-neighbor Nations; from Scotland,
Ireland, France and Almaine, the most approved Knights for valor gave luster
to King Arthurs Court, who for munificent entertainment and large hospitality
far surmounted all his predecessors: at this Turnament (which lasted all the
Whitson week and four days after) was much galantry performed, both by our
Britains and Foraigners, which were tedious to relate in particular. In this
brief discourse it shall suffice to nominate some of the principal actors in
this martial scene, how they were mated and who were Victors. First Cador Duke
of Cornwall a most valiant and British Knight, encountered Macpar Prince of
Lenster (in Ireland) a mighty man in statute and conposure of body so of equal
skill and courage with the best knight then living. These two Heroes at their
first carrier found fortune so impartial in her friendship that they were were
both sent one way, their bodies fell to the earth, and their spears mounted
(with their same) into the the air. This they did three several times with
the like issue. Cador likewise ran against God^rey Count of Henault, a very
good, and experienced Knight, to whom Lady Fortune had been heretofore extremly
prodigal in courtesies, but now to show her mutability, her same left him, and
so did his vital breath; for being a corpulent man of body, with the violent
fall from his horse he broke his neck and died presently in the place, whose
death was so generally lamented, that the good Knight Duke Cador sorrowfully
threw off his armor and titled no more during all the time; briefly the Earl
of Ludlow overthrew and wounded the Duke of Mountpelier; the Earl of Rothsay
(a gallant Scot) did the like to the Count St Paul, and the King of Northwals
running against the Duke of Halstein threw both him and his horse to the
ground, breaking (with the violence of the fall) the neck of the horse and the
arm of the rider, the Duke of Britain did the like with the Count of Ipre; but
the most notable combat of all that I have either mentioned or (for brevity
omitted) happened upon the last day between the Count Palatine of Chester and the
Daulphin of Viena, which considering all circumstan esdeserves expression
(though in a brief manner) turing the Courtly entertainment before the
Turnament (and in the intrim) these two young gallants, both Batchelors, became
mutually enamoured on the matchless beauty of the Lady Jaquinta sole daughter
and heir to the Earl of Flintshire, who was a Courtly attendant on (and Niece
to) the Queen Igren the Kings Mother, and being jealous of each others fortune
in the affairs of Cupid; Mars (upon this offered occasion interposing himself
as a moderator to decide the difference, so that being interiorly (as well as
exteriorly) armed, and both gallantly mounted they entered the Lists with
extraordinary engagment, and courage (as the event justifies) at their first
encounter, both of them fell horse and man to the ground sorely bruised, and
recovering their legs (contrary to their forratuners) fell to it firecely with
their swords, their manhood whetted on that fair Ladies perfections, turned
friendly trial (by turnament) to the mortal thirst of revenge, with such eager
strokes one of them pursued the other, that the Princely spectators must need
judge death to be the umpire of the controversy; for does being dissuaded by
Royal command, and entreated of friends, all was answered with desire of
prosecution, with such accerbity and accrimony of heart, did they strive to
defend, and offend, that it was heart to censure whether malice or valor had
most predominance, the Count Palatine judging his native right to the Lady more
then the Dolphin which was an Aliene, and the Dolphin deeming that Princely
birth, and correspondent qualities might merit affection in any part of the
world. This is the beginning and ground of the quarrel; whereof the end and
issue is death to both, ^s you shall hear presently; the Dolphin hit the Count
Palantin such a forcible blow on the helm, making way by steel (through
steel) it both pierced his skull, and also brought him upon his knees, at
which advantage, he ran violently upon him to have crushed him to the earth,
but the Count Palatine (acttive both in body and spirit) reassumes his legs
(the Dolphins strength being much inferior to his) and with his kine sword lent
him such a lucky, or unluckly stroke between the head and shoulders, that
cutting his win dpipe, down fell the Dolphin, but as he fell he thrust his
sword under the skirt of the Count Palatines armor, which visiting his intrals
with the point of death: these two noble Knights and lovers, though not of each
other, dyed both together in hatred, neither of them enjoying his wish, but
revenge: and so with the end of them I will finish the feast, and turnament,
and withal conclude this chapter.

CHAP. V. Of King Arthurs first War with the Saxons, and how he victoriously
overcame them in twelve several set battles, to the subduing of their pride and
preventing their progress of conquest during his own, and his next successors
reign.
THe triumph thus tragically begun and ended; our worthy Arthur, having first
solemnized the funeral obsequies of his Royal Father; also the Count Henault,
the Dolphin of Viena, and the Count Palatine of Chester, which was on four
several days performed with all due celebritie, begins to think the
redemption of both upon his native Country from Pagan slavery, and revenging of
his Royal Fathers horrible murder. And to this intent he with all possible
celerity, musters op all the bold Britains of this Kingdom Christains and
Barrons assembling at London the metropolitant city of the realm, he made an
oration unto them to this or the like effect. Noble natives, on whom, next to
divine help, my honor, wealth, and safty depends, now is the time that we must
arm our selves with Christian confidence against these misbeseeming
miscreants, who for so long a time have gur^^ndized and glutted themselves in
ours and our worthy amatours blood, the execrable massacce at Salop begun in
the poison of our Royal Father, being yet in fresh bleeding memory, needs no
other incentive, it being of it self a motive forcible enough to conglutinat
your hearts, and put edge to your valor against these blasphemors of Christ
and his Law, and captivators of us, and what should be most dear to us, even
our consciences: to the heathenish Idolatry and merciless tyranny, much needs
not be said to excise, when the cause it self is so urgent, and pressive. Be
ye true to me, your Sovereign, as I by Gods assistance, whose substitute I am,
will be faithful and just, to defend and protect you my Christian British
Subjects, from the vasalage of these infidels; and I doubt not but we shall
bring these our godly resolutions to a happy and a glorious period. This speech
was received with a general plauditie, the acclamations of the people were so
loud, and great, that it is almost beyond credit to tell how far they were
heard, of arm, arm, arm, now is all the cry, and there was no need of
pressing of soldiers as we use now adays, for soldiers pressed forward to
this War, without command or pay: So that within a fortnight space and less,
there appeared in sundry places of the Land above 200000. able fighting men,
all completely armed, all crying for God, King Arthur, the British Liberty, and
Christian Religion: Well, but what do the Saxons all this while, are they idle?
no, great preparations are made, new forces arm daily at the several ports and
havens of the Land: Some at Southhampton, others at Sandwich, and a third at
Famouth; now is Britain become an Acceldama, nothing but blood, ruin and
slaughter is to be expected, but the best of it, it is King Arthur and his
noble Britains are always victorious: the Pagan Idolaters fall under the
Christian sword; insomuch that within 18. months 12. mighty hosts of Saxons are
overthrown in 12. several set battles, fought in sundry places of the
Kingdom; the first and greatest was in Shropshire near Salop upon New Years
day A. D. 517 where 46000 Pagan Saxons were sent to the devil for a New years
gift, 3000. chief Commanders, and Pymen, as they call them, taken prisoners;
this memorable battle in a manner made ship wrack of all the Saxon greatness
in this Land; yet in March following by the aid that came from them from
beyond the Sea, and their scattered forces which they had rallied together they
openly opposed K. Arthur and his British Army, near to Oundly in Norhampton
shire, where with the slaughter of above 18000 Saxons and 150 prisoners, King
Arthur abtainted a glorious victory. To make short, what would bed verlong if I
should tell you all; in the space of time above mentioned tbis noble Christian
worthy, became conqueror of these bloody, and amhious Saxon conquerors. 12.
several times; insomuch that they not being able any longer to withstand his
never changing Fortune, were at the last (so many as were left alive) ensorced
quite to abandon the Land, to which they never returned during the reign of
Arthur, and his next successor, which was (his Nephew) Constantine, Son to the
late mentioned Cador the valiant and magnanimous Duke of Cornwall: Thus much
for his first war with (and extirpation of) the Saxons, wherein he showed
himself to be a true Son to his poisoned Father, and a just Father to his his
oppressed, distressed, and captived Nation great Britain.

CHAP. VI. How King Arthur crossed the Seas, and subdued Denmark and Norway and
Gothland unto him, in which voyage many notable occurrances passed well worth
observation.
HAving thus victoriously triumphed over his enemies at home, our (not idle)
Arthur caused a Navy of 400. ships to be presently well rigged and manned, and
an Army, consisting of 60000. foot, and 20000. horse to be ready to attend his
Majesty upon what design he would be pleased to employ them; which done,
himself in his Royal person, his kinsman Cador Duke of Cornwall, whom he made
Captain General of the horse, the Earl of Ludlow named Sr Marston,
Lieutenantgenerall under him; the Earl of Leicester, Lincoln, Salop, and
Flintshire, all employed in places of great charge in the Army. Morgan King of
Norhwales, and Theoder (of whom the modern name Tender originally sprung) King
of Southwales each of them voluntarily offering unto King Arthur (to whom they
did fealty) their aid and assistance in this gallant intended voyage; So that
having all things fitting, and nothing wanting (that might promise property)
our famous and renowned Navy, with our bold British Christian Army, put from
Dover in the Ides of March, Anno 519. for the Conquest of those thres then
Pagan Nations, Denmark, Norway, and Gothland, and with such happy gales they
were befriended, and waited on by such auspitious stars, that as they were not
long under sail, so upon the shore their wishes were answered with success
accordingly, insomuch that it was no more then hope and have, wish and win; for
our Arthur might always say with Caesar, veni, vidi, vinci I came, I saw, I
overcame; so the divine power was so immediately assistant, with this valiant
Christian Champion our worthy British Arthur, that what enterprise soever he
took in hand (though never so much difficulty appeared in it) he was certain to
come off victor; at his arrival in Denmark, mighty opposition was made to
prevent farther entrance into the Land; but all in vain, our Noble Britains
(had been by former experience) taught to account that ground whereon their
feet stood, to be their own inheritance, and that they would never part withal
alive: this resolution caused King Arthur to conquer where he came, whatever
opposion was made. The King of Denmark whose name was Eschilleus, was at a
strong hold of his, called Bull Castle, which King Arthur (^aving overcome the
Danish Army) laid siege to, and in four days took it by maine assault: the
King to save his life, humbly upon his knees did homage to K. Arthur, for his
Kingdom, which he would hold of him as his liege Lord, paying to him (and his
heirs, Kings of Britain) an anval tribute of 40000 Ducass: which when
Dolleivius King of Gothland heard who was coming to assist Eschilleus (fearing
the event) he began to retire; but our horsemen so plied the opportunity, that
overtaking the rear of the army; they gave fierce onset to them, holding them
in play, till the maine body of the British foot came up, and indeed little ado
their was to-gaine this victory, which fear had half done already, the King
was taken (with 12. men in his company near to a wood side) by a party of our
horse, who were employed in pursuit of the (dispierced) army: who being brought
before, King Arthur, submitted, resigning himself (his Crown and Kingdom) to
hold in Fee of the British Monarchy, yearly allowing a tribunary stipend of
700. Franks (of Gold) delivering his own brother Harpus (Prince of Finia) in
hostage till security was made for the true payment of it. With this prosperous
success, our worthy Arthur set forward to Norway, the King whereof ( Lotho by
name, a man of marvelous strength and valor) having had intelligence of all
that had passed in Denmark (and thereby conjecturing what would come to pass)
gathering all the premission that might be of men and arms to check the
careere of this unresistable army; which he indeed had accomplished, but that a
power more then humane prevented it: at the first arrival of the Britains
(which they permitted as trusting upon their lands strength, which was 300000
horse and foot in a minute all that the Land could make) King Arthur sent a
messen^er to King Lotho, requiring of him his Kingdom, and people to yield
obedience to the Christian Crown of Britain, as his neighbor Kings had done;
which if he refused to do (without effusion of blood) he doubted not to gain by
force what he sought to win by favor: the proud Pagan Prince (presuming upon
his own, more then common ability of body, and the magnitude of his army, sent
back this despicable answer (by way of defiance and challenge) to King Arthur,
and his chevalry. Know daring Arthur, that thou and all thy crafty Christians,
whom contemptuously thou have brought against the decree of the gods, into this
Northeen part of Europe, shall be the laughing stock of Lotho and his matchless
Norveigians, and although fortune have smited thee to triumph over the
cowardice of Eschillius and Dollavius wits; assure thy self all this will
conduce to the greater glory of me, who am (by the gods) designed to be the
Conqueror of thee, who has conquered so many of their devout supplicaters,
thou art come upon my land without my leave, but shall never depart thence with
thy life; but because I intend to win a particular praise in thy ruin (and the
chief men with thee) I challenge thy self to meet my self, in personal combat,
and if thou, and they think well of it, 10. of the most approved Knights in thy
army, against 10. of mine, this if accepted by thee and thine, shall be
performed by me and mine, to morrow morning by 9. of the clock, upon Armond
plain, two leagues from either Army; bring you courage along with you, and let
your horses bring you to the place of destruction; at the time and place
appointed; if you fail, our expectation, we will not fail to be with you (to
the ruin of your host) in the afternoon of the same day; in the in^rim, take
leave to pause upon the words of thy mortal enemy Lotho, Rex Norvegia* This
Letter coming into King Arthurs view, it is unexpressible with what joy he
read it, and calling his Princes, Barrons, and illustrate Knights before him,
unto them he communicated the premises; when presently a virtuous emulation
(and strife arose among them) who should be the combators in this glorious
hazard; to be brief, the business could no otherwise be decided then by
casting lots (so hungry were their Christian appetites after this honorable
breakfast) the lots fell upon Duke Cador of Cornwall, Morgan and Theodore King
of North and South Wales, the Earl of Lecester, Lincoln, Flint, Ludloe, and
Salop, the Barron of Aberqueny, and the Barron of Bark; these 10. gallant
Knights to the spiritual envy of many others rode along with King Arthur (at
the time to the place appointed) where they met there resolute opponents, so
punctual to promise, that I may well say they met indeed, neither party staying
for the other; but just coming to the place together, as though the 22. horses
had been privy to catch others secrets, or known their riders intentions: Thus
being mutually met after a few course complements (such as the present occasion
dictated) they fell to the business which they came about, with such impartial
hardines, that you might well guess that the one party fought to win a
Kingdom, and the other fought to save one: it would be both troublesome and
tedious to recite the particulars of this happy bickering, therefore I will
content my self with the rehearfall of the two Kings encounter combat, and
success, only generally telling how the rest behaved themselves, and to whom
the victory happened: King Arthur charged his enemy so furiously at their first
encoun^er, that Lotho being a man of admirable strength, and not able to
unhorse him, he himself was so near dismounting, that he recoyled into
thecrouper of his Saddle, at which his very eyes revealed the anger of his
heart, so that recovering his seat, and at a second pass^ge both their Lances
(though marvelous strong) flew into the air, but with the vehemence of the
stroke King Lothos left shoulder joint was dissocated, which he chafing (like a
bore) sought his best advantage by sudden dismounting, but King Arthur (the
activist man alive was on ground with sword in hand before him, and at the
first veny struck him on the head so vigorously, that he cleft his helm and
head to the eyes; so down fell Lotho like a mighty Oak, yielding his body and
Kingdom to the mercy of King Arthur, how he would bury the one, and dispose of
the other; in the intrim our hardy British Knights had slain 6. of their 10.
Antagonists, and mortally wounded the other four, either of them having
received any notable hurt: the Earl of Flint had his horse slain under him,
the like had the King of Northwales, Duke Cador was cut in the arm, the Earl
of Leicester in the leg, and the Earl or Salop in the shoulder, no other hurt
was done unto the British Party, the dejected Norveigians bearing these tidings
(so full of horror to them) threw down their weapons and fled, whom our
Britains overtaking; King Arthur caused a proclamation to be made, that
whosoever would forsake the worship of their false gods, and adore the true God
Jesus Christ, and be baptized into the Christian Faith, should be received to
mercy, the obstinate to expect none: upon this many thousands promised, and in
four days performed the same, by baptism, and confession of the Christian
Faith; among the rest, the Duke of Erikine next heir to the Crown of Norway,
was baptized, and Crowned both in one day (by the Bishop of Menevia (since
called Saint David's) who was always attendant on King Arthur, who receiving
homage of this new Christian King (the first of that name and condition, for so
he was named at his imitation to his Kingdom and Christianity) for the
Kingdom of Norway, our illustrions King Arthur (with his Royal British army,
laden with honor and victory) left these coasts, and set sail for Britain,
where soon ariving, they were received with uncredible gladness, and triumph,
as such a sprosperous voyage deserve^.

CHAP. VII. How King Arthur instituted the order of the Round Table, and graced
it with 150. Knights, with the reason of its institution to maintain concord.
KIng Arthur having filled all ears with the fame of his incomparable
victories, and being at home on all sides quiet, by none molested, by all loved
or feared, to honor those high born Princes Nobles, and Barrons, who had done
God and him such notable service, he betheught him how he might in some manner
guerdonize their (incomparable) worth, with some honorable Order of Knights,
had (a thing customary in many renowned conquerors) and because he took notice
that being most of them of equivolent condition, both in birth, and haughtiness
of spicit, to avoid emulation, envy, and heart burnings, incident to such a
Company about priority or precedence of place at feasts, to prevent any such
occasion of distraction (and to continue concord, and mutual correspondence
among that noble fellowship,) he instituted at the City of Winchester where he
then was residing) the Order of the Round Table, causing a certain number of
Round Tables to be made, at which these illustr ous Heroes dined, and supped,
the salt and the bread always set in the middle, there was neither upper end
nor lower end (of the Table) but all equal; into this noble Order was received
150. men of high blood equality which (or what high birth soever) none were
under the degred of Barron) were called Knights of the Round Table, and because
I find many of their names to be at this day great sirnames in the Monarchy of
great Britain, I think it convenient (to the honor of the beaters,
notwithstanding my promised brevity) to set down the names of the first Knights
of the Round Table in Alphabeticall order as I found them long since in an old
Chancerian manuscript.

depiction of the Knights of the Round Table

1. SIr Acolon. 2. Sir Alot. 3. sir Agar. 4. sir Aucruise. 5. sir Ambross. 6.
sir Ascot. 7. sir Ascue. 8. sir Albone. 9. sir Aubaurne. 10. sir Ash. 11. sir
Amice. 12. sir Beumans. 13. sir Belamore. 14. sir Bersunt. 15. sir Belvoire.
16. sir Bo^s. 17. sir Beleobus. 18. sir Basset. 19. sir Bygot. 20. sir Brian.
21. sir Bevis. 22. sir Best. 23. sir Bu^^acie. 24. sir Baude. 25. sir Betris.
26. sir Baulks. 27. sir Cador. 28. sir Christian. 29. sir Carl^on. 30. sir
Clear. 31. sir Clare. 32. sir Cade. 33. sir Cosels. 34. sir Callin. 35. sir
Clay. 36. sir Coats. 37. sir Castor. 38. sir Daubeny. 39. sir Delamore. 40. sir
Deucie. 41. sir Dallin. 42. sir Doughty. 43. sir Daynty. 44. sir Dunsmore. 45.
sir Darcy. 46. sir Dalby. 47. sir Duncombe. 48. sir Dotrill. 49. sir Doguery.
50. sir Doriner. 51. sir Evan. 52. sir Ector. 53. sir Eincrie. 54. sir
E^smeere. 55. sir Eatone. 56. sir Eger. 57. sir Edwards. 58. sir Erskeine. 59
sir Euball 60 sir Eupheos 61 sir Ermin 62 sir Floll 63 sir Frith 64 sir Fly 65
sir Forscue 66 sir Fe^lde 67 sir Foulke 68 sir Fly 69 sir Flesk 70 sir Forbs 71
sir Fleere 72 sir Frisk 73 sir Font 74 sir Fode 75 sir Freake 76 sir Fax 77 sir
Ghislet 78 sir Gavin 79 sir Gaheris 80 sir Gareth 81 sir Gravet 82 sir Geuls 83
sir Gortrim 84 sir Gilden 85 sir Giles 86 sir Goulde 87 sir Gaull 88 sir Guest
89 sir Hard 90 sir Hay 91 sir Hope 92 sir Hill 93 sir Hunt 94 sir Hugin 95 sir
Harcourt 96 sir Harold 97 sir Hamond 98 sir Hoby 96 sir Hollis 100 sir Jermin
101 sir Ingram 102 sir Islip 103 sir Ipre 104 sir Jones 105 sir Joyce 106 sir
Ive 107 sir Killian 108 sir Kirk 109 sir Kercacy 110 sir Knevet 111 sir
Kilegrew 112 sir Lancelot 113 sir Lanjon 114 sir Lyonell 115 sir Jews 116 sir
Loftus 117 sir Laud 118 sir Leuellen 119 sir Lovelace 120 sir Leuk^or 121 sir
Maurice 122 sir Martin 123 sir Morton 124 sir Miles 125 sir Meridith 126 sir
Mariot 127 sir Newton 128 sir Norton 129 sir Norman 130 sir Nayler. 131 sir
Nudigate 132 sir Napper 133 sir Oliver 134 sir Osbolstone 135 sir Ouldtoire 136
sir Osbourne 137 sir Percivall 138 sir Pelleas 139 sir Pallamaide 140 sir
Peregrin 141 sir Plaster 142 sir Querin 143 sir Reiner 144 sir Roderik 145 sir
Randolph 146 sir Sugris 147 sir Tristram 148 sir Tramore 149 sir Tracy 150 sir
Valentine
These were the Names of those Princes and Noble Men.

FIrst brother of this honorable fellowship (and fraternity) called Knights of
the Round Table, between whom there was such an unanmious and mutual
correspondency, that all the whole world admired the admirable feats of
chivalry by them performed; for with those 150. scarce any 300. Knights in
Europe durst adventure to Combat: of their noble act you shall hear further in
the progress of our history to the end.

CHAP. VIII. How King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table, fought against
the Pits, Scots, Irish, and Saxons in one battle; and how he slew with his own
hands, Colgrim King of the Saxons, Balduff his brother, and Childrick a Prince
of Germany, and how he forced Guillamore King of Ireland to become tributary
unto him.
SHe Saxons envying King Arthurs prosperity, and vexing at their late success
in Brit^ine, have now suborned the Picks, Scots, Irish, and the Hesens of
Germany, to aid them in revenging themselves upon K. Arthur; so they came
hither with an army composed of all these aforementioned Nations, consisting of
200000 horse and foot under the conduct of Colgrim their King, balduff his
brother, Guillamore King of Ireland, and Childrick: (Prince Coras now
Landsgrave) Hesen meaning to share the Kingdom of Britain, among them, they
landed suddenly in the North of England, and burnt and spoiled before them for
the space of 18. miles without any opposition, but so soon as ever our Lion
like Arthur, and his Knights heard of it, they came with a puissant force to
withstand them, and near to Humber obtained a glorious victory slew 28000. in
the Field of the common sort, and took 300 of the ir chief Commanders
prisoners; but which most adornes the victory, King Arthur himself in person
slew head to head Colgrim the Saxons King, with Balduff his brother, and
Childrick of Hesen, but Guillamore King of Ireland trusting to his footmanship
(for his horse was slain under him) ran toward the (...), thinking to escape
by shipping, but Sir Cador overtaking him, brought him prisoner to the King,
who forced him for the safeguard of his life, to resign his Kingdom unto his
majesty, and to that effect he did homage, yielding to pay unto King Arthur
(and his heirs) a yearly purtion of nine thousand pounds: Thus was our noble
Arthur every way magnified, his foes every where confounded; and the monarchy
of Britain under his government became the most most renowned throughout all
the whole world; the Saxons never daring to come toward it, during his reign
nor his next successors (Constine) as I told you heretofore.

CHAP. IX. How King Arthur (and his Knights) sailed to subdue Ireland, which he
performed with great honor, converting that, and the adjacent Lands, to
Christianity, and obedience to him and the British Monarchy.
GReat Spirits cannot be idle, the thoughts once fixed on honorable
achievements, and cherished with happy success, are ever busied in finding out
this jewel, where ever it lie hid in the world: This is evident in our
Christian Worthy, and his gallant Knights, who loathing to be backward in
putting forwards Gods glory in the enlargement of Christendom: and hearing that
Ireland, and other people thereabout lived in heathenish Idolatry, and blind
worship, not having the light of the Gospel as yet revealed to them; he raised
an army to reduce them to the Law of Christ (and obedience to him,) with happy
success this voyage goes on, King Arthur and his Royal army, consisting of no
more but ^0000. depending on divine Auxiliaries, adventure upon this great
enteprise, and arive happy in Ireland, where they find great opposition, yet
overcome with small difficulty: The people by Nature rude and savage, as hardy
as their Country is cold; yet these cold comforts nor the peoples frozen
conscience, dismay not our undaunted Britains, whose zealous fire is of force
both to warm themselves, and to thaw their enemies hearts: a furious encounter
they found at their entrance; for the barbarous Islanders were upon a sudden
ranged into a body of above forty thousand, their King Malvasius (a renowned
and hardy Knight, famoused for many victories against the Laplanders, and
Finians) came himself in person before his soldiers boldly demanding a sight
of, and speech with King Arthur, which (to his happy unhappiness) he soon
attained.

CHAP. X. How King Arthur (and his Knights of the Round Table) sailed into
Palestine to sight against the Pagan Infidels, where they performed wonderful
feats of chivalry to the honor of Christ and Christianity; converting, or
confounding all where ever they came.
LOng had not King Arthur and his (honor thirsty) Knights slept at home, but
fresh adventure pricks them forward to travel; Europe (by their means) is
quitted (and the fold of Christ much enlarged) but in Asia the Pagan infidels
rage; Palestine (with her Christians) groans under this heavy yoke; therefore
our worthy Arthur and his gallant warriers will not rest in peace, while
tidings of th^s horrible war and oppression is spread through the land of
Christendom: briefly, with the very same army, which he brought out of the
cold Countries, he marched upon this hot (yet honorable) enterprise, of all
other the most laudable for a Christian Army to engage himself in; let us now
imagine we see the Christian Banner displayed between Jerusalem and Jericho,
upon the plain of Nabor, where an innumerable host of Sarares are encamped
against the Xerxian multitude (with great confidence) goes our Christian Army,
not doubting of (that which they near failed to get) victory, which by divine
providence they accomplished; it were incredible to show what extraordinary
virtue King Arthur, and his Knights performed in that service; for three days
space the battle continued, and then our Christian Army had the happiness to
behold the destrustion and total rout of the whole Pagan host.

CHAP. XI How King Arthur returned into England. He and Mordred were both slain
in battle, and how noble King Arthur was buried at Glasenbury in
Summerset-shire.
NOw has prosperous wind and weather brought our worthy Arthur (and his bold
belonists) to the British Coasts; he seeks lading at Dover, but finds it
fortified, to impeach his arrival, the traitor Mordred had so possessed the
people with his spirit of treason, and rebellion, that they in stead of
magnificent shows, and trumphes to welcome him (as his virtue required, and
their duty had heretofore done) defied him to his face (O ungrateful Caitifs)
and insolently denies his entrance into his own inheritance (a very unfit
guerdon for the unparalleled honor) wherewith King Arthur and his Knights had
endowed and adorned the British Monarchy) upon the British shore he can set no
footing but by force, which (if there be no remedy) he knows how to do (being
so long (and so well) verst in that business) and so by force does enter, and
is by a huge army of (bastardly) Britains opposed, a cruel sight is
maintained for a long time, in fine the King is victor, the usurper and his
wicked company (for so many (...) escaped alive) fly and were pursued by the
King, and their own evil consciences, yet being hardened with malice, and as it
were steeled with baseness; the miscreants (in that nature worse then the
Pagan Infidels which his all conquering courage had so often triumphed over)
have the face again to afront that majesty, the splender whereof had so
bazeiled the eye of the world (which looking on his glor ous conquest) that
none beheld his countenance (in (...) warlike construction) without fear and
trembling, nor durst they have done it had they not been (too bold in such an
action) Britains that dare do any thing. Sir ( C^dor that matchless man of men)
was slain fighting against a whole Regiment. Sir Gawin, a man of invincible
valor, coming to his rescue, also with him joined in fellowship of death, the
renowned, and courageous young King of Scotland Arguisell by name, coming to
the aid of King Arthur, dyed gallantly fighting in his quarrel, Sir Killian
de Londre environed with a troup of horse after the death of 12. men, which
with his own hand he slew, was himself hit with a dart thrown from a common
Irish or Pictish hand laid dead on the earth Sir Martin de Fo^e^ in rescuing
King Arthur encompassed with a troup of horse (that sought to have taken him)
was shot into the heart with an arrow, and dyed presently: after this Sir
Cador, Sir Gawin, Sir Killian, and Sir Martin, after so many unequalled
victories abroad, came to yield their loyal hearis, by the hands of perfidious
Rebels, their own nativis, into the power of death in their native Country,
also that valiant Scot before mentioned King Arguisel, though not a Knight of
the Round Table, yet an undaunted Knight and trusly friend to King Arthur* who
like an enraged Lion makes slaughter on every side with his sword beyoud the
expectation of humane force; insomuch that the enemy beginning to despair of
victory, a Pictish soldier ((...) by Mord^ed) (...) out aloud in the British
Language, fly you Britains, what do you fight for; Arthur your King (on whom
you depend) and all his Knights of the Round Table are dead: This made King
Arthurs soldiers begin to star^, which he hearing made have to the most
eminent place that he could ^i^d, where being conspirnous (and visible to them
all, he spoke these coursgious words: Fight on (fellows in arms) I am (I
praise heaven for it) neither dead nor wounded, but in perfect health (and
strength) and that these vailanous rebels and traitors (who speak what they
wish) shall soon find these words kindle fresh fire of valor in the bre^sts of
all true Britains, so as the battle did (as it were) begin anew; insomuch
that the perfidious Mordred without hope, fled with his rebellious remnant
toward the Town of Glasenbury in Somerlet shire, whither King Arthus* and his
Knights, with the rest of his gallantry, speedily pursued them, and there began
afresh to sight where King Arthur, who in former fights had received ten
several wounds in his head, but none mortal till now, that the speele of a
(broken) Lance happened to pierce his skull, and that proved his deaths wound;
but before he dyed, then when he felt the very agony of death apro^ching in his
hot incensed blood, he did wonderful execution upon his enemies, and still
continued fighting (as though he had felt no hurt) till a messenger brought him
tidings that the Trater Mord^^d was slain; then said he, the unresistable will
and decree of heaven be done, for I am well contented, and willing to dye: So
soon as the Rebels heard, and saw that their Captain Mordred was dead, it is
wonderful to relate in what a disordered confusion they ran some one way, and
some another, they were sensible (by the testimony of conscience) that their
obstract persisting in rebellion (against so rare a King) had brought them
beyond hope of pardon, therefore they asked none: in this distraction there was
a greater number killed in the flight then in the battle scarce a man of them
had escaped, if the sud^en approach of good King Arthurs death had not
pretented further pu^suit; there was slain in the battle twelve thousand, and
to the slight fifteen thousand: Mordreds hateful deeds in his life time
procured him a general hatred after death, be dyed suddenly without any care
for his soul, thrust thorrow the heart with a Iavelin (in the hand of a Common
soldier) and when he was dead none took care of his Body; his own kindred (a
sit guerdon for a Traitor) which were of the blood royal (and was he being
nephew to King Arthur (as you have heard before) the gallant Sir Gawin Knight
of the Round Table, who dyed bravely fighting (for his King) in this battle,
was his own brother, he was cosen garma^ to that Illustrate Cador Duke of
Cornwall (another) Knight of the Round Table, who also triumphed over death in
his Sovereigns cause) whole Son (Constantine) succeeded King Arthur in the
Kingdom, yet all this high birth, and al^en^^ ^ould not purchase a gravs,
unless some Country hynde buried him in his (Orchard or Garden) for of his
sepulcher (though so great a personage) no mention was ever made to this day:
Well, enough of him (unless he had been better) now let us return to K.
Arthus, who lying upon his Deathbed (at Glasenbury) where having (like a
worthy Christian as he always had lived) made an eternal peace between God
and his soul: and also a likely lasting peace (for the future) to his Kingdom,
appointing for his successor (dying without any issue) his Nephew Constantine
the Son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, as I told you lately. So this renowned
Christian worthy (valiant King Arthur) having first vanquished the Saxons at
home, and anexed six foreign Crowns to the Monarchy of Britain: when he had
thus victoriously reigned 26. years, he rendered to death his interest, and his
soul to his Redeemer, in the year of Grace, 543. and was buried at Glasenbury,
they where in this present modern age (I mean within living men's memory) there
has been an old Epitaph, with some other memorials of him, ^ound the Epitaph
(so well as I can) I think it not impertinent to render in English.

King Arthurs Epitaph.
Here lies great Arthur Britains King,
Amongst Christian worthies first of three;
His fame throughout the world does ring,
None did such doughty deeds as he.
Death all unto this pass does bring,
He can subdue the greatest King.
FINIS.
London, printed for Francis Coals at the sign of the Lamb in the Old-Bailey,
1660.


