A Particular of the New-buildings within the Bills of Mortallity, and without
the City of London, from the year 1656. to 1677 according to the account now
taken by the Churchwardens of the several Parishes.
And the old account of New Houses from 1620 to 1656. and what they did amount
to at one whole years Value, as appears by the Duplicates in the Exchequer.
1677 1656 value. l. s. d. Westminster 490 Martins in the Fields, 17 S. Giles
in the Fields, 41 4855 8 6 Covent Garden, 42 10859 4 0 Savoy, 37 S. Clements
Danes, 253 183 3794 0 0 S. Dunston in the West 72 S. Bridget, 126 146 1475 15 0
S. Andrews Holbourn, 550 S. Bride well Precinct, S. Sepulcher, 35 127 725 11 2
Clerkenwell, 199 Bartholomew Great, 11 47 205 15 0 Bartholomew Less,
Aldersgate, 102 30 390 0 0 Criplegate, 517 3362 1 0 Bishopgate, 208 265 1925 7
0 Algate, 50 520 2855 7 8 Minories, 16 6 45 0 0 St. Katherines, 24 51 370 7 0
White Chapel, 423 291 2620 4 4 Shoreditch, 144 348 1170 7 0 Stepny, 2137 1625
11719 6 10 Shadwell, 289 Hackney, 51 Iflington, 25 Saviors Southwark 339 2137
11 4 Olave Southwark, 385 147 963 12 4 George Southwark, 231 144 595 18 0
Thomas Southwark, 160 788 19 10 Redriff, 219 59 397 7 0 Bermondsey, 349 528
3669 9 10 Christ-Church, 100 Newington, 107 247 995 2 8 Lambeth. 185 383 ^684 6
4 6646 57606 1 10

The Total of the New-buildings from 1656. to 1677. is about Ten Thousand.

The Total from 1620. to 1656. was about Seven Thousand Five Hundred.

Their value at one years Rent about Seventy Thousand Pound if it had been
Collected.

Though the particular makes the number but 6646, and the Sum but 57606 Pound,
some Parishes being wanting.

AS there has been great mistakes about the Damage and Nuisance by the Increase
of New-building in the Suburbs; so by this we may see the mistake to be as
great about their number and value; some reporting their number to be Twenty
Thousand, (...) Thirty (...); though it is very plain to any man that con^iders
that their number cannot be much above Ten Thousand, for that the Total of all
the (...)ies, both New and Old, both in the City, (...) the Bills of Mortality
are not Threescore Thousand^

That this is true, and that the number from 1656. to 1677. (...) much exceed
Ten Thousand, will appear by co^ring the Increase of the Burials from 1620. to
1656. with the particular of the New-houses Built within that (...)

The Number of the Houses, as appears before, were about Seven Thousand Five
Hundred; now the Inhabitants that lived in those New-built houses made the
Increase of the Burials within that space of time, Three Thousand; which by
computing the Medium, is the Increase of two Burials for every five Houses that
were Built: So that the Increase of Two Thousand Five Hundred Houses, raise the
Burials One Thousand.

And if we examine the Increase of the Burials from 1656. to 1677. we shall
find them to be about Four Thousand, which being but a Fourth more then were
from 1620. to 1656. The New-houses since that time cannot be reckoned above a
Fourth, which makes the Total now about Ten Thousand.

And this way of Calculation, though it may not exactly discover the particular
number of Houses, yet it is sufficient to prove there can be no mistake of
Thousands in the Account; for that the Inhabitants of Two or Three Thousand
Houses would have added a visible Increase to the Burials.

And to further justify this Computation, it agrees very well with the
Calculation made by the Ingenious Mr. Grant, both of the Total number of the
Inhabitants within the Bills of Mortality, and his probable guess, that about
three in One hundred die, allowing twelve Inhabitants to every House one with
another, which no man I suppose will dispute.

This will apparently confute that wild conjecture of some, who report that
there is Three Thousand Five Hundred New-houses in St. Martins Parish, when the
Burials of that Parish are not above Eighteen Hundred in a year: So that the
Total of New and Old in that Parish cannot be above Four Thousand Five Hundred,
and therefore it is probable that the Account of 1780. now given in is very
true.

The conjectures of many concerning the value of these Houses, that they will
make twenty pound a Year one with another, and raise two or three hundred
thousand pound, are as false as about the number of them.

For ten thousand Houses will not raise above fifty thousand pound, it being
the half years value at ten pound a year one with another, which is the most
they can be reckoned at.

As will plainly appear from the account of the value of those seven thousand
five hundred Houses, which did not amount to Seventy thousand pound at a whole
years value, as appears by the Duplicates in the Exchequer; they not making one
with another ten pound a year.

Now the great Houses in the Piazza, Lincolnes-In-fields, and Queen Street,
were equal in value to these twenty two Houses in St. James Square, or
Bloomesbury Square, or other places; and are more in number of that sort of
Houses then have been built since.

Besides the middle sort of Houses in the Streets of Covent Garden, Long-Acre,
Clare-Market, Old-Southampton-Buildings, and other places have equaled both
the number and value of Leicester-Fiolds, Bleemesbury, York-Buildings,
Essex-Buildings and the rest. And the number of the small Houses at four or
five pound per Annum since 1656. are much greater.

So that upon enquiry, it is plain, that the Houses that were built before
1656. were equal in value to what have been built since. And therefore it is
not probable that a Tax upon the New-foundations can raise above Fifty Thousand
Pound, which considered with the Charge of collecting it, and the loss of his
Majesty's Customs upon Timber, Boards, Wainscot and Iron, being not less then
Ten Thousand Pound per Annum, which will be occasioned by the discouraging of
Building, will not bring in Thirty Thousand pounds clear into the Exchequer, if
it were possible to make the Law so that all might be Collected.

But not to mention how hard the purchasers of New Houses, will believe such a
Law to be, having paid a valuable consideration for them, and offended no Law.

Nor how severe the Workmen builders will think they are dealt with, to be
punished for exercising their lawful Trades.

Nor how partial it will be to those that built since 1656. that have already
paid a years value.

Nor to mention what the owners of the great Houses that have been altered.
think, not being allowed the 500 l. a year, which their Houses yielded before;
since they pay for improvement by the building of their Gardens.

Nor what in general all those sufferers will think, who believe they have done
good service to the Nation by Building.

The Law will have this peculiar disadvantage, it will be impossible so to word
it, as to comprize all men's interests, so as to raise that Money as shall be
designed by it. For after the Commissioners of Olivers Act had set four years,
they did not pay in twenty thousand pound into the Exchequer of the 70000 l.
that was returned upon the Duplicates.


