Part of a TREATISE Written by a Scotch Gentleman, In the Year 1645. Truly
Declaring (notwithstanding the Lyings of wicked men) how Graciously his MAJESTY
has Governed the KINGDOMS of ENGLAND SCOTLAND AND IRELAND.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Part of a Scotch Treatise, written by a Scotch Gentleman, in the Year 1645.
THE incomming of the Scots gave occasion and liberty to diverse of the Nobles
of England (of whom some since have betrayed the Cause of God, and of his
people, what by open warfare, and what by Clandestine undermining) to desire of
the King a Parliament, for the good of the Kingdom: The King then durst not
refuse their demand, by reason of the Scots, more then the continuance of it,
which he granted likewise thereafter for the same cause.

Then the King finding that the Parliament did not only cross, but quite spoil
his designs, he plots with his Army which he had raised against the Scots, to
come and destroy the said Parliament, and to take the spoil of London for their
reward, but the business being discovered, failed; besides, they durst not
undertake, howsoever they had promised, for fear of the Scots, who were then so
near.

The King continuing in his wonted courses, after a little pause, tryes the
Scots, if they will do the deed, and offers them for recompense not only the
spoil of London, but also the four Counties next adjacent unto their Country,
to be adjoined hereafter to it, with Jewels of great value in pawn for
performance, if only they would be engaged in the business.

All these great offers could not make the Scots willing to give their consent
in any kind to this wickedness; for they not only rejected the Kings offers,
but also gives notice of the plot to the Parliament, and to the City of
London, that they might make their best use of it.

So you may see how that the Scots, under God, are the cause of the assembling
of the Parliament, of the continuance of it, being assembled, and of the
preservation of it from total destruction and ruin.

The King seeing that he was stopped by the Scots, first in their own Country,
next in England, to carry on his great design, takes the Irish Papists by the
hand, rather then be always disappointed, and they willingly undertake to levy
Arms for his service, that is, for the Romish Cause, the Kings design being
subservient to the Romish Cause, although he abused, thinks otherwise, and
believes that Rome serves to his purpose; but to begin the work, they must
make sure all the Protestants, and if they cannot otherways, by murdering and
massacring them, for they know them according to the principles of Religion and
State, to be forward, either for the Covenanters of Scotland, or for the
troublesome Parliament of England, if not for both.

But the Irish neither would, nor durst enter into any open action so long as
the Scotch Army in England was on foot, therefore by all means it must be sent
home, and cashiered; and to facilitate the business, the Court Parasites,
instruments of iniquity, with their Emissaries, must rail, and spread abroad
jealousies of the Scots among the people of the Country and City, namely, in
and about the Houses of Parliament, who having not before their eyes the real
honesty and integrity of the Scots, known by so many faithful and loyal
expressions, and not keeping in their minds the many good Offices done to them
by the Scots, gives, in silliness of mind, ear and place to the crafty tales
and apprehensions invented by the Agents of the common enemy, to bring them to
confusion and trouble.

So the plot takes by the silly ones, and is set forward by the hid
Malignants; yea, in a word, it is managed with such address and success,
that the Scots must go home, and till they had done it, there could be no
quiet, but increase of jealousies.

The Scots, although they were not acquainted with the height of mischief that
was intended against the Church and State in these Dominions, by the common
enemy, nor with the ways of it, yet albeit they thought it very dangerous,
after so many attempts of evil doing by the enemy, to retire them from
England, nor as yet well settled, and to cashier their Army, remitting the
event of things to God, resolved to return home, and to dismiss their Army,
and so make known unto all the world their candor and integrity, and to take
away all jealousies both from the King, and from England, not failing in the
least circumstance, yea not of the day.

Well, the King having gained this point, to send home the Scots, and to make
them lay down their Arms, resolves to follow them into Scotland, and to try
once more to draw them to his design, no persuasion being able to stay or stop
his voyage, he goes in haste from London, and overtaketh the Scots as they
were upon their removal from Newcastle for Scotland; he vieweth their Army by
the way, and talks with the prime Officers thereof: he gives order to some
of the good Physicians about him to feel the pulse of the Scots softly, but
they found the Scots pulse did not beat as they could have wished: He goes on
in his journey to Scotland, whither he is no sooner arrived, but he puts
another design on foot, premeditated with many more before, for it is the
custom of the wise Court to have at one and the same time diverse undertakings
in design, of which it is a very hard matter if one or other do not take
effect, yea they have found it but too true, to our woeful experience, that
many have taken effect, and that not of the lesser ones; wherefore the Court
will never cease to devise and invent enterprises.

The plot then set on foot by the King in Scotland, was to make a considerable
party there for his ends, and to make the business there more facile, he
resolves to make sure the chief men of Scotland, who were like either to stop
the design, or not farther it: But this plot is also discovered, and so it
failed. The next recourse was to the Irish Papists his good friends, unto whom
from Scotland a Commission is dispatched under the great Seal (which Seal was
at that instant time in the Kings own custody) of that Kingdom, to hasten
according to the former Agreement the raising of the Irish in Arms; who no
sooner receive this new Order, but they break out, and at the first beginning
of their Rebellion, declare that they have no ill will against any Scots in
Ireland, for they were afraid of the Scots going over to the help of their
Country men, and so they would be stopped to go on with their work; but their
spleen was against the English Protestants, who were friends to that wicked
Parliament in England, so untoward to the good King, and so adverse to their
Catholic Cause.

This Declaration of the Irish did not (although in favor of their country
men) hinder the Scots to offer their present service for the repressing of the
Rebellion, before things grew worse: The King fairly refuses the offer, and
answering with Verbal thanks said. That he neither could, nor would do any
thing in the business without the advice, and assistance from the Parliament
now on foot in England, whereunto he was to repair in all haste; so he leaves
Scotland, saying, That every day he stayed there, was the loss of a County to
him; he comes to London a little before Christmas, the Rebellion having begun
in Ireland in October before, but he goes very seldom to the Parliament, and
when he goes thither, he says nothing concerning the Irish Rebellion, till by
importunity he was constrained to it, and then what he says, was little, cold,
and ambiguous; and when the Scots by their Commissioners, who had followed him
from Scotland hither, did offer him again a considerable help of ten thousand
men; things were so carried both in Council and Parliament by the corrupt and
ignorant party then; that the Scots were delayed from day to day by one shift
or other, for a long space, before conditions could be agreed upon with them
for the sending of their help into Ireland: and it was a longer time after the
agreement, before things could be furnished unto them for their voyage.

By those means the Rebels had to do with less opposition, and consequently,
with less difficulty carried on their barbarous work of burning, spoiling, and
massacring innocent people of all ranks and condition, without regard to sex*
or age.

The Scots are no sooner gone for Ireland, but they assist their friends with
such affection; and success, that after some skirmishes, and encounters with
the Rebels, the North country of Ireland, whereunto their help was
particularly assigned, became pretty well cleared of the Rebels, although much
wasted and spoiled by them.

In this course has the Scots continued to this day, constantly opposing these
bloody wretches, notwithstanding the change that has fallen in the South part
of that Kingdom by the Treachery of those whom the Parliament employed and
trusted to; then when the King made a Cessation with these barberous Canabals,
the Scots resolutely declared against it, and have manfully opposed it to this
day, without which opposition of the Scots, it had been received every where in
Ireland, and the Rebels then having nothing to do at home had come hither with
Bands and Troops into this Island.

Thus did, and still do the Scots pursue their point, notwithstanding all the
hardship they have suffered, and yet suffer in the service; partly by reason of
the great troubles here, of the Parliaments not being able to supply their
friends as they would, and as they need; partly, by the negligence and
unfaithfulness of those who have been employed by the Parliament, and
entrusted to have a care of supplying this need, which has been so great, that
the Scots Army in Ireland had absolutely starved for cold and hunger, if they
had not been helped from Scotland in a high measure.

To return into England, the missed King having left the Parliament,
accompanied, or at least followed by numbers of men of diverse degrees, Traitors
to God, and their country, namely by those double Traitors, who were Members
of the Houses of Parliament; for they not only have been dishonest to the
Church and State, whereof they are both Members and children, but they have
betrayed the trust, wherewith they were entrusted in both, by the assistance of
which, he sets his design on foot to make open war against the Parliament
(although under a hid notion) to destroy it, all other devises and plots
contrived by him and his having failed, as we have seen.

Upon this, the Scots in their respect to the King, love to their Brethren in
England, and above all, in their affection to the Cause of the Church of God,
send Commissioners to the King, and from him, to the Parliament, as occasion
should serve; they found the King at York, where he was pulling his sword out
of his sheath with all his might, and sharpening it in all haste, which God in
his judgment has suffered him to thrust in the Bowels of so many thousands of
his people here, so unnaturally, and barbarously, not only afar off, by not
stopping it by connivance, or by Commission to his Agents and Instruments, as
in Ireland and Scotland, but being present in person, and taking pleasure in
doing of it in his own sight, and seeing it done.

In this place I do affirm, that there has been more Christian blood shed in
these latter years, under the end of King James, and King Charles his reign, by
their Commissions, Approbations, Connivances, and not forbidding, what at home,
and what abroad, (all which upon the matter they might have stopped if it had
been their pleasure) then were in the time of the ten Roman persecutions. God
turn the Kings heart toward him first, other ways he will never turn it
toward his people.

The Scots, as we were saying, seed to him, to desire him to leave off the
design of imbroyling himself and the people in a civil war in this kingdom of
England; withal, to offer him their utmost service of Mediation and
Intercession, for the taking away of all mistakes, and smoothing of things in a
fair way betwixt him and the Par. The misled King resolved to go on in evil
courses, not only neglects the respective and hearty offer of the Scots, but
sends them home, not suffering them to come unto the Parliament, according to
their Order and desire, which was, to try all fair means for preventing a war
in England, and to stop the massacres in Ireland.

The King having thus dismissed the Scots, goes to his work, which having
overcome some rubs at the first, he carries on apace; for having gathered
together considerable forces at Shrewsbury, from thence with his Army marches
toward London, notwithstanding the Parliaments Army lay as it were in his way,
who met with him at Edgehill, and (contrary to his expectation) fights with
him; he after the battle having recollected the remnant of his men, although
he had the worse, continues his design to London, and drew very near unto it,
but being by strong hand constrained to retire, he goes to Oxford.

FINIS.

