A Farewell SERMON Preached in VVAKE-FIELD, January 1, 1655.

By Thomas Parker, Master of Arts, late Minister of that Church.

Published upon the importunity, and for the satisfaction of the good People of
Wakefield.

(...).

Heb. 11.4. LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Richard Lownds, at his Shop, at the
White Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

To the ever Honored, and my very good friend, Mrs. Frances Hustler, at Lupset.
Madam,
IT was not any Ambition to be seen in the Press, but the daily importunities
of my ever dear people, which brought this Sermon to see the light; when I
Preached it, I had no other thoughts of Printing it, th^n in your breasts; I
shall think my pains well bestowed, if the eye may so second the ear, that both
may be an advantage to the Soul, and leave so deep an impression of the true
fear of God in your hearts, that you may be the Epistle of Christ, written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God.

Madam, You will meet here with the words of truth and soberness, in a plain
and homely dress, that which an age never more wanted, nor could less endure:
Truth is like Beauty, never more fair, then when she goes the plainest: This
discourse will meet with my Adversaries, but be welcome to my friends; to whose
Consciences, rather they their Closets, I desire to commend it: For my own
part, I desire to refer my self to the wisdom of God, who knows how to choose
best for me, and through his blessing, whatever it cost me, to run the Ermin's
fate (fall into the hands of the Hunter, rather then foul her body) The great
share that New Years day had in your tears, makes me bold to beg some interest
in your Prayers; and I shall not despair, in Gods good time, of my restoration
to the Vineyard: In the mean time, I commend you and yours, to that blood of
sprinkling which speaks better things then the blood of Abel, Madam, I am

Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ Jesus, Tho. Parker.
From my study at Northgate-head, June 24. 1656.
ECCLES. 12.13.
I Am this day to take my leave, not only of you (my good people) but of the
Pulpit also; To bid farewell to that High Calling, the great Harvest of Heaven,
wherein I have for these eighteen years, painfully and faithfully, and I bless
my God, fruitfully labored. I do not herein strive to justify my self, God
knows my heart; if there be any glory, it is the Lords, I know the Apostles
Rule very well; Not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends: 2 Cor. 10.18.

I know not well upon what account to commend this Sermon this day whether as a
Farewell to you, or a Funeral to my self; for so indeed it is: To impede the
execution of that Calling wherein we are employed, and whereby we should do God
that service for which he has Commissionated us; To force the rusting of the
Talents, which our great Master has commanded us to put to usury: To stop our
mouths, and put out our eyes, when our hands are at the Plough: What is it, but
to bury a man alive, or to leave him like that wounded Pilgrim in the Gospel,
(...)? Luke 10.30. How bitter would this Cup be, if the lips of the Lord Jesus
Christ had not sweetened it? What an excellent saying that is? The servant is
not greater then his Lord, nor the Disciple above his Master; If they have
persecuted me; they will also persecute you, etc. And lest they should forget
so necessary and useful a Doctrine, he puts a special Memento upon it, Joh.
15.20. Remember the words that I have said to you, etc. What ever shall befall
me, or any of my fellow Laborers, We shall ever pray that God may bless his
Church; and I doubt not but he will in his good time restore her to her Purity,
and her Peace.

Old Mercies, thankfully received, are strong engagements for new: Your spirit
will witness with me this day, what cause I have to bless God, as much, I
think, as any man that ever labored in his Vaneyard. First for my
persecutions; It is an excellent saying of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12.10. I take
pleasure in persecutions; (...)
the words is a Gospel Expression, and signifies a willing, pleasing
Approbation, not without much inward contentment: The most precious thing that
good Apostle ever desired to receive, he expresses by this word, namely, to be
present with the Lord. 2 Cor. 5.8. And the most precious thing that ever he
desired to give, he expresses by the same words, namely, The Gospel of Christ,
and his own soul, 1. These. 2.8. and here he makes use of it to show how well he
was pleased, and how much he did approve of himself and his Doctrine, because
of these persecutions, as being undoubted evidences of the truth of Christ. I
should for my own part have suspected my self, yea, and my Doctrine too, if
both had not been persecuted; I look upon my persecutions as love Tokens from
Heaven, Pledges of Gods love, and Badges of my own Sonship: Let me tell you (my
good people) there is no condition in the world, so highly desirable, as that
of suffering for, and with Christ, Jam. 6.11.
(...), this was Divinity in St. James his days; Was it not the minute of his
sufferings, wherein Steven saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at his
right hand? Shall we think our selves worthy to be styled the Disciples of
Christ, and run away, or deny him, when he comes to the Crucifying? When she
who is the Mother of us all is abused, branded, and struggles under pangs and
agonies, with the most hellish and unthankful children, that ever Mother bare;
shall we therefore forget to be Sons, or be ashamed or afraid to suffer? I
mean, the Church of England, which every knowing and moderate Spirit, not
biassed, with factions or self-interest, must needs acknowledge to be the
brightest, and most glorious resemblance of Primitive purity, that ancient and
holy faith, which for these twelve hundred years, any man ever had the honor
of contending or suffering for: Tell me, have not I great cause to look upon it
as a blessing, or have you any cause to be ashamed of my troubles? What my
persecutions have been, and of what nature, in relation not to my person only,
but my Doctrine also; (the proper work of Hell) with what bitterness, violence
and injustice they have been carried on, your own eyes and ears can
sufficiently witness; I bless God this day for the innocence of my own heart,
and shall have another day more cause to rejoice in my sufferings, 2 Cor. 1.12
then my Persecutors in their victory; Our rejoicing is this the Testimony of
our Conscience.

The second Mercy I desire we may take notice of, is the support and constant
supplies of the Spirit of grace, in and under all these sufferings; a high and
unexpressible Mercy! Psalm. 61, 2.
When my soul was overwhelmed, he laid my hands upon a Rock, a Rock that was
higher then I. The more my persecutions grew, the more did the hand of the Lord
appear, in, with, and for me: when the wickedness of my Persecutors grew so
high, and their sin so shameless, that they durst appear like those (...),
those Noon-day-Divels, and declare their sin as Sodom: when they durst come
into Bethel it self, a House of Prayer, a place set a part for divine Worship;
and there with faces harder then flint, out-dare the God and Master of that
House, and being Whores, to out face Angels, the Attendants of that Place; when
neither the sacredness, nor dreadfulness of the place, nor my own performance
of public Duties, could safeguard me from their hellish practices, (whose
only capacity is like Machiavels undertakers, to be wicked enough) even then
the Angel of the Covenant, whose I am, and whom I serve, stood by me; Then was
the grace of the Lord with me, to uphold and support me; What shall I render to
my God for these his mercies? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon
the Name of the Lord:

The third Mercy to be remembered by us, is the continuance of mutual love,
betwixt Minister and People; a Divine love doubtless, because lasting unto the
end: The reproaches and scandals daily heaped upon me, could never alienate the
heart of any one of my hearers, so far, as to a desertion of me: Must we not
needs say, this was the work of God? Love built upon human foundation, is as
the foundation it self, changeable. But here was more then the work of man, God
himself herein owning my integrity, and approving my Doctrine: I look upon all
this, as a fruit of that Sacramental love, wherein our foundation was laid at
my first coming to you: I cannot, as I have desired, longer serve you in my
Preaching yet my Prayers shall never be wanting for you, to that God, who is
love; that for those Bowels of love wherewith you have refreshed me, you may
find mercy in that day when you shall most stand in need of it.

But I must to my Text: My first entrance to you was in love, and the main end
of my undertaking here, was this; That among this great people, I might be an
Instrument of gaining some poor souls to God, (God is my Record, I lie not:) I
cannot say but there were some other Considerations went along with it, but
they were all subservient to this: How far I was from that sin of Covetousness,
wherewith the people too much brand the Clergy, and sometimes deservedly; I
appeal to your selves, I never made any Compact or Covenant with you, upon that
account; your offerings have been of free will, and God has blessed them: What
my Conversation, and Deportment has been amongst you, notwithstanding the many
provocations I have had, I refer to you all; I have not made the Pulpit (where
the glory of God, and the riches of Christ, and the salvation of poor souls is
concerned) a Stage or Theater to act my own parts and passions in: I have
endeavored to walk inoffensively toward God, and toward man: This also was
the Lords work.

Such was my Entrance, and such has my progress been, your Tears do abundantly
witness this day, the sad parting of a Minister and his people, God forgive
them (if at least it be lawful to pray for them) who have robbed us one of
another, where there was so much love, and so much delight in each other, that
we have found God delighting in us all, to do us good: We are now come to the
Conclusion, and to that purpose I have made choice of a plain Text, and I shall
speak to it with as much plainness. You have it

ECCLES. 12.13. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and
keep his Commandments; this is the whole duty of man.


THat Solomon the Son of David, was the Penman of this Book, I think, is
without dispute; the Style is his, and there was no other Son of David, King in
Jerusalem, but he: The dispute is of the Title Choheleth, which the Lxx. render
(...): We, the Preacher: and concerning that, there is a double Query. First,
Why it is used in the Feminine Gender; some say the word Nephesh is to be
understood, and so it must signify a Preaching soul: but how that can hold (it
being a proper name, and never used but in this Book, as Drusius observes upon
the place) I see not; Others tell us it is usual with the Hebrews to put
Feminines names upon men; so the Gospel Preachers are called Mebaseroth, Psalm.
68.11. The Lord spoke the words, great was the company of Preachers or
Publishers; Annunciatricum; But whether they did this to set forth the purity
of the Preachers of Christ, Prove. 9.3. Where they are called Wisdoms Maids; or
those (...), to which the Apostle relates, Gal. 4.19. thereby making out, not
only the great Throws, but the tender and motherly affection of a faithful
Preacher to his people: I shall not now stand to enquire.

But the second and main Query is, why it is called Sepher Choheleth, a Book of
Gatherings or Congregations: Some will have it to be one of the names of
Solomon; as Jedidiah, or Lemuel: Some say, because it was publicly delivered
by Solomon himself to the Congregation; and so it is in his Fathers style,
giving God the glory in the great Congregation, Psalm. 40.10. We read of his
blessings, prayers and sacrifices, 1 Reg. 8. here of his preaching; Petagl.
upon the words. (...)
and thus Schindler seems to expound it, of a gathering of men; Others will
have it so called, from Solomon's being gathered, or re-uniting himself after
his foul Idolatry and Apostasy from the Church; and the Book to be the words of
a soul or person brought back to the unity of the Church, or Congregation of
the Saints: But I rather think, without any straining of the words, it relates
to the subject or matter of the Book. It is a Book of Observations,
experimentally gathered from Natural, Moral, Political, Domestical, and Divine
things: Wisdom is the souls great Endowment, nothing more precious, more
sweet, more coveted, Read Eccl. cap. 2.
especially such as Solomon's was; it pursues such high objects as may
improve, and not vitiate the intelectuals; yet he tells us what the fruit of of
it frequently is; hellish policy pride, violence, oppression and cruelty,
wisdom to do evil: Pleasures suite well with the inferior and brutish part of
man, but in the exact enjoyment of them, there is a mixture either of folly or
want, they grow in time loathsome and tedious to the possessors; he tells you
of buildings and Vineyards and Orchards, and Fish Ponds, and Music, Vocal, and
Instrumental; and he concludes upon the survey, all is vanity: Riches, the
great Idol of the world, the Gold and Silver, the mighty Herds of Cattle, which
himself possessed in abundance; he tells us they are but Snares and Thorns,
either to entangle or torment us; gotten with labor, kept with fear, and lost
with sorrow: All external forms of worship, where Christ is not in the heart,
or not met with in the Ordinance, is no more then a fools Sacrifice; or as the
word carrys it, the service of hypocritical, light, and unconstant men: These
and many other gatherings he makes out from his own experience.

After these discoveries, he prescribes many excellent rules for the settlement
of the soul, in reference both to its present and future good: An humble
acknowledgment under, and dependence upon, the providence of God, in all
events; singleness and sincerity of heart* in his worship and service: The
right use of wisdom in discerning times, and judgments; contentedness, and
sweet reposedness of soul in every condition of life: Obedience and Loyalty to
Superiors; Conscientious walking in our particular Callings: Preparedness of
spirit against all trials and afflictions; Moderation in the use of comforts in
this life; and preparation through the fear of God, and obedience, for death
and judgment, in the words of my Text: Hence he may well be styled a Gatherer,
and his Book a Book of gatherings.

The grand enquiry of the whole Book, is that Summum Bonum, that puzzled all
our blind Philosophers; The Preacher here discovers that Stone, that turns all
things into Gold, which they have long tired themselves in seeking for, and
could never find to this day. Observe I pray you how he begins this Book, (...)
and how he ends it; He begins it with Vanity of vanities; All is vanity:
Idols, light, vile, things of naught, as the breath of ones mouth, or the
bubble in the water, vapors soon vanishing: Vanity of vanities; vain vanity,
or extreme superlative vanity: This our first Parents saw, and therefore called
their second Son Hebel, or vanity; David confirms it, Psalm. 144 4 Adam is as
Abel, or man is like to vanity; there is an Allusion in the Original to both
their names: And herein he makes out the insufficiency and disability of the
Creature, to confer any true happiness upon the Soul. And secondly, observe
how he ends his book, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, methinks it is not
much unlike to that of Christ to Martha; thou art troubled about many things,
Luke 10.41, 42.
but one thing is needful, Mary has chosen the good part, etc. He begins you
see, with nothing, he ends with all things; he shows us what our first estate
is, an observance of lying vanities, and forsaking our own mercies, he shows us
what our best estate is; Fear God, etc. We begin at Idols, and vanity, and
never know what our beginning was, till we come to this end, never know that we
are vain, till we arrive at the true fear of God.

My dear people, whom I love and must ever love in the bowels of Christ Jesus,
and must ever call you so, though now unhappily torn from you, let not my words
this day fall to the ground, lay them up in your hearts; let it suffice that
you have spent your time past, in vanities and Idols, things of emptiness and
torment; let us not be like the people of those countries, that whatsoever they
chance to see first every morning, they worship solemnly all the day after; if
sin have had the morning, let the evening be Gods, it is time we should come
home to that only true happiness the Lord Jesus Christ: Content not your selves
with any outward blessings til you be sure you enjoy him to the Salvation of
your souls: other excellencies may set you out in the eyes of men, generosity,
obligingness, wisdom, learning, valor, etc. every one of these, is
sufficient to be a sober man's Idol, render a man praise worthy, but it is
Christ only that makes us blessed; other blessings you may enjoy and perish
with them, but he that injoys Christ by true faith, Ioh. 3.16.
shall never perish, but has everlasting life.

The Text is Solomon's (...), after a solicitous inquiry, or the treasure of
true happiness discovered; it is in it self an exhortation or a duty, you may
call it whether you please, the substance is the same: There is not any thing
remarkable in the Preface, save that in the Original it begins with a Capital
Letter, as pointing out some high subject, and stirring up the more serious
attention to the matter in hand; which indeed, rightly weighed, is an Epitome
of the whole Gospel: Would you know after my long observations, what you are to
trust to? What is the sum and substance of the whole matter; Where true and
durable felicity may be found? It is in this, Fear God and keep his
Commandments: without this, man is but as one calls him, praestantissimum
brutum; which puts me in mind of that saying, Job 28.28. where the holy man
concludes his speech, as the Preacher here does his book, Behold the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is understanding; man then
becomes wise when he fears God, when Christ the wisdom of the fatheres dwells
in him.

We shall not need, neither did I ever love to name a Text, the conclusion
rises plainly and naturally from it: To fear God and keep his Commandments, is
the whole duty of man; or as it is in the Hebrew, the whole man, and so the LXX
render it, (...); where the true fear of God is once planted, it carries the
whole man with it, spirit, soul, and body, guides and directs the whole man,
rectifies and reforms the whole man; it is all in all, and through all, sets a
price and worth upon the whole man in this life, and crowns and glorifies the
whole man in the life to come.

There is a natural fear arising from the sense of humane weakness, which is
not in it self sinful; we have examples of it in the Saints, (...).
yea, and in Christ himself, Mat. 26.38. Heb. 5.7. he was heard in that he
feared, which though the Rhemists translate for his reverence, and charge us
with the corrupting of the Text contrary to the version and sense of Antiquity,
and the ordinary use of the Greek words; yet I find it, signifying as well a
natural as a pious fear, Acts 23.10. where a commotion being raised, the chief
Captain or Tribune, is said to be (...), afraid lest Paul should be torn in
pieces, which could not be a pious fear in him that was a Pagan, but a natural
civil fear, lest a Roman, a Prisoner, and under his present charge should have
been violently and tumultuously murdered between the Pharisees and the
Sadduces.

2. There is a carnal fear, I may call it a fear of diffidence, because arising
from unbelief, Apoc. 21.8 They are liable to the second death, and joined with
unbeleevers.
the Apostles are called (...), Mat, 8.26. carnally fearful, so the word
signifies, if you look Revel. 21.8. and why? because (...), they were of little
faith; and this fear is directly sinful, when we fear the creature more then
the Creator, blessed for ever. This is that fear the Lord speaks of Isa. 8.12.
Fear not their fear; and our blessed Savior, Luke 12.4, 5. Fear not them that
kill the body, etc. And though this fear may have, and frequently has, natural
weakness for its foundation, yet it is only then sinful, where nature outvies
grace, and self interests are more valued then the glory of God: I deny not but
there is a fear due to man upon Gods account, Romans 13.6. Fear to whom fear,
etc. there is a reverence due to the persons, and a regard to be had to the
Laws of men: But God being alone the proper object of our fear, makes that fear
which is due to man, due to him only, in, and for the Lord, whose image he
bears in a more high and eminent manner, by virtue of some Authority or
dignity derived to him from God, who is the Fountain of honor, and whose sole
propriety it is to ordain powers, the words implying both invention and
ratification, Romans 13.1. the Powers that be, are ordained of God.

3. There is a spiritual fear, and that is a filial, reverential fear of God,
arising partly from a sense of want in our selves (which fear commonly
supposes) and partly from the apprehension of Gods excellency, not in his
greatness only, but also in its goodness: (...).
This is that fear which keeps the whole man in a religious respect, a holy
dreadfulnesse, a sweet dependence upon God, that commands him to walk as in the
presence of God, that his whole conversation seems one undiscontinued holy and
religious adoration; take that one example of Joseph Genesis 30. This is that we
call the grace of fear; the affection of fear is in all men naturally, but the
grace of the fear of God, is a part of Sanctification, and is not found but in
the elect: natural and carnal fear betray the succors of the soul, but this
strengthens and confirms it: I call it spiritual, first from the Object, which
is God; second, from the efficient or working cause of this fear, which is the
Spirit of God, called therefore the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord, Isay 11.2. Thirdly, from the Subject, the inward or spiritual man, hence
is the fear of God inward and spiritual, the worship of the mind, the heart,
the conscience, will, and affections, all hereby carried out to God. Fourthly,
From that spiritual work or effect it has upon the soul, spiritualizing and
sanctifying both our selves and our sacrifices, changing the whole man, from a
carnal, worldly, sensual, selfish interest, to a holy, heavenly, spiritual
frame of heart.

Now this spiritual fear may either be taken generally, and so it includes all
graces and gracious dispositions of spirit: As faith includes all Evangelical
graces in the New Testament, so does the fear of God in the Old, compare Prove.
13.14. with Prove. 14.27. Or else more particularly, for that single grace,
whereby the Soul is overawed with the excellencies of God, the greatness of
God, working the fear of him, as a Judge; and the goodness of God, working the
same fear as a father.

It would be a task too large for the small time I have to spend, to run
through all the branches, properties, and effects of this fear: I shall now
speak only to a few of them, and those the most useful for you, in reference to
the present times, and your present wants; there are no words like those in due
season, Pro. 25.11
or upon their wheels; you shall have them without niceness or affectation
(the common itch of the Pulpit) according to my wonted manner, with all
plainness; plain instructions best beseem a dying father, and are the best
remembered by his children; I shall now wave all other accounts, and present it
to you as a New Years gift, a rich Ring set with precious stones, which I shall
desire may be continually worn, and carried about with you.

And first, to fear God, is to have faith in him; a precious stone: this is
called by St. Peter precious faith; without this we can neither fear him nor
please him. 2 Pet. 1.1
What the Apostle says, Romans 10.14. how shall they call on him, in whom they
have not believed? the like we may say of other graces, how can we either love
or serve, or fear, or glorify God, except we believe in him? it was faith that
made Enoch's work acceptable, and was the ground of the translating there
spoken of whether the (...), Heb. 11.5.
mean exemption from death, as Elias is said to have been under the Moral Law,
or some other deliverance, it matters not, certainly it was through faith the
Emblem of the Gospel; it is sometimes called the mouth and the ear, Creed and
mandu casti, August (...).
but most properly the eye of the Soul; hereby we see through the things of
this world, and above them, we meet with an object worth our loving and looking
on: we see Christ, and God in Christ, and in him mercy, peace, salvation; we
look out of our selves, Heb. 12.2. and meet with Gospel truth, righteousness,
in another, a Surety, a Mediator; we see the brazen Serpent that cures out
wounded souls, John 3.14. therefore the words here used for fear, is by the
LXX. in the seventh verse of this Chapter, rendered to see; noting, that to fear
God and have faith in him, is to see God; and beyond reason to have an in-sight
into those Mysteries, which were denied to the Angels, 2 Pet. 1.12. As the eye
in the body is the Organ by which we see things visible, so is faith in the
soul, to see the things of God; hereby we peep through the Curtains of earth
and mortality, and take a view of Heavens Treasures: Hence come our great
privileges, union with Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. and consequently, an intimate and
familiar communion with him in his promises, Sonship, Victories, Intercessions:
Faith is that spiritual Ligament that makes us one with Christ; Other graces,
as Love, Patience, Meekness, etc may be the grounds of a moral Union; and make
a man like Christ, but it is faith only that is the foundation of a mystical
Union, and makes a Believer one with Christ.

I do not intend to insist upon the Nature, Properties and Effects of Faith. I
have heretofore made them out to you: My present Task relates to the present
times, and your-both present and future benefit: There is not any grace more
disesteemed and misesteemed slighted, and mis-judged, then this branch of
Divine fear: Let me therefore commend to you, two main Remembrances to be
treasured up by you, when your eyes shall be deprived of your Teacher.

And First, I would advise you, ever to set a high esteem upon this grace to
look upon it as the most glorious Stone in the Ring: The rest have their
luster, this is both resplendent and medicinal, heals broken souls; It is no
wonder if St. Jude give it the pre-eminence, since it is both the leading
grace, and brings the first glad tidings of salvation; and also the Mother
grace, whence all others have their birth and original: Without this what are
all our works and duties, but as we say of the virtues of Heathens, Splendida
peccata? Where faith is not laid as the foundation, all our devotions, acts of
piety, charity, observance of Sabbaths, Ordinances; nay, that great performance
of Prayer, are but like that structure built on the sand, Mat. 7.26. Without
this we can no more appear before the Tribunal of Gods justice, then stubble
before a consuming fire: In the word, it is faith that must make us profitable,
in obedience it is faith that must make us cheerful; in prayer it is faith that
makes us successful; and in all performances it is faith that makes us
acceptable: This is that wisdom, Job 28.16, 17, 18, 19. (...) 1 Pet. 1.8.
the price whereof is above Rubies, the Topaze of Ethiopia cannot equal it, it
cannot be valued with pure Gold: This will give comfort, joy, and peace under
all distractions, make the soul skip like a Lamb, leap and dance for joy:
Other divine qualifications may make you confident, but it is faith only that
must give you your assurance: There cannot be such an abasement where faith
will not lift up the head, and render you victorious: Justice gives every man
his own; temperance will restrain lusts; magnanimity will bear, and go through
any hardship, prudence is an excellent guide to our actions, but it is faith
that overcomes the world: in this Paul insults and triumphs over men and
Angels, Heaven and Earth, Romans 8.38, 39. (...), I am confident or persuaded
That neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, etc.
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

You will have a better heart, both to the price and the esteem of it, if you
seriously advise with these considerations: The Author: The Offices; and the
Effects of it.

First, Look upon it as Gods gift, from whom every good and perfect gift
comes, as a fruit of his Spirit, Gal. 5.22. This will make it excellent and
lovely: Let us a little view it in that great interest of our souls, the high
act of justification; we shall there find it to justify, Infundendo creat
creando infundit.
not as man's faith, but as the work of God in in the soul: It is an excellent
place, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God; faith may be in us, but it is not of us; that
is, not from any power of our own, but it is a mere gift of God, both in the
habit, and in the act of it: Justification is is a free Act, of, and from
eternity, without any condition on our parts: and that Evangelical
righteousness by which we are justified, is without us in Christ: It is the
finger of God that works faith in the soul, and having wrought it, puts it upon
acting, thereby to evidence justification to the soul. As a father having laid
up for his son a great Treasure, in some secret place, tells him of it, and
bestows it freely upon him, but wanting the possession and enjoyment of it, the
son is no richer for it, till the father lights a Torch, guides his son to the
hidden Treasure, and puts him into the actual possession of it: Thus is Faith
Gods Instrument, by which he discovers to our souls the unvaluable riches of
Christ (which in the minds and purpose of the Donor was ours from Eternity) and
evidenceth us to be freely justified, lending us that light of faith, whereby
we apprehend, enjoy and apply Christ to our souls: It is called the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Whose evidence? Gods evidence given us, by which he
declares and manifests to our consciences those (...), the invisible things
of our justification and salvation, and when given, it is our evidence also, by
which we possess Christ, and pleads our actual justification against all the
accusations of the Law, sin and Satan, then we have the witness in our selves,
1 John 5.10. (...), Gods witness; so it is sometimes read, witnessing to our
spirits, that we are the children of God, we are justified freely by his grace,
Romans 3.24: The word (...) there, answering to the Hebrew Chinnam, excluding
all, both hope of advantage on Gods part, and preceding desert in man, upon any
account whether of faith or works, excluding as well merit as rewards; hereby
intimating, that all our works are the works of God in us; yea faith it self in
that great and high Act of justifying, is Gods gift: I have here made a little
digression to acquaint you with the excellency of this grace, that you may set
a higher value upon it, not only because it is Gods gift, but so high and
precious a gift of his right hand, whereby he gives us an interest to Christ,
and all his promises, and evidenceth eternal life to our souls.

2. Consider the Offices of faith (which besides union to, and communion with
Christ formerly named) are these two: First, acceptance; whereby we are made
willing to receive Christ upon Christ's own terms; what his terms are he himself
tells you, Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, he must deny himself and
take up his Cross daily, and follow me: This is the receiving act of faith,
and is therefore called the hand of the Soul, not for its working quality
purifying the heart, reviving the dead spirit, working by love, carrying the
Soul through all discouragements; these are indeed the works of faith, but for
its receiving and accepting quality, accepting righteousness in Christ,
receiving him as a gift of his fathers love, embracing the promises afar off,
and laying hold on eternal life: The working righteousness is Christ's, the
Office or act of faith, is accepting, applying, receiving, yielding consent to
that righteousness.

The other Office or Act, of Faith, is resignation, whereby we give our selves
wholly up to Christ, spirit, soul, and body, to be guided and biased by him,
this is that spiritual marriage, Ephesians. 5.17. betwixt Christ and the Soul, by
which, as the soul has a propriety and right to the body, name, goods, table,
possessions and purchase of Christ; so she does reciprocally become all his, by
an unconstrained resignation of her will, ways, and desires, unto his guidance
and government; we become the servants of Christ to be ruled, as well as to be
aided and protected by him; then does Christ own us, and he stands engaged to
watch over and care for us: Then must the Soul have all Christ, and Christ the
whole soul, no sharing, no competition with any lust, but Jesus Christ becomes
all in all to us, and we are made willing to follow the Lamb whither soever he
goes.

3. Consider the admirable virtues or effects of faith, this also will help to
put a high esteem upon it. Faith dissolves the Plots of all our spiritual
enemies, it will give you a conquest over sin, the Devil, and the World, it
will quicken your souls, Gal. 2.20. Sanctify and Purify your hearts, Acts
15.9. hereby you shall obtain whatever you stand in need of, and God has
promised; it will bear you up in all dangers, discouragements, desertions,
deaths; hereby you shall stand, live, walk, be saved, etc. this will bring you
to God, to whom no man comes but by Christ, nor to Christ, but by faith. I
could be large in these things, if I had not formerly made them out to you: The
Lord bring them home to the hearts of every one of you: This is the first main
remembrance; To have a high and precious esteem of Faith.

Secondly, I would advise you ever to have a right judgment of Faith; Every
fancy in these days is pretended for faith and light; and the soul easily
mistakes presumption or credulity for this great grace: therefore it will much
concern you to know, and ever to remember, that is not a bare acknowledgment or
assent to divine truths, and the promises of Christ, as the Socinians would
have it, but an application or closing with Christ in those truths and
promises; for not the promises of Christ barely, but the person of Christ, is
the object of faith: It is a resting upon Jehovah, a rolling a man's self upon
God; as one tired under his burden, casts both himself and his burden upon
something that sustains it. Prove. 3.5. Isai. 10.20. As Saul tired with
fighting, leaned upon his Spear, 2 Samuel 1.6. I do not mean in this place, that
inferior Act of faith, the trusting God with our temporal well being (though
even this be a believers prerogative, and makes all those dreams and wishes of
the old Philosophers, the Scepticks, (...), and (...); the Stoics, (...); and
the Epicures, (...), to become the reality and acquisition of a Christian, a
holy Epicurism, which faith, and only faith furnishes us with) but I mean that
faith which closes with the blood of Christ, for eternal life and salvation:
There is an excellent place in Rom 10.10, where man is said to believe with the
heart, noting that it is not a bare closing with divine truths in our
understandings; Jews and Devils will do that, but a consent or walking up to
the goodness of God in Christ, whereby he is loved above all things, longed
for, and trusted to above all things, becomes food, raiment, life, all things
to us: And this you must look upon as Gods work too, None can thus close with
him, but they whose hearts the Lord opens. Acts 16.


Before I pass this Branch of divine fear, there is one thing I would put you
in mind of; it will much help your judgment of faith, and it is this; That true
faith is ever waited on with self denial; where this is not, there is no faith
nor fear of God; (...). Luke 9.23.
Faith carries with it an Abdication, not only of natural but spiritual self;
the soul finds vanity and nothingnesse, not in reason only, but in duty also
without Christ: In Joseph's vision, the Sun, Moon, Genesis 37
and Stars, did obeisance to him, and all the sheaves in the field, bowed to
his sheafe: In the soul, life, way and work of a regenerate man, all moral
abilities and endowments, all natural powers and faculties of the soul; nay,
all supernatural gifts and graces prostrate themselves at the feet of Christ:
Then will the soul follow Christ in the knowledge of his will, in the belief of
his promises, in the love of his truth, in the obedience of his commands, then
will thou lay aside thine own wisdom as an empty Lamp, thine own will as an
evil commander; thine own reason as a false rule; thine own affections as
corrupt Counselors; thine own ends as base and corrupt marks to be aimed at:
Not a hoof shall be left in Egypt, Exo. 10.26
thou will empty thy self, that thou may be capable of Christ, go out of thy
self, that thou may come to Christ: Christ will reign as that Centurion, Mat
8.8, 9. come or go, the poor heart is ready for him; take away this, your faith
is no more then a pretense, a self flattery; you must go quite out of your
selves, before you can enjoy a Savior: The LXX. have not cast Adam into a
sleep (as the Hebrew Text) but into an (...), Genesis 2.21.
a being hurried out of himself to make him capable of an helper; if you shall
not meet with this upon inquiry into your own spirits, your faith is naught,
and all your service and worship of God, and affront to your Redeemer, or to
give it the best language, plain Pharisaism and Hypocrisy, and God will one
day cast all your duties as dung and dirt in your faces and say, Who required
these things at your hand? The Lord give you self-denying hearts; The Lord
increase faith in every one of you: This is the first Jewel or Stone in the
Ring: He that fears God, believes in him.

To fear God, is to wait on him and for him, an excellent and useful Lecture,
frequently inculcated by the Prophet in the Psalms, as a fruit of the true fear
of God; he doubles his expression, Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, wait I say on
the Lord: He joins waiting upon God, and keeping his way, Psalm. 37.34. Observe
what high promises the Scripture makes to this waiting: Immunity from shame,
Psalm. 25.3. The inheritance of the earth, Psalm. 37.9 Renewing of strength,
mounting up with wings as Eagles, etc. Is. 40.31 New supplies of spirit, (...)
when they seem to be quite spent and lost, a change to be better conditioned,
flying over all difficulties they meet with; Isa. 40.31.
deliverance from enemies, Prove. 20.22. The fulfiling the desires of our
hearts, etc.

But how or wherein you should wait upon God, and express your true fear of
him, is my task now to acquaint you: Much of this I shall from my own
experience commend to you, and I hope you will not forget my words another day;
They will be of great use to you: Wait upon God in his ways, and wait upon him
in his time: I cannot commend any thing more advantageous to you, whether you
look at the present distempers and distractions of the world, or the future
comfort and settlement of your spirits upon all accounts.

First, wait upon him in his own ways, the ways of his Ordinances, and the ways
of his Dispensations: First in the ways of his Ordinances, in hearing the word,
attending at the Gates of Wisdom, in the honor and use of the Sacrament, in
prayer, and other Divine Institutions: This is the way Christ has prescribed
and in all ages wonderfully blessed to his Church: I have experimentally found
it in my self, and to my great comfort have had the acknowledgment of it from
many of you, by, and under my Ministry: These are the Channels of grace, the
Conduit-pipes by which God conveys himself, and the waters of life to his
people; here will your souls meet with God, and find the enjoyment of him, and
the due observation of them is a strong Test of your obedience: I know that
after my departure, you will meet with Foxes and Wolves, some crying down all
Ordinances, as things carnal, and below a spiritual and raised estate; they
will tell you they are weak and low administrations, no more then walking by
Moon light; they will tell you that Seraphical men, are above: and beyond all
Ordinances, and their Enthusiasms of greater concernment then the Ordinances of
Christ: you will meet on the other hand with those, who so far cry up
Ordinances, that they make Idols of them, slighting him who is the substance,
men of Pharisaical Spirits and Interests, who while they should preach Christ
and him crucified, will preach themselves, their own parts, passions and
interests, whereby you may probably be made weary both of them and their
preaching: My ever dear people, let none of these things drive you from the
Church of God, or deter or discourage you from following Christ in those ways
he has prescribed; let it be your care to wait on him: I have known some who
taking offense at these things ( woe in the mean time to him by whom the offense
comes) have in these times declined either to Popery or Atheism; I beseech God
bless you: I hope better things of you, and should be heartily grieved to see
such sad failings in any of you: I have two things to commend to you in this
Point, for your better satisfaction.

First, Rest not in a bare formal attendance upon the Ordinance. The Harlot can
say, I have made my peace offerings to day, the Ordinance is but the means, the
end is Communion with Christ, and fruition of him: The Jews promised themselves
much from the naked presence of the Temple, Ier. 7.4.
though they had but small honor for the Lord of it: Judges 17.13.
Micah promised himself mountains when he had got a Levite to be his Priest,
though he still retained his Idols: The Pharisees boasted they were the seed of
Abraham, when they did the works of the Devil; Ioh. 8.33.44.
How many poor souls have thus turned the means of salvation into the means of
destruction, feeds upon busks instead of the true bread: nay turned their food
into porson, not finding Christ in the Ordinances, nor being led home to Christ
by them? My good people, think it not enough that you have Geheza with his
masters staff; that you have Christ's Minister, and Christ's word, but as that
Shunamite, 2 King 4.30.
lay hold on Christ himself, where every faithful soul sees, casts, receives,
enjoys in these Ordinances.

Secondly, when thou have done thy best and purest service, and met with Christ
in the Ordinances, rest not in the work done, loath yourselves, with a sincere
acknowledgment of your ownunworthinesse, and the unprofitablenesse,
imperfections and iniquities of your most holy things, ever resting upon
free grace: Be so careful of duty, as if there were no grace to justify you,
and so rest upon grace, as if no work were to be done by you.

And then secondly, wait upon God in the ways of his providence and
dispensations, this is that excellent grace, a fruit of the sanctifying spirit
of God, whereby the soul freely submits not to the will only, but to the wisdom
of God, in all the cross acts of Providence we meet with in this life,
enabling us to bear our own burdens without inordinate sorrow, or fretting
discontent: As by faith we enjoy God, and by love we enjoy our neighbor; so
through humble waiting, and submission to the wisdom of God, we possess our
own souls; This is an excellent lesson, but hard for flesh and blood to learn,
to believe that God can choose best for us, better then we our selves: Are not
Abanah and Parphar Rivers of Damascus, better then all the Waters of Israel 2
R^g 5.12. Kinds of age, a few fatherly kisses and embraces, a portion in my
hand, this nature cries out for, and would be well pleased with; but the soul
that fears God, has learned with Paul, to be content in every condition of
life, has learned that sublime Philosophy of subscribing to Gods wisdom, not
to his will only (that he will force us to, and he is a kind of mad Atheist
that should deny it) but to his wisdom, to acknowledge God the best chuser for
us, the stripes he sends more suitable to us, then all the blessings we pray
for, his denying our demands, the most divine way of granting them, resolving
whatever he imposes upon us, is best for us: his thoughts are not like our
thoughts, Heaven and Earth are not always of one opinion; Good is the Word of
the Lord, says good Hezekiah, when destruction was denounced to his whole
family: It is the Lord Iet him do what seems him good, says old Eli, when
besides the loss of both his children in one day, God tells him, there should
not be an old man in his house for ever: All things (says Paul) work together
for good to them that love God: This submission to the Wisdom of God, and the
consequent of it, Rejoicing in Tribulation, is that waiting upon God, which I
would now instruct you in, that better days may teach you humbleness, which is
a part of this fear, Prove. 22.4. and worser days may teach you that Christian
patience, whereby you shall be enabled to undergo the hands of heaven, to look
after deliverance in the ways, and accept it upon the terms of God.

My dear people, you are my glory, and crown of rejoicing, let me commend the
serious remembrance of this to your Spirit; It was never of more use then in
these times of the Churches persecution: You shall see men strangely and
severally wrestling and tugging under Gods Dispensations: In one man a supine
stupidity; in another the relieving his melancholy thoughts in a cup of Lethe,
a sleeping Pill of good fellowship; like Saul's sending to the Minstrel when the
evil spirit came upon him, or his second address to the Witch, to charm the
judgment that was ready to invade him; you shall see a third multiplying his
sins as fast as God his judgments, like the Elephants in the Maccabees, whom
the blood of the Mulberies more enraged, hardening like Pharaoh under the rod;
like Ahab, and Ahaz, growing worse under the judgment: you will meet with more
plausible effects then these, in one, a contempt of the world, his experience
having acquainted him with the vanity, and his miseries with the vexation of
it; In another, perhaps a contempt or weariness of his life, like a
discontented Jonah; Take, I beseech thee my life from me; or Elias under the
Juniper Tree, it is enough, etc. and this is sometimes accounted a special
piece of piety and mortification: A third falls to his prayers, oftener then
usual, and is importunate in the duty, as the tempest in Jonah cast the Heathen
Mariners upon their knees; A fourth making some progress toward reformation,
wishings and wouldings, that he were a better man, but all these make not up
this breach of divine fear, this true waiting upon God, and submission to his
wisdom: I shall now desire for your future good to commend these Instructions
to you.

1. Be sure to eye God in all his dispensations, whether of mercy or judgment,
for all mercies spiritual and temporal return thanks to him from whom every
good and perfect gift comes, as a Present both to humbleness and
thankfulness; but that which I would now commend to you, is, the eying of God
in the several dispensations of his judgments; whosoever be the instrument,
look upon him as the author of the punishment; there is the hand and counsel of
God, (...), Acts 4.28. All the sin and furies, guilt and damnation of Hell, may
be in the (...), the doing or executing Gods Will ( Satan alone having the
Patent of persecution, and every Persecutor intrenching upon Hell for his
Commission) but then all the mercy, and all wisdom, sometimes the redeeming of
a World in the (...), the thing being done; Paul calls his suffering, (...),
the brands or prints of Christ, not only the transcripts of his suffering, but
the works of his hands also: I dare commend this to you from my own experience,
I have found it a strong support to me under my sad persecutions, and I have
cause to bless God this day, that he made me a sufferer, and punished me
immediately for my sins (a fair step to future Salvation) and not a
Persecutor, whereby adding affliction to Gods anger, my own hellish spirit had
wrapped me up to eternal destruction.

Secondly, That you may rightly wait on him, you must not only look upon these
dispensations, as Gods hand, but as his right hand, the hand of love, look upon
your afflictions, as caustic Plasters, preparatory to the incarnative, the
Knife and the Lance reckoned by Hypocrates among the (...), the mollifying
Preparations, which the Physician must ever carry about with him; as your new
Artists tells us of a Fever, it is not properly a disease, but an endeavor or
strife of nature to cure her self; ever look upon your afflictions, as designed
for your good, for the humiliation of your untamed spirits, to bring you to a
nearer sight of your God, a nearer sight of your selves, a stricter inquiry
into your own hearts, to deal near to God, to make your Peace with him and the
like: Look not upon them, as things from chance or malice, those two heathen
principles of Theology, (...), but as sent on purpose from love, and pondering
from judgment and bowels, sent not as a curse to you for sin, that is already
satisfied, to, and for the elect in Christ, but as trials and fatherly
chastizements to bring you to himself.

Secondly, as we are to wait upon God in his ways, so it is a part of his fear
to wait upon him in his times: It is recorded as an error of Gods own people,
that they limited the holy one of Israel, Psalm 78.41. (...)
they would sign, design, circumscribe God, write or determine for or instead
of God, bring him down and confine him to their own times, and their own ways;
a folly we are all naturally inclined to, whether in case of judgment
inflicted, or mercies promised and expected, we are all for the present time;
but Gods times are not our times, My times are in thy hands, says David, Psalm.
31.15. as well the time of removing as aying on the burden; we have met with
evil times (God fit us for the worst) and we are prone to murmur both at the
weight and continuance of our Pressures, and to expostulare with God, and
charge his ways as unequal and unreasonable; let me therefore commend this to
you, wait Gods times in all events, learn to stand still, and you will see the
salvation of the Lord, you will reap in due season, if you faint not, Gal. 6.9.
though it be troublesome, you will find it comfortable and useful to your
spirits, when your rebellious hearts shall put you on to murmuring and
impatience remember this, God has his time to have mercy upon Sion, and he
will assuredly come, when the sins of his enemies are come to maturity, become
impudent and incorrigible, when our own spirits are thoroughly humbled, and all
hopes and helps in man so far removed, that we have neither hope nor help but
in God, then may we look for him, in the mean time I will wait: Thus he that
fears the Lord, waits contentedly and calmly for his return, he believes in
the Lord, and his feet stand fast; This is that time I would entreat you to
wait for; and it is the second precious stone in the ring, to wait God in his
ways and in his times.

The third is to walk with him, which is here in the Text called, Keeping his
Commandments. The word Schamar, signifies not only to Keep, but to lay up, and
hide, or treasure in the heart; as Jacob is said to have observed, or laid up
in his heart the saying of Joseph: It is translated to take heed, 1 King. 2.4.
to observe or keep their ways, Psalm. 105.45. A comparison taken from a Watchman
in a City, or the Garrison in a Fortress; all these expressing that care,
diligence, and solicitude which all those that fear God have in and about their
obedience: This is that yoke of Christ I have often commended to you, an easy
yoke, Matthew. 11.30. all pleasure and profit made up in the word (...), a yoke
not like that of the Law, a weight and burden, but fitted and smoothed by
Christ to be an instrument of advantage, and make the burden more easy and
supportable; a yoke wherein Christ himself draws with and for us, that we may
the better undergo it: I know this part of the fear of God will relish harshly
with such spirits as are unaccustomed to this yoke, unacquainted with the
sweetness of it: To take leave of our old acquaintance, to carry out the whole
body of our lusts to their Funeral; it goes heavy with a heart under the power
of sin, to spiritualize the flesh, rack it, fetch it from the lees, to put on
the yoke, enter the traces, and harness for the future race; these are (...),
the childbirth pangs of dying to sin; but to those that fear God, the yoke is
easy, and the burden light: No life like that of dying to sin, no way so
pleasant as that of walking with God, no treasure so desirable as to be rich
in faith and good works, no comfort like that secret contentment a true
Believer has in his conscionable walking with God: Remember this my good
people, Hereby you shall much honor that Gospel which I have taught, and you
have received, it is that very use which the Apostle every where makes of the
Gospel of Christ, that we should walk as becomes the Gospel, that we should in
all things adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, that we should walk worthy of
him who has called us to his Kingdom, and to his glory, show forth the virtues
and praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous
light, in all these making out the necessity of walking with God in all those
that fear his Name.

The laft Stone or Diamond in this Ring, is the sincere love of God without
hypocrisy, giving him what is his own, the whole heart, without any reserve
for Satan, Mammon, or our selves: No man can truly fear God, but he that loves
him, nor can any man truly love God, whose soul is not first ravished with the
apprehension of the love of Christ to him: We love God, because he first loved
us: This is that high heroical improvement and elevation of the soul, the want
whereof, whether to God or man, is as great a punishment, as it is a sin: There
is as much of hell in the quenching of the one flame, as in the raging of the
other. The Devil cannot possibly pick out, or design to his most hated enemy,
a greater curse then the want of love: My ever dear people, let me entreat you
to remember this, Amor non nisi donum amantis in amatum. Guil. Paris.
you will find many heavenly and comfortable fruits of it, it will call you out
of your selves, to the desire of an union, vision, and participation of the
glory and presence of God; the Soul will go to God, like Noah's Dove to the Ark,
and with infinite sweetness and security repose it self in him, it will cause
you to resign the whole heart to God, to give up your selves wholly to him, to
conform affections and actions to his Will, to love every thing wherein your
souls shall find Christ, his ways, his words, his Ordinances, his Ministers,
when the root is thus seasoned, you will find all corruptions and lusts falling
off like dead branches: Timor transit in charitatem Greg.
A good man is a good Angel, always beholding the face of God, and the more he
sees him, the more he loves him; and the more he loves him, the more he fears
him; he loves him in that fear, and fears him in that love. It is said of the
two Marys, Mat. 28.8. That they went from the Sepulcher with fear, and great
joy: A rare composition of so different affections! All other fear being pain,
the fear of God brings joy, and love with it.

That which I would principally at present urge to you, is that Christian
Brotherly love, which the Gospel frequently makes out, and this Age has almost
forgotten, which arises from, and is accompanied with our true love to God;
Every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him,
1 John 5.1.2. How close a connection there is of the love of God, and the love
of our Brethren? Be kindly affectioned Romans 12.10; the word is very Emphatical,
(...).
and signifies such a natural binding love and affection, as is betwixt Parents
and children, a real, compassionate, fervent melting love; The Lord Jesus has
lest this both to be our duty and our reward, the loving of the Brethren:
would you know the rule you must walk by, love them as your selves, thou
would not be hurt, hurt not thy Neighbor, thou would not be reviled,
revile no man, thou would not be ill spoken of, speak not ill of others, thou
would not be persecuted, persecute no man, this is the Golden Rule;
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, Mat. 7.12.
do ye even so to them, this is the Law and the Prophets, or on these two hang
the Law and the Prophets Matthew. 22, 40. This was sure that fire in the Poet
stolen from Heaven to inspire and warm the Lower World with; It is said to be
a speech of Christ, which the Nazarene Gospel has recorded, though our Bibles
have it not, Nunquam laeti sitis n^si cum fratrem in charitate videritis; There
is no other badge to difference a disciple of Christ from any other man but
this, Ecce ut se invicem diligunt; nay, the Devil cannot so far be an
Hypocrite, as to counterfeit this; All glorious Appearances without love are
but empty shadows, hereby we become like the Saints in Heaven, of whose
blessed estate all we understand is only this, that they are happy and love
one another, and in that eternally happy, that they eternally love one another,
Charity never fails, and so their bliss fails not.

You see, my good people, what times we are fallen into, what wrath, clamor,
malice, bitterness, raylings, revilings there are among men, what
disaffections, divisions, persecutions of the Church, even by those that
profess they have given up their Names to Christ. So far from being Christian,
that they walk as men, nay they have put off man in exchange for Wolves,
Panthers, and Tigers, nay worse then Wild Beasts, who are not Beast enough to
devour those of their own kind, as Erasmus observes. So Act as if they had
made a solemn Covernant with Hell and Death. Let these daily examples from the
Father of malice provoke you to love and good works, to follow God who is
love, and to walk in love as Christ also has loved us. It will be hereafter a
great rejoicing to my Spirit, to see you have thus learned Christ, live in love
and peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.

There are many more branches of this fear of God, every Religious Performance
is a part of it, that of prayer especially, as beneficial to the ^oule as the
rest. But I have not long ago treated of it, and cannot stand now to make it
out. I have already tired you with Pre^ching that, I should rather have prayed
for you, that God would plant his fear in the hearts of every one of you. I
have but two words more to speak in relation to 2. extremes or rocks, upon
which this fear of God may be in danger to be spsits, and I shall give them you
by way of Caution.

First in the defect, beware of carnal security in sin, promising your selves
mercy and impunity, upon false and empty bottoms, blessing your selves in your
hearts, Deutr 27.19.
till your iniquity be found hateful, it will bring you at last to that dead
and dedolent disposition of Spirit, (...) Ephesians. 4.11.
that being past feeling, ye shall work all uncleanness with greediness, if
we shall thus out dare God in his threatenings, and like that Behemoth, esteem
those iron weapons as straw, or as they say of the old Italians, shoot off our
great Ordnance, and Ring our bells, to drown the noise of Heaven's thunder, if
we thus presume, Deuteronomy. 29.20.
God will not spare us, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke
against us, etc. remember that saying Eccl. 8.12. Though a Sinner do evil an
hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely it shall be well with
them that sear the Lord. This is a dangerous and common rock, upon which many
a poor soul splits it self, and the more common it is, the more let it be your
care to avoid it.

The other is in the excess, and that is a servile infernal fear of God as a
Judge or Tyrant, whence arise in the soul hard thoughts of God, Quos mctacule
odcrint.
hatred of him, a secret rising up against him, a wishing there were no God,
and the like. This is that great Engine wherewith Satan labors to batter our
faith, when he cannot robb you of grace, and make you wicked, he will endeavor
to robb you of comfort and bring you to despair, make you miserable. He will
assault you with doubts and fears, touching your Election, conversion,
adoption, perseverance, with the greatness and number of your sins, with the
Curse and horror of the Law, the Majesty and Justice of an offended God, who is
a consuming fire. In all these and such like temptations, let your eyes ever be
fixed upon Christ and his blood, the satisfaction given to the Justice of God
by his death, that redemption from the Curse of the Law, himself being made a
curse for us; then will your souls say, Let the Lord live; then will your
desires be to the remembrance of his name; then will your hearts love him, and
say, I will sing unto the Lord because he has dealt bountifully with me, Psalm
23.6. This is the foundation against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail,
when there is no light nor issue, nor possibility to esdape, here will a do,
of deliverance fly open to you. Remember this also, I pray you, if once you
come to slight or undervalue this great mercy to tread under foot the Son of
God, there remains no more, no other sacrifice for you; you may as much offend
God by despairing, as by presuming of his mercy, Heb. 10.29
both are destructive to the true fear of God: lay these things up in your
hearts, the Lord of his mercy bless them to you.

To all you that thus fear the Lord, Mal. 4.2.
shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing under his wings, joy in
that day when all the Elect shall behold their King and Redeemer in his Majesty
and Glory. For all those that thus fear the Lord, there is a book of
remembrance written: It is said of Tamerlane the Scythian, that he had always
by him a Catalogue of the names and good deserts of his servants, which he
daily perused, and whom he duly rewarded; Mal. 3.16.
how much more shall the Lord, who bottles up the tears of his people, puts
their Prayers as upon the File, and records all their devotions. All those that
thus fear the Lord, he will own in that day when he makes up his Jewels, makes
them up for himself, and takes them away from the misusages and malignities of
the World. When one desired to see Alexanders Treasure, show him (said he to
his Servant) not my Gold or Moneys, Plate or Jewels, but my friends:
Henceforth, says Christ, I call you not servants, but friends, John 15.15.
These are Gods Jewels, his dearest friends, his chief Treasure; none can
plunder or pluck them out of his hands: They are called, the dearly beloved of
his Soul, (...)
Jer. 12.7. the LXX read it, his dearly beloved Soul, noting Gods Saints to be
as dear to him, as a man's life or his Soul is: All these, and these only, will
the Lord pity and spare at that day, as a father spares his own son that
serves him.

I have now done both with the Text and the Times; I have presented you with a
New-years-gift of an inestimable value and worth, All I require from you is but
this, That I may see you wear it; that as great Personages are known by their
Rings and rich Jewels; so you may be by the fear of the Lord: This Ring truly
worn, will seal to your souls assurance of salvation in this life, and be to
every one of you at your death a wedding Ring to marry you to the Lamb for
evermore: Your tears at this time sufficiently witness, how sadly you receive
it from my hands; God will I hope put your tears into his bottle; and that
Fountain which he has opened in your eyes this day, shall swell into Rivers of
comfort and salvation at that day, when God shall wipe away all tears from your
eyes: All I can do, is to pray for you, since I must no longer Preach to you; I
pray God bless his Church; I pray God bless you all, and that God of Peace
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every
good work, to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, and honor, now, and evermore.

FINIS.

