THE JEWS Synagogue: OR, A TREATISE CONCERNING The ancient Orders and manner
of Worship used by the JEWS in their SYNAGOGVE-ASSEMBLIES.

Gathered out of the Sacred SCRIPTURES, the Jewish Rabines, and such Modern
Authors, which have been most conversant in the study of Jewish Customs.

WHEREIN, By comparing the SCRIPTURES in the Old and New Testament together*
many truths are fully opened, and sundry Controversies about Church Government
truly and plainly stated.

By William Pinchion of Springfeild in N. England.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop at the three
golden Lions in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1652.

To the Christian Readers of great BRITANY.
CHristian Reader, all the Authors that I have read about the discipline of the
Jews Synagogues, have mixed many of the Jews late superstitious practices
among some of their ancient approved practices: and because they have not
distinguished the one from the other, they have rather confounded the Reader
than given him any distinct aim how to judge of their Synagogue-orders, and
whether they were ever any particular Churches of Jesus Christ: Nay, many
learned have concluded, that they never were ordained for any true Churches of
Christ. And therefore they have slighted all their discipline-practices, as
nothing exemplary to the government of the particular Churches of Jesus Christ
at this day.

But my apprehensions are otherwise: for I conceive that Jesus Christ did
originally ordain them as true particular visible Churches.

Therefore I thought it necessary to search out, as well as I could, their
Synagogue-worship, together with some of their ancient Discipline-practices;
and herein I have endeavored to avoid their late superstitious observations
which they have added from their own brains in the time of their Apostasy.

This labor I thought necessary to communicate to the godly, for the better
searching into the fundamental grounds of Church Discipline. If any thing I
have alleged be profitable to thy understanding, let God have the glory in the
wise improvement thereof for the peace and comfort of all the Churches of Jesus
Christ. Amen.

A Table of some chief Heads.
Chap. 1. That the Jews Synagogue-Assemblies were true visible Churches of
Jesus Christ.
1 THe Jews Synagogues were particular Churches of Jesus Christ, page 1. 2
Their national Church-worship was not sufficient of it self to preserve the
truth of Religion among them: But their Synagogue-worship was sufficient
without their national worship, both when they lived in the wilderness, and
when they lived in Heathen Countries. p. 9 3 The antiquity of Synagogues in
heathen countries. p. 12 4 The provident care of Jesus Christ for the speedy
spreading of particular Christian Churches into all parts of the world, does
mightily appear by his dispersing the Jews into sundry heathen countries to
build Synagogues, and to get Assemblies before hand fit for the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ to preach to. 12 5 The Christians that were first converted
by the Apostles in the Jews Synagogue, did not presently separate themselves
from the Jews Synagogues, to make particular Churches by themselves, until
the Synagogues did first persecute them for their faith in Christ crucified. 15
6 Jesus Christ did ordain that the place of his particular Church-meetings
should be conveniently seated in some convenient distance from every ones
dwelling. 16 7 If ten men of Israel did live remote from any synagogue, they
must prepare a new synagogue nigh and fit for their dwellings. 17 8 That kind
of worship which Christ ordained to be used in their synagogue-assemblies, was
prayer and preaching, without any leviticall ceremony. 18 9 They used to keep
weekly Lectures in their synagogues. 21 10 How the Jews received Heathens to
be members of their National Church, and of their particular synagogue also.
21 11 The Judges of their Sanhedrims were the Elders of their national Church,
22 12 In their synogogues they observed days of public fasting upon occasion
of any distress that was upon them. 24 13 How the blessing was pronounced in
the synagogue after the Lecture of the Law was ended, 25 14 No Leviticall
worship was lawful to be used in their synagogues. 25 15 What officers the
Jews had in their synagogues. 26 16 Why they called the Pastor of their
synagogue, Zeliah Zibbur. 26 17 In the Heathen countries when the Hebrew tongue
was lost from the common use, then Zeliach Zibbur did read his text in the
Hebrew tongue: but afterward he did expound it in the common Dialect of that
nation where they lived 27 18 The Pastors of their synagogues were not Levites,
but they were chosen out of any tribe. 28 19 The manner how the Elders of the
Sanhedrim made Doctors at large. 92 20 This phrase, Whatsoever thou shall bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven, is a Talmud phrase. 29 21 The Discipline
which Christ ordained for the government of the Jewish synagogue, is recorded
in fragments by Maymony and the two Talmuds. 31 22 The New Testament has many
phrases that are Talmudique, which cannot be so fitly opened as by the Talmud
32
Chap. 2. That the government of the Church of the Jews was instituted by
Jesus Christ, to be, 1. Dependent, when they lived together in the land of
Canaan, 2. Independent, when they inhabited in Heathen Countries.
1 The Jews Synagogue Discipline was sometimes dependent, and sometimes
independent. 38 2 In heathen countries every Synagogue had a general license
to exercise such a discipline among themselves, as tended to the correction of
vice, except life and limb. 39 3 Their synagogue-Discipline was dependent as
long as they lived in Canaan. 41 4 When the Sanhedrim government was first
ordained. 41 5 Jesus Christ first constituted the Sanhedrim government. 42 6
The high Sanhedrim ordained all the other Sanhedrims. 43 7 To sit in Moses
Chair, is to judge according to Moses Laws. 46 8 The Elders of the Sanhedrim
were the general Elders of the Church, and therefore they had power to deal
in all matters of Religion, as well as in civil causes. 47 9 The High
Sacrificer was not the chief Elder of the National Church of Israel, as some
affirm. 49 10 Christ gave the power of excommunication originally to the Elders
of the Sanhedrim in the Wilderness. 53 11 In what cases the Elders of the
Sanhedrim did excommunicate. 55 12 An excommunicate person and a publicane
might go into the Temple, but an heathen might not. 58 13 What kind of
excommunication is the Anathema Maranatha. 59 14 Christ did not first ordain
excommunication in Matthew. chap. 18. 1 62 15 This phrase, Tell the Church, means
nothing else, but Tell the Elders of the Sanhedrim. 69 16 A Court of Elders is
a Church in Scripture phrase. 70 17 All the outward professors of faith through
the world do make an universal visible Church of Christ. 78 18 Who are to he
accounted as fit persons to be admitted as members of a particular visible
Church. 80
Chap. 3. That Schools of learning were at the first erected by Jesus Christ,
for the breeding of a succession of able Men for Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Judges, etc. to the Worlds end.
1 Christ has ordained Schools of learning for the continual raising up of
Pastors, Teachers, and Elders for the good governwent of the Church and
Commonweal to the end of the world. 81 2 Ezra and the Doctors of his Age, did
with great diligence devise many precious rules to preserve the purity of the
Hebrew text to every letter. 85 3 The Hebrew Doctors took care for the
preservation of the truth of doctrine, as well as for the preservation of the
Hebrew text. 88
A Discourse, TOUCHING THE JEWS SYNAGOGUES, Proving that the Jews
Synagogue-Assemblies, were true visible Churches of JESUS CHRIST: With some
other miscellaneous Observations about their Discipline.
CHAP. I. That the Jews Synagogue-Assemblies were true visible Churches of
Jesus Christ.
Scholar, Teacher. WHether were the Jews Synagogues particular Churches of
Jesus Christ or no? The Jews Synagogues were particular Churches of Jesus
Christ.



Teacher, It is evident to me, that the Jewes-Synagogue-Assemblies were
particular Churches of JESUS CHRIST: because it was the Angel of the Covenant,
the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, that did ordain and institute not only
all the twelve Tribes into one Nationall-Church, but also that did divide and
distribute the said twelve Tribes into several particular Churches. I say,
Jesus Christ did institute both these kind of Churches in Israel: he was the
Angel-Jehovah, that first spoke unto Moses out of the bush, Exodus 3. 2. called
also the God of Abraham, verse. 7. and he is also called the God of Glory, that
first appeared to Abraham while he was an Idolater in his Fathers house in
Mesopotamia, Acts 7. 2. Jos. 24.

This God of glory did now appear unto Moses in the bush, and sent him to bring
his People out of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage, Exodus 20. therefore
Christ was that Jehovah, that said unto all Israel, Thou shall have no other
Gods but me: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Images, thou shall not
bow down to worship them; but thou shall worship me alone, with such outward
worship, as I have already appointed, or as I shall now appoint at this Mount
Sinai, or which I shall hereafter appoint, when the Throne of my Tabernacle
shall be reared up.

So then, Christ was that Jehovah that first promised the Land of Canaan, unto
Abraham and his seed, Genesis 12. and that sent Moses to bring them out of Egypt,
and that kept them company in the wilderness, by going before them in a cloudy
pillar by day, and in a fiery pillar by night, until he brought them into the
land of Canaan: And the Apostle Paul does tell us plainly, that it was Christ
that caused the rock to supply them with water in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 4.
Therefore it follows that it must needs be Jesus Christ that did not only
unite the twelve Tribes, into one National Church, but also that did
distribute them into several particular Church Assemblies: And therefore it
was Christ that appointed all the Ordinances of his worship by Moses, both
their national, and in their particular Church Assemblies.


Scholar, How do you prove that Jesus Christ did distribute the twelve Tribes
into several particular Church Assemblies.


Teacher, I prove it by a place of Scripture, that is both plain and pregnant,
Lev. 23. 1, 2, 3. Jehovah spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the sons of
Israel, and say unto them, etc. and in verse 3. he says thus, Six days shall
work be done, but in the seventh day shall be a Sabbath of Sabbatism, a
convocation of holiness, ye shall not do any work, it shall be a Sabbath to
Jehovah in all your dwellings.

In this Text, Jesus Christ is called Jehovah, he bade Moses (the chief
Magistrate) to speak unto the sons of Israel, that is to say, to the chief Sons
or Elders of Israel; as he does explain his meaning in Levit. 9. 1. 3. There
Moses bids Aaron to speak unto the sons of Israel; that is to say the 70. to
the Senate of Israel in the first place, Exodus 25. 1. 9. Numb. 11.
that so by their means all the other sons of Israel might understand the
commandment of Christ, concerning the time and manner of his public worship.
And so it was Christ also, that bad Moses to set the judicial Laws before
them, Exodus 21. 1. that is to say, before the chief sons of Israel in the first
place, and so by their means before all the people also; and by this orderly
way, Christ did communicate all his Laws, and Ordinances to all the people, see
Ains. in Exodus 4. 29. and 12. 3. compared with 21. and with Number. 5. 1. and 30.
1.

Then Christ by Moses bade these chief sons of Israel to proclaim Convocations
of Holiness, that all the people might know the appointment of Christ: and
Christ did command these chief sons of Israel to proclaim unto the people the
observation of two several kinds of holy Convocations. First, particular
Convocations of Holiness, or particular Church Assemblies, which they must
observe every seventh Day in all their dwellings, Levit. 23, 3.

Secondly, By general Convocations of Holiness, or general Church Assemblies,
which they must observe before his Sanctuary three times a year, verse 4. and
so to thee and of the Chapter

Now, the first sort of these holy Convocations spoken of, verse. 3. must needs
be understood of their particular Church Assemblies, for this phrase, In all
your dwellings: cannot be understood neither of their Family-Assemblies, nor
yet of their National Church Assemblies; therefore it must be understood of
particular Church Assemblies.

First I say, that this Convocation which Christ commanded them to keep every
seventh Day in all their dwellings, cannot be understood of their
Family-Convocations. It is a gross conceit for any man to think that Christ
did by this phrase, command every Family to stay at home to keep a Convocation
in every private Family. Secondly, it is as gross a conceit to think, that
Christ did, by this phrase, command all the twelve Tribes to keep a general
Convocation before the Sanctuary, every seventh Day, especially after they were
settled in the Land of Canaan, in their several Inheritances: any man that has
but half an eye, may see that such a Convocation was impossible to be observed
every seventh Day. Therefore it follows by necessary consequence, that the holy
Convocation which Christ did command them to keep every seventh Day in all
their dwellings, must be understood of such particular Church-Convocations, as
were made of several Families, in a convenient distance of place for every ones
dwelling. The truth of this Interpretation will the better appear, if we do but
consider two circumstantial differences. 1. Of Time. 2. Of Place. First, of
Time: This Convocation spoken of in verse 3. is expressly commanded to be
observed every Sabbath, or seventh Day through all the year, even during the
time of their travel in the wilderness; therefore this Convocation cannot be
understood of their general Church-Convocations: for their general festival
Convocations were commanded to be observed only three times in the year:
neither were they bound to observe their festival Convocations in the time of
their travels in the wilderness, but the observation of those Convocations were
adjourned until they were settled in rest, in the Land of Canaan, Numb. 15. 2.

Secondly, this Convocation of holiness, Levit. 23. 3. Differs from their
National-Convocation in respect of place, because their National-Convocation
was commanded to be observed only before the Tabernacle or Temple, which place
was a great way off from the most part of their dwellings, after they were
settled in Canaan. But this Convocation of holiness, in verse 3. is at hand,
and therefore it is commanded to be observed in all their dwellings; that is to
say, not far off, but nigh to every ones dwelling, so that all sorts of persons
might resort thither with ease, every Sabbath or seventh Day, without breaking
the rest of the holy Sabbath by long toil of travel; for the Text says
plainly, Ye shall not do any work, it shall be a Sabbath to Jehovah, in all
your dwellings; but if all the twelve Tribes had been commanded to repair to
the Tabernacle, or Temple every Sabbath or seventh Day, they must have toyled
hard, and so have broken the rest of the holy Sabbath.

Therefore seeing this Convocation in verse 3. is so expressly limited. 1. To
the time of the Sabbath or seventh Day. And 2. to the place of their dwellings;
that is to say, in a convenient nigh distance to their dwellings. It does
necessarily follow that this Convocation of holiness spoken of in verse 3.
must needs be understood only of their particular Church Assemblies, which
Christ ordained as well as their general Church Assemblies.

It is said in Psalm. 87. 2. That Jehovah loves the Gates of Zion, above the
dwelling places of Jacob.

That is to say, Christ did more delight to manifest his visible Presence in
the Cloud of his presence, between the Cherubin upon Mount Sion, then in their
Synagogue-Assemblies: but he did graciously bless their Synagogue-Assemblies
with his Spiritual presence to the conversion of souls, as he did the place of
his visible presence in Mount Sion.

But I chiefly allege this place in Psalm. 87. to note out unto us, that their
particular Church Assemblies, were called the dwelling places of Jacob, because
they were many, and conveniently dispersed in all the Towns and Villages of
Israel.

Secondly, if Jesus Christ had left his people to their own liberty and
discretion, whether they would have met together in particular
Church Assemblies, to worship him every Sabbath or no, all the while they were
in their travels in the wilderness, which was for the space of thirty eight
years together; Then doubtless they would have used that liberty to the
increasing of Idolatry, and profaneness, as experience does teach us in all
places where the strict exercise of Gods worship in particular assemblies has
been neglected; and then the generation that entered into Canaan, would have
been worse then those that came out of Egypt, but they must be better
instructed before they could enter into Canaan; therefore there was a
necessity that Jesus Christ should enjoin them to observe particular
Convocations of holiness, by particular Church Assemblies every Sabbath or
seventh Day, even whiles they were in their travels in the wilderness.


Sholar, What other proof have you to confirm this Tenent, that the Jews
Synagogues were particular Churches of Jesus Christ?


Teacher, The truth of this Tenent does further appear by the term Church, and
the term Synagogue, which are used as terms convertible or synonima.

First the Apostle James calls a Christian Church a Synagogue, James 2. 2. If
there come says he, unto your Synagogue, a man with a gold ring, etc. Here the
term Synagogue, in the singular number is put for Synagogues in the plural
number; for James writes not to one particular Church or Synagogue only, but
he writes to the converted Jews of the twelve Tribes which were dispersed into
diverse heathen Countries, James 1. 1. For they had Synagogues in every heathen
Country, and they had many godly Christians that still lived with them, though
some were separated into particular Churches: James says to them all in
general as if he spoke to one particular Church meeting, etc.

Secondly, David calls the Jewes-Synagogues by the name of Churches, as M.
Ainsworth notes in Psalm. 26. 12. In the Churches, says he, will I bless
thee: And again David does exhort all the faithful to bless God in the
Churches, Psalm. 68. 26. That is to say, in their particular
Synagogue-meetings: so then by the Testimony of James and David, it is evident
that the term Church, and the term Synagogue, are terms convertible or synonima.

Thirdly, The seventy do make the term Church, and the term Synagogue to be
Synonima. These seventy Translators were Jews, and therefore in reason were
able to render the Hebrew word Kahal (which we translate Church) in a right
sense; and they translate Kahal seventy times by Ecclesia, and thirty seven
times by Synagogue: as Kirkerus in his Hebrew-Greek Lexicon does note it to our
hands.

Fourthly, The Prophet lamenteth, that the enemy had burned all the Synagogues
of God in the land, Psalm. 74. 4. 8. The Prophet calls them the Synagogues of
God, because they were appointed and ordained by Jesus Christ, for the use of
his public worship every Sabbath day.

Hence it follows, that if any of the Jewish Synagogues in the days of the
Apostles did embrace the Gospel, they might well be called a Christian Church,
without any alteration of their Discipline; as the whole Synagogue of Antioch
in Syria did: (for I believe there was a Jewish Synagogue in that City, because
there were many Jews there, though the term Synagogue be not expressed in the
text) For as yet the Apostles preached to the Jews only: Acts 11. 29. and
therefore that Synagogue might well continue in the same order of Discipline as
it stood before: and why should it be thought a thing incredible, that a whole
Synagogue might not be converted by the preaching of the Gospel, as well as
whole Families; seeing the Jews of this Antioch, did not oppose the believing
Grecians, as the malignant Jews of other Synagogues did? we never read of any
opposition that this Church or Synagogue made against the Gospel, except by
some Jews that came from Judea, and taught the Brethren, saying, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Acts 15. 1. Neither
do we read of any separation that Christians made from this Synagogue, as they
did from other Synagogues when they were persecuted. Therefore I conceive all
the Jews of this Synagogue were converted in general: and this Synagogue was
first called a Church of Christians. Acts 11. 26. and yet there were synagogues
in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, that were called Churches before this: Acts 9.
31. but they were not wholly converted to Christianity, as this synagogue of
Antioch was: some godly converts there were in these synagogues by the ministry
of John Baptist, and of Christ, who had some rest from persecution, at the time
of Paul's conversion; but no separated Christian Church was established as yet,
except the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 1. 15. and except this synagogue of
Antioch.

5. When Paul was sent with letters from the high Priest, to persecute
Christians that as yet continued in synagogues; he was converted as he was
going to persecute the Christians that were in the synagogue of Damascus;
whereupon he preached Christ in the synagogue of Damascus, and then he preached
Christ also in the synagogues of Arabia, for three years together, before he
consulted with any of the Apostles, Acts 9. 1. 20. Gal. 1, and 2. Then had the
Churches rest, throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria. Acts 9. 31. These
Churches can be no other but the synagogues of those places where diverse of
them were converted to Christianity by the preaching of John Baptist, and by
Christ and his Apostles, where they yet continued: For I find no particular
Christian Church established as yet, but the Church at Jerusalem and at
Antioch, as I noted above. In one place Paul says that He persecuted the
Church of God extremely, and wasted it. Gal. 1. 13. but in Acts 22. 19. he
says, He prisoned and beat in every synagogue, them that believed in Christ.
Therefore the Jews synagogues may well be called particular Churches of Jesus
Christ.


Scholar. Some learned men do affirm, that the Jews Synagogues were no true
Particular Churches of Jesus Christ, because they wanted one of the essential
marks of a true Particular Church: For according to the opinion of sundry
learned Divines, a true Church must have three marks that are essential to the
completing of a true Church. First, The preaching of Gods word by a chosen
Officer. Secondly, The right administration of the Sacraments. Thirdly, the
power of Discipline: Now it is evident that the Synagogues wanted the use and
practice of the two Sacraments, which were in ordinary use before the coming of
Christ. Therefore they were no true Churches of Jesus Christ.


Teacher. This is a hard saying, to condemn the Jews synagogues, as no true
Churches of Jesus Christ, because they did not Administer those Sacraments,
that were in ordinary use among the Jews. If there can be no true Church of
Jesus Christ without the Administration of the ordinary Sacraments, then those
Christian-Assemblies were no true Churches of Jesus Christ, which were often
Congregated at Amersham, and in other parts in England, in the days of Henry
the eight, to hear the Word of God read and expounded, by the ablest Christians
they would choose out among themselves: for I conceive they did many years meet
together to hear the Word of God, without the use of the Sacraments, and
without the use of any settled Discipline, excepting the use of such private
reproofs, as they in godly wisdom did give to one another for the reformation
of sinful misdemeanors: though I grant that such Assemblies had the use of the
Sacraments, and of Discipline also in the days of Queen Mary, but not in the
days of King Henry the eight, that I can find recorded in any story; and yet I
conceive there were many true particular Churches of Jesus Christ in those
days. Therefore I conceive that in time of persecution, where ever a company
of godly Christians did use to assemble upon the Lord's Day to hear the Word of
God preached by one of the most ablest chosen men among themselves, they were
to be esteemed as a true particular Church of Jesus Christ, or else I fear we
shall hardly find any true Church of Christ in the world, for many years
together in the height of Popery.

Therefore notwithstanding this Objection, I conclude that the Jews synagogues
were true Churches of Jesus Christ, as long as they had the use and exercise of
the Word preached among them, though they wanted the use of the ordinary
Sacraments in their synagogues, and yet I suppose they circumcised in their
synagogues, for they came to the Administration of that seal of the Covenant in
a public manner, as Learned Divines think, Luke 1. 59.


Scholar, I confess that the Jews Synagogues have been of excellent use from
ancient times: but I have formerly thought that these Synagogues had been
erected at the first, by the voluntary care of their godly Governors: and not
by Divine Institution of Jesus Christ.


Teacher, I have sufficiently proved from Levit. 23. 3. that synagogue-worship
was not first erected by the voluntary care of godly Governors, but by the
special appointment of Jesus Christ: and it is most like that synagogue-worship
was ordained by Christ from the beginning of the world: for they did sanctify
the Sabbath by particular Church Assemblies, whilst they lived in Egypt long
before they came into the Wilderness: for the Angel of Gods presence said thus
unto those that went out to gather Manna upon the Sabbath (before they came to
Mount Synai, and therefore before the Law given at Mount Synai) How long will
ye refuse to keep my Commandments, and my Laws? Exodus 16. 28. From this text
it is evident, that Jesus Christ had given them a commandment and a law, for
the public sanctifying of the holy Sabbath, before he gave the ten
commandments at mount Sinai: and therefore he had instructed them in the
observation of their festival sabbaths; for he did not require them to observe
their festival sabbaths while they were in their travels in the Wilderness, but
he adjourned the observation of their festival sabbaths, until they were settled
in rest in Canaan, Numb. 15. 2. and therefore after Christ had commanded the
Tabernacle to be twice erected in the Wilderness, for the place of their
National Church Assemblies, and after that he had declared the Ordinances
thereof (which was done in the second year after their coming from Egypt)
then, immediately after the Tabernacle was folded up again, 38. years together,
as M. Ainsworth observed, Numb. 2. In all which space, they did not observe any
of their festival sabbaths, except the Passover once only, in the second year
after they came out of Egypt. Number. 9. And yet in all this 38. years space, the
Angel of Gods presence did not leave them to their own liberty, whether they
would observe the sabbath by an holy convocation or no: but he did straightly
charge them to observe that day with an holy convocation in all their
dwellings; they might not omit this holy convocation every seventh day in all
their dwellings; though they must omit the observation of all their festival
sabbaths for 38. years togethers: If they had neglected their Particular
Church Assemblies, as they did omit their National Church Assemblies, for 38.
years together, doubtless Religion would have perished from among them.

Yea, after they did enjoy their National Church Assemblies Their National
Church-worship, was not sufficient of it self to preserve the truth of Religion
among them. But their Synagogue worship was sufficient without National
worship, both when they lived in the Wilderness, and when they lived in heathen
countries.
in the land of Canaan three times a year, Religion would have perished among
them, if it had not been for this command of Christ, to observe those
particular Church Assemblies in all their dwellings.

And this is evident, by considering the defects that were in their National
Church-worship: 1. In regard of Persons. 2. Of Place. 3. Of time.

First, Consider the Persons that were enjoined to be present at their National
Church Assemblies; and they were but some part of those persons that were to be
instructed in Faith and Holiness: For neither bondmen, nor women, nor
children, were bound to be present at any of their National Church-meetings,
only men that were free, were commanded to meet three times a year: vid.
Ainsw. on Exodus 23. 17. Therefore their National Church Assemblies, were never
intended by Christ as the chief means to train up all sorts of Persons in faith
and holiness.

2. Consider the place that the Son of God appointed for their National Church
meetings, and that was set but in one of their Tribes, which the Lord would
choose; therefore all sorts of persons could not come thither every sabbath day,
in regard of the length of the way; for the place was a great way off from most
of their dwellings. Therefore the most men could not come thither every
sabbath, especially if any infirmity were upon them; and if it had been
possible for all sorts of persons to assemble every sabbath unto the Lords
Temple, yet so great a multitude could neither hear the voice of the Priests,
nor yet see the public sacrifices with their eyes; and in that regard, every
one that resorted to the National Church-Assembly, were commanded by Christ to
bring their own private sacrifice over and above the public, and not to come
before the Lord empty. Deuteronomy. 12.

Therefore the place of their National Church meetings, was never intended by
Christ, as the only Church meeting of the Israelites, for the training up of
all sorts of persons every seventh day in faith and holiness.

3. Consider the time of this National Church-worship, and that was commanded
to be done, (not every sabbath or seventh day) but only three times a year,
Exodus 23. 14. 17. Lev. 23. Therefore it must needs follow by necessary
consequence, that this National Church-Assembly, was never intended by Christ
as the only Church-meeting for Israel: and therefore Christ must needs
establish some other particular Church-meetings for holy convocations in all
their dwellings, to be observed every seventh day, as the most constant and
familiar way and means for the education of all sorts of Gods people in faith
and holiness: and what other particular convocations could Israel have in all
their dwellings, but their synagogue-assemblies, whither all sorts of people
might easily resort every sabbath? Bondmen as well as Freemen; Children as well
as the most Ancient; Women as well as Men; Proselites as well as Israelites;
yea Heathens might come thither to be instructed, though they might not come
into the holy Temple. And these holy convocations in all their dwelings, were
commanded to be observed in the Wilderness, while they were in their travels, as
well as in the land of Canaan when they came thither. Yea they observed these
particular Church Assemblies in all Heathen Countries, when they were in
dispersion. Christ did not leave them in any place of their captivity, free
from the observation of the holy sabbath, in the best manner they could attain;
but he did fully free them from all their National Church-worship when they
were in captivity in heathen countries: but he commanded them to observe his
National Church-worship, but only in that particular place which he had chosen
in the land of Canaan, and not in heathen Countries, nor in the Wilderness.

From the due consideration of these three circumstances, the Angel from whom
Moses received lively Oracles, does plainly show unto us, that there was an
absolute necessity why he must distribute the National Church of the Jews, into
particular Church Assemblies, in a convenient distance among all their
dwellings, for the better instruction of all sorts of people, every sabbath or
seventh day, in faith and holiness.


Scholar. I confess you have given me good satisfaction in this point: I do
conceive that Christ did distribute the National Church of the Jews into sundry
particular Churches, in a convenient distance among all their dwellings, for
the better instructing of all sorts of people every sabbath in faith and
holiness; not only in Canaan, but in the Wilderness, and in all places of their
dispersion; by means whereof they did preserve the truth of Religion, till the
coming of Christ, better then the Jews did in Canaan, where they did for the
most part enjoy the free use of their National Church-Worship. And Christ did
much honor these dispersed Synagogues, with the conversion of many ten
thousand souls, both of Jews and Heathens, by sending abroad his Apostles and
Disciples, to preach the glad tidings of the Gospel among them.


Teacher. I am glad that you are now satisfied that the Jews synagogues were
established by Christ as his particular Churches: now seeing you grant their
synagogues to be true Churches, you must allow their Discipline to be according
to the mind of Christ: and indeed Christ did highly honor this point of
Discipline among them, in that their Officers did so freely give way to the
Apostles and Disciples to preach in their synagogues. This freedom and liberty
was a commendable custom among them, and it was well rewarded with plentiful
preaching, and conversion of souls all the world over.


Scholar. In what parts of the world had the Jews liberty to have or build
Synagogues?


Teacher. The Jews were scattered abroad into the four winds of heaven, by the
just anger of Christ for their Apostasy, but in the midst of wrath he
remembered mercy; for at last he gave them favor in the sight of all Nations,
to have and build synagogues for the free ex^rcise of their Religion.

As for example, in the days of Ahasuerus the Persian Emperor, The antiquity
of Synagogues in heathen Countries.
Haman did inform the King that there was a people which were dispersed in all
his Dominions (which was an hundred twenty and seven Provinces) that had laws
differing from all Nations, and differing from the Kings laws, and he persuaded
the King it was not fit for him to suffer them to live. Est. 3. 8. Now if Haman
had been asked what laws had the Jews differing from all Nations, and differing
from the Kings laws? I believe he could have found no other laws peculiar to
them, and differing from other Nations, but the laws and Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, which they publicly preached and taught in their synagogues every
sabbath, in all the said hundred twenty and seven Provinces. From this
accusation of Haman, it may be safely gathered, that the Jews had abundance of
synagogues in all the hundred twenty and seven Provinces of Ahasuerus Dominions.

And we may guess, they began to build synagogues in the time of the Babylonian
Captivity, for Christ did procure favor for the poor captives at the hands of
the Babylonian Emperors, as well as of the Persian, by many stately passages of
his wise providence: For about the fifth year of Nebuchadnezar, he caused
Daniel to be advanced into the Kings favor, by giving him skill The provident
care of Christ for speedy spreading of particular Christian Churches into all
parts of the world, does mightily appear by his dispersing the Jews into sundry
heathen Countries, to have Synagogues, and to get Assemblies beforehand, fit
for the Apostles and Disciples of Christ to preach the Gospel to.
to tell and to expound Nebuchadnezar's dreams; and then he procured them
another new favor, by delivering the three noble Martyrs out of the fiery
furnace. Thirdly, Daniel obtained another new favor of Darius Madai, fellow in
government with Cyrus, when Christ did so miraculously deliver him from the
power of the ^ungry lions. Fourthly, Christ caused Ester and Mordecai to be
highly advanced into favor with Ahasuerus, and with Darius Artaxerxes his son:
and thus it pleased Christ by these stately passages of his providence, to
procure favor for all the Jews in general that were dispersed into several
heathen Countries for the building of synagogues for the free exercise of their
Religion. And though Haman plotted the overthrow of their Religion, yet through
the wise providence of Christ (to whom the Father gave all authority and
power) Haman was overthrown with all his Amalakite party, who had determined
the death of the Jews in every Province. Then the fear of the Jews fell upon the
Heathens, and many heathens became Proselites, Ester 8. 17. that is to say,
they did associate themselves with the Jews, to worship God, with them in
their synagogues.

And thus the Lord Christ by these stately passages of his providence, did
promote some of the Jews to special favor with the heathen Emperors, by whose
favor the rest obtained favor for the erecting of synagogues, and for the
exercise of their religion in all Countries.

Nay, It appears to me that the Jews began to have and build synagogues in
heathen Countries in the days of Nebuchad-nezar, and in the time of Ieremies
preaching, for he and Ezekiel did assure them that Nebuchad-nezar should
conquer the land and lay it wast for seventy years, thereupon many Godly Jews
did sell their estates and flee away, as they could get opportunity into
diverse heathen countries aforehand, either unto Babel before they were
captivated, or else into some of those hundred twenty seven Provinces
abovementioned, even as Elias fled from the face of Iezabel, so did many Godly
Jews flee from persecuting Princes, Priests and Prophets into diverse heathen
countries for safety; for God had his outcasts that did hide themselves from
the evil day, Esa. 16. 3. 4. Ier. 40. 11, 12. and 43. 5, 6, 7. and 44. 14.
Ezekiel. 7. 12. and of the number of these outcasts they might well be who had
and built synagogues in Corinth and Rome and other remote parts, as Mr
Broughton thinks in Lam. 1. 3.

And Christ Jesus did provide by his special providence, that these synagogues
should be made famous and eminent for learning and Godliness in all heathen
Countries, for many heathens were affected to religion, and became Proselites,
and many did accompany the Jews that returned with Zorobabel that could not
discern their fathers house, whether they were of Israel or no, Ezra 2. 59.
60. and by this quaere into their genealogy it appears that the rulers of the
Jews did conceive that there were some heathens among them that had been so
long joined to their Church, that they could not find out their pedigree,
whether they were Israelites or no. And though forty nine thousand Jews
returned at the first, Ezra 2. and many after, yet many thousands did continue
in all Nations, and did exercise their Religion in particular Church-assembies,
which Church is continued till the Gospel of Jesus Christ was preached among
them: as in Babylon, they had a synagogue, if not more then one: for the
Apostle Peter (near 500. years after) converted many souls to Christ there: and
dated his first Epistle from thence, 1 Pet. 5. 13.

2. Jesus Christ did still more and more disperse the Jews, after the Chaldean
and Persian times, by the interchangeable wars that continued long between the
Seleucidae and the Lagidae, the two legs of the Image; Dan. 2. for the seat of
their war was for the most part in the land of Canaan and in the Countries
adjacent. And when the Celeucidae prevailed, they led captive many Jews into
the Eastern and Northern parts. But when the Lagidae prevailed, they led many
Jews captive into Egypt, and the parts adjacent. And thus Christ the Lord used
these Tyrants as his instruments to disperse the Jews all the world over, to
build Synagogues for the exercise of Religion, and for the instructing and
converting of many heathens, and for the use of the Apostles and of other
Apostolic men, that by this means they might have a free and ready entrance to
preach the Gospel, to the conversion of many ten thousands both of Jews and
Heathens. And thus the Lord Jesus did beforehand prepare a way for the ready
preaching of the Gospel all the world over: and then, when he was ready to
leave the Apostles behind him, he commanded them to go unto all Nations, to
teach and baptize them into the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, Mat. 28.

And Paul himself was so industrous, that he did quickly make the word of God
to abound from Jerusalem to Illyricum, and also to Rome, Romans 15. 14. for he
found ready to his hand, many Synagogues in all places where he came: when he
came first to Damascus he found Synagogues there, Act. 9. 2. 20. and at
Salamis, Acts 13. 5. at Antioch in Pisidia, chap. 13. 14. at Iconium, chap. 14.
1. at Thessalonica, 17. 10. at Athens, chap. 17. at Corinth, 18. 4. at Ephesus,
chap. 18. 19. at Philippi, there was a place for public worship, chap. 16.
13. and by the opportunity of these Synagogues, Paul had a ready entrance to
preach the Gospel everywhere, to the conversion of many ten thousand Jews,
Act. 21. 20. The Lord Jesus Christ by the seven eyes of his providence,
prepared these Synagogues, by dispersing the Jews all the world over, to build
them for the preservation of Religion, and for the spreading thereof: and then
the Lord did also make a gracious promise to the Jews that went into
dispersion, that they should honor him, by setting up his pure worship in all
those heathen countries where they were captived, Ezekiel. 6. 8. 9. 10. Zac. 10.
9. Ezekiel. 11. 16. and 12. 16. and this prophecy was fulfilled by the Jews
practice of Religion, in one hundred twenty and seven Provinces, Ester 3. 8. 1
Pet. 1. 1. Iam. 1. 1. Acts 2. 5. and 21. 20. And Christ did honor these
dispersed Jews by sending his Apostles to preach in their Synagogues, and by
dedicating a great part of the New Testament to the faithful that lived among
them; for Peter wrote two Epistles to them, and James wrote an Epistle to the
twelve Tribes that were in dispersion, and John wrote several Epistles to
them, and Paul wrote an Epistle to the Hebrews in general.


Scholar. You have spoken much of the free liberty the Apostles had to preach
in their Synagogues, but they did often find strong opposition also by the
malignant part of the Synagogue: What course then did the Apostles take to
train up their young Converts in faith and holiness?


Teacher. In this case the Apostles were forced to separate the believing
Christians from the malignant of the Synagogue, and Those Christians that were
first converted by the Apostles in the Jews synagogue did not presently
separate themselves from the Jews synagogue to make particular Churches by
themselves, until the synagogues did first persecute them for their faith in
Christ crucified.
they app^inted them to meet together in some convenient place, as a Christians
Church upon every Lords day. As for example, when the malignant Synagogue of
Corinth did persecute the believing Christians that were converted among them,
then the Apostles did separate them from the malignant Synagogue, and then they
kept Church-meetings in the house of one Iustus, Act. 18. 7. But the greatest
part of these Converts were the Proselites of that synagogue, 1 Cor. 12. 2.
Act. 18. 4. and many of them were Jews also, for the incestuous person was a
Jew, 1 Cor. 5. 1.

2. The believing Christians of Ephesus did separate themselves from the
malignant synagogue, and they kept their Church-meetings in the Schole of one
Tyrannus, Act. 19. 9. 10. and these Converts were part Jews and part Gentiles.

3. The believing Christians in Thessalonica did separate themselves from the
persecuting synagogue, and joined themselves in company with Paul, Act. 17. 4.
5. they kept their Church-meeting in the house of Jason, and part of this
Church were Jews, but the greatest part were heathens, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. and I
think, all the Jews synagogues in all the parts of their dispersion had many
Gentiles that were joined to their synagogues, as Proselites, Act. 17. 4. and
14. 1. and 13. 42. 43. But when the Apostles and Disciples did evidently evince
by the Scriptures that Christ must die and rise again, then it stirred up many
Jews to envy, which caused persecution, and persecution caused the believing
part of the synagogue to separate from the unbelieving and malignant part. This
separation was not made because the believing part held the unbeleeving part no
true Church, but because they could not be suffered to preach and teach those
sundamental truths, but must endure great opposition and persecution if they
did still abide with them.


Scholar. You said ere-while that the Lord Christ commanded them to order it
so, that the place of holy Convocations every sabbath must be placed in a
convenient distance for their dwellings, for the more easy and familiar
access of all sorts of people every sabbath: but how far off, or how nigh this
place of worship must be from every ones dwelling, is not expressed in the
Text; Therefore how can this distance be determined?


Teacher. The command of Christ in this and such like cases, is contained or
included within certain general rules. As for example, Christ says thus, every
seventh day ye shall observe a convocation of holiness in all your dwellings,
Levit. 23. 3. Hence Jesus Christ did ordain that the place of his particular
Church-worship should be conveniently seated for their dwellings.
it is evident that the place of their holy convocations must be so
conveniently disposed, that they might come to them without bodily toil; for
the Text says, that no work must be done upon that day.

2. There is another general rule which Christ gave them, for the conveniencie
of place, in Exodus 16. 29. Let no man go out of his place upon the seventh
day: by this limitation Christ does not prohibit men to go out of their private
dwellings upon the sabbath, for the Text does command holy convocations upon
the sabbath, Levit. 23. which cannot be done except men go out of their private
houses to make a convocation. But by this prohibition, Let no man go out of his
place upon the sabbath: The Hebrew Doctors understand it as a general
prohibition, that no man should go far from his private dwelling, to the
public place of Gods worship, upon the sabbath. But still the distance is not
expressed, therefore it is left to the wisdom of Godly superiors to set down
some convenient order therein: Therefore these commands of Christ do contain
as much in them as is contained in those other general commands in the New
Testament, Let all things be done to edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26. And Let all
things be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Hence it is evident that
there are many particular circumstances about the manner of Gods worship, which
are not expressed, but are left only to the Godly wisdom of superiors to order
and determine. And in this respect the Hebrew Doctors took care to settle an
order touching the distance of place, how far off the synagogue must be set
from every ones dwelling; and by their order they did not allow men to go above
two thousand cubits upon the sabbath. Kimchi in his Annotations upon Ezekiel
48. 7. says that two thousand cubits are a mile, (meaning an Italian or
English mile:) and from this ancient Hebrew decree, the speech of a sabbath
days journey was common among the Jews: and in this sense Luke does
Thalmudize, saying, that mount Olivet was a sabbath days journey from
Jerusalem, Act. 1. 12. vid. Ains. on Exodus 16. 29. And by this Godly Hebrew
decree we may see that the vast distance of some meeting houses in England, are
so far off from some men's dwellings that they cannot come thither on the Lords
day, unless they travel and toil for it three or four miles together, by means
of which travel they are more fit to sleep at Gods worship then to attend it as
they ought to do.

But in case no good preaching be to be had near to every ones dwelling, or in
case there be far more excellent means to be had further off, What then is to
be done? Then I conceive the point of conveniencie must give way to the point
of necessity, as in the days of Christ, they flocked to his Ministry from
their own synagogues, and yet he did not rebuke them for it, as a sin.


Scholar. What would you have those men to do whose habitations are three or
four miles distant from the place of Gods public worship? would you have them
to forsake the place of their habitation where their inheritance lies, or where
the means of their livelihood lies, to dwell in a near distance to the
meeting house?


Teacher. Either they ought to remove nearer to the place of public worship,
or else they ought to provide a place for public worship near unto their
habitations. The Hebrew Doctors If ten men of Israel did live remote from any
synagogue, they must prepare a New Synagogue nigh to their dwellings.
did wisely labor to stop this objection, and therefore they decreed, that
where ever Ten men of Israel did live but above a mile from any synagogue, they
should prepare them another house for prayer, wherein they might assemble at
all times of prayer. And in Cities they compelled the Citizens to build them a
synagogue, and to buy them a book of the Law, Prophets, and Scriptures. And it
is evident that the Jews built synagogues in every small place, And it is
recorded by the Hebrew Doctors, that the Jews had of old four hundred Schools
and Synagogues within the City Jerusalem, besides what they had in other Cities
and Towns, through all the Tribes in Canaan, and through all heathen Countries
whither-so-ever they were carried captive: in all places they did exceedingly
multiply synagogues and schools of learning, as the chiefest Nurseries of
Religion. See Ains. in Levit. 26. 31.


Scholar. What kind of worship did the Lord ordain to be used in their
synagogues on the sabbath?


Teacher. The Apostle James* does tell us that Moses had of old time in every
City, them that preached him, being read in the synagogue every sabbath, Act.
15. 31. and Paul does tell us that That kind of worship which Christ ordained
to be used in their synagogue-Assemblies was Prayer and Preaching, without any
Levitical ceremony.
the Gospel was preached to the Jews as it is unto us. Heb. 4. 2. Gal. 3. 8.
Maymony does testify, that Moses did appoint a certain portion of scripture to
be read in their synagogue every sabbath throughout the year: and he does tell
us also, that Ezra did renew this custom, after their return from captivity of
Babel: and that Lections of the Prophets were by him chosen out, in number and
matter agreeable to the Sections of Moses. And the Rabbis do commonly make
Ezra the Author of the Petaroths Distinctions, (not agreeing with Elias
Levita,) which must needs be a long time before Antiochus Ephiphanes. They
began to read their Sections and Lections in the feast of Tabernacles, and in a
year they finished all. And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, they
that would (having leave of the Ruler of the synagogue) spoke upon those
scriptures. And this custom was retained among them until the days of the
Apostles, as Luke does witness in Act. 13. 14, 15, 16. vid. H. Broughton in
his lesser Concent before the Petaroth: and Mr Ainsw. in Genesis 6. 8.

The place of their public worship they called Beth Hacktensen, The House of
Doctrine: and sometime they named it The Place of Prayer, Act. 16. 13. by the
term Prayer, they meant it was the place of Gods public worship: They
comprehended Preaching under the term Prayer, as we may see by Paul's action,
because he preached in this place of Prayer, by whose preaching Lydia and her
household were converted: and afterward as Paul and Sylas were going to this
place of Prayer a certain maid having a spirit of Divination, cried out,
saying, These are the servants of the most high God, which show unto you the
way of salvation. This Maid does bear witness that Paul and Sylas did
something else in this place, more then bare Prayer: for she does affirm that
they did show unto the people the way of salvation, by preaching Jesus Christ
in that place. Therefore this place was not only a place of bare Prayer only,
but it was a place of Preaching also: and it is called The place where the
women did meet: but it appears by verse. 40. that men also did meet in this
place, for they are called the brethren: It is called the place where the women
did meet, in honor of Lydiaes conversion; but it was not a place for women
only, for it appears by Neh. 8. 2. that men women and children, and all that
could understand, did assemble themselves to the preaching of the word of God:
all sorts of people might and must resort to worship God in their synagogues:
even unclean persons as well as clean; and therefore the very lepers (which
were the most contagious of all unclean persons) had a place by themselves in
their synagogues, vid. Ainsw. in Lev. 13. 46. but no unclean person might come
to the public worship of God into the holy Temple.

So then their Synagogues were called the place of Prayer, by the figure
Synocdoche, because Prayer was a principal part of that worship which was used
there; Prayer was the beginning and ending of every duty. When they read the
Law and the Prophets, they began and end with Prayer. But now the Jews have
sophisticated the ancient gravitie of this duty, for the Jew that now reads in
the synagogue, begins with Praising God, who chose Moses and the Prophets, and
delights in their most true words, likewise ends with praising of God, who
speaks and performs, says and establishes, so that no one word fails:
then he prays for the coming of Elias, and for the restoring of the pompous
Kingdom of David by the Messiah. vid. H. Broughton, after the Petaroth in the
Concent.

But in the days of Ezra, this manner was more pure, for then they begun with
solemn Prayer before they read the holy Scriptures, Neh. 8. 5. 6. and the King
himself when he read the Law publicly in the seventh year in the feast of
Tabernacles, he began with solemn Prayer, Deuteronomy. 31. 10, to 14. And the Hebrew
Doctors say, that when the King was to read the Law publicly, they blew
Trumpets through all Jerusalem, to assemble the people: and they set up a
Pulpit of wood, and set it in the midst of the Court yard, and the King went
up, and sat thereon, that they might hear him read: and all Israel that went
up to the feast, gathered round about him: and the Minister of the synagogue
took the book of the Law, and gave it to the Ruler of the Synagogue and the
Ruler of the synagogue gave it to the Sagan of the Temple, and the Sagan of the
Temple gave it to the high Priest, and the high Priest gave it to the King, to
honor him before the multitude. And the King took it standing, and if he would
he sat down, and opened it, and blessed God: and after he had blessed God, he
read until he had made an end; then he folded it up, and blessed God again
after it: as the manner was to bless God in the synagogues. Both the reading
and the blessing was in the Holy tongue. vid. Ains. in Deuteronomy. 31. 11. This
Hebrew record I bring for this purpose, to show their ancient practice in
blessing God, both before and after they read the holy Scripture in the
Synagogues: for it is said that the King blessed God before and after, as the
manner was to bless God in the Synagogues.

And when the King read the holy Scriptures, all the hearers were bound to
prepare their hearts, and to make their ears attentive, and to hear with fear
and reverence, and with joy and trembling, as in the day when the Law was given
in Mount Synai. And though they were great wise men which knew the whole Law
every whit, they were bound to hear with great attention; for the King is the
Angel of the Congregation, to cause the word of God to be sounded. (vid. Ainsw.
ibid.) that is to say, the King is the Angel of the general Assembly, to cause
the word of God to be heard on that day.

But Sheliach Zibbur was the Angel of each particular Congregation, to cause
the word of God to be read and expounded in their synagogues every sabbath day:
therefore all their hearers were bound to make the like reparation, and to hear
with great attentiveness in their synagogues. And when the King read, or the
chief Ruler, he must endervour to make the people understand the reading, as it
is recorded in Nehemiah, chap. 8. 8.

And the persons that were bound to hear in the last day of the feast of
Tabernacles, were not only men, but women and children, and the stranger that
was within their gates, Deuteronomy. 31. 12. but yet no unclean person must come into
this general Assembly, as it is written in verse. 11. When all Israel is come;
but the unclean were not fit to come, because this general Church-Assembly was
kept at Jerusalem in the Holy place. But no unclean Persons were exempted from
coming into their particular Church-Assembly, for all were bound to come to
their synagogue convocations every sabbath; yea the very lepers which were the
most contagious of all unclean persons, they had a place prepared for them in
their synagogues, as I noted it before.

And indeed their synagogue-Assemblies were in such high They used to keep
weekly Lectures in their Synagogues.
esteem among them, that they frequented those Assemblies, not only on the
sabbaths, but also they kept Lectures therein upon the week days, for the
better edification of Gods people in faith and holiness. For when Paul and
Barnabas had ended their preaching upon the sabbath at Antioch in Pisidia, then
the Proselites of that synagogue besought them to preach the same sermon again
in the middle sabbath: Acts 13. 42. That is to say, in the middle of the week,
which they called the middle sabbath; for they dated all the days of the week
from the sabbath, thus; the first of the sabbath, the second of the sabbath,
the third, the fourth of the sabbath, called here by Paul, The middle sabbath:
on this day it seems they kept a weekly lecture at Antioch in Pisidia, and
doubtless other synagogues in other places did the same: and in this regard the
Apostle Paul does exhort Timothy to preach the Word, and to be instant in
season and out of season: 1 Timothy 4. 2. That is to say, be instant to preach the
Word, not only upon the sabbath days, but also in the week days, in keeping
Lectures: and this may be said to be out of season, because weekly Lectures is
not so constantly and certainly commanded as the sabbath Lectures are; but it
is a voluntary sacrifice which we give to God out of our own time and labor.


Scholar. When the Jews received Heathens, as Proselites into their Synagogues,
What did they require of them to fit them to be Members? For diverse Heathens
became Proselytes, and joined with the Jews in their Synagogue Worship. Act. 2.
10. and 13. 43. and 14. 1. and 17. 4.


Teacher. Those Heathens that desired to join with the Jews, How the Jews
received heathens to be members of their National Church, and of their
particular Synagogues also.
as one body in their synagogue-worship, must be thus and thus qualified: The
Hebrew Doctors say, that they received none to be Proselites, as long as they
lived in the land of Canaan, until they had performed three actions. First,
They must be circumcised. Secondly, They must be baptized. Thirdly, They must
bring a sacrifice. But in the Heathen Countries, where it was not lawful for
the Jews to offer sacrifice, because they had no Sanctuary, there they received
Proselites into their synagogue, by the performance of the two first actions
only, (and Women were received only by Baptism) and he that was baptized,
was baptized in the presence of three, etc. And in the land of Israel, when any
heathen man or woman came to join themselves to the Commonweal of Israel as a
Proselite, the Elders of the Jews made diligent enquiry after such, lest they
came to get themselves under the Law for some riches, or for some dignity, or
for affection for marriage-sake, with some Jewish man or woman: If no such
occasion were found against them, then they made known unto them the weightines
of the yoke of the Law, and the toil that is in the doing thereof, above that
which the people of other lands have: to see if they will leave off; if yet
they will take them upon them, and not withdraw, and see that they come of
love, they then receive them; as it is written, When Naomi saw that Ruth was
steadfastly minded to go with her, left speaking unto her, and embraced her.
Ruth 1. 18.

But the Judges of Israel received no Proselytes into the National Church, all
the days of David and Solomon: not in David's The Judges of their Sanhedrins
were the Elders of their National Church.
days, lest they should come of fear; not in Solomon's days, lest they should
come because of his peaceable Kingdom, and great prosperity which Israel then
had: For who so comes from the Heathens for any thing of the vanities of this
world, he is no righteous Proselyte.

Notwithstanding, there were many Proselytes in the days of David and Solomon,
that joined themselves to the Church, in the presence of private persons, and
the Judges of the Sanhedrin had a care of them, and drove them not away out of
any place after they were baptized, neither took they them near unto them,
until their after fruits appeared. Vid. Ainsw. on Genesis 17. 12. and Mr.
Broughton on Dan. 9. says, That many thousand Heathens became Proselytes in
the days of David and Solomon; being admitted only by Baptism, without
Circumcision.

Baptism was ever frequently used among the Jews, and doubtless it was in use
from the beginning of the World, as sacrificing was; and it is evident, that the
Godly after the Flood, did use to baptize their bodies, and their wearing
garments, when they were defiled by any polution: as Jacob did, Genesis 35. and
Christ commanded Moses to ordain the use of Baptism among his People, as a
sign of their sanctification. But at the last, when Christ ended all the
Typical Ceremonies; then it pleased him to retain the use of Baptism still, as
the Sacramental Seal of our Justification; but he ordained it to be used in
another form then it was before: For at first, every unclean person did baptize
himself, but now he ordained it to be administered by his Apostles and Teachers
to the end of the world as a sign of our initiation into his Visible Church,
according to the use of it amongst them, when they received Proselytes into
their synagogues: so in like sort, from the use of the bread and wine at their
voluntary feast of peace offerings, which they usually adjoined to the
Passover: Jesus Christ authorized his Sacramental Supper of part of that Bread
and Wine for the comfort and confirmation of all Believers in particular
Churches.

And when John Baptist began his Ministry, preaching that the Kingdom of
Heaven was come; he began to enter men into the said Kingdom by Baptism: and
that action of his was nothing strange among the Jews; Matthew. 3. 5, 6. they
made some question of his person that did it, but not of the use of Baptism.
John 1. 25. M. Broughton says John was not astonishment to the Jews for his
Baptism, but for his person only, and in that respect they demanded whether
he were Elias, or Christ, or that Prophet named in Deuteronomy. 18.

2. When there was a question between some of John's Disciples, and the Jews
about purifying; that is to say, about the Jewish Baptismes, and John's
Baptism, they made no opposition against John's Baptism, as a new upstart
device of his own brain: John 3. 23. 25. but they approved the use of Baptism.
And the Hebrew Doctors do determine the quantity of Water that they held fit to
baptize a person withal, to be forty Seahs of Water. Vid. Ainsw. in Levit. 15.
12. 17.

But the Hebrew Doctors did not receive Proselytes by Baptism only, as it were
hand over head: but they put them upon trial to see if they came out of love to
the Law of God; and in this respect the Hebrew Doctors say thus, Moses our
master gave the inheritance of the Law of Commandments to Israel only, as it
is written, Deuteronomy. 33. 4. The inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob: And unto
any other that the Nations that willingly joined himself as a Proselyte, as it
is written, Numb. 15. 15. As ye are, so shall the stranger be before the Lord.
But whosoever is not willing, they force him not to receive the Law and the
Commandments, vid. Ainsw. in Exodus 12. 49. These Proselites they were wont to
be called Strangers within the Covenant, and Just Strangers, to distinguish
them from Strangers within their gates, that did but dwell among them; such as
are mentioned in Deuteronomy. 14. 21. and in Exodus 12. 15. So then I conclude in
answer to your question: That the Judges or Elders of the Sanhedrin, whiles
they lived in Canaan, and likewise the Elders of their Synagogues when they
were dispersed into Heathen Countries, received not all Heathens to be
Proselytes that were willing to dwell among them; but they received those only
to be Proselytes, that willingly testified their earnest desire to live in
obedience to all the Laws and Commandments of the Lord: and this their willing
desire was testified in the land of Canaan; First, By Circumcision. Secondly,
By Baptism. Thirdly, By offering a Sacrifice. But in Heathen Countries it was
testified by Circumcision, and Baptism only: and Women were received by
Baptism only, as the badge of their repentance and new obedience.


Scholar. Did the Jews practice public fasting in their Synagogues upon
special occasions or no?


Teacher. I find by their Hebrew records, That the synagogues were careful to
observe days of public fasting upon occasion In their Synagogues they
observed days of public fasting, upon occasion of any distress that was upon
them.
of any distress that did befall them. And they decreed that upon every
Fasting-day which was appointed by the Congregation, the Judges or Elders
should sit in their synagogues, to make enquiry of the deeds of the men of that
City from after morning prayer, till midday; and they removed the stumbling
blocks of transgressions, and did admonish, enquire, and search, concerning
injurious persons and transgressors, and separated them; and concerning violent
persons, to humble them; etc. vid. Ains. in Numb. 9. 10. And we have an example
of their practice in that Ester and Mordecai, with the Jews in Shushan, and in
the hundred twenty and seven Provinces, in their distress keep a Fast, until
the Lord was pleased to hear their Prayers, and to turn away the wicked device
of Haman. Est. 9.

And the whole Congregation in Canaan did observe days of public Fasting, for
sundry kinds of distresses. First, For enemies that came against Israel.
Secondly, For the sword that passed by the land; as when heathens did war with
heathens. Thirdly, For the Pestilence. Fourthly, For evil beasts. Ffthly, For
Locusts. Sixthly, For Caterpillars. Seventhly, For blasting of Fruits.
Eighthly, For Mildew. Ninthly, For downfalls of Buildings by Earthquakes or
Winds. Tenthly, For sickness that spread among the people. Eleventhly, For decay
of Trade. Twelfthly, For rain, if it be too much or little; for these they fast
and sound an Alarm, until the distress be taken away. Vid. Ains. on Numb. 10.
and in Exodus 5.


Scholar. Whether did the Jews use any form of blessing in their Synagogues
when they dismissed the people, or no?


Teacher. Yea, The Past^r of the synagogue used to dismiss the people with a
grave and gracious blessing. Maymony says, that How the blessing was
pronounced in the synauogue after the Lecture of the Law was ended.
the synagogues which were all Priests (as many synagogues were in the Towns
allotted to them) they all lift up hands when the blessing was pronounced: and
the Men, Women, and Children said Amen. But in the synagogue, wherein there was
no Priest, but a Minister only (called elsewhere Zeliach Zibbur) he lifts
not up his hands, but when he is come to conclude with peace, he says; Our
God, and the God of our Fathers, bless us with the threefold blessing in the
Law, written by Moses thy servant, which was pronounced out of the mouth of
Aaron and of his Sons the Priests, with thy Saints: as it is said, Ad^nai,
bless thee, and keep thee, etc. In this last sentence they alter the Original,
for in the Original it is said, Jehovah bless thee and keep thee. By this
alteration, we may see how the Jews have fallen into blind superstition by not
pronouncing the attribute Jehovah; as if they could preserve this Name from
polution, more then the other Titles and Attributes of God, by exchanging
Jehovah for Adonai.


Scholar, Did the Jews use any Levitical Ceremony in their synagogues, or no?


Teacher. The Hebrew Doctors say, That it was unlawful to make any house,
either synagogue, or any other private house, No Levitical worship was lawful
to be used in their synagogues.
after the fashion of the Temple, or a Porch like the Porch thereof, or a
Courtyard like the Courtyard thereof, or a Table like the Table thereof, or a
Candlestick like the Candlestick thereof, etc. Vid. Ainsw. in Levit. 19. 30.
Neither had the synagogues any thing to do with sacrifice, neither might they
any more imitate Aarons attire, then they might sacrifice there: and yet the
Father of Rome does counterfeit all, He will have a Candlestick, Cope,
Linen-Garments, Precious-Stones, Miter, Girdle, etc. He will have Sacrifice,
Priest, and Altar, and Jubilees, etc. and yet it was death for any in Israel to
meddle with Levies proper duty; and now seeing his Office is quite extinguished,
it is a most high contempt of God to revive it by imitation from man's brain;
and therefore such Reformed Churches as retain any of these Popish Jewish
Rites, ought speedily to repent and reform, or else God will surely purge them
by sharp trials, to provoke them to repentance and reformation.


Scholar. What Officers had the Jews in their Synagogue?


Teacher. They had Zeliach Zibbur, as their chief Officer for teaching, and
they had Archysynagogus as their chief Elders for ruling: and doubtless they had
more Elders then one in the most What Officers the Jews had in their Synagogues.
of their synagogues: For the synagogue at Thessalonica had two ruling Elders,
which were both converted by Paul's ministry: and it seems that every Synagogue
used to have more ruling Elders then one: vid. Mark 5. 22. For they were Judges
in causes criminal, and in all Aristocratical Governments one man is no man, as
the Greek Proverb is.


S. Why did they call the Teacher of the Synagogue Zeliach Zibbur?


Teacher. To denote the quality and dignity of his Office; for Zeliach Zibbur
does signify the Angel of the Congregation, or the Angel of the Church, as the
Thalmud speaks: and our Why they called the Pastor of their syuagogue Zeliach
Zibbur.
Lord in imitation of the Hebrew Doctors, bade John write to the Seven Angels
of the seven Churches of Asia. And the Scripture does often call eminent
Persons Angels; as for example; The Prophets, are sometimes called Angels, Judge.
2. 1. 2 Chr. 36. 15. 16. Hag. 1. 13. sometimes Priests and Levites are called
Angels; to dignifie their Office (which was in a special manner to teach and
expound the Law, Deuteronomy. 30. 13.) Mal. 3. 7. And the Hebrew Doctors styled the
King Zeliach Zibbur, when he did read the book of the Law before the people, in
the seventh year, the year of release; and they gave him this Title, to
dignifie his person; and to dignifie that religious action. Vid. Ainsw. in
Deuteronomy. 31. 11. and M. Broughton in Apoc. 265.

From these considerations it is evident, That the Hebrew Doctors gave this
Title to the Pastor of the synagogue, the better to describe the excellency of
his Office, and to teach him and the people what excellent qualities such
Officers ought to have: For by this Title the people were directed how to make
choice of a fit Teacher for their synagogue; namely, they were hereby directed
to make choice of one that was learned, wise, and godly; that so he might
answer to the dignity of his Title.

Secondly, By this Title every Pastor was warned to behave himself sutably,
both in their inward frame of soul, and in their outward deportment and
behavior: and doubtless, at the first, the people made choice of such as were
grave in their outward attire and deportment: and therefore when Moses was so
much favored of Christ as to show him his glory, Exodus 33. Then Christ
appeared unto him in the graceful form or habit of Zeliach Zibbur: Mamony
says, that Sheshinah (for so they called the Angel, the Redeemer) appeared
unto Moses like to Zeliach Zibbur, clad with a robe: and in another place
Maymony says thus, that Moses saw him on the Red Sea, like a mighty Warrior;
but on Sinai clad like Zeliach-Zibbur, that is to say, in a graceful habit,
like the Angel of the Church: ready to teach him the mysteries of the Law. Vid.
Ainsw. in Exodus 33. 23.


Scholar. In what Language did Zeliach Zibbur read and expound the Scriptures
to the people in their Synagogues in Heathen Countries?


Teacher. As long as the Hebrew Tongue was the common language of the Jews,
they did all in the Hebrew Tongue; but when the Jews had lost the common use of
it, not long after their In heathen countries, when the Hebrew Tongue ceased
from common use, then Zeliaeh Zibbur did read his Text in the Hebrew Tongue,
but afterward he did expound it in the common Dialect of that Nation where
they lived.
captivity in Babylon; then they used to read the Text only in the Hebrew
Tongue, and made their expositions in the language that was most used in every
Heathen Country: and so the Jews are said so to do in Maymony: The reading of
the Text, and the Blessing both before and after, they used to do that in the
Holy Tongue; as I noted above out of Maymony, when the King did read the Law in
the year of Freedom, the Sabbath year: But they made their expositions always
in their common Dialect of the Country where they lived: And the Apostle Paul
does approve of this practice in 1 Cor. 14. vid. Mr Broughton in Apoc. 76. and
it is further evident that this was their practice, by the example of Ezra
after the captivity, He did read the Text in the Hebrew Tongue, Nehem. 8. and
as soon as he had finished the reading, then Iesua, and Bani, and others, did
explicate the meaning unto the people in the Chalde or Syriack Tongue, which
was then the common language of the returned Jews: vid. Brerewoods Enquiries,
p. 62. 64. By these Testimonies it is evident, That the Jews synagogue
Discipline, and Paul's in the Corinths is all one, 1 Cor. 14. 6. 13. 27. And in
my apprehension it would be an ornament to learning, now that every learned
Teacher should first read his Text in the Original Tongues, and then proceed to
make their Expositions in that language, that is most common in every Nation.


Scholar. When they wanted a Pastor for any Synagogue, whether were the People
bound to choose one out of the Tribe of Levi or No?


Teacher. Levi had no particular stroke in any synagogue of the other Tribe:
but their custom was to go up from their forty eight Towns, to Jerusalem, as
their courses came; therefore they were not so fit as other Godly and learned
men were, to be The Pastors of their Synagogues in Canaan were not Levits, but
they were chosen out of any Tribe.
chosen for Pastors in the other Tribes: but they had sundry synagogues in
their own Towns, and there all the Officers of the synagogue were Levites. But
as for the synagogues of other Tribes, they had not a Levit to their Officer:
but all their Doctors were of Israel. vid. Mr Broughton in Apoc. 77. and in
Lords Prayer, p. 13. and Tharg. Ierusalemi, says of the Simeonites, that they
were Teachers of the Law, in the Synagogues of Jacob, and the Levites in the
Schools of the Sons of Israel. vid. Ainsw. on Genesis 49. 7.


Scholar. Malachi seems to make the Levites the common Pastors of all the
twelve Tribes: for he does tell us, The Priests lips should preserve knowledge;
and that they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the Angel of the Lord
of Hosts. Mal. 2. 7.


Teacher. Malachi means that they were general Pastors, appertaining to the
general place of Worship; for their Office was, to wait upon the service of the
Temple, whither all the twelve Tribes used to resort three times a year,
besides their occasional resorting thither at other times: Therefore the Office
of the Levits was not restrained to particular Synagogues, but they were
Pastors at large, to expound the meaning of the Law, unto any of the twelve
Tribes, as they had occasion to resort to their Ministry at the temple, where
they had not only right to offer all Sacrifices, but they had also some
separated places for the opening and expounding of the Law unto the people, in
a daily practice, Levit. 10. 11. Deuteronomy. 33. 10. 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. and 35. 3. And
some of the Levites also taught the Law in Schools; as Samuel of Korah did: And
also they taught the people in their own Synagogues, in their own forty eight
Towns: some of them also taught the Law as Judges and Elders, when any of them
were chosen to be of the high Sanhedrin, Deuteronomy. 17. 11. 12. 2 Chronicles. 17. 8. as I
shall by and by show more at large, in my discourse upon the Sanhedrin: But
because their Office was to attend upon the service of the Temple, as general
Pastors to the twelve Tribes, therefore in reason they were bound to be
learned. But Daniel of Judah was not inferior in learning to any Levit;
Likewise those three noble Martrys and Confessors, who by faith is escaped the
violence of fire. Heb. 11. Dan. 3.

The Pope indeed will have all his Church-Ministers to be distinguished from
the Common people, by the name Spirituality and Clergy, to tie learning to
them; but David had his Warriers as learned in Moses as any Levit, who by
foresight of Christ were valiant in battle; and Daniel of Judah, with Ananias,
Azarias, and Misael, were the glory of the world, before Ezekiel of Levi was
come to Babel: and it would be an honorable renown, if all of wealth and
leisure were brought up in the Bible, in frame of Art, to know it thoroughly.
Jehosaphats memorial is precious, because he sent some Princes (as well as
some Levites) to teach and preach the faith, in the synagogues of Judah. 2 Chronicles. 17. 7. and it is like they were all chief Doctors of the high Sanhedrin
Court.

So then the case is now clear that Zeliach Zibbur was usually of Israel, and
not of Levi, except in their own forty eight Towns: for the Elders of the
Sanhedrin made any scholars Doctors, that they approved of for learning and for
Godly conversation, of any of the twelve Tribes as well as of Levi.


Scholar. How did the Elders of the Sanhedrin make Doctors?


Teacher. The Talmud and Maymony in Sanhedrin shows that they did not lay
hands suddenly upon any man, not till they The manner how the Elders of the
Sanhedrin made Doctors at large.
found him to be Muphla, Wondrous learned: but after trial, if they found him
to be so, then two or three of the Sanhedrin imposed their hands and said,
Learned Rabbi, Take thou authority to teach what is loose and what is bound.
This was their manner in making Doctors at large.

And when our Savior would make his Apostles to be the first teachers of the
kingdom of heaven, he did first prove them with This phrase, whatsoever thou
shall hind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. is a Thalmudical phrase.
learned questions, and when he found them to be fit, then he made them to be
Doctors, in the very manner of the Talmuds known speech; saying thus unto
Peter, because thou have answered my question, and declared my natures and
office, therefore, I will give unto thee (as the Foreman of the rest) The Keys
of the Kingdom of heaven, to teach what is bound and what is loose; and
whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Mat. 16. 19. In this
phrase of speech the Lord does plainly talmudize* therefore the sense of this
phrase cannot be so well opened, as by comparing it to their use and custom.

Keys signify Power and Authority: both Papists and Protestants agree thus
far: but yet there is a great difference between them about the kind of Power:
the Pope and his Clergy will have the Keys in this place, to signify the Power
of Government over men's souls and bodies also; because the term Keys, does
signify so much in other scriptures. Yea, many Protestants will have the term
Keys in this place, to signify the power of Excommunication. But these
interpretations will not agree to the Talmudical sense; for the Talmud (from
whence this phrase is borrowed) does mean it of the Key of Authority, to
preach only; and not of the Key of authority to rule over men's bodies. When
they made a Doctor at large, they did not give him power to rule over men's
bodies, but they gave him power to preach only as a Doctor at large, until he
might be called to some particular Place or Office; either as a Pastor or
Teacher to some Synagogue, or as an Elder to some one or other of their
Sanhedrins.

Some Reformed Churches understand this Key of Authority to signify the Power
of Ecclesiastical Censures, upon scandalous members; but considering that this
phrase is borrowed from the Talmud use and practice, I wish that this
Exposition of some Reformed Churches may not in the end be turned into a spice
of Pope-like power.

I grant that the Elders of the Synagogues in heathen Countries had the Key of
authority, to execute the sentence of Excommunication upon scandalous and
impenitent persons: but that power of theirs must be fetched from other
scriptures, and not from this phrase in this Text: for this Text speaks only of
that Key of Power and Authority which our Savior gave unto his Apostles to
preach what was loose, and what was bound in the Kingdom of Heaven, here upon
earth.

Christ gave them Power and Authority to teach, that whosoever believed in the
promised seed, should be loosed from his sins; and that whosoever believed
not, should be bound up in his sins to death and damnation. vid. Master
Broughton, in Apocalips 76. 78. 109.

And our Lord after his resurrection, did again confirm his Apostles with new
authority, to teach what was loose, and what was bound, Ioh. 20. 23. and by
the use of this phrase at another time, he put them in mind of their
Authority, to preach what is loose, etc. Mat. 18. 18. I confess that some do
expound this Text to mean the Power of Excommunication; but yet reserving to
them all due respect, I take it to be meant only of their Authority to preach
what is loose, and what is bound. And I shall be ready to give some further
reasons of this Exposition hereafter.

Mr Broughton in his Explication of the Article of the Descent. p. 30. says,
All Ecclesiastical discipline-terms, I dare undertake to show from Maymony and
the two Talmuds: yea, even the phrase of loosing and binding, in making a
Doctor absolute by the Sanhedrin, with imposition of hands.


Scholar. I would fain see what manner of Discipline it was that Christ
ordained for the orderly Government of his particular Churches in their
Synagogues?


Teacher. Neither the holy Gospel, nor the Epistles do teach any other thing
for Ecclesiastical Government, but as the holy synagogues did. vid. Mr
Broughton in Apoc. 303. I say they had the same discipline for substance, as it
may appear by comparing the Discipline terms of the New Testament with the
Discipline terms of their synagogues, as they may yet be found in Maymony, and
the two Talmuds. Therefore seeing the Hebrew Doctors speak the same things the
Apostles do; reason will teach us that The Discipline which Christ ordained for
the government of the Jews synagogues, is recorded by fragments in Mayomy, and
the two Talmuds.
the Apostles speeches which are like theirs only, and differing from all
others should be expounded according to their Dialect and peculiaritie of
phrase and speech: and what though all the Rabbis now extant be later then the
Apostles? Yet, says M. Broughton, Seeing they only, of all foreign writers,
have some hundreds of speeches, which are used in the New Testament, we may
well conclude, that the old Hebrews before them used those speeches, whom the
Apostles do follow. Vid. Mr Broughton in Melchizedek, cap. 3. and in D. 3. he
says thus, The latter Rabbis have much from the ancient Rabbis, agreeable to
the Apostles doctrine, yet stained with their late dogged blasphemies:
notwithstanding, their Records in pieces of ancient truth, must be regarded:
and as the mouth tastes, so Wisdom will taste their sayings, and know which
agrees to the sense of Scripture, and which not.


Scholar. You say that the Hebrew Doctors above all foreign writers, have some
hundreds of speeches yet abiding in their Records, which no other writers have
but the New Testament. Now I pray you show me how often the New Testament does
Talmudize or borrow speeches from their ancient Hebrew Doctors, as they are yet
recorded by their latter Hebrew Doctors?


Teacher. It will be a long digression from the point of their Synagogues
order, to number up all the words and phrases which the New Testament does
borrow from the ancient Hebrew Doctors: yet notwithstanding, I hold it
necessary to enlighten your understanding with some particulars. Our Lord Jesus
Christ The New Testament has many phrases that are Thalmudik, which cannot be
so fitly opened as by the Thalmud.
(says M. Broughton) does often confirm the Hebrew Doctors particular
Decrees, and learned speeches, such as plain reason of all know to be good. Our
Lord reverenced the divine schole of the Sanhedrin, at twelve years of age,
(Luke 4. 46.) sitting among them, (hearing and posing them) the reverence of
all gestures, which their Decrees have for the reading of the Law, in their
Synagogues. May. Tom. 1. And our Lord dotb show his approbation of their
Decree, for that gesture by his practice in Luke 4. 20. Their just
Excommunication he allowed, and their Law for excommunicating them who mis-use
Authority, as it is recorded by Maymony, Tom. 1.) himself (by himself alone)
practiced upon the Scribes and Pharisees, and upon all Jerusalem. Mat. 23. But
their late traditions now in the Talmuds, he damned, as foolish, and contrary
to Godliness, Mat. 5. 6. 7 chapthers, and chap. 15. 9. Yet what the latter
Rabbis have from the ancient Rabbis, he allows. All their Terms, Phrases,
and Proverbial Sentences; The world to come, The dead, Tasting death,
Resurrection of the dead; Forgiveness in this world; Paradise: Gehenna, and
Gehenna large, in Mid. Tillin. Eating, and drinking the object of Faith, Eating
and drinking in the world to come; Carrying the Cross. These and many other
phrases the New Testament does borrow from the Hebrew Doctors common use, yet
abiding in their Records: yea, and to singular use, Jod and Prick: and in Greek
proverbial speech Alpha and Omega: after the Hebrew manner from Aleph to Thau:
in Ben. Aram. on the contrary, He taunteth Talmuds, Raca: the swearing by the
Head: their Corban, their Abothenu, and Rabbi, etc. These and such like
corruptions he blames. -- Vid. Mr Broughton on Daniel 9. in his Reduction.


Scholar. I confess it does ad a great deal of light to the full
interpretation of Scripture, to seethe ground and rise of every borrowed
speech: From what custom or dialect it is taken.


Teacher. You judge rightly: and therefore M. Broughton has often given
special caution concerning this useful observation.


Scholar. How many sorts of Dialects are contained within the several parts of
the New Testament?


Teacher. Four sorts of Dialects are especially to be marked in the New
Testament. 1. Much of the New Testament is attique, or common Greek, such as
Heathens used for matters known to heathens; for no man will deny but that they
which will move others, must speak in such a Dialect as is proper to their
capacity.

2. More of the New Testament is borrowed from the Septuagint Translation; and
it was needful that when the Apostles did relate to the Church such things as
concerned the Jews matters; they should express it from the seventy
translation, which was in common use among them. Mr Broughton says, that he
gathered many thousands of words out of the New Testament, which the Apostles
took out of the Seventy: but lately (says he) I used the help of Kirkerus his
Hebrew-Greek Concordance, for a book of which nature I would have given
formerly an hundred pound sterling: and (says he) I am sorry that our
University students know not the use of this most profitable work.

3. Much of the New Testament is Apostolic Greek: for as all faculties draw
common terms to their Trades peculiar to each Trade: so do the Apostles, they
fit many Greek words to the Hebrew in a new manner, differing from all others.

4. Much of the New Testament is Talmudique-Greek, being framed according to
the Schole phrases of the Hebrew Doctors; and of this last sort I have given
many instances already.


Scholar. I acknowledge you have showed how that sundry terms and phrases of
the New Testament Discipline is taken from the Jews synagogue discipline: but I
desire yet more fully to know how the New Testament does imitate their
Talmudical Doctrines in other points also, for that will enlighten mine
understanding, and persuade me more fully that the New Testament does indeed
borrow its discipline terms from the Synagogue-customs, as they are expressed
in their Talmuds.


Teacher. I will endeavor to satisfy your desire by sundry other particular
instances, wherein the Apostles do speak after the Talmud manner.

1. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. That the wicked shall be revealed, whom the Lord
shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth. Now if it be demanded who this
wicked is? Then Jonathan the Chaldea Paraphrase in Esa. 11. 4. will tell you
that it is the wicked Romulus, for he in Esa. 11. 4. does render the last
Clause of that verse thus, with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked
Romulus. But Arias Montanus when he translated the Chaldea into Latin, omitted
the word Romulus. Such faith there is in Papists, to corrupt the Translation of
any place that makes against their Antichristian State. But the Venetian copy
is in thousands abroad, and by that we may see the Truth. Arias Montanus saw
plainly, that S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. did borrow this phrase from the Chaldea in
Esa. 11. 4. for this Chaldea Paraphrast was newly extant in Paul's time.

2. Our Lord Jesus says, Mat. 12. 32. that they which sin against the Holy
Ghost, shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come: This
Phrase is borrowed likewise from the Hebrew Doctors; For Maymon. in Poenit.
Perek. 6. says, That there be sins whereof Judgment determines, that
judgment shall be taken upon a man in this World, in his body, or in his
wealth, or in his children, which are his possession: and there is a sin
whereof punishment is taken in the world to come, and nothing passes upon him
in this world: and there is a sin which is punished both in this world and in
the world to come. The penitent thief examplifieth the first: The Rich man Luke
16. proves the second: the men of Sodom makes good the third.

This speech doubtless Maymony had from elder Rabbis, and from them our Lord
spoke to the Scribes in their own Schole-Phrase, that they sinning against the
Holy Ghost should not be forgiven in this world nor in the world to come. Vid.
M. Broughton in Apoc. 301. and alibi.

3. The Apostle Iuda-Thaddeus does tell us, that Michael disputed with Satan
about the body of Moses, and durst not (as our English Translation is) bring
against him a railing accusation, Jude 9. This the Apostle speaks as a thing
known to them: But they could not know this from the Old Testament, for there
is no mention made of such a disputation in the Old Testament: But this
disputation is recorded by the ancient Hebrew Doctors, as it is yet recorded in
Abboth. Rab. Nathan. and in Middras Rab. and in many Rabbis more.

4. The Apostle Thaddeus adds another sentence, That Michael durst not forbear
Strife of blasphemy: but said, The Lord rebuke thee. We translate this Text as
though Michael (who is one with the Father) durst not give Satan better words.
* But the Text holds forth, that he gave him as bitter as could be; (even So
Theod. does translate this text: Michael could not forbear, but put Satan under
the check, saying as it is in Zach. 2: The Eternal rebuke thee Satan.
as bitter as Paul gave to Alexander the Copper-smith.) And the learned
Abridger of Iudes Epistle, in Robert Stephens edition, has (...) for (...).
That Michael durst not suffer Moses (the first King in Israel) to be blasphemed
by Satan. Vid. Mr Broughton in Manus.

The term Michael is frequently used in the Rabbis, for the Messiah, and it is
used once or twice in Dan. 10. and 12. but in the Rabbis it is often used for
the Messiah. Therefore Expositors ought to look much to the Thalmud for the
better Explanation of these and such like terms. vid. Ains. in Genesis 32. 24.
and in Exodus 3. 2. and in Exodus 23. 23.

5. It is said, 1 Pet. 3. 19. that the Spirit of Christ went and preached in
the days of Noah, to them which are now spirits in Prison. Every word of this
Text is spoken after the Jews vein: they make the Spirit of God in Genesis 1. 2.
to be the spirit of Messiah, and the spirit of Jehovah, Genesis 6. and Peter after
the Jews manner calls it the Spirit of Messiah; and so the Zohar and
Baal-Hatturim and other Rabbis, many do speak the same.

And so the next clause, [By which he went.] This speech is ten times spoken of
God in the Old Testament: and so likewise it is called the going down of the
Spirit in the days of Noah, by Rab. Eleazar in Perek. Again the Hebrew Doctors
speak of the Preaching of the Spirit: How the Holy Ghost preached by Noah: as
the Zohar upon Genesis fol. 49. and often elsewhere; and how that generation
strove against the Spirit of Jehovah, and how God brought upon them double
waves of water, and of Gehenna fire, and that their spirits are now in Prison:
for the Text of both Talmuds has set it down as a common Article, That the
generation that dyed in the deluge, have no hope of blessed portion in the
world to come.

These phrases are something hard to us Christians, until we look to the
Hebrew Doctors, and then they make them familiar and easy to us, because they
flow out of their Fountains, vid. Mr Broughton in his Epistle to the learned
Nobility, p. 39. and in Apoc. 226. and in Manuscript.

6. When the Prophets were no more, and the Kings of the North and South, the
two legs, (Dan. 2.) vexed Judah still with wars, then the Jews soldiers became
Sadduces, rejecting the writings of all the Prophets (but the five books of
Moses, which never speak plainly of the place of souls after this life:)
thereupon they denied the immortality of the soul: for the cure of which
Pestilent error. The better sort of Hebrew Doctors (having but few in those
days that regarded Divinity) enacted certain terms against the corrupt Tenets
of these Athistical Sadduces.

They termed all the Old Testament, the Law, from Psalm. 82. and from Esai. 8.
And this term of theirs the New Testament does imitate in Ioh. 15. and in Romans
9.

They also enacted diverse terms to ratify the Doctrine of the souls
immortality after this life is ended; as, the world of souls: the world to
come: the day of Judgment: the great day of Judgment: the Kingdom of heaven:
eating and drinking in the Kingdom of heaven: the feast of the Passover in the
Kingdom of Heaven: the place of Godly souls under Gods throne: Crowns for the
Just: and many such like which the New Testament allows.

Also they enacted proper terms for the immortality of wicked souls; as
Gehenna, the fire of Gehenna: frizing cold: gnashing of teeth: the second
death, etc. this last phrase is used in Onkelos, upon Deuterenomie 33. and in
Jonathan upon Isaiah 22. and in Zohar, and in many others.

They hold also in Abboth. Rabbi Nathan, that the Prophet Moses and all
faithful, at their death, are presently carried to Gods Throne, and that they
rest there under the Throne: and the New Testament uses the like speech for
the souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, Apoc. 6.

Again, the Hebrew Doctors testimony is cited by Paul, and by their Talmuds,
for the very names of those Sorcerer that resisted Moses, they call them Iannes
and Iambres, and so does Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 8. also the term Colyrion is from
them, and the girding about the breast, as the High Priest was: just as it is
expressed in Apoc. 1. 13. This girding of the Priest about the breast, Maymony
proves from Vzielides in his Treatise of Holy Implements, Perek. 10. and 4. of
the Precious Jewels in Apoc. 21. are from the ancient Rabbis, as the Thalmud
does witness. Also the term Angels, as it is applied to the seven Pastors of
the seven Churches of Asia is Talmudical: And Raca in the Talmud is a term of
contumelious reproach: and so Beelzebub in Mark 3. 22. is a contumelious term
of reproach in the Talmud: also the Furlong of the New Testament is a Talmud
term, and so it differs from the Roman Furlong: for eight Roman Furlongs
make an English or Italian mile: but the Talmud allows but seven and a half to
an English mile. Also the Talmud does use the term Dead, for such as are
profane in Zeror often: and Peter and Paul use the same term in their sense, 1
Pet. 4. 6. Ephesians. 2. 1. Also the term Mammon, for riches of iniquity, is from
them. These and such like words and phrases, the New Testament does often
borrow from the ancient Hebrew Doctors, whereof many are yet to be seen in
their Talmuds. vid. more in Mr Ainsw. in his Epistle to Genesis: and in his
Advertisement, at the end of Deuteronomie.

Hence I infer, that seeing the New Testament does cite so many terms from
the Hebrew Records, Why then may it not cite other terms from their Synagogues
Discipline, seeing the N. Testament does use such Discipline terms as they give
to their synagogue discipline, as I have showed in many particulars already?


Scholar. I cannot deny but that the New Testament may as well borrow its
Disoipline terms from their Synagogues Discipline, as it does other terms
from their Records. But I do much wonder why the Apostles should write to
Heathen Christians, after the Jews peculiar vein, seeing such Christians of
the Heathens might be as much to seek in their Talmudical phrases, as we are
at this day.


Teacher. I think not so: for I conceive that many heathen Christians were
first well instructed and bred up with the Jews in their Synagogues in all
parts of their dispersion: and heathen Christians and converted Jews were
conjoined together in all Christian Churches, as Peter and James do testify in
their several Epistles. Therefore the heathen Christians in those parts might
be better acquainted with their Talmudical phrases, then we can be at this day:
and therefore the Apostles might well garnish their Sermons and Epistles, with
several phrases from the ancient Hebrew Doctors, as well as from their heathen
writers: And by this means every Nation under heaven might see a sweet accord
between the Doctrine of the Gospel and their best Writers.


CHAP. II. That the Government of the Church of the Jews, was instituted by
Jesus Christ, to be 1. Dependent, when they lived together in the Land of
Canaan. 2. Independent, When they inhabited in Heathen Countries.
Scholar, WEre the Jews Synagogues Dependent or Independent Churches in the
point of Discipline and Government, yea or no?


Teacher, Sometimes their Discipline was Dependent, sometimes Independent.


Scholar. This is a strong answer. Did Jesus Christ establish such a different
order in the administration of their Synagogue-Discipline? This Tenent is
contrary to the judgment of many learned Writers: For those that are for
Dependent Church Government, do affirm that way of Government to be the only
way that Christ has established for ever in all Particular Churches. On the
contrary, those that are for Independent Church Government, do affirm their way
is the only way that Christ has ordained for ever in all particular Churches.
Both sides are confident of their way to be the only way, therefore one of
these two ways must needs fall to the ground, as not being the only way of
Christ. How then say you that the Jews Synagogue-Discipline was sometimes
Dependent, and sometimes Independent? Did Christ allow of both these ways of
Government?


Teacher. Yea Christ allowed of both these ways of Government, The Jews
Synagogue Discipline was sometime Dependent, and sometime Independent.
because he did put his synagogues into several capacities by difference of
place and case: Therefore the word [onely] ought not to state the case. As for
example, whiles the Jews lived in their own land, their synagogue discipline
did depend upon their Sanhedrin Courts; because Christ established the Elders
of their Sanhedrin Courts; as the general Elders of the whole Church.

2. But when the Jews were dispersed by the hand of God into sundry Heathen
Countries, then Jesus Christ did necessitate them In heathen countries every
Synagogue had a general license to exercise such a discipline among themselves,
as tended to the correction of vice, except life and limb.
something to vary the form of their synagogues-discipline, because they had no
Sanhedrin Courts in those Heathen Countries to depend upon: therefore in those
Countries the Elders of each synagogue did keep a Court or Consistory in each
synagogue for the correction of manners; and this power of Discipline was
allowed to them by the consent and approbation of their Heathen Governors. I
say, the Elders of each synagogue had this power of discipline, as it is
evident; because the high Priests did send Paul with letters unto the Elders of
every Synagogue, to imprison, and to beat such in every Synagogue, as embraced
the holy ways of the Lord Jesus: they had some power to inflict some kind of
corporal punishment, as well as power to excommunicate: and in some cases they
did good justice against some sins, which else would have escaped unpunished;
as swearing, cursing, blasphemy, fornication, incest, and such like sins, which
heathen Magistrates would have passed over lightly. But the Elders of each
synagogue had power to punish these and the like sins, provided they did not
take away life or limb: for this was the only Prerogative of Heathen Courts in
every Country where they lived in dispersion. And it is further evident, that
the Elders of each synagogue did exercise some power of discipline even in
Canaan it self, after they became subject to the Roman Jurisdiction, which no
doubt was allowed them by their Sanhedrin Courts also; for in those days they
did inflict scourging upon offenders as often as there was just cause, as these
places do testify, Mat. 10. 17. Mat. 23. 34. Luke 6. 22. and 12. 11. and 21.
12. Acts 22. 19. and 26. 11. and sometimes they did also excommunicate, by
putting evil persons out of their Communion for a time, namely, as long as they
were incorrigible and impenitent: as these places do testify. John 9. 22. 34.
and 12. 42. and 16. 2.

And godly reason and wisdom did necessitate the dispersed Jews to use this
Independent power of Discipline, when they were first dispersed into heathen
Countries, for many godly Jews were forced to fly for safety into many heathen
Countries, even in the days of Jeremiah, for he preached 40. years together
that the land should be made desolate by the Tyranny of Nebuchadnezar;
thereupon many godly Jews took the warning, and fled away as they could get
opportunity before the captivity, for their better liberty and safety: the
believing Jews sold their lands and means, though with some reluctation, and
others bought with great content. But Ezekiel said, Let not the seller mourn,
nor the buyer rejoice, Ezekiel. 7. 12. Our case for New England was much like
theirs.

And wheresoever these godly Jews came, they had liberty to build synagogues
for the exercise of Religion, as these Scriptures compared together do
testify, Ezekiel. 7. 16. and 6. 8, 9. and 11. 16. and 12. 16. Isa. 24. 13, 14,
15, 16. Est. 3. 10. And it seems the blessing of God was much upon the
posterity of these dispersed Jews: For James, and Peter, and John, wrote
several Epistles to them, with sundry heathen Proselytes that were conjoined in
the profession of the same Faith, and Paul does testify that there were many
(Myriads, that is,) ten thousands dispersed Jews that did believe in Christ,
Acts 21. 10.

And I make no question, but as these dispersed Jews found favor with their
heathen governors to build synagogues in every heathen Country where they
came, so also they found the like favor to set up such a form of Discipline in
each synagogue, as might tend to the preservation of their Religion, by
censuring scandalous and impenitent Persons according to their demerits,
provided they did not take away life or limb.

I say, it is evident they had this power of Government with the consent of
their heathen Governors; For Gallio the Deputy of Achaia does testify, that
the Jews of that Country had a certain power of Government among themselves:
for Gallio does thus answer the Jews that accused Paul of false Doctrine. If it
were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed, O ye Jews, I would according to reason
maintain you. But seeing it is about a question of words and names of your Law;
look ye to it your selves: Acts 18. For you have a power of Government among
your selves, in such like cases as this is, whereof you do accuse Paul,
therefore I will be no judge of these things: and so he drove them from the
Judgment seat.

And other Heathen Governors did acknowledge also that the Jews had a certain
power of government among themselves in all matters that concerned the
preservation of their Religion; as it is evident by Acts 23. 29. and 25. 19.

Yea Haman by way of accusation did affirm to Ahasuerus, That there was a
people scattered abroad among his people in 127. Provinces, that had Laws
diverse from all his People: Esth. 3. 8. Now it may be demanded what Laws had
they diverse from all other people? Did not they live according to the Laws of
the Empire? Yea doubtless: but they had an order of Discipline which the Elders
of each Synagogue did exercise upon such as did not live according to Gods
Laws: and in this respect the Jews had Laws differing from all other Nations.

Reason does tell all reasonable men, that in what Country soever heathen
Governors did allow the Jews so much liberty as to build synagogues for the
worship of their God, they would doubtless allow them so much power of
Discipline also, as did necessarily appertain to the preservation of that
worship: and the Scripture does tell us, that as long as they might lawfully
make Judges of their own, it was not lawful for them to plead before Infidels;
I mean in such cases wherein they had power of government. vid. Ainsw. in Exodus
21.

By these considerations it is evident, that the Jews had an Independent power
of Discipline in each synagogue, as long as they lived in heathen Countries.

Now in the second place, I think it necessary also to speak a little more
fully of their synagogue Discipline, as it was Dependent upon the Elders of the
general Church while they lived in Their synagogue Discipline was Dependent as
long as they lived in Canaan.
Canaan. I mean before their dispersion into heathen Countries. But before my
meaning can be well discerned, I must first explain the nature and constitution
of their Sanhedrin government.

Their Sanhedrin government was twice ordained. 1. By the advice of Iethro: and
2. By the immediate direction of the Angel of Gods presence. First, I say, that
Iethro by the light of true When the Sanhedrin government was first ordained.
reason, did advise Moses to set up this form of true government, Exodus 18. But
secondly, afterward the Angel of the Covenant himself, did ordain this form of
Government: and therefore he appointed Moses to make a new choice of Elders of
the best and ablest that were among them; and for this purpose the Angel (that
gave Moses lively Oracles) appointed Moses to gather before him 70. men: viz.
such as the people had before chosen, and approved to be their Elders: and they
must be such also as Moses himself knew to be men of approved wisdom and
godliness, and then the Son of God (to whom the father committed all authority
and power as Mediator) said unto Moses, I will come down and speak with thee
there, and I will take off the Spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon them,
and they shall bear with thee the burden of the people. Number. 11. 16, 17.

In these words are laid down the original ground of ordaining and instituting
the chief Court of their Sanhedrin government.

But because one Court could not conveniently serve for the daily use of all
parts of the Land. Therefore the Son of God to Jesus Christ did first
constitute the Sanhedrin government.
whom was given all power and authority, directed Moses and the Elders of the
high Sanhedrin to make and constitute as many other Sanhedrin Courts as they
should have Cities in their possession when they came into the land of Canaan:
In Deuteronomy. 16. 10. Thus it is expressed; Judges and Officers shall thou make thee
in all thy gates which Jehovah thy God gives thee through all thy Tribes.

Judges, that is to say, Elders siting in the seat of Judicature: Officers are
such as attend upon the Judges to execute their commands. Shall thou make thee,
that is to say, thou that art the high Sanhedrin, thou shall make and
constitute Judges in all thy gates, both in the greater Cities, and lesser
Towns within the land of Canaan. But thou art not bound hereby to constitute
Sanhedrin Courts out of the land of Canaan, for it is said in all thy gates
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Though Christ do command the high Sanhedrin to set up sundry Courts of
Judicature in every City, yet he does not determine the number of Judges how
many shall belong to each Court, but he leaves that to be ordered by the wisdom
of the high Sanhedrin, because they were the chief chosen Elders of the whole
Church: and they saw it necessary to ordain two degrees of Sanhedrin Courts mo,
which they set up as soon as they were settled in the land, in every City and
Town, for the more convenient distribution of Justice through all the parts of
the land of Canaan, not only within, but also without Jordan in the Tribes of
Ruben, Gad, and half Manasses: reserving only to themselves such cases as were
too difficult for the lesser Courts. And thus was the disposition of their
Courts according to the exposition of the Hebrew Doctors.

First, The highest Sanhedrin consisted of 70. Judges and one, Numb. 11. 16,
17. 30. where Christ joined 70. Elders unto Moses the King. For Moses is said
to be a King in Iesurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. and in imitation thereof, they did ever
after account their kings to be the head of the high Sanhedrin, and at last
this high Sanhedrin was settled at Jerusalem.

Secondly, This high Sanhedrin erected two other Sanhedrin Courts in Jerusalem,
each of them consisting of twenty three Judges a piece: one of them sat in the
mountain of the Temple, and the other sat at the door of the Courtyard of the
Temple: and the high Sanhedrin sat in the chamber of hewn stone within the
Temple.

Thirdly, They appointed and ordained another Sanhedrin of twenty three Judges
in every City of Israel, if there were in it but an hundred and twenty men:
And they kept their Courts in the gates of the City. Amos 5. 15.

Fourthly, They set up also a Court of three Judges in every Town and City,
wherein were less then an hundred and twenty men; and they ordained that no
Court should be kept of any less then three chosen Elders: they ordained also
that every City which had not in it two wise men, the one fit to teach the
whole Law, and the other skilful to hear, and to demand, and to make answer;
that no Sanhedrin should be set therein, although it had in it two thousand
Israelites. Vid. Ainsw. on Numb. 11. 16.

By these conclusions we may see what great care the Hebrew Doctors took for
the well ordering not only of the highest, but of the lowest Sanhedrin also,
with learned and skilful Elders.

And the Hebrew Doctors say, that the Elders of the lowest Sanhedrin, (which
they call the Court of three men) must have every one of them these seven
properties, First, Wisdom. Secondly, Meekness. Thirdly, The fear of God.
Fourthly, the hatred of Mammon. Fifthly, Love of Truth. Sixthly. Love of their
fellow creatures, (that is, of other men) and seventhly, that they be men of
good name. Vid. Ains. in Exodus 18. 21.

Moreover, the Elders of this Sanhedrin of three, had great honor: Vide Ains,
in Deuteronomy. 22. 15. They were called Elohim, Gods, as well as the Elders of the
high Sanhedrin, because the word of God was given to all the Elders in general,
Exodus 24. 9. 13. 14. Deuteronomy. 5. 23. with John 10. 34, 35. The Hebrew Doctors say,
that none are called Elohim, but those Judges which were ordained in the land
of Israel only, and such as are wise and fit to judge, and such as the Senate
of the land of Israel sought out, appointed and imposed hands upon them. Ains.
on Exodus 21. 6.

And when the high Senate of the Land sought out any to set The high Sanhedrin
ordained all the other Sanhedrins
them as Elders over the people they did it with the advice of the people by
making inquiry of them among the people. Deuteronomy. 1. 13, 14, 15. They say also
that if any Sanhedrin, King or Governor di^ set up a Judge for Israel that is
not wise in the wisdom of the Law, and meet to be a Judge: Although he be
wholly amiable, and have other good things in him, yet he that sets him up
transgresses. Ains. on Numb. 11. 17. and they counted it a great shame for a
just Judge to sit in company with one that was wicked. Ains. in Exodus 23. 7.
yea they held it unlawful for a wise man to sit in the place of judgment,
until he knew with whom he sat, lest he had society with men unworthy and
unmeet, and come within the compass of conspiring with the lawless, against
the law of the Judgment Hall. Maymon. San. Perek. 2. fol. 229. and in Perek.
3. fol. 230. he says thus, whatsoever Judge gives a bribe to come to his
place: It is unlawful to be tried by him, and the learned teach to set him at
naught, and to cut him short.

But notwithstanding, their godly care touching Courts and Elders which they
set up in all parts of the land for the well ordering of Religion and Justice,
yet the Devil and man's corruption quickly found out devises to corrupt these
Fountains of good government; and as soon as the fountains of good government
were corrupt, the lesser riverets, I mean their Synagogue government must needs
be corrupt also. But ever and anon God raised up fresh means of reformation.

Corruption in government was increased by Samuels sons, and more by Saul;
but after some space of time, God raised up David, A man after his own heart to
feed his people Israel with Justice and judgment. 2 Samuel 7. 7. 8. Psalm. 78.
70. In those days godly David took care to furnish all these Courts with wise
and able men, out of all Tribes, and some of the Tribe of Levi were conjoined
with them: For he appointed Chonaniah, and his sons of the Icharites for the
businesses without (that is to say, remote from Jerusalem) for Officers and
Judges: and of the Hebronites, he appointed Hashaviah and his brethren which
were men of activity seventeen thousand over the charge of them of Israel,
beyond Jordan westward in all businesses of the Lord, and in the service of the
King. 1 Chronicles. 26. 29, 30. And Iediiah the chief of the Hebronites, and his
brethren twenty seven thousand chief Fathers, whom David in the fortieth year
of his reign made Rulers over the Gadites, the Reubenites and the half Tribe of
Manasseh for every matter pertaining to God, and for the things of the King.
Verse 31, 32. Many Rulers were needful in such a time of Reformation, but it
is worth the marking, that all these chief Rulers were appointed to look to
every matter appertaining to God, as well as to the things of the King.

But after some space of time these Sanhedrin courts were again corrupted, and
good Iehosaphat did again reform them: first he sent abroad diverse of his
Princes as well as Levits, to instruct the people in the knowledge of Gods Law,
in all the Cities and synagogues of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7. Those Princes were
learned and therefore were not ashamed to expound the Law of God, being sent
unto the people for that purpose: hence I gather that any Prince of any Tribe,
having a fair calling, by the Sanhedrin, might as lawfully preach in any
synagogue of the Jews, as Paul of Benjamin might, or as the Apostles of Judah
might. But this example ought not to be imitated by such as want an outward
calling, or that want learned abilities.

After this Iehosaphat prosecuted this new-begun Reformation, by restoring the
Sanhedrin courts to their original purity. First, He reformed those Courts
that consisted of three and twenty Judges in all the strong Cities of Judah,
City by City, 1 Chronicles. 19. 5. 2. He reformed the high Sanhedrin of seventy
Judges, setting up some Levits, some Priests, and some of the chief families of
Israel, for the Judgments and Cause of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 19. 8.

The Rulers of Israel did not take themselves necessarily tied to set up some
Levits among the Elders of Israel. For the Hebrew Doctors say, that this high
Sanhedrin might be all of Israel, though usually they adjoined some of Levi to
them, Aaron was joined to Moses the King, in the first election, Numb. 11.
afterward Moses also did appoint some Priests and Levits, to sit with the
other Judges of the other Tribes, Deuteronomy. 17. 9, to 14. and Aaron was joined with
Hur, among the Elders of Israel at Mount Sinai, Exodus 24. 14.

After the captivity Ezra also did obtain so much favor of the Persian
Princes, that he restored this government again to the purity thereof, Ezra 7.
25, 26. with chapter 10. 14.

But in process of time, when the Roman Emperors were Lords over the Jews,
then they took away from them the power of life and death, about a year or two
before the death of Christ: For Talmud Ierusalemi, and Maymony in San. do show
that 48. years before the destruction of Jerusalem, causes of life and death
were taken away from Israel, and this Testimony is confirmed by the Jews own
confession to Pilate, for they told Pilate, that it was not lawful for them to
put any man to death: Ioh. 18. 31. and this was brought to pass before the
death of Christ, by Gods special providence; that the words of Christ might be
fulfilled, when he foretold the manner of his death, that it should not be
after the Jewish but after the Roman manner, Ioh. 12. 32. 33. Mat. 20. 19.

And yet, though the Romans took away the power of life and death, from the
Jews they did not take away all power of Government from the Jews, but they
still left them to exercise the power of their Sanhedrin Courts in all other
cases, as Pilats speech to the Scribes and Pharisees does import, when he bade
them take Christ and judge him according to their own Law, Ioh. 18. 31. * And
our Savior taught the Jews to Hear, that is to say, To sit in Moses chair is
to judge according to Moses Laws.
to obey the Scribes and Pharisees, as long as they sat in Moses chair; that
is to say, As long as they judged according to the Gramatical sense of Moses
precepts: and for that cause our Savior does eight times over curse them,
because they urged the observation of their own traditions, with equal
authority to Moses Laws. Mat. 23. Therefore the Jews did exercise the power
of Government, in their Sanhedrin Courts, except in the case of life and death,
when the Romans had taken away from them the power of life and death.


Scholar. I had thought, this speech of hearing the Scribes and Pharisees, that
sit in Moses chair, had been meant of such Preachers and Teachers as used to
expound Moses Laws in their synagogues, and not of the Sanhedrin Doctors, that
expounded Moses Laws in their Sanhedrin Courts or Schools.


Teacher. This speech; [Hear the Scribes and Pharisees, that sit in Moses
chair,] does plainly point out unto us, that we must hear and obey the Laws and
Constitutions of the Scribes and Pharisees, as long as they sit in Moses chair;
that is to say, As long as they expounded Moses Laws in a Grammatical sense.
For as Christ (the Angel, Act. 7.) was the first giver of all Moses Laws, and
ordained Moses to be the chief head of the Sanhedrin Court: so he bade the
Jews, Hear all those that sit in Moses chair. It was Christ that bade Moses
charge the Levits to lay up the book of the Law in the side of the Ark, as the
Standard of all their Laws and Constitutions, and as the rule of all their
judgments and proceedings, Deuterenomie chapter 31. verse 24, 25.


Scholar. You said ere-while. that the Elders of the Sanhedrin, were the Elders
of the Church. But how do you prove that the Elders of the High Sanhedrin were
the general Elders of the whole Church, in all matters of Religion, as well as
in matters of the Common weal?


Teacher, I have already proved that Christ did put this power into their
hands. 1. They are plainly called the Elders of the Church, Levit. 4. 14, 15.
2. It is evident that every Elder of the chief Synedrion, was chosen to be a
general Elder of the whole Church. Numb. 11. 25. 30. And the Elders of this
high Synedrion set up other Courts and other Elders in every City, who judged
in all matters of Religion that fell out in their respective parts, as The
Elders of the Sanhedrin were the general Elders of the Church, and therefore
they had power to deal in all matters of Religion as well as in civil causes.
well as in civil matters, except the matter were too hard for them, and then
in such cases Moses ordained beforehand, that all such hard matters should be
brought in an orderly way unto the high Synedrion, (which was settled afterward
at Jerusalem.) And this orderly way of bringing the difficult causes before
them, is described by the Hebrew Doctors, as you may see it set down by Mr
Ains. in Deuteronomy. chap. 17. 9.

3. It is evident that the Elders of the high Synedrion were the general Elders
of the Church, because they were ordained to be Judges, not only in civil
Causes, but also in Levitical matters, as these places well examined do fully
testify. Deuteronomy. 19. 12. and 21. 2. 19, 20. and 22. 15. to 19. and 25. 7, 8, 9.
and 27. 1. and 29. 10. and 31. 9. And the Angel-Iehovah, Christ, (1 Cor. 10.)
commanded Moses the Magistrate, as well as Aaron the Priest, to instruct the
people in all his Levitical Laws, Speak ye to all the people of Israel, saying,
etc. that is, Teach them to observe all my Levitical Laws, Levit. 11. 2. Hence
it is evident, that if any question did arise about the practice of the
Levitical Laws, that Moses the chief Magistrate, (as he was the Head of the
Sanhedrin) must expound the true sense and meaning of such Laws, both to the
Levits and people: and in case any did walk contrary to their Teaching, they
might correct and punish them: as for example, There were certain men, in Numb.
9. 6. that were unclean by a dead corpse. In this case they could not tell
whether they might come to that second Passover, yea or no. Therefore those
men brought the matter before Moses, as well as before Aaron, as they were the
chief Heads of the Synedrion. And Moses said unto them in verse. 8. Stand still,
and I will hear what Jehovah will command concerning you. This deliberate
enquiry of Moses into this difficult matter, may teach the Elders of any Church
or Common Weal, not to pass sentence too hastily in doubtful cases, till they
have a word from Christ, to warrant their judgment.

4. It is also evident that all the Judges of the Synedrion had need to be
wise, and learned in the wisdom of the Law, because they must give judgment,
and pass their sentence in all doubtful and difficult cases; yea even in
doubtful Levitical cases.

Mamony says, that the Elders of the great Sanhedrin were wont to sit in the
Temple to judge and try the Priests, both touching their Genealogies, and
Blemishes: and what Priest soever they found dis-allowable by his Genealogy,
they clothed him in black; and so he went out of the Priests Court in the
Temple. But whosoever they found perfect and fit, he was clothed in white, and
went in, and ministered with his brethren. Ainswoth in his Preface to Genesis.

By all these testimonies we may see that the Judges of the Synedrion Court
were the general Elders of the Church, to look to all matters, as well
Levitical as Civil.

Yea, sometimes the Priests were so simple in the knowledge of their duty, that
the Judges of the Sanhedrin were fain to teach them their duty. As for example,
If the Priests were unclean or unmeet any kind of way to burn the Red heifer,
then it was the proper duty of the Judges of the Sanhedrin to look to this
matter: they must take abundant care to see it done, as it ought to be done.
Ains. Numb. 10. 7.

It belonged also to the Elders of the Sanhedrin to judge in all Levitical
Ordinances, both of Prohibition, and Permission: between the Clean, and the
Unclean, and in all like cases. Ains. in Exodus 23. 2. and it belonged to them
to judge in all cases about tithes: Ains. Levit. 27. 33.

And if a Priest were not able to judge of the signs of the plague of
Leprosy, then it was not lawful for such a Priest to look upon any Plague,
till a Master had taught him, and made him expert in all Plagues. Ains. Levit.
13. 3.

Therefore seeing the Elders of the Synedrion must judge in all such like
Levitical cases as this: it follows by necessary consequence, that they were
the general Elders of the whole Church: and therefore they had power to inflict
the sentence of Excommunication upon any offender, as well as other
punishments: For they judged in all cases; as well in matters of Religion, as
civil Justice: and therefore also by the same rule of equity, the Judges of the
highest Court, now may dispense the same power now; both they and their
Substitutes: provided they take the like care that none be made Judges, but
such as be learned and godly.


Scholar, You said ere while, that Jesus Christ put Aaron the high Priest in
trust with the care of matters of Religion, as well as Moses the King. In that
respect, I conceive that the high Priest was the principal Elder of the
National Church: If so, then it belonged to him, as the chief Elder of the
Church, to dispense all actions of Church Discipline, and so many learned do
conclude and affirm.


Teacher, I grant that many learned Divines do usually say and affirm, that the
high Priest was the chief Elder of that national Church; and thus Chrysostom
in Photius Library does make the high Priest the stay of the State.

But I Answer first Negatively; That the high Sacrificer was The high
Sacrificer was not the chief Elder of the National Church in Israel, as some
affirm.
many times so simple, that he was not fit to be chosen for an Elder of the
Sanhedrin, and therefore not fit to be the chief Elder of the whole Church. But
secondly, I say, that if the high Sacrificer were at any time chosen to be one
of the Elders of the Synedrion, then by that choice he was made an Elder of the
National Church, or else not: His Priestly Office did not make him an Elder of
the high Sanhedrin (or Synedrion) unless he were chosen thereto in an orderly
way, as all the other Judges of that Court were. But, If he were orderly chosen
to be one of the Judges of the Sanhedrin, then if his gifts and parts were more
eminent then others, he might happily be more exercised in judging Levitical Laws
and Ordinances then others. But if his parts were less eminent then some other
Judges of the Sanhedrin, then other Judges chosen out of their Tribes might be
more exercised in judging Levitical Laws and Ordinances then he, and so they
might be preferred above him.

2. It is evident, that the high Sacrificer was not the chief Elder of the
Church, as he was the high Priest: for though he had a privilege above all
other Priests, in the Priests Office, yet he had no place among the Elders of
the Sanhedrin, as he was the high Priest: For his high Priests Office fell to
him partly by birth (which has no learning nor gifts intailed to it) and
partly he was chosen by the Elders of the Sanhedrin. They anointed the high
Priest, and installed him into his Office, because they were the Churches
Elders. Ains. Levit. 6. 20.

And Talmud Ierusalemi in Sanhedrin shows that the seventie Elders of the
high Sanhedrin might be all of Israel, without any one of Levi: and that the
high Priest was not of the Sanhedrin, except he were rarely learned and sage:
but says the Talmud, they were often times so simple, that the Elders of the
high Sanhedrin were forced to teach them their duty on Expiation day: And this
the Elders of the high Sanhedrin did not as a voluntary act, but as a duty
commanded them by virtue of their Office, as they were the Churches Elders. For
it was the Angel of Gods presence that commanded Moses the Magistrate (or head
Elder of the Sanhedrin) to speak unto Aaron, the high Priest (after the death
of Aarons two sons by fire) for their transgression) to warn him of his duty on
Expiation day, lest he might transgress in his duty, as his sons had done.
vide Ains. on Levit. 16. 1, 2. 33.

And as the Elders of the high Sanhedrin must anoint the high Priest, and
instal him into his office: so also they might excommunicate him for his
offenses, as the Hebrew Doctors do testify, they say they might not
excommunicate the King (except in Ieroboams case) but in great offense the high
Sanhedrin would say unto the King; Keep your house (for a time) and salve your
honor. v. M. Brough, in Apoc. 90. and 108 But they say they whipped the high
Priest for his faults, ^s much as any other man. As for example, if the high
Priest do marry a widow, and lie with her, he was beaten twice: once for
transgressing this Law, He shall not take a widow; and once for this, He shall
not profane. Ains. Levit. 21. 15. Yea, the Talmud in Sanhedrin shows that the
high Priest was judged in all sorts as any other man: Therefore the high Priest
was not by the virtue of his high Priests Office the chief Elder of the
National Church. But the Judges of the high Sanhedrin (whereof the King was the
head) were the chief Elders of the National Church. They had the charge, and
the burden laid upon them to deal in all Levitical controversies as well as in
matters of civil justice: for as it was the Angel (Acts 7.) that gave Moses
lively Oracles) that said unto Moses the King, as well as unto Aaron the
Priest, (as they were chief persons in the high Sanhedrin) that he should
instruct the people in the observation of all Levitical Ordinances. Levit. 11.
2. and so on as it follows in the next Chapter, as I have noted above. 2. It
was Moses the King, as well as Aaron the Priest, that charged all Israel to
observe holy convocations every Sabbath in all their dwellings. Levit. 23. 3.
Christ commanded them to charge the people to observe the Sabbath.

3. It was the Angel that had the Name of God in him, that first ordained the
Elders of the high Sanhedrin, as the general Elders of the Church in all
matters of Religion, as well as in matters of civil Justice: they must regain
people from Apostacy. Therefore Jehovah the Mediator (to whom the Father has
committed all authority and power) said to the Judges of the Sanhedrin: Hear I
pray you, O ye heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of Israel, should
not ye know judgment? Mica. 3. 1. As if Christ should say, none ought to be
Judges of the Sanhedrin, but wise and godly men, such as are able to judge and
try causes exactly, according to all the Ordinances of Moses. We may take
Iehosophats example for a Lanthorn to our feet in this case: He charged the
Judges to try all matters of Religion, as well as civil affairs. 2 Chronicles. 19.
But how could they be competent Judges, except they were learned in the
Levitical Laws, as well as in the Judicials. This shows what care ought to be
taken in all those whom it concerns, to seek out for the ablest men that can be
found for Elders and Judges, for variety of great and difficult matters
appertained to their judgment. Vide Ans. in Levit. 5. 15. and Deuteronomy. 25. 2.

4. It is evident that the Judges of the Sanhedrin were the general Elders of
the whole Church: because the Sin-offering of the whole Church was presented to
the Lord by their hands. For if the whole Church did sin ignorantly in their
practice against any branch of the Law of God through the erroneous teaching of
the Elders of the Sanhedrin, then as soon as this sinful practice was found
out by any man of Israel, the Church must bring a bullock for a sin-offering,
and yet the whole Church of people were not bound to come to Jerusalem, to
offer this general Church sinne-offering. But the whole Church did it, (being
absent) by their Elders only, namely by the Elders of the high Sanhedrin. Yet
still the question will be, who among them was the Churches chief Elder in this
action. The answer is, Not the high Priest, although he were one of their
Elders chosen to be of the Sanhedrin. But the Elders of the Sanhedrin Court in
general, or any three of them, did bring this bullock as they were the Churches
Elders, they laid their hand upon the head of the said Bullock, in the name of
the whole Church, whose sin-offering it was. verse 14. 21. Therefore the Elders
of the high Sanhedrin might be called the Church, for they were the whole
Church representatively. But after the Churches Elders had thus presented the
said Bullock for the sinneoffering of the whole Church; it belonged to the high
Priect (as he was the chief anointed Priest) to kill the said Bullock before
Jehovah. Ains. Levit 4. 13, 14, 15.

Hence it follows that the Judges of the high Sanhedrin Court were the General
Elders of the whole Church: and this thing is put out of doubt, because they
are plainly called the Elders of the whole Congregation, in v. 15. This is so
plain, that nothing can be plainer spoken: and so in like sort the Elders of
all the other Sanhedrins (being many thousands in all) were to be accounted as
the Elders of the Church also, in all the parts of Canaan, in their respective
Tribes; they must bear the burden with the high Sanhedrin as their Delegates.

And when the Churches sin-offering was to be offered, Aaron the high Priest,
as he was an Elder of the Sanhedrin, must speak to the sons of Israel to bring
it, namely he must speak to the chief sons of Israel, which were the Elders of
the high Sanhedrin Court to bring it. vide Ains. Levit. 9. 3. For these Elders
were the highest Officers that the Church had. And therefore the term Elder, is
a superior Title to the term Bishop: For the term Bishop is given to those
inserior Officers that attended upon the Elders of the Sanhedrin Court, Numb.
3^. 14. vide also Ains. in Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Yet an Apostate Priest might be a
Bishop after his repentance, but he might not be an Elder of the Sanhedrin:
neither might he be restored to be a full Priest any more, but he might serve
as a Bishop in a place of inferiority in the Temple. Ains. Levit. 21. 20. ult.
And I grant that the term Bishop is sometimes given to the highest degree of
men; For it is sometimes given to the Emperors of Asia, as a Title of Honor to
their Office: And Eleazar the Prince of Princes over the Levites, did exercise
the Bishops Office over them. Ains. in Numb. 3. 32. That is, he did oversee
them: And in that sense every inferior Officer that takes the charge to
oversee others, is a Bishop: and so the term Bishop may properly be given to
all Officer both high and l^w, that take upon them the charge to oversee others
as well in civil, as in religious matters: But the term Elder, is never given
to inferior Officers, as the term Bishop is: this distinction I bring in for
the honor of the term Elder; by way of parenthesis only.


Scholar, Was the power of Excommunication given to the first Elders of the
Sanhedrin, when they were first ordained in the wilderness, or not?


Teacher, I make no question but Jehovah the Mediator, from Jehovah, gave them
all power that was suitable to the well ordering of his Church, from the very
first time that he ordained them to be the general Elders of his Church in the
wilderness: therefore Christ gave them power of Excommunication originally to
the Elders of the Sanhedrin in the wilderness.
he did then give the power of excommunication into their hands; and though it
be not in plain terms expressed, yet it is employed by necessary consequence,
because he gave them power to correct all vice and sin, with suitable
punishments, as I have already demonstrated.

Therefore seeing that power of Excommunication was given by Christ originally
to the Elders of the high Sanhedrin in the Wilderness, it must belong also to
the Elders of all the other Sanhedrins in their respective places, because they
had their power of Delegation from them, yet by Christ's ordinance, as above,
and so in time it went from them to the Elders of each particular synagogue
also, especially when they lived in dispersed places in several heathen
Countries, Yea the power of Excommunication was practiced in the synagogues of
Canaan, at least after the captivity, if not before.


Scholar, Some learned men do think, that Excommunication came not into
practice among the Jews, until the Romans had taken away the power of life and
death from the Elders of the Sanhedrin, and that thereupon the Elders of the
Sanhedrin were forced to invent the use of excommunication as a capital
punishment for capital offenders, next unto death: and thereupon they think
that seeing the Elders of the Church of Corinth could not put the Incestuous
person to death, as Moses Law did appoint, Levit. 20. they did excommunicate
him out of the Church, as the next punishment unto death.


Teacher, I grant that the Romans had taken away the power of life and death
from the Sanhedrin-Court of Judea, about a year or two before the death of
Christ, as I have formerly noted: and therefore the Elders of the Church of
Corinth could much less put him to death; neither ought Excommunication to be
accounted as the greatest punishment next death. Neither do I agree to those
that say, that Excommunication was not in practice among the Jews, until that
time when the Romans took away the power of life and death from them. I do not
think that the Elders of the high Sanhedrin at this time (being most of them
degenerate, Scribes and Pharisees) would now first have invented such a
religious course of Justice, as Excommunication rightly used is: I rather think
that Excommunication was in practice among the Jews, in the days of Moses, or
at least, long before the days of Ezra. And my reasons are these:

First, It is evident that the Son of God did endow the high Sanhedrin in the
Wilderness, with full power and authority to ordain such Laws as might tend to
the suppression and Reformation of scandalous sins; and therefore they had
power to ordain a Law for Excommunication, if they saw it needful; as I noted
before* and therefore they did ordain Excommunication, or some other Act of
Justice in the place of it.

Secondly, The Hebrew Doctors in Sannedrin say, No King ought to be
excommunicate, except in Jeroboams case: but they say, That for his great
offenses, the Elders of the Synedrion did warn him to keep his House for a
time, to salve his honor.

Hence I reason thus, that this rule of Excommunication which is given by the
Hebrew Doctors, must have relation to those times when Kings reigned among
them. But the whole race of Kings was ended before the days of Ezra, and no
more Kings were suffered to reign afterward. For Ezra, and the Doctors of his
age, knew well enough that they should have no more Kings till Christ came:
They knew well enough from the Prophecy of Daniel, that the four great Beasts
would take away the Kingdom of the Saints of the Most High. Dan. 7. 18.
Therefore he and the Doctors of his age would never have given this rule to
preserve the King from Excommunication, in relation to succeeding times, and
therefore they gave this rule to be observed in the days of Kings at least.

Thirdly, I conceive that Excommunication was in practice before the days of
Ezra; because else I cannot see how the godly Jews that were dispersed into
sundry heathen Countries, where they built synagogues for the exercise of their
Religion, could possibly preserve their Religion in purity, and from scandal,
without the use and practice of Excommunication in their synagogues. And the
scattered Jews very hardly could have agreed upon such a practice universally,
except they had known the use of it among the Jews, before the Captivity.

And it is evident that the Jews did universally practice Excommunication in
their synagogues in all heathen Countries, by the complaint that Haman the
Amalekite made to Ahasuerus against the Jews that were scattered into the
hundred twenty and seven Provinces of his Dominion: He told the King, That
their Laws were diverse from all people, and that they did not observe the Kings
Laws: Esth. 3. 8. This differing Form of Laws from all Nations, cannot be
understood of any other Laws or Government, but such as the Jews did practice
in their synagogues: I grant they expounded the Law of God in their synagogues,
but they could not correct incorrigible and scandalous persons, without some
form of Laws to strengthen their Discipline, therefore in reason they could not
be without the use and practice of excommunication in all their synagogues; And
it was foretold that they should not be reckoned among the Nations, Numb. 23.
9. because they should have certain Laws distinct by themselves.


Scholar, In what cases did the Elders of the Sanhedrin excommunicate? Did they
excommunicate for sins of Omission, as well as for sins of Commission against a
Prohibition? And did they excommunicate for sins against God, as well as for
sins against Man?


Teacher, I cannot as yet find in the Hebrew Doctors for what particular sins
they did excommunicate: but by collection, I find that they did excommunicate
for sins against the first Table, as In what cases the Elders of the Sanhedrin
did excommunicate.
well as for sins against the second Table, and for sins of Omission sometimes:
though most usually for scandalous sins against a prohibition. But for sins of
trespass against a man's neighbor, they did ordinarily punish such sins, by
imposing upon them some kind of satisfaction by their goods, rather then by
Excommunication.

I find one instance in the Hebrew Doctors for Excommunication for a sin
against a prohibition of the first Table. The case is this. Whosoever did any
servise work in the Passover evening, from midday, and forwards, he was to be
scourged, or excommunicate with the Niddui, that is to say, with the lesser
Excommunication. But they did not scourge or excommunicate for working in the
Evening of their Festival Sabbaths, nor yet for working in the Evening of the
Sabbath or seventh day, because the evening before the sabbath (which by their
Ceremonial anti-date they called the evening of the sabbath) was not any part
of the sabbath it self, it was but for preparation to the sabbath. But the
evening of the Passover from midday and forwards, was the very day of the
Passover it self, for the Passover evening began at midday, and ended at
midnight. The words of Maymony run thus, It is unlawful to do works in the
Evenings of the Festival days (from the time of Evening Sacrifice, and
forwards,) even as on the Evenings of the Sabbaths: and who so does work in
them, shall never see a sign of blessing, and he is to be rebuked, and to be
made to leave off by force, though he is not for it to be scourged or
excommunicate, except in the Evening of the Passover, after Midday: who so
does work therein after midday, is to be scourged, or excommunicate with the
Niddui, if he be not scourged. For the fourteenth of Nisan is not like unto
other Festivals, because in it are the feast and the killing of Sacrifices: See
Ains. in Lev. 23. 5. Hence I gather also, that they used to excommunicate men
for such sins as deserved scourging: they used scourging or excommunication as
an indifferent punishment for the same sin, as the circumstances of time,
place, person, and the like, did sway with them.


Scholar, How many sorts of sin did they punish with scourging? And how far was
excommunication a suitable punishment for the same sins?


Teacher, The Hebrew Doctors do reckon up the several sorts of sins that
deserved beating to be 207. Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 25. 2. and for the most of these
sins, I conceive that excommunication was as suitable as whipping. But for some
sins of trespasses, if the sinner did confess and repent, then he was appointed
to bring his Sacrifice of Atonement, Numb. 5. 7. and then he was free from any
further punishment: But for some kind of sins he was not only to bring his
sacrifice of Atonement, but he must be beaten also; as for example, He that
swears vainly or falsely, was both to be beaten by the Magistrate, and he must
bring his sacrifice of atonement also. Vid. Ainsw. in Lev. 19. 12. and 5. 4.
and Numb. 5. 7. But the most ordinary punishment of lesser capital sins, was
done by scourging. They whipped the High Priest for marrying a Widow, as I
noted before: and they whiped other Priests for several sinful failings in the
execution of their Office; as for example, in omiting a duty of the first
Table: If the Priest did not divide the poor man's Trespasse-offering with his
nail aright, he was to be punished by beating. vid. Ains. in Lev. 5. 8. and in
such like cases as this, they whipped a Priest rather then Excommunicate him,
because the Priests were bound to wait upon the service of the Sanctuary,
therefore they might not be Excommunicated, lest it should dis-able them for
their service in the Sanctuary.

I conceive that the sin of Impenitency after admonition was the chief cause of
Excommunication: for if a Jew met an Excommunicate person in the Temple, he
would thus salute him: He that dwells in this House, give into thy heart that
thou may hearken to the words of thy neighbor: The words of the Hebrew
Record run thus, All that went into the house of God went by the way of the
right hand, except he to whom some thing had befallen him: for which cause he
turned toward the left hand. Thereupon if any asked him, What is befallen
thee, that thou turnest toward the left hand? if he said, Because I have the
Niddui upon me. (That is to say, the lesser Excommunication.) Then the party
answered him, He that dwells in this House, give into thy heart, that thou
may hearken to the words of thy neighbor. vid. Ains. in Levit. 19. 30. From
this Hebrew Record it is evident that his impenitency in not harkning to the
words of his neighbor was the chief cause of his Excommunication.


Scholar. This Testimony of the Hebrew Doctors shows that they held an
Excommunicate person to be an alone person: because he might not go in the
common way of Converse into the Temple, until they gave satisfaction to the
offended brother, by their verbal and particular Repentance. But I wonder at
this, Why was he suffered to come into the Temple, seeing many Godly Divines
say, that an Excommunicate person ought not to come in within the Church door,
because it is said, Let him be to thee as an Heathen and Publican?


Teacher. It is most certain that an Excommunicate person was excluded out of
the Synagogue, till he repented; but not out of the Temple: therefore he was
not to be held as an heathen in all respects; for a heathen might not come into
the Temple at all; because they were uncircumcised, and unclean. Act. 21. 28.
Ezekiel. 44. 7. Numb. 19. 20. but they might come into the Synagogue if they
pleased; and so might not an Excommunicate person, till he had repented, and
were released of his Excommunication: but yet that Excommunicate person being
circumcised, and ceremonially An Excommunicate person and a Publican might go
into the Temple, but an heathen might not.
cleansed, might come into the Lords Temple; though not without some note of
shame: because he must turn toward the left hand: and it is evident that our
Savior did find the blind man after his Excommunication in some part of the
Temple: as Ioh. 9. 35. compared with the sequel of Christ's speech in the porch
of the Temple, does show, Ioh. 10. 21. 23. and it is evident that a Publican
might also go into the Temple to pray, Luke 18. Again, the Jews were forbidden
to have communion, by eating and drinking with Heathens, Act. 10. but with
Publicans they might eat and drink, as we may see by our Saviors practice,
Mat. 9. 10, 11. and 11. 19. though the blind Jews did superstitiously hold it
unlawful to eat and drink with Publicans.


Sch. Some Divines do think that the punishment of cutting off, so often
threatened in the Levitical Law, for several transgressions against the
Levitical Law, was nothing else but Excommunication.


Teacher. There is a wide difference between that punishment and
excommunication: for the Hebrew Doctors do expound this Cutting off in the
Levitical Law, to mean nothing else but Gods cutting men off, by an untimely
death, if their sin were secret: but if their sin were known, and witnessed to
the Elders of the Sanhedrin, then they did punish the said sinner according to
the nature of the sin, all circumstances considered: some of those sins
which God threatens with cutting off, they did punish with death, and others
they punished with scourging, or with Excommunication in the place of
scourging; but in case men did those sins ignorantly, they appointed such to
bring their sacrifice of Atonement to the Priest, to be offered on the Lords
Altar. vid. Ains. in Genesis 17. 14. Exodus 12. 15. 19. and 31. 14. Levit. 7. 20.
21. 25. 27. and 17. 10. and 20. 35. and 22. 9. Numb. 9. 13. Therefore seeing
some of those sins were punished with death; this phrase they shall be cut off,
does not point out unto us the particular censure of excommunication. Neither
do I find that excommunication is expressed by the term cutting off, neither
in the New Testament, nor yet in the Hebrew Doctors: but it is expressed by
casting out, Ioh. 9. 34. or putting out, Ioh. 12. 42. or separating, or putting
away, 1 Cor. 5. 13.


Scholar, It seems the Jews used two sorts of Excommunication: the less called
the Niddui, and the greater Excommunication called the Anathema maranatha: what
kind of Censure is the Anathema maranatha?


Teach. The Talmudists did frame this word from two Chaldy words, in likelihood
from Daniels Chaldy Visions. [Mar] is What kind of Excommunication is the
Anathema maranatha.
one of the names of God, by the confession of Nebuchad-nezzar, Dan. 2. 47. and
(...) is in Dan. 7. where Christ the Son of man is described coming into his
Kingdom, to judge the four persecuting Beasts, or Kingdoms; because they took
away the Kingdom of the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 18. This word (...) is
of great force, because it sets out the Kingly justice of Christ, against
wicked persecutors.

Paul delivers this Anathema as a command, and therefore it must be regarded,
and obeyed as all the other commands of God ought to be. The command is thus
uttered; If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha: that is to say, Let him be separated to the Lords wrath (which is a
river of fire from the fiery throne,) who comes in the clouds of heaven, that
is to say, With thousands of Angels, to judge such wicked persecuters, Jude
verse 14. The not loving of Christ, by it self simply considered, is no just
ground of inflicting this curse: for then the poor ignorant Heathen, which know
nothing of Christ, should be cursed with this Anathema: but no man I think will
say so: therefore I expound this curse to belong to such as are so far from
loving the Lord Jesus Christ, that they hate him, his Kingdom and servants.

Neither do I think that the Apostle does command the Church of Corinth, to
execute this bitter Anathema, as a Church act upon any like unto the lesser
Excommunication, but either a whole Church, or any one Godly particular man,
may denounce this bitter Curse, upon incorrigible persecutors. But no man can
give this curse to any that God has not cursed, Number. 23. 8. Now Christ
declared unto Abraham what kind of persons he would have cursed, Genesis 12. 3.
him that speaks thee evil, I will curse: From this commanded promise Paul
does infer his command, If any love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema maranatha. Tremellius in his Translation of the Syriac Testament, has
a Note to this effect, upon 1 Cor. 16. 22. The reason of this term (says he)
may be applied to the Thalnudists, they mention such a kind of Anathema in
their Thalmud, which is made up of two words, which signifies as much as [Come
Lord,] yet (says he) I am not ignorant that it is otherways expounded three
several ways, by the Thalmud Expositors; which I leave to be scanned by the
Learned.

But this I say, I do not apprehend that this Anathema does bind men over to
the eternal curse as most Expositors think, but to some exemplary judgment of
God in this world (as those four beasts had. Daniel. 7.) such as are open and
incorrigible enemies to Christ and his Kingdom may and ought to be cursed by
such as love the Lord Jesus Christ: either they may threaten the vengeance of
Christ upon them from such positive curses as are in Gods Book delivered
against such, with a positive command; or else such may be cursed by
imprecating the wrath of Christ upon such wilful and implacable enemies.

And in this sense, Christ bade Moses to command all Israel to pronounce both
the blessings and the curses, as soon as they came into the land of Canaan,
Then the Priests and the Levites stood between the twelve Tribes, and pronounce
both the blessings and the curses with a loud voice, and all the people said,
Amen.

Now the last of those curses was denounced against self-Justiciaries; Cursed
is he that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law
to do them: Deuteronomy. 27. This last curse must be understood of the eternal curse,
but all the rest must be understood of temporal curses chiefly.

By this Law, Christ taught his people how, and when, and whom to curse. The
Ruler may not be cursed. Exodus 22. 28. And yet such Rulers as mislead the
people, and cause them to go astray in their practice, Are cursed, in Deuteronomy. 27.
13. And by this Law Paul cursed Ananias, Acts 23. 3. And by this Law, Our
Savior cursed the ruling Scribes and Pharisees eight times over, Matthew. 23. 13.
to 39. And David cursed obstinate Saul, Psalm. 59. And Ezekiel cursed Zedekiah,
Ezekiel. 21. 25. And by this rule Jeremiah cursed the Priests of Anathoth and
Jerusalem, Ier. 11. 20. and 18. 21. and 17. 18. and 10. 25. Lam. 3. 64. This
last curse Paul translates according to the 70. and laid it upon Alexander the
copper-Smith. 2 Timothy 4. 14. And Nehemiah is bold to curse such as had married
wives of Ashdod, etc. Nehe. 13. 25. and in this sense the godly Martyrs, and
Confessors, and Professors do curse the Cesars and the King of Locusts. Apoc.
6. 10. and 8. 4. 5, and 11. and 16. James 5. 7. 8. And in this sense Paul must
be understood, Let him be Anathema maranatha, that loves not the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Apostle speaks this to all godly Christians, they are bound to execute the
curse that is written, either by a positive denunciation, or else by way of
imprecation, as the occasion is offered. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the
Lord, curse ye the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord,
to help the Lord against the mighty, Judges. 5. 23.

They that curse others for private injuries ought to be severely punished by
the Magistrate. Levit. 19. 14. But they that curse the enemies of Christ may do
it in Faith, because they have a word of command to warrant their Act. And thus
Paul delivered Hymeneus, and Alexander to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 20. He delivered
them to Satan, by denouncing the Anathema. 2 Timothy 4. 14. A little before this,
Alexander was a defender of the Truth at Ephesus, Acts, 19. 33. He was a Member
of that Church: but Paul does not appoint the Church of Ephesus to give him the
Anathema, but he did it by himself without them.

The Talmud gives a rule of caution to such as denounce the Anathema, to take
good heed they do it upon right grounds, or else they say, the curse given,
shall return to the giver: And so Solomon says, That the curse which is
causeless, shall not come.

The seven cups of Gods wrath in Apoc. 15. and 16. are nothing else but the
pouring out curses and imprecations against the Antichristian Tyrants.

When Zachariah, the son of Iehoiadah was stoned between the Temple and the
Altar, he said, The Lord look upon it, and require it. This Anathema maranatha
took effect: For when Nabuzaradan came into the Temple, he saw some blood upon
the pavement not washed off, thereupon he asked what blood that was? It was
answered, That it was the blood of a Prophet that foretold all these things
that now are come upon us, and we rose up and killed him: Yea, said
Nebuzaradan, and I will pay you for it; The reupon he caused his Soldiers to
fall upon the young Priests, and they killed eight thousand of them: This the
Jews record in Tugueh, fol-69. Col. 1.


Scholar, I cannot tell what to think of the use and practice of this great
Excommunication: whether it be any Church privilege or no? But I will leave it
for the present: and desire rather to search out the lesser Excommunication
which is granted on all hands to be a special privilege belonging to all
Christian Churches. And very learned Divines do affirm that Jesus Christ did
first ordain it, in Matthew. 1. 18. 17. as a special Ordinance for the use of all
Christian Churches to the worlds end.


Teacher, I cannot believe yet that Jesus Christ did first ordain
excommunication in Matthew. 18. 17. as a new Ordinance Christ did not first
ordain Excommunication. in Mat. 18. 17.
for the use of Christian Churches. I have already showed that Jesus Christ did
institute many particular Churches or synagogues among the Jews, and that they
had the use of Excommunication among them of old time: therefore I cannot as
yet believe that Christ did now first ordain excommunication as a new Ordinance
for the use of Christian Churches, in Matthew. 18. 17.

Secondly, It is evident that Christ did not now first ordain excommunication
as a new Ordinance for the use of all Christian Churches, in Matthew. 18. 17.
because Luke relates a part of this exhortation touching private brotherly
dealing, and makes no mention of proceeding on to excommunication, which
doubtless he would not have omitted, if Christ had now first ordained it for the
use of Christian Churches.


Scholar, Very learned Divines do think, that the circumstances of the Text,
Matthew. 18. 17. do plainly demonstrate, that Christ did now first ordain
excommunication as a new Ordinance for the use of all Christian Churches to the
Worlds end; and that Christ exhorted his Apostles to put this new Ordinance in
practice, as soon as they should plant any new particular Christian Churches.


Teacher, I desire that the circumstance of this Text may be alleged and
weighed, whether any of them do prove the ordination of excommunication at this
time or no.


Scholar, The first considerable circumstance is this: If he will not hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen and Publican: Hence I gather, That
none could account his Brother of the same profession as an Heathen or
Publican, until the Church had excommunicated him.


Teacher, Your collection is not sound: for first, If this sentence had employed
his excommunication by the Church, then Christ would have said thus; Let him be
to it, that is to say, to the Church: Or let him be to them, that is to say, to
all the members of the Church, as an Heathen and a Publican: But Christ does
not say so, but let him be to thee, that is to say, let him be to thee that art
the wronged Brother, as an heathen and a Publican, if he refused to hear the
Church, though he never were excommunicate by them: For it is a point of good
Justice, and of Christian Wisdom, to account an obstinate sinner that will not
hear the Church, no better then an Heathen or Publican: And thus godly David
did, when his brethren. Israelites sought to betray his life into the hands of
Saul; he both esteemed them, and called them Heathens for it, his words run
thus, Lo they lay wait for my soul, yet not for my trespass, nor for my sin:
(for I have done them no wrong at all) Therefore thou, O Jehovah, God of hosts,
God of Israel, awake to visit all the Heathens. Psalm. 59. 4, 5. and in verse 9.
he says thus; Thou Jehovah wilt laugh at them, thou will mock at the Heathens:
Thus David esteemed his brethren the Jews no better then heathens for their
treacherous endeavors, and yet I believe he knew they were not excommunicated
by the Church. In like sort he calls the Ziphims of the Tribe of Judah,
Strangers, that is to say, Heathens, for their treacherous endeavors against his
life: Psalm. 54. 5. In like sort Jeremiah ranks the profane Jews, with the
uncircumcised Heathens. Ier. 9. 26. and John calls the persecuting Papists,
Gentiles, Apoc. 11. 2. 18. and Heathens also; in chap. 19. 15. and Isaiah calls
the Kings and People of Judah, Kings of Sodom, and People of Gomorrha. Es. 1.
10. and yet I believe none of these were so esteemed and called because they
were first excommunicated by the Church. Therefore you cannot conclude (that
Matthew does mean) that the impenitent brother was first excommunicate by the
Church, because Christ bade the innocent party to esteem him as an Heathen and
Publican.


Scholar, There is another circumstance in verse 18. which does imply
Excommunication, as all Interpreters say; The words of the Text thus speak:
Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. Hence
Interpreters conclude, that the Church by the power of Excommunication, do bind
sinners in their sins on earth; and when they repent, then they loose them from
their sins on earth, by discharging them from the sentence of Excommunication,
and that Christ does ratify all their doings in heaven.


Teacher, I do not look upon this 18. verse in the same sense that you take it:
I do not apprehend it to have any necessary dependence on the three former
verses: but I take this 18. verse to speak of another matter distinct from the
former: For it is evident that Christ does use many miscellaneous exhortations
in this Chapter, which have no dependence on each other.

Secondly, I say, that this sentence in verse 18. does not agree to the terms
of the Churches Excommunication; For then Christ would have said thus:
Whatsoever they bind on earth, that is to say, Whatsoever they, the whole
Church both Officers and Members do bind on earth, etc. But Christ does not say
so, But, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, namely, ye that are my Apostles and
Disciples: Or else Christ would have said thus, Whatsoever [thou] bindest on
earth, in relation to the phrase afore-going in verse 17. Let him be [to thee.]

This phrase, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc. is a Talmudd phrase, which
phrase of speaking Christ had formerly used to his Apostles, when he gave them
authority to preach the Gospel, in Matthew. 16. 19. and now again he does put
them in remembrance of their calling and power to preach the Gospel, by
repeating the said Talmud phrase: and he begins his memento to them with an
asseveration. Amen, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven; that is to say, Whatsoever person he or she be that lives in sin,
without change of mind, ye shall by the preaching of the Gospel bind him or
them over to eternal condemnation; but whatsoever person he or she be, that
has the truth of change of mind, according to the rules of the Gospel, you
shall loose that person from his sins, by preaching to him his pardon,
reconciliation and atonement, by resting on Christ for his pardon and atonement.

And in this sense every faithful Preacher does bind on earth, and loose too,
though he never do excommunicate, nor release any from their excommunication.

And if any man doubt whether this exposition of this phrase be to be
understood of their power and authority to preach: let them confer hereto
another place in John 20. 21. where our Savior uses the like phrase to his
Apostles; and there he does plainly expound it of their calling and power to
preach the Gospel; for in verse 21. Christ says thus to his Apostles, As my
Father sent me, so send I you, namely, to preach the Gospel: and in verse 23.
he says, Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosoever
sins ye retain, they are retained. This manner of speaking implies, that they
must teach according to the rules of the Gospel: Whosoever sins ye remit
according to the rules of the Gospel, they are remitted: But the Gospel does
not pronounce pardon of sin to any but to the godly repenting, therefore you
must remit no man's sins but theirs only; to such repentant sinners you must
preach remission of sins, for their sins are remitted in heaven. But whosoever
sins you retain, according to the rules of the Gospel, they are retained: You
must tell all unrepentant sinners, that without good change of mind, they shall
all perish eternally. These are the limits of that commission which Christ
gives to all true preachers, when he does first give them power and authority
to preach the Gospel: and I think that no sound Divine dares deny this
exposition. And thus by comparing these Scriptures together, the true
interpretation of Matthew. 18. 18. may be found out.

Thirdly, This phrase, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,
cannot be expounded of the Churches excommunication: For no Church is so
perfect in judgment, as to know the spiritual estate of an excommunicate
person: many godly persons have been excommunicate for a particular sin, and
have died under their excommunication, and yet their sin not bound in heaven,
when they dyed: and some are unjustly excommunicate: and some are released from
their excommunication, upon their verbal repentance only. In this case the
Church cannot say, we know thy repentance is true, and therefore we do loose
thee from thy sins on earth, and Christ does also loose thee from thy sin in
heaven: No Church can say thus.

But when a godly Minister does preach remission of sins to the truly repentant
sinner, (or to a man thrt truly turns to the Lord) and preach everlasting
damnation to the unrepentent: they do not personate men, as they do when they
excommunicate persons, they only deliver the rules of the Gospel to persons in
general: If any of their hearers can find themselves so and so qualified, then
they preach remission of sins to such as do truly repent (or turn to God. Act.
26. 20) according to the rules of the Gospel, and they preach damnation also to
them that do not turn to God, that is, to the unrepentent. But a particular
Church had need an of infallible Judgment in men's personal conditions, before
she can conclude that all her personal censures are ratified in heaven.


Scholar, Sir, I must confess that your exposition of this verse 18. does set
me at a gaze what to think of other men's Interpretations: but yet I am not
fully satisfied: Therefore I will yet try further in another circumstance of
the Text: It is said in verse 15. If he hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother. These words imply, that the only end and aim which the innocent
brother had, in telling his trespassing brother of his fault, was to gain him
from his sin by gaining him to repentance, to change of mind, therefore his end
and aim was the same in verse 16. in taking with him one or two: and therefore
his end and aim was the same also in verse 17. in telling the Church. Now if
his end and aim was the same in all these proceedings, namely to bring him to
repentance, then it follows by necessary consequence, that the Churches dealing
with him was either to bring him to change of mind, or else to excommunicate
him, in case he shall still remain unrepentant.


Teacher, I grant that the two first degrees of proceeding against the brother
offending, was only to gain him to the sight of his sin, and so to godly
repentance for it. But the third degree of proceeding in telling the Church,
might well have another end; namely, to bring him to some public shame for his
unrepentancy (or non-change of mind) and to gain him to make some satisfaction
for his injurious trespassing against him.


Scholar. Do you make the word Trespass in this Text, to mean such sins only as
do trespass or hurt a man's brother? Very learned Divines do take it to signify
all kinds of sin, as well against God immediately, as mediately against man.


Teacher, I acknowledge that the Greek word used in this Text is often put as
well for sin against God, as for sin against man: But most usually it is put
for sin or trespass against man: and methinks that the circumstances of this
Text do carry it plainly of sin against a man's brother: If thy brother sin
against thee, namely, by hurting or injuring thy person, goods, or good name,
then thou shall tell him his fault between him and thee alone.

2. This kind of sin is such a sin, as a brother may forgive, and so Luke does
explain our Savior to mean, Chap. 17. 3. But a brother cannot forgive a sin
against God; and so Eli says, If a man sin against God, who shall plead for
him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. therefore the sin here spoken of, is not to be understood of
sin against God immediately, but of such sins as a brother may forgive by
passing by it, and not revenging it, in case his brother testifies his sorrow
and repentance for it. In this sense Joseph's brethren sinned against Joseph, as
Reuben does explain the nature of their sin, Genesis 42. 22. with Genesis 37. 21, 22.
And therefore, after Jacob was dead, all Joseph's Brethren came to him and
confessed their sin (many years after,) and they prayed Joseph to forgive their
Trespass and their sin. Genesis 50. 17. They did not pray him to forgive their
sin, as it was a sin against God, for in that sense they knew that Joseph could
not forgive it, but as it was a sin against his person, in that sense they knew
he might forgive it if he pleased; and he did forgive it, though it were a sin
of the highest nature: for the sin that is done against a man's person, is far
greater then that which is done against a man's goods: and so the Hebrew Doctors
affirm; they say if a man have done his neighbor damage ^n his goods, as soon
as he has paid that which he ought to pay, atonement is made for him.

But he that hurts his neighbors person, although he give unto him for
satisfaction all the five things spoken of in Exodus 21. 13. yet atonement is
not made for him thereby, yea though he should sacrifice unto God all the Rams
of Nebaioth, Es. 60. 7. yet atonement is not made for him, nor his iniquity
forgiven, until he request it of Him that was hurt, and he do forgive it him.
Ains. in Genesis 50. 17.

Our Savior also gives the like rule of caution; If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest thy brother has ought against thee, leave there
thine offering before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Mat. 5. 23, 24.

Thirdly, This kind of sin against a brother, may be explained by other
instances. Jonathan entreated Saul not to sin against David, because David did
not sin against him. 1 Samuel 19. 4. And so David pleaded with Saul (when he cut
off the skirt of his robe) Know thou, and see that there is neither evil nor
transgression in my hands, I have not sinned against thee, yet thou huntest my
soul to take it. 1 Samuel 24. 11.

In this sense also Jacob asked Laban, What is my trespass, and what is my sin,
that thou have so hotly pursued after me, Genesis 31. 36. the 70. translate this
phrase thus, What is my injury, and what is my sin? Shimei also met David at
his return, and acknowledged that he had sinned against him, and desired
pardon, thereupon David accepted of his acknowledgment, and forgave him. 2 Samuel
19. 19, 20. 23. David forgave the sin that was done to his person, but David
could not forgive his sin as it was done against God.

So the prodigal son, when he had sinned against his Father, in wasting his
Fathers goods: he confessed his sin against his Father, and said, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and against thee: Luke 15. 18. and his Father
forgave him the sins that were done against him.

Breach of promise is a great sin against man, as Judah did acknowledge unto
Jacob. vide Ains. in Gen 43. 9. and 44. 32. which a man may forgive to his
brother.

4. It is plain that Christ speaks in this Text of such a kind of sin as a
brother may forgive, because Peter demands this question in ver. 21. in
relation to Christ's exhortation, How often shall my brother sin against me, and
I forgive him? Our Savior by his answer to the end of the Chapter, shows
that he spoke of the sin of injurious dealing against a man's brother, and our
Savior does much inculcate upon this point of dealing brotherly in point of
wrongs and injuries: and in his form of Prayer he does lay it down, as one of
the conditions of those Petitions, which we ought to make unto God in our daily
prayers, To forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. Matthew. 6. 12. and in verse 14. he enforces this point by this
reason; If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you; but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your
heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. And in this sense Christ did
conclude his answer to Peter's question. Matthew. 18. 35. All these places
compared together, do plainly evidence that the kind of sin Christ speaks of in
Matthew. 18. 15. is no other but the sin of trespass or injury which one brother
may do unto another.


Scholar, It seems to me that our Savior does exhort his Disciples to rebuke a
brother for every sin they see in him: for sin against God, as well as for
sin against man: As for example, if a man hear his brother swear a vain oath,
ought he not to rebuke his brother for it; and if he repent not then, to take
one or two with him, etc. Yet that sin does no hurt to a man's brother, it is
only a sin against God immediately?


Teacher, The point about which we reason, is about a particular case; namely
about a brother sinning injuriously against a brother. But now you start a
question about sin against God immediately: Whether a man that sees his
brother sin against God, immediately ought not to rebuke him for it. I will
answer as plainly as I can. First I say, that all sin in general ought to be
rebuked. But yet secondly, I say, that this duty of rebuking sin against God
must be grounded on some other command of Christ that is more large then this
in Matthew. 18. 15. namely, it must be grounded upon the second or third
Commandments, or upon Levit. 19. 17. Which I conceive is a general command to
rebuke all kind of sin in all sorts of persons, as far as any brother may
have a necessary calling thereunto, or else says our Savior, He hates his
brother in his heart, and must bear sin for him: and if he remain impenitent
or perverse, he ought to complain against him to authority, provided he can
witness his complaint. But this extraordinary command in Matthew. 18. 15. is a
more particular command to rebuke a trespassing brother in a private way first,
which is a loving and honorable kind of dealing, and this duty is of necessary
concernment to be practiced for the better preservation of Christian love and
society, as I have above noted it from our Saviors large answer to Peter's
question.

Therefore now I conclude from all the premises, that our Savior did not
ordain excommunication in this Text: no otherwise then he ordained scourging,
fining, or the like punishments, for the correction of unrepenting sinners,
such as the Church or Court of Magistrates should see cause to inflict upon
complaint and proof.


Scholar, Do you hold the word Church in Matthew. 18. 17. to be a Court of
Magistrates? learned Divines hold it to be meant of a particular Christian
Church assembled together both Elders and Members.


Teacher, I apprehend that the word Church in Matthew. 18. 17. This phrase, Tell
the Church: means nothing else, but tell the Elders of the Sanhedrin.
Must be taken for a Court of Magistrates, and that it cannot be taken for a
particular Christian Church of Elders and Members assembled together.

First, because there were no particular Christian Churches as yet established.

Secondly, It is plain by the circumstances of the Text that Christ spoke of
such a Church as was in present being, unto which the present offended brother
might repair for justice against his unrepentant trespassing brother: or else
how could his Disciples practice his Doctrine, seeing he does nor explain
himself to speak of Christian Churches.

Thirdly, It is evident that Christ spoke of such a Church, as was in present
being among the Jews; because he applies his speeches to the present Jews
capacity, Let him be to thee as an Heathen and Publican. This phrase is not
suitable to a particular Christian Church: for Christians might company with
Heathens and Publicans. But the Jews might not hold communion with any unclean
and uncircumcised Heathens, as Peter's refusing to go to Cornelius does
testify. Acts 10. Neither did Christians hate Publicans, but the Jews in
general did, because they raised them up in the point of Tribute to Caesar. But
converted Christians were allowed to eat and drink with Heathens in civil
feastings except it were in the Idols Temple; and they might also eat and drink
with Publicans, as our Savior and his Disciples often did, though the Jews in
general (through their own unjust tradition) took offense at Christ for it.


Scholar, Can you make it manifest by Scripture with good reason, that a Court
of Magistrates are a Church: Learned men affirm the contrary. They affirm that
a Court of Magistrates is no where called a Church in Scripture.


Teacher, I will answer you fully and plainly: I affirm that a Court of
Magistrates is often called a Church in Scripture.

First, It is evident that the Hebrew word Kahal the Church, A Court of Elders,
is a Church in Scripture phrase.
is in Deuteronomy. 31. 30. must be understood of the Elders and Officers of the
Church only, which also were the Magistrates of the Commonweal: they did now
assemble unto Moses out of all the Tribes: as it appears by comparing verse 30.
with verse 28. Therefore the said Elders with their Officers attending on them
were called the Church. They were the whole Church representatively; and it may
be further observed that Kahal in this place is translated by the seventy
Ecclesia, the Church.

Secondly, If the whole Church did sin ignorantly in their practice against
some branch or other of the Law of God: then the Church must bring a
sin-offering, and it is called the Churches sin-offering, in Levit. 4. 13, 14.
21. and yet the Common people of the twelve Tribes did not assemble to
Jerusalem to present this Church sin-offering, but the Elders or Magistrates of
the Sanhedrin did it, without the presence of the people, Levit. 4. 15.
Therefore the Elders of the Court Sanhedrin, are a true Church representatively.

Thirdly, Kahal the Church, 1 Chronicles. 13. 2. 4. compared with verse 1. is
nothing else but the Captains of thousands, and hundreds, with the Governors
or Elders of the Court Sanhedrin; and the 70. translate this Kahal by Ecclesia.

Fourthly, Kahal the Church in 1 Chronicles. 29. 1. 10. 20. Is nothing else but the
Elders of the Court Sanhedrin, together with other chief. Princes and Captains
of thousands, and Captains of hundreds, etc. As it is evident by comparing this
place with 1 Chronicles. 28. 1. 8. This Kahal also is translated by the seventie
Ecclesia.

5. Kahal the Church in 2 Chronicles. 1. 3. 5. is nothing else but the Captains of
thousands and hundreds with the Judges and every Governor in all Israel: all
these did accompany Solomon to seek the Lord at Gibeon: all this assembly of
Governors and chief Fathers, are called a great Church: This Kahal is also
translated by the 70. Ecclesia.

Sixthly, Kahal the Church, 2 Chronicles. 23. 28. 31. 32. and in 2 Chronicles. 3. 2. 4.
is explained in 2 Chronicles. 29. 20. to be nothing else but the Rulers of the City
assembled together in a Sanhedrin Court; that is to say, there was the 70.
Elders of the high Sanhedrin, and the Elders of the two other Sanhedrins, who
had their residence in Jerusalem: (as I noted above in opening the kinds of
Sanhedrins) and this matter is also further explained, in verse 28. 31. 32. and
in 2 Chronicles. Chap. 30. 2. 4.

This Assembly of Elders is termed a Church in all the said verses, both in the
Hebrew, and in the seventy. The generaltie of the people did not come to the
first Passe-over in the first month: Therefore Hezekiah took counsel of this
Church of Elders, and they counseled him to gather together all the people on
the fourteenth day of the second month: So then Hezekiah and the Elders made a
Church by themselves in the point of Counsel in the first month. But in the
second month, both the Elders and the people together made a very great
Church: and these degrees of Church meetings were ordained by Moses: If one
Trumpet alone sounded, then the Elders came alone to the Church-meeting; but if
both Trumpets sounded together, then both Elders and People did meet together
in one Church-Assembly, vide Numb. 10.

7. Kahal the Church translated by the seventy Ecclesia in 1 Chronicles. 28. 14. is
nothing else but the Elders of Samaria assembled together: For by the counsel
of the Prophet Oded, certain of the Heads of the children of Ephraim stood up
against the Soldiers that were returned from warring against Judah: And they
said unto the Soldiers, ye shall not bring the captaives into this City; and
the armed men obeyed their voice, and left all the captives before the Princes,
and before all the Church: This Church therefore is nothing else but the
Magistrates of Samaria, which were assembled to this place by the counsel of
Oded the Prophet to prevent the further occasion of Gods wrath.

8. The word Church, in Deuteronomy. 23. 1, 2, 3. 8. is Kahal in all the four places,
and in the Seventy, Ecclesia, in one of these four places it is said, that a
Moabite and an Ammonite may not enter into the Church of Jehovah for ever. This
place does not exclude a converted Ammonite or a Moabite from the Church of the
Jews: but yet it did exclude them from bearing any Office in their Church or
Public Courts; and so both the Hebrew Doctors and some learned Christians do
understand the word Church in this text to be spoken of the Church of Elders
assembled in the Sanhedrin Court: a Moabite or an Ammonite, though converted to
the Faith, yet they might not bear any Office in the Church-Court. So Mr
Broughton expounds the word Church in this place, and so does Mr Ainsworth in
effect.

In another of these four places it is said, The Priest which was hurt in his
privy members, might not enter into the Church of Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 23. 1. He
might not enter in, to wait upon his Office, as a Priest complete; neither
might he enter into the Sanhedrin Court, to bear any Office there, as long as
that part was defective, but he was not excluded from coming into the Temple;
he might come thither to do some inferior works. As for example, He might
cleave wood in the Wood-chamber, and in that respect, he must have his portion
in the holy things; therefore he was not excluded from the Church at large: he
was only excluded from bearing special Office in the Church as a Priest
complete, and as a Magistrate: For this phrase, He shall not enter in, or come
in, is expounded, [To bear Office as a Magistrate,] 1 Kings 3. 9.

9. The Congregation of the gods, Psalm. 82. 1. is translated by the Seventy,
the Synagogue of the gods: it may be as well translated [the Church of the
gods;] for the seventy do often put the term Synagogue, for the term Church,
and for the term Congregation. vid. Ains. Exodus 21. 6.

10. The Congregation before whom the manslayer must stand in judgment, Numb.
35. 12. etc. and Ios. 20. 6. is termed by the Seventy, the Synagogue or Church
of Elders: for I find these three terms, Congregation, Synagogue, and Church,
often put the one for the other, as terms Synonima.

11. Solomon describes the course of Justice against an impenitent person, much
like to that course of Justice which Christ does direct us to, in Matthew. 18.
15, 16, 17. He says, That he whose hatred is covered by deceit, his
wickedness shall be showed before the whole Church. Prove. 26. 26. The Hebrew
word in this place is Kahal; but the Seventy translate it, the Synedrion, or
the Session of Elders. Solomon by this phrase [his hatred is covered by
deceit,] does imply, that he will not acknowledge his fault to his neighbor,
but did labor to cover his hatred to his brother by deceit: thereupon the
matter must be brought before the Church, or Court of Elders, called the
Synedrion.

And our Savior does tell us, that contumelious nicknames (such as Raca is in
the Talmud) were a just cause to bring such a person before the Elders of the
Synedrion, Matthew. 5. 22. or at least they were liable to be brought thither:
and the Greek word in Mat. 5. 22. is Synedrion: and so the word Church, in Ier.
15. 17. is Synedrion in the seventy.

12. The Church is commanded to rejoice in the Feast of Tabernacles, with
exceeding joy; with music, songs, and palm-branches in their hands. Levit. 23.
40. But this kind of joy was not acted by the whole multitude of the Church,
but by the Elders of the Sanhedrin Court only, for they were the whole Church
representatively. vid. M. Ains. in Levit. 23. 40.

13. Not only the Elders assembled in the high Sanhedrin, but all the Elders of
their inferior Sanhedrins in each Session, might well be called a Church: as
in Psalm. 107. 32. Let them exalt him in the Church of the people, and praise
him in the sitting of the Elders. The term Church, and the sitting of the
Elders, are terms Synonima in this Text. The manner how the Jews did exalt God
in the Church of the people; and praise him in the sitting of the Elders, is
thus recorded by the Hebrew Doctors. Men made confession unto God, for four
sorts of deliverances, before ten men, whereof two of them must be wise men.
After this manner they exalted God before the Church of the people, because it
was done before some of the Elders of the Church, who may be called [a Church,]
for so they are called representatively.

And marvel not that two Elders, or two wise men, are called [A Church;] for if
Symeon and Levi assembled together in Counsel, about the destruction of the
Sychemites, be called Kahal, a Church, as they are in Genesis 49. 6. then two wise
men, or Elders of the Sanhedrin with eight of the people in their company, may
as well be called A Church of people.

14. Kahal, the Church, Prove. 5. 14. translated by the Septuagint [Ecclesia,]
means the Assembly or Court of Elders: the words of the text run thus. I was
almost in all evil, in the midst of the Church and Assembly. The Seventy have
the like phrase upon the word Church, in 1 Chronicles. 28. 8. Now therefore in the
sight of all Israel, the Church of the Lord: this Church was nothing else but
the Congregation of Elders, compared with verse 1. and with chap. 29. 1 - 10 -
20. These Elders were the chief Doctors in Moses Laws; and therefore those
that lived in evil, contrary to their teaching, might well fear the evil of
punishment, when they stood in the midst of their Church and Assembly, as
Solomon warns, Prove. 12. 13, 14.

15. Jesus Ben Syrack, one of the former Hebrew Doctors, since the Prophets,
puts the word [Church,] for a counsel of wise and learned men. He first shows
the un-aptnesse of Artificers, for matters of Counsel and Judicature, they
shall not be sought unto, (says he) in matters of public Counsel, neither
shall they sit high in the Church, nor sit in the Judges seat, nor understand
the sentences of Judgment. Ecclus. 8. 24. 33. In these words he does plainly
make the Elders of the Court Sanhedrin to be a Church by themselves.

16. The same Author says, that the adulterous wife shall be brought into the
Church, and inquisition and examination shall be made of her children, Ecclus.
23. 22 - 24. he says plainly, that the adulterous woman shall be brought
before the Church of the Elders, and they shall make inquisition concerning the
Legitimacy or bastardy of her children: And after this sort the Congregation or
Church of Elders sit to judge them that had taken strange wives, Ezra. 10. 14.
16.

17. It is no more absurdity to call the Elders of the Sanhedrin a Church:
then it is to call a Court of Heathen Magistrates, a Church. But a Court of
Heathen Magistrates are called a Church properly; for the Town Clerk of Ephesus
told Demetrius and his consorts, that if they had any thing to lay against Paul
and Alexander, it should be determined in a lawful Church, that is to say, it
should be legally determined in an Assembly of Magistrates, Act. 19. 39.
Therefore seeing a Court of Heathen Magistrates are properly called a Church;
why may not that Church in Mat. 18. 17. be taken for a Court of Elders, seeing
the Elders of all their Synedrions were the chosen Elders of the Church for all
matters, and therefore were or ought to be learned and expert in all the Laws
of Moses, both Leviticall and Judicial.

18. Those eminent persons in the Church of Corinth, that spoke with Tongues
and prophesied; are called a Church by the figure Synecdoche, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
Thus the text is, when the whole Church is come together into one, and [all]
speak strange tongues: No man that is well advised will say that the word
Church in this place, does mean the whole people in general: the word [all]
must not have that sense, except you will say [also] that the whole multitude
spoke with strange tongues: but no man (I think) will say so: therefore the
word [all] and the word Church, must have reference to those only that spoke
with strange Tongues. These only are called the whole Church, by the figure
Synecdoche. Likewise it is said, every one that has a Psalm, or has a
doctrine, has a tongue, has interpretation: this phrase [every one] must not
be taken vulgarly for every one of the common multitude of the Church. The
Apostle himself does contradict that Exposition; for he does teach us to oppose
the learned to the unlearned, in ver. 23. 24. therefore he does exempt the
unlearned, as not fit to be accounted into the number of every one that has a
Psalm etc. therefore these two phrases, all and every one: means all and every
one of those only whom God had gifted with extraordinary gifts, for the
plantation of his Church: these only the Apostle calls the whole Church, by the
figure Synecdoche, because they were the chief guides and directions of the
multitude.

19. The word Church is of a large capacity; it signifies an Assembly of any
kind of men: and therefore it may as well be applied to an assembly of
Magistrates, in a Court of Justice, as to any other Assembly.

First, The whole Army of Saul's soldiers that lay encamped in the field
against the Philistims, are called Kahal a Church: and in the Septuagint,
Ecclesia. 1 Samuel 17. 47.

Secondly, Nebuchadnezzars Army against Israel, is called Kahal, a Church, and
in the seventy, Ecclesia. Ezekiel. 16. 40.

Thirdly, Nebuchadnezzars several companies of soldiers collected into several
bands out of several Nations, are called Churches, in the plural number, Ezekiel.
26. 7. and in the seventy, Synagogues.

Fourthly, The Persian Army is also called a Church: Ier. 50. 9. and in the
septuagint, a Synagogue.

Fifthly, Pharaohs army is also called Kahal, a Church. Ezekiel. 17. 17.

Sixthly, The Army of Gog is four times over called Kahal, a Church, and in the
seventy, a Synagogue. Ezekiel 38. 4. 7. 13. 15.

Seventhly, all the multitude of Israel that came out of Egypt are called
Kahal, a Church, before ever they entered into that Church Covenant which God
made with them in Horeb. Exodus 16. 3.

Therefore it is no absurdity to call a Court of Elders a Church.

20. A confused multitude of people may be called a Church: therefore much more
an orderly Assembly of Elders in a Court of Justice. In Acts 19. 32. It is
said, that the Church was confused that rose up against Paul and Alexander: and
in verse 41. The Town-Clark dismissed the Church, that is to say, the
disorderly multitude: and Syracides puts the word Church, for a disorderly
multitude of evil doers. Ecclus 26. 5.

21. A company of wicked and corrupt Elders may be called a Church, as in Psalm.
26. 5. I hated the Church of evil doers; that is to say, the Church or
Synedrion of Saul's flattering Counselors. And Jacob also in his last will,
speaking of the bloody action of Simeon and Levi, says, O my soul come not
thou into their secret, and unto their Church mine honor be not thou united.
Genesis 49. 6. Hence it follows, that the conclave of Cardinals in Rome, may be
truly and properly called a Church: and the general Councels of Cardinals,
Bishops, and other Popish Doctors, may truly and properly be called a Church:
though also they ought to be called a malignant Church, or a Synagogue of Satan.

Therefore I wonder why any man of learning and wisdom should account it such a
strange matter to interpret the word Church in Matthew. 18. 17. to mean the
Elders of the Synedrion-Court: especially considering they were the Churches
chosen Elders, appointed to sit in Moses Chair, to expound Moses laws, and to
punish all the Transgressors thereof with suitable punishments; and though they
were grown now more degenerate then in former times, yet they had some godly
Elders among them, as Gamaliel, and Nichodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea, with
many others, doubtless here and there dispersed among their several Sanhedrins.

I will conclude these one and twenty Collections with this Sum.

First, Their opinion, that, Tell the Church, requires a new Court; would
breed new speech in the New Testament. But our Lord spoke it, as is evident, of
the Church of Elders, of the Polity known and practiced of old in Israel, Bro.
in Manuscript.

Secondly, In the Jews Reipublike, the same Ecclesia that judged Damages, or
Death, judged of excommunication: and still the chief Rulers being of Faith,
should have their stroke. They will and should study to excel in Divinity, to
be true Bishops and Elders, to eat up the book of the Gospel, and to see all
miscarriages sagely restrained. The Apostle did excommunicate the Corinthian,
as an Elder or Bishop. Bro. in Manus. and Apoc. 155.

Thirdly, The Reformed Churches as Zurick, take the wisest order that destroy
all the Popes marks, The Consul is present at all Scholars dealings: and most
straightly look to Scholars carriage twice in the Year, and all punishments are
referred to the Consul and Synedrion: such was the Apostles Doctrine and
Synagogues of old. Bro. Apoc. 230. and on the Lords Prayer. page 10. and 11.
and alibi.


Scholar, Truly I must needs confess that I cannot justly except against your
exposition of the word Church in Matthew. 18. 17. and yet I desire a little
further satisfaction: Whether it be lawful to call all the visible professors
of the Faith dispersed over the world, A Church of Christ or no?


Teacher, I have already showed you, that the word Church is of such a large
capacity that it may well comprehend them all: and therefore I do fully accord
with those Divines that describe the Church of Christ to be outwardly visible
far and wide over the face of the earth.


Scholar, Very learned men do think that there can be no such universal visible
Church of Christ. 1. Because all those visible Professors cannot meet together
in any one place to perform that public worship which Christ has ordained:
And secondly, they cannot have any general Officers over them, because they
cannot meet together to choose them.


Teacher, I do desire that no man will be offended suddenly at the term Church,
attributed to all visible Professors of the Faith: For though they cannot now
personally meet together in any one place, as perhaps they did in the days of
Adam and Noah* yet they do daily meet together in the unity of the Faith, and
they do all make the same public Profession of salvation by All the outward
Professors of the Faith through the world, do make an universal visible Church
of Christ.
Christ alone. But for the better performance of the same public Faith and
Worship, they are fitly divided and distributed into particular visible
Churches: And my reasons for calling all visible Professors an universal
visible Church of Christ, are these. 1. What other Temple of God can that be,
wherein Antichrist does sit as God, but the universal visible Church of Christ
dispersed over the world? Antichrist cannot be said to sit as a God in any one
particular Congregational Church; but he sits in the Temple of God, even as
Christ sat formerly in the Temple between the Cherubims, whither the twelve
Tribes resorted three times a year; And these twelve Tribes are called a Church
of Nations, Genesis. 28. 3. Because they Typified all the outward Professors of
the Faith in all Nations, as well as the inward Professors of the Faith all the
world over. In this outward Temple or Church Antichrist, did set up the throne
of his Dominion, to rule them and govern them after his own will, by his own
Laws and Decrees.

Secondly, What other Church was it which Paul did persecute, but the
universal visible Church of Christ. He says, that in times past he did
persecute the Church of God, and wasted it; he is not said to persecute any one
particular Church, but he persecuted the Church of God in general not in Judea
only, but in other strange Conntries and Cities also: that is to say, he
persecuted diverse Godly persons that believed in Christ, and which as yet
continued in several Synagogues, in several Countries. Acts 22. 19. and 26. 11.
All these visible Professors of the Faith in several Synagogues, and in several
Countries, the Apostle calls them all together, The Church of God in the
singular number, Gal. 1. 13. Phil. 3. 6. Though they were not personally united
into one particular visible Church; yet they were united together by the same
Faith into one universal visible Church, The Jerusalem from Heaven.

3. What other Church was it whereof Paul was made a Minister, that he might
preach unto the Heathen the unsearchable riches and mysteries of Christ, that
the Church might know the manifold wisdom of God? Ephesians. 3. 8. 10. and verse 21.
He desires that praise may be given for it in the Church through all
Generations for ever. But Paul was not made a Minister to any one particular
Church, but to the Church of Christ in General.

4. Paul tells the Corinthians, that God had ordained in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily, Prophets, etc. For what particular Church did God ordain
these Officers? surely, not for any particular Church; therefore they were
ordained for the good of the general visible Church, dispersed over all the
world where ever a door of entrance was opened to them: and when Christ gave
them a new Commission to preach the Gospel at his Ascension, he did not send
them to any particular Church, but appointed them to preach the Gospel to all
Nations in the world.

5. Christ made a promise unto Jacob, That he should grow into a Church of
Nations. Genesis 28. 3. Genesis 35. 15. and 48. 4. This Church of Nations must be
understood of an universal visible Church, dispersed into all nations as well
as of the invisible Church (as I noted in the first mark of an universal
visible Church.) The universal visible Church, does include the Elect among
others that hope to go to Heaven, as well as they by their outward Profession.
Therefore all outward Professors of the Faith may be well called the Children
of Jacob, because they profess the Faith of Jacob, and because they are
begotten to this Faith by the children of Jacob. For the twelve Apostles, and
the seventy Disciples were of Jacobs loins. They begat other Preachers who
begat many children unto the Faith of Jacob: Therefore all these professors of
the Faith may well be called the children of Jacob. (Galathians 6. 16.) And
thus Jacob did grow into a Church of Nations.

The Hebrew Doctors say, That God did not only ordain the twelve Tribes to
make one National Church; but they say also, That every Tribe was a Church by
it self (as I have formerly noted.) It is written in 2 Chronicles. 20. 5. that
Iehosaphat in the Church of Judah; Here the Tribe of Judah is called a Church:
And so it is again in verse 24. and in 2 Chronicles. 30. 25. Therefore say the
Hebrew Doctors, When the Church brought a Bullock for a sinne-offering, as it
was commanded in Leviticus 4. 14. The Elders of the Sanhedrin brought twelve
Bullocks for twelve Churches, because every Tribe made a Church by it self.
Vide Ainsworth in Leviticus 4. 14. and Numbers. 15. 34.

And it seems to me that every Tribe made such a kind of Church by it self, as
a Christian Nation is: For I apprehend that a Christian Nation may be called a
Church, as well as a Tribe by it self may.


Scholar, How can such visible National Professors be called a Church, or be
called the Kingdom of Heaven; seeing most outward Professors are but
Hypocrites?


Teacher, It is true, most outward Professors are but Hypocrites; yet these
together with some Godly among them, may well be called The Church of Christ;
and by the noblest part they may well be called The Kingdom of Heaven, because
their profession is of an Heavenly calling: And so that place must be
understood in Matthew 13. 19. 41. 42. 44. 47. and Matthew 8. 12. Apoc. 8. 10.
and 10. 1. and 12. 14. And for the outward Covenant sake, he does outwardly own
them, rule them, govern them as his Church and People, and if any do wrong
them, he does revenge their cause: Therefore all visible Churches have great
privileges.


Scholar, Very learned men do think that none ought to be admitted into a
particular visible Church as a Member thereof, until the same Church shall
judge them to have true grace in their souls by trying and examining the marks
of their effectual conversion; for they do not hold it lawful to receive any
one that is an Hypocrite into a particular visible Church.


Teacher, If none ought to be admitted into a particular visible Who are to be
accounted as fit persons to be admitted as members of a particular visible
Church.
Church, until they manifest the Truth of Grace in their souls, then doubtless
Christ has given infallible rules, whereby the Church may discern aright of
the Truth of their Grace, and distinguish it from close hypocrisy: But I must
confess that I am to seek where to find those rules. For though the Scriptures
have perfect rules in general, yet when these rules come to be applied to
particular persons, then am I to seek for certainty of judgment. I conceive it
is one of the royal Prerogatives of the Lord Jesus, to know what particular
persons have the truth of Grace in their Souls. Questionless, all such are the
most fit persons that are to be joined as Members of particular Churches. But
yet, if there be any other that do call upon the Name of the Lord, and depart
from iniquity, our Lord Jesus Christ would have us to esteem them also as fit
matter for a particular visible Church; until by their scandalous walking they
deserve to be excommunicated. I will no more speak of this, because diverse
godly learned have dealt in the Argument to very good purpose. Yet this I would
say, let Churches, both Teachers and Members, be careful that they be not too
censorious and pragmatical, lest they turn men upon the stumbling blocks of
Anabaptistry, etc.


CHAP. III. That Schools of Learning were at the first erected by Jesus Christ,
for the breeding of a Succession of able Men: for Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Judges, etc. to the end of the world.
Scholar, WHat means has Christ ordained for the raising up of continual
succession of Pastors and Teachers, Elders and Judges, for the well governing
of his Church to the end of the world?


Teacher, The Son of God, the Eternal Wisdom, has ordained Christ has
ordained Schools of learning for the continual raising up of Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, etc. For the good government of Church and Commonweal, to the end of
the world.
schools of Learning to be erected every where for the education of youths, in
all good literature, until they might attain to gifts and parts of learning and
godliness, by which they may be made fit for any place of government, either in
Church or Commonweal. I say, it is evident that Christ ordained schools of
learning to be erected every where for Seminaries and Seed-plots of able men,
fit to bear Office in particular visible Churches, and Commonweal. Because
from time to time, Jesus Christ did stir up diverse Prophets and other excellent
persons to rule and order Schools of learning.

First, Jesus Christ stirred up Samuel the Prophet to erect schools of learning
when he was King over all the twelve Tribes, he kept a school at Naioth in
Ramah: wherein he trained up diverse scholars in such a way of learning, as
might sit them for Prophecy: and therefore when Saul came thither to seek
David, The blessing of the Prophets School fell upon him, and he did prophecy
whiles he was there; and thereupon grew a Proverb by way of Admiration, Is Saul
among the Prophets? 1 Samuel 19.

Seconly, there was another Prophets school erected at Bethel, in a high piece
of ground, which was called The Hill of God: 1 Samuel 10. 3. 5. And we may see
the care of Godly Samuel to train up young men in learning, that so there might
be a succession of Prophets, and of other able men fit to bear Office in Church
and Commonweal, when he was dead and gone; and though Saul came not to this
last school, with any intent to be a scholar there: yet he obtained a
Prophetical gift from their society; and this Prophetical gift did signify to
him, what great need he had of the best gifts of learning from the Prophetical
School to execute the Kingly Office that was now laid upon him. And by this
Prophetical gift which fell upon him after he was anointed, he was confirmed
and strengthened in his Office.

So likewise the seventy Elders, as soon as they were chosen to bear Office in
the high Sanhedrin Court, they were confirmed in that Office by the immediate
gift of Prophecy. Numb. 11. 20. to 30. And those gifts of Prophecy which fell
upon them in that day, did point unto them what manner of men they ought to be,
that should enter into such a weighty Office and Calling. Sometimes our
glorious Mediator did extraordinarily fit men for places of public employment.
But ordinarily he did fit men to such eminent places, by training them up in
the Prophets schools.

Thirdly, The Hebrew Doctors do often make mention of these Prophetical Schools
from ancient times. They say, That Sem or Melchisedech was a Teacher of
Schools, when he was the King of Salem.

Abraham was a Prophet, and had a house of Doctrine, and did exercise his gifts
in Teaching his Household the way and charge of Christ in his Commandments,
Statutes, and Laws; and withal commanded them to walk in the way, (that is,
the Faith and Religion) of the Son of God, and to do Justice and Judgment.

The Rabbis say also in the Ierusalem-paraphrase, that Isaac went from the
School-house of Sem the great, to the Well where the Majesty of the Lord had
been revealed. vide Ainsworth, Genesis 24. 62. This Hebrew Record is probably
true; because, It is certain that Sem was still living in the days of Isaac,
as it is evident by comparing the years of his life, in Genesis 11. 11. with
the Story of Isaac in Genesis 24. But however you may take this Hebrew Record
as a Prosopopeia to set forth the dignity, and the antiquity of School
learning. And out of question it might as well become Sem, Sacrificer to the
most high God and King of Salem, to keep a Prophetical school after the
confusion of tongues (that most lamentable curse and plague) as King Samuel:
and he might well train up his Nephew Isaac in learning, seeing he knew that he
should be heir of the promise after he was dead and gone. And doubtless, Sem
was the great Doctor of that age: and so the Hebrew Doctors do often style him,
SEM the Great. vid. Ains. Genesis 14. 18.

Fourthly, The Hebrew Doctors say, That Jacob was a Master of learning, and
that he dwelt in Tents, and studied the Law all his days: But Esau the wicked,
walked in the way of death to kill Jacob. vide Ainsworth Genesis 25. 27. The
Caldy says, that Jacob was a Master of a House of Doctrine: as giving himself
to religious study and Scholarship.

And Jacob departing to the Heavenly City and Country, left the Faith of the
Son of God in his glorious Family; and in special prophesies, That Judahs
Tribe should have Teachers of Judahs Shiloh. (The great Mystery of Godlimess,
God manifested in the flesh) and Expounders of the Law, that to him all the
Nations should be gathered, Esa. 11. and 66. John 11.

5. After that great Apostasy of Israel in Egypt, The Son of God stirred up
Moses, a faithful servant in his house, to be a restorer of the Church, and a
Teacher to all Israel forty years: And to all the Israel of God ever after
Moses from Christ, directed that Levites from twenty five to thirty years of
age, should be as Graduates, before they entered into the work of the
Tabernacle: And they were forty years studying the Law in the Wilderness. And
Moses Aaron, and the seventy Elders, etc. were famous Rectors and Directors to
them. And in David's days, The Levites had a lower degree to begin to study and
prepare themselves from twentieyeers old. Numbers 8. 24. 1 Chronicles. 23. 24.

6. Schools of learning were of great esteem, even in the days of Apostasy,
when the ten Tribes worshipped the Calves of Dan and Bethel: And though Iezabel
destroyed many Prophetical Schools, yet they had some godly friends in those
persecuting times that preserved many of them. Good Obadiah hid one hundred of
the Prophets by fifty in each Cave. 1 King 18. 4. with 1 King 19. 10. 14.

A while after, the Prophet Elisha erected many Prophetical Schools in sundery
parts of the ten Tribes.

First, He kept a Prophets School at Gilgal. 2 Kings, 2. 1. with Chap. 4. 38.
And in this one School there were one hundred Scholars, for whose sake Elisha
healed the bitter pottage: This Miracle Christ did among them for the
countenancing and encouraging of Schools.

Secondly, There was another School of the Prophets at Ierico. 2 Kings, 2. 4,
5. and for their comfort and encouragement, Elisha healed the barren waters of
that place. verse 18.

3. There was another Prophetical School at Bethel. 2 Kings 2. 23. But some of
the young children of this place mocked the Prophet Elisha contumeliously, but
for that presumptuous sin, Elisha did curse them; thereupon forty two of
them were by Gods hand killed with two Bears that came suddenly out of the
wilderness upon them: to the terror of all ungodly-educated children, Luke 10.
16. Psalm. 105. verse 15.

4. Another Prophetical School was at Carmel, 2 King. 2. 25. with Chap. 4. 25.
and 23.

5. Another Prophetical School was in Samaria (as I think) for there Elisha did
sometime dwell. 2 Kings 2. 25. and Chapter 5. 3.

6 There was another Prophetical School at Mount Ephraim, as Gehazi tells u^. 2
King 5. 22. And we may well conceive that there were many Prophetical Schools
in the other parts of the ten Tribes.

But what number of Prophetical Schools were erected in the Kingdom of Judah at
this time, is not recorded: yet we may suppose that there were more then in the
ten Tribes; because they had some Godly Kings that would cherish and nourish
such Seminaries of Learning and Piety. There was a College in Jerusalem, where
Huldah the Prophetess lived, 2 Kings 22. 14. It seems by the story, that he
did not only live near unto the Prophets Schools, but she was a lover thereof
in the affections of her soul; and therefore the blessing of the Prophets
Schole fell upon her, and so she became an extraordinary Prophetess. Yea, the
most of the Prophets (as I conceive) were at the first trained up in Schools of
Learning, in a way fit for Prophecy, when ever it should please the Lord to
act upon them by his spirit immediately: but in case the holy spirit did come
down upon them, yet they lost nothing by their learned pains; for thereby they
were made fit to be called into public places.

7. Godly Daniel, Ananias, Azarias and Misael, did erect Schools of Learning
among the Jews, that were captived into Babylon, into Persia, etc. after they
were raised to places of Honor by Nebuchadnezzar and Darius: else how could
Ezra have been so ready and so perfect a Scribe in the Law of God, shortly
after the first company that returned out of captivity.

8. After the captivity, this perfect Scribe, Ezra together with some other
Godly Doctors of his Age and time, did erect Schools of learning, for the
preservation of the Hebrew text, lest it should be corrupted through the decay
of the Hebrew Tongue: for they saw the Hebrew Tongue began to decay from common
use; therefore they which the diligence of ten thousand eyes, devised and
ordained many precious rules for the preservation of the holy Text, to every
Hebrew letter and voice; so that no one letter could be lost, but it might be
soon espied by the observation of the said rules. By their rules, and the
seventy Translation, and by the Talmudiques, and by the New Testament, the Text
and sense of the Old Testament is most fully preserved to us, upon whom the
ends of the world are come.

These Hebrew Grammarians which sprang from Ezra, and Ezra and the Doctors of
his Age, did with great diligence devise many precious rules, to preserve the
purity of the Hebrew text to every letter.
continued long after, were called Massorites, and they were raised up by the
special eye of Gods providence, to devise certain rules for the preservation
of the purity of the Hebrew Text, so that by their Orthographie Dictionary or
Massoreth, the Hebrew that is kept most pure and perfect, so that no one letter
was ever more or less; nor of any other form in Moses time, with Vowels,
Accents, and Marginal-readings (expounding the Text,) then at this day. vid. Mr
Broughton, Apoc. 65. and in page 118. he says, that the Massorites Dictionary
was invented for the peeservation of every Letter, Prick, and Accent. And a
latter work called Tipheroth Israel tells us, That the Hebrew Letters, Pricks,
and Accents, are at this day as God set them in the two Tables. vid. Mr
Brought. in Apoc. 294.

9. This great diligence of these Godly Schole-Doctors deserves to be had in
everlasting remembrance, and their good example ought to be imitated of all
Governors of Schools of Learning. Some praise is due to them that erect fair
buildings, for Schools of learning; But more praise is due to them that study
to set up the best way of Discipline that can be devised, for the training up
of young Students in the speedy understanding of the original Tongues, and in
the right understanding of the true sense of the text.

Let me produce one Rule which the Hebrew Doctors devised, for the preservation
of the Holy Text, touching the latter Jod: they would not have the letter Iod
to perish from the Law, and therefore by way of Prosopopeia, they bring in the
Law as a Plantife before God, complaining of losing Iod, with humble cry before
God, in these words. O Lord of the world, this is thy rule, that a Testament
which fails in a Letter, fails in all: in Sarai I had Jod, but when she was
named Sarah, then Jod was gone, and so the authority of the Law is lost. God
answers thus, Thou have no loss at all; for though Jod was in the end of a
feminine, yet now I have set it in the beginning of a masculine, when I named
Hoshea by the name Jehoshuah. uid. M. Broughton, in Apoc. 297.

Also he further shows, that this diligence of the Massorites for the
preservation of the least Letter, our Lord commends, in these two words,
(...) and (...), in Mat. 5. 18. by these two terms our Lord does tell us, that
the least Letter or Tittle in the Law shall not fail: but any man may see that
he borrows this speech from the Massorites diligence, touching the Letter
Iod. And by these terms our Lord does countenance Gramer-study, as a
profitable proffession, by naming the least letter in the Greek tongue, in his
book: for the term (...) is rare; none of the hea^hen have it (that I
remember) but Plutarch: yet Matthew and Luke have it. Hence we may learn, that
though Punctum (a prick) has no quantity, yet the term is of great
quantity. Bro. on Dan. 9.

10. Again, There fifteen words in the Old Testament that are pricked over the
head, for special deep consideration, and they have ever been so written from
the first Copy. The Hebrew Doctors call these Pricks (...) But that term is
not used by Matthew, nor by the Syriack or Arabic: therefore not the fifteen
strange Pricks, but Vowel Pricks must needs be meant, which point contains
the most exquisite depth of the Hebrew Tongue. And thus our Lord does approve
and commend our Schole-studdies, by touching upon these terms: and by this his
testimony he authorizeth all the rest. vide Master Broughton in Daniel 9. in
his Reduction of the Gospel to Gabriels Relation.

Again, The Hebrew Doctors of Ezraes Age, gave another rule for the
preservation of the Hebrew text. They reckon how often every letter comes in
the Hebrew text, how often words of short or full writing were diversely
written, and where, and what strange text would seem corruptions to the
unstayed: and how often eth and vau, (little particles) do come together, in
sort easy to deceive a Coppyer, without a Table of Direction. Such points are
a Brazen wall to keep the Scriptures certainty. vid. Mr. Bro. in Epist. to the
Nobil. p. 7.

From this provident care of God over the Hebrew text, I conclude, that neither
book nor letter of the Hebrew text, which was written by Gods Prophets, for the
use of all ages is lost: only those books are lost which some Prophets wrote
in the nature of humane Chronicles, for the present use of that Age and Nation:
and in that respect they took no more care to preserve them, then they did of
their humane Chronicles, because they did nothing at all concern other Nations
in after Ages. But every book and letter which the Prophets wrote as Divine
Scripture, for the use of all Nations and Ages, Jesus Christ has preserved by
the diligence of the Massorites. And their Tables of Direction are extant and
kept safe with great care until this day: one of those Tables is kept Naharden
upon Euphrates, and another is kept at Jerusalem.

Again, the Hebrew Doctors from and after Ezra took special The Hebrew Doctors
took care for the preservation of the truth of doctrine, as well as for the
preservation of the Hebrew Text.
care to preserve the truth of Doctrine unto Posterity: and for this end they
made the ten Commandments to be the foundation of every point of Doctrine. And
our Savior Christ says, that the whole Law and the Prophets does hang upon
the two Tables. Matthew. 22. 40. Therefore the ten Commandments must needs
contain in them all matters concerning faith and manners: and therefore the
ancient Hebrew Doctors might well make the ten Commandments the foundation of
every point of Doctrine. And for the honor of the two Tables, they did number
up all the letters of the two Tables, and found them to be six hundred and
thirteen, then they drew up all the Laws of Moses unto six hundred and
thirteen. They might have made them mo, or fewer; but by Gods spirit in honor
of the two Tables, they bring them just to the number of six hundred and
thirteen: they make two hundred forty and eight bidding Commandments, telling
us what we should believe or do; and 365. forbidding evil. vid. M. Brought. in
Apoc. 175.

But after the Hebrew Doctors, under this silver age of the Persian Monarchy
were decayed, then the Jews began to be more loose in Religion under the iron
Dominion of the Seleucidae and Lagidae. The cruel wars of those days bred such
profanes among the generality of the Jews, especially under the reign of
Antiochus Epiphanes, that many Jews became Atheistical Sadduces: yet then in
these evil days, God by his providence raised up some Schools of Learning,
wherein were some godly Doctors that took care to preserve the truth of
Doctrine, in opposition to those Atheistical Sadduces: And this they did by
enacting diverse terms of Religion. They called all the Books of the Old
Testament, The Law, Because the Sadduces did now reject all the Books of the
Old Testament, except the five Books of Moses Law. They also enacted diverse
terms wherein they professed the immortality of the soul, in opposition to the
said Sadduces; as I have formerly noted it before at large.

After those days, they had still some care of godly learning: for in the
days of our Savior, they did maintain Schools of Learning, and our Lord was
present among the Doctors, hearing them, and posing them with Questions. Luke
2. 46. And in Jerusalem there were certain of the Synagogue, called Lubartines,
which rose in opposition to Stephens Doctrine. Acts 6. 9. These Lubartines must
not be taken for Libertines, as some unadvisedly do call them, because of their
opposition to Stephen, but that is a great mistake: I say they were called
Lubartines, because they belonged to some Lubar or College: Lubar says M.
Weemt signifies a high place^, and on such high pieces of ground they used to
build their Schools.

Again, in another of these Schools Paul was brought up at the seet of
Gamaliel: and there he was taught according to the perfect manner of the Law of
the Fathers. Acts 22.

Again, many such Schools were erected am^ng the dispersed Jews, while they
lived in Heathen Countries; one of these Schools was governed by one Tyrannus,
and there the Disciples disputed daily. Acts 19.

And thus Jesus Christ by the means of these Schools, has in all ages nursed
up many godly and able scholars, fit to teach the Law in synagogues, and fit to
bear Office as Elders, in the Sanhedrin Courts.

And these Schools of Learning were so highly set by among the Jews in ancient
time (neoterici nostrates effuciunt) that they accounted it a great shame for
any man of wealth or leisure, if they did not frequent those Schools at the
least three times a week, except hand-labourers. Maymony in Thal. Thora, says;
That all the Jews but hand-labourers did bring up their children from seven
years old to fourteen, in learning the plain tongue: yea, they studied the
Tongue all their days weekly, for some few hours; not minding gains thereby,
but delight to know God: And our Savior at twelvs years of Age delighted to
sit in the midst of the Doctors, hearing them, posing them, and asking them
Questions: and all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers. Luke 2. 46, 47. This place where Christ sat amongst the Doctors, was
such a College or house of Doctrine, as that was where Huldah the Prophetess
lived. 1 Kings 22. 14.

Yea, the Jews set a higher esteem upon their Schools of Learning, then they
did upon their Synagogues. vid. Ainsw. in Levit. 26. 31. and such privileges
did belong to Schools of learning, as rewards of learning: that if a Scholar at
unawares committed manslaughter, and thereupon was exiled to a City of
Refuge, his master must go with him, as it is written, [and live] For the life
of them that love and seek after Wisdom, is counted as death without the
Doctrine of the Law. In like sort, if the master were exiled, his School goes
with him. vid. Ains. in Deuteronomy. 19. 4. This great privilege Jesus Christ gave to
Schools and Scholars, as a reward of learning.


Scholar, What rules of direction can you give for the well ordering of Schools
of learning in these days, that so the Scholars thereof may speedily attain to
the knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, and to the right understanding
of the holy Scriptures?


Teacher, No question but a better way of discipline may be found out, then yet
is practiced; as M. Broughton has often warned, and has propounded sundry
directions that way: but it would be a two-handed labor for me to bring all
particulars into a compendious method. The Lord in mercy stir up others to take
this work in hand, for the advancement of Learning and Godliness. Amen.


FINIS.

