The PARLIAMENT under the Power of the SWORD.
WEdnesday the 6. of December. 1648. before eight in the morning, the Army sent a
Party of Horse and Foot to beset all Passages and Avenues to the two Houses of
Parliament to fright away the Members; yet many Members of us repairing to the
House, were seized upon, and carried Prisoners by the Soldiers into the Queens
Court; nothing being objected against us; nor no Authority vouched for it:
Colonel Birche and Master Edward Stephens were pulled out of the House of
Commons, as they looked out at the door: at last the number shut up Prisoners
in the Queens Court amounted to 41. And Hugh Peter's came to us and avowed this
as the Act of the General, and Lieutenant General: So did Col: Hewson, about
4 of the Clock that day we were told by an Officer, that we must be carried to
Wallingford-House, and so put into Coaches: But before this happened, I should
have told you, That the Sergeant of the House of Commons was sent with his Mace
from the House to command our attendance there; and came into the Queens Court
to us, but the Guard would not let us out: He was sent again with his Mace for
us, but then the Guards upon the House would not let the Sergeant come to us;
at last the Coaches aforesaid (to put the greater scorn upon the Parliament)
carried us all to Master Dukes Alehouse in Hell, and there thrust us in to
spend the Night without any accommodation of Beds, etc. only C. Hewson came to
us, and offered it as a courtesy, that some of the Eldest should be suffered to
lie at home that Night, engaging to render themselves the next morning by 9 of
the Clock at C. Hewsons lodgings in Whitehall; which was refused, it not being
thought fit we should so far own an usurped Authority. All this is done in
pursuance of the Armies last Remonstrance and Declaration, and in subversion of
the KING, and His Posterity, Parliament, City, and Kingdom; the utter
extirpation of all Law, Government, and Religion: and the converting of our
wel-regulated Monarchy into a military Anarchy, with a popular Parliament of
the meanest of the Commons, only at the beck of the Army: I appeal to Heaven
and Earth whether the attempt of Germin, Goring, etc. to bring up the Northern
Army to London to overawe the Parliament; which attempt only was then voted
Treason: whether the Tumult of Apprentises at the Parliament door, so severely
prosecuted against the City, were comparable to this Rebellion: The Members so
surprised are almost all such as have lost for their constant service to the
Parliament, ^^d have gotten nothing.: Their Names follow:

Sir Robert Harlow. Col: Harlow. Sir Will: Waller. Sir Walter Earl. Sir Samuel
Luke. Sir Rich: Anslow. Sir John Merrick. Sir Martin Lyster. Lo: Wenman. Mr.
Knightly. Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Sir Benjamin Ruddiard. Mr. Francis Gerrard. Mr.
Swynfin. Mr. Crew. Mr. Edw: Stephens. Mr. Buller. Sir Harbottle Grimston. Mr.
Bunkley. Major General Massey. Sir Robert Pie. Mr. Walker. Mr. Hen: Pelham.
Col: Leigh. Sir Anthony Irby. Sir Tho: Soame. Col: Birch. Mr. Lane. Mr.
Wheeler. Mr. Drake. Mr. Green. Mr. Bowton. Mr. Prynne. Mr. Priestly. Sir Simon
D'ewes. Sir william Lewis. Sir John Clotworthy. Col: William Strode. Commissary
Copley. Mr. Vaughan. Col: Nath: Finnes, who was soon set at liberty: and when
he asked, By what power he was committed? it was answered, By the power of the
sword.
THE END.

