THE PARLIAMENTS NEW AND PERFECT CATECHISM, FIT AND Necessary to be known and
practiced by every old Christian and loyal Subject.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

A NEW AND Perfect Catechism, fit and necessary to be known, and practiced
by every old Christian and Loyal Subject.
QUest. What is your Name?

Ans. Reformation -- A blessed one.

Quest. Who gave you that name?

Ans. The Parliament. A blessed one.

Quest. What did the Parliament then for you?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my name. First to maintain the
true Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Religion. Secondly to defend his
Majesty's Royal Person in his just Prerogatives. Thirdly to preserve the
Privileges of Parliament, and the liberty of the Subject.

Quest. Do not thou think that thou art bound to believe and the Parliament
to do as they have promised for thee?

Ans. Yes verily, charity obliges me to believe no Parliament can be so
damned, as to take an oath, with intention and resolution to break it, and
make the Covenant a very stalking horse to all their designs, blinding the
people with specious pretenses only.

Quest. Has the Parliament truly and faithfully kept their Covenant?

Ans. No verily, but violated every particlar branch thereof.

Quest. What texts have you to prove that?

Answ. Their several apocryphal orders, and ordinances extant, which at
pleasure they vote, and unvote, do, and undo as they see occasion to the
necessitating and undoing of us all.

Quest. Is not the true Religion established and maintained according to the
best Reformed Churches of Christendom?

Answ. No indeed, but the best Reformed Church of Christendom is deformed, by
irreverently forcing her to conform to the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Kirk of Scotland.

Quest. Do thou not believe thou art bound by the Covenant, steadfastly to
labor and earnestly endeavor the settling of Presbytery in this Kingdom?

Answ. Truly no, but rather to destroy all possible hopes of it, and the very
Covenant it self: which is impossible to keep, for if the Scottish
Presbiterie be allowed to be the best, and we confirm, and establish that
form of Government we confound the second Article, which is to preserve the
King in his just Prerogatives. Monarchy (his due) and Presbiterie being
incompatible, and altogether inconsistent, nor can the liberty of the Subject
be at all maintained, where an usurping power challenges the privilege to
exercise Tyranny over the very consciences of freeborne Subjects.

Quest. Is not the King defended in his Royal Person and his just Preroga^tves?

Answ. Yes indeed as well as Colonel Whalyes Regiment can defend him, and of
his just Prerogatives as yet, he enjoyes just nothing.

Quest. How is the condition of the King then good or bad?

Answ. The Kings own conditions are extremely good, but he stands in a very
bad condition, being in the nature, and extremity of a Prisoner.

Quest. Is the King a Prisoner?

Answ. Certainly not so free as he ought to be, amongst those many high, and
just Prerogatives of a King, he enjoyes not the liberty of a Subject to go
where he pleases.

Quest. How is the Privilege of Parliament and Liberty of the Subject
maintained?

Answ. The Privilege of Parliament, has confounded the Liberty of the
Subject, and the Liberty of the Subject, destroyed the Privilege of
Parliament.

Quest. Is it not then a free Parliament?

Answ. The Parliament is free enough to give to themselves what they take from
us, but no free Parliament.

Quest. Is it not very just and reasonable, that this present Parliament should
be dissolved?

Answ. No expectation of Peace and happiness without the dissolution of this
most dissolute Parliament, and it should be the desire and resolution of the
whole Kingdom, to free it self from the Tyranny and oppression it suffers,
and the fear, otherwise of an inevitable second war, etc. The Houses
consisting of two several irreconcilable Factions; the weaker and oppressed
will be always plorting and practicing to maintain and support their
reputation in the Country, which shall ever be preserved in their ancient
ignorance, to their own undoing and confusion.

Quest. What hopes have you, that the Army, according to promise, and just
expectation will dissolve this Parliament?

Answ. Truly little, for now, that Party prevailing in the House) the Army has
an Authority and Vote to countenance all their Actions, which otherwise might
have been Questioned; So they will preserve mutually each other, to the
destruction of us all.

Quest. What necessity is there for the Synod to sit longer?

Answ. None, for if Liberty of Conscience be allowed; there will be no use of
Form or Prescription for Church Discipline.

Quest. Why are they not dismissed, without further trouble to themselves and
us.

Answ. There is a mystery, in that they serve for better use to the
Parliament. The Synod has in Sequestration Church livings, to the value of six
hundred thousand pounds yearly coming in. The Parliament as much otherwise;
they are well contented to divide the Spoil. The Parliament borrowes
conscience from the Synod, the Synod derives law from the Parliament.

Q. Will the long deluded People endure this long, which conduces not to the
Good, but ruin of the King and Kingdom.

A. Certainly no, nor can it be long safe for those, that thus imprison, and
enthrall the King, captive and enslave the Kingdom, that will not be longer
subject to the usurpation and controlement of fellow subjects.

Q. You speak as if there were a probability of resistance, if they should
malign the King, or infest the Subject. What power could any obtain to
oppose, and impede their designs, they having posest themselves of that ever
famous, and memorable City of London, the Navy at Sea, and maintaining a
powerful Army at Land.

A. The Eyes of the whole Kingdom are intent and fixed on the King, and look
upon him, as the only unjustly suffering and injured Party, crucified between
two Factions. The Army by not executing their pretenses, and not perfecting
their promises, has contracted a general hate; and by delaying the Kingdoms
peace, and welfare (which depends altogether on the Kings happiness and
safety) are grown burdensome and intolerable, so that their continued
sufferings will force them to shake off their tameness, and rouse up thoughts
thirsty of revenge.

Q. If the Army have good intentions, as they have plausible pretenses, what
means this cruel delay? why is not the King settled, Prisoners of war
released, the Parliament dissolved, and the Army disbanded?

A. Their tedious delayings, draw their intentions into a suspect of being ill,
that they merely pursue designs of their own interests, without reflecting
on the great concernment of King and Kingdom, that by their slow motion they
gain the advantage of reducing the whole Kingdom, under the power and command
of the Army, which they will never be able to compass; for if they reflect on
their present state, there is a division in their Army (as well as in the
Houses of Parliament) which cannot be cemented but in the King, the proper
Center where we must meet and agree in.

Quest. Which is the best and readiest way to procure and establish our
constant, durable Peace and happiness?

Answ. The most certain, and infallible way is to refer all to his Sacred
Majesty, offer him innocent and spotless hearts, white and unblotted Paper;
He writes a fair hand, let him imprint his own conditions, and that is the
way to perpetuate our bliss, ye do violence on his modesty far, but doing
our Duty, would so overcome him, that he would not ask so much as we ought,
and should most cheerfully submit to him.

FINIS.

