A WORTHY SPEECH made by Master Pym, TO THE LORDS ON FRIDAY THE thirty one of
December concerning an Information against the Lord DIGBY.

Wherein is discovered the dangerous effects of the said Information, if not
suddenly prevented, against the Royal power Prerogative of the King, and
privileges of Parliament.

In the free votes and proceedings thereof.

London, Printed for Thomas Banckes. and F. Coals. 1641.

MASTER Pym his Speech to the Lords, at a conference on Friday the the 31 of
December concerning an Information against the Lord DIGBY.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons now assembled in
Parliament, have commanded me to present to your Lorships this Information
which they have received against the Right Honorable George Lord Digby, of
dangerous consequence, that if not prevented, evil and troublesome events may
ensue, to the great hazarding of the peace of this Kingdom, and a great
hindrance of the happy proceedings of this Parliament.

My Lords,

I humbly crave your patience to declare to your Lordships what I am commanded
concerning the said Information, which is that he the said Lord Digby should
give forth report upon reading of the Petition and Protestation of the 12
Bishops, That this Present Parliament was a forced one, That the Act, vote, and
La^es that shall be Enacted herein without the votes and assent of the Bishops
are void and of none effect, and not binding to the Subject.

My Lords,

This report is of great danger to the State if proved against the said Lord,
in these three respects as I under your Lordships favor conceives.

First, It is a great breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament.

Secondly, It intrencheth much on the prerogative of the King, and abridges his
Royal Power.

Thirdly, it is the first step to bring into this State an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical form of Government.

First my Lords it is a breach of the privileges of Parliament for these
reasons.

First, it is against the free votes of Parliamentary proceedings, which ought
to be reserved and unquestionable, during the free sitting thereof.

Secondly, It is aginst an Act of Parliament in that case provided for not
adjourneing or abrupt breaking off of the same. These Acts my Lords was freely
voted by both houses freely and willingly passed by his Majesty without any
force or compulsary means used in any, or private working or inducing his
Majesty by any of the Members of either of the Houses to do the same: An Act
voted as well by the said Lord as the rest of this Honorable House; this report
now of his must needs be against his knowledge and former free consent in
passing that Act contrary to this Information.

3. One Privilege of Parliament, and that is one of the greatest is to accuse
and freely proceed to the punishment of delinquents, that have caused the
troubles in this State, both in Church, and Commonwealth; this report is
against this Privilege, It opposes altogether our Proceeding against the
Bishops, accused as the greatest delinquents both in Church and State; for my
Lords if a Parliament is forced in the absence of the Bishops, how may then the
Parliament proceed lawfully against them; If the Bishops sit and have their
votes (although delinquents) in Parliament how can we proceed (I beseech you)
against their votes, therefore under favor I conclude this repoer of the said
Lord is against this Privilege of Parliament.

4. To redress the greivances of the Commonwealth, is a Privilege of
Parliament, this report is against this Privilege, how I pray you my Lords can
our greivances be redressed, when the oppressions, Injustice and vexations,
troubling of his Majesty's loyal Subjects, may not by the Bishops, may not be
called in qutstion, nor the mis-doers ^herein prosecuted and punished for the
same.

5. This report is against diverse acts of Parliament in this Kingdom, that
have been made without the voice or Bishops in Parliament, as is on record in
the Iournalls of those, and thus my Lords, I have showed you that how this
report is against the privileges of Parliament.

2. My Lords, this information intrencheth on the royal power and Prerogative
of the King, And that in two respects.

1. His royal Prerogative in making, and enacting laws by Parliament, it
resting only in his Power to pass or, refuse the votes of Parliament.

My Lords.

The King of this kingdom have the greatest perogative (to require the
Council an assistance the whole state upon any occasion whatsoever, when
pleases him) of any Prince in the world unless France, and under favor my
Lords, I conceive a Parliament cannot be termed forced, when it is freely
called, and willingly continued by the King, I conceive my Lords a forced
Parliament (is) when against the free consent of a King and his Lords without
lawful called by wtit men assembleth themselves, and by force of arms sit in
Council and inact laws, not tending to the welfarre of the Kingdom. The
Parliament holden at Oxford in the reign of Edward 2. after the unhappy
dissolution of the Parliament at Westminster, in the 10. year of that Kings
reign, was a forced Parliament, compelling by undue means, the King and that
Parliament to inact laws tending to the ruin of the whole state of this
Kingdom.

2 My Lords, this Information intrencheth on the Royal power of the King in
making of Laws, for as before I have touched Parliaments have biue with out
Bishopps Laws made and enacted without their vots, then by this supersiou my
Lords should they be of no validity the King restrained in his power, and let
Bishops be never so vile and dissaffected to the tranquillity and securety of
the state yet must they have votes in rectifiing and setting in order such
things as are am^sse in the same, (as well by their own procureing as others)
which is not then likely to take any good effect, nay my Lords it is too
Apparent they have been the greatest opposers of our proceedings in ths
Parliament the Chiefest cause noe more is dove by the same.

3 Lastly my Lords this Information is the first stepp to bring in an Arbitrary
and tiranicall form of Government, and that under favor for these reasons.

1 Free Parliaments are the securest and safest Government that ever could be
found for this nation, and that in respect of the power and wisdom theirof, it
is vpholden defended atd preserved by the whole body of the kingdom, therefore
powerful, the members thereof are men elected, one of tenn thousand by the
whole state, therefore the wise, then to oppose the proceeding there of to deny
the Government thereof is, to the intent to change the same and if charged to
another form (None being so secure, so powerful and so wise) must needs be
Arbitrary and so, Tiranicall.

2. My Lords, I no laws can be binding to the subject, but such as are voted
and assented to by the Bishops, then none can be expected, but such as are
destructive to the state, their affections being altogether aberted from free
Parliamentary proceedings and their designs, only agitated, for the oppossing
the government thereof, and we cannot but daily fear thereby the utter
confusion thereof, of the same.

Now my Lords having to my weak Abillity fulfilled the command of the House,
in speaking somewhat of this Information I am to desire your Lordships from
them, that the said George Lord Digby may answer the said Information, or
otherwise be proceeded against, as the Parliament shall think fit.

FINIS.

