THE FRVITS OF A FAST, Appointed by the Churches gathered against Christ and
his Kingdom, who go about to mock God with their outside-Worship, and appointed
Fasts, and Days of Voluntary Humiliation.

Or, A Declaration of the persecution of a Messenger of the Lord, by a people
who go under the name of Independants, in Essex, who have set themselves in the
enmity of their Spirits to oppose the Truth of God, calling it a lie, and
persecuting his Messengers as Deceivers, and Wanderers, wherein their
persecuting Spirits is made manifest, and them to be in Cains Generation, and
strangers to the Spirit of Christ, which never persecuted, and so are none of
his, Romans 8.9.

And also, of the unjust dealings of Judge Hills, who sat upon life and death
at the last Assizes, at Chansford, which began upon the eleventh day of the
sixth month.

And also, Several queries, that was sent to the Priests and Magistrates,
which may be serviceable for them, or any other to Answer, whom they do concern.

By a VVitness, and sufferer in outward Bonds, for the unchangeable Truth of
God, by Cains Generation, who am known to them (by the name) in Colchester
Castle, JAMES PARNELL.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Black-spread-Eagle near the West End of Paul's, 1655.

THE FRUITS OF A FAST, appointed by the Churches gathered against Christ and
his Kingdom, etc.
FIRST, I shall give unto the Reader, a declaration of the work of God in my
Soul, and the conversion of my heart from darkness unto his marvelous Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, and out of the path of death into the
path of Life, where I now walk in the Light of my God, with the Ransomed of the
Lord, who are traveling toward the Holy City; and also the cause of my coming
forth into the World to declare the truth, for which I now suffer Bonds, by the
persecuting Generation, wherein I once lived a Child of wrath (as all are by
nature) and when I was loved of the world, while I followed the vain courses
and ways of the world, where by nature I was led in imitation of others, being
in that nature which is prone unto the same: the time I was sent unto the
Schools of humane learning, for to learn the humane wisdom, for which end the
Schools are profitable; but for the attaining of heavenly wisdom and knowledge,
they are as far unprofitable, and many books that are there read, are much for
the corrupting of youth, and the nourishing of the wild profane nature, which
then ruled in me, and I was as wild as others, during the time I followed the
School; and after I was taken from the School, I still continued in the same
nature, growing and increasing in sin and iniquity, following the vain courses
of the wicked world, and also was trained up in the customary way of the
worship of the world, which is held in the Idols Temple, every first day of the
week, but no conversion there was wrought, but all still continued in the old
nature, both Priest and people, young and old, and as was the people, so was
the Priest, all walking in darkness and blindness, by form, custom* and
tradition, but ignorant of the pure light, which is the guide and reacher of
the faithful, which oftentimes did reprove in secret, when I was a lone, but
then I knew not what it was, but oftentimes it did strike me into a
consideration of my ways and doings, and set life and death before me, so that
I have sometimes promised within my self, never to do the like again, but the
promise being* in the will made, it did not stand, but when the temptations
came, the careless mind got out again, and led me still to delight my heart in
the vanity which my eye did see, and my ear did hear, which all passed away
with the using thereof, and left me to the judgment which was due unto me, for
my iniquity, which did follow me time after time, calling me to repentance, and
the more I did incline my mind and draw nigh to it, it also did draw nigh to
me, and so the goodness of God led me to repentance, and the Grace of God
wrought in my heart a Reformation, and so I was found of him when I sought not;
and thus he both wrought the will and the deed of his own good pleasure, and
plucked me as a brand out of the fire, to make me a vessel of honor to his
name; all living eretnal praises, be to his name for ever; my soul shall praise
and magnify his name for ever; For, I may well say with Paul, Of sinners* I was
chief; for according to my years, J was as perfect in sin and iniquity, as any
in the Town where I lived; yea, and exceeded many in the same, so that there
was as little hopes of my conversion, as any in the Town; and yet though it is
a place of many people, J was the first in all that town which the Lord was
pleased to make known his power in, and turn my heart toward him, and truly to
seek him, so that J became a wonder to the World, and an astonishment to the
heathen round about, but they was such enemies to goodness, and so given up to
idolatry, that as much as before they had loved me in my vain conversation, so
much the more thdy hated me in my conversion, yea, and my Families came to
ensnare me, and lay wait for me for to entrap me, but when they could not
prevail, Psalm. 41.9.
they stood afar of me, and reproached me with lies, and proved my greatest
enemies, yea, and my Relations became my adversaries, and labored to destroy
what God had began in me, because that thereby J came under the reproach and
shame of the world, because J could not conform to the world in their invented
facious customs and traditions, and their words, ways, fellowship, and
worship, but was made subject to the law of God, and could not respect persons,
neither in word nor deed; then the beast which rules in proud flesh was
disturbed, who before ruled in peace while he was worshipped; but when I came
to see proud Lucifer, Rev. 13.38.
the lust in man, to be the beast, which all the world worships and wanders
after, but these whose names are written in the book of life; therefore J could
no longer follow the world in blindness, for by the power of God my eye was
opened, so that J did behold their idolatry, and therefore J could no longer be
conformable to them, so that their rage and persecution arose against me, and J
became a mock in the streets; yea, and was I accounted as one not worthy to
live amongst them; yea, and they said, he that killed me would do God service;
but he that had called me out from amongst them unto himself, that I might no
longer follow the vain courses of the world, nor set my delight no things
below, but that I might serve him in newness of life, that in me his
workmanship might appear, to the confounding of the heathen, who know him not;
he by his power kept me, and gave me strength to bear his Cross, and despise
the shame; so that neither foul words nor fair words, could cause me to deny
what God by his grace had wrought in my heart, but by his power he carried me
above the raging waves of the tempestuous sea, so that I knew that he that was
in me, was greater than he that is in the world; yea, and out of my kindred and
acquaintance I came, and became a stranger to them that loved not the truth;
yea, and presently I came to see the Priests of the world, by their fruits, and
the fruits of their Ministry, which was cursed from God, and therefore profited
not the people at all; but when the Lord by his power had changed and converted
my heart unto himself, the Priests became mine enemies, and said I was deluded,
whenas before, when I lived in the vain conversation of the world, they took no
notice of me, either to reprove me or instruct me, but as they went on in a
customary way, for again and lucre, speaking against sin in the general but
not reproving it in particular, but was as deep in it in their lives as others,
and so what they preached down with their tongues they upheld in their lives,
and countenanced in their conversations, and so from them I turned, whom I saw
had gotten a form, but denied the life and power, and I sought for a people
with whom I might have union; and there was a people with whom I found union, a
few miles from the Town where I lived, whom the Lord was a gathering out of the
dark world, to sit down together and wait upon his name, but we was the objects
and reproach of the country, and was accounted as the off-scourings of the
world but in all this we saw the Scriptures fulfilled, and that we might thus
suffer if we would live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
and here was our confidence and strength, which carried us above our
sufferings, as knowing it greater riches to suffer affliction with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and about this time I
was about 15 years of age, and afterward I was called forth to visit some
friends in the North part of England, with whom I had union in spirit before I
saw their faces, and afterward I returned back to my outward dwelling place,
and remained in my outward calling, and the Lord all this time still more and
more perfecting and increasing his work in my heart, which by his power he had
begun in me, and by his pure power bringing forth his truth in me, and making
known his will unto me, until by his power he opened my mouth to declare his
truth in the world, and still I continued in my outward calling, and also in the
work of the Lord, as not being called far from my dwelling place, and when I
was betwixt 17. and 18. years of age, I was moved in my spirit to go to a place
about fifteen miles from my outward dwelling place (southward) amongst a
people, to whom the Lord was making known his truth, not knowing when I went
out of going farther than that place; but when I was there, I was moved of the
Lord to come on to Cambridge, and in obedience unto the Lord, I came to see
what he had to do for me, not knowing one soot of the way, but as I was
directed, neither knowing when I came there where to be received, but had heard
before of two of my friends that was there whipped, caused by the Mayor that
then was, only for declaring the truth as they past through the town, against
the deceit thereof, neither did I know but it might be my portion also when I
came there; but without conferring with flesh and blood, I passed on my
journey, and he that called me forth went along with me, and did direct me, and
when I came there, I found these that was worthy that received me; and also I
found a friend, whom the corrupt Rulers had put in prison for the same
testimony which I also was sent to declare; and before I had continued there
the space of fourteen nights, William Pickering the Mayor of Cambridge,
committed me to Prison for publishing two Papers, the one against the
corruption of the Magistrates, and the other against the corruption of the
Priests, at the time of their commencement, as they call it, and there they
kept me in Prison the space of two Sessions, and tossed me from Prison to
Dungeon, and had nothing to lay against me, whereby to prove the breach of any
Law, but when I came to the last Sessions, they called a Jury to prove the
Papers to be scandalous and seditious Papers, and they was nigh two hours about
them but could not prove it, but came and said that they found nothing, but
that the Papers was mine, which I had before owned in the open Court, and there
was my name to them to testify the same; and so they was crossed in their
intentions, and their plots came to naught: then they committed me back to
Prison again, and after the space of three days they sent me away with a
Pass, under the name of a Rogue, yet durst not give me the Law which belongs
to Rogues, but had me away with Clubs and Staves, and I could not see the Pass
until I was three miles out of the town where I lodged that night, and the next
day there came a Justice of peace from Cambridge, who knowing me to be innocent
of what was laid to my charge, so he witnessed the Pass to be false, and took
it back to Cambridge, and so I was set free: And not long after I went to
Cambridge, again, and went abroad, preaching and declaring the truth freely in
the Countries about, and many I found that received the truth gladly, but more
enemies; yet nevertheless, Truth spread and conquered over its enemies; and
there I continued laboring in the work of the Lord about the space of half a
year in the Countries about Cambridge, and from thence I was moved of the Lord
to come into Essex, where I heard of the people that was seeking the Lord, and
when I came there, I found those that were worthy, who received the truth
gladly, and there I continued, freely declaring and preaching the truth, from
place to place, sometimes in the Synagogues and was haled out by the Priests
party, that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon that Generation; yet
nevertheless, I continued in constant preaching of the word to the consciences
of the people, freely and publicly, in several plains of the Country,
notwithstanding much opposition both of Priests, people, and professors, and
much did the truth prevail in the hearts of people, to the glory of God the
father of truth, which did make glad the hearts of many, who have long expected
this day to appear; but the false Prophet begun to utter forth his lies and
Blasphemies against the truth, and the Beast (by whose power the false Prophet
stands) began to rage and persecute; and the Ministers of Antichrist stood up
for their Kingdom, crying against truth, striving to present it odious in the
ears of the people, but when J came to their faces, they fled like hirelings,
and left their I lock behind, so that the truth much prevailed, notwithstanding
their railing and raging, so that they begun to appoint meetings, purposely to
set themselves against the truth, to present it to the people, as error and
heresy, so that if by any means they could by their evil incensing and
leavening of the minds of the people, turn away their minds from harkening to
the truth; and on the other side they had the earthly powers to uphold them and
strengthen them against whomsoever should come to gainsay them, and to lay
their Law upon them; so I hearing of a public Meeting that was appointed by
the Priests and Professors of these times, to be at a Town, called Great
Coggashall upon the 12. day of the 5th. month, called Luly, as was declared in
public by the Priest of the said Town, to Fast and pray against the errors (as
they said) of the people called Quakers, and also their intent was to ensnare
me, and to bring my body into Bonds if that I came amongst them for to defend
the truth, which afterward appeared, and although I did see their intent
toward me, I was made willing not only to be bound, but also to suffer for the
pure eternal Truth which I am made a witness of, so I being pressed in my
spirit for to go amongst them, and in obedience to the same I went, and there
was one Priest Willis, an independent Teacher, who was set up in the seat of
the Pharisee, the chiefest place of the Assembly, Mat. 23.6
these speaking a divination of his own Brain, and not from the Mouth of the
Lord, and therefore knew not how to divide the Word aright, but cried against
false Prophets, and Deceivers, and he himself one of them; and when the Priest
had done, I spoke unto the people, in vindication of the truth of God, which
the Priest had before reproached, reviled, and blasphemed, but the Priests and
the Rulers interrupted me, and run into many words, which bred much disorder
and confusion; and then another of the Priests got up into the Pulpet, and they
bid me put off my hat, and stand with my hat off the time the Priests was
praying, which worship I denied, and therefore could not be conformable to it,
and so J said, before J should be subject to their wills, J would pass out of
the meeting place, and so J did, and many people came out after me, for I
intended to declare the truth in the Town, being I could not have liberty in
the public place; and as I was passing on the way quietly toward my friends
house, he that is called Justice VVakering came rushing behind me amongst the
people, and suddenly smote me with his hand upon my back, and said, he arrested
me in the name of the Lord Protector, and so I turned me about, and looked upon
him, (but knew not that he was a Magistrate) so I asked him, where was his
writ? and he said, he had one, but none he showed me; then they hurried me
into a house and there some friends engaged that I should be forthcoming when
their worship was done; and so I went unto my friends house, and there spoke
the word of the Lord unto the people that there came together, and was also
ready when their worship was done, according to my friends engagement; and when
I came before them, there was four men called Justices, and six or seven
Priests; yea, there was nigh nine or ten Priests that day, that was gathered
together against the truth; and when I was come before them, he that is called
Justice VVakering, came and plucked my hat off my head, and threw it away; then
they fell to question me of many things, to which I made answer, and many
frivolous questions they asked me, whereby to ensnare me, which was neither
just nor honest for men of their profession to do; so when they had satisfied
their wills in examining of me, they caused a Mittimus to be made, and
committed me to the Common Goal at Colchester, and there was several of the
chief Priests in Essex that was actors in this Persecution; Priest Willis, who
is a Teacher of an Independent company at Brantry, and Priest Sammes, a Teacher
of an Independent company at Great Coggashal, and Priest Sparrow, a Teacher of
an Independent company at Halstead, and Priest Stellum a Teacher of an
Independent company at T^^ling, yet are all Parish Priests, and are maintained
by those that are not of their Church, and those was the head actors in this
persecution; yea, and Priest Stellum spoke to the Rulers in the public place,
thereby to stir up their spirits to persecute; and this was plotted amongst the
Priests and their gathered Churches, to appoint meetings, Mat. 7.15 16.
thereby to ensnare the innocent, and raise persecution against the truth; yea,
and two of the men called Jusrices, who was my chief persecutors, are members
of the Independent Church; and thus the Churches garher themselves against
Christ and his Kingdom; and now the ravening wolves in sheeps clothing does
appear, yea their fruits makes them* manifest, and those are they which calls
themselves Jews and are not, but the Synagogue of Satan, and those are the
builders which have and do reject the Cornerstone, which is now become the
head of the Corner, and over their heads is set, and woe unto them on whom it
lights. And after I was sent to prison, there I was kept close, and could not
have my friends and acquaintance to come to see me with peace and freedom; and
so when I was there, I writ an Answer to the Mittimus, whereby I was falsely
accused and imprisoned, and sent to the men that committed me, for to clear my
conscience unto them, and lay their injustice and cruelty before them, and
leave them without excuse in the presence of the almighty; and so when the time
came that I was to go to the Assize, they put me on a chain amongst felons and
Murderers, and joined me to one suspected for murder; and thus I was numbered
amongst transgressors, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, and thus six of
us was hooked together upon a Chain, so that we could not go into a bed, for
four of us remained upon the Chain day and night, and thus I was led 18. miles
through the Country for a gazing-stock unto the world; but truth was preached
in all this, and prevailed on the hearts of the people, so that I could rejoice
in all, and triumph over mine enemies: So when we was at the Assize Town, which
is called Chansford, the Juge came in upon the seventh day of the week, and
upon the second day of the next week I was brought into the Court before Judge
Hills, who sat upon life and death, and there I stood for a gazing-stock a
while, and then the Judge commanded them to take me away, and did not say any
thing to me, for then I was singled from the rest, only had Irons upon one of
my hands, then upon the next day morning the Jailer sent his man to take off my
other Irons, and so in the afternoon I was had before the Judge without any
Irons, and the Jailer took off my hat and cast it upon the floor, and then the
Clerk read a long Indictment full of falsehoods, and asked me if I was guilty,
and I told him I denied all guilt, and called for my accusers, and the Judge
said I might see my accusers, and told me I might say guilty or not guilty, and
I told him I was not guilty; so they called twelve men to try me, and the
Foreman was a drunkard, and they bid me object against any of them, and I told
them I owned none out of the doctrine of Christ, and all that swore was out of
the Doctrine of Christ, and they had all sworn before my face, and therefore I
openly denied by them to be tried; yet nevertheless they went on with their
work, and Priest Willis was called and he swore against me, and swore falsely
too; and the two men called Justices swore against me, and swore falsely too;
and one of the Justices m^^ (so called,) and another man swore against me, and
swore falsely too; yet all these false witnesses was heard to the full what they
would say against me, and thus the leader of the people caused them to err,
for if the teacher be a swearer and a false swearer, what may the people be?
for Christ says, swear not at all, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay be
nay, for whatsoever is more is evil: and the Apostle says, Mat. 5.34.35, 36,
37 Iam. 5.12. 2 John 9.
in all things my brethren swear not at all, etc, and he that abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ has not God; and thus like people like Priest, all live
without God in the world. And when their false witnesses had spoken what they
could against me, they brought in the Letter which I had sent to the men called
Justices in Reply to their Mittimus, and it was openly read in the COURT, and I
owned it, for my Name was to it, and the reading of it was much satisfaction to
many that understood it, and they also brought another Paper that I writ
against the Idols Temple, and the deceiver therein; both which shall follow in
order afterward; and then when they were both read, Judge Hills took them
both, and repeated over unto the Jury all that the could gather by wrong
interpretation and construction against me, whereby to incense the Jury against
me, and told them if they did not find me guilty, the sin would lie upon their
heads, and he as it were passed the sentence upon me before the Jury went
forth, yea, and told them what they should do, whenas they had sworn before to
speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, and I had charged them to take heed
what they did, for I told them none could judge betwixt truth and heresy, but
by the spirit of the Lord; but when I would have spoken something to the Jury
before they went forth, the Judge interrupted me, and would not suffer me
(though one of the Jury desired it) neither would he suffer that the Jury
should have the papers that was brought in against me, though I required it,
but sought all that he could against me, true or false, although I had sent him
a true declaration of the grounds of my imprisonment, with the hands of four
Witnesses to it, neither would he suffer that to be read; and that which I
would have spoken unto the Jury, was to clear it unto them, that it was no
scandalous nor reproachful words, to call a corrupt Magistrate, a corrupt
Magistrate; and to call an unjust Judge and Lawyer, an unjust Judge and Lawyer;
or a persecutor, a persecutor; or a deceiver, a deceiver; all which was brought
against me, and called railing and scandalous, for by that account they might
have taxed all the Prophets for railing and scandaling, for they open and often
declared against the corruption of the Priests and Rulers, as you may read in
many places in the Prophets Records, Isajah called the Priests, greedy dumb
dogs; Isa. 56.11. Ezekiel. 34. John 10. Lu. 13, 14, 15. Luke 13.31, 32. Ioh. 3.14.
and the Prophets called them Idoll-shepheards, and the like, and Christ called
them hirelings, and Christ called the Rulers hypocrites, and Herod a Fox: and
read the 23. of Matthew, and see if you may not as well call that railing, and
yet in all this they did not rail nor scandalize any, but gave to every nature
its name, and due reproof, whether they would hear or forbear; but this is the
condemnation of the world, light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather than light, because their deeds are evil. So when the Jury came into
bring in their evidence; they could charge me with nothing, but the Paper I had
writ in reply to my Mittimus after I was imprisoned, which Paper I had before
owned in the open Court, with my name to it; but the Indictment they could not
charge me with, for it tended to a Riot, which I was far from, or any that
owned me, but the Judge and the Clerk, both, dishonestly strove to draw words
out of the Foreman of the Jury, which the rest did not consent to, neither
could he speak their minds, but others of the Jury was fain to speak
themselves, but nothing was cleared against me, then the Jailer was commanded
to take me away, and when I was gone forth of the Court, they sent for me
again, and the Judge imposed two fines upon me to the value of about forty
pounds, the one he said was for the contempt of the Magistracy, the other for
the contempt of the Ministry; for he said, the Lord PROTECTOR had charged him
to see to punish such persons, as should contemn either Magistracy or Ministry:
But what a Ministry is this, that stands in need of an outward Magistracy, to
uphold it against a people that comes with nothing but spiritual weapons, to
defend themselves against spiritual wickedness, which now sits in high places;
but this Ministry is contrary to the Ministry of Christ, whose weapons are not
carnal but spiritual; and also several of mine accusers stood upon the Bench
hard by the Judge, several times whispering of him in the ear, 2 Cor. 10.4.
and leavening and incensing his mind against me and I reproved one of them in
the open Court for so doing, and yet these things was suffered, and also the
Judge gave charge unto the Jailer to let no giddy-headed people come to me (as
he called them) which I never desired that any such should come, but thereby
they take occasion to keep my friends from me, accounting them giddy-headed
people, but they are not giddy-headed people that own sound Doctrine, but they
are giddy-headed people that cannot endure sound Doctrine, but have itching
ears carried about with reports and hear-says, to speak evil of the things they
know not. But thus without all honesty they acted in the enmity of their
spirits against me, yet in all I was made to rejoice, for I see their deceit
was manifest to the people, and the Truth owned in many hearts, so that my
sufferings was not grievous but joyous; but as the Judges dealings was rigorous
and unjust toward me, it was so much the more on the contrary to Barrabas, for
there was three or four arraigned for suspicion of Murder, and others for
Felony, yet he did deliver them, and there was not one that dyed or was
branded, neither which I did desire, but only this I do declare, to show how
the world loves its own, and how the same spirit now rules in both Priest,
people, and Rulers, that ruled amongst the Jews, who esteemed Barrabas above
Christ, and numbered him amongst Transgressors; and so in all this the Scripture
is fulfilled, Isa. 53.12.
and the day further appears to the Glory of God, the Father of Truth, who will
exalt his truth by his own Power, over the heads of all its enemies: So then
they brought me back to prison again, where I still remain in the peace and
freedom of my spirit, which none can take away, though in the hands of mine
Enemies; yet this I know, That the invisible God is working in secret by his
power, and with a strong arm, carrying on this great work which he has
begun in the Earth; yea, and he will bring down, and overturn all, until it
come into his hand whose own it is, and he will exalt his Kingdom in the
hearts of his people, and his Son shall rule ovre the earth, yea, and all his
Enemies shall be his footstool, and shall bow unto him, and be glad to lay
down their crowns before him, and acknowledge his power, yea, and he will dash
all the forms and false likenesses and images, which is set up by man in his
imaginations, (calling them Churches;) and he will dash them* and the Powers of
the earth in pieces one against another, like a Potters Vessel, though now they
set at naught the Cornerstone, yet then by it shall they be grownd to powder,
for our God is a consuming fire, and who is able to stand in the day of his
wrath? Therefore it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, then woe to all his enemies, or he that lifts up his hand against his
Maker, to contrary what he has decreed.

Here follows a Reply to my Mittimus, which was adjudged a contempt of the
Magistracy.
Whereas I who am of the World called James Parnell, am committed as prisoner
to be kept in the Common-Goal, by a Mittimus sealed and signed by you four men
who are called Justices of the Peace, who write your selves Herbert Pellham,
Thomas Cook, Dyonisius Wakering, William Harlackinden, wherein I find several
Lies, Slanders, and false Accusations cast upon me, therefore for the Truths
sake, and for the satisfaction of the simple, I shall reply to the same, and
clear the truth, and return the venom upon your venomous spirits from whence
it comes, that you may be convinced of your evil, and cease fighting against
Christ and his Kingdom.

First your own, as follows.
Whereas it duly appears unto Us, by our own view, and also by the Examination
of James Parnell, who says, he was borne at Retford, in the County of
Nottingham, Labourer, that he the said James Parnell, with very many other
persons of his gathering together, did this day in a riotous manner enter into
the Parish Church at Great Coggashal aforesaid, and there being a great number
of Chrians met in the said Church, to hold and keep a day of Public
humiliation, and seeking of God, and being in order thereunto then exercised in
the Divine Worship and Service of God Almighty, hoe the said James did then and
there stand up, and told the Minister blasphemed, and spoke falsely, and used
many other reproachful words against the said Minister, and afterward he
departed the said Church, and went into the Common Highway, in the said Town
of Great Coggashall, with a great number of persons his followers, who kept
there unlawfully together, and some of them gave out menacing and threatening
speeches, tending to the breach of the Peace, and against the Law; and also the
said James cannot give us a very good account where he was last settled, or of
his life and conversation, but does further appear unto us to be an idle,
disorderly person: These are therefore in the Name of his Highness the Lord
Protector, to will and require you to convey forthwith the said James Parnell,
unto the Common-Goale for this COUNTY, there to remain until the next
General Goale-Delivery to be holden for this COUNTY, and until thence
delivered by due course of Law, unless he the said James shall come before us,
or any two of us, or two some other Justices of the Peace for this COUNTY, and
shall find very able and sufficient Sureties to be bound with him by
Recognizance for his personal appearance at the said next Goale-Delivery, there
to answer what shall be then objected against him, and not to depart thence
without license of the Court, and in the mean time to be of good behavior,
and thereof fail not at your peril. Dated at Coggashal aforesaid, the twelfth
day of July, 1655. The Keeper of the said Common-Goale is hereby required to
receive and keep the said James, if he shall be brought unto him.

Herbert Pellham, Thomas Cook, Dyonisius Wakering, William Harlackinden.


A Reply to the aforesaid Mittimus.
WHereas I am hereby accused, that I (who am of the World called JAMES PARNELL)
with very many other Persons of my gathering together, did this day in a
Riotous manner, enter the Parish Church of Great Coggashall, aforesaid.

Reply.
ARe you not ashamed, who profess your selves Ministers of law, justice and
peace, to begin with lies and make them your refuge against the innocent,
tending to the disturbance of the peace of the faithful, whom you both ought
and would encourage and countenance, if you were faithful Ministers of peace
and justice, standing in the pure counsel of God, ruling for God and not for
your selves, in all things discharging your consciences unto God without
partiallity, or respect of persons, as faithful Ministers of Law and Justice;
but contrary unto this you have acted in your corrupt wills, turning your
swords against the messengers of the most High, and wilfully resisting the
truth of God, making lies your refuge, as here does plainly appear; for upon
the day aforesaid, I was at a friends house in Great Coggashall, where several
friends and neighbors was come to see me, and there sat peaceably together,
waiting upon the Lord; and I having heard of a public meeting at the
Steeplehouse in the said town, of the Priests and Professors of these times, as
it was openly published by Priest Sammes, and the Priest of the said Town, in
the said Steeplehouse, upon the first day last past, to that end as I heard,
and since did understand, for to fast and pray against (and lay open the
errors, as they said) of the people called Quakers, for the returning of them
who owned them, and the establishing and strengthening those against them that
did not own them (to wit) the people called quakers; so I being pressed in my
spirit for to go amongst them, in the behalf and defense of the truth of God,
brought forth in these people whom the world scornfully calls Quakers, I also
being made a Minister of the same eternal truth, through the power of God, by
which I am made able and carried on to declare it openly and publicly to the
confounding of the heathen, and the reviving of the witness for God in the
Conscience, and also to suffer for the same, which I did believe, the Priests
did much blaspheme and reproach, striving to present it odious to the people,
so in obedience to the Lord I went out from amongst my friends, not telling one
of them whither I was agoing (as many can witness, and one friend followed me
to the door, and perceiving something of my going, he asked me if he might go
with me, and I bid him use his freedom to come after, but I desired to go
alone, and so I went on the way single, and when I came at the Steeplehouse
door, which you persecutors calls a Church, and also accounts your selves
another Church, and thus you set up Churches in your imaginations, yet are
strangers to the true Church, which are no persecutors; but when I came there,
there was several boys and Children that would have flocked in after me, and I
bid them go in before me, rather than to go in disorderly, whereby to occasion
any disturbance, and so I went in very orderly, and stood very orderly, not
speaking one word until their peiest had done, and was coming out of his seat,
as many can witness, though the priest had been openly reviling and reproaching
the people of God in particular, whom he scornfully called quakers, therefore
let all people whose understandings are enlightened, judge in what riotous
manner I entered the place, which you call a church, and bear witness against
you who are not ashamed to make lies your refuge against the innocent; and also
what are the weopons which you make use of, who calls your selves Christians,
but makes lies your refuge, and covers your actions with deceit? But was this
the practice and nature of Christ? for a christian is Christlike, and let all
that profess Christ, walk as he walked; but these are the Fruits of your
peblick Humiliation, who go about to mock God, but your end shall be according
to your works.

2 Accusation.
ANd whereas you say, being in order thereunto, then exercised in the Divine
worship of God Almighty; he (the said James) did then, and there stand up and
told the minister he blasphemed, and spoke falsely, and used many other
reproachful words against the said minister.

Reply.
UNtil him (called Minister) had done the Divination of his own Brain, from
whence you derive your Divine Worship, and was coming out of his Seat, I did
not speak one word unto him, as hundreds can witness, and the first words that
I spoke was not as you accuse me, but this I said, 1 Cor. 14.29, 30, 31.
this is the order of the true Church, that all may speak one by one, and if
any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his peace; then
I spoke on in the behalf of those people called quakers, whom the Priest had
before often and openly reviled, but so soon as I had spoke a few words, the
Priest and several others disorderly ran into many words, and so interrupted
me in speaking, that it bred much confusion; then the Priest asked me what I
would object against him, I told him in that he reviled the people called
quakers, and said they was built upon a sandy foundation, and so called them
Shakers and the like, but I told him I would prove their Foundation not to be
sandy, and him to be the false Prophet, and so I declared of The Stone cut out
of the Mountain without hands, which strikes at the Feet of the Image, whose
head is Gold, and Breast of Silver, and Thighs of Brass and Legs of Iron, and
Feet part Iron and part Clay, and this Stone is become a great Mountain, upon
which the Church is built, as a City set on a hill cannot be hid; and this is
the Foundation of the people that are called quakers, not all that are called
quakers, but the real people whom the world scornfully calls quakers; and this
is become a stumbling stone, and a rock of offense to the nations, and so it
seems it is unto you, because you are the worshippers of the great Image, which
you call the Divine worship of your God, but God almighty you know not, for he
abhors all the sacrifices of Cain, and his Generation, which was ever the
persecuting generation, upon which must come all the righteous bloodshed, from
righteous Abell until now; therefore woe unto you ye Serpents, ye generation of
vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Mat. 23.35. ver. 3 3. Act. 5.7
5^.
And now you fill up the measure of your Fathers wrath; ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as did
your fathers so do ye; but think not that you shall be heard for your much
babbling, who for a pretense make long prayers, but ye shall receive the
greater damnation, and the Lord will make your diviners mad, who have spoke a
Divination from their own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, but cried
peace, peace, where there is no peace, Isa. 44.25 Ier. 14.14.
because ye put into their mouths, and so heals you slightly, daubing you up
with untempred mortar, but you shall all fall amongst them, that fall in the
day that I visit you, says the Lord, ye murderers and crucifiers of the just:
So when I had cleared the foundation of the people called quakers, as
aforesaid, some of you accused me that I owned no CHURCH, and I said it was
false; then some of you asked me what CHURCH I owned, and I answered, the
CHURCH in GOD, and more words I spoke about the Church; then Willis the
DIVINER stood up in his Will, and said I spoke nothing but nonsense, and I bid
him name one word that was nonsense that I had spoken, and he said, to say the
Church in GOD, then I took out my BIBLE, and read unto him the first Chapter of
the Thessalonians, and the first verse, where the Apostle writes to the Church
of the Thessalonians, which is God the Father; then paleness struck the face of
the Diviner, neither would any of his fellows stand up to justify what he had
taken in hand; and this was it wherein I said he blasphemed, to say the Church
in God was nonsense; then there was one Priest Stellum, a Magician of Egypt,
who stood up in the enmity of his spirit, and accused me with severallys, and
slanders which hardened Pharoahs heart, so that you corrupt rulers would not
suffer me to clear my self from what he had accused me withal, but the
Magician got up into the seat of Divination, and was going to his abomination,
and then the RULERS called to me to put off my hat, then I bid you call to the
Priest to put of his cap.

And thus may all see the blindness and ignorance of Priests and People, who
are offended at a hat, and not at a can; and this is as the vain traditions of
the Pharisees, who observed the washing of Pots and cups, and such like things,
making clean the outside, which Scripture Priest Willis, (who said, the
Church in God was nonsense) brought in reference to the people called Quakers,
because they do not put off their hats in respect [or worshipping] of men's
persons; but let any who has understanding, consider which is more
Traditional, for a man to keep his hat on his head, for which end it is made,
as also his shoe for his foot, his glove for his hand, or the putting off
these things, in observation of customs, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9.
and reverencing men's person, for all which there is no Scripture; therefore a
vain Tradition of Man; and thus they teach for Doctrine the Traditions of Man;
therefore in vains do you worship God; who come near him with your lips, and
with your mouths, but your hearts are far from him, John 5.44.
in the unbelief, seeking honor one of another, and observing vain Traditions
and customs, as did your forefathers, whom Christ pronounced woe against, who
were his Persecutors, and in whose steps ye are found; and therefore read your
portion: And thus while you are crying against the Scribes and Pharisees for
observing vain Traditions and customs, and their strictness in their
observations, and yet Persecutors of the Just; you also are found the same, who
are set up in the chiefest place of the Assembly, Mat. 23.
as they were, and called of men Master, as they were, stand praying in the
Synagogues, as they did, teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of men; as they
did, and are strict in your Observations, and calling of Assemblies, and in
your set-times of Worship, and appointed Pasts and days of Humiliation, and
yet are persecutors of the just, as they were, yea in the very height of your
Worship the bitterness of your spirits appeared; but is this such a Fast as
God has chosen? Nay, it is abomination, his Soul loathes it, and he will judge
the cause of the Innocent upon you Hypocrites, and be avenged of you his
Adversaries, and give you your portion with Unbelievers in the Lake that
burns, prepared of old for Cains Generation, in which you are found, by the
Eternal Light of God, which cannot lie, which will rise up in Judgment
against you at the last day, though now you stumble at it, and are offended at
it; yet then shall you behold him whom you have pierced, though with Lamentation
and Sorrow of Mind, when there is none to deliver you from the wrath of the
Almighty, and this is answered and witnessed in your Consciences.

Then the occasion of my passing out of the Steeple-house was this, when I
could not have liberty to speak in the vindication of the Truth, against
gainsayers, ye would have had me have stood with my hat off the time the
Priest was praying, which Worship I denied, and therefore could not be
conformable to it; and so I said, before I would stay to fulfill your wills, I
would pass out of the Steeple-house, and many came out after me, but not of my
calling, and many that I knew not, and yet you are not ashamed to fay my
followers.

And again, That I went into the Common Highway, and there kept with the
people unlawfully together, as you affirm, is a very abominable Lie, especially
for men of your profession to tell, which many can witness against, for I was
passing on the way quietly without disturbance toward my friends house from
whence I came, not purposing to stop until I came there; but that he that
writes himself Dyonisius VVakering came hurrying in amongst the people, and
clapped me on the back, and sail, He arrested me in the Name of the Protector,
and there stopped me, and the first words that I spoke was, Where is thy
Writ? and so the people gathered about, and thronged much, but that any gave
out menacing and threatening speeches J cannot say, neither whom they was spoken
against, but any that owns me it is wel-known, they are not men of such
boystrous spirits, but rather are made willing to to be reviled, then to
revile, for from me no other example they have, as hundreds will acknowledge;
but VVakering if the was true to that of God in his conscience, he would
confess how I labored in his presence to still the people, when he had
violently laid hands on me, and given the occasion; and so let all take notice,
that there was no disorder nor disturbance until the Magistrate came and laid
violent hands on me, tending to the breach of the peace, and against the Law,
and this is the fruits of your hypocritical fast and voluntary humiliation.

3 Accusation.
And also you accuse me, That I could give no good account of my last
settlement, or of my life and conversation.

Reply.
As for my life and conversation, let it preach forth it self, and them that
can accuse me let them; and as for my settlement it is in the Lord, where I
have found a habitation, and so am no vagabond nor wanderer, though I challenge
no propriety in the earth, because my Kingdom is not of this world, though you
accuse me that I appear unto you to be an idle disorderly person, and before
you set me down James Parnel Labourer; and thus you utter forth your folly with
your changeable minds, but I am a Labourer in the Gospel of God, in which work
none can tax me with idleness, since I came into these parts, but if I had been
more idle in the same ye would have been more pleased, for it is my great Labor
and Diligence in this work of the free Gospel, and the prosperity thereof, in
the overturning and lay open the deceits of deceiving, and deceived men, that
torments you, who are the shelterers of the false Prophet, whom you carry in
your bosom, because he cries peace unto you, when the Lord cries woe; yet
nevertheless it is but for a time, for the hand of the Almighty is against you,
and who shall deliver you?

And when you have laid all these lies, slanders, and false accusations upon my
back, you commit me to the Common Goal for this County, as you say, in the
name of his Highness the Lord Protector, and so you make his name a cover for
your lies, and a Protector of persecution and oppression; but according to his
own Declaration, he took not upon him that place and Title, for that end, but
by your proceedings in his Name it does so appear, or else the messengers and
servants of Jesus Christ would not be so persecuted, and cast into prisons, and
dungeons, and holes, in his Name, as they are; but what a Liberty of Conscience
is this? and how will this stand in the presence of the Almighty God, who will
judge him that judges, as well as him that is judged?

That all Sects, Forms, Judgments, and Opinions should be at liberty, and be
protected therein, and the dear children of God persecuted and imprisoned, and
shamefully entreated as they are, and all this done in the Name of the Lord
Protector of England; therefore in the day of the Lords vengeance, he will be
avenged of all his Adversaries from the least to the greatest, and who shall
escape his hand in the day that he will deliver his own, and advance them
above all their enemies, though here you his enemies have cast me, you say,
until I shall be delivered by due course of Law.

Reply. What law or justice can I expect from such unjust Lawyers and Judges as
you are? for you that cast me in contrary and without Law, it is likely you will
proceed contrary and without Law, for your own Law will bear witness and
testify against you to your shame and confusion of face, though to this Libel
you have set your hands and seals, who write yourselves, Herbert Pellham,
Thomas Cook, Dyonisius VVakering, William Harlackinden.

Here let your hands bear witness, and testify against you, for enemies and
persecutors of the just, who bind heavy burdens, and lay them upon the
oppressed, but will not touch them with one of your fingers, but the greater
will be your condemnation when there is none to deliver you from the hand of
the Almighty, neither Rocks nor Mountains to shelter you, but the refuge of
lies shall be done away, therefore while you have time prize it, and bring your
deeds to the light, and own your condemnation by the light, that your souls
may be saved; now you are warned and the messenger of the Lord discharged, by
whom you are warned, and the truth cleared from your lies and false
accusations, which in the enmity of your spirits you have cast upon it; and so
in the liberty and peace I rest and stand, wherein Christ has set me free,
which none cat take away, who am a sufferer in outward bonds for the testimony
of a pure conscience, at Colchester-Castle, who am known to you my persecutors
by the name,

J. Parnel.

Here follows a copy of some Quaeres that was sent with the foregoing Letter,
to the Justices so called.
Several Quaeres to all you Magistrates and Officers, and proud and lofty ones,
who rage, persecute and despise men, because they cannot put off their hats to
you; and call it a contemning of Authority, and mis-behaviour, and yet say, you
are Christian Magistrates, and profess the Scriptures to be your rule; now try
your selves and prove your practice by the Scripture, and by it answer these
quaeries.

1 Quaere. WHat Rule have you in the Scripture for the putting off the hat?

2 What is that in man that would be honored with the putting off the hat, or
bowing the knee?

3. Why is it called courtesy to put off the hat to the poor, and honor, and
manners, and due respect, to put off the hat to the rich?

4. Whether is this respect of persons, because of advantage, yea or nay; or
what makes this difference.

5. Where is your example for this amongst all the Christians under the Gospel,
as you profess.

6. And what is that in man that so swells, and causes such wrath and rage to
appear against another, for not putting off the hat, if the putting of the hat
or bowing the knee be such a small matter as some accounts it.

7. Whether is that right Authority or Justice in man, that commands his
fellow creature to put off the hat before him, and so to stand until he suffer
him to put it on; and if he do not so stand, then to fall into wrath and rage,
and say he contemns Authority, yea or nay.

8. Where is there any Law that commands a man to put off his hat to one man
more than another.

9. And if there was a Law that did so command, James 2.9.
whether he that obeys the Law of God that commands no respect of persons, and
disobeys the other Law, do contemn Authority, yea or nay.

10. Whether was that Authority in Hamon to be obeyed, East. 3.
(who was a chief Ruler) and would have had Mordecai to have bowed unto him.

11. And what was that in Hamon that made him full of wrath, so that he would
have destroyed Mordecai, and all the Jews in the Nation, because Mordecai could
not bow unto him; and what difference is there betwixt Hamon and you in this
matter, who now are full of wrath and rage, and imprison those that cannot put
off their hats to you.

12. And whether was that mis-behaviour, or a contemning of Authority in
Mordecai, in not obeying the Kings command to bow unto Hamon, as you say it is
in not putting off the hat, or bowing to you now; and wherein do you see any
difference betwixt these men now, and Mordecai in that matter, seeing they
suffer imprisonment before they can do it.

13. And what Lordship and authority was that, which they that were accounted
to rule over the Gentiles, Mat. 2^.25.
did exercise upon them which Christ declared against to his Disciples, and
wherein do you differ from them in what matter?

14. And what honor was that which the Pharisees received one of another, Ioh.
54.4.
for which cause Christ judged them to be in the unbelief, and whether you be
not guilty of the same, yea or nay?

15. And what is the honor which comes from God, which Christ there spoke
of; and whether it stands in the putting off a hat, ye a or nay?

16. What is the Beast which all the world worships and wonders after? and what
is the worship of that Beast and his image? Rev. 13.3.8.
and whether the power and authority of that beast is to be obeyed, yea or nay?

17. How is Justice to be honored?

18. And whether a man may not put off his hat to a Magistrate, and yet envy
him and hate him in his heart? And whether many in these days do not so? and
whether this be the honor that a Magistrate ought to seek for, yea or nay?

19. And whether a man may not honor Justice and Equity in his heart without
putting off a hat to a Magistrate? and he that so does, Whether is he fit to be
called a Magistrate, that calls such a one a contemner of authority, and
commits him to Prison for mis-behaviour; and whether this be Justice or Equity,
yea or nay?

20. And you that pleads this Scripture, Be subject to every Ordinance of man
for the Lords sake; whether is it for the Lords sake that a man would have his
Fellow Creature to stand with his hat off before him or for his selfs sake,
and whether then it is to be obeyed, yea or nay?

21. And he that for the Lords sake and for conscience sake cannot so rob God
of his Glory and honor, as to bow to, or Worship any creature but God alone
who is the Creator: Whether ought he to be imprisoned for misbehaviour, or a
contemner of authority, yea or nay, according to the law of equity, and whether
this is to be called liberty of conscience, according to the Law of England,
yea or nay?

Now all you that profess your selves christians, and the Scripture to be your
Rule, take the Scripture and prove your practice by the Scripture amongst all
the christians, or else let the life and practice of the true christians judge
you and condem you, and own your selves to be in proud Hamons nature, and so
liable to Hamons judgment; and henceforward look to your Office, to rule for
God and not for your selves, and then you will not stand upon such frivolous
things, for it is a frivolous thing to look for the putting off the hat, and is
no part of true nobility or christianity.

Given forth for the clearing of the truth, to which the Nations must bow, I. P.

Here follows a Copy of a Note that was written against the Idolls-Temple,
which was judged a contempt of the Ministry.
THis is the Idols-Temple, where the worship of the Beast is upheld, down with
it, down with it, 1 Cor. 8.10. Rev. 13.7, 8. Dut. 12. God that made the world
and all things therein, dwells not in Temples made with hands, Act. 7.47, 48,
49. Act. 17.21. neither is he worshipped in Idolls-Temples made with men's
hands, Act. 17.24. God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth; for the Father is seeking such to worship him, John
23.24. All the world wonders after and worships the beast, but those who have
their name; written in the book of life, Rev. 13.3.4.8. And they that worships
the Beast receives his mark in their foreheads, Rev. 13.16. as sprincking
Infants, and worshipping the works of their own hands, Isa. 2.8. And following
the imagination of their own hearts, such must drink of the wine of the wrath
of the Almighty; powered out without mixture, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.12.

This Idoll-Temple that is made with hands, is a place for N^ght-birds, and
Skrich Owls to meet each one with his male, Jer. 34.13, 14, 15. to the
dishonor of the only true God, that dwells in temples made without hands, at
new Jerusalem, where the tabernacle of God is with men, Rev. 21.3. Drunkards
and Swearers, Revilers, and Scoffers, and Scorners, proud and wanton ones,
Hypocrites and Dissemblers, envious Haters, Backbiters, Persecutors, Iustfull
covetous ones, and Earthworms meets here, the fearful and unbelieving,
peevish, perverse, contentious ones meets in these Idols-Temples, to satisfy
their lusts; and says the Lord, these people draw near me with their mouths,
and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; but in vain do
they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the traditions of men, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9.
But know you not that no unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of God,
1 Cor. 6.9, 10. But must be cut down and cast into the Lake that burns, Rev.
21.8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, such as you sow, such must you reap,
Gal. 6.7. And to whom you yield your members servants to obey, his servants you
are, Romans 6.16. For he that commits sin is the servant of sin, and so is of the
Devil. Ioh. 6.34. 1. Ioh. 3.

This is a Deceiver that stands up here every first day of the week to deceive
the people, he is proud and Covetous, and speaks a divination of his own
brain, but not from the mouth of the Lord, and so makes the people light and
vain, Ier. 14.14. But the Lord is against him, hold him not up, for he ran and
the Lord never sent him therefore he profits not the people at all, Ier. 23.21,
22.32. but has stolen the Letter, which is carnal with it to feed the carnal,
for carnal ends and lucre, and so has a form but denies the li^e and power,
and therefore from him turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5. therefore spend not your moneys
for that which is not bread, nor your labor for that which profits not, Isa.
55.1, 2 for all the children of the Lord are and shall be taught of the Lord,
and in righteousness shall they be established, and they shall be far from
oppression, Ier. 31.34. Isa. 54 13, 14. 1 John 2.27

He that has an car to hear let him hear what the spirit says, and be
deceived no longer.

J. P.

Here follows several queries that was sent to four of the chief Priests in
Essex, with some more added, which may be serviceable for them, or any other,
to answer, whom they do concern.
Several queries unto Priest Sammes, Priest Sparrow, Priest Willis, and
Priest Stellum, and your gathered Churches, by you to be answered according to
Scripture, which you profess to be your rule.

Query 1. How and by what was you called to the Ministry which you profe's.

2. What is the Gospel which you pretend to preach, and how did you receive it,
and whether your Gospel be free and without charge; as the Apostles was, yea or
nay?

3. What do you Minister from, and what do you Minister to, in the natural
man, and what is the end of your Ministry?

4. What rule have you in the Scripture, to take a Text of the Apostles words,
and speak from it what you have studied, with your Uses, Points, Trials and
Motives, and Applications?

5. Whether do you speak by the same infallible spirit as they did that spoke
forth the Scripture, yea or nay?

6. And whether he that has the same infallible spirit, need study how or what
to preach?

7. And whether it is not as lawful now for Fishermen, Plow-men, or Herds-men,
to preach, if they be called to it, and fitted for it, by the same power and
spirit as they was in the days of old, and whether Christ is not the same
yesterday, to day and for ever according to Scripture?

8. And whether any now ought to teach and preach in the name of Jesus, but who
are caled to it and fitted for it, the same way as the holy men of God was,
spoken of in Scripture?

9. Whether do you own immediate Revelation now, yea or nay?

10. What is a Minister of Christ, and what is a Minister of Antichrist, and do
you distinguish the one from the other?

11. What Scripture have thou to give unto the world David's conditions to be
sung in a Meeter.

12. What rule have you in the Scripture, to abide in a certain place, and to
agree with the people for so much a year for preaching, as 40, 60, or 100. or
200. l. as you can get it.

13. How and by what are you gathered and united, who calls your solves a
Church.

14. And what is the Church in God, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay?

15. What is the Baptism into the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea
or nay?

16 And Scripture have you to sprinckle children with water, and to what end do
you do it?

17. Whether you be of one heart and one mind, as the true Church was yea or
nay?

18. Whether you have passed from death to life, yea or nay.

19. What is the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; and whether to it you be come,
yea or nay?

20. Whether he that believes is not born of God; and whether he that is born
of God, does not commit sin, yea or nay?

21. Why do not you maintain your Teacher, but let him rob the world instead of
robbing other Churches, and so is chargeable unto the world?

22. Whether do you own and hold up the first Priesthood, that took Tithes, or
the second Priesthood that took no Tithes, and which do you deny, seeing you
pay tithes, and your Teacher takes tithes, yea or nay?

23. Why do you own and hold up such that are called of men Master, and have
the chiefest place in the Assembly, and stand praying in the Synagogue, and
love greetings in the Markets, which Christ himself cried woe against.

24. How is Christ the light of the world, and how does he enlighten every one
that comes into the world, if it be not in the conscience; and whether that
Light which comes from him be natural, yea or nay?

25. How is the light the condemnation of the world, if it be not in the
conscience

26. And how is it said, that he that does evil hates the light, and will not
bring his deeds to the Light, lest the Light should reprove him, if it be not
in the conscience, and whether that be a natural light which reproves for sin,
yea or nay.

27. How did Paul turn peoples minds from darkness to light, if it be not in
the conscience, and whether that light was natural which Paul was sent to turn
the minds of the Gentiles unto.

28. Whether that light which shines in darkness, be not one, and the same,
with that which shines out of darkness, yea or nay?

29. And whether the light of the world be not a saving light in the least
measure, yea or nay? and how can that be said to be natural?

30. Whether the Light which John came to bear witness of, was natural or
spiritual?

31. How has the grace of God, which brings Salvation, appeared to all men,
if it be not in the conscience, and whether it be natural.

32. How does it stand with the impartial God, to give to one man a measure of
grace, and not to another, and yet require obedience from all.

33. Whether the slothful servant has not a Talent as well as the faithful,
though he hide it in the earth, and what is that Talent.

34. What is the account that God will require of every one in the day of
Judgment, and how can he call all justly to an account, and reward them
according to their deeds, if he has not given to every one a Talent.

35. What is that which leads to repentance; and whether that which leads to
repentance be not in the conscience, and whether it be natural yea or nay.

36. And where do you read in the Scripture of a natural light to be in the
conscience.

37. What is the redemption; and what is the end of Christ's coming.

38. Whether the redemption by Christ, be not as full in every in every respect,
as the fall by Adam, and what is the fall by Adam.

39. And whether you do not go about to make the commands of Christ unjust, who
says, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly father is perfect; and you say it cannot
be while you are upon the earth, then how is it your rule.

40. Will you own a purgatory, or where is the place betwixt heaven and earth
where man shall be cleansed, if not upon the earth, seeing no unclean thing can
inherit the kingdom of God.

41 Whether do they deny Christ come in the flesh, that witness forth
perfection from sin here, or they that tell people they can never be perfect, or
be wholly set free from sin so long as they are upon the earth, and whether
such be not the Ministers of Antichrist, yea or nay.

42. Where had you this Doctrine to tell people the light in the conscience is
natural, and that Christ has not enlightened every one that comes into the
world.

43. And whether in this you do not bring another Doctrine, in opposition to
the Doctrine of Christ, who says he is the light of the world, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the world.

44. And where had you this Doctrine, to tell people they could never be wholly
cleansed, or be set free from sin, so long as they are upon the Earth.

45. And whether this be not in opposition to the Doctrine of Christ, who
says, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.

46. Whether God justifies any in their sin; and whether sanctification go not
before justification, yea or nay.

47. Whether you do not seek justification by works, who put one another upon
prayer, and duties, observations, Ordinances, and commands, without the Light,
in imitation of the Letter, and whether these be not your own works which are
done out of the light, yea or nay.

48. What is your own righteousness, and what is the righteousness of Christ,
and how do you distinguish betwixt the one and the other?

49. And whether he that is justified by the righteousness of Christ, does not
dwell in it, and it in him, and whether he that dwells in the righteousness of
Christ does sin, yea or nay.

50 Whether any can walk according to the Scripture but by the Light of Christ;
and whether any that are guided by the Light of Christ, do, or can act contrary
to the Scripture; and whether this Light be not a sufficient guide, if it be
owned and followed?

51. How is the Scripture left unto the world for a rule, who know not the
Light, seeing to them it is a parable, and as a book sealed.

52. And what is the word, and whether there be any other word of God then one?

53. What is the death that has passed over all men, forasmuch as all men have
sinned; and whether this death you ever passed, yea or nay.

54. What is that which is lost, which Christ comes to seek; and what is that
which was driven away, which Christ comes to bring again; and whether this is
not to be witnessed and fulfilled in man, yea or nay.

55. What is the Paradise wherein man was placed; and what was the Image of God
wherein man was created.

56. And how was man a living soul; and whether all this is not to be restored
unto man, and fulfilled and witnessed unto man, while he is upon the earth, yea
or nay.

57. What is the Tree of Life, and what is the Tree of Knowledge, and whether
upon it you do not feed; and what is the flaming sword that is set to keep from
the tree of life, and whether it you ever passed.

58. Whether the natural man can try and discern false spirits by the
Scripture; and by what does the spiritual man try and judge all things, and
whether by the same he did not try and discern spirits.

59. And by what did the holy men of God that gave forth the Scripture try and
discern spirits; and whether yours be the same tryer of spirits as theirs was,
who say you must try the spirit by the Letter.

60. Whether you are not conformed like unto the world, so long as you follow
their fashions and customs.

61. Whether you are not partial amongst your selves, so long as you respect
persons.

These things I do not ask as if I knew them not, but for the satisfaction of
the simple, and the clearing of the truth, and manifesting your deceit to the
world, by which you have deceived the world, who are the deceivers of the
world, therefore answer by plain Scripture, and your own experience, or else
let all flesh keep silence before the Lord, and let guilt stop your mouths, for
Railing, reproaching, and blaspheming the truth of God, which is made manifest
in these people, whom you scornfully calls quakers, who by you and your agents
are persecuted, but where do you find that the Church of God was ever
persecutors, or ever made use of carnal weapons to defend them.

J. P.

Here follows a Copy of a Letter that I was moved to write to Judge Hills,
after the Assize.
A Few words unto thee that art set in the seat to do justice, and to bear the
sword of Justice in thy hand, and have turned the edg of it against the
righteous, and laid it upon the innocent, and thy fair words will not shelter
nor cover thy deceitful actions, but thy deceitful heart is made manifest, and
thy hypocrisy does thee appear, for thou have hearkened unto the false Prophet,
Isai. 5.10.
and by his enticing words thou art deceived, and so puts darkness for light,
and light for darkness, evil for good, and good for evil, and so art liable to
the woe from the Lord, and have persecuted Christ, and set at liberty Barabas,
yea, and I was numbered amongst transgressors, yet could not have the liberty of
transgressors, as in many things might be nominated, but in short I shall
declare it; first, that mine accusers should stand in the place as judges over
me, and their accusations and false witnesses to be heard to the full, and also
to whisper and buz in thy ears in secret, what they would against me, and also
that thou that sat in the seat as a Judge to repeat over unto the Jury all
that thou could gather by wrong interpretation, and construction against me,
but nothing of my defense against my accusations, but rather to drive out of
their minds, by thy evil incensing, what I had before declared in my own
defense, but thou, as it were, passed the sentence upon me before the Jury went
sorth, but thou thoughtest thou had pannelled a Jury wherewith thou wast
pleased to try me according to thine own mind and will, for the Foreman was a
drunkard, and the rest swearers, out of the Doctrine of Christ, against all
which I did object, and denied by them to be tried, but it was thy will and
pleasure so to do, and when they come to bring in their evidence, they had so
much understanding, that they charged me with nothing, but the papers which I
had before confessed to be mine, and owned them, but the Indictment they would
not own to be truth against me, though dishonestly both thou and the Clerk, did
draw words out of the Foreman of the Jury, which the rest did not consent to,
and then in thy will, with thy fair and deceitful speeches thou imposed a fine
upon me, contrary to all law and equity, but where equity is not it cannot be
expected, for oppression within, oppression without, and he that cannot witness
the sword of justice set up in his heart, knows not how to handle it without,
for he that rules not by the law of God in his heart rules in his own will, and
is partial and understands not the things of God, but what pleases his will,
that he cherishes, and what crosses his will that he would curb, and the will
of man is opposite to the will of God, therefore the Cross of Christ is of use
to them that know it, but a stumbling block to the world; but he that rules in
his own will is no minister of God, he that respects persons is not fit to bear
rule for God, he that seeks himself is not fit to bear rule for God; all which
appeared, and was openly manifest in thee in the open Court, as in those things
beforementioned, and many other which are now out of mind; but for the clearing
of my conscience unto thee, I was moved to write, that thou might see what
thou have done, and be left without excuse of ignorance in the presence of the
Almighty; for contrary to the Light of God in thy conscience thou have acted,
by which thou stands accused in the presence of the Almighty, and if thy
conscience accuse thee, God is greater; but if thou had stood in the place
where thou art set, to judge of legal malters, about natural and temporal
things, thou had had the less to account for, but in meddling to judge about
spiritual matters, is authority which the Scripture (which thou calls thy rule)
does not allow thee; for the natural man receives not the things of God,
because they are spiritually discerned; therefore in this the spiritual man
judges thee, and thy condemnation is great; therefore lay these things to
heart, and put them not far from thee, for to the light of God in thy
conscience I do speak, which eternally will witness me and condemn thee in the
presence of the Almighty, who have taken upon thee to judge and condemn those
whom God has justified; therefore consider what advantageth it thee, or what
will it advancage thee when thou comes to give an account before the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, the Judge of all the quick and the dead, it thou have now
power to keep this body in prison until thou have the life of the creature,
which I am freely made willing to give up, rather then to deny the truth of my
God, and if I should pay one penny for the liberty of my body in this cause,
would be as much as if I paid the whole fine which thou have unjustly laid upon
me; for therein I should own my self a Transgressor where I am not guilty; and
also a bought liberty is bondage to my spirit, but my liberty under thy bonds
is bondage to thee, which liberty thou can not rob me of, with all that thou
can do, for it is the free gift of God, which none can take away, though thou will not allow me in thy bonds to have the outward liberty that thou allows to
Thieves, and Murderers, and Fornicators, that is, to have my friends and
acquaintance to come to seem, wherein the very heathen will condemn thee, who
when they had committed Paul to prison, said, Forbid none of his friends and
acquaintance to come to fee him, Acts 22.24. Therefore now read how thou
exceeds the Heathen in persecution and injustice, though I am a freeborn
subject in England; therefore let the life of all the Christians condemn thee
who never was persecutors. And this of the Lord I was moved to write, which is
the Word of the Lord unto thee, whether thou will hear or forbear, in the peace
of my conscience I do rest in the Will of God. Known to thee by the name,

James Parnel.


And now a few words unto you who call your selves gathered Churches, who go
under by the name of Independants in Essex, you are gathered by the will of man,
and are joined by the will of man, and so stands in the will of man, and are
upheld by the will of man, by which you are begotten, but still alive in the
worlds nature, in the worlds customs, fashions, and traditions, in the worlds
fellowship, words and ways, and rudiments, only differing from others in
judgment, opinion, or profession, wherein is your life in high notions, and
feigned apprehensions, and false applications, and glorious expressions, and
customary duties, and vain Traditions, which all appertains to the great Image,
which all the world worships; by which they are deceived, whose head is gold,
and breast of silver, and thighs of brass, and legs of Iron, and feet part Iron
and part clay: and in the same nature ye are found with the world, the day does
declare it, and you to be the enemies and strangers to the light, which is not
of the world, which is now come into the world, testifying against the world;
and the deceit of the world, and the deceivers in the world, and the profession
of the world and this is the condemnation of the world, Job. 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light,
because their deeds are evil; in which evil you are found, despising and
sett^ng at naught the Cornerstone, and standing in the enmity of your spirits,
and joining with the powers of the earth, to persecute the life and power which
now is manifest in the earth, and is come to discover your empty shadows,
forms, and fair shows of godliness, but without life and power, which you have
set up in your imaginations, and thereby are deceived, and blinded, and led in
blindness, so that you cannot see the light, nor receive the substance, now it
is come and made manifest, but stands up in your wills and wisdom to oppose
the same, and persecute it in the enmity of your spirits, as if you hoped to
kill the heir, that the inheritance might be yours; and therefore because you
do despise this day of your visitation, and reject and slight the glad tidings
which now are come to them that dwell upon the earth, and revile, and reproach,
persecute and slander the faithful messengers of the Gospel, rejoicing your
hearts in their sufferings, by you and amongst you, therefore the Lord will
raise up a people out of the dust, and gather them from far, to bear testimony
unto his name and bear witness against you, yea, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of the Son, and you, and such as
you, shall be cast out into Tophit, prepared of old for hypocrites and
unbelievers,, therefore now read your portions ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in hearts and cars, who do always resist the Holy Ghost, as did
your fathers so do ye, but the greater will be your condemnation, who go about
to mock God with your will worship, with your calling of Assemblies, and Solemn
Meetings, with your appointed Fasts, and days of voluntary Humiliation, with
your long Prayers and feigned duties, all which is done out of the Light, and
so are your own works, acted by self, for self But who has required these
things at your hands? it is all abomination to the Lord, his soul loathes it,
for your sacrifices are as Cain's, for your are found in Cain's nature, envying
and persecuting the righteous, yea the witness lies slain in your streets,
therefore woe is unto you who go on in the way of Cain, for upon you shall come
all the righteous blood shed from righteous Abel until now; and your
professions stinks in the nostrils of the Lord, for you have lift up your hands
against him and his Anointed, and opened your mouths in blasphemy, and false
reports against the truth; yea, you are blind, and stumble at the noon day,
you come near the Lord with your lips, but your hearts runs awhoring after
other Lovers, and you know not the only true God, that dwells in Temples made
without hands, whose worship is in spirit and in truth, but would limit the
unlimited under your wills, as if he were not a God of might, but that you could
control him with the arm of flesh, but be not deceived, God is not mocked,
such as you sow, such shall you reap, and your end shall be according to your
works; Gal. 6.7.
for our God is a God of Judgment and Justice, and will avenge the cause of the
innocent upon you his adversaries, yea and though your Teachers do cry peace,
peace unto you, because you put into their mouths, and so daubs you up with
untempred mortar, that you cannot see your wound, and so heals you slightly,
yet you shall know that our God is a God of Truth and his word shall stand for
ever, and their sorcery shall appear, and their witchcraft shall be laid open,
and the cup of fornication (wherewith they have made drunk and deluded the
Nations) shall be taken from them, and the cup of the wrath of the Almighty
given them to drink their reward, and then shall you behold the Harlot with whom
you have committed fornication, who now lies in your bosoms, bewitching you
with a golden cup, with whom you have defiled your garments, then to be cast
into the bottomless pit, where you shall all be tormented together, who now
partake of her pleasures, and thus shall you fall amongst them that fall in the
day that I visit you, says the Lord.

And all you my dear friends, you scattered and despised ones in and about the
County of Essex, whom the Lord by his powerful word is now gathering out of
darkness into his mavelous light, out of the Kingdom of this World, into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, whom he is seperating unto himself to walk before him
in holiness, that you might know him, and he might know you in the light of his
countenance, whose faces he has turned to words Sion, to seek after a Land of
Rest unto your wearied Souls which has been tossed to and fro, from mountain
to hill in this cloudy and dark day, seeking rest but finding none; but now is
the day of beauty broken forth nigh you, even in you, yea and glad tidings is
come unto your wearied souls, by which a pure love is begotten in you to the
everlasting truth, which has been freely declared amongst you by the
messengers of the most high, who has reached the witness for God in your
consciences, which does seal the same upon your hearts, which your teacher is,
and unto it you hearken, and are abedient, in which light all stand still, and
behold the work which the Lord has begun amongst you, and you shall have no
cause of discouragement, though the sea do rise, and the raging waves do swel
as if they would swallow all up, yet it is limited by the unlimited, and it
shall but foam out its own shame. And as I had a time to preach the truth
amongst you, to the convincement of many, so also now I have a time to seal the
same with patient suffering in the bonds of the Gospel, that you may see that
it is no other but what we are made able and willing to seal with patient
suffering, yea with our blood if we be called to it, as many of us has done in
this Nation, though it be called a Land of Liberty, but it is for Iniquity, but
truth and equity are strangers in it, and therefore are persecuted, but you
that are found worthy to receive these strangers happy are you; and though the
raging Sodomites compass you about for to cause you to cast out these
strangers, that they may work their wills upon them, yet be faithful and fear
them not, but cast out your darlings before them, and stand in the faith of the
God of truth, and equity, and you shall see the Sodomites struck with blindness,
that they shall not be able to prevail against you, but when they are weary with
striving they shall be made to sit down in sorrow, and so shall it be fulfill d
which of old was prophesied, that no weapon formed against the faithful shall
prosper, but woe unto them that lift up their heel against them; therefore I
charge you all in the name of the God of truth, be faithful, valiant, and bold
for the truth received, and as you have received it, so walk in it, that you
may profess no more in word but what in life you seal, that the light may be
preached forth in your lives, and shine forth in your conversations, to the
glory of the father of lights and the confounding of the heathen, who profess
God in words, but in life denies him, and be willing that self shall suffer for
the truth, and not the truth for self; for the truth was ever sealed with
persecution since Cains generation had a being upon the earth; and so own the
Cross, and despise the shame, and give up your selves to suffer for the truth
received, all you that would follow the Lamb to the Land of rest, and through
many trials you will wax strong and bold, and confident in your God; for God is
not known what a God he is, until the time of trial; and all keep your meetings
in the name and fear of the Lord God, waiting for his power, in the obedience
to his Light, which in your consciences does reprove you when you do amiss,
that in it you may wait, and watch over the foes that are of your own house,
that you may know the warfare begun in your hearts against your spiritual
enemies; and so the God of Power manifest himself amongst you by his mighty
power, bringing down all that in you which opposes him, and would not that he
should reign over it, and exalt his own seed in your hearts, and establish you
in righteousness, that his image you may bear, and he shall be your God, and you
shall be his people.

And so in the unchangeable Truth, I rest in unity with all the faithful in the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, though in outward bonds for your sakes.

Known to all that can read me in spirit, I.P.

FINIS.

