Independency accused By nine several ARGUMENTS: Written by a godly learned
Minister, to a Member of Mr. JOHN GOODWINS CONGREGATION, AND Acquitted by
several REPLIES to the said ARGUMENTS by a Member of the same CHURCH.

In both which, sweetness of spirit, and soundness of Arguments have been
endeavored.

GALAT. 6.1. Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy
self, lest thou also be tempted.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley 1645.

To the Reverend, my dear and loving Pastor, Mr JOHN GOODWIN, Pastor of the
Church in Colemanstreet.
Dear and reverend Sir,
YOur favorable acceptance of my present pains, and candid construction of
engaging my self therein, is my humble request by my present address, whereof,
though mine own insufficiency might beget my suspicion; yet the knowledge of
your love (which thinks no evil) gives me satisfaction; for although the
piety and parts of my ingenious Antagonist did challenge an opponent of suitable
endowments; and renders me presumptuous for my attempt therein, (unworthy to be
named in competition with him) yet the perfect knowledge of your pressing pains
of several kinds in the work of the Lord, stopping the mouth, which
otherways would have begged your own labors in this present business,
together with the requests of some of our friends, pressed me hereunto, wherein,
if I have not prejudiced the Cause I plead for; distasted you, nor dishonored
God, but (though in the least measure) have furthered the truth, it is the
highest ambition, and greatest reward of

The unworthiest to be numbered amongst your flock, J. P.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
Unity in judgment amongst the Saints, is the promised blessing of another
age, but Unity in affection is our present duty confessed by all, though the
practice hereof be the care of few; witness the bitter pens, and railing lines
of men professing the fear of God, each against his brother, in the faith, to
the scandal of Religion, and scorn of Profession, dishonor of God, and
disgrace of the Gospel, the joy of the Jesuit, and hazard of the kingdom, the
stumbling of others coming into the paths of life, seeing them traced with
Lions, and Bears, and Wolves, and Tygres, in stead of Lambs and Doves, the meek
Saints of the most high God, as if they had gotten a special dispensation in
this present age, to slander the persons, traduce the actions, reproach the
names of their dearest brethren, to fight the Lords battles with the Devils
weapons, and to trample under foot that royal Law of their liege Lord, This is
my commandment, that you love one another. ^oh. 13.33.
In this present Discourse thou shall not observe (allowance afforded to humane
frailty) the least tincture of that unchristian strain, the mind of the Lord,
and truth of Christ being the mutual design of my opponent and my self: I
have not altered one word of his Letter, only whereas he writ it entire, I have
presented thee with each Argument, and immediate Replies, with a different
character between the one and the other, for thy more distinct apprehension of
both. I say no more, but prove, and approve, and the Lord direct thy heart into
the knowledge and love of the truth.

I. P.

My dear Friend,
YOu are not ignorant, how respectfull and reverent I have carried my self
toward the Congregationall Way, almost ever since you knew me, and daily am,
both praying and reading, that I may be fully persuaded in mine own heart
whether that, or the other Way, called Presbyterian, b^ the Way of God. For
this end, I have given my self to the perusal of Mr. Goodwins Theomachia, and
his justification of it against Mr. Prynne, and so far as my judgment
reaches, he gets the better of him; but yet some doubts I have, to which I
cannot pick answers out of both his books. I dare not be guilty of that which
he so much pleads against, blind obedience, implicit faith. I must not take up
Religion by the lumps (as once Mr. Thomas Goodwin said) I must not pin my faith
upon the sleeve of any person or persons upon earth, though never so holy or
learned, as not knowing whither they may carry it; the best of men are but men
at best: both God and men will expect from me, that I be able to render a
Scripturall Reason of my faith and conscience, and therefore I request you
earnestly, to improve your interest in some friend (you know I have no
acquaintance with any Divine of that Way) to communicate their light to me in
the following particulars, and doubtless, it will be an addition to my
charitablenesse toward that Way, if not quite pull me into it; for it is my full
purpose of heart, to sall down before the truth when I meet it, and know it; I
will be their's (what ere come on it) that I find to have not the strangest
hand, but argument.

Dear Sir,
THe spirit of sobriety and Christian moderation does so sweetly look through
your lines, casting such a gracious aspect of meekness, humility, with all
lovely and Christian ingenuity and modesty, that upon the first reading
thereof, I desired to engage my self into your Christian acquaintance, and to
return an answer (being desired hereunto) according to my judgment unto your
Letter, being much encouraged by the spirit of your writing, which promises
me a candid and an ingenuous interpretation of my mean endeavors, and as the
first fruits thereof, I shall humbly desire these things of you.

First, That you will please to pass by what you observe weak, and wanting,
(whereof you may find more then enough) and to bestow your more serious
considerations upon any thing (if such a thing can be found) which you may
judge more valid; the purest gold may be found in the grossest earth; and
arguments for truth are oftentimes like neighbors in their vicinity: the poor,
weak, and insufficient, have the rich, able and more sufficient for their
support and comfort: truth is welcome to a gracious heart, though evidenced but
by one or two sound arguments, when many shall say, Lo, it is here, or there,
and cannot show it.

Secondly, That you would be a Midwife to any argument which you judge
pregnant, and which has truth in the belly thereof, having strength to
conceive, but not to bring forth; surely the sons of truth cannot but help the
truth in straits, which often suffers through the great insufficiency of the
abettors thereof; the hearts of the Saints sometimes can better defend the
truth discovered then their tongues or pens; a nimble wit, and learned head
prove not always the truths friend; but Sir, I do not prejudge you.

Thirdly, That if we cannot agree in this truth, yet we may love one another
in the truth; let this be written in letters of gold upon the foreheads of all
the Saints, HOLINESS TO THE LORD, AND LOVE TO THE BRETHREN: Faith and Love are
the golden pillars, supporting the hearts of the Saints together in the spirit
of which love, I come to your arguments.

Fourthly, That no case is so clear, but some question may be raised about it,
to which present satisfaction may not be given; it is sufficient if the main
things things be justified.

ARGUMENT I.
LEt it be granted that the Churches in the Apostles time were Congregationall,
(for all national profession in the world was either Jewish or Heathenish) yet
if they were to be the president of the form of Church-ordering and government
for ever under the Gospel, how could all the Churches the Apostles had
constituted up and down the world; yea, and all particular Christians be so
corrupted, as to suffer the government and worship of God to be taken from them
so easily, as that none (that I can hear of) are found upon record, to have
stood up for Christ, and the truth, but Nationall-Church-government was brought
in? and we cannot learn that there was any scuffle on contestation against it.
I do not think there can be named one truth of God that Antichrist, or any
other Heretic fought against, but it is possible with a little search or study
to name those persons that disputed, or w^it, on suffered in the defense of it,
and stood in the gap to keep out the error, only in this, all the Christian
Churches in the world suffered the government of Christ (which is so dear to
the heart of a Saint) to be destroyed, and a false Antichristian government and
worship to be obtruded on them, and all sides are silent in the business;
Where is the Scribe? is there no Disputer, no Martyr to be found? what, not one
that retained any spark of zeal for Christ, that after ages could speak of,
either o^th approbation or detestation, for willingly suffering shame, spoiling
of goods, banishment, death, rather then Christ should be pulled down in his
worship, and a National false Church Government set up in the room of it? I
cannot but wonder that all Christian Churches should fall at once into such a
dead sleep, to suffer the evil One thus to pluck up, and thus to plant; or
else, if their eyes were open, I cannot but call it the greatest piece of cow
ardise that ever the Churches of Christ were guilty of, to stand idle,
speechless spectators by; where was the valor of their faith? Heb. 11.33, 34.
Or if they did dispute and suffer for it, I cannot but think it the greatest
unfaithfulness and oversight the Churches were ever guilty of, not to transmit
the story to posterity.

REPLY.
FIrst, this Argument impleadeth Presbytery as well as Congregationall
government; for where read we of sufferers for Presbytery?

Secondly, To come more directly to the point, you grant the Churches
constituted by the Apostles Congregationall; now if we show this practice of
theirs was intended, as a pattern for us, and so taken by the most Primitive
Churches, we hope your demand will be satisfied, though we could not
distinctly show you why none appeared in the defense of it -- of which anon.

First, God and nature do nothing in vain, was the saying of the ancient
Naturalists; the Spirit of God did so distinctly set down the manner of the
constitution of the Jewish Church by Moses, that posterity may have a distinct
pattern as well as a rule to walk by, the Holy Ghost has to some purpose
surely, so punctually noted the manner of gathering and governing the Churches
planted by the Apostles, and what can this purpose be, but our imitation in
things lawful and possible? for all in the new, as well as in the old
Testament, are written for our learning, and follow me, says the Apostle, and
that by way of forbearing, and negatively, as by way of doing, and
affirmatively; that is, we may not do what they did not, when they might, and
the nature of the thing seemed to require it, (as the subjecting particular
Churches to a combination of Elders, which should have ordinary authority over
the several Congregations) which they might have done, as well as to keep up
the government in one city, which they did; and as well as the Church of France
at this day, though under persecution, yet keep their government; and when by
reason of the paucity of believers, and the temptation of persecution, they had
much need of the help of government, and no hinderance why they might not,
seeing though by reason of persecution they might have been hindered for a
time, and in some places, yet the rule of such a government, if it had been the
will of God, had been useful, and though they had been disturbed in one place,
yet it would have been exercised in some other; this was a sufficient argument
for God to use, Jer. 7.31. they did -- which I commanded them not: and for the
Apostle, Heb. 7.14. of which Moses spoke nothing, Ergo, God intended it not.
And so affirmatively, what they did for substance, we must: Hence Gualter in
the end of his Comment on the Acts, says they are not to be listened unto that
tell us the way and practice of the Apostles in constituting Churches, is not a
pattern for us to follow.

Secondly, The Churches in the first and second hundred years after Christ, did
take the Apostles practice for their pattern, and therefore every Church did
transact all their ordinary affairs within themselves, as admission of
members, choice and ordination of officers, excommunication of scandalous
persons, deposition of their officers, where just cause was; in difficult cases
indeed, they used the counsel and help of other Churches, but as being engaged
thereunto only out of the bond of mutual love and fellowship; not of necessity
or subjection; and where any Church was more famous for gifts, numbers,
Ministers, etc. to these they gave the greater respects, and did more depend
upon their guidance; till this voluntary and occasional office of love became
a custom, viz. for the lesser and obscurer Churches, to do nothing without the
greater; and for the greater, to exercise inspection, and some kind of
jurisdiction toward the lesser, by way of charge and office, till in the third
Century it was by the Council of Nice -- established by a Canon for a
Church-law; at which time Antichrist had made much progress toward his
usurpation: For proof of all which, I shall show you some of the words of the
Centurie Writers touching this Argument; and first of the constitution of
Churches planted by the Apostles: 1. C^nt. lib. 2. cap. 7. de gubernatione
Ecclestitul. de consociatione, etc. If it be said these consisted of many
congregations, and so were Presbyteriall, I answer, it cannot be proved they
were so; secondly, nor disproved, that they were one congregation; because we
read so often, both in Scripturall and Ecclesiastical story that they had one
Eldership, not several over them, and that they all met upon one great
occasion together, as upon the choice or deposition of Ministers,
excommunication of members, etc. and if they did meet in several places, yet
having one Eldership over them, and not several Elderships for the several
companies, and not being tied any of them to come to any one place more then
another; it does no more argue they were many congregations, or hinder their
being one (though inconvenient to be governed by reason of its vastness) then
it does in Holland, where the case is so, or then in some great parishes in and
about London; where, though they meet in one place, yet cannot meet all
together, by reason of the multitude, being above 10000. in some parishes,
unless at several times, if it were so, that they had been Presbyteriall in a
city, yet it is far different from that government that makes many towns and
cities one Church, and draws them to subjection to one common Presbytery, and
that in ordinary, against which many Reasons might be given, though the other
were admitted.

Thirdly, If the Churches of those times had not so judged that the Way the
Apostles left Churches in was to be their pattern, as it had been easy for
them to order it; (as afterward their posterity did into Episcopacie) so had it
been more advantage and ease to them, to have united many Churches together
into one body, and to set one Council and President over it, for the
suppressing of Heresies, Schisms, etc. which yet they did not, till times grew
more corrupt, and which at this day is the state of the Papacy.

Fourthly, Though this might suffice, yet I shall now show you how it might
come to pass, that this received truth might be lost, and no notice left of
any contending for it.

First, greater truths then this of government have been stolen from the Church
without any great reluctance: As far as appears; as the reading of the
Scriptures by the people, transubstantiation of the bread in the Sacrament,
adoration of the Host, the Mass it self, taking the cup from the people, etc.
which the subtilty of men taking advantage by the negligence and cowardice of
the people, brought in without much opposition till long after.

Secondly, the monuments of antiquity in this kind, are very defective; first,
by the notable carelessness of Writers in those times, of which, Ludovicus,
apud Illyricum, in Refutat. Brin. page 15. an Author of no mean credit,
complains, It is a singular grief to me (says he) when I call to mind, how
diligently the actions of Alexander, Scipio, Annibal, Pompey, Caesar, Socrates,
Plato, Aristotle, and other Captains and Philosophers, have been noted, that
there is no peril of their perishing, but the doings of the Apostles (except
such as are set down in sacred Scripture) Martyrs and Saints of our Religion;
yea, and of the Church it self, whether growing up, or at full age, are covered
in deep silence; for these things which are written, excepting a few only, are
corrupted with feigned inventions, etc. thus he a man by profession a Papist.
Secondly, because of the prevalencie of the Romish faction, whereby all
monuments, almost, that seemed to oppose the intended usurpation (as the
ancient government of the Churches especially did) were either spupressed, or
some way violated, as (amongst many others) Dr. James has discovered at large
in his book entitled, The Corruption of Fathers, etc. But,

Lastly, to give you a more direct answer, there have not been wanting
defendents of the liberties of the Churches in this particular; for seeing it
is evident by the first, second and third particular in this answer, that both
in the Apostles times, and next ages after, the Churches were governed each by
themselves (as in respect of authority out of their own body) if there were any
that resisted those that invaded that liberty, those are the examples of
suffering (or at least contesting) for this government, but the Bishops were
the first that usurped the power of many Churches, in ordinary, and these were
often resisted by word, writing and fact, as appears, not only by Aerius (who
was counted an Heretic for his labor) but also by Jerome, who says, that
Bishops were brought in to prevent Heresies and Schisms, but that the Churches
were anciently governed by the joint counsel of the Elders. Now this was
either by the Elders of the same Church, or if with others, it was a
conjunction by way of Christian fellowship and society, not by jurisdiction,
authority, and necessity, (as we saw before) I add, that the sufferings of so
many in opposition to Papal government even in the ancient times, is an
argument in a negative sense, that there has been sufferings for
Church Government, because they would not submit to a false government: To
conclude this argument, I shall endeavor at better leisure to give you some
particular instances out of the story, which maymore fully satisfy this Querie.

Insigniores Ecclesiae, etc. They which were more eminent Churches (say they)
were in some honor because of the Apostles that taught in them, and because of
their Ministers that were more excellent for learning and constancy, and
likewise of the benefits that those Churches did afford to other neighbor
Churches, but they had no other power over other Churches, then by mutual
offices in things belonging to the edification of the whole Church, to afford
them their help: and then instances in particular Churches.

2. The Churches in the next age after the Apostles, Cent. 2. cap. 7. titul. de
consociatione Ecclesiarum. Caeterum si quis probatos autores, etc. If (say
they) any man look into the approved Authors of this age, he shall find, that
the form of government was almost like a popular government; for every Church
had equal power, to preach the Word of God purely, to administer the
Sacraments, to absolve and excommunicate heretics, and wicked men, -- to
elect, call and ordain Ministers, and upon sufficient grounds to depose them,
to call assemblies and Synods, -- in doubtful things, and that were
controversall, to require the opinions of others, to judge and determine them.
Further, the neighbor Churches for charity and edification sake, not for any
superior jurisdiction, but for the command of Christ concerning mutual love,
in their necessity craved the help of their neighbor Churches, and also
afforded theirs to them. -- in more weighty questions, all the Churches or
Elders of that Province, or else the most of the Teachers came together, and
determined by common advice what was to be done; for the faithful in Asia
(says Eusebius, quoted by them in that place) came often from many places
together, and examined the new doctrines, and pronounced them wicked, and
rejecting the heresy, they cast and excommunicated it out of the Church.

The Churches that were farther off, in other Provinces, consult with other
Churches by letters, which they did generally, or by common consent subscribe;
this new prophecy (says Serapin in Eusebius. cited by the Cent.) is refuted and
rejected by all the brotherhood which is in all the world.

Tit. de Synodis private. each Church (that things might be better ordered) had
their Synod or assemblies or Church-meetings, in which the Rector (or Pastor)
the Elders, the Deacons, and also the people did deliberate and determine of
things belonging to the government of the Church.

3. The Churches in the third hundred year, Cen. 3. cap. 7. Tit. de Synodis
privatis in principio. Now that the jurisdiction of the great Churches over the
less was established, and the authority of metropolitanes determined by the
Nicene Council; yet, if any business happened, which could not be perfected
without the rest, both Ministers and people, then they came together and
dispatched them with common advice, without the calling of the Churches of the
same Province: So Cyprian (cited by them) Epist. l. 3. cap. 10. From the
beginning of my being Bishop, (or Pastor) I determined to do nothing without
your counsel (he speaks to the Elders and Deacons) nor without the consent of
the people, by my own private opinion. -- In these assemblies in other
Churches, there were few orders made by the Bishops or Pastors, and afterward
approved by the Church, unless it was in Rome, according to the efficacy of
the mystery of Iniquity. (they are the Authors words) some Bishops made
decrees as Damasus, Galixtus, etc. By all which it appears, that the Churches
most Primitive were ignorant of any necessity or law lying on them, to be
governed by one Church, or more, or of associating with any, but as they saw
cause, and by the law of charity, neither understood there was any Provincial,
much less National or universal and ministerial and governing Church, which
must by way of authority dispose of all the affairs of the particular Churches.

Object. But they excommunicated in their Assemblies of many Churches?

Answ. 1. So did they in each particular Church, as of their own right, and
consulted not with others, unless the cause was difficult.

2. The excommunication was rather of the opinion by damning and condemning of
it, then of persons.

3. If there were such excommunication of persons, yet it was done by the
willing consent of the Churches, or else for themselves; those Churches that
met not for others, unless by consequent, that he who is excommunicated out of
one Church, if it be duly performed, is excommunicated out of all.

ARGUMENT II.
WHy has not the civil Magistrate a power to set up and establish by a law
such a worship as an Assembly of godly Divines shall present to them to be
according to the Word of God, as well as they had a power to pull down false
worship, Popery, Episcopacie, Arminianisme, and such gross errors and
innovations as had justled out the true servants and service of God? and this
they did with the approbations and acclamations of all those that professed the
power of godliness, of what Way or Sect soever they were; I never heard of any
such, that accused them for stretching beyond their line therein. If the
subject matter of Political administration be merely humane matters, why did
not Congregationall Divines inform them as much, but were silent while they had
their hands thrust deep into Church-affaires, and things spiritual? Why did
not their jealousy over the Parliament break out when they saw them begin to
dash the foot against that stone, but gave thanks to God for them and their
doing; but now when they have come to set up, and it proves aworship against
their judgment and conscience, they are reproved, and have no power at all in
things Ecclesiastical, but every man must enjoy his conscience, worship and
way? If they once had a power to pull down, why have they not now power to pull
down in the like case, with the like proportioned approbation? and if in things
Ecclesiastical they have a power to pull down, why not to set up too? That the
civil Magistrate shall have a power in things spiritual, and yet no power, is
a mystery unto me.

REPLY.
1. THe government the Magistrate has pulled down, was erected as a Law of the
kingdom, and by that power was enabled to the persecution of the Saints, and
disturbance of the State, which was the defection of the Magistracy of these
times. Now when the Magistrates shall not only withdraw their power, but also
prohibit the further exercise thereof in the persecution of the Saints and
disturbance of the State; we suppose it is no more then according to their just
power, and therefore do rejoice therein.

2. The Magistrates just doing any thing according to the joint consent,
desire, approbation, and congratulatory acclamations of all the Saints, is no
good argument to prove a lawful power in the Magistrate to do things contrary
to the joint consent, desires, etc. of all the Saints. Herod and Pilate, Felix
and Agrippa, had a just power to release Christ and Paul, etc. but that does
not argue that their power was just in delivering them up unto whipping,
imprisonment, death, etc. it was indeed potentia, but not potestas, might, but
not right, and it is the latter, I suppose, that you mean.

3. We did never deny the Magistrate a lawful power to intermeddle with that
kind of Church Government or doctrine, (opinion or practice) which shall most
dangerously intermeddle with the State it self; and thereby prove evidently
hurtful, and apparently destructive thereunto, and so did the government
whereof you speak, which was the ground of that act of abolishing the same.
When Congregationall or Presbyteriall government, or the professors thereof be
found in their principles and general practices, underminers of the peace and
welfare of the kingdom, raising up wars and trouble to maintain the same, it
is high time for the Magistrate, who is mainly to mind salutem populi, to pull
them down, and no longer to tolerate the same, and such is the instance which
you speak of.

4. Those Christian or unchristian Magistrates may have a lawful power and
authority to destroy Antichrist, which may have no lawful authority to appoint
laws and rules for the government of the Churches of Jesus Christ, and to
enforce the same contrary to their judgments and consciences; Cyrus may have a
just warrant from God for the ruining of Babylon; but not for the compulsion of
Sion to worship God according to his thoughts of the will of God therein, all
Magistrates may, and ought to assist and preserve the Churches of Jesus Christ
from those that wonld ruin and destroy them, but that any magistrate has
power to compel the Saints of God what to believe in matters of faith, and
what to practice in matters of immediate worship (especially in things that are
of an intricate and deep cognizance, and controversall among the godly learned)
( which is the main business in hand, between the Presbyterian and Independent
party) is beyond any ground that I can yet perceive from the Scriptures; but we
shall meet with this again in another of your Arguments.

ARGUM. III.
Why do not our Congregationall Divines write to the Brethren of New England,
and convince them of their error, who give (as some say) the civil Magistrate
a power to question doctrines, censure errors? sure we are, some have been
imprisoned, some banished, that [pleaded] Religion and mere conscience, and
were no otherwise disturbers of the civil peace, then the Congregationall Way
is like to be here: So that if our Magistrates and Presbyters must be ruled by
Gamaliels advice, and suffer all opinions till God disclaim and fight against
them from heaven, why is not his advice sent over to them, lest they should
fight against any Way that calls God father? If Old-England be said to
persecute, for suppressing Sects and Opinions, because threatening the truth,
and civil peace, why may not the same name be put upon New England, who are
found in the same work and Way? and if both he guilty, 'twere wisdom and piety
for our Congregationall Divines to east the first stone at themselves, I mean,
their Congregationall Brethren, to convince and persuade them to suffer all
Opinions amongst them, this would be an argument that they walk in all
simplicity and sincerity of spirit preferring Gods will and the naked truth,
above any ends of their own, (whereof some suspect them, how justly, God the
searcher of hearts knows) and next their arguments and persuasions would be
more easily received at home.

REPLY.
THis is an Argument, or rather an Insinuation to the accusing of our Brethren,
then to the finding out the truth; but to this I answer:

First, in relation to our Brethrens practice in New England, I answer you in
this case, as the father of the blind man answered the Pharisees about the
manner of procuring his sons sight, Job. 9.21. He is of age, ask him; so say I,
they are able to answer for themselves, if not, they stand or fall to their own
Master; But,

Secondly, I suppose it is easier to affirm then to prove that any were
imprisoned or banished merely for their consciences, we have a common
Proverb, That untruths lose nothing by distance of place, and by often
reporting, some affirm it has been so, as you say; others deny the same; for
my part, because I have more reason to believe the one then the other (because
the Magistrates themselves deny any persecution merely for a man's private
conscience, in the case of Mrs. Hutchison, See the book [the rise and end of
Antinomianisme in New England, p. 46. of the first Edition;) I had rather look
unto these things that do concern us at home, then to go so far to accuse our
brethren abroad.

Thirdly, I humbly suppose it is out of your certain knowledge that the
Congregationall Divines have not at all written unto their Brethren of
New England about this business, and have not received satisfaction herein, I
suppose likewise, I have as much reason, if not more, to affirm that they have,
as you that they have not; But,

Fourthly, suppose they have not written, this will prove but the remissness of
their duty at the most, and will not facilitate and ease the business in the
least; doubtless the Presbyterian party in other parts of the world not all
things according to the mind of God, even in the judgments of the
Brethren-Presbyterians of this Nation; and if so, may not the same thing be
retorted upon them which you do here upon these?

Fifthly, As for those jealousies which you say are in some about the
Congregationall Brethrens simplicity and sincerity of spirit in preferring Gods
Will and the naked Truth above any ends of their own, as Gods royal
Prerogative in searching all hearts, should stifle such misprisions, and quit
all such unworthy surmisings, till better proof appear; so any man's reasons
(not mastered with prejudice and discontent) should fully discharge all such
vain, unworthy, and uncharitable imaginations concerning their Brethren; for
except men's ends and aims should be sorrow, trouble, reproach and contempt,
perplexity and misery, penury and want, what other ends can they have? Are not
some of these for the present, and all of them for the future, the threatened
issues, products and consequences of their ways and practices? Surely men
should make a better use of their own personal weaknesses, viz. their own
sinful ends and aims, and by-respects in their own hearts, then to make them
the measure and rule to judge of their Brethrens hearts by; every man should
think better of his brother then of himself; surely the men of their jealousies
are not usually steered up and down from one place to another, by the golden
lure of an hundred, or two or three hundred a year, as many of their censorious
Judges are, but it is worthy our observation; the Saints of our most high God,
many times are chiefly charged for those things whereof they are least guilty,
and where they are most innocent, and therefore most able to bear the same:
Thus Joseph for incontinency; Elisha for the troubler of Israel, (though indeed
the horsemen and chariots of Israel;) thus David for seeking Saul's life, whose
heart smote him for but cutting off one of the skirts of his garment; thus
Jesus Christ for a deceiver (who was the truth it self,) and for a familiar
with the Prince of the Devils, who was indeed the great enemy to him and his
works: and as it was from the beginning, so it is now, the humble, the meek,
the simple-hearted, the peaceable, the most forward for reformation; yea, when
their zeal therein cast them into imprisonments, sorrows, troubles, etc. these
men (I say) are under jealousies, nay, evident and express censures of being
proud, perverse, deceitful, disturbers of the peace of the State, hinderers of
Reformation, with many such like and unworthy reproaches, but the faithful
Witness and Judge of all hearts will one day bring forth their innocence as
the light, and in the mean while support their spirits under all those hard
speeches, thoughts and calumnies of this world.

ARGUM. IV.
TItus 1.10, 11. There are many unruly talkers, and deceivers, who subvert
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, whose mouths must be
stopped: But Church-censure or sentence of non-communion, will not stop their
mouths; for (as it is in the Apologeticall Narration) they being of another way
and judgment, it binds not their conscience, and so dare pish at the sentence
of Non-communion of Excommunication, let the Presbyterians pronounce a sentence
against Congregationall Churches; or let Congregationall Churches pronounce any
sentence against Presbyterians, Antinomians, Anabaptists, who will teach
things, as they think, which they ought not, and see when this sentence stops
their mouths: But Paul says, Their mouths must be stopped, Church-censure does
it not; therefore, if they must be stopped, the civil Magistrate must strike
in to stop them, else they will ever be open to subvert whole houses. In the
Apostles times, what Church-censure could not reach to, was left to the power
and providence of God to subdue and master, and supply the office of a
Magistrate; but now when God has blessed a Christian Commonwealth with a
Christian Magistrate, if Church-censure will not stop deceivers mouths, but
still they will subvert men's precious souls, the Magistrate must exercise his
power, for they must be stopped.

REPLY.
FIrst, whereas the Apostle tells Titus, that such unruly talkers and deceivers
mouths must be stopped, it is clear, that it is Titus that must stop them, for
otherwise the Apostle writes unto him to no purpose, and he directs him
likewise which way he should stop their mouths, viz. verse. 13. Rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, and in the first verse of the
next Chapter, but speak thou the things which become sound doctrine; and verse
the 8th, he says of sound speech that it cannot be condemned. Surely, in that
sense that Titus may be said to hinder them from condemning sound speech, he
may be said to stop their mouths; you know in Scripture language, a man's mouth
is said to be stopped, when he is not able to gainsay the power of reason and
arguments that are opposed unto him: So Luke 21.15. Christ promises his
Disciples to give them a mouth and wisdom, which all their adversaries should
not be able to gainsay nor resist; that is, which shall stop their mouths,
viz. argumentatively: So Acts 6.10. Stephen so spoke, that the Cyrenians and
Alexandrians were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he spoke;
So Matthew. 22.34. Christ is said to put the Sadduces to silence, that is, to
stop their mouths, and verse. 46. the Pharisees likewise were not able to answer
him a word, and (to name no more places) 1 Pet. 2.5. the will of God is, that
by well doing we should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. You know
there is nothing does more open their mouths, then the well doing of the
Saints; but they open not their mouths like men: so here their mouths must be
stopped, viz. by Titus his sound words: this I humbly conceive is as clear as the
day; and to make it so, you have the same phrase, Romans 3.19. that every mouth
must be stopped.

Secondly, whereas you say, that that which Church-censure could not do was
left to the power and providence of God to subdue and master, and supply the
office of a Magistrate, I answer, that though it was left to the power and
providence of God to subdue and master, yet that this was to supply the office
of a Magistrate is but petitio principii, and therefore your inference, that
now when God has blessed a Christian Commonwealth with Christian Magistrates,
he must stop their mouths, is likewise taken before given.

Thirdly, if by stopping their mouths, you mean directly according to the
literal sense of the words, the Magistrate neither can stop their mouths,
except he will cut out their tongues, or sow up their lips, etc. for they will
be speaking where ever they are.

ARGUM. V.
GAlat. 5.11, 12. There were some that preached circumcision and Christ
together; this hotch potch-doctrine much prevailed, exceedingly troubled the
Churches, and Paul sighs and gromes out this wish; I would they were cut off
that trouble you. The question is, what kind of cutting off he means, is it
by Church-censure? then he might soon have eased himself and the Churches of
them, himself might have excommunicated them, as he did Hymeneus and Alexander,
1 Time 1.20. or commanded the Churches, when they had been gathered together,
and his spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to have delivered such
up unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. but this he did not, on if he did, it would not
serve his and the Churches turn, he and they still groan under the misery of
false Teachers; therefore it must be meant of a cutting off by some special
extraordinary providence of God, their destruction by the divine hand of
justice. Whence I think this note may genuinely be collected, The Church of God
may be pestered with false Teachers, which no Church-censure will so cut off,
as that they can be freed of them, and therefore the civil Magistrate by his
power (God having left off extraordinary manifostations of justice against his
and his Churches enemies) must cut them off, and not suffer the Churches to be
troubled and sowred with the leaven of their doctrine.

REPLY.
I Answer, by cutting off there, you suppose, not to be meant Church-censure,
and you give reasons for it, but you think it was some special, extraordinary
providence of God in bringing to pass their destruction, and I think so too,
though it may be meant also of Church-censure, which the Apostle could have
wished, might have been done, but the state of those Churches could not bear
it; but for that you infer that because now Church-censure cannot reach them,
therefore the civil Magistrate by his power (God having left off extraordinary
manifestations of justice against his and his Churches enemies) must cut them
off, and not suffer the Churches to be leavened and sowred with such leaven of
their doctrine. But, Sir, I humbly deny your inference; for if Magistrates have
a lawful power to supply the extraordinary instances of justice, which God
hathgiven in the punishment of sin, if, I say, Magistrates have a power thus to
do in your sense, why then the Magistrate should kill and destroy liers,
because God by an extraordinary stroke of justice did kill Ananias and Saphira,
Acts 5. for telling a lie, the Magistrate should destroy men for sleeping at
hearing the Word, because Eutychus by an extraordinary hand of divine justice
fell down dead from an upper loft where he was sleeping when he should be
hearing the Word of God, Acts 20. Nay, which is more absurd, Magistrates should
then omit the execution of justice upon more notorious sinners, and destroy the
less guilty sinners; yea, and should be at an uncertainty herein, because Gods
justice has reached some, and spared others guilty of the same sins; yea, much
greater, which I presume you will judge absurd; for the Magistrate is to
execute justice according to a known just law, and not according to the example
of God, who may destroy for an idle thought, if he pleases.

ARGUM. VI.
REv. 2. God has something to say against the Church in Pergamos, because she
had those that taught the doctrine of Balaam, and these also that held the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans (i.) they had them still, their mouths open,
teaching these doctrines, not suppressed, not taken out of the way. And
something he had against the Churches in Thyatira, because they suffered that
woman Jezabel to teach and seduce his. servants, either those that actually
were his servants, or those that possibly (for ought they knew) might have been
his servants; her they should not have suffered to have taught and spread her
infectious errors, though. doubtless, she being a Prophetess was able to
have said much for her, Way, and would have pleaded conscience too, yet it is a
charge drawn up against them, that she is suffered, and to me it seems by the
Antithesis, to run thus; verse. 22. Behold (as if he had said) though you have
failed in the execution of justice upon her, yet behold, I will cast her into
great tribulation, and will kill her and her children with death; I will not
suffer her, I will not fail in doing justice upon her and her children, as you
sinfully have done. Church-censure only would not have bindered her from
teaching, but she was not to have been suffered to teach, therefore a further
power ought to have come in for the suppression of her and her followers.

REPLY.
FIrst, I humbly conceive, that Church Censures, if duly and timely performed,
would have prevented this reproof, both to the one Church and the other, and
the neglect hereof, or (which is worse) the not suppressing these false
doctrines by a powerful preaching against the same, was the ground of these
sharp and bitter reproofs, and my Reason is this; it is evident they had not
the help of the Magistrate therein: for in respect of the political state, it
is said of the Church of Pergamus that she dwelt where Satan had his seat, or
throne, and where Antipas (Gods faithful servant) suffered martyrdom; so that
they had no help in that respect from the Magistrate, and if so, I suppose you
will not say the Church could imprison, banish, etc. so that I presume their
neglect must be of something which was in the power of the Church; And,

Secondly, whereas you say, Church Censures would not have hindered these
proceedings in the Church, I humbly conceive the contrary, because, if the
Church officers and members had examined these doctrines as they ought, and
upon the finding of them erroneous, had proceeded to censure them, in case they
would not forbear the promulgation thereof, from that time the Church was not
to permit them to preach any more amongst them, neither should they give them
any more hearing.

Thirdly, If a means sanctified by God to an end, do not always effect it, we
may not therefore devise another, Magistracy does not suppress all vice.

ARGUMENT VII.
MOst evident it is, that the civil Magistrate in the Commonwealth of Israel
was supreme in things Ecclesiastic ill, 1 Chro. 15. David assembles all Israel
to Jerusalem, gives the Priests and Levites their charge, orders the things of
the Ark of God, verse. 1. to 18. 2 Chronicles. 15. Its said, King Asa took courage,
and put away the abominable Idols, and renewed the Altar of the Lord, and made
a Covenant, and whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put
to death, whether great or small, man or woman. Now let it be shown, where God
took this power from the civil Magistrate under the new Testament; why the
Magistrate has not as much power, or the same power in matters Ecclesiastical,
as then he had? It Is true, the Apostles were very silent, and close in giving
the civil Magistrate his just power in things spiritual, but I conceive this
closeness of theirs was their prudence, and that in these two respects.

1. There was no Magistrate then, but Heathonish or Jewish, and so understood
not Gods will in his worship; and so had any thing been commanded, it had been
but a oarnall commandment, humane, which Christians must have refused, and
therefore 'twas not their wisdom to speak or write much to this point, lest it
had proved a snare.

2. Had they spoken much of a Christian Magistrate, that should have power in
things civil and Ecclesiastical, and be able to defend Christianity against
all it is enemies, this would have bred jealousies in the Roman State, and
Christian Churches would have been looked upon as a conspiring traiterous
generation, and persecutions would have soon been raised up against them; It
was the Apostles wisdom to keep Cesars head free from jealousies, that so the
Churches might enjoy Christ, and their consciences the better, therefore they
spoke so little of the Christian Magistrate in things civil and
Ecclesiastical, well knowing, that afterages would not be at a loss, or stand
in this point, but might look upon the examples of the godly Kings of Israel
for their imitation, (never being repealed) and in David, Josiah, Asa, might
see what was their right and just power in matters both of Church and State.

REPLY.
FIrst, it is not to be denied, but that the civil Magistrates in the
Commonwealth of Israel were supreme in things Ecclesiastical, but upon such
grounds and reasons as were peculiar unto them; and therefore not presidentiall
for Christian Magistrates under the Gospel, except upon the same or the like
grounds; For,

First, the godly Kings of Israel and Judah were types of Christ: thus David,
whom you instance, it is said of him, Psalm. 75.3. The earth and all the
inhabitants thereof are dissolved; I bear up the pillars thereof, which is true
only of Jesus Christ the antitype, who laid the foundations of the earth, Heb.
1.10. and upholdeth all things by the word of his power, verse. 3. Now, when the
antitype is come into the world, Jesus Christ in the room of his father David;
the law henceforth is to proceed from his lips, and the government is to be
upon his shoulders, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Isa. 9.6, 7. So
Moses was a chief magistrate unto Israel, unto whom they were to hearken,
until Christ, whom he did typifie, was come, and of him he says himself,
Deuter. 18.15. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you like unto
me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you: And it
shall come to pass, that whosoever shall not hear that Prophet, that soul
shall be destroyed from among the people, Acts 3.22, 23. The Kings of Israel
and Judah whom you mention, are types of Christ's kingly office, Christ
therefore being come, the types are gone; for though kings of Commonwealths may
be of a moral consideration, and so perpetual; yet kings as the head of the
Church in things Ecelesiasticall were types, and therefore abolished; and by
the same argument, as you will maintain the power of Christian kings over the
Churches of God in things merely Ecclesiastical, from the examples of the
kings of Israel and Judah, who were types of Christ, by the same arguments may
the Pope maintain a chief Priesthood under the Gospel after the example of
Aaron, and the rest of that order successively.

Secondly, the godly kings of Israel and Judah were directed by the infallible
mouth of God, and guidance of his Spirit, even in these Ecclesiastical
businesses; and thus David, whom you in stance to give the Priests and Levites
their charge, 1 Chronicles. 15. if you look into 1 Chronicles. 28.12. he had his
direction from the Spirit of God, and verse. 19. David professes, that the Lord
made him understand all the work of this pattern. When you can prove such an
infallible guidance and direction by the Spirit of God in matters of
Church Government to be the portion of Christian kings under the Gospel, there
may be some color in this argument.

Thirdly, The kings of Israel were Elders of one ministerial congregation; for
the whole Church and State were so, as is evident, and what they did, unless
upon express, either Text or revelation, was done with the consent of the
congregation, 1 Chronicles. 13.2, etc.

Fourthly, I do not remember that ever they did banish, or otherwise punish
all strangers from among them, that were not of their own Religion, or had such
a commission so to do, and that these severe laws about Church Government did
belong unto any but their own nation and people, or those that joined
themselves to them; all that acknowledged the seven precepts of Noah they
tolerated, Ainsworth on Genesis 17.12.

Fifthly, Most evident it is, that they did suffer several Sects, and
differing Opinions among them, and that of a more dangerous consequence then is
the difference that is the difference that is between the Presbyterian and
Independent, as the Sadduces, the Pharisees, the Herodians, Alexandrians, etc.
And therefore you may after their example plead for the like toleration, or
rather for the toleration of those that are of less danger.

Sixthly, But if any thing must be added, for conclusion, we say as the
Christians of old, leaving the dispute of the Magistrates power, in general,
we say this Way being of God, at least in great probability, the Magistrate
has no power to suppress it, (which I desire you to take as a full answer)
those kings of Israel commanded nothing but the express will of God, and that
without infringing the liberties of the Congregation, whose consent they had,
which two things, if our Magistrates shall do, all that we shall say, will be,
Go on and prosper.

Seventhly, Whereas you say, Let it be shown where God took this power from
the civil Magistrate under the new Testament, etc. I answer, where we find
types and ceremonies taken away, there we find this power in matters of
Church Government taken away, which (though it be not expressed in so many plain
words (as many other cermonies (granted on all hands to be taken away) are not)
yet this, with others, is to be understood (as I humbly conceive) in that
general expression of the Apostle, Gal. 3.24, 25. The law was a Schoolmaster
to bring us to Christ, etc. but after that faith is come, we are no longer
under a Schoolmaster; these things being shadows of good things to come, but
the body is Christ, Col. 2.17. And until it can be proved that the civil
government of the Jews had nothing typical as well as the Church, and that
the kings of Israel and Judah were not typical, in this particular, I humbly
conceive it a sufficient answer to that part of your Argument.

Eighthly, As for the Reasons which you give of the Apostles closeness (for so
your word is) in declaring the power of Christian Magistrates at that time,
they are but conjecturall not Scripturall, and therefore may as well be denied
by me, as affirmed by you, and that upon as probable grounds.

Your first Reason is, There was no Magistrate then, but Heathonish or Jewish,
and so understood not Gods will in his worship, and so had any thing been
commanded, it had been but a carnal commandment, humane, which Christians
must have refused, and therefore it was not their wisdom to speak or write
much to that point, lest it had proved a snare.

I answer, that men's not understanding Gods will in his worship (whether Jewish
or Heathonish, Magistrate or not Magistrate) could be no just ground why the
Apostles should not teach them; (their work being to teach such things which
were not before understood) and if any thing had been commanded by them (though
Heathonish or Jewish) according to the will of God, their commanding the same
had not made the commandment carnal, for I suppose it is not the person
commanding, but the nature of the thing commanded, that renders it carnal: For
if a Heathen commands that which is the will of God, and a Christian Magistrate
that that is net the will of God, it is the Heathens command that must be
obeyed, and the Christian Magistrates command that must be disobeyed, because
it must be the will of God, and not the authority of man that must be the
grouud of warranted obedience, and they might have taught it without peril, by
showing, that though he had power in Church-affaires, yet not against their
profession, as being of God, which was the only argument they defended it by.

Your second Reason is -- Had the Apostles spoken much of a Christian
Magistrates power in things civil and Ecclesiastical, and be able to defend
Christianity against all its enemies, (what you mean by this last clause I know
not) this would have bred jealousies in the Roman State, and Christian
Churches would have been looked upon as a conspiring traiterous generation, and
persecutions would soon have been raised up against them; it was the Apostles
wisdom to keep Cesars head from jealousies, that so the Churches might enjoy
Christ and their consciences. the better, etc.

I humbly answer, though it be true, the Saints should be as wise, as Serpents,
yet as innocent as Doves; and herein the Apostles snewed their innocence, in
that they kept back nothing of the will of God that was profitable, Acts 20.20.
I suppose this could not be unprofitable; and although every truth must be
preached seasonably, yet at one time or another, (your asserting the Apostles
supposition of the Saints sufficient understanding the will of God about
Christian Magistrates, from Gods will revealed therein, by the example of the
Kings of Israel, being only your own conjecture, as I said before, and not
Scripture; does not at all ease this business) for that must first be proved
before we can grant it you: and moreover, it is evident the Apostles did not
balk or forbear to preach such truths as were every whit as exasperating the
Roman Magistrate as this particular you speak of: as that Jesus was both Lord
and Christ, Acts 2.36. and that he should put down all rule and all authority,
and power, yea, and that he should reign until he has put down all his
enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.24. yea, and the more they were forbidden to
preach, the more they went about preaching, not regarding the command of the
Magistrate, when it was beyond the line of his just authority, and many other
Scriptures of this nature may be given; and these things (I conceive) may be
sufficient answers unto your 7th Argument.

ARGUM. VIII.
I Desire to know if Gamaliel had given the Council this advice of refraining
and letting alone, concerning Theudas or Judas of Galilee, I say, whether the
Council, being able to have demonstrated them and their ways erroneous, they
ought to have consented to him or no; for this is the true state of the
Question, and not whether the Ministers and truths of Christ may be suppressed,
we all know this would be fighting against God, to run a hazard no less then
death, but whether a Council finding a generation of Teachers erring from the
truth, and wilful in their errors, must then let them alone, and expect that
God should fight against them from heaven before they would sentence or smite.
I am sure Gamaliel seems to approve of rejoicing in the destruction of those
two forementioned, with their followers, when onee they were destroyed; and
doubtless, they were destroyed in an ordinary course of providence, by the
Jews, God making no extraordinary or remarkable revelations from heaven against
them or their errors, and therefore I conclude, it had been better to have
sentenced and quite crushed them in the shell, which had prevented all the
mischiefs that were done, the troubles of the State, the subversion of souls
not a few. Me thinks, through the spectacles that I look upon the place,
Gamaliel seems clearly to imply, that if the Council could have discovered by
any means, them and their doctrine not to have been of God, (as before they had
done Thendas and Judas) finding them so peremptory as they did, they might have
passed their own sentence upon them, and neither God nor Gamaliel would have
reproved them for it, but good service they had done. So that had I been to
have spoken to that Text, these three points I should have insisted upon:

1. It is a most dangerous thing to sentence and persecute the servants and
truths of God; it is no less then fighting against God.

2. God sometimes over-powers wicked men (as he did Gamaliel to advise, and the
rest of the Council to submit to his advice) to make way for the servants and
truths of God, that they may stand and prosper.

3. As to oppose the truth of God is to fight against God, so to sentence and
oppose doctrines which by the clear light of Scripture, are from men, or of a
worse descent, is to fight for God, and do him service: this is implied. I
would gladly know, how did God disclaim or renounce from heaven, Theudas and
Judas of Galilee, with their errors, that after the Councels forbearing, might
be a warrant for their destruction; what contrariety unto God was discovered in
their Ways when they fell upon them, that was not apparent when first they
showed their heads? their opinions catching and kindling in the hearts of many,
might have stumbled the Council into a longer forbearance of them, as being
easily of this Interpretation, that God owned them, and they went on in the
power of God, and therefore now more dangerous to resist them then before, it
consequently must never have parted the value of the least hair of their heads
against them, till they had seen fire and darts come down from heaven amongst
them. But doubtless, their destruction was no otherwise but thus; the Council
finding their Ways thwarting Moses and the Prophets were sorry for their thus
long forbearance of them, sent out forces, slew and scattered them,
notwithstanding their consciences, notwithstanding their errors claimed,
doubtless, a glorious and high descent. How has God disclaimed the Church of
Rome? any otherwise then he has done Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme? he has
clearly written their condemnations with his finger in his Word, that all of
them stand in enmity and opposition unto him and his providence [seemingly]
never owned any Religion more under the Gospel, then it has done Popery, and
therefore why must not their consciences and Ways be refrained from, as well
as the others? I cannot yet see, how upon Gamaliels words can be grounded the
forbearance, letting alone, any Way, that is once discovered to be not
according to the rule, the Analogy of the faith of the Scripture, etc.

REPLY.
THat question concerning the Councels duty to proceed against Theudas and
Judas, in case it was demonstrated unto them their doctrines were erroneous
(notwithstanding Gamaliels advice to the contrary) cannot I conceive be
rationally answered, except there had been a certain knowledge of the nature of
those errors, and upon supposition that those errors were gross and
dangerous, as it is like they were, even unto insurrection and sedition, I
answer, that they ought not to have hearkened unto his advice, but to have
proceeded according to rules of justice made in that behalf; and it is not
denied, but that the Christian Magistrate has a coercive power in matters of
Religion, in things that are of a moral and capital consideration, such as
are profane swearings, cursings, blasphemies, and such things; that first are
against the light of nature and conscience; yea, secondly, of cursed apostasy
from Christ, professedly denying him to be God, or come in the flesh, or
wickedly blaspheming him, teaching men so; and thirdly, such as are turbulent,
violent, mutinous and factious in raising up parties to the disturbance of the
peace of the State, as the late Bishops did; Neither has Mr. Goodwin, in my
best observation, said or writ any thing to the contrary in his Theomachia, or
elsewhere; for I cannot see any such thing in any of his doctrines raised from
his Text of that Sermon; and the main point which he prosecuted, and which was
(as it were) the spirit and life of all those particular instructions therein
contained, was, that, For any man to endeavor or attempt the suppression of
any Doctrine, Practice or Way, that is from God, is to fight against God.

This point is proved, and cleared and confessed on all hands to be a truth of
God, and if you look into application, he renders those obnoxious to the wrath
of God, who shall exercise any high handed apposition or contestation against
any Way, Doctrine or Practice whatsoever, UNTIL they have proof upon proof,
demonstration upon demonstration, evidence upon evidence; yea, all the security
that men in any ordinary way (at least) can have, that such Ways or Doctrines
only pretend God to be the author of them, and that in truth they are not at
all from him, but either from man or of a baser parentage. What is this against
the just power of a Magistrate in matters of Religion, and no more power then
this can you prove, even from the example of the kings of Israel and Judah;
and therefore, if you will reduce the Christian Kings and Magistrates unto
them as a pattern and example of their power in things spiritual, and make the
case directly as it is, you must bring in some instance or other of a
difference between the holy and godly Prophets and people of God themselves,
and that in a case very difficult and intricate, and hard to be found out from
the Scriptures or any of those ways wherein God did usually reveal his mind,
and that in such a case the magistrate did determine the business according to
his judgment, and compel the dissenting party to submission thereunto, and
that according to the approbation of God; and therefore an example for
Magistrates under the Gospel: such is the very case in hand, as might be
evidently declared. Moreover, there were those that did differ in many things
of a very deep and serious consideration (provided they made profession of the
Jewish Religion and government they were tolerated) as is very clear (as I said
before;) Sadduces, Pharisees, and several other sorts were permitted; neither
do I remember where they were compelled against their judgments, either in
matter of Profession or Practice, except (as being members of that Church) to
the main doctrines, worship and government expressed in the Word; and surely
there is far more, and better reasons for the toleration and permission of the
Independent, then can be given for the toleration of such persons as the Jews
did tolerate, for these agree with Presbyterians in the main grounds of
Religion, and principles of the Gospel; these are confessed by their Brethren to
be holy, godly and learned, and of singular use and benefit, both in Church and
Commonwealth, etc. and the toleration of none others are pleaded for in Mr.
Goodwins Theomachia, from that Sermon which you mention. But we will not stand
on this particular, because it may be one of the corruptions of those times, to
suffer such Sects, especially the Sadduces, who though (for reasons) not
reproved by our Savior, as some other corruptions were not mentioned by him.
We have said enough before to this Argument: As for those Doctrines which you
say you would raise from that Text, if you were to preach upon it, I conceive
the two first you mention are indeed very natural, but how you will draw the
third from thence as natural from that Text I cannot see; but it would be a
digression for me to meddle with that, and therefore I leave it to your own
further consideration.

ARGUMENT IX.
I Desire to know whether that law, Deuteronomy. 13. of putting a false Prophet to
death, or any one that should entice men from the Way of the true God, there be
not moral equity in it, and therefore bind the Magistrate and Chuches of God
to the end of the world? Calvin and the Church vf Geneva burnt a blasphemer,
they looked upon the moral equity of that law, Levit. 24.16. He that
blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall surely be put to death, all the
Congregation shall stone him; Why should not Christians be as tender of the
name of God as the Jews were? Is not his name as great and glorious, that it
may be more securely blasphemed now then it might then? But a Presbyterian
president will have but little authority with Congregationall Churches,
therefore I desire that Mr. Cotton (one of your own, upon whose learning and
judgment the wel-willer to Mr. Prynne (he that put forth the first answer to
his twelve Queries) would have men much to rely) may be heard speak in the
point, in his book, entitled Pouring out the seven Vials, on Rev. 16.4, 5, 6,
7. Verses. His very doctrine is this; Upon the discovery of the deadly
corruption of the Sea of Rome, it was a righteous judgment of God, and such as
argued him unchangeable, ever like himself, that the Priests and Jesuits, who
carried that Religion up and down the Nations, should be adjudged or condemned
to a bloody death. His meaning is evidently this, not because enemies to the
civil State, but because they carried Ordinances, Doctrines up and down the
world which were no better then the blood of a dead man, and every soul that
drank of them died, therefore they themselves must drink blood. Within a few
lines after his doctrine, he quotes Zach. 13.2, 3. (spealing of the times under
the Gospel, it is clear from the first verse, and so does Mr. Thomas Goodwin
interpret it in his trial of the growth of Grace) God will out off the false
Prophet, and if any false Prophet shall arise, his Father and Mother shall
thrust him therow, because he speaks lies in the name of the God of truth, be
shall not live. Upon which Text, he thus glosses, It is not spoken of his
typical death (i) of his death by Church-censure or banishment, which have a
kind of death in them, but of such a death as that he was not worthy to live,
because he cast a lie upon the God of Truth, the Oracle of Truth. In his first
Reasons of his point he affirms, that no Magistrate ought to have put Paul to
death for his errors and blasphemies, because be did all ignorantly, 1 Timothy
1.14. had the truth been made known to him, he would not have done as he did,
but such as blaspheme and teach errors wilfully after admonition twice or
thrice, the glorious light of the Gospel shining round about them, those he
affirms, ought to be looked upon with another eye, ought to drink blood.

His first objection is this, In the new Testament we must look for a
spiritual death (i) Church-censure only: He answers, his Text is in the new
Testament, not in the old, the new Testament says such are worthy to drink the
blood of their own hearts; the holy Ghost says, he will have it true
according to the Letter; and further answers, that 'twas one of Moses his
moral laws of perpetual equity, thrusting men away from God is as odious now
as then.

In his fifth Use he has these very words, Heresy is no more pleasing to him,
nor blasphemy, nor seducing, nor to change the Way of Gods worship, and to
draw men to Ways wherein they cannot enjoy God in peace; murder of souls is
no more welcome to God now then of old, and therefore if there were a law to
punish such with capital punishment, it is a like justice in God to enjoin
such laws in every Christian Commonwealth.

His second Objection is this, Conscience must not be forced, men must not be
put to death for their conscience. He answers, Heretics were as conscionable
in the old Testament as now; and if any man have a conscience to turn men from
God, God would have men have as much conscience to cut them off; glossing upon
Tit. 3. 10, 11. thus: He that will not be admonished is rejected, given up to
the civil Magistrate to be punished, or put to death, not for his conscience,
but because he sins against his conscience, the clear shining light of the
Gospel. Whereupon I think it follows, that any error whatsoever, though not
fundamental, if it be wilfully held and taught against instructions and
admonitions, especially if it make Sects and Factions, let them be never so
conscionable in their Ways, profess never so much of God to be in them, the
Magistrate may and ought to punish them according to the nature of their
errors, and their mouths must be stopped, that their teaching do no more
subvert.

REPLY.
FIrst, if that law, Deuteronomy. 13. of putting a false Prophet to death, or any one
that shall entice men from the true God be moral equity, and still binding the
Magistrates and Churches of God unto the end of the world, is to be understood
(as it there follows) of inducing to Idolatry, wherein notwithstanding there
is something peculiar to that nation, as in the 15th verse of that Chapter, If
a City should turn away from the true God, to serve other gods, that they
shauld smite the inhabitants thereof, and the cattle thereof with the edge of
the sword, and that they should gather all the spoil thereof into the midst of
the streets thereof, and should burn with fire the city, and all the spoil
thereof every whit, and that it should be an heap for ever, and that it should
be never built again, verse. 16. But this, because it is circumstantiall, I will
not insist upon. Now how far the moral equity of this law may extend in other
cases, I will not now dispute; because whether it reach further or not, no way
concerns the law fullness of Congregationall Churches.

Secondly, as for your instancing Calvin, and the Churches of Geneva's burning
a blasphemer, and grounding their act upon the moral equity of that law,
spoken of Lev. 24.16. I shall say nothing, but refer you to what Calvin has
written of it, a Tract entitled Explicatio perfidiae Valentin Gentilis, and to
Gods (...) of it one day in the sight of heaven and earth, it is notoriously
evident to be meant of a profane, wilful, wicked blasphemer and curser of
God; if that Heretic were such, as Galvin endeavors to show, Explicat
perfidiae Valent. Gentil, he is condemned in the very Text; but it is not
meant of one that through ignorance misconceiveth of God, either in respect of
his Attributes, or in respect of the Trinity; and surely, if such kind of
mistakings should not be atoned but by such sacrifices, we should have hot work
amongst Christians; yea, and with such sacrifices God would be pleased after
the manner as he would be pleased with the sacrificing of the fruit of our body
for the sin of our souls; yea, for any thing that I know, and they that shall
deal so with men for such mistakes in such things (I think) are in a great
error, as well as the mistaken themselves; and my reason is, because men have
been in many places but meanly instructed and educated in the right
understanding thereof, but oftentimes notions of the deepest cognizance are
handed over unto men from father to father, in a traditionall manner, without a
clear debating, evincing and confirming the truth thereof, and liberty given
to declare ones doubts herein; insomuch, that meeting with a deceiver, many are
so soon led away with his error, which is one great cause of the so many
woeful divisions, and errors that are now amongst us, and (by the way) this
indeed would be a business worthy the endeavors of our godly and learned men
of our age, to take pains in businesses of this nature) viz. the great things
of the Law and Gospel of God, to establish men in the right understanding of
the grounds of their Religion, to the rectifying of their judgments, and the
reformation of their lives and conversation, and not thus unhappily always to
wrangle about things of more inferior consideration.

Thirdly, suppose that Law, Deuteronomy. 13. and that also Levit. 24.16. be moral?
what is this to the business in hand? Mr. Goodwin in his Theomachia, nor
elsewhere (that I know of) did ever plead for the toleration, either of such a
false Prophet spoken of, Deuteronomy. 13. or such a blasphemer spoken of, Levit.
24.16. And your self brings in Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Thomas Goodwin, (men of the
same Way and opinion with Mr. Goodwin, in matters of Church Government) to
clear the Independent party from any such opinion, which (notwithstanding) is
insinuated into men's thoughts to be their darling, when, alas, it is nothing
so; and therefore why are they charged herewith? Surely want of love in the
accusers, and not guilt in the accused, is the ground of their accusation; But
the Question is about the Magistrates compelling men, even in matters of a
difficult and hard finding out the mind of God therein, and which indeed
oftentimes, is out of the cognizance and clear knowledge of the very Magistrate
himself. But can this follow, the Lord commanded a false Prophet that turns
away people from the Lord to be put to death? Deuteronomy. 13. Will it therefore
follow, that that Prophet that shall teach any thing at all contrary to the
supposed and disputable mind of God, that he also must be dealt withal after
such a manner? is there not great difference between men's pleading for this and
that kind of government of the Churches of Christ, and the turning away men
from the faith of Christ? do you not all confess, that the Independent men are
holy, godly, learned men; and useful unto the begetting unto, and building men
up in the knowledge of Jesus Christ? and does not God seal unto their Ministry
as well as unto any others Ministry? And so for the other Text, Levit. 24.16. A
blasphemer must be stoned to death; will it therefore follow, that an
Independent must not be suffered to live in a Christian Commonwealth? surely
this conclusion never grew on that Scripture, nor in any other that I have yet
seen.

You say, That any error, though not fundamental, if it be wilfully held, and
taught against instructions and admonitions, especially if it make Sects and
Factions, let them be never so conscionable in their Way, profess never so
much of God in them, the Magistrate may, and ought to punish them according to
nature of their errors, etc.

Answ. 1. It is not sufficient a point be cleared, but that it be cleared to
the persons we would persuade; else they are to be born with till that be
done, as appears in the weaker Jews about ceremonies, and some of the
Corinthians about the resurrection.

2. It is confessed, that obstinacy and wilfulness, and that after instructions
and admonitions, is justly punishable by the Magistrate, where ever it be
found; but, Quid inde? where will you fasten this obstinacy and wilfulness,
that you may bring your supposition to the business in hand? upon the
Independent? May they not as well recharge it upon them from whence it came?
have there not been instructions and admonitions on both fides? and is not
satisfaction as far off from many godly and learned men it the one as in the
other? Must nomen multitudinis determine the business? No, certainly, your
self has proposed a better rule, and that is, the making of Sects and
Factions; and for this, quit you the one party, the other quits it self: As,
first, for the making of Sects: surely it is not the trial of doctrines before
received, but the receiving of doctrines (if compelled by authority) before the
trial thereof that makes Sects, it is not the mutual binding of men together
in the bond of love, and the mutual engagements unto watch fullness,
instructions, exhortations one unto another (which the Apostle prescribes, as
means against men's being tossed up and down by every wind of doctrine, Ephesians.
4.14.15, 16.) it is not these things I say, that makes Sects, but the want of
these things; it is true, there are several Sects that profess these Ways,
so there are several Sects that profess the Gospel and the Protestant
Religion, in so much, that Father said, The Devil was let loose, when he saw
the Saints that sprung up under his Doctrine, is the Gospel or Protestant
Religion the worse therefore? An ^as for the other part of your rule of trial
(the making of Factions,) let the Magistrate spare none where it is found, no,
upon his peril, and as he will answer it before the Lord, let him not spare
any; for this indeed is the main end of his authority, to keep the people
committed unto him in peace, and to be a nursing father unto the Church, if any
be in his dominion: but who are these Faction-makers? surely not the meek in
the earth, the weapons of whose warfare are arguments, reasons and Scripture,
and who would have men be at peace with all men, not men that are gentle, sofe,
striving only with the cords of a man (viz.) reason and understanding, and not
with the whips of Horses, and the goads of Oxen. Were not the Bishops a
factious generation? And wherein did it appear? was it not by their
insinuations into the Magistracy, to have their Ways maintained, urged and
pressed upon men by a law, by fines, imprisonments, banishments, whips and
pillories, by procuring Laws, and Canons, Decrees and Injunctions, to press
men against the truth, their judgments and consciences unto obedience thereof?
and has not this State-troubling generation, raised up and kindled that
consuming fire, that is like now to devour the kingdom? Well, if this evil
spirit of distraction, contention and faction be found in the Congregationall
party, let not the eye of the Magistrate spare them, but let him take heed,
that he do not condemn the innocent, and justify the guilty. Now the Lord in
mercy conjure that spirit of Faction where ever it be found, and give the
Magistracy of this poor kingdom wisdom to observe where it is, and prevent
all dangers thereby, that this distressed Nation may flourish in truth and
peace.

The Conclusion.
THese are the Arguments or doubts that for the present I desire some
satisfaction in, that my judgment and conscience may be settled; Let it not be
thought that I am making a party against them; or that I think my Arguments
cannot be answered, I am better persuaded of their holiness and abilities then
to think they will take up any opinions, but they can satisfy any equal
minded man that asks them a reason of such their faith; nor yet let it be
thought that I have followed these objections with a spirit that intends not to
receive satisfaction; I call him to witness, before whose Tribunal I and all
the purposes of my heart must stand naked one day for to be judged, my very
heart (if I understand mine own heart) stands open to receive all the truths of
God, whoever brings them, with what external inconveniences soever they come
accompanied, I have urged my doubts, it may be thought, with somewhat too much
earnestness and heat, I am sure with all singleness of heart, aiming at
nothing but to know more of the mind and Way of God, that God may be more
glorified in me. Grace be with us all.

Your true friend to love and serve you and yours in Christ Jesus, etc.

REPLY.
THese are the Answers which for the present I humbly return unto your
Arguments, which (I must confess again) have been tendered with more
sweetness and candidnesse of language, phrase, and expression, then ever yet I
did read any arguments of this nature before, wherein, if I have showed, that
which is indeed. mine own, viz. weaknesses, insufficiencies and mistakes, I
hope the power of Christ in you ( viz. the spirit of love) will cover them all;
and here again I must renew my former request, viz. the letting slip, if any
thing be weak, and your more serious thoughts upon that which is more valid
and considerable; to presume your satisfaction, would be too great ambition,
though to assure my self of your acceptance is my perfect confidence; Sir, I
leave what I have here tendered, unto your prudent consideration, desiring the
Almighty to lead us all into the ways of truth and peace, knitting our hearts
together in love, and so guiding us by his counsels to bring us to his glory,
which is the hearty prayers, Sir,

Of yours in all Christian love and sincerity, J. P.

FINIS.

