THE PARLIAMENT JUSTIFIED In their late Proceedings against Charles Stuart, Or a
brief DISCOURSE concerning the Nature and Rise of GOVERNMENT, Together with the
Abuse of it in Tyranny, and the PEOPLES Reserve.

1 Samuel 17.28. And Eliab said, I know thy pride, and the haughtiness of thy
heart.

AS ALSO AN ANSWER To a certain PAPER, entitled, The humble Advice of the
Lecturers of Banbury in the county of Oxon, and Brackley in the County of
Northampton.

By J: Fidoe, T: Jeanes, W: Shaw, Students in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's, 1648.

Impartial READER,
LEt neither the Title nor the matter offend thee; the title is nothing else
but the Books Name, by which you may distinguish it: Let not the Frontispiece
affright you, if so, rather throw it by: Christen it by what Name you will;
Names or Titles are but tokens of things, and evidences of men's affections. We
for our parts cannot (though others do) forfeit our Trust to those, who next
unto our Creator, have been the Preservers and Restorers of our Rights and
Privileges, which Tyranny had bereaved us almost of. We cannot suffer our
selves to be called unthankful, or to be branded with Injustice; for if Cicero
may be credited, there is Injustice in not turning away an injury, when it is
in our power, as well as in doing it. Though we could humbly wish, That better
wits, and riper judgments in these matters, would have undertaken this task; a
task indeed able to break our shoulders, were there not Atlasses to bear us up,
and who knows not but Atlas is able to bear up the whole world: The Tongue,
says St. James, is a little member, but set on fire of Hell, with it we bless
God, and curse man: Some men are of Jobs wife's temper only in this different,
she advises her husband to curse God, they men, who sees not innumerable
Shimei's, that when Saul is departed, cast reproaches upon our David's or
honorable worthies; how many Rabshekahs that reproach, and with uncircumcised
tongues defy our Bethel, or Parliament, for God is wont to be in the
Congregations of the Gods. We are true Englishmen, cannot endure to deny, but
ingenuously to confess the least favors: Who knows not but that this Parliament
and Army now on foot, have restored to us, not only our well being, but our
very lives (for not to speak of the slavery of Subjects under Tyrants, who
cannot call their lives their own, of which more shall be said) from him that
would have enslaved us in more then Egyptian bondage; for it is probable, that
though Pharaohs Taskmasters did afflict their bodies, yet their lives were not
hazarded; ^^t who is ignorant of the purpose and intent of our adversaries, not
only to have enslaved our bodies, to have usurped our possessions, but also
our very lives, should have been at ones will; who, we say, can be so unlike a
man, as to labor to destroy those that gave him life and all, that cannot be
content not only to receive good, but they must requite evil: O perverse
Generation, if you should do good to those that do good to you, what more do ye
then the Heathens? But what example can you bring to parallel this ingratitude?
A few spare hours wrote this handful; we Scholars have not much time to spend
upon the State, only these few words may testify our hearts, who are not
only willing to word it, but to justify, if need be, some other way. We know
we shall endanger the tongues of many a Zoilus; what is it to us? Tongues are
but childrens bables: Fools use their tongues, though not their Reason; To
those therefore that are so Eagle-eyed, that they can spy any fault but their
own, we shall conclude with that of the Comedian, Ut Maledicere desinant
monemas maledicts ne noscant sua.

Thine as thou art for the Truth, John Fidoe, Thomas Ieanes. William Shaw.


THE PARLIAMENT JUSTIFIED In their late Proceedings against Charles Stuart.
BEfore we proceed to Treat of Government in the rise and growth, it will not
be needless to give our definition of it, as we think fit enough to the nature
of the thing: We define it therefore a voluntary submission, when one or more
rule, and others willingly obey (by which we distinguish it from Tyranny, of
which more hereafter) for the end of all Government, it Salus Populi, there
being, as says Cicero, a natural instinct in all Men and Beasts to conserve
themselves, and to shun those things that are destructive: Now that this may be
the easier done, Nature seeks Union; for all Union preserves, but discord and
disjunction kills: And Solomon says, that two are better then one, for if one
fall, the other shall help him up: And Aristotle says in his Book De Repub.
That man by nature is Civil Animal: And therefore the same Author says, That
he that is a Member of no City, is either a notorious Rogue, or better then a
Man: To which agrees Cains punishment, to be a wanderer and a vagabond, which
he said was to heavy for him to bear; and those in the Hebrews, who wandered
about in sheepskins and goat skins, of whom the world was not worthy. The
first age we confess dwelt apart, and lived vicati^^; as also it is said of the
Athenians, that they lived like Beasts in holes, till by Government they were
civilized: Now for the preserving of mutual intercourse between man and man;
Nature, who does nothing in vain, endued man with a reasonable Soul, and
discursive faculty or speech, by which he might signify to his fellow
Creatures, both joy and gladness, and also bewail his misery: He has made him
also to distinguish betwixt good and evil, just and unjust, and that not upon
constraint, but by an innate Principle, by a Law written in his heart: But
after that God had Created man a living soul, he forgetting that duty of his
Creation, increased in wickedness; so that it was necessary for the
conservation of the whole, that this vast body might have some head to rule it,
and something that might be as a rule just and right to be governed by. Now
this Government admits of several divisions, and several names: For certain it
is, that the first Image of Government that ever was, has been betwixt Father
and Family: For as much as those things that are simple, are before Aggregates;
and therefore Aristotle first speaks of a House, as being the part of a City,
and then of a City.

A House consists of two parts, Servants, and Children; A Servant is nothing
else but a living possession, one who has given up himself to the disposing of
another, and is as an instrument in the hand of his Master, who does with him
what he pleases, save only that which the Law of Nature, and the Law of the
State wherein we live forbid. How this came about, and whether God at first
Created men alike, and whether men put themselves first into this condition, we
will not now dispute; yet its probable by nature all men are alike free, and
that either Tyranny made first slaves, or else happily some having spent their
Talent, and being ashamed to beg, put themselves into another possession,
though Aristotle says, Some men are born to serve: Sure it is, that to
command, and to be commanded, are not only necessary, but also useful; for we
see that in our selves, that consist of soul and body; the soul commands, and
the body as Servant obeys, yea, the very Heathen had this notion; and that as
some think, from the sight of the goodly universe, or in imitation of the
Celestial Deity: For seeing all things so fitly moved, they knew it could not
be but by some kind of Government; whereupon some think there was a certain
kind of Government among the gods, Jupiter being so often styled King, but yet
for the favorableness of his Scepter, styled by Homer, the Father of gods and
men. Now as we said before, it is evident that the state of a Servant is
slavery, because that some that have been of Ingenuous Parents are compelled to
it: And that which is natural to men; viz. Freedom, is so often fought for.
Hence it is that we Read of the Servile Bellum, of the Scythians and Romans.
Now Servants are either such as have voluntarily put themselves on it, or else
are such by Law, by which it is established that those that are taken by War,
are the spoils of the Conquerers; whence some are called Mancipia, Quasi Manu
Capta: And such is the power of the Master over his servants, that the
Scythians being gone over the Seas, Justin. Hist.
and their Servants Rebelling, they came to them with no other weapons but
whips in their hands, a manifest token of their Servants subjection. The second
part of a house are children, the power of the father over them, is the same
that a King has over his people; and as a King is to provide for the good of
his people, so the father for his children, till they be able to provide for
themselves, which is the very instinct of Nature in all Creatures to provide
for their young, till they can pick their own meat. Such was the power of the
father in Liberos, that the Romans had power over their childrens lives;
examples hereof are exceeding many, and some think paralel'd in Abraham's
offering Isaac, and Jephtha's Vow: To put bounds to this power, it is not our
intent, only this we will say, which is granted by all (and which shows all
power limited) that the Son is not to obey the Father in all things: The
grounds of this is in the Jewish Law, and holds true by the Law of Nature; for
if one should be commanded by his Parents to sacrifice to Idols, or the like,
he is in no wise to obey him, it being contrary to an express Command: Now
though obedience is better then sacrifice, yet it binds not contrary to a
Command; for in case the Magistrate should command one thing, Parents another,
we demand which is to be obeyed, since the Scripture is express for both: There
is reported in the Rabbines a pretty conceit; A Boy was commanded by his
Mother, to take a nest of Birds with the Dam, the Law forbids it; the Boy
assaying to break the Law in the obedience of his Parent, broke his neck; what
a King is in his City, that a Father is in his House: And as Kingly Power is
continued by the obedince of Subjects, so is an House; For if a House be
divided against it self, it cannot stand: And he that will learn to govern
well, and be a Member profitable to his City, must learn first to rule his own
House, which is a part of it. And now we come to Cities; The general forms of
Government, we shall only name them; it being our intent only to speak of
Government in its self, not in this or that, which is only accidental, and not
essential; though some States stand best by one, some by another: The usual
forms are, first, Aristocratical, where men of the greatest Parts and Trust,
are singled out for the good of others: Much like the States in Holland: and
these gathered out of every county, and assembled together, seem to us to carry
the true notion of a Parliament, the Commons being a representative body. The
second is Democratical, when the people have a voice in all that is done: Not
much unlike this, was the Tribunus plebis among the Romans, who suffered the
Senate to do nothing without Rogation of the people; and they had power to
choose Consuls, and to Enact Laws, which were therefore called, Plebiscita. The
third, is Monarchical, when one has sole command: concerning this, though it
be very ancient, and the common opinion be, that in Nimrod or Belus, Father to
Ninus, the first Monarchy began after the Flood; yet its probable there were
Kings before him: For besides that Cains building of a City, and denominating
it from his Son Enoch, seems to have the Character of a Kingdom in it; yet some
make Adam the first King, and that Seth succeeded in his Kingdom: And the
Letter of Alexander to Aristotle, in Joseph-Ben-Gorion tells us, that Kenon the
Son of Enoch, Grandchild to Seth, was Emperor over the whole world, and
buried in an Island of the East-Indian Sea; yea, some would have Monarchy
derived from the very Law of Nature, and that Man as a Civil Creature was
directed to this form, to which they bring that of Justin. In the beginning,
the command was with the Kings, whom no popular Ambition, but Spectata inter
b^^^s moderatio exalted to it. And Homer says, that one King is best;
notwithstanding, to speak the truth, for all that can be said of Monarchy, we
think that no one Government is more suitable to the nature of a man then
another, it being contrary to men to be in subjection, if they can avoid it; if
any, that which is most conservative, which would be disputed: This only we
will say, That in the multitude of Counselors, there is wisdom. And the first
disorder of Government in Scripture was in Saul, a King. The fourth form,
concerning which we shall speak a word, because that now adays men argue from
that to ours, is the Jewish policy, which Josephus and all Writers confess to
be a Theocratia, or a State mediately governed by God: For we put the case
thus, and we say, That they could do nothing but by express command from God,
whether in Peace or War, (not to speak of the Vrim and Thummim, Typical of Gods
presence, who is both Light and Truth) they, we say, have their Government
immediately from God: For its proper to Nations that are sui Juris, to make War
and Peace, as we see in the Romans, and all others: But the Jews could not make
either War or Peace with any Nation, but by an immediate inquiry, which when
they neglected, how often did it prove their destruction? And how often do we
read in holy Writ, of asking counsel of God, and of doing nothing without him?
Secondly, those that had their Magistrates and their Laws from God, their
Government is of God: But the Jews had their Magistrates, Judges, and Kings
from God, yea their Laws, which are so often called The Book of the Law of the
Lord. Now the Constitution of a Commonwealth being nothing but Heads, and
Laws, it follows, that they who had those two from God, and could not Enact
Laws, or Establish Governors by a Power seated in themselves, had the
Fundamental Constitution of their Republique from God. Although it be otherwise
in other Nations, A digression concerning the end of Magistracy.
in which we suppose the Power is fundamentally seated in the People (as will
be said) for whose good it was first instituted: For when Res Publica comes to
be Res Privata, it ceases to be a Commonwealth, and is then Tyranny: The
judgment of the Israelites was to be without Magistrates, or else to have
foolish Magistrates who knew no good but their own, whereas they should be
common Parents, consulting not for themselves but for their People, wherefore
they are compared to Shepherds: And those that feed Israel in Scripture, are as
well Magistrates, as Ministers: Plato in his Repub: in diverse places keeps this
similitude: A Shepherd, he says, (speaking of Governors) cares for nothing,
but that he may keep what is committed to his care; the same says, all
Government ( quatenus Government) commands us to take care for no other thing,
but what is committed to our charge: And therefore Plutarch says, That it
behooves a Prince first to govern himself, and then to govern his Subjects; for
he that knows no order, cannot order others; the same would have them to
consider, that they themselves are subject to Command: Not like the King of
Persia, who made all Slaves but his Wife, and therefore the Law is to be his
rule, the King of men and gods, says Pindar: Not so much that written in Books
or Tables, but viva in corderatio, always dwelling, always watching with him;
and therefore the King was to have the Law continually read to him: And it may
be the cause why so much sin in Israel, was, because the Law was lost and not
found, or at least not used till Josiah, at which time there was great joy for
the finding of it, and the King read in it from Morning until Evening: Not much
unlike this is that of the Persian King, who had one to come to him every
Morning with these words, Rise O King, Care for those things which Oromasdes
would have you care for: They are called Ministers of God (yea gods) to
preserve men's Estate, and what nature has bestowed upon them, to distribute it
and preserve it: And therefore at first, the Romans had only their Senatus
which consisted of old men, best able to judge of things, being experienced in
the affairs of this world: Concerning this, Plutarch has wrote a Book, in
which is elegantly discussed who are fitter for the Commonwealth, youths, or
old men; for we know that Rehoboams young men made the Tribes fall off: The yoke
of Tyranny being insufferable, and therefore upon due consideration and power
to be cast off; for who is ignorant that the first Power entrusted was but
small, and no more, then if a blind man should entrust a seeing friend with
his leading, and he contrary to his Trust, should either attempt a murder, or
else a throw from some preoipice: we say, that if this man should receive his
sight; he may then cast him off, for that he desired him to lead him, not to
throw him down. Now having said something of Government in general, as also of
the declination of it, we shall proceed to that which indeed is nothing else
but the abuse of it, and that is Tyranny, or an unlimited and usurped Power, by
which one man, or more, without an Appeal to the Law of Nature, written in the
heart of every man, or to that Divine written Law of God, entrench upon (by
freely exercising) the Natural or Political Rights of others, according to
their own pleasure: It is a Power merely Arbitrary, which is so far from coming
under the notion of Jus Divinum, as it is altogether Repugnant to the Law of
Reason and Nature; neither of them allowing the private Interest of a part, to
exalt it self above the common good of the whole; whence comes the ruin of a
body Natural? but from the superabounding, unlimited and Tyrannical Power, of
some one of the Malignant humors: As Sampsons strength lay in his Locks, so
that of a State lies in the Complication of an universal Interest, common unto
all; we shall speak of Tyranny under a twofold account: 1. There may be Tyranny
by Conquest, as those that know any thing in History, know that the foundation
upon which the first four Monarchies was built, was an usurped Power, got by
the Sword: For indeed, the world being enlarged, and the estate of the people
confused, it was then a fit time for Tyranny to take its original; every one
being a Law to himself, and Interpreter of his own Actions, no marvel that the
strongest governed all the rest at his own will: If this principle of Tyranny
be good, other men may not only free themselves from slavery as soon as they
can, but also exercise power (when its put into their hands) against Tyrants,
their former oppressors; it will amount but to Lex talionis, to pay them home
in their own Coin, from their own Principles. 2. Tyranny may be by
Maladministration, or by abusing and going beyond the Trust reposed in a man,
by a Kingdom or State: The present age in which we live, presents before our
eyes an example most fresh and lively; That our late King, Charles Stuart, was
not a Tyrant in the first sense, is confessed by all, witness his Oath at his
Coronation, as also his claiming Interest in the Crown, by a lineal descent
from William the Conqueror, who thought the choice or Election of the People, a
better and surer Title then Conquest: But to free him from Tyranny in the
latter sense, who can? unless spirits wilfully prejudiced against the Honorable
Parliament, and the High and Supreme Court of Justice; for that he was
entrusted by the People with his power, is clear, it being irrational to think
that our Ancestors gave any such absolute unlimitted Power unto our late Kings
Predecessors, as that they might use them how they pleased; and
notwithstanding, that no reserve left in people, when as the exercise of
Government, the bestowing it upon one or many, is founded in the consent and
mutual agreement of the whole body, or society of men in a State-Government or
Magistracy, is indeed a power ordained of God, and upon no pretense to be
resisted: but when a man through depraved Principles of Tyranny and Oppression,
usurps over the Conscience in things Spiritual and Divine, above the reach or
determination of the Spirit of a man, by proposing his will and fancy to them
for a Law, or when he entrenches upon Natural or Civil Right, then he loses
the notion of a Magistrate, because he goes contrary to the end of the
Government of that Fundamental Law, which is Salus Populi: But suppose our
Forefathers had given away to any one man without a remedy or appeal, that
power originally in them by way of dispensation, it will not follow, seeing
nature makes us free, and this freedom never given away by us, we should be
bound to embrace any slavery our Forefathers should seemingly cast us in, they
could only engage for themselves, they had nothing to do with their Posterity,
as to take from us what Nature gives: Now that Charles Stuart broke this Trust,
which we have showed he must necessarily be entrusted with, we shall not need
to spend time in the probation of, it being abundantly proved by many learned
Pens, we shall proceed to show the lawfulness, for Freeborn men in a State,
according to that Fundamental Law of Reason, to execute Justice upon a man
degenerated into Tyranny: In doing this, we shall not spend time to Treat of
the several names and kinds of Government, we having spoken somewhat of them
before, yet this we would put you in mind of, That Theocracy was only of
Divine institution, and that this was only proper to the Jews: As for the
rest, they are of humane institution, and are derived from the People; and the
people have power to put down, or to alter these or any of these as they find
occasion; seeing it is confessed by all, that Salus Populi est Suprema Lex, All
Governors are but Trustees unto the People: And therefore when the people find
them acting contrary to the Trust reposed in them, they may justly take it from
them, and commit to others; or in case they cannot find others that they can
entrust, or in case they find that Government inconvenient for the State, they
may alter it, and keep the Trust in their own hands: But we know that there are
many, who deny the Supreme Power to be in the people; and those men make it
Haereditary to Kings and their Successors, and that by virtue of the Laws of
this Nation. But concerning the first, we would have them see from whence this
Succession did proceed; There could not be a Succession before there was an
Election; and if so, then either the first King must have this power in
himself, or receive it from the people: Now we suppose that no men are so
absurd, as to affirm it was in the first King, before he received the Crown and
Power from the people; and if so, then the prime and chief Power must
necessarily be in the People: If Kings obtain Crowns and Kingdoms any other
way, it must be by Conquest; and if that be a sufficient Title, then if the
great Turk should invade our Kingdom, we must necessarily own him as our lawful
Sovereign; and if any private man by force can beat another out of his
possession, he may lawfully enjoy it, and he to whom it did of right belong,
must acquiesce, and not seek to regain it. But there are some that say it is
not our case for we have had a Succession of kings according to the Laws of
this Nation, for diverse Generations: But we desire to know of them, by whom
those Laws were Enacted; as also, who the first king was, from whence this
Succession did proceed: And as for this first king, which was the main Basis or
stock from whence this Succession took its rise, It was William, surnamed
Bastard, Duke of Normandy, who invaded this Land, and destroyed many of the
Freeborn English: We shall not spend time to dispute what Title he pretended
he had to the Crown: But this only we shall say, If he had any Interest, it
could be but a weak one, seeing he was an illegitimate: We shall rather speak
of the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government he exercised on the Freeborn
English, as soon as he had invaded this Nation, and obtained the Crown: How he
subverted their Laws, and by force Enacted and put in Execution such as were
most suitable to his own Tyrannical Spirit, to the great dislike and
malcontent of the people; Though they were constrained to submit unto them,
as appears by the several insurrections of the English, both of the Nobility
and Commonalty, who several times endeavored to throw his servile yoke off
their shoulders: Amongst whom Edgar Ethling was chief leader, who also is
reported to have had the greatest interest in the Crown, with whom joined Edwin
and Morcar, who were brethren of the Queen.

We shall not stand to tell you of the multitudes slain in diverse places, nor
of his unjust acting in particulars; Though History makes it plainly appear,
That in a Bloody and Barbarous manner, he dismembered many, put out the eyes of
some, and slow many hundreds which were at his mercy: Only this we will say of
him in general, He came in a Conqueror, and lived a Tyrant; but it was not our
intent to have spoken any thing concerning him, only this we thought good
briefly to discover, the stock from whence this Regal Succession did spring. We
shall not speak any thing of the Tyranny of his Successors, nor how far they
walked in his wicked steps, but shall pass all over in silence, until the
unhappy Reign of Charles Stuart, who came unto the Crown after the death of king
James his Father, his Brother Henry being before poisoned: We shall not here
stand to reckon up the Capital crimes which were committed by him in the
beginning and middle of his Reign; neither shall we undertake to determine how
far he countenanced the Spanish Faction; neither shall we intermeddle with the
transactions of Ree, Rochel, etc. But we shall rather descend to the last seven
years of his Reign, and here we could declare sufficiently the horrid impieties
and bloody slaughters committed by him: But seeing the illegality of his
proceedings is sufficiently proved, and so fully made manifest to all the
world, we shall not spend time to dispute of it, seeing all men, unless
wilfully blind, may read it ^n bloody Characters; but we shall rather speak
something concerning the justness of the Parliaments proceedings against him:
It being apparent he degenerated from a king unto a Tyrant, it was not unjust
for them to Act against him, as a Tyrant; now all rational men acknowledge it a
just act to execute a Tyrant: But the difference amongst them is, By whom he
should be executed? Whether by a Native? or Stranger? or for any man without
Judgment? or else whether it must be done by some Court of Judicature? and to
this last most men agree: We read of Nero and Maximinus, how they were both
executed by the power and command of the Roman Senate: And likewise diverse of
the kings of Denmark, for Tyranny have been Banished, Imprisoned and Executed;
so odious is Tyranny to all men, that the very Heathens, when Hercules had
subdued Tyrants, they numbered him among the gods: And in our Neighbor Nation of
Scotland, the Lord President of the High Court of Judicature, has given a very
large example, and therefore we shall pass that by.

But if we had had no president, either Domestic or Foreign, yet the very Law
of Reason and Nature, were sufficient to clear them in it: As for the Laws of
the Land, they are all subordinate unto this of Reason, and must give place to
it: And seeing kings have always had a Negative Voice, which they have kept up
by usurpation, it is not to be expected the letter of the Law should so fully
speak to their particulars: Therefore we cannot but acknowledge, that we are
abundantly satisfied, in the justness of their proceedings in the Trial,
Condemnation and Execution of Charles Stuart. Now seeing Government is so
necessary (as we have already declared) and Tyranny taken away by Gods
blessing, and the endeavors of our Honorable Parliament, and Renowned Army: Our
earnest desire is, That God would direct and enable them to settle a
Government, that all men, especially those that are in places of Trust, as well
in Universities as elsewhere, may be compelled to acknowledge the Supreme Power
of Parliament, which they have received, and are entrusted with by the people
of England, that we may have cause to rejoice in them, and to bless God for
them, and as long as they shall thus Act according to their Trust, we shall not
cease to be their faithful and affectionate Servants, to the utmost of our
powers.

AN ANSWER TO A BOOK ENTITLED, The humble Advice of certain Preachers of
Banbury in the county of Oxon, and Brackley in Northamptonshire.
WE had thought, that such had been the Equity of our Parliaments proceedings,
and so manifest to all the seeing world, that even Envy her self would have
been silenced; but we had delivered to us a Paper, Entitled as is mentioned;
which Paper, though it came to our hands like an old Almanac, bearing date
from before the death of him, whom you styled, Your Dread Sovereign, yet we
could not pass it over, without showing you how far you have out stript-your
Classical bounds. As for the particulars in the Book, having perused it, we
find neither good Reason, nor good Arguing; yet nevertheless, we will single
out two or three, to which we will briefly Answer.

Whereas you instance in the profanation of your Covenant and Oaths, we
Demand,

1. How far Oaths and Covenants are obligatory?

2. We ask, what you meant by entering into Oaths and Covenants, of Restoring
Charles Stauart, and Reforming Religion? As to the first, we say, That some
Oaths and Covenants are not to be made, and if inconsideratey made,
consideratey broken; for we know, that more then forty of the Jews bound
themselves by Oath, Not to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.

As to the second we make some Quaeres:

1. Whether the Covenant to restore the King, was without any condition? If so,
it was unlawful; for to instance in a Simile, Suppose a man should engage
himself to another, to defend and protect him from all violence; put case that
person violate the Laws of the Land, and is therefore condemned to dye, that
man's Oath binds him not (yea cannot) to protect him. 2. If your Covenant had a
condition, whether to restore the King to his Throne, without reference to the
peoples Liberty; if so, its all one, as if you should engage your selves in
slavery, and your actions differed nothing from the Cavaliers, whose ultimate
end it was, to restore the King unto his Throne, without any satisfaction. 3.
What you meant by the Reformation according to the Word of God? whether the
imposal of an outward Form, to which all men should be forced to give an
assent? if so, you drive at nothing else but the Popish and Prelatical
Conformity. 4. Whether all have equal light, or see with the same eyes? if not,
while should any be compelled outwardly to profess that, which inwardly they
never knew? 5. Whether the Reformation of Religion be not rather Internal and
Spiritual, then the imposing of any External Form of Government? 6. Whether
Christ is not the alone King of the Commonwealth of Israel? if so, then the
Reformation is wholly carried on by his Spirit. 7 Whether the Magistrate, as a
Subordinate Reformer, has any thing to do with the Church, but to preserve
them from injuries as men. 8. What is the Toleration which you say is no way
consonant to the Word of God? if Christian liberty, we dissent. 9. We demand,
whether you hold perfection in this life? if so, why speak you and write
contrary to your principles? if not, why account you all erroneous that dissent
from you? 10. Whether the Results of any Assembly, in matters of Faith and
Conscience, are obligatory? if so, they must be infallible, and then we demand
whence they had their infallibility. 11. Whether the interpretations of
Scripture, made by any Assembly, has as much Jus Divinum as the Scripture it
self?
To all which Quaeres we should gladly receive particular satisfaction.

We likewise find you in your Paper, urging Statute Law; we thought you had
been Dispencers of the Gospel, and not Expounders of the Law; Lecturers, not
Barristers; Country Ministers, not Inns of Court Gentlemen: You say, you are
informed by Law, that the King could do no wrong; surely it was out of some of
Judge Ienkins his Papers; as for your reading it in Parliament Declarations, we
conceive it was in Mecurius Aulicus, whom you took for the Moderate
Intelligencer. We likewise find you too much intrenching upon the Authority of
the Magistrates, advising his Excellency not to meddle, without direction from
the Assembly. Unless we are mistaken, this borders upon Popery, which commands
nothing to be done in State, without the Assent of Ecclesiastique persons. For
your better satisfaction, we will give you the Popes own words, as we find
them in a Bull written to Philip the fair King of France, mentioned in the
French History; the words are these, Boniface Bishop, Servant of the Servants
of God, to Philip King of Frenchmen, Fear God, observe his Commandments; we
will thee to understand, That thou art subject to us both in Spiritual and
Temporal things.

We likewise find you stiling your selves Watchmen and Seers: If Watchmen, we
advise you to have a care that you give us no more false Alarums, for fear of
Martial Law; and as you are Seers, we desire you to keep in mind, That the
Seers of Israel have oftentimes been blind.

FINIS.

