Mr: PYM His Vindication in Parliament of the Accusation of high Treason,
Exhibited against him and the Lord Kimbolton, and the other four Members.

AS ALSO The KINGS Majesty's Replication to the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT.

With a DECLARATION by the Lords and Commons in Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament that this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and published.

H. Elsin. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for William Gay, Sept. 10. 1642.

Master PYM his Vindication in Parliament, of the Accusation of high Treason,
Exhibited against him and the Lord Kimbolton and the other four Members.
THese Articles of High Treason, exhibited by his Majesty against me and the
other Gentlemen in the accusation charged with the same crime, are of great
consequence, and much danger to the State: The Articles in themselves, if
proved, are according to the Laws of this Land are High Treason.

First, to endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land is by this
present Parliament in the Earl of Strafords case adjunged High Treason.

Secondly, to endeavor to introduce into this Kingdom an Arbitrarie and
tyrannical form of Government, is likewise Voted High Treason.

Thirdly, to raise an Army to compel the Parliament to make and Enact Laws,
without their free Votes, and willing proceedings in the same, is High Treason.

Fourthly, to invite a foreign force to invade this Land, to favor our
designs agitated against the King and State, is High Treason.

Fifthly, to animate and encourage riotous assemblies and tumults about the
Parliament to compel the K. to assent to the votes of the House is Treason.

Sixthly, to cast aspersions upon His Majesty and His Government, to alienate
the affections of His people, and to make His Majesty odious unto them is
Treason.

Seventhly, to endeavor to draw his Majesty's Army into disobedience, and to
side with us, in our designs if against the King, is Treason.

I desire Mr. Speaker, the favor of this House to clear my self, concerning
this Charge, I shall only parallel and fimilize my actions since the sitting
of this Parliament with these Articles.

First, Mr. Speaker, if to Vote with the Parliament, as a Member of the House
wherein a^^ our Votes ought to be free: it being one of the greatest
privileges thereof to ha^^ our debates, disputes, and arguments in the same
unquestionable, be to endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws, then am I
guilty of the first Article.

Secondly, if to agree and consent with the whole State of the Kingdom by Vote
to ordain and make Laws for the good gove^ment of his Majesty's Subjects in
peace and dutiful obedience to their lawful Sovereign be to introduce an
Arbitrary and tyrannical form of government in the State, then I am guilty of
this Article.

Thirdly, If to consent by Vote with the Parliament, to raise a Guard or
Train-band to secure and defend the persons or the Members thereof, being
environed and beset with many dangers in the absence of the King, and by Vote
with the House, in willing obedience to the Royal command of his sacred
Majesty, at his return, be actually to levy Arms against the King; then am I
guilty of this Article.

Fourthly, if to join with the Parliament by free Vote to crave brotherly
assistance from Scotland, Kingdoms both under obedience to one Sovereign,
both his loyal and dutiful Subjects, to suppress the Rebels in Ireland,
which lies gasping every day in danger to be lost from his Majewies subjection,
be to invite and encourage a foreign power to invade this Kingdom; then am I
guilty of high Treason.

Fifthly, if to agree with the greatest and wisest Council of State, to
suppress unlawful tumults and riotous assemblies, to agree with the House by
Vote to all Orders, Edicts, and Declarations for their repeling, be to raise
and countenance them in their unlawful actions, then am I guilty of this
Article.

Sixthly, if by free vote to join with the Parliament in publishing of a
Remonstrance, in setting forth Declarations against Delinquents, in the State
against Incendiaries between his Majesty's Kingdom, against ill Counselors
which labor to avert his Majesty's affection from Parliaments, against those
il-affected Bishops that have innovated our Religion, oppressing Painful,
learned and godly Ministers with vexatious suits and molestations in their
unjust Courts, by cruel sentences of pilory, and cutting off their ears, great
fines, banishment, and perpetual imprisonment, if this Mr. Speaker be to cast
aspersions upon his Majesty and his government, and to alienate the hearts of
his loyal Subjects good protestants, and well affected in religion, from their
due obedience to his royal Majesty, then am I guilty of this Article.

Seventhly, if to consent by vote with the Parliament to put forth
proclamations, to send declarations to his Majesty's army, to animate and
encourage the same to his Loyal obedience, to give so many Subsidies, raised so
many great sums of money willingly for their keeping on foot to serve his
Majesty upon his Royal command on any occasion, to apprehend and attach as
delinquents, such persons in the same as are disaffected both to his sacred
Person, his Crown and dignity, to his wise and great Council of Parliament, to
the true and Orthodox doctrine of the Church of England, and the true Religion
grounded on the doctrine of Christ himself, and established and confirmed by
many Acts of Parliament in the reign of H. 8. E. 6. Queen Eliz. and King James
of blessed memory, if this Mr. Speaker be to draw his Majesty's Army into
disobedience, and to side with us in our designs, then I am guilty of this
Article. Now Mr. Speaker, having given you a touch concerning these Articles,
comparing them with my Actions, ever since I have had the ho^or to sit in this
House as a Member ^hereof: I humbly crave your consideration, and favorable
judgment of them, not doubting they being weighed in the even scales of your
wisdoms, I shall be found innocent and clear from these crimes laid to my
charge. Mr. Speaker, I humbly crave your further patience to speak somewhat
concerning the ehxibiting of this Charge; which is to propose to your
Consideration these propositions, viz. First, whether to exhibit Article of
high treason by his Majesty's own hands in this House agrees with the rights
and privileges thereof. Secondly, whether for a guard armed to come into the
Parliament to accuse any of the Members thereof, be not a breach of the
privilege of Parliament. Thirdly, whether any of the Members of Parliament
being so accused may be committed upon such accusation, without the whole
consent thereof. Fourthly, whether a Parliament has not privilege to bail
any member so accused. Fifthly, whether if any of the Members of a Parliament so
charged, and by the House discharged without release from his Majesty may still
sit in the House as Members of the same. And thus Mr. Speaker, I humbly crave
pardon for my presumption in so far troubling this Honorable House, desiring
their favorable consideration of all my actions, and that I may have such
trial as to this wise Council shall seem meet, cheerfully submitting my
self and actions to the righteous judgment of the same.

The KINGS Majesty's Replication to the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
WE will not repeat what means We have used to prevent the dangerous and
distacted estate of the Kingdom, nor how those means have bin interpreted,
because being desirous to avoid effusion of blood, we are willing to decline
all memory of former bitterness that might make Our offer of a Treaty less
readily accepted.

We never did Declare, nor ever intended to Declare both Our Houses of
Parliament Traitors, or set up Our Standard against them, and much less to
put them and this Kingdom out of Our Protection: We utterly profess against
it before God and the World. And further to remove all Scruples which may
hinder the Treaty so much desired of Us; We hereby Promise, so that a day be
appointed by you for the revoking of your Declarations against all Persons as
Traitors or otherwise, for assisting of Us, We shall with all cheerfulness
upon the same day recall Our Proclamations and Declarations, and take down our
Standard: In which Treaty, We shall be ready to grant any thing that shall be
really for the good of Our Subjects; Conjuring you to consider the bleeding
condition of Ireland, and the dangerous condition of England, in as high a
degree as by these Our offers We have declared Our Self to do: And assuring
you that Our chief desire in this world is to beget a good understanding and
mutual considence betwixt Us and Our two Houses of Parliament.

A Declaration of the LORDS and Commons in Parliament.
WHereas His Majesty in a Message, received the fifth of September, requires
that the Parliament would revoke their Declarations against such persons as
have assisted His Majesty in this unnatural War against His Kingdom. It is
this day ordered and Declared by the Lords and Commons, That the Arms which
they have bin and shall be forced to take up for the preservation of the
Parliament, Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, shall not be
laid down, until His Majesty shall withdraw His Protection from such persons
as have been Voted by both Houses to be Delinquents, or that shall by both
Houses be Voted to be Delinquents, and shall leave them to the Justice of the
Parliament, to be proceeded with, according to their demerits; to the end that
both this, and succeeding Generations may take warning with what danger they
incur the like heinous crimes, and also to the end that those great charges
and damages wherewithal the Commonwealth has been burdened in the
Premises, since His Majesty's departure from the Parliament, may be born by
the Delinquents, and other malignant and disaffected persons: And that all His
Majesty's good and well affected Subjects, who by Loan of Moneys, or otherwise
at their charge have assisted the Commonwealth, or shall in like manner
hereafter assist the Commonwealth, in time of extreme danger, may be repayed
all Sums of Money by them lent for those purposes, and be satisfied their
charges so sustained, out of the Estates of the said Delinquents, and of the
malignant and disaffected party in this Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliment that this Declaration, be
forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

