Copied from the original in the John Carter Brown Library

^A^DAD John Carter Brown Lihrary Brown University


Not to be reproduced without permission.

TO HIS GRACE WILLIAM DUKE of HAMILTON THEIR MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And
the Honorable ESTATES of PARLIAMENT, HVMBLT SHOWS THE Answers for Hendry
Navilpayne, To the Indictment raised at the Instance of Their Majesty's
Advocate, before the High Court of Parliament.
WHereas it is Lybelled in the said Indictment, That the Defender did come here
to Scotland for purshewing Treasonable practices, against the Government; And
that being thereupon apprehended and Imprisoned. he has hitherto prosecute the
said design by keeping Correspondence with dissafected Persons and Enemies to
Their Majesty's Government, and did openly declare, that there was an Invasion
designed both Here and in England, and that the Defender did carry on the same
under disguiesed names, both for Persons and Things; And that his said Project
is already found, and declared by a vote of Parliament, past upon a letter
alleged written by the Defender, daited the 3d: of December 1692: And which
letter is verbatim contained in the said Indictment, and a Commentar or
Exposition put thereupon by my Lord Advocate; And pretending, That there are
several other letters written, and subscribed by the Defender, by which his
hand write, and guilt of the premises will evidently appear.

It is Answered for the Defender, That, He is exceedingly surprised to see such
an Indictment presented against him, And, the raither, That being a Stranger,
and absolutely ignorant of the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom, He should have
received an Indictment upon Thursday last, to Compear and Answer this day, And
so, not having six free days! And Lawyers having refused to give him Advice
before they were Authorized by their Majesty's Commissioner, and the Estates of
Parliament, to do the same. It is impossible for the Defender, to have all
these Evidences read in so short a time, which he would have adduced for
Vindication of his own innocence, anent all that is lybelled against him, in
case he had been charged upon fifteen free days, as (conform as the Defender
is informed) is usual to be practiced in the like cases, Especially where the
Defender was for so long time a closs prisoner, and so precluded from having
the Advice or converse of any person, whereby he might have been assisted to
prepare himself for this Trial; And therefore, He humbly beggs, and expects,
from the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, That they will be pleased to
allow him some further time to have his Defencess and instructions thereof, in
readiness against this indictment.

But least it should be pretended, That the Defender were inclyned to shift and
tergiverse in this Affair. Albeit he has not all the proofs and Evidence of
his innocence here in readiness, which otherwise he could have adduced, in case
a competent time had been allowed him; Yet for convincing their Majesty High
Commissioner, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament (as far as is possible
upon such a surprise) of the Defenders innocence, He does absolutely deny the
Indictment, and whole Members Qualifications, Circumstances, and Aggravations
therein contained; And as to that point of the lybel anen^ the Defender his
coming to Scotland, out of a treasonable design, denying, as said is, It is
represented for him; That as he hopes it is well known to several Honorable
Members of Parliament, That the panna^ upon his first entering within the
Kingdom, was apprehended without any warrant from Authority, b^ a number of
Country People, who were occasionally convocate together for the time, And
brought i^ to Edinburgh, where he was immediately imprisoned, and in which
place, and in Stirling and Blackness, b^ has continued now prisoner for the
space of more then three years; And for more then two of these yea^^ a closs
Prisoner: And the true design of the Pannals coming for Scotland was that he
being a Roman Cath^lick, And apprehensive, that those of his persuasion might
meet with some severities in England: A^ having sent some of his Effects
abroad, he did resolve to have gone off the Kingdom, and lived privately; But
there being an Embargo then put upon all the Ships in England, so that he could
get no occasion for going abroad at any Harbor there; He came for Scotland out
of a harmless design, to get the occasion of shipping here; And which is
evident and undeniable, and clear from this, That there was not found in his
Custody, when he was first apprehended, any Papers relating to the Government
any manner of way, and the only Paper then found upon him, being a Catalogue of
the initial letters of five men's names, with two Letters subjoyned to each of
these two Initial Letters, he did before the Lords of Privy Council, when he
was under Tortour, Freely and Heartily expone these Initial Letters, and
designations thereto subjoyned, by declaring that J: G: L: S: was understood.
John Gilles Skiper in Leith, where the Pannal was intended to have come and
stayed until he had got occasion of Shipping abroad, and that the other two to
which the two letters M. A. were subjoyned, were Merchants at Amsterdam: And
the last two to which the letters B: P: were subjoyned, were Bankers at Paris,
with whom the Pannall had settled some of his Effects: And the pannal did then
condescend upon the names and surnames of the said four persons, And that there
were then such persons in Amsterdam and Paris, as the pannal did then
condescend upon: Neither then was, nor as yet can be contraverted, so that the
pannal admires that their Majesty's Advocate should as a preface to this
indictment, allege that the pannals coming to Scotland, was out of a
Treasonable design, thereby to represent him as unfavourable to the Members of
the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, He being a Stranger to this
Kingdom, and absolutely innocent thereof, as is above represented: And that
their Majesty's Advocate should farther insinuate, that the pannal during his
imprisonment should have been tampering with Enemies, for disturbing of the
Government, and peace of the Kingdom: It being clear and obvious, That a
prisoner, especially a closs prisoner, to whom paper, pen, and ink, and access
from all other persons were discharged, could not be in any possible capacity,
for managing or carrying on any such contrivances or designs: And albeit the
pannal his long and tedious imprisonment, and what he suffered while he was
prisoner, could not but be grievous to any Mortal: Yet he patiently endured the
same, with that just submission, and humble acquiescence that is due to
Authority; And therefore he humbly conceives, that Charity it self will
vindicate a poor Stranger from any such imputation, And that he needs not make
use of any other legal Argument for his Vindication thereof, And in Case the
Pannal were Conscious to himself of any such Guilt or Design, as truly he is
not; Yet he has this Unanswerable Defense in Law, That having endured Tortur
two several times, and being Interrogat upon the Occasion, and his design of
his coming for Scotland whilst he was under the Tortut, And having denied any
other Design, then as is above-represented, viz: to go abroad, and live
privately, he cannot now be Indicted or pursued upon that account, conform to
the Law and Custom of all Nations.

And as to that part of the Indictment, bearing that the Pannal did frequently
declare that there was an Invasion designed, etc. It is Answered, that denying
the same, yet the Common Discourse of the Country, being these two years by
past, that there was an Invasion designed from France into Britain: The Pannal
his repeating the Common and ordinary Discourse of the Country; And which was
contained in several public News Letters, can never be stretched to make him
liable to the Crimes and Pains libelled. 2do. The Pannal not being a Scots
Subject, and never having received any Benefit or Protection from the
Government in Scotland: But being an Englishman, and there being more freedom
and Liberty of Speech allowed in England, than is permitted by the Law of
Scotland, albeit any Rash Expressions had escaped the Pannal (and which he
absolutely denies) yet he could only be Tried and Punished therefore, conform
to the Laws of his Native Country of England, by whose Laws and Customs He
was obliedged to Walk and Conform his Life and Deportment into, and not
conform to the Laws of Scotland, whereof he was no Subject; And which he
neither knew, nor was presumed or obliedged to know. 3tio. The Pannal being
Naturally Melancholy, and His Melancholy being much augmented and increased by
His long Imprisonment and Sufferings. It is offered to be proven, that during
all the time of His Imprisonment, His Conversation and Discourse was Harmeless
and Innocent, and Free and Open, as is Natural to all Englishmen: So that in
Charity (if any Discourse has escaped Him) The same ought to be Interpreted,
as designed only to suport himself against the Grouth and Increase of his
Melancholy, especially seeing it cannot be made appear, that in his Discourses
he did Tamper with any Person, But on the contrair, that he used that same
freedom of Discourse with all concerned in the Government and Authority, with
whom he had Occasion to Converse, which he did Utter and Express to any other
person whatsomever. And it is not conceiveable how such Discourses can be
stretched to infer any Plot or Contriveance by the Pannal, when the same was
publicly Talked and uttered by him, to those who were concerned in the
Government.

And as to that part of the Libel, mentioning an Vote or Opinion of Parliament;
The Pannal humbly conceives, that he himself cannot at all be Obliedged to make
any answer thereto, there being no such Vote or Opinion of Parliament, or
Double thereof, given to him with his Indictment. 2do. Neither (as the Pannal
humbly conceives) can he any ways be concerned therein, as to this Indictment
presented against him: Because albeit the least suspision may give the
Government occasion to secure the Kingdom against Plots and Mischeass, yet
where there is no Vote or Act of Parliament, fixing the guilt against the
Pannal Nominatum, He can never be precluded from any Competent defense for
securing of his Life, by any such Vote to the passing whereof the Pannal was
not called.

And as to the last and matterial part of the Indytement, founded upon a
missive Letter alleged wirtten by the Pannal: And the Commentar and
exposition thereof contained in the indictment, and my Lord Advocat, his
offering to prove the same to be the Pannals hand Write; Comperatione
literarum, and by other papers and missive Letters under the Pannals own hand,
ready to be produced.

It is Answered, that the Pannal does absolutely deny that ever he Wrote any
Letter of the Tenor, and Contents Libelled, and the said Principal Letter ought
to have been produced and shown to the Pannal himself. And he allowed to
consider the same before he can be obliedged to make any Answer thereto. 2do.
By the double of the said pretended Letter, as it is set down at the end of the
Copy of the Indictment given to the Pannea; The same appears neither to be
subscrived by the Pannal, nor to be derected for any person whatsomever; So
that it is obvious to common sense, that the said Pretended Letter has been
allennatly the product of the same distempered and Melancholy brain. 3tio. It
is not at all Libelled, that ever this pretended Letter was sent abroad, or
delivered to any Person whatsomeever, nor does the indictment condescend upon
any person, by whom the same was conveyed away, nor in whose Custody the said
pretended Letter was found, without all which, were specially Libelled and
instructed: The Indictment can never be found Relevant, to sustain this
Criminal Libel and conclusion against the Pannal because in case such a special
Condescendance were made; The Pannal would exculpate himself by referring to,
and proving by these persons Oaths, that the said pretended Letter had been
conveyed and delivered to them by some other person than the Pannal; and that
the same was the hand write of some other person than the Pannal, and that the
Tenor, and import thereof was absolutely differant from, and inconsistant with
the exposition and Commentar, put thereupon, by my Lord Advocate. 4to. Albeit a
person in a Melancholy or distemper, should Scrible over a rediculous and
impertinent paper for the ease of his disturbed fancy for the time, yet in
case he should either before he subscrived the same, and before he directed it
to any person cancel the said impertinent and rediculous paper, or let the same
fall by as neglected such a paper; albeit thereafter found in the Custody of
the Melancholy Person or in his Room, would never make the said Melancholy
person liable to the Crimes and pains libelled, unless he had dispersed and
sent the same abroad, because hoc ipso, that he never made use thereof, by
directing the same to any person. Law presumes that he passed from, and
repented of that which the distempered fit of his melancholy had formerly
prompted him to.

And as to that part of the indictment, bearing that my Lord Advocat Intends to
prove Comparatione Literarum, that the said pretended missive Letter is the
Pannals hand write. It is answered, 1mo. That seeing the Pannal absolutely
denis the same to be his handwrite, or that he had accession thereto, or knows
any thing of the design thereof in the least, yet he humbly represents to my
Lord Commissioners his Grace, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, that it
is an uncontraverted printiple in Law, that as every man is presumed to be
innocent and free from all guilt and fine, until the contrair thereof be
instructed against him by a clear probation; So by the Laws and Customs of all
Nations, and by the opinion of all Doctors that ever wrote upon the Criminal
Law; This is uncontraverted and undeniable, that the guilt of any Crime, by
which a Capital conclusion for taking away a man's life may be inferred, can be
fixed upon any person, except by a positive probation, as clear as the Sun
shininng in his Meridian: And neither the Law nor Custom of any Nation did
ever allow Capital Crimes to be proven by conjectures or presumptions: And GOD
Almighty himself by the mouth of Moses, requires two or three witnesses in all
such casses: So that for my Lord Advocat to pretend to have a presumptive or
conjectural probation sustained to him against the Pannal, who is a poor
stranger, for taking away of his Life, is against the Law and practice of this,
and all other Nations. 2do. Albeit Comparatio Literarum and or her papers have
been sustained to Adminiculat a write, and to make up the defects of the
solemnities thereof, yet no instance can be given, where ever such a probation
was sustained Relevant, to fix a Capital guilt upon any person, to take away
his Life. 3tio. As all probation, especially in casses capitally Criminal,
ought to be clear as the Sun, and positive, and pregnat, and incapable of any
doubiety, or uncertainty: So it is referred to my Lord Commissioner, his Grace,
and the Honorable E. states of Parliament, whither a probation by comparison
of Letters, and hand-writes, can be so pregnant, clear, and certain, that it is
absolutely incapable of being redargued by other documents, or whither or not
the same be in all casses subject to doubtfulness and uncertainty, seeing the
most that can be inferred from such a probation is, That the hand Write are
like to other, and (as alike, is not the same) So it is certain that many hand
writes are like to others; And it is notterly known, and offered to be proven,
That some persons have attained to that perfection of Writing, that they are
able to counterfeit whole sheets of paper, as Written by any other person, to
that exactness and perfection, that the person himself whose hand Write is
fienzied and counterfeited, can scarcely be able to deny the same, to be his
own hand Write; And seeing a decision in Parliament, in this case will be a Rule
and precedent, and have the force of a Law, in all criminal cases for the
Future; It is Referred to the consideration of the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament, what the dangerous consequence of such a preparative, might in
process of time amount to, and whither the lives and fortunes of any Subject:
Be not at the discretion of any silly Rogue who has the skill and villainy to
counterfeit his hand Write. 4to. This is also an undeniable principle both in
Law and Religion, that it is better to let a Thousand guilty persons go free,
then that the blood of an Innocent person should be shed, Because, albeit a
guilty person should escape the hand of Justice for a time. Almighty GOD might
thereafter suffer him to fall in an other snare; By which he might thereafter
be brought to condingue punishment for all: And which is not only clear from
the instances of Joab and Shimei: But many instances thereof might be given in
this and our Neighbor Nations: And the book entitled GODS Reveange against
Murder, has many examples thereof; Whereas on the other hand, the shedding of
the blood of an innocent person, is like water spilt upon the ground, which
cannot be gathered up, or recovered, but lies as a burden upon the Land;
calling for Vengeance from Heaven: And this is a common principle received, and
constantly repeated in the mouths of all Mankind, That the case of a Defender,
when pursued for his life, is always most favorable; And when there is any
thing doubtful, either as to the Relevancie or probation which may admit of a
twofold sense or interpretation, The Exposition and Interpretation Thereof, is
always to be made in favors of the pannal, and Defenders: And by the Opinion
of all Lawyers, Jura sunt cogenda, That is, the Laws themselves are to be
stretched, and even forced so far as is possible in favors of the pannal, for
absolving him from the crimes lybelled, and preservation of his blood. 5to.
Neither can my Lord Advocate be allowed to make use of any letters for
probation against the pannall, seeing no such letters nor doubles thereof were
given out to the pannal, with his indictment, as they ought to have been.

And as to the Commentar and Exposition of that pretended letter, whereupon the
Indictment is foun^ed, which my Lord Advocate has made, The Pannal not being
at all concerned in the Letter, he cannot be concerned (...) what Exposition or
Commentar My Lord Advocat thinks fit, or fancies with himself to put upon the
same: And albeit (...) does admire the quickness of my Lord Advocates Fancy in
that commentar; Yet he humbly con^ves, that his Fancy and Opinion can never be
sustained to infer any crime or guilt against the pan^^, Because, 1mo. The
whole strain of that Exposition, being an alleged Design in the Writer; As
(...) Law can be alleged for allowing a Design, which is only the thought of
a Man's breast, to be pro^^^ by Witnesses, or by other Men's conjectures; So
there is no instance thereof can be adduced in this ^^ny other Nation, The
enquiring into and judging the thoughts of the heart, being the prerogative of
GOD Al^^^ty, which He has reserved to Himself, excluding all Mortals from any
share thereof. 2do. As the design and meaning of the Writer of that pretended
letter, is neither in Law probable by Witnesses, nor can the design thereof be
inferred from presumptions or conjectures; So it is referred to the Wisdom of
the Parliament, Whether or not the stretches made by my Lord Advocate in that
exposition, be either presumable or consistent with themselves. Because, 1mo.
The lybel tending to infer the pannal his keeping a Treasonable correspondence
with Enemies abroad: My Lord Advocate neither condescends upon the persons
names, or designation, with whom the said correspondence is alleged to have
been kept, and without condescendance upon the same, the Relevancie cannot be
sustained. 2do. Can any Rational Man presume or imagine, That the late King
would take up his measures in matters of the greatest importance, from a person
of so little signification and interest, and of so little conduct, as the
pannal is known to be: Especially, considering the circumstances the pannal was
in at the time, and for several years preceding, being always a prisoner, and
for the most part of that time a closs prisoner. 3tio. How can the late King,
his late Declaration for England, be pretended to be the product and
consequence of this pretended missive letter, whereupon the Indictment is
founded, as my Lord Advocate expressly lybels, Seeing it is clear, That the said
pretended letter, did never come to the late Kings hands: For, if it had once
come to his hands, how is it possible that it could now be produced before the
Parliament, as a pretended instruction of his indictment. And this per se is
sufficient to demonstrate to the World, That my Lord Advocates commentar and
exposition of that pretended letter, is only groundless and conjectural: And
does redargue the Faith of his Commentars thereupon. 4to. Whereas it is
pretended by my Lord Advocates commentar upon this letter, That the pannal
desired a Gift from the late King of the Clerkship of Edinburgh, in favors of
Mr. Patrick Smith, or his son, upon the account that his Wife had been long
imprisoned upon the pannals account; And that the pannal would have been
starved if she had not supplied him. It is answered, 1mo. That it is absolutely
denied, that ever Mr. Patrick Smiths Wife was imprisoned upon the pannals
account, or that ever she was imprisoned since the pannal came to Scotland:
Neither does the pannal know if she be fled or not, or upon what account. And
Mr. Patrick Smith is known to be in that circumstances, that he is even much
straightened as to the maintenance of himself and his family. 2do. Could the
pannal be pretended to be so ridiculous, (unless he had been under some
melancholy distemper,) to write for the Gift of a Clerkship, where there was
no Vaccancie, Eneas Mackleod being then in possession of the equal half of the
place, long before Sir James Rocheads deceass, And being secured in the
survivancie of the other half many years before: And that Clerkship being known
to be not at the Kings disposal, but only at the disposal of the Town Council,
when vaccant. And to clear the High Court of Parliament, That this is only a
designed stretch, for loading of the pannal, when the debates were betwixt the
Old and New Councils of Edinburgh, anent their Elections: There was an other
person then specially condeseended upon, as designed for that Clerkship.

And as to that pretense, That in the said Letter by the word (Agents) is
understood; My Lord Advovocat, and Lord Justice Clerk, in respect they were
nominate to these Employments by the King, about four days before the date of
that pret ended Letter, viz: upon the 28 of November; And this pretended
Letter, is alleged to be dated the third of December thereafter. It is
answered, that seeing it is impossible, that what was done at London upon the
28 of November, could have come to the Pannals Knowledge, who was then a
prisoner at Blackness in so few days, in that Season of the year: This does
convincingly redargue that part of my Lord Advocates Commentar; And the pannal
is content to depone, That he never knew or heard of my Lord Justice Clerk his
being preferred until he did see his Lordship, lately in the Toolbooth of
Edinburgh. And, That he never heard of my Lord Advocates preferment, until
long after the date of that pretended letter. And therefore it is referred to
the Justice and Wisdom of the High Court of parliament, Whether or not such
uncertain conjectures, as to all the Branches of my Lord Advocates Commentar
and Exposition of that letter, evidently appears to be, Can by the Law of this
or any other Kingdom be sustained, as is a clear and convincing probation to
fix a Criminal Guilt upon a poor Stranger to take away his Life! And as the
said Letter appears to be the nonsensical product of a disturbed Brain in all
the points thereof; So there is neither any thing lybelled or produced, which
can instruct any one of the Names or Particulars therein contained to be the
same, which My Lord Advocat affirms and supposes in his Exposition.

And seeing by the Claim of Right of this Kingdom, (and which the Petitioner
humbly conceives to be equivolent to the Petition of Right in England, the
great and unquestionable Securitys of the Subjects of his Native Kingdom.) It
is expressly declared, that the pursuing persons, upon stretches from old and
Obsolet Laws or upon Frivolous and Weak Pretenses, or Lame and Defective
Probation, are contrair to Law, and that there was never a Criminal Libel
offered to be founded upon such Weak and Frivolous Pretenses as this; The
foundation thereof, being only a pretended Missive Letter, neither subscrived
nor directed nor delivered to any person; But as it appears to be the
Melancholy Product of a disturbed Brain. So also it appears to have been
casually lost and neglected, and as there can neither Sense not Crime be
inferred from the Letter it self; So all that is libelled against the Pannal,
as Criminal therefrom, is only founded upon My Lord Advocats own Fancy and
Conjecture, So the Probation offered therefore, Viz. Comparatio Literarum,
being such as never was yet sustained in any Court, for taking away the Life of
a Man; The Pannal humbly conceives, that this Libel and Probation offered
against him, by the foresaid Clause in the Claim of Right, is expressly
declared to be contrair to Law. And therefore, albeit the Pannal be a poor
Stranger, and that he be also unknown to the Members of this Honorable Court
of Parliament, as he is ignorant of the Laws of this Kingdom: Yet seeing it is
his Misfortune (and for which he is heartily sorry) to be indicted and accused
of such high and Attrocious Crimes. He judges himself happy in this, that he is
to be tried before My Lord Commissioner, his Grace, and the Honorable Estates
of Parliament, of whose impartial Justice to a poor Stranger now pursued for
his Life, he is not in the least doubtful, but on the Contrair out of the
Consciousness of his own Innocence, does repose an entire Confidence in their
impartial Justice, And humbly expects therefrom to be assoilied from his
groundless lybel, which contrair to the claim of Right, is only founded upon
frivolous and weak pretenses, and craved to be supported and made out by a Lame
and Defective Probation in manner Above represented.


