Querees, to find out who it is that holds out in Arms against the State of
England.
Seeing the King is our prisoner, as in the Scottish Army, who by contract are
our servants and our Army, and therefore not to do what they list, but what we
command them, seeing they receive pay from us as mere mercinaries, and serve
not freely as brethren; therefore if our State representative, the chosen
Commons of England assembled in Parliament, shall give Order to the State of
Scotland for the King presently to disband all his Forces in England, Ireland
or elsewhere, and to deliver up all Towns and Garrisons unto our States hand,
-- Quere; I say if it be not done thereupon, if we may not conclude, that it
is the Scots hold up Arms against out State, for the King being our Prisoner,
and in their power (our servants) has no power, but must do as they will, and
they will do as they list for him.

For if they of themselves can prostrate their own opposite arms of
Montrosse, etc. -- and put his name thereto for a color, as if done by him,
or enforce him to do it, to color their doing, why not the same form upon
order from our State aforesaid, -- Why, oh English States, is not this assayd,
to discover who it is that holds up arms against you? -- for what power has
one man that is in the power of others? And if our State will not give order
for the same what may we not conclude there of? must the lives and estates of
multitudes of men be sacrificed to the wilfulness of any? But our State
performing their parts, we shall apparently see where it rests, for how can the
King hinder what they please to do?

Do not these that are called the French and Spanish States, what them please
-- and put -- or their King must put their names thereto, to culour it, that
the State may not be seen in it, but it may pass as if their Kings act, not
theirs -- Can any be so simple to think their Kings may or can rule a State --
which is as much as the wisest State can do -- In short it is the States do
all, and so do the Scot, and so ought our State -- and not let the weal,
safety, happiness, prosperity and being of a Kingdom or Kingdoms, and
Millions of lives therein, lie at the will, or the wilfulness, folly, or
madness of one man, whom they call their King, though the Parliament of
England in their late letter to him when he was at Oxford, do tell him
plainly, that he is guilty of all the innocent blood which has been now shed
in all the three Kingdoms.

Oh therefore, let not the world jeer us, that our prisoner can use his keepers
as his prisoners, etc. -- Who has stood it out in open Hostility as long as
possible he could, against his Earthly Sovereign, Lord, King and Creator, the
state Universal; Whose legal and formal representative, the Parliament, (he
has unnaturally, wickedly, unjustly, and irrationally) proclaimed Traitors and
Rebels for doing their duty in endeavoring the preservation of those that
trusted them, from the ruin and destruction endeavored and intended to them
by him, their rebellious servant.

How can it be properly said, that the English Creator, the State of England,
can commit Treason against it is own mere creature, the King? If it be treason
to assist the King with men moneys, arms and horses in this his unnatural
War and Rebellion against the Parliament and people of England, as the
Parliament has often declared, then is it not the height of Treason for any of
the Parliaments Armies privately to treat with him, and to receive him into
their Army, and there protect him (from those who requite him and have right to
him) and to dispose of him, yea, and afford him elbow room and liberty to send
Messages and Embassages to Denmark, Holland, France, Spain and Ireland, or
whether he pleases, that so he may lay new designs for the utter subversion
and destruction of the State and Kingdom: Oh the hght of -- etc. no longer to
be put up, borne, or suffered by trustees that desire to approve themselves
faithful to their trusters.

FINIS.
London August, 1646.


