SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the HERB called Perigua, Imported from the INDIES:
SHOWING Its Admirable Virtues in Curing the DIABETES.

Written by a Dr. of Physic in the Country to Dr. Burwell, President of the
College of Physicians at London.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1694.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Made upon the HERB called Perigua; SHOWING Its Admirable
Virtues in Curing the Diabetes. In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Thought fit to give you an Account of the Success I find in the Use of the
Herb Mr. Boil sent me, in Curing that sad and deplorable Distemper known by
the Name of Diabetes, or making abundance of Water, which quickly Ends in
Death, and contemns the best of our European Remedies.

I find it an Excellent Medicine, it sometimes gently Purges, and sometimes
Vomits, sometimes neither only promotes insensible transpiration, according as
it finds Nature disposed, and by a peculiar quality it Cures the abovenamed
Distemper.

I gave the Tincture of this Herb three Months together in Wine and Water to a
Merchant who had lived in Turkey, and had been Baunio'd for it, and used all
the Remedies that Country could afford; but finding no help there came over
into England, and this Medicine, with God's Blessing, Cured him, his immoderate
Evacuation ceased, his Water came to be of a good Color, and saltish taste, his
Thirst abaited, and he recovered his Flesh and his Strength, though brought very
low by the Distemper.

An old Man who was reduced to a mere Anatomy by the prevalency of this
Disease, and several Physicians had delivered their Prognostics, that there
was no hopes of Recovery, because their ordinary Methods of Cure had failed
them, yet I gave the Tincture of this Herb upon the Report that Mr. Boil had
given of it, and I found it wonderfully answering Expectation. I have written
to Mr. Box at London to send me down what can be procured at any tolerable
rates.

I find admirable Success by giving the Tincture in Decoctions of China Root,
and sometimes in Hearts horn Drink, the Horn being first Calcined.

The Learned Marchioness of Dorchester, who was an excellent Physician, told me
by way of Lamentation, that most Physicians of his Acquaintance did
pertinatiously jogg on in the old Road of Vomiting, Purging, Bleeding,
Blistering, Sweating, Urining; and if that would not do, they would rather let
their Patients dye than prescribe a Specific.

I also used the same Medicine in the Cure of a middle Aged Man, who made much
more Urine that what proceeded from his liquid Aliment, so that all his radical
Moisture, seemed to be dried up, like a Brook in Summer. I only directed him to
a temperate, moist and nourishing sort of Diet, that might help to incrascate
the thinness of the Humors, and also Correct the Acrimony of the Blood, and
nourish the macerated Habit of the Body, such as Broaths made of Knuckles of
Veal, and Panado's, and Caudles of Newlaid Eggs, and Milk boiled with Water and
Pearl Barley, and sometimes with Rice. This Method, with the Tincture of this
Specific, wrought a wonderful Cure.

This Disease is very dangerous in Old Men, by reason of the decay of the
Natural Heat; and it is hard to Cure in young Men, because they will seldom be
obliged to observe Rules, and therefore it usually brings into Consumptions,
all their Nourishment running away by Urine.

I lately knew a Country Gentleman who drank his Bottle at his Club every
Night, seven Months in the Year, when he was at London, and by that means
brought himself into this Disease: Much Advice was taken, and many of the
ordinary Shop-Medicines were used, but all in vain: Six hours before he dyed
his Friends desired the Drops drawn out of this Indian Herb, but it was too
late.

I also knew a Clergyman who drank abundance of Tea, and whatever Friends came
to visit, he must drink three or four dishes with them; at length it brought
him into this Distemper: I gently purged him with Syrrup of Mirabolans, desired
him to quench a piece of Gold in all his drink, and gave him twenty Drops of
the Tincture of this Herb, with the Extract and Spirit of the same in his
Spoon-meat and he wonderfully escaped with his Life.

An Eminent Physician, my Neighbor, who suspected himself going into the same
Disease, and hearing of this Specific, desired a little of it, and told me he
owed his Life under God to this Medicine. These things I thought fit to
acquaint you with, that you may tell others.

FINIS.

