QUESTIONS PARLIAMENTARY, Concerning the RIGHTS OF THE COMMONS of ENGLAND, AND
THE DUTY OF THEIR REPRESENTATIVES Assembled in Parliament.
1. WHether it be not the undoubted Right of every Commoner of England to
prefer Informations, and to Present and Prosecute any Crime or Misdemeanor,
contrary to the Laws and Customs of this Realm, against any Person whatsoever,
before such Judge or Judges as have Cognizance thereof? And whether the House
of Commons be not the only, or most proper Authority, to receive and hear
Complaints of Crimes and Misdemeanors committed by their own Members?

2. Whether it be not the Special Duty of every Member of the House of Commons
to Present and impartially promote the Just and Reasonable Petitions of any of
those for whom they serve, when required so to do? And whether the Refusal or
wilful Neglect thereof by any Member, be not a Breach of the Trust reposed in
him?

3. Whether such a Refusal or Neglect, when the Petition is for the Honor of
the Prince, and of the Government, be not moreover a Disrespect, and Neglect of
Duty to the Prince; and the slighting of such a Petition by a Member who is
also a Privy-Counsellor, a Misdemeanor against his Duty in each of those
Capacities?

4. Whether a Speaker of the House of Commons has any Privilege to exempt him
from Complaints, for any Crime or Misdemeanor, more than a Peer, or than any
other Member of the House of Commons has?

5. Whether it be not a special Branch of the Business and Duty of the House of
Commons, to enquire of all Hindrances and Discouragements of the Execution of
the Laws by Persons in great Place and Authority; and to complain of them for
it to the Prince; and to punish the same in their own Members as far as their
Authority extends?

6. Whether to hinder or discourage the Execution of the Laws, be not a
Misdemeanor greatly aggravated in a Member of Parliament, by being committed
against the special Office and Duty of the House? and more yet if committed by
the Speaker himself?

7. Whether the same Offense be not farther aggravated, if committed contrary
to an express Command of the Prince, who is obliged to command the strict
Execution of the Laws, upon any special Occasion, as in case of a general
Neglect of the Magistrates, and the like?

8. Whether the same Offense be not farther greatly aggravated, by being done
to countenance others combining together in the same Misdemeanor,
notwithstanding the express Command of the Prince?

9. Whether such a Misdemeanor, with the Aggravations aforesaid, be not such an
Insolent and Presumptuous Contempt of the Royal Authority, as ought to be
resented accordingly by every Member, as well out of Duty and Fidelity to the
Prince, as out of Duty and regard to the Honor of the House?

10. Whether the House of Commons have not turned out, imprisoned and impeached
their own Members for Misdemeanors, not greater in their own Nature, nor so
aggravated with Variety of Evil Circumstances?

11. Whether it does not concern the Prince, and the Government, in respect of
Interest and Safety, as well as of Honor, that the Royal Authority be kept up,
and such Insolences and Misdemeanors suppressed, by due Correction and
Punishment of such Offenders?

12. Whether it be not the Right, necessary Duty and Wisdom of the Commons of
England, and of all Loyal and Faithful Subjects, to enquire and take special
Notice of the Behavior of their respective Representatives, in all such cases,
wherein the Honor and Interest of the Prince, the Safety and Peace of the
Government, or their own Rights are in any special manner concerned?

FINIS.

