Jewish Hypocrisy, A CAVEAT TO The present Generation. Wherein is shown both
the false and the true way to a Nations or persons complete happiness, from the
sickness and recovery of the Jewish State. Unto which is added a Discourse upon
Micah 6.8. belonging to the same matter.

By Simon Patrick B. D. Minister of the word of God at Batersea in Surrey.

Luke 12.1. Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

Arrian Epict. L. 1 Cap. 27. (...).

Remember it, You can never preserve godliness, unless godliness and gain be
the same in your account.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at the three
Daggers in Fleetstreet near the inner Temple Gate, 1660.

To the Honorable Sr. Walter St. John Baronet, and the Lady Johanna St. John
his Wife: All happiness.
THIS small labor, to which as well your love to me, and to the truths herein
contained, as my great engagements and no less affections to you, have long
since entitled you, does humbly put it self into your hands, and craves the
acceptance of that which is so many ways your own. If I were capable of making
any other returns to you for your favors; Yet (since they would be all so
inconsiderable) I could not pardon my self so great an injustice, as the not
presenting you with this would seem to be: but seeing I despair of doing any
thing else, I could not justly expect to find a pardon from you, if I had
denied you this poor acknowledgement.

It is true indeed, that you expect neither this nor any other requital of your
kindnesses; but all my services are the more due to you because you, expect
none at all.

I have detained you so long in some former addresses, that I shall be the
shorter in this: and only acquaint you, that this Treatise was intended for a
remedy of those evils under under which we in these Kingdoms long groaned: but
now by reason that our deliverance from our oppressions was so speedy, and its
delivery from the press so slow, it must serve as a preservative from the like
mischiefs in time to come. I know it shall not want your prayers to assist it
in the effecting of its design; which is the advancement of unfeigned and
impartial godliness in the hearts of those that read it. This only can make his
Majesty glorious, and his Kingdoms happy, (both which I know none can wish more
heartily then your selves) This should employ all our thoughts, and engage all
our endeavors, and be the sum of all our prayers; And to the promoting of this
I hope that I shall always bend all my studies, and therein approve my self to
you above all others,

Your most affectionate friend and servant, Simon Patrick.

To the seroius Reader.
IT is not much above three years since a Sermon of mine was published by a
good friend now with God, containing many of those things which you will meet
with in the first part of this Treatise which I put into your hands. It was
judged useful by a very discerning person, that the Sermon should receive some
enlargements, and be made more comprehensive; by whose advice and counsel I
have been ruled to bring it into the form you now see, attended with such
additions as might more fully describe the several kinds of false godliness
that are among us. I am no Prophet, but yet I can foresee that I must not
expect any other Readers then you; For they who love rather to talk of the
Bible, then to understand it, and can content themselves with some ends and
shreds of it, to make their speech relish of Scripture phrase, will lay these
things aside as dry and dull discourses. But I have the confidence to invite
those whose understandings are advanced to any manly thoughts, and have a mind
to be acquainted with the Counsels of God, to a perusal of them; and hope that
they will be not only acceptable, but delightful to their meditation. And if
they meet with any thing that is not for their present gust, I desire them that
they would notwithstanding read on to the conclusion, and by that time I may
have converted their palate to another taste.

I cannot but wish that this Treatise may have as many Readers as many books of
little significancy and use are observed to have. With which wish I am not
inspired by vain ambition, and desire of popular applause: but by a great sense
which I feel my self possessed withal of the weight and importance of those
truths which are here discoursed. But it is no more then a wish; for I know the
hearts of men are full of these things that I here speak against, and the world
has so many things for them to do, that it will not give them time to be
serious. If any shallow and superficial discourse be presented to them, which
shall only bid them believe, and then shall comfort them with the privileges
of the Saints; it will go down easily, and needs but little chewing. But that
which searches deep, especially so low as the heart, and tends to the
mortifying of all carnal affections and passions that are there, is too
laborious, and too unpleasing also for them to meddle withal.

I shall not tell you how much I believed that which is now come to pass in
this Kingdom, when I conceived (a great while ago) these meditations; because
my private thoughts are not so considerable as that they should be communicated
to the world. Nor will I add any thing more by way of preface, but only these
three short Advertisements. First, that the reason of some sad complaints that
you will meet withal in the discourse, is, because it was all written (except
the last chapter) before the Kings Majesty was happily restored to his
hereditary dominions. And Secondly, that I have written most against that sort
of hypocrisy which was in fashion, and least against that which was worn out
of date, which none will judge to be partiality in me, but Christian Charity,
which bestows most of its labors where there is most need. And Thirdly, that
the Sermon annexed was thought fit merely for kindreds sake to bear these
Papers company. But they are not more of kin to each other, then both of them
are to your souls, and therefore let me say to every one as Solomon does, Bind
them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart Say unto Wisdom
Thou art my Sister, and call Understanding thy kinswoman. Prove. 7.3, 4.
So shall thou find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
Prove. 3.4.


Yours in the Lord Jesus, Simon Patrick.
Battersea May 12. 1660.
ERRATA in the Treatise.
PAge 24. marg. r. (...): p. 54. l. 1. r. security: p. 76. l. penult. r. repent
in: p 101. l. 14. dele some; p. 117. l. 27. r. he did smell: p. 118. l. 22. r.
neck: p. 130. l. 2. r. you must: p. 135. l. 10. r. strange impudence: p 144. l.
19. r. (...) and 20. r. These: p. 151. l. 2. r. relieve them: l. 4. r. them: p.
153. l. 23. r. the wicked ones: p. 165. marg. r. E. cap. 2. p. 190. l. 4. r.
out of this: and l. 26. (...): p. 193. l. 19. r. of the same: p. 195. l. 8. r.
wives; violence: p. 249. l. 1. r. they can be: p. 259. l. 18. r. (...): p. 280.
dele Crete in marg. p. 325. l. 9. r. Some people: and l. 10. r. same: p. 332.
l. 4. r. of a reproof.

ERRATA in the Sermon.
Page 5. l. 16. r. make them delight: p. 7. l. 10. r. is past: p. 20. l. 6. r.
of the words: p 64. l. 17. r. mourn: p. 67 l. 2. r. (...): p 73. l. 2. r. can
be defended: p. 112. marg. r. Hierocl. p. 117. marg. r. (...): p. 125. l. 10.
dele no.

Jewish Hypocrisy, a Caveat to the present Generation.
CAP. I.
1. Sin is a madness which undoes us, and yet pleases us till we come to our
selves. 2. All men are miserable sick of it when they see it. 3. But there are
many bad Physicians. 4. And most are unwilling to be thoroughly healed. 5. And
many take that for healing, which does but feed the disease. 6. Witness to all
this our own Nation. 7. The way proposed for finding out a remedy for us.

1. IT is the common acknowledgement of all sober persons, that sin is the
sickness, or the ill habit of our souls. And the great Hippocrates, who
understood the distempers of the mind as well as of the body, thinks that this
sickness is but of one kind, (...). Hippocr. in Epist. ad Senate. Abder.
and may be called A violent madness, strangely distracting the reason from the
true use of it self, by fond opinions and absurd fancies that impose upon it.
In this frantic state men give so many fatal strokes to their own immortal
souls, that it grieves all men who are not in the like manner alienated from
themselves, to see the blood of them so barbarously spilt, and so many silly
creatures perishing by their own hands. But the sinners in the mean time are
tickled with their own lifeblood, and laugh as mad men do when they are making
away with themselves, till their reasons can be delivered from the impostures
of those carnal imaginations, that like so many Devils have got possession of
them. As a man that is in an hot pursuit of his desired conquests and spoils,
does not feel the smart of his wounds, till he come to be cold, and have the
spirits settled in his blood: So is it with a sinner, who perceives not the wide
breaches, and the gaping wounds that sin makes in his soul, nor complains of
any grief and pain that it creates him, while he is in an eager chase of his
beloved lusts, till he has done his fierce pursuit, and in cool thoughts
quietly reflects upon his folly. And when he is (as we say) in his cold blood,
not enraged with his passions, nor pricked forward by the heat of his burning
affections, he sees that every sin which he committed gave a slash to his soul,
and opened a door to let out his precious life. Then, as the wounded man calls
for a Surgeon, and is as impatient for something to lenifie and assuage the
pricking of his sore, as before he was to run into the encounter: so is the
sinner desirous that some applications may be made for his cure, and that some
balsam may be found out for to give him healing, which will be more grateful to
him then all the pleasures of his sinful enjoyments.

2. All this you may easily see verified, not only in particular persons, Isa.
57.5.
but in whole Nations. When Judah inflamed themselves with idols, and was so
mad upon them (as another Prophet says of Babylon, Jer. 50.38.) that they
burnt with filthy desires after those spiritual adulteries, and debased
themselves even unto hell: ver. 9.
It was but a sport unto them, and they considered not of what a deadly disease
they labored. As Tholosanus calls a disease dissolutio foederis in corpore,
the dissolution of the covenant or agreement that is in the body; the setting
of the parts at odds one with another: So we may say of all sin, but especially
of Idolatry, that it is a breach of the peace with God, a renouncing of the
Covenant that is between us, a proclaiming of open war with heaven. And yet for
all this, those mad sinners used to cry Peace, Peace, to themselves (as the
Prophets frequently tell us) when there was no Peace at all. ver. 10.
Though they had quite wearied themselves in the greatness of their way; yet
they said not there is no hope: i. e. by following so many lovers, they were
become like an harlot, lassata sed non satiata; tired, but not satisfied. They
did not say (as the vulgar Latin renders it) Quiescam, I will rest, I will
cease all this toil and labor, whereby comes no good, but much hurt to me. But
when God had let them blood, to take down their inflammation, and made them
feel the smart of their sins by many sharp judgments, then they began to roar
like bears, and to mourn sore like doves; then they said, their transgressions
were with them; and as for their iniquities, they did know them; as you may
read in Isa. 59. v. 11, 12. When the whole head was sick, and the whole heart
was faint, when there was as many sores as parts, and their body was one great
wound; Isa. 1.5, 6.
then they cry as so many Lazars for the balm of Gilead, and say with Jeremy,
Heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, Jer. 17.14.
and I shall be saved.

3. But as there are many Mountebanks that pretend at a two-penny charge to
give sovereign balsams for all wounds; and for as much more to cure I know not
how many desperate diseases: So are there Physicians of no value, that
undertake the cure of sick souls by merry company, pleasant books, fasting from
their sins for a day or two, or by some such trifle; and to restore the
collapsed strength of a sick Nation by their politic receipts, their changes
of government, their craft in managing affairs, and an hundred such little and
feeble devices.

4. Now when both the one and the other see that these are but delusive ways
of continuing our maladies, then they begin to ask after the method of the
great Physician, and to enquire what God would have them do, that they may be
healed. But then as most men would be willingly healed of their wounds without
any searching or launcing of them, and are contented if they be palliated and
skinned over, though they will break out again, either there or in some other
place: And as they are for outward applications, but cannot imagine that the
cleansing of the inward parts by purging physic to carry away bad humors,
should conduce much to a cure: So likewise it is with sinful men, they are loath
to have their hearts thoroughly searched, and such severe and sharp medicines
that will eat away all the dead flesh, all their base lusts and desires,
applied: but they love smooth and oily things, that will mitigate the pains and
assuage the grief, and flatter them into a mere conceit of a cure. They would
not have the inward and more latent cause removed, nor the foulness of their
souls meddled withal; but they content themselves with an outward amendment,
and desire only that the lips of their wound may be closed, that they may not
cry out against them. A plaster of the blood of Christ they can well like that
shall be clapped upon their sore, and cool the rage and anger of their
conscience; but to be purified and refined by the Spirit of burning and
judgment, is a way of healing that they are not willing to submit unto. They
would have a robe of Christ's righteousness cast over them that should hide the
rottenness and putrefaction of their wounds; but his righteousness in them
which should recover their health, and restore them to soundness, is a thing
far from their desires, if not from their thoughts.

5. But supposing that men are willing to undergo any thing for a cure, and
fall into the hands of honest Physicians also; yet it is possible that they may
not understand the whole cause of the distemper, and so apply but imperfect
remedies, and administer medicines proper but for one particular affect: By
which means the disease may not only continue, but be increased, and turn into
a worse. For so it happens to many souls, who begin to think their condition is
very bad, and resolve for to amend, they are put upon the practice of some
Religious duties, and are followed most with such advices that make them think
these are sufficient to work their amendment. They easily imagine, that if they
can but weep when they pray or hear a Sermon, those tears have a rare faculty
to wash, supple and cleanse all their sinful wounds. But while they use not all
Christ's prescriptions, they fall into a more dangerous distemper, and the
hardest of all to be cured. The sore eats deeper, the heart becomes rotten and
unsound, and makes a man to labor with hypocrisy, of which few do ever
recover. And so it is likewise with politic bodies; the corruptions which seem
most notorious in the eyes of the present Governors, are commonly lamented, and
in some degree reformed; but then under the comfortable shadow of that
reformation, a thousand other sins walk securely, and enjoy their freedom and
protection, from having any hands laid upon them.

6. The state of our Nation is at present so very sick and weak, and so
desirous now we are of a cure; and yet so willing to have our hurt healed
slightly, that the most ordinary understanding can apply what has been said
unto its case and condition. Our sins have brought us down under a great number
of diseases, and laid us upon a bed of affliction. Great gaps are made in our
body, our bones are broken and sore vexed; the last drop of our vital blood is
ready to issue forth. If I should but represent to you, how the treasures of
the Nation are exhausted (which Statesmen call its blood and spirits) it would
make any heart ache, to see how pale and wan we look, without any color in our
cheeks. But besides that Trading is dead, Justice also is sore maimed; Charity
and Love is broken; Piety is dismembered; the very frame of our Government is
dissolved; and a whole deluge of miseries threaten to flow in at these wide
breaches. Jer. 8.15, 22.
Long have we looked for peace, but no good comes; and for a time of health,
but behold trouble. Is there no Balm for such wounds as ours? Is there no
Physician in the English Nation? Why then is not the health of it before this
time recovered?

Whether we have not tampered too much with State-Doctors, who sought by mere
power and worldly policy to settle our discomposures, I leave to every serious
man to consider. And whether we have not been backward to take the advice of
our spiritual Physicians, and to follow their directions, is a thing that may
be soon determined. That which I shall enquire into, shall be this, whether
even among the spiritual Physicians some have not been sought unto, who
considered not the chief cause of our maladies, but applied those things most
unto us, which did accidentally feed our diseases, and make them to be more
dangerous. And so we shall find out what will completely remedy all our evils,
and restore us to an healthy constitution again.

7. Now in this matter, I know not how to take a better course, then to imitate
Physicians, who consult not mere reason, but likewise the experience of former
times. And where they find the same symptoms, and all indications of a disease,
which an exact Author has described, though many hundred years ago, they
conclude the same remedies and medicines are to be used, which are consigned to
them by his Probatum est. I shall therefore search into the records of divine
History, and observe what the state of the Jews used to be, and what method
they were wont to take for the healing of their Nation, when any public
calamity did befall them; and as Physicians truly say, Curatio indicat morbum;
by their cure we shall certainly know what their disease was; and give a guess
also at our own, both disease and remedy. But many ineffectual applications
there were, which the holy Writ takes notice of, and therefore I shall divide
my discourse into two parts, and first show you what things were not of
sufficient virtue to cure them, though otherwise they were good and healing.
And secondly what God did particularly direct them unto, for a perfect recovery
of their strength when it was decayed, and a binding up of their wounds when
they were sorely broken.

CAP. II.
1. The seventh of Zachary opened, with many other Scriptures which show the
grounds of their appointing Fasts. 2. Gods slighting of them. 3. Which
discovers this was one of the ineffectual courses they took to appease him,
though they were very ceremonious in this performance. 4. Under which mistake
the world still labors. 5. The true ends and uses of Fasting are discoursed
of, in regard to the time past. 6. And to the time to come. 7. And to the time
present. 8. Which we ought seriously to mind.

1. AND you shall find both the one and the other of these insisted upon in the
seventh Chapter of the Prophet Zachary, out of which I will take the foundation
and groundwork of my ensuing discourse. For the understanding of which, you
must remember how God for their sins had forsaken his house, and left his
heritage, and given the dearly beloved of his soul into the hand of their
enemies, as Jeremiah speaks, cap. 12.7. These enemies were the Chaldeans, whose
Prince Nebuchadnezzar God had raised up for to destroy many Nations, and among
the rest Judea; the people of which he carried captive unto Babylon, after he
had burnt their chief City and the Temple of the Lord with fire. In
consideration of which calamities, those Captives appointed certain Fasts to be
kept at some set times in the year, both as sad commemorations of the ruin
that God had brought by sundry steps upon them, and as a means to atone him,
and procure his return to them. In the Law of Moses we read but of one Fast
commanded by God to his people, which was in the same month with one of these
that I am going to mention; viz. on the tenth day of the seventh month, as you
may find, Lev. 16.29, 31. Lev. 23.27, etc. This is the time mentioned by Saint
Luke, Act. 27.9. when he says the Fast was past, and so sailing was become
dangerous, i.e. it was about that time that we call Michaelmas, when great
flaws use to be upon the Seas, which makes them rough and tempestuous. It is
called by Philo (...), L. de Sept. and festis.
the Feast of the Fast, and the Sabbath of Sabboths. The neglect, or rather
hypocritical observance of which Sabbath, or day of rest, is reproved very
sharply in the 58. of Isaiah through the whole Chapter. Where by Sabbath, verse.
13. is to be understood this fasting day, on the tenth day of the seventh
month, and not the seventh day of the week, as will appear to him that will
take the pains to compare that Chapter, with those places in Leviticus just now
cited. But as there were many occasional Fasts which private men kept as they
had need; and as there was no month in the year (if we may believe the Hebrew
Calendar) wherein they did not observe some stated Fasts in remembrance of some
sad things that had befaln that Nation in former times; and as the second and
fifth days of every week were Fasting days for Religious persons (which the
Pharisee boasts that he observed, Luke 18.12.) So in conformity to this usual
practice, their Rulers did appoint four Fasts to be solemnly observed every
year, which are all mentioned together, Zach. 8.19. and were in remembrance (as
both ancient and modern, Christian and Jewish Interpreters conjecture) of so
many several remarkables in their ruin. The Fast of the fourth month was in
memory of the first breach made in the wall of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, of
which we read, Jer. 52.6, etc. The Fast of the fifth in memory of the burning
of the Temple, which in that month happened, ( Jer. 52.12.) as the burning of
the second Temple by Titus did also. That of the seventh was in memory of the
slaughter of Gedaliah by Ismael, of which we read, Jer. 41. And that of the
tenth was either in memory of the beginning of the siege, which proved to be so
fatal to them, which fell out to be in that month, 2 King. 25.1. Jer. 52.3.
Ezekiel. 24.1, 2. or else because in that month Ezekiel and they of the first
captivity had the news brought to them that Jerusalem was taken, Ezekiel. 33.21.
For I take it to be very frivolous which some of the Jews say, that the Fast of
the fourth month was kept, because in it Moses broke the Tables of stone; and
the Fast of the fifth, because in it they were prohibited to go from
Kadesh-Barnea, which was the shortest way to the Land of Canaan, etc. There
being no reason then for to be given, why they should not have been still
observed, after they came out of captivity; whereas the people were in doubt
(as we shall see presently) whether they should keep these Fasts any longer.
But before I pass any further, it will not be amiss to take notice on what
places in the Law they built this practice. And you read in Numb. 10.9. that if
they were going to war with an enemy that oppressed them, they are bid to blow
an alarm with Trumpets, and God would remember to save them. This they
understand to be a command for proclaiming a Fast, and calling Assemblies (See
Joel 2.15.) that they might humble themselves when they were in distress, and
turn Gods wrath away from them. And then because it is said, Levit. 26.40. that
in the Land of their captivity they should confess their sins, and the sins of
their forefathers, they concluded (as Ainsworth there observes out of Maimony)
that they ought to humble themselves on certain days of the year, for the sins
and miseries of their forefathers, as well as their own; and so they appointed
these Fasts which are here mentioned in Zachary for that purpose.

2. Now the people being returned out of that captivity after seventy years
humiliation, they sent their messengers to the Priests, to enquire whether they
should keep the Fast of the fifth month any longer, Zach. 7.
ver. 2, 3. And they not being able, it seems, to resolve the Question, came to
this Prophet, as you may gather from ver. 5. where he speaks not only to all
the people, but the Priests also, in Answer to this enquiry. The reason why
they make mention of that Fast only among all the four, was this; because the
building of the Temple was now in hand, in memory of whose destruction, this
Fast (as has been said) was observed; and so they might well think that the
cause of that mourning was ceased, and they had reason rather to rejoice. But
before the Prophet comes to determine the case, and to tell them, that the
days should still be observed, only with a change of them from Fasts into
Feasts (as it is chap. 8.19.) he gives them to understand what a true Fast is,
lest afterward their days of mirth should be to no better purpose then their
days of sorrow; and lest they should think that such humbling of themselves
had purchased their deliverance. And he tells them plainly, that they were much
mistaken, if they imagined that God had been served by them in the fifth or
seventh month either, any better then by their forefathers, whose Fasting is
in the forementioned place ( Isa. 58.) undervalued and slighted, as unworthy
of his least regard. And this he does in the fifth verse, and those that
follow, wherein he grants, that they had indeed observed many days of
humiliation, but yet absolutely denies that they had in the least done him any
pleasure, or satisfied any of his desires. When ye fasted and mourned in the
fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me,
even unto me? or as it is in the Hebrew (...) did you fast your fast to me, I
say to me? which is a phrase like that in Hag. 1.4. (...) is it a time for you,
I say for you (who are newly delivered by me) to dwell in your seiled houses,
and this house lie waste? So here, did you fast to me, I say to me, who have
often declared to you, that I care not for these outward performances, unless
they be accompanied with the hearty forsaking of sin? Sure you cannot think it
was (...) or (...) (as Aben-Ezra interprets it) because of me, for my sake, for
my glory, or to do any thing really pleasing unto me. Did I command any such
Fast as this unto you? (for so it may be rendered, by putting (...) before
(...)) who bid you fast on this fashion? When you did eat and drink (as it is
ver. 6.) did you any thing else but satisfy your selves therein? The same kind
of action is your fasting, and I am no more pleased with it, then with your
eating and drinking. If you had bestowed your time the quite contrary way, it
had been as grateful to me, as all your fasting days. This is the sense of
the Prophets sharp answer, which being proposed by way of question, is a most
peremptory and undeniable assertion, that they had not pleased him but
themselves, with all their labor; for he appeals to their own consciences, and
makes them Judges in the case. Do you your selves now tell me (says God) in
your own sober thoughts, whether you can believe that not eating, weeping,
howling, and such like things, are fasting unto me? No, you have been told
often enough of this, and it is not the first time that you have been informed
of your duty in this particular. Nunquid non sunt verba quae locutus est
Dominus, etc. (as the vulgar renders those words, ver. 7. out of the Hebrew)
Are not these the words which the Lord has cried by the former Prophets, when
Jerusalem was inhabited, and in her prosperity? Have not I told your Fathers by
all my servants, while you were in this Land, before your captivity, that such
kind of service is not acceptable to me? And yet you their children are in the
same mistake, and come confidently to me, telling me of your performing that,
which I always upbraided them withal. Methinks your own hearts should reprove
you, and spare me a labor of giving you any further answer.

3. By which you clearly see, that this was one of the ineffectual courses that
their sick Nation took for their recovery, viz. outward fasting and abstinence
from food, whereby they much afflicted themselves. Very severe and rigorous
they were in this thing, so that they refrained not only from the delicacies,
but all the ordinary refreshments of nature. And so punctual and nice they were
in these austerities, that they tell us, to the afflicting of the soul (by
which phrase the great Fast is described, Lev. 16.) there were four things
required beside forbearing all their food, viz. abstaining from and laying
aside their bathes, their ointments, their wives, and their shoes; i. e. every
thing which might be a pleasure and delight to their bodies. And these may seem
to be included in that phrase, ver. 3. of the 7. of Zach. Shall I weep in the
fifth month ((...)) separating my self as I have done these many years? So
serious they were, and scrupulous in this matter, that they thought they could
not in conscience leave off these exercises, till they knew Gods mind about it.
Would not we have taken them for very pious folks? Would they not have passed
among us for persons of a very tender conscience? And yet the Lord tells them,
that if they had taken their repast, followed their callings, anointed their
heads, done as they used at other times, they had equally given him content,
and found as much acceptance with him, who looked for other kind of fasting, as
the Prophet tells us, in the 9, 10, 11. ver. of the same Chapter. As a
Physician keeps his patient to a thin diet, and takes his ordinary food from
his table, that he may starve the ill humors; so did they think to work a cure
upon their souls, and by mere fasting from corporal food, to make them well;
Not considering that the fast of the soul consists in an abstinence from those
things that are hurtful to it, as the fast of the body is the forbearance of
such meats as feed its diseases. (...). in cap. 58. Isa.
When their enemies were upon them (says Procopius) they thought by bodily
fasting to pacify God, and make him favorable to them; abstaining from meat,
but not from spiritual wickedness. And so all their severities amounted to a
labor about nothing, because whilst they would not for a world touch a bit of
bread, they swallowed any unlawful gains, they tore the flesh, and gnawed the
very bones of the poor, as shall be manifested, before I leave their story.
While they would not moisten their mouths with a sip of drink, they drunk in
iniquity like water, and were filled with it to a strange excess, and it broke
out like a sore disease. While they pined their bodies, they suffered their
lusts, the body of sin, to be fat and wellliking. While they took down their
flesh, and made their faces look thin; that which the Scripture calls flesh,
was lusty and strong, pampered and high fed. Their Pride was not starved, their
big and ambitious thoughts were not taken down; their inordinate, covetous
desires were not impaired; their luxurious appetites were not retrenched;
nothing that was unreasonable in them was paired off, moderated or abated: No,
all sorts of sins were never more nourished and made more hungry and ravenous,
then when fasting and its concomitants could in gross the name and reputation
of Religion to themselves. And so their Fasts were to no more purpose (not
being thus designed) then if they had been feeding their corpse with a plenty of
more then ordinary cheer.

4. I need not tell you that the world has ever since made use of the same
remedy, as a cure for all their surfets of sin and wickedness. As the Master
many times sins, and his Man suffers for it; so do men use their bodies,
beating them with fasting and hunger, as if they were in the fault, and not
their souls. This present generation has been so laborious and zealous in
their public and private, their weekly and monthly humiliations; that few
ages can parallel them, either in sins, or such kind of sorrows. We have blown
the trumpet so loudly, and proclaimed Fasts so frequently, that we have made
the world ring of them, and heaven (I fear) deaf with them. Seeing we intended
no more by them, then what the Jews performed, they have proved but like the
vulgar medicines which people take from their neighbors in bodily diseases,
that leave them as sick as they were before, if not in a far worse condition.
Men sin still at such an height, and grow so confident in it, that any
judicious person may discern, they are grown more sick by their remedies, and
like to die by their Religion. They could not be more licentious and
intemperate in their desires then they are, if they had done all this penance
on purpose to purchase a license to live as they list. And having their hearts
so leavened with Jewish superstition, they had as good have gone and made a
feast, invited their neighbors, and passed that time away merrily, which they
spent only upon a sad ceremony. For if we consider the mere simple act either
of the one, or the other of these things, they have no goodness in them: but as
they are designed by us to certain purposes which are good, so they become acts
of Religion.

5. And then fasting from food is good and profitable, when it works upon our
souls, as Physic does upon our bodies, purging out the foul humors, making us
clean, and rendering us fit for action and employment. And first in respect of
the time past, it is to be used as an act of sorrow and grief for our
ingratitude; and our emptiness should make us feel, that all our mercies come
from Gods fullness. It should testify our anger and displeasure against our
selves, and be an act of revenge upon our selves for the abuse of those good
things which God has given us leave to feed on to our refreshment, but which
we have fatted our selves withal to an excessive fullness and wantonness. We
should make it an expression of our repentance, and disclaiming of our former
courses; an acknowledgement that we deserve not a mouth full of meat, but
rather to have our daily bread taken from our tables, and not so much as the
scraps and fragments of that plenteous provision left behind, which God blesses
our Tables withal. And when it looks back with such an austere countenance
upon our inordinate enjoyments; when it confesses our unworthiness, chides our
unthankfulness, afflicts and chastises us for our former follies; then there is
some good in it, and this sour sauce may make us hereafter relish all divine
blessings better. But this is not all the good it must do us; for if we return
again to our former course, it is but a mock-repentance, and a gluttonous
abstinence. For it is nothing but fullness, that makes some men fast; and their
fasting does but prepare them for the greater fullness.

6. And therefore secondly, in regard of the time to come, it is to be an act
of mortification, designed to the starving and pining of our lusts; to the
cutting off their provision, and withdrawing of their nourishment; to the
learning of sobriety and temperate living; to the practicing of self-denial in
our appetites, and crossing our own desires; and in short, to the bringing the
body into subjection, by taking away its provender, if it be an unruly beast
that will not be governed. And so it is not a business of a day, or whose
efficacy reaches but till night; but it has a design upon the whole life,
wherein we are to abstain as carefully from all excess in pleasures, yea from
all sin, as we do on that day from all our food. To this, that of the Father's
does most truly accord, who calls fasting (...), a symbol of death; it being
that which tends to the destruction of the body, and the taking away of its
life. It should not only signify that we are dying to all earthly things, but
it ought to be an instrument of death, to take away the life of our lusts. And
when it is so used, as not to be a whet-stone to sharpen our stomachs against
the next meal; but to be a knife to cut and slash off all the immoderation of
our appetites, to wound and kill all our sins; it is a thing very acceptable to
God, and hugely serviceable to our souls. But let us here note two things,
First, that it is to be used, not only to the mortifying of some, but of all
our lusts and carnal affections. If we would fast holily and purely, we must
(...), In Isa. 58.3.
as Cyril of Alexandria speaks; relinquish and depart from our own wills, to
choose that which is pleasing to God, and to yield a neck most gentle, tractable
and easily reined by his commands. We must withdraw the food of our appetites
after vain glory and the praise of men, as well as after pleasures and fleshly
entertainments. The swollen desires of honors and great heaps of worldly wealth
must be diminished, no less then the intemperate cravings of the stomach, and
the lower belly. We must make it an instrument to dull and blunt the edge of
all our inordinate longings, and to fix such deadning considerations in us, as
may take us quite off from pleasing our selves. So Clemens Alex. observes, that
a Christian knows very well the secret meaning and enigmatical sense of fasting
upon the fourth and sixth days of the week, viz. Wednesday and Friday, which
are called after the names of Mercury and Venus, (the Heathen Governors of
Merchants and Lovers) (...). L. 7. Strom.
He thereupon learns to fast through his whole life, from covetousness and
voluptuousness. The choice of those days, was to give him this secret document
and remembrance, that he should pine and waste away his greedy desires of
riches and pleasures, from whence spring all manner of evils. And indeed it is
one excellent end of a Fast, if we intend thereby to enable our selves to
exercise charity to the poor, and to give in Alms to them, what we deny to our
selves. It is a sad thing if the Divine nature cannot teach us Christians so
much tenderness, as good nature taught some Heathens. The people of Rhegium,
Aelian. L. 5. var. hist. cap. 20.
when their neighbors of Tarentum were besieged by the Romans, fasted every
tenth day, and sent those victuals to them, which they should have eaten
themselves; in memory of which a Feast called (...), or, the Fast, was ever
after celebrated by them when their Town was relieved. A rare example of
kindness, scarce now to be matched, which made me think good here to insert it.
But beside, a Christian (as Clemens also observes) fasts not only according to
the Law, (...), from all evil actions; but according to the perfection of the
Gospel, (...), from all wicked thoughts and imaginations. These days give him
notice, what he is to do every day of his life; and the Gospel fast is so
strict, that it will not let an evil thought or affection have its daily food,
though they never grow so strong as to beget any evil actions: But it
substracts their nourishment, and intends their mortification, and puts the
soul upon cutting off all those luxuriances and excrescencies, of which a
sprouting fancy is apt to be guilty, which no body observes. In short, (...).
Orat. 2. de jeju.
it is as Saint Basil has defined it, an alienation and estrangement of the
soul from all evil. But then (secondly) you must further note, that the use of
it is to learn our appetites to feed upon spiritual things, upon God and all
his holy truths. When the soul is at liberty from its attendance upon the
necessities of the body, it should stir up its own hunger, and satisfy it self
with its own proper nutriment. When it is not the palates Taster, it should
labor so to taste and relish the sweetness of its own food, that ever after it
may have a longing for it, and observe set times for its own repast. And so the
bodies fast, should be the souls festival, wherein it not only relieves and
refreshes it self for that present, but affects its palate also with such a
delicious savor of Gods holy commands, that they seem sweeter then the honey
and the honeycomb, and make the soul break for the longing that it has unto
those judgments at all times.

7. Thirdly, In respect of the time present, fasting is an help to
self-examination, prayer, and holy meditation, and so it is to be used. It
frees the mind from clouds and obscure vapors, it sets it at liberty from
bodily mixtures and interposals, that it may altogether attend upon its own
business and concernments, (...), In Eclog.
says the forementioned Clemens. Fasting voids and discharges the soul of that
matter which clogs its spirits, and renders it pure and clear, light and
cheerful, together with the body in heavenly employments. We cannot at the same
time eats, and drink, and taste pleasant things, Porphyr. l. 1. (...).
(...), and be conservant with things separate from all matter, and that are
within the knowledge of the mind only, as a Philosopher could determine. And
therefore it may be to very good purpose to abstain from our daily food, that
thereby our souls being lightened and exonerated of that dull heavy matter
which oppresses them, they more freely and clearly mind their own most proper
objects, which are perfectly spiritual. When there is this universal intendment
in our fasting, it becomes of excellent use and singular advantage to us, and
it may deserve all those great names which Ephraim Syrus bestows upon it, The
chariot to heaven, the raiser of Prophets, the teacher of Laws and Wisdom, the
custody of the soul, the secure companion of the body, with many more too long
to be recited. But when we understand no more by it then the Pharisees did, who
fasted indeed twice every week, but were still full of covetousness, rapine and
excess, we shall be so far from being able by it (...), (as Basil speaks) to
make our excuse to God, that we shall the more accuse our selves, and become
very loathsome things to him, with all this kind of Religion. For this is not
the Fast which God has chosen, to pinch and use our bodies unkindly for a day.

8. And yet alas! who is there that makes his fasting serve for any other
matters, but the ends of his reputation, or silence of conscience. Orat. 1. de
jejun.
I may take up the complaint of Saint Basil in one of his Sermons. Thou eatest
no flesh, but thou devourest thy brother; thou abstainest from wine, but thou
art full of violence and wrong. Woe to them that are drunk, but not with wine.
Anger is a drunkenness of the soul, and makes it beside it self: And so is
sorrow, which drowns and drinks up the understanding: And so is fear, which
quite takes away the spirits: And so is every other passion, which is (...),
and puts the soul out of its truly natural temper. Fast therefore from all
these; for if thou still retainest thy sins, thou do but pour thy tears into
a tub with holes (as Ephraim Syrus speaks in this case) and losest all thy
labor, as well as thy reward.

CAP. III.
1. Mourning and sad lamentations were another art of moving God to pity them.
2. But very unsuccessful also, though it was practiced among them with a great
deal of ceremony. 3. The true nature of godly sorrow briefly opened in many
particulars heaped together. 4. The small hopes that we can build upon such a
watrish foundation as our tears, which are shown to be things often times of
little worth.

1. AND this will lead me to another thing, which was usually a companion of
their fasting, and a means whereby they hoped to insinuate themselves into Gods
favor. Weeping I mean, wailing and making lamentation for their sins; which
they were wont to do with no small sadness, and with many doleful complaints,
as the word (...) in that 7. of Zach. 5. gives us to understand. It is said of
Mordecai, Esth. 4.1. that he cried with a loud and bitter cry. Their Planctus
or mourning used to be with howling, beating of their heads, or knocking of
their breasts, and sometimes tearing of their hair, with such like expressions
of inward grief, whereby they thought to move God, as they are apt to do men,
to compassion and pity toward them. For they ask the Question, Zach. 7.3.
(...) Shall I weep in the fifth month? etc. intimating that they took it to be
pleasing to him, and therefore they durst not leave it off, unless they
understood he would be pleased with the ceasing of it.

2. Now God returns an answer to them, ver. 5. which grants more then they
spoke of, and says, When you fasted and mourned, i. e. wept with wailing and
lamentation, etc. you did it not to me. For that word (...) in the 3. v. is
altered here into (...), weeping is changed into mourning; and it is as if he
had said, To what purpose is your weeping? yea where you make a pitiful moan,
a lamentable deal of do, most bitter complaints, and pour out your tears with
loud cries, it is nothing at all to me. God could by no means be brought to a
good liking of their sins, though they were content to be at this trouble for
them, and wash them out of his memory with their tears. He could not be moved
to mercy with blubbered eyes, and sad looks, and fearful scritches, and owl
like howlings in the night of their affliction. And there was as little in all
the appendices of this weeping, which here we may reasonably conceive not to
have been excluded: Such as rending of the garments, (...). L. de Isid. and
Osir.
putting on of sackcloath next their loins, wearing of dirty apparel, strowing
ashes on their heads, lying on the ground (a thing in fashion among Heathens
themselves, as Plutarch tells us of the Athenian women) hanging down their
heads, and sitting in silence. Which last was an expression of sadness, as well
as their bitter cries; excess on either side being an indication of great
grief. All this, I say, signified nothing to God, but that they were miserable;
for alas, the deep and hearty sorrow for sin, the mourning of their souls after
God, the rending and tearing of their hearts; the doffing off all the fine gay
clothing, wherein their hearts secretly prided themselves; the uncasing and
stripping of their souls of all their coverings, wherein they hid and kept warm
many beloved sins; the laying some grating considerations as close to their
hearts, as sackcloth was to their flesh; the pouring shame and reproach upon
themselves; the blushing to look up unto the face of God with any confidence,
till they were peremptorily resolved (against all impediments) to be better;
the trembling prostrations at his feet; the fullness of grief that makes the
heart unable to speak a word for it self; these things they were strangers
unto. And therefore the Prophet Isaiah cries out, cap. 58.4, 5. Is this the
Fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down
his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou
call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? No, rend your hearts and
not your garments (says the Prophet Joel) and turn to the Lord with fasting,
weeping and mourning.

3. Then tears are good, when they are the companions of a relenting and
returning heart; when they run out of a soul that is running toward God. 1 Samuel 7.2, 3. All the house of Israel lamented after the Lord, and Samuel spoke
unto them, saying, If you return unto the Lord with all your heart, then put
away the strange gods, and prepare your heart to the Lord, and serve him only,
and he will deliver you. That is, if you be in good earnest, let us see
something else beside your weeping and lamentation; and if these be the outward
expressions of the in ward relenting of your hearts, then put away all those
displeasing things that have created you so much mischief, and cost you now so
many tears. Away with all these sins that are such offenses to your selves as
well as unto God. Thrust not these needles any more into your heart, these
thorns into your eyes; carry them all away in this flood of tears. Tears are no
further liked of God, then as they are expressions of a serious inward grief
and sorrow, which is fed and nourished even by our reasons, and have their
spring in the deepest considerations. And then only are they expected from us,
when we use to weep in other cases of sadness, and upon doleful accidents. If
that be our temper, to weep bitterly when some mournful object presents it self
to us, wherein we are concerned; it is a sad sign to see our eyes dry, when the
deplorable condition of our souls does lie before us. But if our sorrow uses
to express it self some other way in such cases, then that is all the outward
token that God requires in this. Yet let it be what it will, God will not
accept of it, unless it amount to a great displeasure against our selves; base
thoughts of our selves, that have committed such acts; a huge trouble in our
mind for what is past; hearty wishes that all were undone; sense of our
obnoxiousness to Gods displeasure; humble and earnest requests to be received
into his favor. Which last thing, if it be true, is inconsistent with our
remaining in a state of sin, and therefore this sorrow goes a great deal
further, and includes in it an hatred of sin; a resolution never more to have
to do with it; a choosing rather to die then willingly attempt such another act:
An actual declining of it; a setting of our selves to resist the next
temptation; a placing of a watch over our selves; and in every thing, such a
temper as cannot be quiet in the condition it is, but which must be better. If
we find not our selves in this posture, all our tears are no better then puddle
water, our sighs but the reek of a dunghill, our tearing of our hair but a fit
of madness, our mourning but the noise of wolves; and there is not so much as
the beginning of that work in us which God looks for when we fast, and weep,
and call after him.

4. And it will not be amiss to observe what cheap and easy things tears are,
before we pass any further. First, there are some weeping tempers and
dispositions; hearts so soft and tender, so full of moisture, that they have a
flood of tears for any occasion. The breaking of a glass, the loss of the least
thing that they love, an unkind word, the crossing of their wills in the
smallest trifle, will make some hearts burst forth into them. And therefore
easy, and soft natures, have little reason to lay any weight upon them. And
secondly, you know that stones will be moist, and weep in foul weather. In a
great danger, or when some sad judgment is upon them, the hardest and most
marble hearts may begin to relent and bedew themselves with tears. When men
have dismal and black apprehensions of a tempest that rattles in their ears;
when they have a sound of Gods wrath that comes and amazes them with its
fearful noise; it may make them shrike and cry out, and it may squeeze some
sad groans from them, which may end in tears. Nay thirdly, tears being bodily
things, they are many times sooner caused by bodily calamities, then by a sense
of spiritual concernments. We may weep for the harm that sin has done us, when
we think it is for the wrong that we have done to God. The loss of our health
or goods may most trouble us, and not the loss of God and our souls. The
discredit sin has brought upon our name, may more affect us, then the
dishonor that thereby we have cast upon our Maker. And so while men think that
they weep for sin, and that Gods name suffers, they do but pour out their own
private grief, and lament their own sufferings. As the people of Israel (whom
Zach. speaks of, and whose case we are stating) might easily mourn and weep all
the seventy years, if it had been but to think of the great calamities that had
befaln them. The ruin of their City, the burning of their Temple, the
captivity of their Nation, the pouring out their blood like water, and sundry
doleful circumstances in all these might well make them wish with Jeremiah,
cap. 9.1. that their head was waters, and their eyes a fountain of tears, that
they might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of their people.
But what is all this to a sense of sin, and a groaning under the intolerable
burden of their iniquity! To what purpose are all these tears, if inward grief
and anguish for sin do not give them all their acrimony and smartness? if they
wash and scour not the soul from all its filth and nastiness? Or, fourthly,
tears may be but some heat-drops, when men have a great sense of some mercy,
and the Sun shines very comfortably upon them: which though they are very
great, and bigger then fall in more constant showers, yet they are soon over,
and all is fair again. Or, fifthly, they may be like the morning dews; some
good moods when they are cool and sober; a good fit as soon as they are up in a
morning, and before they go into any company or employment. But in the heat of
the day, and when a temptation comes, they are all lickt up, and no foot-step
of them remains. And it is well, if they become not more scorcht and dry by
such little moistures. Or, sixthly, suppose that there be some present heavy
sense of sin that makes them bigg with a cloud, and express these briny tears;
yet alas! they are but like a sudden dash of rain, which is soon passed over,
and then all is clear again, until the next affectionate shower. At the next
meeting they entertain their sins with as great a friendship and familiarity,
as if there had never been any falling out, nor any unkindnesses passed between
them. And if after some embraces and new endearments, there happen again a new
distaste also; yet the reconcilement is easy, and a small importunity will make
them forget all the injuries their sins have done them, and all the ill
language that they have given their sins. Such are the tears of many a man, who
cozens himself into a conceit that he is a penitent; they are but the issue of
a natural tenderness, or the product of some sharp affliction, or the overflow
of some sudden passion, whose surges may swell by some outward as well as
inward causes. As a child while he is under the lashes of the rod, makes a sad
face, and waters his cheeks, and promises loudly, but as soon as the boys
come, goes to his play as merrily as ever again: So is it with many finners,
who are good no longer then they feel the smart; but smile upon their ancient
pleasures, and wash their faces in sweet waters, which you would have thought
should never have been washed with any thing but salt tears. Or as you see a
young man who being in love with one much below him, and therefore chidden by
his Father, weeps like a little babe, and seems as if he would drown himself in
the flood of his tears; but upon the very next sight is as hot in his love, and
as eager in his pursuit, as though there had been no such cooler. So it is with
many fond men, who in the absence of those creatures that they dote upon, and
when they are under sound reproofs from God for their follies, they weep as if
they meant to leave themselves no eyes to look upon them any more: But yet when
those objects shall happen to give them a kind greeting, they cannot forbear to
answer the salutation with their usual civility. And yet how much men please
themselves in this tenderness of heart, is more apparent, then that I need
speak of it. They take this easiness to be sorrowful, to be a sign of grace,
and that their hearts are not hardened; when as they have the same easiness to
sin, and are no harder to be wrought upon to consent unto it. They will take
this to be godly sorrow, though it work no repentance and amendment, in spite
of what the Scripture says, and the clearest reason that can be offered. But I
will spend no more time about those who cozen themselves with such little
things; for all that I can say will not convince them, unless they will
consider; and if they will, then half of what has been said will be sufficient
to convince them. And besides, I would not either make this book swell to a
great bulk (which I do not affect) or pass over too lightly what I chiefly
intend.

CAP. IV.
1. Confession of sin was another usual attendant upon a Fast. 2. But no more
prevailing then the rest, as they used it. 3. True Confession, the nature and
workings of it described, not only in the mouth, but in heart and life. 4. More
valuable with God then sacrifices.

1. THE tongue is a member that hangs so loose, and is of such ready motion,
that when the heart is full of sighs, and the eyes of tears, it is no difficult
matter to draw this neighbor into their assistance, to tell a sad story, and
to beg for some relief. And therefore in those times of solemn fasting and
mourning, they used to make large confessions of their sins, and pray to God
for the pardon of them, and turning away of his wrath. Concerning Confessions,
you may read the ninth Chapter of each of these three Books, Ezra, Nehemiah and
Daniel, where they spread before God the transgressions of the Nation, and
acknowledge their great demerits. And you may well think the people were not
negligent in this piece of importunity, the mouth using to speak when the soul
is full of desire to be eased of the burden that lies upon us. They brought (it
is most likely) before God long catalogues of their own sins, and of the
provocations of their forefathers. They accused their Kings, Princes,
Prophets, Priests, and all the people of the Land of many rebellions and
treasons against him. They charged themselves liberally with all manner of
crimes against God and each other, and they subscribed to all the inditements
which the Prophets of the Lord used to lay against them. They condemned and
sentenced themselves before him, and acknowledged that all his judgments were
righteous, and that they deserved to suffer far worse punishments, if he should
deal severely with them. And yet this was nothing but an hypocritical talk to
God, while they were in love with those sins that they did so confess: and
remained in a state of reconciliation to those iniquities, of which they stood
there by their own consciences arraigned.

2. But though this kind of devotion might give themselves good content, yet it
gave God none at all. It is an easy matter for a man to rail at himself, while
he thinks the better of himself for it. It puts a man to no great cost or
trouble to reckon up all his debts, if thereby he hope to get them all
discharged. But God is not of our mind, and does not like a man the better,
because he tells him he is a grievous sinner, but far the worse, because
against his conscience he continues still a sinner: He is so far from finding a
kind entertainment with God by these pretended submissions, that he will rather
meet with a frown, and this angry sentence, Out of your own mouths, O ye
hypocritical traitors, shall you be condemned: and you shall perish, you your
selves being Judges. For this is a most ridiculous piece of pageantry, and as
if we should say to him, Lord! we are most miserable sinners, most notorious
offenders, and so we intend with thy good leave still to continue. We have
broken all thine holy Laws, and may we but do so still, we will never disown
the act, but always sadly acknowledge it. This Confession signifies nothing
else, but that men desire they may do still as they were wont to do, at no
greater charge then again to confess it. They beg that the acknowledgements of
their faults may procure leave to practice the same again, with no greater
trouble, but only to make a new acknowledgement. It speaks only that they are
sinners, and that they desire the favor to be so still, and they will not
stick continually to make Confession of it. Confession is the condition of
sinning more freely in their Divinity; they disburden their consciences by it,
that they may lay on more load. As the mariners unlade the ship to take in new
stowage, and as the drunkard vomits up his former draughts to continue the
merry meeting; so do men that are weary with sinning, bring up all before God
that troubles their stomach, that so under the severity (as they imagine) of
his pardon, they may fill themselves again when they have a mind unto it. They
think it not good manners to come to Gods Table smelling rankly of a debauch,
and so against some such high time, they may confess their sins, as a means to
cleanse and purge their souls. Or their consciences are griped, and their sins
make them sick and ill at ease, and so they go to disgorge themselves (for by
no better name can I call it) and make a relation of their case to the great
Physician. But then as many patients, if they hear but a word drop from the
Physicians mouth, that their disease is not dangerous, but they may easily
recover, will take no Physic at all, but throw away their Bills of advice; so
if these sinners can but hear one good promise, any merciful saying that gives
men encouragement to hope, away they go with it in their mouths, and with no
amendment in their lives. And yet many times these Confessions come not from so
high a cause, but owe their birth to mere custom and imitation, being as common
as to say, Lord have mercy upon us, we are all sinners; and God help us.

3. But whatsoever men may mean by them, such Confessions as these signify
nothing at all unto God. For the sins that men rehearse unto him, are all known
by him before, and lie continually in his eyes. If this be all they have to
say, that they are sinners, and have committed such and such acts against him,
they may as well let their tongues rest in quiet; there is nothing new in all
this. Then Confession is significant, when it is an act of shame and reproach
to our selves, an act of grief and hatred, a disavowing and disclaiming for
ever such practices. Now we say something unto God; this is a new business; the
case is quite altered; and there is forgiveness with him for such persons. So
the Apostle tells us, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Which is
to the same sense with that of the wise man, Prove. 28.13. He that confesses
his sins, and forsakes them, shall have mercy. And what Solomon prays for in
the behalf of such supplicants, 1 King. 8.47, 48. God himself promises to them,
1 Chronicles. 7.14. as you may see, if you will take the pains to read the places.
True confession signifies that we are ashamed and blush to look up unto heaven;
that we have nothing to say for our selves, but much against them; that we
cannot but cry out upon our own baseness and falsness unto God, that we had
rather not be, then do one such vile act again; that we are grieved and pained
at the very heart, and cannot but give vent to our souls in sighs and groans;
that we cannot with patience think upon our selves, nor hold from proclaiming
our own guiltiness; that we remember nothing with so much sadness, as that we
have been offenders; and that we resolve by Gods assistance and our utmost
endeavors, to grow better, may we but be pardoned such offenses. It is
begotten by a deep sense of the nature of sin, and the high affront which it
puts upon on God. The soul is stounded with such thoughts, and struck with a
strange palsy and a fearful trembling, that it should dare to adventure upon
such a contempt. The multitude of these depsperate acts makes it groan
earnestly for a deliverance from them. Every groan, every word grates upon the
heart, as a file does upon iron, which at every rub fetches off some of the
rust. And the further it proceeds in such Confessions, the more is all
affection to sin diminished and impaired.

4. Now God loves such a pungent sorrow as pricks to the very heart, and gives
a deadly wound to all our sins. Such words are acceptable to him, as strike
like darts through the very life of our lusts, and nail them to the Cross. He
loves when we look upon him whom we have pierced, and mourn so bitterly, that
our hearts are shot through with an incurable wound to the flesh, and all the
affections and desires thereof: And he loves such a Confession as expresses
this sorrow, this pain, and this torment of our hearts, which will be mixed
with a vehement displeasure and hatred, both against our selves and our sins.
This he loves more then all sacrifices, or such like gifts, whereby they
thought many times to flatter him. And therefore the returning sinners promise,
as God bids them, Hos. 14.2. that they will render the calves of their lips; i.
e. as Kimchi interprets it, humble and penitent Confessions instead of
sacrifices; for thou love (says he) the words of repentance best. And
therefore he observes that the scapegoat, Lev. 16.21. on which the wickedness
of the children of Israel was laid, that he might carry them away, was not
offered upon the Altar, but Confession only was offered to God, which was far
better. But then this Confession of ours is to be, (1) with a promise never to
do so any more; and (2) it is to be made good by actual forsaking of sin; and
(3) it is to be done presently, in such instances as we have been most guilty
in. So we read in Numb. 5.7. and the Hebrew Doctors Comments upon it. The text
says, that in case of a trespass, a man was to confess his sin that he had
done, and to make a recompense for any wrong by a full restitution, with some
addition to it. And Maimon says, the form of Confession was this, O God, I
have sinned, V. Ainsw. in loc.
I have done perversely, I have trespassed before thee, and have done thus and
thus; but lo I repent, and am ashamed of my doings, and I will never do this
thing again. And he says, no atonement could be made for a man, no not when he
had made satisfaction for the damage he had done his neighbor, till he had
confessed, and did promise to turn away from doing so again for ever. And
therefore when Ezra exhorts the people to make Confession unto the Lord God of
their Fathers, he adds, and do his pleasure, and separate your selves from the
people of the Land, and from the strange wives, Ezra 10.11. And it may be
added, that it is part of Gods will and pleasure, that we should confess our
faults one to another, as well as unto him, Jam. 5.16. when the heart is truly
humbled, it will be glad of any ways to shame it self, or to make satisfaction
to others that are offended, or to convince sinners, that they may cease to
offend. But whatsoever volumes we bring against our selves, either before God,
or others, without such a sense of sin as I have described, it is but lying
unto the Lord, and telling him hypocritical stories, which will remain as
matter of new accusation upon our account. We shall but more provoke and
incense his anger against us, when we think for to avert it, and by our own
breath, kindle a flame that will devour us.

CAP. V.
1. Prayer is another refuge they betook themselves unto in their misery. 2.
And so now men expect great things from it. 3. But self-love indites them. 4.
And men's love to their sins makes nonsense of them. 5. For when they pray
against sin, they labor to uphold it. 6. And so neither their own prayers, nor
the prayers of good men will prevail for them. 7. What prayers are acceptable
to God. 8. And for what.

1. IT is a saying ascribed unto an Angel, in the book of Tobit, cap. 12. 8.
that, Prayer is good with Fasting. And of this the people of the Jews had such
an opinion, that they never neglected it on those solemn days, but thought
that it could fetch down any blessings from heaven upon them. God himself
commands, when he calls for a Fast, that they should cry unto him, Joel 1.14.
This they used to do (says the Book of Judith) with great fervency, with
earnestness, with all their power, cap. 4. 9, 12, 15. And sometimes (as is
there expressed, cap. 6. 21.) they called on the God of Israel all night for
help. Their hearts were even dissolved into petitions. They seemed to be so far
from stoniness, that they were more yielding then flesh, and could melt into
water. Their eyes could not flow with tears so plentifully, as their hearts did
with prayers. For so in the Chaldee those words are paraphrased, 1 Samuel 7 6.
They drew water, and poured it out before the Lord; i. e. They poured out their
hearts in supplications unto him.

2. And so now at this day, men are content to pump hard for as many buckets
full of prayers, as will hold them pouring out from morning until night.
Devouter persons the heavens never saw, if this be to be Religious. How can God
choose but pour down his blessings on such men, who are so free and open-hearted
to him, and could be content to do nothing else but present him with such
services? Prayer passing under such a magnificent name as the Key of heavens
Gate, and having those Scriptures applied to it which speak of having power
with God and prevailng, men think that by it they can do great matters, and
place no small confidence in its authority. So I call it, because they are
ready to apply those words to its office, Isa. 45.11. concerning the work of my
hands command you me. Though good Interpreters (which I think fit to admonish
the Reader of by the way) do read that verse with an Interrogation to this
sense: Do you command me what I shall do, and ask me what I mean to deal so
with my sons, the people of Israel, who, I say, shall go into captivity? which
agrees well with ver. 9, 10. Woe be to him that strives with his maker, etc. Woe
be to him that says to his Father, What begettest thou? etc. And as the words
lie in our translation, their meaning is only this, that they should enquire of
Isaiah and the rest of his Prophets, concerning the future state of their
Nation, and bid them tell them what he was about to do with them, from whom
they should receive good satisfaction, both of his Justice in their captivity,
and his Mercy in sending them deliverance by Cyrus, which in that Chapter he is
treating of. But so, I say, it is that men advance their prayers to such a
prerogative, that they have engrossed the name of Religion to themselves, and
they have learnt to call praying, going to duty, as if this were all, or the
chief of what we have to do. And so if in their Confessions they should be
dejected and cast down, yet their petitions are able to lift them up very high
in hopes again. Especially since some have taken this new way of boldness, to
tell God in plain English, that he must not, that he cannot deny them, and that
they will have audience, and that without any delay also. Which are no devised
expressions of mine, but those which some of name have uttered, and which their
followers may be apt to imitate, as an high token of a zealous Faith. If any be
offended at this plainness, it is their own fault that occasion it, and they
cannot be more offended then many good souls are at their saucy language.

3. But it is now as it was then in another regard also; The prayers of the
Jews were commonly to no other purpose, but that God would pardon them, turn
again to them, and save their Nation from their enemies hands, whilst they
thought not of turning unto him, and putting all his enemies out of their
souls. Nothing was sadder to them, then to be in bondage and slavery, and
therefore that made their hearts sigh more then their sins. Their prayers
differed from the desires of good men, as the Mahometans Lords prayer from that
of the Christians. The last thing that we beg of God is, that no temptation may
prevail over us, to make us fall again into those sins for which we beseech
forgiveness. But the Turks conclude that prayer, (which they call the prayer of
Jesus the Son of Mary) in this fashion, Let not such an one rule over me, See
M. Greg. observe. p. 165.
which will have no mercy on me, for thy mercies sake, O thou most merciful.
Self-love and sense of misery can indite good store of petitions, adorn them
with eloquence, inspire them with fervency, and thrust them forward with a
lusty degree of confidence. But as they say of some sort of precious stones,
that though they are of sovereign virtue, yet they lose all their force, if
they be put into a dead man's mouth: So it is with this Christian Jewel, which
does wonders when it is it self, but languishes and dies when it is in the
mouth of unreformed sinners. Such men's prayers are but a stinking breath, which
is very offensive to the nostrils of God. They are so far from being a grateful
voice unto him, that he turns away his ears from them, as we do from the
braying of Asses, or the talk of fools. And therefore he tells the people of
Israel, ( Isa. 58.4.) that he would not have them fast as they did, to cause
their voice to be heard on high, not regarding either their mournful howlings,
or their clarnorous petitions, whereby they thought to stir him up to help
them. And by the Prophet Jeremiah he tells them ( cap. 14. 12.) that when they
fast he will not hear their cry. For he that turns away his ear from hearing
the Law, even his prayer shall be an abomination, Prove. 28.9. If men will not
hear God, he will not hear them, yea he cannot give ear unto them. For the
things that they love and embrace, are such necessary causes of the evils under
which they groan, and so inconsistent with the mercies that they desire, that
unless God alter the nature of things, or change the method of his proceedings
in the government of the world, he cannot hearken to their petitions. Either he
must change his mind, or they must change theirs, or their prayers be
unanswered. And therefore unless they heartily renounce their sins, and
thoroughly discharge their iniquities, all their prayers for sending mercies,
and for removing miseries, are a piece of mere nonsense, incoherent ignorant
stuff, which will be returned with such shame upon them, as if he had thrown
the dung of the sacrifices in the face of those that brought them.

4. When men bear a love to those sins, the evil consequents of which they
desire may be prevented, or remedied, that they may not ruin them, they are as
ridiculous and unsuccessful, as if a man should beg health while he continues
in his riotous and intemperate course of living: It is as if we should desire
that the effect may cease, while the cause remains in act; that God would not
be angry, though we continually provoke him, and that he would not hate us,
though we do not love him. Let a man raise his confidence by what arts he
pleases, and speak with a boldness in his prayers, as though he would command
heaven, and have what he would of God; yet he cannot have a true faith that he
shall be heard, unless he utterly abandon in heart and resolution, whatsoever
is incompatible and cannot stand with the things that he desires. We may call
our Fasts by the name of days of prayer (as we commonly do) but though we
should pray from morning until night, though the whole Nation should cry to God
that he would bow the heavens and come to save us, though it should be with a
voice that would rend the clouds, and seem to make way for him to come down to
our rescue; yet if we be in love with our sins, the causes of our trouble, we
have put in such a strong Caveat, such a bar to our suits and petitions in the
Court of heaven, that we can obtain no audience. And therefore some Heathens
were wiser then these sottish children of Israel (as Jer. calls them, 4.22.)
for when Niniveh was afraid of Gods Judgments, they not only proclaimed a
Fast, and cried mightily to the Lord, but they turned every one from their evil
way, and the violence that was in their hands, Jonah 3.5, 8. It is a prudent
saying of Cyril of Alexandria; Fasting is a choice thing, ((...)) prayer is
profitable, and of great benefit, In Isa. 58.3.
it is to humble our souls in Gods eyes; but it is most absurd for those that
come in this manner to obtain mercy, to provoke the divine Lawgiver in another
way, by not loving to do his commands.

5. But so willing are men to deceive themselves, that though sometimes they go
a little further, yet they suffer their prayers to fall short of heaven. When
men have made their faces sour with fasting, they begin sometimes to look
angrily upon their sins, and to take up some resolutions to be revenged on
them. And therefore they beg the divine grace to destroy them, and beseech him
to send his Spirit to purge their souls from them. But then as if they had no
mind to be heard, they resolve to be at no trouble nor pains themselves about
this great business. They leave all to the care of God, whom they would have so
far to concern himself in our affairs, as not to expect that we should be such
creatures as he made us. They sit still and wait for an unheard of power from
above, as if divine Faith were a relyance on God to carry such by force to
heaven, who have no list to walk in the way thither. Such prayers have a
perfect likeness to the requests of the man in the Fable to Hercules, when his
cart stuck fast in the mire, who would neither prick forward his Oxen, nor lay
his own shoulders to the wheels, nor unload the wagon, but cast all upon the
strength of his God, expecting that he should come and draw it out. And such an
answer as was returned to that silly swain, will very well befit such
petitioners: O bone, disce pigris non flecti numina votis,
Praesentesque adhibe, quum facis ipse, Deos.


Learn, Good Sir, that God is not moved by lazy desires, and sluggish wishes,
but that thou shall then find thy God present, when thou thy self art busy
about thy work. It is help that we beg, and that supposes we are active though
infirm. Assistance we crave, and that implies our endeavors, though
ineffectual unassisted. They are in all regards therefore idle prayers which
careless sinners put up for divine aid and strength, seeing they cannot speak
common sense, nor know the meaning of their own language. They ask succor
against their enemies, but either they mean nothing, or else victory without
fighting: and if that be it they mean, it is as if they asked nothing, because
there is no such thing to be granted. O that all men would at last learn to
labor for that after which they seem to long; and not make a perpetual trade
of praying much, and doing little or nothing. Let us not merely run from one
Church to another, from private Fasts to public, from common to extraordinary
devotions; for this was the manner of the heathen people, who when they could
not prevail by their daily sacrifices and prayers, betook themselves to more
laborious but unsuccessful devices. We read of Moab in Isa. 16.12. that when he
was weary in the high places, he came to his sanctuary to pray, but he could
not prevail; i. e. when they had tired themselves with petitions for
deliverance, after the ordinary form that was used, they went to the most holy
place in the Land, where their great god Chemosh was worshipped, and there they
doubted not but to speed. But as they prevailed not, because they did nothing
at all but pray; no more shall we (of whom they are a perfect picture) while we
have confidence in our repeated prayers, without a real reformation. This kind
of faith which men cherish in themselves, is the most horrid infidelity,
greater then which, the worshippers of Chemosh or Baal could not be guilty of.
For they believe not him at all who has said, Unless ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13.3. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because
we keep his commandments, and do the things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.22.

6. But I must add further, that the case may so be, that though there be some
Good men in a Nation that do most seriously and heartily pray for it, yet they
may not be able to help it, nor prevail for the averting of Gods anger. For the
attesting of which truth, I might call in the Testimony of the Prophet
Jeremiah, cap. 11. where after God had said, ver. 11. that if the people did
cry unto him, he would not hearken unto them, he adds, ver. 14. that he will
not have the Prophet pray for them, nor lift up a cry in their behalf, for it
shall be in vain. The like to which you may read, Jer. 14.11. And therefore he
says in Lam. 3.8, 44. that when he did cry and shout, God shut out his
prayers, and covered himself with a cloud, so that they could not pass through.
The like testimony Ezekiel would afford us, who tells us more then once, cap.
14. that in some cases, three such prevalent persons as Noah, Job and Daniel,
shall obtain no more then their own security. And I might have all their
suffrages to this, that sometimes nothing less then an universal reformation
(in the great Officers, Magistrates and Governors especially) will procure Gods
favor. But it is time to draw toward a conclusion of this Chapter; and in the
following discourses this matter will be abundantly cleared.

7. Then our prayers are to good purpose for our selves or the Nation, when we
or they come to God with an holy disposition of heart to forsake our sins which
we pray may be forgiven; with a readiness of heart to make use of that divine
grace which we beg at his hands; and with a resolution to do that our selves,
which we desire he would do for us. When they are instruments to Piety and
Godliness; and put our hearts into such an holy frame, that even by our actions
we may pray and pull down the blessings of heaven upon us, then they are indeed
strong and prevailing petitions. For as Clemens Alex. speaks of a spiritual
person, (...). His whole life is a prayer to God, and a familiar converse with
him. He prays all day long in some sort, viz. as to the effect and issue of
prayer. For the holiness of his life speaks most powerfully and effectually, if
not more prevalently then any other thing in his behalf to God, being the use
and the improvement of that grace which he has received, and so directly
intitleing him to the blessings that are in that promise, To him that has
shall be given.

8. But yet we must take notice of this, that when we pray thus to the
reforming and amending of our hearts and lives, the blessings that we are most
confidently to expect, are those of a spiritual and eternal nature: Such as are
forgiveness of sins, acceptance with God to life; and we cannot be certain
sometimes, that by all our reformation we shall avert temporal judgments upon
our own persons, or our Nation. Perhaps the Decree may be irrevocably gone
forth, the ruin of a people or person may be absolutely determined, or at
least some very sharp punishment, without any possibility of reversing the
sentence, may be resolved upon; and though the sin may be forgiven to some (and
those the chiefest) purposes, yet not to all. Who can tell whether God will
return and repent? was all that could be said in the Ninivites case. And in the
case of Jerusalem, it was at last decreed, that their City and Temple should be
destroyed without any hopes of prevention of such a calamity, though they had
space given them to repent, in that their souls might find mercy. Though it be
said of Josiah, that he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his might, so that there was none like him; yet
notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, 2 King. 23.25, 26. And afterward
when they were carried captive, the Lord decreed a seventy years banishment,
and though many, no question, were reformed, and they poured out their prayer
when Gods chastning was upon them, yet they could not get the time cut short,
nor spy any hopes of deliverance, as you may see, Isa. 26.16, 17, 18. Like as a
woman (say they) with child, that draws nigh to the time of delivery, is in
pain, and cries out in her pangs: so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. We
have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth
wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, neither have the
inhabitants of the world fallen. This therefore is our satisfaction, that when we
fast and pray aright, we shall partake of the principal benefits that attend
upon them, though not always of all the fruits and blessings which have thereby
been procured.

CAP. VI.
1. Sacrifices another way of turning away the wrath of God. 2. But by their
trusting in them, they brought his wrath upon them. 3. God did not value them,
when they neglected his greater commands. 4. Therefore we should not trust in
outward worship. Many places of Scripture are in this Chapter illustrated.

1. THose prayers that we spoke of in the last Chapter, were thought by the
Israelites to be most powerful, which were offered up at the time of the
morning and evening sacrifice, which were the hours of prayer. And therefore in
these sacrisices they put a great deal of confidence, which they were not
forgetful to offer unto God after as liberal a sort as he could wish: They
hoped by these holy vapors, together with their own holy breath, to make heaven
of their mind, and stoop to their desires. And therefore as on the day of the
great Fast there was the greatest sacrifice of expiation offered for the sins
of the people: So we may presume that on other days of fasting they offered
some extraordinary sacrifices. And so much, me thinks, may be collected out of
the Book of Judith, where we read, cap. 4. 14. that on their fasting days the
high Priest and the rest of the sons of Aaron stood and ministered before the
Lord, with their loins girt with sackcloth, and offered the daily burnt
offerings with the vows and free gifts of the people. In Jer. 14.12. we read
also of burnt-offerings joined with fasting, and crying unto God. These sacred
vapors, and the holy perfumes of incense, they thought would scatter all
infections that might annoy the air. If they did but pay God his sheaf and his
cake, at the appointed times of first fruits, and furnish him a plentiful Table
every day; then they feared no famine to eat up their Land. The beasts that
were slain at their Altar, they thought would fright away all wild beasts from
coming among them. While the heavenly fire burnt, they could not imagine that
any other fires should consume them. They hoped that Ariel (as the Altar is
called, Ezekiel. 43.15.) i. e. the strong one, or the Lion of God, would devour
all their enemies, as it did the flesh that was laid upon it. God is said to
dwell between the shoulders of Benjamin ( Deuteronomy. 33.12.) because the Altar and
the house of God stood in the portion of that tribe; and therefore some of the
Jews interpret that blessing which Jacob gave him, to be meant of the morning
and evening sacrifices, when it is said, Genesis 49.27. Benjamin shall raven as a
Woolf in the morning, he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide
the spoil. As though the Altar did but feed upon its own conquests, and feast
it self with its own victories over their enemies. And indeed when God speaks
concerning the destruction of the Assyrians who besieged Jerusalem, he
describes himself in this manner, The Lord whose fire is in Sion, and whose
furnace is in Jerusalem, Isa. 31.9. As if the Angel should come with fire from
the Altar to burn up the Army of Senacherib, which was encamped about the City
of God. And God dwelling thus among them in a familiar manner made them much
presume upon his favor toward them, hoping that he would maintain his own
habitation, and not suffer himself to be ejected. They little thought that he
would ever be a consuming fire to them, or burn up his own house, but they
imagined his wrath would smoke only against the heathen, and this fire on the
Altar would only scorch their adversaries if they did take care but to feed it
with constant sacrifices.

2. But in this they were miserably mistaken, and it proved to be quite
otherwise then they accounted. For if you read Isa. 29.1, 2. you shall find
that God pronounces a woe to Ariel ( i. e. to Jerusalem) and says, though they
should observe all their yearly feasts, and kill a multitude of sacrifices, yet
he will distress his own City, and it shall be unto him as Ariel, i. e. the
people should be slaughtered just as the beasts were at the Altar. It is like
that they had given to Jerusalem this name of Ariel, because of the Altar of
God that was in it, wherein they trusted. They took this City to be as strong
as a mighty Lion, and that none should be able to prevail against the mountain
of God (as the word Harel signifies, which is once used, Ezekiel. 43.15.) But the
Prophet tells them, that they should resemble Ariel in a quite contrary sense;
that name they should call their City by, but much to their cost. For as the
blood of the sacrifices was poured out, and their flesh torn in pieces by
Ariel, or the Altar; so he says, should their blood be shed, and their enemies
should rend them, as a Lion does his prey. And therefore he tells them by the
Prophet Jerem. cap. 14. 12. that when they fast, he will not hear their cry,
and when they offer burnt-offerings and oblations; he will not accept them, but
consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence. And the
Prophet Hosea tell them, that though they should go with their flocks and with
their herds to seek the Lord, they should not find him, Hos. 5.6. though they
should bring a drove of sacrifices to enforce their prayers, and ingratiate
themselves with him, yet they should not gain his presence, but he would be
withdrawn from them. And in the next Chapter God tells them of a thing more
delightful to him then any sacrifices, and that was to do good to the poor, and
become like to God whom they worshipped, Hos. 6.6. But of that they had very
little; no more goodness then a morning cloud, ver. 4. They had not much more
then the reek that went up from their sacrifices in the morning, some little
sprinklings and drops of good nature, but no hearty and divine love unto
others. And therefore I have hewn them (says he) by the Prophets, I have
slain them by the word of my mouth, and thy judgments are as a light that
goes forth. Which last phrase may be interpreted to this sense, that their
punishments should be as manifest and visible to all, as the flame that went
from their sacrifices was unto them; For those was not the things that he so
much desired, but as it follows in the next verse, He desired mercy and not
sacrifice, etc.

3. And that you may see how much he undervalued these things, it is observable
what is noted by Maimonides, that as there was no sacrifices admitted for the
greatest sins (as all considering men know) so the smallest sacrifices were
offered for greater sins, and greater sacrifices for the less. For Idolatry and
apostasy from the one God of Israel, there was no offering prescribed, but the
guilty person was to be stoned. But for idolatry ignorantly committed
(concerning which crime they interpret that place, Lev. 4.27.) the offering was
a kid of the goats, and that a female. No creature that was offered, was
accounted more vile then a goat, and the female is of meaner condition then the
male; and yet this was all that was to be offered (according to that
understanding of those words) for so great a sin: Whereas a leper, who suffered
only a bodily defilement, was to offer two hee-lambs, (which were more noble,
both in kind and sex) besides one ewe-lamb for his cleansing, Lev. 14.10. And
so an offering for a trespass, which was a smaller fault, was to be a ram, Lev.
6.6. but in an offering for sin, which was a greater, a goat would serve the
turn (which was a lower creature) and a female, which was of the lower sex,
Lev. 5.6. By this might be signified, that as the sacrifices could not expiate
for sin by their own worth and value (for then the greatest must have been
given for the greatest fault) so the greater sins they committed against him,
of the less acceptableness were all their sacrifices, and the more he did
undervalue them. He could not be drawn to approve of their evil doings, by all
the pompous entertainments they made for him at his Table, which was the Altar;
no, when their iniquities increased, he did as good as say, Away with them, I
care not for them, bring me not the flesh of ramms, or of lambs, I had as leive
eat of a shee-goat, unless you will be better. Insomuch that if they grew
enormous and heinous in their crimes, God would have nothing to do with them,
nor accept any of their gifts that they would bestow upon him; there being no
sacrifice appointed for the breach of any moral precept. And therefore by the
Prophet Isaiah he sharply reproves their forwardness and diligence in these
services, saying, To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? I am
full of burnt-offerings, etc. ( i. e. I even nauseate the plenty of these
devotions) When you come to appear before me, who has required this at your
hands? etc. The Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting; your new moons, etc. are a trouble to me, I
am weary to bear them, etc. And he bids them, if they intend that he should
speak kindly to them, and be friends with them, that they should cease to do
evil, learn to do well, and put away the evil of their doings from before his
eyes, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, etc. Strange indeed it was, and worse then all the
rest, that they should see so much reason to do all those things, and yet see
no reason to be good. But they were like to most men now, who will have God to
be pleased with what pleases them, and gives no great distaste to their
natures; but will part with nothing that they dearly love, though it be the
greatest offense to him. Very desirous they were to give God content by
sacrifices, and make him satisfaction, even for the most secret sins, if we may
believe themselves. For the burnt-offerings, as some of them say, was to
expiate for the thoughts of the heart, or (in their phrase) for that which goes
up in the heart; but they forgot what Isaiah says in another place, Isa. 55.7.
that unless the unrighteous man forsake his thoughts, and return to the Lord,
he will not have mercy on him.

4. And the Christian world still depends on their prayers, which are their
daily sacrifices; and on their Alms, which are another offering unto God; and
upon their Altar (as the Lords Table may be called) where they represent
Christ's sacrifice of himself: I heartily wish there were more of all these acts
of Religion exercised; but if Prayer do but hallow our unjust and unrighteous
actions; and if Alms be but a bribe for the passing by of our drunkenness and
debauchery; and if the Table of the Lord be but the putting of a complement
upon him, after we have many ways offended him, and continue still to sin
against him: we shall but still maintain and propagate to posterity that false
and hypocritical spirit, against which, God has of old expressed so much
hatred. But of this, and concerning the ends and uses of Sacrifices, See the
Sermon hereto annexed.
more hereafter.

CAP. VII.
1. The sins that we forsake must never be again embraced. 2. And without this
perpetual forsaking, all our strictnesses about Religious performances will not
avail us, though done out of conscience. 3. Let every man make a judgment of
himself by what has been said.

1. AND now I might show, that as God expects a through reformation in all
things (which I have already often suggested, and shall more fully ere long
demonstrate) so we must continue in that state, and not put away our sins only
for a short time, till we think that Gods anger is passed over us, and will not
fall down upon us. To be good for a while, after we have fasted, confessed our
sins, and prayed, will not quite turn away his wrath, though it may deferr it.
That which God expects, is an eternal divorce between us and our sins, and that
we seek him with our whole heart, so as to continue in well doing. For else
with our return again to folly, the stripes which are for the back of fools
will return also. And commonly the case is more dangerous, and the disease
harder to cure when we do relapse, after we were pretty well recovered; and the
rods which before were prepared for us, will be turned into scorpions. But the
holy Story is so clear in this, that he must be much unacquainted with the
condition of this people in all those times, that does not see it; and
therefore knowing every one can furnish himself with proofs enough, if he do
but read any one Book of their History, I shall herein spare my further labor.

2. I might take occasion likewise here to show, that though all this be done
out of conscience, and we would not for any good omit these performances, but
out of a kind of honesty we observe days of fasting, times of confession, and
constant prayer, and have pious intentions in the business, yet this will not
procure our good acceptance. But it is plain enough in the temper of this
people, as I noted in the beginning of this discourse. You could not have hired
them to have laid down these Fasts; and when they could not offer sacrifices at
the Temple, they were very constant in their prayers at those times that they
used to be offered; And because they could not in their captivity offer those
sacrifices that are commanded to be added on the eight days of the Feast of
Tabernacles to the constant sacrifices, Numb. 29. they used certain peculiar
prayers (which they retain to this day) which they recited at that time that
those sacrifices used to be offered at the Temple, calling the time wherein
they recited them Musaph, V. Buxt. in voc. (...)
i. e. an additament to their ordinary devotions. And they were very scrupulous
in their consciences also (a thing that many please themselves in very much, as
a mark of piety) and they came to the Prophet, as men do now to the Minister,
for to be resolved. Very loath they were to displease God, by the neglect of
such good duties, and if it were his pleasure they would still perform them;
but alas! poor souls, this was the hypocrisy the Scripture so much speaks of,
the finer sort of hypocrisy, that carries so many to Hell in a pleasing belief
that they are going to Heaven. They were serious and zealous in some things,
but not in all; and so they did but in good earnest (as we say) and in a more
sober way set themselves to cheat their souls. They fasted very severely, they
mourned very bitterly, knocked their breasts heartily, confessed devoutly, and
prayed earnestly, and sacrificed plentifully; but yet they did not search and
try their ways, to turn again unto the Lord; they did not every one put away
the evil of their doings; and so all their zeal in the former things, instead
of doing them good, wrought their greater mischief, by making them confidently
to account themselves Religious persons, and to be angry with the Prophets, who
would persuade them to the contrary.

3. It were well now, if every one (before he read any further) would examine
his own heart, and give himself an account whether he have done thus much, as
the people of the Jews did, and then whether he have done any more. There are
not many, it is like, that have thus fasted, and wept, and prayed, either for
their own good, or the good of their Nation; and at what a vast distance are
they from Gods favor, who are not come to the porch of his house, no are not
in the way to become his servants? But I doubt they are very hard to be found
(one perhaps of a thousand) that make a conscience not to sin, and to keep a
Fast every day to God, by the constant practice of mortification, and holy
living. If railing and swearing against their enemies, if damning and cursing
those that are the cause of our troubles, were the things that would cure our
Nation, we need not light a candle to find a multitude of such Saviors, their
deeds of darkness being so open and manifest: And if praying, fasting, and such
like things, had been plasters broad enough for our wounds, they had been long
since closed by many pretenders: But as for those who pray for their enemies,
and live all their prayers, and exercise daily denial of themselves, though
they are not so few, but we can see their light shining before men, yet they
are scarce enough to testify to all men that their deeds are evil, nor have
they been able hitherto, to dash the outside Religion out of countenance, and
to prevail for salvation to be brought to us. I leave it to the private
scrutiny of every man's conscience, to find whether or no he be in the number of
those that are healing their wounds slightly, or of those that thoroughly amend
their ways and doings. And I have said enough to let him know the state of his
soul, if he will impartially ransack his heart, and have no mind to put a cheat
upon himself. If it be necessary further to assist him, the explication of the
second thing which I proposed to be considered, will I hope, contribute some
further help to his sincere search, both into his own, and the whole Nations
condition, unto which I shall now betake my self.

CAP. VIII.
1. The remedy that God prescribed them by his Prophets, was a general
reformation. 2. The proof of it from them and other things also. 3. How they
came notwithstanding to be so negligent in matters of greatest moment. 4. Which
were the duties of the second Table, as appears out of Zachary. 5. The Rulers
especially neglectfull in these things, and how it came to pass. 6. They might
easily have known better, therefore the sin was greater. 7. And their
forefathers being corrected for them, made their persisting in them more
inexcusable. 8. No peace without these. 9. The sum of many of the following
Chapters, consisting of four general heads.

1. THE Prophets of God were not like the Fanatique spirits which are now in
the world, that know how to find fault with what is in use, but cannot advise
how to amend it; nor like Ignorant Physicians, that cry out upon all vulgar and
old-wives medicines, but know not themselves how to apply any that are more
proper for the disease: But when they cast so much disrespect upon their Fasts
and other Religious duties, they directed to the true use of them; and when
they showed how the false Prophets that were among them, did but flatter and
humor their distemper, they discovered its true nature, and prescribed them a
certain and effectual way of cure. And it was no far-fetcht medicine to which
they advised them; there was no need that they should climb up to heaven, and
consult with the Planets, or go beyond the Sea and traffic with some strange
Country for it, as we do for drugs to cure our bodily diseases; but the Word
was nigh them, even in their mouths, and in their hearts, that they might do
it. A general reformation of their manners, was that to which they exhorted (if
the people expected a General good) as he that does not want eyes, may read in
every leaf of their Books. All the exercises of devotion which they used, were
but in order to this: And without this, all their Fasts were but painful
provocations; all their Confessions but accusations brought in against
themselves; all their Prayers but the labor of their lungs, which like
bellows, did make the fire of Gods anger burn, and not blow it out. And
especially they earnestly beseeched the Governors and Leaders of the people to
amend, who have a manifest influence upon a whole Nation, and after whose
fashion almost every body uses to dress himself. For which cause their sins are
sometimes alone named in holy Writ, as procuring Gods Judgments upon a Land,
because by their neglect and ill example, the rest run more pronely into all
wickedness.

2. And therefore Jeremiah commands all the words of his prophecy to be
written in one book, and read to all the people upon their fasting day, in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim (as you may see, Jer. 36.6.) which was perhaps upon
the day of expiation, when the great Fast was observed. And again, the next
year, upon occasion of another Fast which was proclaimed (ver. 9.) he took the
same course, and caused Baruch to read his exhortations and threatenings in the
ears of all the people of Jerusalem, and those that came likewise out of the
Cities of Judah to Jerusalem. Hereby teaching them, that their fasting and
praying was to no purpose, unless they hearkened to Gods voice, by returning
every man from his evil way, which he says was the only way to obtain
forgiveness of their sins, ver. 3. and 7. And they might have understood this,
even from the manner of their offering sacrifices, in which they so much
trusted. He that brought a burnt-offering, was to lay his hand upon the head of
it before it was slain ( Lev. 1.4.) which was an evident sign ((...)) if we may
believe Philo, a learned man of that Nation, of innocence and an unreprovable
life, conforming with the Law of nature. For God (says he) would have him that
sacrifices first of all to have a mind purified and exercised in pious and
profitable principles; and then a life consisting of the most excellent
actions, so that he may be able confidently to say out of a pure conscience,
when he lays on his hands, L. de anim. l. sacrificio idoneis.
(...), etc. These hands did never receive a bribe to do wrong, nor have they
touched innocent blood, nor have they been instruments of any hurt, injury,
wound or force, nor have they ministered to any other dishonest action; but they
have been serviceable to all things good and profitable, and which are approved
by the Laws, and by all good men. And he takes notice likewise, that the blood
being the soul as it were of the living creature, the pouring out of that
signified the offering of our souls to God. And that it was therefore poured
out round about the Altar, because a circular figure being most perfect, it
should signify, That the whole soul should be given to him, and that all the
mind should cheerfully move, and (as it were) dance round in all kind of words,
thoughts and deeds, according to the divine pleasure.

3. A great wonder then it may be to some, that they should be so defective in
matters of the greatest concernment, while they were so curious, even to
superstition, in the outside of these services. Especially considering, that on
their fasting-dayes they used to examine offenses, and the Court sat to punish
those that were guilty. To which sense, Valent. Schindler in vocab. (...)
a learned man expounds that place in Joel 1.14. Sanctify a Fast, call a
solemn Assembly, gather the Elders, etc. i. e. call a Court, who may make
inquisition into crimes that have been committed, and see that they be
animadverted upon and reformed. And so when Jezabel wrote letters to the City
wherein Naboth dwelt, that they should proclaim a Fast, (1 King. 21.9.) it was
as much as to say, Call a Court, that may examine and take cognizance of the
high sin that Naboth is guilty of. But one true reason I suppose, that there
was not a general reformation in all things made by these Judicatures, was
because they heard only matters of fact against such Laws of Moses, to which
there was a punishment annexed. Now there was a great penalty inflicted upon
all those that did eat upon the great Fast a bit of bread, though but as big as
a date, and on other Fasts the quantity of an Olive; but for covetousness,
unmercifulness, and such like things, you read of no punishment at all. If a
man did not fast, he was to be cut off by excommunication, Lev. 23.29. and
besides by the decrees of the Elders, he was to be beaten: And for the breach
of any of the nine first Commandments, you shall find some, either death, or
some great punishment threatened: But for the breach of the Tenth Commandment,
which is, Thou shall not covet, there is no corporal penalty which they
incurred, for we find none threatened. And therefore they were more careful to
keep the Sabbath, not to worship idols, etc. (though in these sometimes they
were negligent) then to do justly and love mercy: Because they might suffer for
the one by the hand of the Magistrate, but not for the other. Their carnal
desires not standing in any awe of any bodily infliction, they took occasion,
as the Apostle says ( Romans 7.8) to be more licentious, and to work all manner
of concupiscence.

4. And the sins indeed against this Commandment, and those that concern our
neighbors, were those which the Prophets called chiefly for reformation in, if
they expected any good to their Land. This I will first of all show you out of
the same Prophet Zachary, upon whose words I built the former discourse. After
he had told them from the Lord, that they had not fasted to him in all the
seventy years of their affliction, he proceeds to acquaint them what the true
Fast was, which God always called for and expected. And that he does, chap. 7.
9, 10. and again, chap. 8. 16, 17. which places I desire the Reader to take
pains to consider. And then I doubt not but he will see good cause for this
observation, that the sins they were chiefly guilty of more then others, were,
Neglects of the duties of the second Table (as we speak) not performing of
those offices which one man owes to another; but violent breaking of all those
bonds whereby men are tied by God together. They may be reduced to these three
heads.

1. Unjust dealing and defrauding one another, by lying, false-swearing,
devising to overreach and ruin their Brethren. chap. 7. 9, 10. chap. 8 16,
17. Speak every man the truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment of truth,
imagine not evil, love not a false Oath.

2. Want of mercy and compassion, cruelty, hard and rigid dealing with their
neighbors, which is as bad as downright in justice, chap. 7. 9. Show mercy
and compassion every man to his Brother.

3. Oppression of the poor, and those that could not right themselves against
the mighty. Chap. 7. 10. Oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the
stranger nor the poor.

5. Concerning all which sins, you must note these things. That all of the
Nation were generally guilty of the breach of the tenth Commandment, there
being nothing to restrain them from it, but only the fear and love of God, and
the belief of another life, of which that stiff-necked generation had very
little sense. And this covetousness or greediness of the things of this world
(which God having liberally promised them, they were the more desirous of) was
the root of all that evil which broke out against the other commands of the
second Table. And their Rulers especially were guilty of this, and the rest of
the sins that proceeded from it, both because they had fairer occasions to
satisfy those desires, and because though many of their sins against the Law
were punishable, yet the punishment could be executed upon them who were in the
supremacy, by none but God. And these sins were the greater in them, because
they ought to have rectified others, and given them a better precedent to
follow; and the greater in the people likewise, both because they might easily
have learnt better, and because they were the sins for which their forefathers
had been punished very severely by God.

6. It is an observation of Philo, De animal. sacr. idon.
in the book forementioned, that among all those living creatures that were
offered in sacrifice, whether aerial or terrestrial, there were none chosen by
God, but those that were of a gentle and good nature. The Dove, of all those
that love society and company, is most mild; and the Turtle, of all those that
are naturally solitary, is most easy to be made tame and brought to hand. And
among the flocks of four-footed creatures, those three sorts that were selected
for holy use (the oxen, the sheep, the goats) are of all other the most gentle
and inoffensive; one man, or a boy, being sufficient to drive whole herds of
them to pasture, and again to bring them back without any rebellion, to their
stalls and folds. And this (says he) also is a most manifest token of their
gentleness, that none of them eat flesh, but all of them grass and herbs,
neither are they armed with such hooked claws and tallons, nor with such rows
of teeth as other creatures. And besides they are the most profitable and
useful, as well as most innocent and harmless of all others. For the sheep
afford clothes for our bodies; the oxen plow the earth, and after it has
yielded its fruit, they tread out the corn; and the hair and skins of goats
make clothes for travelers, and soldiers, and such like persons, whose
necessities force them to abide much in the open air. From all which (methinks)
we may gather, that they were taught by those things wherein they did most
confide, not only to keep good order by Justice and Uprightness, not using any
rapacity or crooked dealing: but also to be tenderhearted, loving, gentle,
living in all peaceableness together, and being beneficial and useful unto
others. God many times said it, that it was not the flesh or blood of beasts,
wherein he delighted; and therefore hence they might easily have received
documents that he desired mercy more then sacrifice, and that they would
present him with the qualities of those creatures, rather then with their
bodies.

7. But as the proverb tells us, that (...). A bad bird has a bad egg; So it
was with this people. These sins being the faults of their forefathers, they
were the more easily inclined to take after them. And though they might have
learnt by their ancestors harms, who were soundly punished for them: yet either
by the sweetness of these sins, that made them forget the punishment, or by
the conceit of the purity of their Religion, wherein they excelled their
fathers; they trod in the same steps with them, and became guilty of the very
same faults which had been so fatally mischievous unto others. For in the
second part of this seventh of Zachary. God tells them what words he had spoken
to their progenitors by the Prophets of old; who for these sins, together with
two other (Sabbathbreaking and Idolatry) were turned out of the promised Land.
Other sins indeed there are mentioned by the Prophets, but none so much
insisted on as these, to be the cause of their expulsion out of Gods Land, and
banishment into a strange Country; as you shall discern before I have gone
much further. Now it seems that their posterity (the men of the captivity) were
grown more observant of the Sabbath, and greater haters of Idolatry; and
because of their Religious services which were more pure, took themselves for
very good men, though they retained their fathers injustice and fraud, cruelty
and unmercifulness, oppression and violent dealing. Which was plainly the case
of the Pharisees also (the posterity of those persons) in our Saviors time,
before this their last and long dispersion. They were notoriously guilty of
these sins, more then any other, whilst they could not be challenged with any
idolatrous practices, or with neglect of the Sabbath Day, no nor with less
strictness in any other Religious performances. Under their Religion, they
cloaked their unrighteousness, and made all their piety good for nothing, being
stained with covetousness, oppression of the widows, and violence toward those
that had no helpers, with such like wickedness.

8. From all which we may be bold to affirm still, that God proceeds in such a
method of Justice with Nations, that where he finds these sins to remain, it is
in vain to fast, and pray, and cry to God for mercy, yea to reform in other
matters which concern Gods worship and service. And yet the most noise is
commonly made about these, out of hope their prayers, and preachings, and other
Religious offices, together with the asserting of these from superstition and
impure mixtures, will drown the cry of injustice, cruelty, blood, oppression
and such like sins, which are destructive of all humane society. But far be it
from the Lord and Governor of the world, to suffer himself to be fawned upon by
such persons, who while they cry out against superstition, are the most
superstitious. For out of a great fear and dread of God, they crouch unto, and
speak him fair, and lay great stress upon some small things wherein he has
given greater liberty; and they hope, that because of all this he will wink and
connive at their evil doings to their neighbors, of whom they stand in no awe
at all. But as I said, he that loves good order, and rules the Nations in
righteousness and truth, will punish for these things as severely as for the
other, and without reformation in them, he will hold no Nation guiltless, nor
let them long live in peace. Of the which, that we may be the more sensible, I
shall digest what remains concerning the state of this people, in these
particular considerations.

9. First, I shall make it appear that this of old was the Fast which God
required of their Fathers by the Prophets, viz. That they should forsake those
sins that I have mentioned: And that he everywhere urges, even in the most
reforming times before the captivity, their growing more just, and merciful in
their dealings, and their practicing those duties which arise from the respect
that one man has to another.

2. Then I will manifest, that after their return from the captivity of
Babylon, still these things more then any else are insisted upon, as those they
were deficient in, and should amend.

3. That these are noted as the wasting and destroying sins of a people, though
there should be no other.

4. That where men expect peace and settlement, quiet and removal of judgments
from a Nation, they must have an especial care to reform in these particulars.
And because Nations are most commonly defective in these things, and are apt to
imagine that some Religious duties are all, or the greatest matters that God
expects; therefore I shall insert such observations in this discourse, as shall
both discover this mistake, and the ground of it.

CAP. IX.
1. The first thing opened, how that all the old Prophets required amendment of
their manners in point of Justice and Mercy; Proved from Hosea. 2. and 3. From
Isaiah. 4. From Micah. 5. From Habakkuk. 6. From Zephaniah. 7. From Jeremiah.
8. and 9. From Ezekiel, in all whose prophecies many places are expounded. 10,
11. Their impudence in mocking at the Prophets, who reproved these sins, and
one reason of it. 12. The ten tribes sick of the same disease. Four things
proposed as observable from this discourse.

1. THat the things which Zachariah speaks of (in the places now mentioned)
were the same which the former Prophets had mainly insisted upon, and
constantly called for, is the first thing to be cleared. And if we follow the
interpretation which Solomon Jarchi gives of that place, Hos. 1.2. I must begin
with the testimony of the Prophet Hosea, to whom the word of the Lord came,
before any of those whose prophesies are extant in the Scripture. For so he
says some expound those words, The beginning of the word of the Lord, to
signify that he was the first of the four Prophets, that prophesied in the
days of King Uzziah. And the word that he says is this, The Lord has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge in the Land; by swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood,
Hos. 4.1, 2. And in chap. 6. ver. 8, 9. he accuses them of violence, murder,
and robbery; and chap. 7.1. of falsehood and theft; and chap. 12.7, 8. of their
cheating and oppression, which he could not make them believe, because they
prospered and thrived in it. These places it is likely may most of all concern
Ephraim, i. e. the ten tribes, as the greatest part of his prophecy does. But
you may observe, that though he find most fault with them for their idolatry,
yet these other sins had an hand also in their ruin. And as for Judah (whose
state I shall chiefly enquire into, because there was the house of God) though
they were not always so bad in regard of Idolatry, and did not in the time of
their good Princes compass God about with that deceit, but were faithful with
the Saints; (as he says, chap. 11. v. 12.) yet they were guilty of the other
deceit, which was of a very destructive nature, as we shall see if we do but
consult the rest of the Prophets that lived in the same time with Hosea.

2. And the Prophet Isaiah (one of the royal family, as the Hebrews think, and
so writes in a most majestic and stately style of these matters) offers
himself to be a witness in the very first Chapter of his Vision: Where he finds
no fault with them for their Idolatry, nor questions the legality of their
sacrifices, nor charges them with neglect of praying to him, nor blames them
for withholding of his due oblations from him: No, on the contrary he
acknowledges a multitude of sacrifices of the best and fattest, that he was
full of burnt-offerings, that they observed all their appointed Feasts, and
solemn meetings, and made many prayers to him. But then he tells them, v. 15.
That he could not endure to look upon them when they spread their hands toward
heaven, because those hands were full of blood. And therefore the thing that he
calls for is, ver. 16, 17, 18. That they would wash and cleanse their hands of
that blood which had besmeared them, that they would put away their injustice,
oppression, unmercifulness, and such like sins: And then if they came and
prayed to him, he would speak friendly to them, and have a parlee with them;
and do away those bloody crimson sins; and restore them by their repentance and
amendment to a snow like whiteness, as if they had been as innocent as Lambs,
and not so ravenous as Lions. And observe to whom it is that he speaks, viz. To
the Rulers first (who were like to Sodom) and then to the people, who were not
far distant from them in this wickedness, (being like to Gomorrah) ver. 9. I
say, to the Rulers first, who had the deepest share in this guilt, and were the
ringleaders in these sins, as will appear to him that shall but cast his eye
upon the 21, 22, 23, 26. verses, which I shall forbear to transcribe.

3. I will not yet dismiss this witness, who speaks so fully and closely to the
business before us. Be pleased then to consider those woes which he denounces
against them that decree unrighteous decrees, and write grievousness which they
have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor, that widows might be their prey, and that they might rob
the fatherless, chap. 10.1, 2. and then tell your selves what sins they were
much guilty of. To which add chap. 30.12, 13. and seriously read the 58.
chapter, ver. 4, 6, 7. and you will need none to expound to you, what
reformation it was that he expected upon their fasting-dayes. In the 59. chap.
likewise he gives us a large description of the temper of this people,
complaining of these sins as the only cause they were not delivered. Behold the
Lords hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither is his car heavy that
he cannot hear, ver. 1. that is, He can deliver you from Sennacheribs Army, as
well as from former enemies, and is as willing to hear your prayers as ever, if
he could but hear any good of you, But your iniquities have separated between
you and your God, etc. ver. 2. You are so monstrously unjust and deceitful,
unmerciful and cruel (as you may read, ver. 3, 4, etc.) that he cannot but hide
his face from you. There was nothing but mischievous plots and designs which
they had against each other, to be found among them. They were like a
Cockatrice, that lays poisonous eggs, or like to Spiders, that make nets to
catch those things that are weaker then themselves, ver. 5. And if a man did
not find out their plot which was laid, but did eat of their egg ( i. e.
believed all they said, and took them for honest men) it was certain death to
him, and he was utterly undone. And if they did smell it out and crushed it,
then a viper did break forth, i. e. they would never endure him, but be always
vexing of him, and seeking to destroy him, ib. ver. 5. A man could not be safe
by any means among his neighbors; if he trusted them, they would be his ruin;
if he did not trust them, that was pretense enough still to endeavor his
ruin. Read also, ver. 13, 14, 15. of that Chapter, and observe that in the 16.
ver. he says, that he could not find so much as one man that should atone him:
Not one man whose hands were clean enough from unjust gains, and fraudulent
dealing, to be lifted up to heaven for them. And therefore he rose up only out
of his own great zeal, and for his glory's sake to bring salvation, ver. 16,
17, 18. And when the enemies came in like a flood ( i. e. when Sennacherib with
his great host over-flowed the Land, even as far as the neek, which was
Jerusalem) the Spirit of the Lord lift up a Standard against him, ver. 19. He
that will take the pains duly to consider these places, will find so many
other bordering upon them to the same purpose, that he will be more sensible of
the truth of that which I affirm; and I shall have occasion to call in the
assistance of many of them in other parts of this discourse.

4. Let us next hear what information the Prophet Micah will give us concerning
this matter, who lived in the same time with Isaiah, and speaks still more
plainly (if it be possible so to do) against these sins, as very predominant in
them and their Rulers. The Woe in the 2. chap. v. 1, 2. (which I beseech you
read) is against those, who because they had power in their hands, contrived
how to greaten themselves, though with the ruin of others. If they saw but a
fair field or house which they coveted, it was made a prey to their lust, and
they took it away by violence, though it was the man's inheritance, and tended
to his utter undoing. And though together with him they undid his posterity,
and together with their bodies, brought their souls to ruin, yet they
sacrificed them all to their covetousness, and cast both women and children out
of their houses, making them thereby become Idolaters. Which may be the meaning
of that phrase, ver. 9. From their children have they taken away my glory for
ever; i. e. by their cruelty they have made them fly to strange Countries, and
to lose their Religion; or they have been the cause of their captivity, and
carrying into a Land where God was not worshipped. Yea so ravenous and greedy
were they, that they were not ashamed to strip those stark naked, and leave
them neither upper nor inner garment, who were harmless and innocent, neither
intending wrong to others, nor fearing any from them, as you may read, ver. 8.
And in the 3. chap. 1, 2, 3. he speaks of most barbarous and butcherly actions,
the flaying and peiling of the people to the very bones. And as if that did not
make them miserable enough, they would have no pity on those poor Skeletons,
but broke their very bones, and chopped them in pieces, as one does when he puts
flesh in a pot; which is as much as to say, they utterly devoured them, and eat
them up. They did abhor Judgment, and pervert all Equity (ver. 9.) and (which
is to be observed) at that very time they built up Zion and Jerusalem with this
blood and iniquity, ver. 10. i. e. They repaired or enlarged the great City;
they adorned the Kings palace which was on mount Zian, and in all likelihood
they beautified the Temple, (for that is mentioned together with these two,
ver. 12.) with this robbery and murder that they committed. They were reformers
of things amiss, or decayed in Gods worship, at the cost and charges of many a
poor innocent, that they had rent in pieces, and shared amongst them. For that
these words were spoken in the times of reformation, you may learn from Jer.
26.18. where we are told that Micah made this threatening which is mentioned,
ver. 12. of making Zion like a plowed field, etc. in the days of Hezekiah, who
you know repented of the evil his Fathers had done, and so turned away the evil
in his time. Now what is all this which Micah says, but what the Prophet
Isaiah has already told us. chap. 1. ver. 10, 21, 23. and again, chap. 3. ver.
13, 14, 15. where God reproves the Elders and great ones for beating his people
to pieces, and grinding the faces of the poor, whose cause he says he was come
to plead: The Rulers then being so bad, there is little reason to expect much
justice or mercy among the people, who also oppressed and offered violence one
to another, as far as their power would reach. For proof of, which, spare not
to read Mich. 6. ver. 10, 11, 12. and likewise the six first verses of the
seventh Chapter, which tells us largely of the General cruelty, covetousness,
treachery, etc. both of the Princes, and all the people, though never so nearly
related one to another. Which was so great and universal, that it was as hard
to find a merciful and a just man, as to find a bunch of grapes, after the
gleanings of the Vintage. And therefore in the sixth Chapter, ver. 6, etc. God
by the same Prophet calls not for their sacrifices and religious services (in
which it seems they were frank enough, and could have been contented to have
put themselves to any expense, so they might but quietly have kept their
covetous, griping and devouring lusts and desires) but to do justly, to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with God.

5. And in the days of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, things still grew worse,
and proceeded to a greater height of injustice and cruelty. For as he is noted
for a most gross Idolater, so likewise for a great shedder of innocent blood,
wherewith he filled Jerusalem, 2 King. 21.16.24.3. such violence, iniquity,
grievances, perverting of judgment there was in his days, that the Prophet
Habakkuk (who some think was one of those that God sent to admonish him, 2
King. 21.10.) could not endure to behold it, and seems to be wearied with
crying to God against it, as you may see, if you read Habak. 1.2, 3, 4.
Whereupon God threatens to raise up (with such speed, that no body would
believe it) the Chaldean Nation to destroy them, ver. 5. And this he did not
long after the time of Manasseh, when the Chaldeans brought the Assyrian power
under their feet, of which only the Jews stood in fear.

6. If we draw nearer to the time of the first captivity into Babylon, by the
hands of those Chaldeans, which they little dreamed of; we shall hear no new
Sermons, but the very same sins still reproved. Zephaniah will be our informer
in this matter, who lived in the days of Josiah, a good Prince, and very
zealous to reform things amiss in the worship of God. With him it is manifest
(from 2 Chronicles. 35.8.) the Nobles of the Realm joined to purge the Land from
Idolatry, though we may guess from Zeph. 1. v. 4, 5, 6. that many of the people
did not affect their proceedings. And yet if you do but read the five first
verses of the third Chapter, you will eafily discern, how shameless these very
Reformers were in their unjust and violent dealing, and that they would rather
part with any thing (even their Idols) then these rich and thriving sins. And
therefore the Prophet exhorts those that had any of those rare virtues in them,
any mercifulness, and righteousness, that they would go on to practice them,
and in those ways to seek the Lord, telling them that it was probable (but not
certain) that they might be secured in that deluge of misery, that was like to
overflow the whole Land, chap. 2. ver. 3. And afterward, chap. 3.12, 13. he
prophesies that the poor and the afflicted (they that had been oppressed and
stripped naked by the great and the rich) were the persons that should escape and
be left in the Land, when all those men's possessions were taken from them, and
that they should be such a remnant as should not do iniquity, nor speak lies,
nor have a deceitful tongue in their mouth, but should trust in God, and not in
these evil arts.

7. Jeremiah also, who prophesied in the days of the same Josiah, and likewise
of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, in the time of both the first and second captivity,
and afterward also: He, I say, speaks the very same words, as will be very
evident to those who will do themselves so much right, for the understanding of
this truth, as to ponder these places of his prophecy. He tells us in the 3.
chap. ver. 10. That Judah did not return to God with her whole heart, but
fainedly; which words were spoken (as you may see ver. 6.) in the days of
Josiah, who had made a Covenant to serve the Lord with all their heart, and all
their soul, and all the people stood unto it, 2 King. 23.3. This is the
returning which the Prophet says was but fained, because notwithstanding this
great profession, they were not sincerely out of love with their sins, nor did
with all their heart, as they pretended, abhor them. For he tells us, chap.
7.9, 10. that many of them, though they came to the house of God to worship in
the time of this reformation, yet had an Altar likewise in some private corner
for Baal. And beside this, they were all guilty of cheating, oppression,
stealing, false-witnessing, and all manner of injustice, as you may see there,
ver. 4, 5, 6, 9. Insomuch that he says, ver. 11. the house of God was become a
den of Robbers, a mere nest of thieves, where a crew of oppressors met
together, thinking to expiate for all by their flattering devotions. And chap.
9. from the second verse to the ninth, he bewails these sins against our
neighbors, and these alone with a sad and compassionate heart, they being the
very sins that undid them, as he notes v. 6. (through deceit they refuse to
know me, says the Lord) and as I shall ere long demonstrate. For so General
were these sins, that there was not so much as a man that did justice to be
found, though the salvation of the Nation had lain upon it, chap 5.1. And
though God did smite them grievously, yet they would not amend, ver. 3. but all
hardened their faces as a rock in these evil courses. The poor indeed one could
not expect much from, and they might either be tempted by their needs to live
by lies, or they might be ignorant of the Law, and have less understanding what
judgment was, ver. 4. but when he went to the great ones, who had better
advantages of knowledge then the other, he found that they were lawless also,
and would be bound by no obligations of Law or conscience to their duty, ver.
5. And therefore he says of the City Jerusalem, chap. 6.6. that she was wholly
oppression, and ver. 7. that a continual stream of wickedness run down her
streets, so that he could see nothing but the sad spectacles of grieved and
wounded persons.

8. Ezekiel likewise will witness largely to this truth, who prophesied in the
days of Jehoiakim, in the time of the first captivity, chap. 1.1, 2. This
person saw the glory of the Lord which dwelt between the Cherubims upon the
Ark, departing from the holy place, and from the Nation by several steps and
degrees. First it went from off the Cherubims where it used to sit, viz. from
the mercy-seat, which was in the West part of the Temple, and it stood over the
threshold of the house, chap. 10.4. Then it mounted upon the back of the
Cherubims (which were that chariot described by him, chap. 1.) and they
carried it to the Eastgate of the house, at which the people came to worship,
ver. 18, 19, 20. But there being nothing but mischief and violence to be found
among those that came to worship, though Princes of the people (chap. 11.1, 2,
6, 7.) they carry it into the midst of the City, as you may gather from chap.
11. ver. 23. But the City being full of the blood of the slain, as you may see
in those verses 6, 7. the Cherubims lift up their wings, and carry it away
still further off unto the mountain that was on the East Side of the City (ver.
22, 23.) which was the mount of Olives. And from thence it went quite away from
his sight, as he says, ver. 24. which signifies that God forsook the land
because of their iniquity.

9. Now that their iniquity for which he forsook it, was the same with that
which I have mentioned, and that they were but little amended after the first
captivity, you may see by that descriptio which he makes of those persons that
God would account righteous, and accept to life, and of those who were so
wicked, that they should be destroyed. For this the most read the 18. chap.
from the third verse to the nineteenth, and chap. 33. ver. 14, 15, 16. where
though he mention their idolatry, yet he enlarges far more upon these other
sins, and the contrary virtues. But especially he notes the Rulers as most
guilty in this kind, and therefore spends one whole Chapter in their reproof.
For by Shepherds, chap. 34. you may understand (...), the Governors of the
people, and those that bear office in the Land. So the Princes and Captains of
Chaldaea that destroyed Jerusalem, are called Shepherds, (and their subjects
their flocks, Jer. 6.3.) and Pastors, Jer. 12.10. Jer. 49.19, 20. Now these
Shepherds of Israel that should have had a care of all the flock, they did not
tondere, but deglubere, not shear them, but flea them, and pull their skins off
from them: yea they tore their very flesh, if they were fat and rich, ver. 3.
And whereas they should have been a guard to the people from Wolves and
Devourers; if any poor weak man of the flock was broken or wounded by the great
beasts, they never took care by right judgment to redress their grievances,
but rather exercised more cruelty upon them, ver. 4. The richer sort imitated
them, and did violence to their poor neighbors, who could get no relief by the
Law, which these Shepherds did not execute; and therefore God himself says
that he would come and judge between the fat cattle and the lean, ver. 18, 19,
20. Read also chap. 12.19. and chap. 22.6, 7, 9, 12. where God complains of the
Princes and People both, and says, ver. 13. that because of this, he had
smitten his hands at their dishonest gain which they had made, etc. Which was
as if a man should clap his hands at his enemies, and say, I will be revenged;
you shall not escape so with your wickedness. They thought that those whom God
had delivered into captivity, were the sinners that had provoked him, and
therefore were cast out, but that they who still remained in the Land were his
good people, and dearly beloved of him. Whereas the Lord says, that he had
sent them out for their good, and would be a little Sanctuary unto them, chap.
11.15, 16. which is exactly conformable to what Jeremiah says, chap. 24. where
he compares those of the first captivity to good figgs, and they that remained
to naughty figgs, that could not be eaten they were so bad; and says that the
former he had a respect unto, and would own them for his; but the latter he
would make a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse in all places whether
they should be driven.

For their sins must needs be the greater, in that they did not reform after
such a fair warning given them by the captivity of a part of their Nation, not
above twelve year before; No nor when the Chaldeans were just ready to take
their City again, and destroy them utterly, as you may note from Ezekiel. 33.21.

10. These things they were so settled and rooted in, that they made but a mock
of those that came to reprove them, and threaten Gods judgments upon them.
They did but laugh when the Prophets told them that these sins would destroy
them, and that the King of Babylon would come like a seething pot to scald
them, Jer. 1.13. We must be the flesh, and this City is the Cauldron, say they,
by way of flout ( Ezekiel. 11.3.) when they were building houses; and therefore we
had best build in this place that is not near the City where we are to be
sodden. And therefore the Prophet applies this saying to another purpose, and
tells them, that since they had multiplied their slain in that City, and filled
the streets with them, (ver. 6.) he was sure that those murdered persons might
well be compared to flesh, and their City to the Cauldron where it had soaked
and been sodden in its own blood (ver. 7.) and that their saying did better set
forth their own wickedness, then their punishment, which they would not believe
should come. For because of their bloodiness, he tells them they should be
slain, not in the City (where then they hoped for security) but in the border
of the Land of Israel, whether they fled, hoping that way to save themselves
when the City was taken, ver. 10, 11. But God had said by Jeremiah, not only
that he would send Fishers to fish them, and take them in a net (which was done
in the siege of Jerusalem) but hunters also, that should pursue them, and
ferret them out of every hole, as they did Zedekiah and his men of War, Jerem.
16.16.

11. And so indeed Jeremiah tells us they jeared at him, using to say to him
when they met him in the street, What is the burden of the Lord? Jer. 23.33. As
much as to fay, how now Prophet, what evil do you threaten us with all? What is
the next mischief that we must expect? The word Burden in the Prophetical
language, signifies some great misery and calamity that should oppress them,
and under which they were like to sink, unless they repented; and many of them
begin their Prophesies of destruction with that word, as every one that reads
them very well knows. Now the people often hearing this word from his mouth,
used to say in a mocking manner when they met him, What is the burden or
punishment that you threaten us withal? And they did this in such a
contemptuous manner, that God threatens, ver. 36. That every man's word should
be his burden, i. e. that every one should be punished who used this language.
One reason of which strong impudence might be, that they had gotten so much
riches by this covetousness and injustice, that they thought they could hire
the Ethiopians to come and help them in a time of need, when some burden was
like to fall upon them; See Isa. 31.1, 2, 3. and Jer. 17.5, 6. From the latter
of which prophesies we may gather, that they pretended not to trust in man and
the arm of flesh, ver. 9. but God says in the 10th. ver. that he knew their
deceitful heart well enough; and threatens ver. 11. that all those who had
gotten their goods unjustly, should be robbed of them by the hands of the
Chaldeans, as a bird is of her eggs, which she never hatcheth. And this
covetousness I conceive might be the reason that they observed the Sabbath no
better, ver. 20, 21. and counted it a burden to them, when they did observe it,
and carry no burden through their gates, Amos 8.5, 6. Which made God deliver up
all their treasures (as I said) wherein they confided, and to search Jerusalem
with candles, so that they should not be able to save a single penny in any
secret hole, Zeph. 1.12, 13. The King of Babylon robbed them, as the King of
Assyria glories that he had done all Nations, of their goods; and his hand
found as a nest the riches of this people, Isa. 10.13, 14.

12. I should be too tedious, should I write all that may be said in this
argument. The ten Tribes were guilty of the very same sins, and this was the
voice of the Prophets to them, as well as to Judah, that they would reform
themselves, not only in their idolatrous worship, but in these matters also.
But for this, I will referr the Reader to the Prophet Micah, whose Vision was
concerning Samaria and Jerusalem both, chap. 1.1. And to the Prophet Amos,
whose vision chiefly concerned Israel, and who saw what was coming upon the
kine of Bashan, who did oppress the poor and crush the needy, chap. 4.1. And I
will only observe four things to you, which will be useful to take into your
consideration, and will more illustrate all this discourse, and so pass to the
second of those General heads that I propounded in the end of the last Chapter
to be spoken unto.

CAP. X.
1. The first observable, that these sins were committed when they were
reformed in Church Matters. 2. The second, that their knowing of themselves to
be reformed in those, was the ground of their hypocrisy. 3. Proved out of
Micah, Jeremiah, and others. 4. Their confidence in this opinion of their being
Gods favorites, though they lived wickedly. 5. Which made them not profit by
Gods judgments on their forefathers. 6. And upon the ten tribes. 7. And when
God came nearer to them, and sent captive a part of themselves. 8. So far they
were from amendment by it, that they grew riotous. 9. Yea after the second
captivity they continued in these sins, out of a persuasion they were pious
persons. 10. The Israelites ruined by the same deceit. 11. And the Pharisees in
aftertimes. 12. And the Jews and Christians at this day. Many places of holy
Writ are explained through the whole.

1. AND first of all, You cannot but take notice from what has been faid, That
even when they were reformed in their Divine Worship and Service, when Idolatry
and Superstition were cast out of the Church, yet these great abuses, these
crying sins remained among them. The Temple was purged; The Priests and Levites
were sanctified; sacrifices according to the Law were offered; the Passover
celebrated in such a manner, that scarce ever was the like seen from its first
institution; the brazen Serpent was broken; and all this by the consent of the
Princes and Rulers, who yet continued thus unjust, cruel and devouring, as both
Isaiah and Micah (who lived in Hezekiah's time) and Zephaniah (who lived in
Josiah's) have informed us very largely. Do but consult 2 Chro. 29. and 30.
chap. and you will find that Hezekiah the King and the Princes ordered the
worship of God; and chap. 35. where you may behold the Princes in Josiah's
time, giving at the Passover, an offering of two thousand six hundred small
cattle, and three hundred Oxen; when notwithstanding these were the men who
like Lions and Wolves tare the people in pieces, and gnawed the very bones;
after they had done with the flesh, making them as bare and poor as ever they
could, according as Zephaniah has told us. I hold it unnecessary to lead you
through all their story for the proof of this, seeing I have so often reflected
light upon it in my passage through the former discourse.

2. And therefore I shall entreat you rather attentively to consider a second
observation of great moment, which is this; That herein consisted a main ground
of their hypocrisy and deceiving of themselves, which brought them to utter
ruin. A man must wink very hard that does not see the duties of Justice and
mercifulness, of pity and favorable dealing, etc. written in capital letters,
both upon his own heart, and in the book of God; and one would not think it
possible that a man should have such strange Arts of abusing himself, as to
make himself believe that he is a good man, and in a safe condition, while he
lives in the violation of all these known principles. There must be some
notable blind, some very plausible trick, that can cast such a mist before his
eyes, and juggle him into such a conceited belief, which here (I think) we have
discovered. They had high thoughts of their divine worship, and looked upon
their Religious services as hugely pleasing unto God, and they knew themselves
to be very earnest (it is like) in this piece of reformation; and so they
judged themselves to be the people of God, the right worship being restored,
the Altar being cleansed, and the Temple repaired by their means. Now their
great zeal in these matters, and their forwardness to introduce the true
Religion after so much Idolatry, made them overlook these little trifling
things (as men account them) of justice and equity, of mercy and compassion,
and to hope that God would do so also, and not be angry with such a reformed
people for a small matter. What I pray you (might they say in their hearts to a
Prophet) will not God give leave to a people that hate idols, and observe
diligently his Sabbaths, and offer him his constant sacrifices in the right
prescribed manner, to get a little for themselves in the world, and to use all
Arts of growing rich, after they have been so faithful and liberal to him? Will
he fall out with such good friends of his upon so poor an occasion? Cannot he
be pleased that they give him his due, and defraud him of none of his right,
though they be not so exact in their Justice one to another? Must he needs take
notice what they do among themselves, when they hope he has no reason to
complain that he is neglected in any piece of his own worship? Will it not
satisfy him, that they are so zealous in those great and weighty concernments
of his, which had been so long disregarded, and for which they had been so
often threatened? Yes surely thought they, we are in a safe condition, God is
well apayed, and we need not trouble our selves any further, but confidently
wait upon him, that he will be with us and save us.

3. Thus the Prophet Micah tells us they found a way to deceive themselves, as
you may read, chap. 3.11. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests
thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money; yet they
will lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come
upon us. They would needs be Gods favorites, and thrust themselves upon him,
and be confident of his goodness to them, though they were conscious to
themselves of all this wickedness. They cried the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, as long as those of Ephesus cried, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. And in this Temple-worship and Religion they trusted, thinking that
God was fixed to that place, and that the Temple would secure them, as
certainly as the Trojans thought themselves out of all danger, while they could
keep their Palladium. And therefore Jeremiah bids them not trust in those lying
words, saying the Temple of the Lord are these; i. e. not hearken to the false
Prophets, who told them that they were Gods Temple, a separated people, an holy
Nation, among whom God did dwell; for all this would not avail them, and they
were words that would not profit, or give them any help, ver. 8. yet they
dreamt, that as long as they kept their holy place pure, they need not fear the
taking of their City: Just as the heathens thought their fortresses could never
be won, while they could keep the good Genius of the place from being charmed
away out of it. And so an excellent Linguist takes that word (...) or Thele,
Lud. de Dieu.
to refer not to the persons, but to the several parts of the Temple, which
agrees well with the words foregoing, ver. 2. where the Prophet is bid to
stand in the gate of the Lords house, and to proclaim these words among the
rest, Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord are these. As if
he had pointed with his finger to the buildings of the house of God, and said
to those that came to worship, Do not deceive your selves in a vain confidence,
that these will save you, as if God were bound to these dwellings. But yet they
came and stood before God in his house (as he says, ver. 10.) and said, We are
delivered, and that made them do all those forementioned abominations. And
therefore he gives them that reproof which you read, ver. 11. where he asks
them, Is my heuse become a den of Robbers in your eyes? behold I have seen it,
says the Lord; i. e. Do you imagine to fly to the Temple, as thieves to their
den, and think all is safe, if you do but offer me some sacrifices? No, you are
mistaken; I see what you are well enough, and you cannot so deceive me. It is
very plain that they were confident none of those things should come upon them,
which the Prophets threatened; but gave God the lie through his messengers ears,
as you may read, Ier. 5.11, 12, 13. and therefore seeing they were so unjust,
as he tells us there, ver. 1, 2. and ver. 25, 26, 27, 28. there must be
something whereby they strengthened their hands in this wickedness. And he
tells us, what it was in that chapter, ver. 14 when he calls the Temple the
house wherein they trusted. They did swear by the name of God, and pretended
great reverence to it; but it was not in truth and righteousness, Isa. 48.1.
they styled themselves by the name of the holy City, ver. 2. (viz. the men of
Jerusalem, the people of Sion) and they stayed themselves on the God of Israel;
whereas they were stouthearted and far from righteousness, as you may read, Isa.
46.12. But they offered to God sacrifices out of their unlawful gains, and this
they thought would bribe him to take no notice, as you may gather from Isa.
61.8. The Lord loves judgment, I hate robbery for burnt-offerings. And so
the Vulgar Latin renders these words, Jer. 11.15. Numquid carnes (anctae
auferent a te malitias tuas in quibus gloriata es? Do thou think thy holy
flesh ( i. e. thy sacrifices) shall take away the wickednesses wherein thou
gloriest? As if he should say, Thou can not expiate for thy beloved sins, by
making God many oblations, as thou think to do; no, never dream of it, for
it is a very deceit.

4. Yet knowing themselves to be very zealous in their worship, they have the
confidence to come and challenge God, as though they had wrong done them, and
had hard measure at his hands, in not being saved by him from their enemies.
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? Isa. 58.3. Do we not seek
thee daily? do we not delight to know thy ways, and take pleasure in
approaching to thee? do we not fast and pray, and put our selves to a great
deal of pains in thy services? Why then do thou take no notice of us? how
can thou deny such importunate suitors to thee for thy favor? It seemed
strange to them, that he should not love such persons, and condescend to their
requests; and they thought they might justly plead their cause with him, and
that it would appear they were very innocent. But God there tells them (as you
have seen) what was still wanting; and their not observing of such lessons,
made them run into such a dangerous mistake. And so the same Prophet speaks in
Gods name to them of the captivity, (by way of prediction) as though they were
dissatisfied about the Justice of Gods dealing with them. And he asks them,
Isa. 50.1. Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I have put away?
Or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your
inquities have you sold your selves, and for your transgressions is your mother
put away; i. e. you complain as if I had without any great cause, or merely for
my pleasure, put away your Nation which was married to me, as you use to do
with your wives. You make as if I had sold you, because I was in want of
something that you could not furnish me withal, Exodus 21.7. 2 King. 4.1.
as you use to do your children in case of poverty and distress. But what proof
can you make of this? produce the bill of divorce if you can; and let it be
seen that you were unjustly put away. No, no; it was for your iniquities, your
horrid injustice and violence, that you were sold into the hands of cruel men;
and it was for your transgressions, your whoredom, by Idolatry, that I put you
away. I may rather complain of you (as it is ver. 2.) and ask, Wherefore when I
came was there no man? When I called there was none to answer. Strange it was
that there should be no pious and upright men to be found among them but
stranger it is that these wicked men should have the boldness to argue with
God, and plead their own innocence. Sure the reason was none else but that
which I have assigned; they had been lately reformed, a little before the
captivity; the worship of God was much amended in the days of Josiah, and they
were not all fallen back into so gross idolatry, as formerly they had maintained.
This, this was the very thing that immediately ruined them; this was it that
would not let them, see the mischief that was coming upon them for their
oppression, violence, and such like sins; nor acknowledge it just, when it was
come. They held fast this deceit ( Jer. 8.7.) and so refused to return.

5. And this I conceive might make them interpret all the instances of Gods
displeasure against others, to the encouragement of themselves in their evil
ways, rather then to the awakening of their hearts to repentance. Ahaz the
predecessor of their good King Hezekiah, was delivered into the hand of the
King of Syria, who smote him, and carried a great multitude captive into
Damascus: and into the hand of the King of Israel, who made a strange slaughter
among them, destroying an hundred and twenty thousand valiant men in one day,
and carrying away captive two hundred thousand, men, women and children, which
God commanded to be sent home again, and gave more time unto for to amend. 2 Chronicles. 28.4, 5, 6. The Edomites also and the Philistines came and laid them
waste, and brought them very low: The King of Assyria likewise who was hired to
relieve him, did but more distress, and not at all strengthen him, ver. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20. But they could easily impute all this evil which befell their
Fathers unto their Idolatry, their offering incense unto other gods, and
forsaking the God of their Fathers, ver. 25. As for themselves, they were
returned to him, and hated the strange worship with all their hearts. How could
they be in such peril of being destroyed now they amended those very faults for
which their Fathers were scourged? This justice and righteousness, which the
melancholy Prophets called for, were (they might think) but Heathen virtues.
The pure worship of God was that which distinguished them from all others, and
would secure them without any of that admired Pagan morality. And so the
Prophet Ezekiel observes, that they were worse then their heathen neighbors
that were round about them; for they followed all their bad examples in
worshipping Idols, but not their good in doing justly and uprightly. Ezekiel. 5.7.
You have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither
have done according to the judgments of the Nations that are round about you.

6. And when God proceeded further in his judgments, and sent all the ten
tribes into captivity in the days of Hezekiah, as you may read, 2 King. 17.
this did not at all make them to stand in awe, and not to sin. For the Answer
was ready, They worshipped the calves in Bethel; the remnant of them laughed
the messengers of Hezekiah to scorn and mocked them, who were sent to invite
them to join in the reformation (2 Chronicles. 30.6, etc.) and therefore God cast
them out of their Land, and gave it unto others. But how any such evil could
betide those that were the reformed, they could not tell how to imagine. What,
would you have them believe that Jerusalem is no better then Samaria, and that
the house of David shall not be more regarded then the house of Jeroboam or
Jehu? Will not the Lord Jehovah, whom they worshipped, do more for them, then
Baal or the Egyptian Gods could do for their Brethren? Yes surely, they were
Gods beloved people, and no evil should come near unto them. They were haughty
because of his holy mountain, as the Prophet Zephany speaks, chap. 3.11. They
bragged of Gods presence with them, and of the care they had to keep his house
clean from all heathenish impurities; and by this means they hugged themselves
in their injustice, and flattered their souls into a conceit of their
acceptance with God, and security under him, though they had seen such
calamities befall others. Nay so sottish were they that when they grew
Idolatrous again after all their reformations, yet because they retained some
devotion, they said they were innocent; as you may see, Jer. 2.33, etc. Why
trimmest thou thy self to seek love? Therefore have thou also taught thy
wickedness, thy ways. Or as the Vulgar reads it, Quid niter is bonam ostendere
viam tuam ad quaerendam dilectionem, etc. i. e. Why do thou endeavor to
purge and clear thy self, as though thy way was good, and thou had no spot in
thee, hoping hereby to obtain my favor? whereas thou have not only done evil
thy self, but taught it others also. And besides thy Idolatry (spoken of
before) in thy skirts (or wings) is found the blood of the souls of the poor
innocents, which is so plain to be seen that one need not search for it, ver.
34. As upon the wings of an Eagle or such a bird of prey one shall find the
blood of those lesser birds that they have devoured, so there were manifest
marks and tokens everywhere to be seen of their cruelty and injustice. And yet
they have the face to come and say, ver. 35. I am innocent, Surely his anger
shall be turned from me. The worship of God was that which they pretended, and
they would not grant that they had gone after Baalim (as you may read, ver.
23.) and so they thought they might stand upon their own justification, not
fearing the guilt of any other sin but Idolatry.

7. Well; but when part of Judah her self is gone into captivity, then sure we
shall hear a new story and find a great change wrought in them. One would not
imagine but that he should read how they were convinced when they saw Gods
judgments come not only to their gates, but within their walls. But if you
look into the Prophet Ezekiel, you shall see that they who were left behind,
and not yet carried away, remained in the very same sins, and supported
themselves with the same false hopes. Besides those places formerly mentioned,
I shall add these that speak of their injustice and violence. In chap. 7.10,
11. he says the day of their destruction was near; the rod for their backs did
blossom, and therefore would ere long bring forth its bitter fruits; which
they might easily gather from hence, because pride had budded among them, and
violence was risen up to a rod of wickedness. i. e. As their sins increased and
grew to a greater hight, so would their punishment grow more ripe, and no man
should be able to strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life, ver. 13.
Their silver and gold he says, should not deliver them, ver. 19. but because
of their bloody crimes, he would bring the worst of the heathen to possess
their dwellings, ver. 23, 24. And chap. 8.17. he says that to all their
abominations which they committed, and as if they were not sufficient, they
filled the land with violence, and devised new ways of heathenish worship
also. But though they did so, and though God had done so already to part of
their Nation, and threatened to expel them also from their land, yet they
wearied themselves with lies, as it is, Ezekiel. 24.12. And what they were, you
may guess from ver. 21.25. the Sanctuary was the excellency of their strength,
the joy of their glory, and in this they trusted, and thought to be safe,
though their devotions there were many of them Idolatrous.

And more then this, they that were gone into captivity, would not be persuaded
that there was any other cause of their expulsion but the profaning of Gods
worship; nor any thing more required to the pleasing him then keeping of it
pure; and so they still retained their unrighteousness under the cloak of
serving God. The Prophet Ezekiel will bear witness to this also, chap. 33. v.
31, 32, 33. They came and sat before him as though they took a great deal of
delight in hearing of Gods word, when as their hearts run after their
covetousness. Which words appear by the whole story to have been spoken to them
of the first captivity, and that after the taking of the City the second time,
ver. 21.

8. I must add further, that this people exalted themselves to such a degree of
confidence in their evil ways, that they turned good fellows (as we ordinarily
speak) and fell into drunkenness and gluttony by reason of their wealth and
their security; See Isa. 28.7, 8. Yea so haughty were they that they laughed at
the Prophets when they told them of those Judgments that were coming upon
them, and used to repeat their words with derision, ver. 10. The Prophets used
to say thus has the Lord commanded, and yet a little while and such or such a
thing shall be. Now they imitate this language of theirs, and say manda,
remanda, etc. (as the Vulgar renders it) Command again and again if you will,
let us have precept upon precept, bid us expect and look for ruin; though you
say yet a little while, yet a little while (or nearer to our translation, a
little while for this thing here, and a little for the other there) and then
the King of Assyria shall come, we fear it not. Therefore God says, a people
of strange lips should come and speak to them, seeing they would not hear him,
v. 11. and because they would not refresh the poor and weary (but rather
oppress them) which he told them was the way to have peace, ver. 12. And that
this is the meaning of this obscure place, seems very probable from v. 14.
where he calls them scorners, who said ver. 15. that hell and death was at an
agreement with them, so that they were as sure they should not dye, as if they
had a lease of their lives. And though the overflowing scourge (spoken of chap.
8. 8.) should come, yet they doubted not but they should escape; for they made
a refuge to themselves. But as the Prophet tells them it was a refuge of lies
and hypocrisy, and Gods judgments should come upon them notwithstanding their
presumptuous confidence, ver. 18. And do not think that the way to heaven is so
wide that you can go between God and the world thither; do not think that the
bed in which he lays his Spouse is so broad that it will hold many lovers.
Coangustatum enim est stratum, it a ut alter decidat, etc. as the Vulgar Latin
translates the 20th verse, For the Bed is so strait that it will not hold two
but one must fall out; the covering is so short that it will not wrap them
both. Either God, or the world and all Idols, must be thrust out; they cannot
lie together with us, nor cannot he endure any companion in his love. Which is
just like that of our Saviors, No man can serve two masters, etc. or that of
St. Paul's, What agreement is there between Christ and Belial. And yet
notwithstanding all these admonitions, they minded nothing but to fortify
Jerusalem, to repair the breaches in the walls, and to bring a moat about it,
Isa. 22.9, 10, 11. and when God called for reformation, they betook themselves
to their pleasures, and were jolly and merry, as though no harm could befall
them, ver. 12, 13. And therefore God threatens, ver. 14. that this iniquity
should not be purged away till they dyed.

This profane Spirit which taunted the Prophets was more fit for the children
of Esan then of Jacob, who as you read, Isa. 21.11. call to the Watchman, i. e.
the Prophet, and ask him What of the night? What of the night? i. e. what have
thou now to say concerning the black night of affliction wherewith thou usedst
to threaten us! we see no darkness, but it is a day of peace with us. To which
he answers, ver. 12. True, the morning is before the night, but ere long your
misery will come; therefore if you intend to amend, you had best do it
presently. But the seed of Israel did not only imitate them, but far exceed
them; for in process of time they arrived to such an height of impiety as to
say in Josiahs days, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil, Zeph.
1.12. And after the first captivity, when their iniquity was exceeding great,
and the land was full of blood, and the City of perverseness; they said. The
Lord has forsaken the earth; and the Lord sees not, Ezekiel. 9.9. i. e. they
thought there was no providence, and that it came but by chance thar their
brethren were carried captive, so that they might still fare well enough.

9. But sure when this party was removed out of their country also, and but
some few of the poorer sort left behind by the Chaldeans, we shall find better
dealings. And yet you must not expect it; for they thought of nothing but that
they should increase and be strong, because they were Abraham's children. And
thus they reasoned with themselves, Ezekiel. 33.24. that seeing their Father
Abraham, though but one, had the land promised to him; they being many should
surely possess it, and have it for an inheritance, especially having escaped
the destruction that was fallen on others. But they became guilty of the very
same sins that were formerly committed; For they shed blood, ver. 25. i. e.
committed the greatest violence, and they stood upon their sword, v. 26. i. e.
they hoped to protect themselves by that which was the instrument of their
violence, oppression and such like sins as they practiced. I wish heartily that
all the men of the world at this day would take example by those that have been
before them, and not think that they shall escape destruction because they did
not fall with others. God can do with them as he did with this remnant of Judah
whose doom read, ver. 27, 28. And above all I desire that every one would apply
these things to himself, and to this Nation which have been spoken of
hypocrisy. For as far as we are parallel to them in our manner of sining, must
we expect the like punishments to be inflicted upon us. Beware therefore,
Beware whosoever thou art that read these things, least thou cheatest thy
self with an hypocritical godliness, with a great deal of heat in some
Religious duties, without the most exact and scrupulous justice and the bowels
of tender mercy that the Gospel requires of us. This deceit is very common in
the world, and more familiar then many are aware of; and yet withal so fatally
destructive, that men had need to have a mark set up whereby to avoid this rock.

10. For you must not think but that the Israelites also as well as the Jews
were helped forward to their ruin by this falsehood. No question but they
thought their religion (as bad as it was) would preserve them, and were so
confident of it, that with the very spoil of the poor they would serve their
Gods. So you may read Amos 2.6 8. They sold the righteous for silver, See also
Amos 4.1, 4, 5.
and the poor for a pair of shoes; they were very corrupt in judgment, and
they lay down upon clothes which they had in pledge by every Altar, and they
drank the wine of the condemned in the house of their God; i. e. they served
God with those things that they had so unjustly and violently gotten, and were
content to spend something upon him, so he would but wink at these unlawful
and cruel ways of getting This iniquity would in all likelihood have stared
them in the face and made them afraid, had it not been for this fine deceit
(this hypocrisy which I speak of) that their serving of God and keeping up his
worship such as it was, would be accepted of by God instead of all other things
wherein they might be faulty. And so when Hosea says that the Rulers who loved
gifts and bribes, should be ashamed because of their sacrifices when they were
carried captive, Hos. 4.18, 19. he clearly intimates that in these they trusted
while they oppressed the subjects; but found themselves miserably deceived and
disappointed, as all such men will be in such weak supports.

11. And how far this piece of self-cosenage prevailed in after times, when the
Pharisees were in their greatest height, I leave to those to judge who read but
those passages in the Gospel, of their making long prayers, fasting twice in
the week, strict observance of the Sabbath, and boasting of their skill in the
Law, while in the mean time they were the most gross transgressors of the Law
and dishonourers of God. They thanked God that they were not Publicans, but
were separated by many many strictnesses from the herd of men; and they said
with those in Isaiah, chap. 65.5. Stand by thy self, come not near, for I am
holier then thou, or as De Dieu interprets it (for there is no note of
comparison in the Hebrew) Sanctus sum tibi, I am holy to thee. Thou being a
common man may not touch me, no more then thou may the holy things. And yet
these seeming Saints were unnatural to their parents; devoured widows houses,
absolved men from their oaths, were full of extortion, ravening, and
wickedness, and derided the Sermons which our Savior made, because not sorted
to their covetous humor. They would do nothing indeed but what would stand with
their worldly lusts and desires; or else their own Fathers (whose traditions
they were so zealous of) would have taught them more goodness. For this was a
saying among them, Be as careful to keep a small precept as a great: Ep. 2.
pirke (...).
and they gave this reason for it, because the Scripture does not express what
precepts have the greatest rewards, which was therefore omitted, that with the
like diligence they should keep them all. But for all this they have found a
way to know this secret, and their rule is this, that the greater the
punishment is for a transgression of a command, V Paulum Fag. ^b.
the greater will be the reward for the observance. I hence they conclude that
there shall be a greater reward for keeping of the Sabbath, then for keeping of
the Passover, because the punishment for neglect of the former was stoning,
but of the latter no more then cutting off Who knows but from hence th y might
glory, so much in keeping of the Sabbath and such like things, and overlook the
matters of mercy and ustice, because they found severe punishments for the
breach of those, but as I noted before, covetousness was not forbidden under
such penalties?

12. Some such thing it was that made them esteem themselves so highly in Gods
favor for the observance of days and ceremonious worship, and made them think
the breach of moral commands would not injure their interest in his love; for
to this day they have a strange opinion of the power that a right
sanctification of the Sabbath has to restore them to their ancient enjoyments.
Thus one of the Doctors says in the Talmud (as Hulshius has observed) he that
observes the Sabbath according to the custom, L. 1. de Theolog. Jud. part. 2.
though he should commit Idolatry, yet it should be forgiven him (rendering that
word Isa. 56.2. (...) from profaning it, as if it were (...) it is forgiven
him) Another of them says, that if they had observed the first Sabbath aright,
no Nation had ever prevailed over them. But it is said, Exodus 16.27, that some
of the people went to gather Manna on the seventh day; and therefore it was in
his opinion that Amalek came to to fight with Israel, Exodus 17.8 Another Doctor
says that if Israel could but now observe one or two Sabbaths aright, strait
way they should be delivered; the Messiah would come, and he would bring them
to his holy mountain again, as he gathers from Isa. 56.4.7. So strangely are
they drunken with the same cup of hypocrisy which made their Fathers to reel,
and stagger and fall to the ground. Of which likewise the Christians have drunk
so deep, and are so intoxicated with the same conceit, that it was but
necessary that I should make this long discourse as an Antidote for the
expelling of this deadly poison. And I wish that every man would not merely
lick the outside of the glass, and give these things a superficial reading; but
would seriously consider and suck in this truth into his very soul, That the
greater Zeal we have in religious performances, the more certainly shall we
undo our selves, unless there be an equal heat in all other duties that God
has commanded.

CAP. XI.
1. The third observable, That the prophets were the cause of the peoples
hypocrisy. 2. Proved out of Micah, Isaiah and Hosea. 3. Out of many places in
Jeremiah. 4. And of Ezekiel. 5. Their persecution of the true prophets arose
from hence. 6. Therefore they were first destroyed; which is proved out. of
Ezekiel. 7. The fourth observable, That this made them so easily revolt unto
Idolatry when occasion served.

1. IT is time now to come to the third of those four things that I said were
to be observed; which is this, That the hypocrisy and partial dealing (which
was treated of in the former Chapter,) was cherished by the Generality of the
Prophets and Priests, who had exceedingly corrupted their ways and loved
nothing better then filthy lucre. The study of the prophets was to curry favor
with the Rulers; and to please the people, which made them preach smooth
doctrines, soft and oilely sermons that should never grate upon the conscience,
least they should lose their gain, or deminish their worldly advantages. And
the Priests cared for no more but that the worship of God at the Temple might
be maintained, that it might maintain then; that there might be a multitude of
offerings and sacrifices, whereby their fees might be increased and made more
plentiful. And so both the one and the other of them made the nation believe
they were religious and godly enough so long as they worshipped not Idols though
they did all those other villainies that I have been speaking of.

2. For the proof of this, you may read the Prophet Micah who says, Chap. 3.5.
That they made Gods people to err, and that when anything was put into their
mouths, then they would cry peace; but if nothing were put into them, then
against that man they would at all adventures proclaim war. He must be Gods
enemy that was not a friend to their belly and purse, and God could do him no
harm, that would be kind to them. Unto which you may add that which you read v
11. of the same chapter, where the Priests and Prophets (we are told) made a
trade of their office, and sold their words, as the princes did of theirs, who
sold justice. With whom agrees the Prophet Isaiah, who was his contemporary as
you may see Chap. 56.10.11. Where he likens them to a company of hungry dogs,
in regard of their greediness, covetousness and insatiable desire of riches and
pleasure; but otherwise he says they were like to sleepy curs that bark at no
body; or if they do lift up their head and give a yelp or two, lay themselves
down again in their sweet slumber. i. e. They were careful for their own
private concernments, but they would never reprove any for their wickedness; or
if they did, it was so gently as if they were afraid to displease them. And so
likewise the prophet Hosea testifies, Chap 4.8. that they eat the sin of Gods
people, and set their heart on their iniquity, i. e. They eat the sin offering
which was not lawful for them to meddle withal if the blood was carried into
the holy place; or they eat more of the ordinary sin offerings then they
should, feeding themselves even with Gods portion, they set their heart on this
iniquity; or rather they were glad not sorrowful of the peoples sins, and set
their heart on the peoples iniquity, because they eat of their sin, and lived
by the sacrifices for it. They were so far from reproving the people for their
faults, that they loved their sins and rejoiced at their trespasses, because
they would bring them in more large provisions by the sacrifices that were
appointed for expiation of them.

3. The prophet Jeremiah also lets us know that even such persons as they who
should have been the Fathers of the people, were guilty of sheding the blood of
the just in the midst of Jerusalem. Lam. 4.13. Their holy garments were stained
with those foul sins of oppression and cruelty; and they were as visible upon
them as in the rest of the Nation. They cried up (it is likely) the purity of
their Church, the holiness of their ordinances, the devotion of their Rulers,
and the forwardness of the people to divine worship, and thence concluded
without any farther scruple that God would not destroy such a people as they
were, and that the King of Babylon should not come into such an holy City. They
said even unto those that despised the Lord, You shall have peace; and unto
every one that walked after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall
come upon you. Jer. 23.17. Every one from the least even unto the greatest was
given unto covetousness; from the Prophet even unto the priest every one dealt
falsely; For they healed the hurt of the daughter of Gods people slighly, saying
peace peace when there was no peace. Jer. 8.10, 11. And were they ashamed when
they had committed all these abominations? Nay, they were not at all ashamed,
neither could they blush, v. 12. If you would know the reason of this
confidence, it is apparent that they imagined they were holy persons, and said,
We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us, v. 8. which words signify
that they laid the greatest weight of their hopes upon that piece of Religion
which has respect to God, though they had no respect at all in their actions
toward the good of one another. And the very same words you shall find in
another place Chap. 6. 13, 14, 15. and that which deceived them, was, their
Sacrifices wherein they trusted, as you may gather from v. 20. where God says,
To what purpose comes there to me incense from Sheba? and the sweet cane from
a far country? Your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices
sweet to me. And you may observe also that when these prophets could not avoid
but they must prophecy of some evil that so they might imitate the true
prophets and not be suspected for mere flatterers by speaking of nothing but
peace and prosperity; then they saw for them false burdens and causes of
banishment, Lam. 2.14 Some little mischief or other they foretold should come
if they did not amend; some small burden they laid upon them which the people
did not much dread; and so their threatenings were but mock burdens, like the
reproof of flatterers who smile while they give them; like the Dogs ( Isaiah
spoke of) who when they seem to bite their masters, they do not fast en their
teeth.

4. Unto this you may add the words of Ezekiel. Chap. 22. v. 25, 28, 29. where he
tells us of the defection which both priests, prophets, princes and people had
made from God, so that there was not so much as a man among the people to make
up the hedge and to stand in the gapp against the wrath of God, which had made
a breach upon them. And particularly he says of the prophets and priests that
they were like ravening Lions, had devoured souls, made many widows, dawbed
with untempered mortar, seen vanity and divined lies. Let me entreat you to
read the whole 13. Chap. where he relates how the Prophet and Prophetess
seduced the people preaching peace, when there was no peace, and strengthening
the hands of the wicked that he should not return from his wicked way, by
promising of him life. The prophets they promised the people security and built
an imaginary wall of defense about them v. 10. The prophetesses they bid them
be as quiet and at as much ease as men are when they lean their arms on a
cushion; And if any man's head did but ache, they had a kerchief for it to bind
it about, and make him sleep in security without any fear of danger. v. 18. And
all this unfaithfulness to souls they were guilty of for the vilest, the
smallest gain imaginable; For an handful of barley or a bit of bread they would
pollute Gods, name and slay poor souls that depended on them. v. 19.

5. And more then this, they persecuted the true prophets who dealt sincerely
with the people and told them the great danger that was impending over them.
One place in the Prophet Jeremiah may serve instead of all for the attesting of
this charge against them, which is Chap. 26. where they accuse him to the
Princes for nothing else but because he prophesied destruction to them. v. 8, 9.

Some of the Elders indeed were affected with his prophecy, and brought for
his justification in what he had said, the example of Micah, who had spoken the
same words in the time of Hezekiah, and yet that King did not put him to death,
but feared the Lord, and labored for a reformation, ver. 18, 19.

But then the people have their story to oppose to this, (in ver. 20. which
seems to be their words) How that Urijah had lately taken the same boldness to
prophecy in the present Kings reign against their City, but the King would not
endure it, but though he fled into Egypt, yet he sent after him and brought
him home, and slew him with the sword in a disgraceful manner. And it should
seem that had not Ahikam resolutely stood his friend, this last story had
prevailed against Jeremiah, ver. 24. And in the next chapter, we read that some
of them undertook to prophecy that shortly the vessels of the Lords house
should be brought again from Babylon that had been lately carried thither. And
though Jeremiah assured them of the vanity of this assertion, yet in the next
after that, chap. 28. there arose a Prophet, who to please the people assigns
the punctual time when it should be done; and out of a great conceit sure that
they were Gods beloved people, whatsoever did befall them; there arose Prophets
in Babylon among them of the first captivity, who foretold the same things with
those at Jerusalem, as you may see chap. 29. In so much that it became a
Proverb among those that were left still there, that another captivity would
never come, whatsoever the Prophets said, Ezekiel. 12.22, 23, etc. And they
plainly intimate, Ier. 18.18. that they had as good Prophets as he, and should
always have, notwithstanding he prophesied their destruction; and therefore
seeing they could well spare him, they devised how to dispatch him out of the
way, that he might not trouble them.

6. But these Prophets who made the people believe the captivity should never
come, did themselves first feel the burden of it before any other persons. The
wall of defense, that bulwark of security that they built for them in their
Sermons being laid together and daubed with untempered mortar, it fell down
upon them that daubed it, so that it was said, This Wall is no more, neither
they that daubed it, Ezekiel. 13.15, 16. And these two things are remarkable in
another vision of his ( chap. 9.) where he sees the slayers sent forth to
destroy all those in the City that did not sadly bewail the sins of it. First
that the Priests were first punished; for he bids him begin at the Sanctuary,
and it is said they slew the Elders which were there, and so went forth and
slew in the City, ver. 6, 7. Secondly, That they were all slain and destroyed,
none of them being spared; for though they are bidden to mark some in the City,
ver. 4. yet you read of none to be marked in the Sanctuary. And therefore
Ezekiel complains as he if was left alone, ver. 8. i. e. in vision he was
present at this slaughter made among the Ministers in the Sanctuary, and he
could see no Priest remaining there but himself. So dangerous a thing it is to
have a form of godliness without the power of it actuating the whole soul, that
such persons run themselves into destruction by their false hopes and dreams of
Gods favor; and bring likewise all their credulous admirers, and those that
hang upon their lips, into an unexpected ruin with them. I shall not presume
so far as to tell you what examples we have of this in our age of the world;
but pass to the fourth thing observable, which shall be quickly dispatched,
because I have staid so long upon the two former.

7. From hence you may perceive the reason why they did so casily upon any
occasion revolt from God and fall to Idolatry again. They were but half
reformed, and retained the very root of Idolatry in their hearts; and therefore
rather then suffer any thing from the displeasure of a new King, they would set
up the false worship again, and become of his Religion. For so you may see that
after Hezekiahs time who had made a great change among them, Manasseh and the
people with him returned to their Idols; and after Josiah, it is the complaint
of Jeremiah, that they went a whoring from God. Now what reason can be assigned
for this, but that their hearts were rotten, and though they prided themselves
in a Religion, yet it was that which they did not understand; or love upon any
other account but as it did maintain them in their present covetousness and
violence? Whence it came to pass that the same covetous affections made them
change their Religion when there was no other way to serve them. And as their
reformation in Religion was sometimes a cloak for their covetousness; so in
process of time their covetousness made them think any religion to be good
enough, and to debauch the worship of God without any alteration of their
confidence. And this run them also upon another mischief, which was, that when
they had forgotten God, and principles of Conscience, though they were
confident, yet it was in the power and strength of men rather then in God, who
used to defend them marvelously. Is Israel a servant (says Jeremy, chap. 2
14.) is he an home-born slave? i. e. does not God care how he uses him, or what
misery he exposes him unto, as men do with their slaves that they have full
possession of? Is he not Gods son, yea his first born? but how then comes it to
pass that he is spoiled? The Prophet answers that indeed both Assyria and
Egypt had devoured him, ver. 15, 16. but it was his own fault who forsook his
God, and sought to those for help who rather did him harm, ver. 17, 18. And so
it will be with every one (as it was with him, ver. 19.) who betakes himself to
evil courses to defend what he has as unjustly gotten: His own wickedness
shall correct him, and his backslidings shall reprove him; he shall know that
it is an evil thing and a bitter that he has forsaken the Lord, and that his
fear is not in him.

CAP. XII.
1. The second General truth discoursed of, that after their return from
Babylon they had not left these sins. 2. God had taken care to prevent their
falling-into them, but Zachary tells us to how small effect. 3. And so does
Haggai. 4. And Malachi in whose Prophecy a difficult place is explained, Mal.
2.13, 14, 15. 5. Zachary tells us what would be in after times. 6. Which was
too fully verified in their base usage of the Lord of life. 7. Christians not
free from the same sins to this day.

1. AND now leaving these observations to every man's private consideration, I
shall pass to the Second General truth which I promised to illustrate, and that
is this; That these were the sins which the Prophets note this people to have
been guilty of after they were returned out of their captivity, and when an
amendment might justly have been expected. Ezekiel who had seen the Glory of
the Lord depart from the Temple, and so his protection from the Nation (as you
read before, chapter 9.) does prophecy likewise of its return again, and in a
vision he beheld it coming in at that gate where it went out, and seating it
self in the new house of God, which he describes, Ezekiel. 43.3, 4, 5. Justice and
gratitude would make us now think that they would never offend God in such
manner as their Fathers had done; especially after they had felt so long
darkness by the departure of the divine glory from their land. But yet as if
these sins had been transfused into them with their parents seed, they would
not cross the old Proverb, Like Father, like Son, treading in their steps, and
leaving the like example to their posterity. Very devout they were (for ought
that we can read) in their Religious worship; no complaints are brought in
against them for not keeping the Sabbath, not praying, fasting, and offering
Sacrifice: But they knew themselves so punctual in these things, that they
slided into the same deceit wherein their Fathers were caught and perished.
They imagined that those things were all the reverence that was to be performed
to the divine glory which dwelt among them, and that it would not be offended
with their unjust and unmercifull dealings. For in the very beginning of this
Prophecy of Zachary (where we begun this discourse) he cries out chap. 1. v. 2,
3, 4, etc. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn you, turn you unto me; Be not ye
as your Fathers, unto whom the former Prophets cried the very same words; who
though they would not hearken then, yet afterward were forced to acknowledge
when Gods words took hold of them, that they were punished according to their
doings. And this was when the captivity was expired, that he made this
proclamation unto them; whereby we may judge that they were not converted when
God had turned their captivity.

2. And indeed God foresaw what would be their practice, and wherein they would
bestow their greatest ceremony; And therefore many years before this
deliverance he labors to secure the observance of these neglected duties when
it should be vouchsafed to them. For before he warns them a word about their
sacrifices by the Prophet Ezekiel, he gives the Princes a great charge about
matters of justice, equity and kind dealing, as you may read Ezekiel. 45.8, 9, 10,
11, etc. And then there immediately follows a large direction about their
offerings and feasts that they should observe, in the latter end of that
chapter, and part of the next. But as he begun, so he concludes that discourse,
with a business that concerns justice, Ezekiel. 46.18. The Prince shall not take
the peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession,
etc. And yet we cannot but take notice that they were horribly faulty in these
things, though the Laws of sacrifice which they carefully kept, were environed
with cautions about them. For Zachary plainly tells us that robbery and perjury
(two most gross sins) did still reign among them, and to make them more
provoking, they said notwithstanding that they were innocent. So Iunius reads
those words, ver. 3. This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the
whole earth; for every one that steals of this people, says, as it, ( i. e. as
the rest of the earth) I am innocent: and whosoever swears of this people
says, as it, that he is innocent. i. e. They were no more sensible of these
sins then many Heathen people who knew but little of God, and so might more
easily forget what was only taught them by themselves. But in our translation
indeed it is a threatening, and thus it may be expounded (as De Dieu has noted)
most agreeably to the Hebrew text, He that steals is cut off on this side (
viz. of the flying roll) according to it ( i. e. according to the curse) and he
that swears is cut off on the other side according to it. The roll or book that
he speaks of, ver. 2. which contained a curse in it, threatened upon all Judea
(which was as the roll, longer then broad) was to fly abroad and spread it self
upon all the guilty persons. Now one side of the Book (says he) contains a
curse against all thieves, which shall certainly light upon them and the other
side of it against all false swearers, which shall also come upon them
according as is threatened. And therefore he goes on further to denounce Gods
judgments upon such persons, v. 4. and speaking of the woman that sat in the
midst of the Epaph, ver. 7. (by whom was shadowed the people of the land, whose
iniquities should be born withal but to a certain measure,) he says ver. 8.
this is (...) Wickedness, i. e. iniquity it self, the mother of all deceit,
thefts and perjuries: And for this he threatens again unto them another
expulsion and dispersion into another Babylon, as you may see in the following
part of the chapter. And afterward God having most plainly told them how the
case stood with their Fathers, and how angry he had been with them, chap. 8.2.
he says, that now he was returned to Zion, and would dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, and it should be a City of truth, etc. ver. 3. And he tells them
what great things he would do for them, and that as they had been a curse, so
now they should be a blessing, ver. 4, 5, etc. and v. 13. But then He adds that
these are the things they must do; Speak ye every one the truth to his
neighbor, execute the judgment of peace and truth in your gates; and let none
of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor; and love no false
oath: For all these are things that I hate, says the Lord, ver. 16, 17.

3. And if we look back to Haggai who prophesied but two years before these
words in the eighth of Zachary were spoken (one being in the second, the other
in the fourth year of Darius) he will tell us no better news of this people.
For he says, chap. 2. ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. That every thing that the people
did take in hand, was as unclean and polluted as that which was touched by one
defiled with a dead body, and that though they were an holy people to him, yet
that did not make the things that they meddled withal holy. Now if we compare
this passage with those that were before gathered out of Zachary, we shall
easily discern I think what the matter was that made God so offended with their
doings. At first they let the Temple of the Lord lie waste, and builded their
own houses after their return from captivity before they built it, though God
had given them a command to go about it. But of this neglect they were awakened
by these two Prophets, and by many judgments and sore afflictions mentioned,
Hag. 2.15, 16, 17. and Zach. 8.9, 10. And then they thought all was well,
because they obeyed Gods voice in this thing, and because he promised from that
day forward to bless them, Hag. 2.19. So the Temple were but carried on to
perfection, they thought no great care was due to other things, and so
continued in a world of wickedness, making their zeal for Temple-work eat up
all their love to justice and mercy.

4. If we should trace their footsteps further, we should soon find that when
the Temple was completed and finished, they were but little better. For
Malachy who concludes their story in the Old Testament (and is called by them
(...) the seal of the Prophets, because he was the last and shuts up all)
complaining of the iniquity both of Priest and people, sets down these sins as
famous among the rest, chap. 3.5. False swearing, oppression of the hireling in
his wages, of the widow and fatherless; and turning aside the stranger from
his right, all which they did without any fear of what would follow. And
particularly of the Priests, he tells us that they were partial in the Law,
chap. 2.9. i. e. they did not judge according to the merit of the cause, but
according to their love of the person. And of the Princes we are told by
Nehemiah, how heavily they oppressed the people, by exacting usury of them,
chap. 5. By which together with the dearth they became so poor, that it was the
cause (I believe) of their detaining the tithes from the Levites, chap. 13.10.
and that they were tempted to rob God him self as the Princes robbed them, Mal.
3.8. To which add the great violence that they all offered to their wives,
either putting of them quite away, (as some understand the place) or else
taking others to them (which was worse for their poor wives) and these the
daughters of a strange God, Mal. 2.11. This you know they had begun to do
presently after their return out of captivity, and upon the serious admonition
of Ezra repented of it; but it should seem that they fell into the same sin
again in after times, and that so universally, and so much to the injury of
their wives, that they caused the Altar of the Lord to be covered with tears,
with weeping and with crying out, insomuch that he regarded not their offerings
any more, etc. Mal. 2.13. i. e. their wives made such grievous complaints to
the Lord of the violence that was offered them (so it is called, ver. 16.) that
it caused him to despise all their gifts that they brought him; he looking more
at the others tears, then at all their sacrifices. And yet they have the front
to come and ask God wherefore he would not receive them, ver. 14. To which he
answers, that he must deal righteously though they would not, and he could not
but take notice how treacherously they had dealt with their wives, who as they
had been their companions merited greater kindness from them, and as they were
taken by Covenant and contract, they were in justice obliged to have dealt
better with them. And he proves that it must needs be a great offense, because
it was so contrary to Gods institution in marriage; for did not he make one,
and yet he had the residue of the spirit, etc. ver. 15. i. e. according as we
translate it Did not he make one wife only for Adam, whereas he having more the
same spirit that he breathed into her, could have made many, etc. Or if we
render it with others: Did not be who is one make it ( i. e. the covenant of
marriage) and he has abundance of spirit still to breath into our seed. And
wherefore did that one make that order that a man should cleave to his wife,
but that he might have a godly seed? and therefore take heed what you do in
putting away your wives, and taking others; for hereby you offend him that
breaths the spirit of life into us. Or if we take it as others interpret it,
their wickedness is still argued to be the greater, because they boasted that
they were the children of Abraham. Now Did that one ( i. e. the first of your
family) do so, of whose spirit we are the residue? and what did that one? he
sought a godly seed, he put not away Sarah though she was barren (which to you
would seem a just cause) nor matched with an Idolater, that he might have
issue. Or if we receive that rendering of the words which the learned De Dieu
prefers above all the rest, it argues them of great inhumanity, and that they
had not common good nature in them, which makes the sin still greater. No one
would do thus that had but any relics of the spirit of God in him, and
therefore much less they that seek a godly seed, as you pretend to do. You see
that he might well call this covering violence with his garment, ver. 16.
because it was such a wrong to those that by the Laws of God and nature
deserved better at their hands. To spread ones garment, or ones skirts over a
woman, is a phrase in holy writ for to marry her, Ruth 3.9. Ezekiel. 16.8. By
taking therefore of a strange woman into their society, which was engaged
before to another, they did as it were marry to violence, and contract a
relation with injustice. Or as the forenamed author thinks it should be
translated, Violence covered their garments, i. e. when as they ought still to
have cast their garments of love and protection over their wives violence and
wrong did cover those garments; their marriage was an act of injustice, and
their skirts which they spread over strangers, were all over stained with
cruelty, hard-heartedness and oppression.

5. And Zachary tells us by way of prophecy, what should be in after times
toward the end of this Nation and what manner of Rulers should be over the
people. He compares their Shepherds, i. e. Governors (as I have shown before)
unto young Lions, who do not use to protect but to devour the sheep, Zach.
11.3. And he calls the people the flock of slaughter, ver. 4. (whom he is bid
to instruct) either because they were to be destroyed by the armies of their
enemies or because they were a prey unto their Governors; According as it
follows, ver. 5. Their possessors slay them, and they hold themselves not
guilty. Yea to such a confidence were they arrived in these sins, that they
Bless God for the riches which they had got in this sort. They had some
devotion you see left, though no honesty nor goodness. God is entitled to all
wicked possessions and acquisitions, that he may make them good, and defend
them against all the clamors of men, and the suits of their own conscience. And
it seems the people were very bad also, for ver. 6. he threatens them that he
would have no more pity on them then their Rulers had, but let them destroy
one another by seditions, and at last deliver them all into the hands of the
King that oppressed them, who should be so far from taking any pastoral care of
them, that he should only slay and devour them, as you may read, v. ^6.

6. And some understand by that King the Roman Caesar to whom they made
themselves a prey by such sins as those I have been treating of. That long
Captivity which indures to this day, had its way prepared by their avarice and
cruelty, as those acquaint us upon whom the spirit of prophecy was again poured
forth. For our Lord coming and reproving the chief of that generation when he
lived, for devouring widows houses, for extortion, rapine and blood; for
covetousness and oppression, for being without natural affection, and the like
sins; while they made long prayers and pretended a great deal of sanctity and
religion: He declaring also that faith, judgment, mercy and the love of God
were more to be regarded then their strict observation of days, and the
multitude of sacrifices; They out of a great zeal for their religion which they
thought he did not speak honorably enough concerning, most shamefully put him
to death I believe they took themselves to be very religious persons, and were
zealous in what they did; only their zeal was not equally dispensed nor
conveyed alike through the whole body of duties that God commanded. Their heat
was like the flushing in men's faces, or the burning in their hands, which we do
not take to be an argument of a good temper; but rather a sign that there are
obstructions (as the ordinary language calls them) in the body, so that there
is not a free motion of the vital blood in all the parts. I mean, they spent so
much zeal in a few things, that they left no warmth of affection for other most
necessary duties. In those things their heat was staid and stopped, which made
them of an extraordinary high color, and to have the repute in the world of
very great Saints and most virtuous persons. Yea they themselves gazed so much
upon this flame that they took no notice how cold they were in matters of
common honesty, but they committed all iniquity, in a comfortable belief that
they were good men, and most beloved of God. Their great zeal for the Sabbath
and such like matters made them take themselves for pious and devout persons:
but the partiality and particularity of it (whereby it remained there confined)
made them really to be such as our Savior calls Hypocrites; which appellation
they took in such disdain, that they conspired his death, who would not let
such as they pass for godly men.

7. And are Christians to this day more reformed who have inherited their
promises? I wish I could say that we are as free from covetousness, rapine and
unmercifulness, as the Pharisees were from Sabbath-breaking and Idolatry. R. D.
Kimchi upon Hos. 2.19, 20. has confessed a great deal of that truth which I
have endeavored to illustrate, but I can only wish that the latter part of his
gloss were found as true as the former part has proved. He says those words
cannot have a complete sense till the time of the Messiah, and that God uses
the word betroth three times because of the 3. captivities after which God does
as it were marry them to himself; but in the days of the Messiah after a more
excellent manner then in former times. For when they came out of Egypt he did
not betroth them (...) for ever, as he says he will, ver. 19. And when they
came out of Babylon he did not betroth them in righteousness, judgment and
mercy, as he says he would, ver. 19. for we read, Ezra 9.2. that they took
strange wives, and they oppressed their Brethren likewise, etc. Therefore in
the days of the Messiah (which they still expect after this third captivity)
all this shall be done, when he will betroth his people in faithfulness, ver.
20. We have seen the truth of what he says concerning the time of their coming
out of Babylon, and that they did not love righteousness, judgment and mercy;
We also see the days of the Messiah, and God has married us Gentiles to
himself; O that we could see the Christian world full of justice and charity!
But alas! Christians deal falsely with God in his covenant, and they are not
thus espoused to him They would have God and Mammon at the same time in
marriage together. And they grieve the spirit of God as the Jews did their
lawful wives, by taking copartners with it into their love. I wish that this
truth did not shine as clear without any proof, as it does appear by the many
proofs I have alleged, that this was the state of Israel. And I need not
borrow more light from any other Scriptures to make it plainer then it is, that
these have been very often the wasting and destroying sins; because commonly
not observed in the midst of a blaze of religious duties which dazzle men's
eyes, and make these sins seem either none at all, or very little and
contemptible.

CAP. XIII.
1. The third General propounded, that these sins are of a most destructive
nature to Nations. 2. Proved from the captivity of Israel. 3. And from the the
first Captivity of Judah 4. The injustice of Rulers very fatal to them, and
why. 5. The second captivity of Judah imputed to the same cause. 6. Tire split
on the same rock. 7. Ninive likewise and Babylon. 8. With many other Nations
mentioned in the first and second chapters of Amos. 9. And in many other
places. 10. This confirmed from an observation among the wise men of the
Hebrews. 11. And from the history of the last Greek Empire; where 10. Causes
are given of its destruction by the Turks.

1. AND this leads me to the third thing that I am to make proof of, viz. That
these are sins which pull down ruin and destruction upon a Nation, and are often
the chiefest cause of it. The Poet never spoke a truer word then when he said,
Pindar.
(...) ( i. e. as the Scholiast well notes (...)) Justice is an high wall;
there is no such tall and impregnable bulwark, such a safe defense to a Nation,
as to deal uprightly and honestly one with another, and with all their
neighbors. And then I am sure a Nation is like to be laid waste when there is
a breach made in this wall for oppression, violence and wrong to enter in. I
have already noted so many passages out of the Prophets that make these sins
the cause of their desolation and being carried captive out of their land, that
I may presume the Reader is sufficiently convinced of it: But that I may leave
no room for doubting and give more abundant satisfaction in this particular, I
shall distinctly by these steps confirm him in that belief.

2. And first let it be observed that the captivity of Israel or the ten Tribes
is in great part charged upon the account of these sins. This will be evident
to him that can take the pains to consult these places in the Prophet Amos,
whose vision was concerning that people, chap 2.6, 7, 8, and chap. 3. v 8, 9,
10, 11, 14 in which place he speaks as if he destroyed them for these sins, but
would reckon with them also for their Idolatrous worship at the same time. Read
also, chap. 4.1, 2, 3. chap. 5.7, 10, 11, 12, 16. and chap 8. from the fourth
verse to the end of the tenth, to which add chap. 6.3, 7. and Hosea 4.1, 2, 3.

3. Let it be observed in the second place, that the captivity of Judah both
first and last is most manifestly ascribed to the same sins which even in their
reformations they spared from being destroyed. For the causes of their first
captivity I must again put the Reader to the pains of considering these places
in the Prophets, which are too large to transcribe, Mic. 2.1, 2, 3. Mic. 3.12.
Isa. 10.1, 2, 3. Isa. 30.12, 13, 14. and Isa. 57.^7. where God says, that for
the iniquity of his covetousness he was wroth, etc. So unjust indeed they were,
that they hated all good men, and cared not whether there was one of them left
in the world, ver. 1. But especially consider, Isa. 29.2. which has been
explained before ( chap. 6.) to signify that the people of Jerusalem should be
slaughtered just as their sacrifices wherein they trusted for salvation were at
the Altar. Now if you look into ver. 21. you will see what their sins were;
unjust dealing, and laying hold of every occasion to ruin their neighbor, and
contriving ways to entrap him. And it is remarkable that such as their sin
was, such was their punishment. As they were unsatiable in their covetousness
and thirst after wealth, so were their enemies unsatiable in their appetite to
devour them. For he says v. 7, 8. that their enemies shall be as an hungry man
that thinks his belly is full in a dream, but awakes and finds his stomach to
be sharp let by reason of emptiness. They had a kind of dog-like appetite; all
their cruelties wherewith one would have thought their anger would have been
satisfied, being but like a dream in comparison of those that were behind. As
their thirst of unjust gain still used to increase; and the more they had the
more they desired to have: so was it with their enemies thirst after their
blood; one draught that might be thought enough to quench it was but a
preparation for a larger, and made them more greedy of it. Read likewise Jer
5.25, 26, 27, 28, 29 and Jer 7.28, 29 where after he had said, Truth is
perished and cut off from their mouth, it follows, Cut off thine hair O
Jerusalem, and cast it away, etc. i. e. he proclaims a captivity which should
be a cause of grievous mourning and lamentation to them. And so Jer. 21.12, 13.
He calls for speedy execution of judgment, or else his anger should break
forth like fire against them, and though mount Sion was strong as a rock, yet
they must not think that it should be able to defend them without justice,
which (as I said) is a rampart stronger then a wall of rocks and mountains.

4. And let me here before I proceed further, take notice how angry God was
with the injustice of their Kings and Governors, and destroyed them for it.
Ezekiel compares their two Kings Jehojakim and Jehojachin to two young Lions
who did devour and tear the people in pieces, chap. 9.3, 6 and therefore he
takes up a lamentation over them, ver. 1. and says that they were destroyed
just as they used to do wild beasts which they took in pits made for that
purpose. The one of them was taken by the King of Egypt, ver. 4. and the other
by the King of Babylon, ver. 9. that they might no more catch any prey upon the
mountains of Israel. And hereby the strength and power of that Nation was much
impaired, there being no strong rod to be a scepter to rule, v. 14. as shall
further appear in the next observation. It is such a monstrous thing for those
who are the Conservators of right and justice to transgress it, that God cannot
but punish such misdemeanors, he being the supreme moderator of all, who will
see that right take place. They are Gods here below, and should act his part
among men, which if they do not, it belongs properly to him to chastise them,
and turn them out of their office. And he will do it, because they commit sins
so contrary to the end of their institution, and so disagreeing to the nature
and being of the office they bear. So strange and monstrous a thing it is for
Rulers to violate justice, that the son of Sirach says, Eccles. 20.4. it is
like the lust of an Eunuch to deflour a virgin, i. e. not only a treacherous
but a most unnatural thing. Justice is ordinarily compared by all Authors to a
virgin; and therefore (1) It must be kept pure, chaste and uncorrupted; and (2)
for that end it is committed to the charge of Judges and other officers, as
Virgins in the Eastern countries used to be entrusted to Eunuchs who waited
upon them; but then (3) These Judges and Rulers must be as far from corrupting
justice as an Eunuch is from vitiating of a Virgin; or (4) If they do
construprare justitiam (as Tertullians phrase is) commit a rape upon right and
justice, it cannot but be looked upon as a strange act of violence. For as God
and nature forbid such a force by an Eunuch, so do God and man forbid it in a
King or a Judge. And (5) If they prove guilty of such an unnatural sin, they
shall endure the punishment that such wretched persons were condemned unto; God
will not spare them above all other men. To this purpose Delrio on that place,
notes out of Jansenius and others.

5. And now for the second captivity of Judah, we shall soon see to what cause
it was to be imputed. Ezekiel tells us in the 17th chapter of his prophecy
thar Nebuchadnezzar like a great Eagle had carried away to his own country the
highest branch of the Cedar in Lebanon, i. e. Jeconiah the King of Judah, who
was first carried captive by him, v. 3. And this Eagle only left a little seed
which was Zedekiah, whose Kingdom could not grow any stronger or higher then a
Vine, because overtopped and oppressed by the Chaldaeans who cast a dark and
cold shadow upon it, ver. 5, 6. Now Zedekiah took an oath to be true to the
King of Babylon who had planted him in the Kingdom, as you may see ver. 13, 14.
But he hoping to rise to a greater strength and talness then the stature of a
Vine, and beholding another Eagle (which was the King of Egypt) under whose
protection he imagined that he might spread and dilate himself; we read v. 7,
8, 15. that this Vine inclined her branches, and shot her roots toward him
that he might water it and make it grow great by helping it from the oppression
of the Chaldeans. But for this falseness and breach of Covenant God was no less
angry then Nebuchadnezzar, and threatens to pull it up by the roots, and make
every leaf of it wither, v. 9. i. e. utterly destroy the Kingdom of Judah, and
to leave none of them to bear rule in the land, as you may read from the 15th
to the end of the one and twentieth ver. where you may see the sin that he
denounces this judgment upon, is breach of promise, and much more violation of
his eath and covenant, which he took so hainously that it is repeated five
times as the cause of their ruin, ver. 15, 16, 18, 19, 20. And God calls it
not only Nebuchadnezzars oath, ver. 16. but his own oath which was despised,
ver. 19. And it is again repeated, Ezekiel. 21.23. as a thing that God could not
forget but for which he brought the King of Babylon against them. And if you
compare Hos. 10.4. with 2 Kings 17.4. you will find that this piece of
unjustice in swearing falsely and breaking covenants, was a sin that brought
Israel also to ruin. There is but one place more that I shall note, which
concerns this captivity of Judah, and it is Jer. 34. Where the Prophet calls
upon them to let the Bondmen of the Hebrew Nation go free according to the Law
in that behalf. And they promised by a solemn covenant that they would yield
obedience; but afterward became doubly guilty by breaking their promise, and
keeping their Brethren still in slavery. Now see what God threatens because of
this oppression and transgression of their covenant, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, etc.
No less then a total extirpation of them out of their land, if not out of the
land of the living by the sword, pestilence and famine. And to this I am apt to
think that passage relates which we meet withal in the very beginning of
Jeremy's lamentations, Judah is gone into captivlty, because of affliction, and
because of great servitude, chap. 1.3.

6. And now if any one has a list to look into the state of other Nations
mentioned in the Scripture story besides these, he will find the destruction of
them all attributed to the fatal influence that these sins had upon them. Tire
a neighbor country, called the total sum of all beauty (Ezekiel. 28.12.) that
walked in the midst of the stones of fire, (v. 14.) i. e. of precious stones
and Jewels that sparkled on every side of her; and that was like an Angel for
glory and bravery, and as a Sanctuary for strength and safety ( v. 16.18.) this
famous and perfect City corrupted her self by violence, covetousness, deceit in
her traffic which she anciently had abhorred, and then God brought a fire to
devour her, ver. 15, 16, 18, 19. She flourished you there read after a
wonderful manner till iniquity was found in her, and then (as it is chap.
26.14.) she became like the top of a rock, a place to spread nets upon. And
thus she lay for seventy years as Jerusalem did; according as Isaiah tells us,
chap. 23.17. by whom you must interpret those words in Ezekiel, that she should
be built no more.

7. And least you should think that these things concerned only Judah and some
of her next door neighbors who might have some report of their Laws; but did
not bode so sadly to other more remote Nations where these sins are found; Take
further into your consideration what God says of Ninive, which City had been a
great hammer or maul in the times of the Assyrian Kings unto Judea and other
countries. And you find that these sins beat her to dust, and slew those
Lion-like Kings though they filled their holes with prey, and their dens with
ravine, and thought to bring up their whelps, i. e. their sons to the same
trade of devouring, Nahum. 2.11, 12, 13. and Nahum 3.1, 2, etc. God sent one of
those Lions, (viz. Senacherib) against the Hypocritical Nation, that I have
been describing, and gave him charge to take the spoil and the prey of it, Isa.
10.56. But he thought of nothing but destroying and cutting off Nations not a
few, ver. 7, etc. and therefore God threatens to destroy him utterly, and to
take off his burdens and yoke from his peoples neck, v. 26, 27. This he did by
the hand of the Chaldaeans who broke the Assyrian Empire in pieces, but yet
succeeded them in cruelty, and ravening, covetousness and unmercifulness,
taking all for fish that came to their net, according as the Kings of Nineve
did, Hab. 1.15. and therefore they drunk of the same cup of his indignation, as
you may read, Isa. 13.19, 20, etc. and Isa. 14.3, 4, 5, 6. where he notes the
hard bondage wherewith he made the conquered to serve, and their oppression,
and ruling the Nations in anger, as causes of their destruction. To which may
be added that most evident place, Isa. 47.56. where he says plainly that
cruelty and oppression toward those whom she had overcome, brought the Lady and
Mistress of the world to sit down in the dust in perpetual silence and
darkness. I will refer you but to one place more which treats most largely of
the Chaldaeans ruin, and that is Habakk. 2. from the fifth verse to the 18th
which whosoever reads must cast his eyes very carelessly upon it, who does not
see that unsatiable covetousness, cruelty, bloodiness, violence, spoiling and
such like sins, are made to have a greater hand then their Idols in reaching
the cup of the Lords right hand unto them, and making them so drunken and full
gorged, that shameful spewing was upon all their glory. And take notice also
that one reason why this mischief was not prevented, and this destruction came
upon them while they thought not of it, was the same with that which we met
withal in the case of Judah. viz. The base flattering humor of their
Soothsayers, the men-pleasing prophesies of such Diviners and watchmen as they
had (though pitiful ones they were) who had told them lies, just as the
watchmen of Gods people had done to them: which the latter part of that Isa.
47. does give us reason to take for a truth.

8. How long should I make this discourse if I should multiply more particulars
from Damascus, Gaza, Edom, Ammon and all the rest mentioned together with
Israel in the first and second chapters of Amos, who were all threatened for
their oppression and cruelty to be punished without any mercy? He says there
that for 3. yea for 4. transgressions, i. e. for a great many he would reckon
with them, but he instances only in this one of cruelty, as if this was the
principal, and that which excelled all the rest in provocation. And I will only
desire you to consider as you read those chapters, whether you can refuse to
assent to this as a true observation, that one great destroying (if not the
chiefest) sin of all those Nations, was this piece of unmercifulness, their
cruel dealing with those whom they had conquered, and got into their power. I
am sure that Edoms four transgressions are so near of kin to this, that we can
scarce make them any more then four degrees of this one sin, viz. want of
kindness, compassion and mercy to those whom it was natural for him to pity,
especially when he had the better of them, Amos 1.11. He did pursue his Brother
with the sword; and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually,
and he kept his wrath for ever.

9. And I think there is another whole chapter, which renders no other cause of
the perishing of those Amonites, Moabites, Edomites and Philistines also, but
this, That they either rejoiced and clapped their hands at the ruin of their
neighbor Judah, or else with an implacable and irreconcilable hatred
prosecuted their victories over them intending their total deletion and final
destruction, Eze. 25. If any cause is to be added, it must be one of the same
nature, which was, that they made use of the victories of others, See Joel 3.19.
to the revengeing themselves, and they killed those that fled for refuge to
them. For so the Edomites did, as you may see, Obad. 14. and Jer. 49.2. where
the Prophet tells us that they seized on their land, and took themselves to be
the heirs of Judah, whom they looked on as their younger brethren. And
concerning both their cruelty and their covetousness in seizing on their land,
you may see more in Ezekiel. 35.5.10. for which they are there sorely threatened,
ver. 11, 12. But as I said, I will not make a volume by prolonging this
discourse till a particular narrative be given you of all these things. Nor
will I any more then suggest to your meditation, (1) how that Ammon is again
threatened for insulting upon the neck of the slain, i. e. of a fallen and feeble
enemy, Ezekiel. 21.9. And (2) Pharaoh for deceiving and cozening the expectation
of Israel who leaned upon his promise, Ezekiel. 29.6, 7. And (3) the Israelites
themselves, for slaying their brethren of Judah with rage that reached up to
heaven, and intending without any pity, to make them their bondmen, 2 Chronicles.
28.9, 10. And (4) how in general it is denounced, that the robbery of the
wicked shall destroy them, because they refuse to do Judgment, etc. Prove.
21.7.15. And (5) how that God has styled himself the avenger of the poor and
needy, and he that will plead the cause of those that have no helper; that are
crushed by the mighty, neither having power to right themselves, nor the favor
of others to do them right; And (6) that these are such unnatural sins, and so
contrary to all the dealings of God with men, (who is merciful, kind, and
compassionate as well as just and righteous) that he will not let them go
unpunished: especially in the rulers whose office it is, to see right, equity,
and mercy take place among men. And (7) that honest heathens note it as an
infamous thing to use captives either cruelly or ignominiously; or to do
unjustly, and hardly with those who are brought under our power; especially if
there be any nearness of one to the other, as he that will may see by many
instances in Aelians Var. hist. L. 6. Cap. 1. where he condemns the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians, etc. for that when they had a gale of prosperity
breathing on them, (...) they did not bear it moderately, and use it with a
humble mind, but were, (...), and behaved themselves in an injurious
contumelious manner toward those who were shipwrackt in the storm.

10. That God is the avenger of all such; the Jews you have seen, are a notable
example, though they stood in a nearer relation to him then the rest of the
world. And by often woeful experience, it seems some of them grew so sensible of
it, that there is a saying upon record of some wise men among them to this
sense. When Gods ears are shut against all men's prayers, he will hear the cry
of the poor, needy, and oppressed. Quando vastata fuit domus sanctuarij, omnes
portae clausae fuerunt, ((...)) excepta porta oppressionis: i. e. when the
Temple was destroyed, there was no gate open for the prayers and petitions of
any to enter, but only the gate for the petitions of the oppressed, which they
say is never shut. V. Lex. Talmud. Vocah. (...).
This they prove (as Buxtorf has noted) out of Amos 7.7. which they render
thus, And he showed me, and behold the Lord stood (...) upon the wall of
defraudation or oppression ( i. e. I suppose of Samaria or Jerusalem, Cities
full of violence) and in his hand were defraudations, i. e. prayers against
defrauders, petitions of those who complained of oppression, and unjust
dealing, of which we have heard they were extremely guilty. And then God says
ver. 8. that though he had spared them twice upon the petition of Amos ( ver.
3.6.) yet now that these petitions of the poor came to him, he would not again
pass by them any more. And seeing the word (...) is used in this place only,
they have some color for this interpretation, and I conceive they took the
signification of it from a word that is of near sound, and differs but in a
letter, viz. (...) which denotes sighing and groaning, which oppression you
know causes. Even in Israel you see (if this interpretation be true) where they
had fallen from God, he would not exclude the suits of such persons, but take
their request into his hands, and let them have a favorable answer. See
Ecclesiast. 21.5. and 35. ver. 13, 14, 15, 17. etc. in the former of which
places there are these remarkable words, A prayer out of a poor man's mouth
reaches unto the ears of God, and his judgment comes speedily. But I am not
much concerned to dispute the truth of this gloss, seeing the thing it self
which it asserts, is otherwise put out of all doubt; and this very Prophet Amos
presently after says (as we noted before) that these are such works as God
cannot forget to punish, Chap 8.7. and there is such particular notice taken
also of the shedding innocent blood, as an iniquity that he will not pardon. 1
Kings 24.3, 4 And therefore leaving this to obtain what credit it can get, with
those that are better skilled in that language then my self, I shall conclude
this chapter with a brief relation of those causes which are assigned by the
Greek historians, of the destruction of their Empire, and delivery of them unto
the power of the Turks.

11. And I shall go no further then Mart. V. Page 55.
Crusius his notes upon that political history of Constantinople which he set
forth, where he observes these causes as most notorious amongst others, (1) the
Injustice and Oppression of their Emperors, as he instances in Michael
Parapinatius, Anno 1075. and Alexius Comnenus, Anno 1084. who thought himself
not to be (...), but (...), not the Father (as we speak) but the Lord of the
common wealth. He there notes several unjust acts of his, which gave his people
such discontent, (...).
that when the Turks came into Asia, many chused rather to submit to them, then
bear the oppression of the Emperor any longer. So Choniates says in his life,
whose words are these, The cruel and inhumane Barbarians seemed to be fuller of
compassion, kindness and humanity then our selves. (2) He takes notice of the
Idleness and voluptuousness of the same Princes (which commonly is fain to
maintain it self by rapine and violence) from whence it came to pass, that when
the Turks broke in with their forces, they were more fit to sit and spin with
girls at home, then take their arms into their hands and fight with enemies in
the field, as the same Choniates says. (3.) The perversity and covetousness of
those that chose the Emperor, who minded only their own profit, and made no
reckoning of a valiant and ancient Roman spirit; So that an infant (as the same
author speaks) in his swaddling bands, was as good as any else to be promoted,
if it would promote their own private designs. (4.) Civil-wars and the
ambitions of great men, which made them sometime fall off from the Emperors:
(5) the malice of some men against their private enemies, made them invite the
Turks to come and take their revenge; who were easily allured by the goodness
and riches of the country to embrace such motions. (6) Covetousness and the
love of riches, which made them that they would not pay garrison soldiers, and
so the places were quit The very navy was neglected through parsimony, and so
the Islands were lost. And he or some other observes that the Citizens in the
last siege would not give a supply of necessary charges for the defense of the
City, complaining of their poverty, when as there were vast treasures found in
their houses when it was taken. (7) The insolences and wrongs that the
soldiers were luffered to offer to their friends; which made the Historian
say, that they were not like to atchieve any thing who went to the war loaded
with curses and tears for their Viaticum in their march. (8.) Treachery and
perfidiousness to their enemies; for they kept not faith with the Turks, which
much incensed their anger against them. (9) A general neglect of Government, in
so much that he says, no care was taken to punish vice; ancient Fabrics fell
to the ground, the coin was adulterated, and false money stamped, and a great
looseness there was in their apparel, which one thing, he says, wise men looked
upon to fignifie (...), the alteration of the Government, and dissolution of
the Kingdom. I may add the (10th) though not so near to my present subject, and
that was the dissentions and differences that were among other Christians, so
that they could not give them relief. But how should such differences have
been, and still remain in the world, if there were that love to mercy, kindness
and justice that God by his Prophets and his son called for? Let all Christians
consider how they are concerned in these things, and let them learn both by
ancient and later stories of indubitable credit, to lay aside their angry
passions, and their covetous affections, or else they will be their undoing.
Man cannot, God will not help it.

CAP. XIV.
1. The fourth general head, That if a Nation expect settlement, it must
establish justice and mercy. 2. God is desirous of the peace and quiet of the
world. 3. But it must be on those conditions, as is proved from what was said
to them before the captivity. 4. And from the words of the Prophets, after
their return out of it. 5. From many other places of Scripture, with which a
conclusion is put to the discourse begun, chap. 9.

1. ANd now I shall descend to the fourth and last thing which I am engaged to
treat of; That where peace, settlement and safety is expected by any Nation,
they are to have a great care to see whether they be guilty of such things as
these, and if they be, deeply to be humbled, and speedily to reform. This
commands our regard with the greater authority, because it has all the former
discourses speaking in its behalf. But nothing should more awaken us to mind
it than this consideration, that many cozened themselves by a ready performance
of some religious duties, into a most dangerous security and vain confidence in
God, whilst by reason of these sins (which are accounted by such persons but
small petty matters in compare with their glistering piety) they have been
working their own ruin. And I think no Nation is more concerned in it than
this wherein we live, because God has begun, shall I say, to smite us, and lay
us low, or has almost laid our honor in the dust; to this land therefore I
may well use the Prophet Isaiahs words, and say, as it is Isa. 28.22. Now be ye
not mockers, lest your bands be made strong. For I have heard from the Lord God
of hosts a consumption even determined upon the whole earth, I mean, let us not
make light of all Gods admonitions and messages that he sends to us, lest we be
bound with such iron chains of affliction as we shall never be able to shake
off; for I have assurance from the Word of God in the mouth of his Prophets,
that God will make an utter end, as he has begun, if we will not put away the
evil of our doings.

2. God indeed does really desire the peace and quiet of Nations, and he loves
not to afflict them, but when there is great need; which should make us reform
more speedily when he chastises us, because his chastisements are an indication
of great distempers upon us. He does not always use the same courses to make
us good, but he changes his method as he sees most useful for us. As the
husbandman sometimes plows and breaks the clods, and again at other seasons
sows his seed (according as it follows in Isa. 28.24, 25.) so does God
sometimes cut and break us by afflictions, and sometimes instruct us and teach
us by his Word that he sows among us. And as the Husbandman does not draw his
Cart wheel over the smaller grains, as he does over his Wheat, but beats the
Fitches and Cummin out with a rod or a switch: Even so does God in his
husbandry upon men's souls; he sometimes afflicts more gently and lightly, and
at other times more sharply and heavily, according as the condition of his
patients require, v. 27. And as the same husbandman will not be ever threshing
his Wheat, or breaking it with his wheel, or stamping upon it with his horses
hoof, but only so long till he has separated it from the chaff, v. 28. so does
God likewise afflict and beat us, only so long till he has loosened us from
our sins wherein we were settled, as the Corn in the ears, and then he ceases.
God is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, and he oft-times shakes
Nations very sorely, but it is that they may repent and be divided from their
sins, as the Wheat by winnowing from the chaff, and then he will settle them
more firmly again, and lay them up safely, as the Wheat is reposited in the
granary after all its knocks and agitations.

3. But then these things which have exercised my pen so long, must (as I said)
be carefully repented of and amended. For first they were proposed to this
people before their captivity as matters to be reformed, if they hoped for any
favor from God; as you may read in Hosea, chap. 10.12. and chap. 12.6. and
especially in Amos his words to Israel, who had been much wasted and spoiled
(chap. 4.) from the seventh verse of the fifth chapter, to the sixteenth, which
is again repeated with abundance of earnestness, ver. 21, 22, 23, 24. to this
sense, Do not make a noise in mine ears with good words and flattering
devotions; away with these offerings and sacrifices in which you are so
forward, but let me see judgment and righteousness like a mighty torrent carry
all before it. And to what they say relating to Israel, the Prophets Isaiah and
Jeremiah consent, when they speak concerning Judah. This you may understand, if
you will be at no more labor, but to cast your eyes on Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, 19,
20. Isa. 58.8, 9, 10, etc. and Isa. 33.14, 15, 16, etc. in which last place you
may observe, that when the sinners in Sion saw the great destruction that God
had made by the Army of Senacherib (of which he had been speaking before) those
hypocrites began to be surprised with fear, lest the same burning should be
made among them, ver. 14. Now the Prophet tells them how to avoid it in the
following verses, and says ver. 17. that if they did do as he advised them,
they should see their King in his beauty, and God would enlarge their
territories, and they should be a terror to all their enemies, and they should
see no Assyrians among them any more, but Jerusalem should stand for ever, and
be like a Land of rivers, yet without any enemy to annoy it, ver. 17, 18, 19,
20, etc. And so you may read in Jer. 7.5, 6, 7. and Jer. 22.2, 3, 4, 5. where
he says, that if they would execute judgment and righteousness indeed, etc.
then Kings should still sit upon the throne of David. Which very thing they
might have learnt from the experience of their Fathers, ver. 15, 16, 17.
concerning one of whom it is there said, That he judged the cause of the poor
and needy, and then it was well with him. And was not this to know me says the
Lord? Yes, this is the business, though you would fain make the world believe
that you know God, while you are covetous, unjust, unmerciful, bloody, cruel,
and would persuade your selves that you are a Religious people, and shall be in
safety; yet there is no such matter; do not deceive your selves; It went well
with your Fathers then only when they did execute judgment and justice, and
then they truly had the knowledge of God. Those words indeed are spoken of a
particular person (but concerned all the Nation, as I have applied them) and
that was Josiah, a good Prince, whose son Shallum it seems stepped over his
brothers head to the Crown (for he was the youngest, 1 Chronicles. 3.16.) and
therefore is threatened by God to be carried away, and they are bid to weep for
him, more then for Josiah who was dead, ver. 10, 11. And then for the next
King, who was Jehojakim, he minded only his own greatness, and built him a fine
house by unrighteousness, raising unreasonable taxes, or otherwise oppressing
his subjects, and defrauding laborers of their wages, ver. 13, 14, 15. and
therefore God threatens him, that he shall be buried with the burial of an Ass,
none lamenting for him, his Nobles not bewailing him with Ah my Brother, nor
the people or strangers with Ah Lord, or ah his glory.

4. I need not add, that as without these things they could not be continued in
the good land that God gave them; so there was no hopes of any long settlement
after they were returned from Babylons slavery, unless they did carefully
observe them: For the Prophet Zachary (in the next chapter to that, at which
this discourse began) does plainly tell them, as has been already said that
they must execute judgment, and speak truth, and not so much as harber any
evil devises and contrivances against one another in their hearts, Chap. 8.16,
17. Without these their Feasts and days of rejoicing (which came in stead of
their mournful meetings, ver. 18, 19.) would do no more to keep the heavens
clear and shining upon them, then their Fasts and sorrowful days could do
before, to disperse those black clouds that had gathered about them. And
therefore when God tells of such joyful times, he adds this memento again.
That they should love truth and peace. As one of the Jews says concerning a
Fast, that Merces jejunij est Eleemosyna, the best thing in it, and that which
crowns it, is an act of mercy; the same may we say of their Feasts, which were
all of them like the Athenian (...) in memory of some burden that God had
shaken off from their shoulders; and therefore did teach them how kind-hearted
they should be to others; and particularly you know, that as every seventh day
they were to let their servants rest; so in every seventh year they were to
release them from their service, and to forgive all their creditors who were
not able to pay them. And observe these three things that are said (in the 15.
Deuteronomy.) about this release, which might have taught them how far they ought to
have been from all covetousness and oppression, if they expected God should be
good to them. First, if any poor man came a little before that year to borrow
money of his neighbor, he was not to forbear to lend him as much as he needed,
out of a wicked thought that the time was near, after which he could never
recover it of him, ver. 7, 8, 9. And secondly, they were not to send away their
servants empty when they did release them, but to furnish them liberally with
provisions, as God did them when he brought them out of Egypt, ver. 12, 13, 14,
15. And thirdly, that this is made the condition of their having prosperity, v.
10. Because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto. According as he says
concerning that great time of joy, which was after seven times seven years, and
when even the servant, whose ear was bored, went free; that by keeping these
statutes, they should dwell in the land in safety.

5. Psalm. 11.7.
For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, and his countenance does behold
the upright. Psalm. 5.12.
He will bless the righteous, and compass him with favor as with a shield,
Psalm. 18.25.
with the merciful he will show himself merciful: with an upright man he will
show himself upright. Isa. 32.7, 8.
The instruments of the Churl are evil, he devises wicked devises to destroy
the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaks right; but the liberal
devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand. When judgment
shall dwell in the wilderness, Ib. v. 16, 17, 18.
and righteousness remain in the fruitful field; Then the work of righteousness
shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for
ever. And his people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting-places. To the further attesting of which
truth, I might remember the Reader how that Moab her self was directed to
exercise justice, and also to show mercy toward those Jews that should fly to
them for refuge; and that because they were proud, and would not hearken to
such good counsel, God threatens to shake their foundations, which else might
have been settled. Isa. 16.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. where he bids them pay their
tribute as they were wont, though Judah was brought low by the Assyrian Kings;
and also to let them have a dwelling among them who were expelled by their
enemies from their own country. And I might call to his mind also that counsel
which Daniel gave to Nebuchadnezar as the only means (if there were any left)
of lengthening out his tranquillity, viz. to break off his sins by
righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.27. But
the thing is so clear already, that he who has not eyes to see it in this
broad light, will not be convinced of it by all the labor that I can use. And
therefore I shall here put an end to those four things which I propounded to be
handled, leaving every man to judge of the truth of these observations.

CAP. XV.
1. The reason why I make not a particular application of all that has been
said to the case of our Nation. 2. Which others may do better then I can, and
more to the general good; great need they should, because there is great reason
to suspect us guilty of these sins. 3. Because so many unjust and unmerciful
actions have been committed. 4. Every man therefore must search into himself.
5. The Rulers especially are herein concerned, for sundry reasons.

1. IT may now be expected that I should search into the state of this sinful
Nation wherein we live, and consider whether our case do not parallel that
which I have now described. But I being one of the meanest of those spiritual
Physicians that are in it, and but of small practice and little experience, do
not conceive my self sufficient to make a full discovery of the temper and
constitution of it. Healthy I am sure it is not, but desperately sick and like
to die, unless Gods infinite mercy and our care prevent: But whether it labor
of this disease more then any other, which was the plague of the Jewish state,
I have not acquaintance enough with particular persons to affirm. But yet I am
not so blind, as not to see what the actions of some men professing Religion
have been among us, at whose disease, without coming near them to feel their
pulse, an ordinary skill may more then conjecture. And therefore I cannot but
suspect that a great many are sick of the same, though I do not know them; and
that their zeal and good affection to some duties of piety, is but their
disease and not a good habit of their souls.

2. This jealousy made me to take this pains, and to touch this sore something
sharply in many passages of this discourse. And let me entreat those that are
of greater skill and larger observation; that have had more to do in the world
then my years and obscurity would permit me, and whose books are like to come
into more hands; let them I say make a more exact inquiry into the state of
this nation, and when they have passed a judgment upon its proper distemper,
tell all the people of it as plainly as they can, the danger in which they lie,
of being made the people of his wrath. For though I dare not take upon me to be
as one of the old Prophets, and to say that the nation is generally guilty of
all these sins; yet thus much I have more then said, that as they were the
ruin of Israel and Judah, so will they bring down Gods vengeance on our heads
if they be found to reign among us, unless we unfeignedly forsake them. And
this I shall further say, that I very much fear by what I have observed of
some, that if a Prophet should now arise among us, or in other parts of the
Christian, yea the Reformed world; he would thunder out against us the same
words that I have cited out of the book of God. He would tell us how little
difference men make of right and wrong, that they invade one another rights
and properties, wallow in blood and cruelty, etc. and yet cry up the purity of
Religion, the merits of Christ Jesus, and such like things, with as loud a
voice as they in the Prophet did the Temple of the Lord. And though men talk
much of separating themselves from the world, yet it is a great doubt with me
whether He would have any better language for those who are double-refined from
Popery, and have reformed even the reformation.

3. For sad it is to think what horrid things have been done among us, under
the glorious name of Christ Jesus. It is but a small thing to say that men have
winnowed with every wind, and gone in every way (as it is Eccles. 5.9.) or that
they have taken all ways of getting riches, and become any ones creature to
become great; or that they have broken the Laws and Sanctions of the place
where they live to make them serve their ends, with such like things: For
rapine and oppression, cruelty and bloodshed, falsness and perjury, and
whatsoever the covetousness or ambition of men would put them upon, have been
blanched and whited over with the most specious and fair names of Religion, and
the honor of God. And one cannot choose but have a fear that this infection
has spread far and near in the Nation, seeing it has been almost an
honorable thing to wrong an enemy, and seeing men have had so many rich and
inviting occasions (which they call providence) to do against known Laws and
principles of Conscience. Who can then hold his peace from speaking of these
things? how can I forbear to wish that I had a voice as loud as Stentor, or
like that of Mars in Homer, that I might make these things that I have said to
ring in the ears of the people of this Land! Though you exalt your selves as
the Eagle in high flown devotions; and though you build your nest in the stars,
and talk of glorious illuminations, though you think you dwell in the rock, and
shall hide your selves in Christ Jesus, yet from thence will these sins bring
you down, and shame shall cover you. I have the word of the righteous Lord for
what I say, and I the testimony of all ages, and mine own eyes have seen those
things done which I verily thought would be the ruin of the Actors of them,
and so they have proved.

4. Let every man therefore enter into his own heart, and consider whether
there be any violence in his hands when he lifts them up in supplications to
heaven; any of the blood of the poor and oppressed running about his fingers
when he lays hold of Gods mercy; any unjust acquisitions that he is conscious
of, when he devotes any thing to his service. If these things be not found
among us, we may have hopes that God will not make us a desolation; but if they
be, we ought deeply to be humbled for our hypocritical fastings, prayers and
humiliations; and for that whilst we would needs lean upon God, and cry the
Temple of the Lord, and called for the building up of Sion, we have not minded
so much as matters of common justice, equity and mercy between a man and his
neighbor. And we may fear that the Lord will make an utter end of us, unless
we do with all speed amend our ways and doings. For the Hypocritical Nation is
the people of. Gods wrath, Isa. 10.6. And he will be avenged of such enemies,
and ease himself of his adversaries, Isa. 1.24. When he goes into his vineyard
(as it is, Isa. 5.7.) and looks for judgment, but behold oppression, and for
righteousness, but behold a cry; when men are come to that pass, that they take
the matters of Justice but for a trifling business, and hope that the change of
so small a thing as a letter, the placing of (...), in the stead of (...), and
of (...) in the room of (...) will make no great change in Gods affection to
his people, and be accounted but a petty oversight; Then immediately comes out
a woe in the following verse; and a loud asseveration, that many houses shall
be desolate, even great and fair without an inhabitant, ver. 8, 9. and see ver.
20. unto 25.

5. If I may be allowed to say any more, it shall be only this, that the Rulers
of the land must carefully and impartially inquire into themselves about these
matters. For first they are more then others concerned in them, as many of
those places which I have alleged will tell him that reads them; and (2) They
have greater power and temptations to do these things then most of the people;
and (3) They raise these sins nearer to the height of the prophetical
expressions, then the ordinary sort of men can do (in regard of whom many of
those phrases that I have cited must be interpreted with some diminution and
abatement) and (4) God gave a particular command concerning the Kings of
Israel, V. Schickarti jus reg. Hebr. cap. 3. Theor. 11.
that they should not multiply silver or gold ( Deuteronomy. 17.17.) i. e. private
riches they should not strive to gather into their Coffers; for this he knew
would make them oppress his people; and likewise that they should not lift up
their heart above their Brethren (v. 20.) i. e. be proud and despisers of their
subjects, for this would make them unmercifull and void of pity toward them.
And (5) a Prince is called in the holy language by a name, ( viz. (...)) which
teaches him to be like that Ptolomy who for his good deeds was called (...) a
Benefactor, one that does good to all, but harms none of his Subjects. And (6)
they cause the People to err, if they be bad, as it is Isa. 9.16 so that every
one becomes an hypocrite and an evil doer, and every mouth speaks folly,
according as you read in the following verse.

Let us all then from the greatest to the least examine our selves, and be well
informed whether we be guilty or clear in this matter; and let us make the same
conscience of doing justly, that we do of hearing Sermons; and of loving mercy,
that we do of fasting and praying, and then God will dwell in the midst of us.
And let no man's heart be so wicked as to think that he shall lose by doing
thus; for God says, In the house of the righteous is much treasure, Prove.
15.6. and righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14.34. And, The Lord will not
suffer the soul of the righteous to famish, but he casts away the substance
of the wicked. Blessings are upon the head of the just, but violence covers
the mouth of the wicked. As the whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more;
but the righteous is an everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.3, 6, 25.

CAP. XVI.
1. A Caution; the reason why these sins were more destructive then others. 2.
Further cleared. 3. The reason why men are more apt to be inclined to zeal for
religious duties, then for justice and mercy. 4. A further reason of the same
thing. 5. This zeal may make men take injustice it self to be a just thing. 6.
It concerns us therefore to look well to our selves in these matters. 7. And
Judah should be a warning to England.

1. BUT that this discourse may not be liable to any mistakes, I shall a little
farther open the sense of what has been said, whereby likewise it will become
more useful to the Reader, if he please to attend it. I do not affirm either
of these two things; first that these are the only sins that undo a Nation; or
secondly that these were more heinous in themselves then the Idolatry whereof
the Jewish Nation were also guilty. No, let me not be so understood as if I
thought that denying of God, blaspheming of his name, worshipping of Idols, and
such like sins as are more immediately against the Deity, were not wasting
sins, and more horrid then the other: But the truths that I assert are these.
First, that the sins of injustice, fraud and cruelty are and have been enough
to destroy a Nation without the other; and Secondly, that they commonly prove
the most dangerous and ruinating to a people of any else, because they are
overlooked when they reform, though being duties toward our Brother whom we
continually see, one would think they should be in our eyes above all other.
When men reform impieties against God, they think themselves to have done him
such high service, and are so much in those upper speculations, that they take
no notice of these things under their feet, and make no reckoning how they deal
with men, so they be but zealous and fierce for that which is due to God. Or
they be content to be religious and given to devotion, so they may but retain
their unlawful gains, pleasures and ambitious ends; yea their very religion
and forwardness for reformation in such matters may give them a better
advantage more colourably to practice these iniquities; and their unmortified
affections will easily put them in mind to make use of such opporunities.

2. Hence I say it is that these sins do more commonly ruin those Nations that
know God, then corruption in his worship does; not because that is not
destructive, but because men will a great deal sooner reform in that then in
these other; for a fair correspondence with God in all the outward duties of
his worship is a great deal more easy then this denial of men's selves in their
covetous, malicious, ambitious, and other fleshly desires. And beside it is
more apt to get a man a great name among others, if it be in any good measure
of fervency and heat, and likewise to beget in himself a comfortable opinion
that he is mightily beloved of God, seeing he does those things that are most
highly reputed of. So much hypocrisy therefore and deceit being in men's
hearts, and they being so willing thus to put a cheat upon themselves; I hope
it will not by any be deemed unseasonable that I have treated of this matter,
rather then of the other. And if any will be so censorious as to say that I
have not pressed the matters of religious worship so much as I ought; they had
best take heed that they do not bring our Savior himself under their lash. For
when the Ruler asked him ( Luke 19.18.) what he should do to inherit eternal
life; He does not say one word concerning the duties of the first Table, but
only of the Second, in which it should seem they were more negligent then in
the rest. And when the man answered that he had done all those things that he
spoke of: Our Savior does not Catechize him how he had kept the Sabbath, and
abhorred Idols, and such matters; but he desires him only to be careful of this
one thing further, which was that he would wholly take his heart off from
covetousness, and the love of the world.

3. If any ask how it comes to pass that men should be so very zealous and
forward in pious duties when they are so cold in the other; I have already
given him an answer to this purpose. First the religious services in their
greatest outward purity do not find the nature of man so averse unto and
abhorrent from them, but that they may be very forward to do them. And
(Secondly) They make also a great sound and dinn in the world, and have such a
glorious appearance, that by the doing of them he may be reputed, and also take
himself for a Saint. And (Thirdly) Then he may be so pleased with this fine
persuasion, and so inwardly tickled with the sweetness of such thoughts, that
he is engaged to mind with all his power the promoting of such matters as have
gained him the credit of an holy person, without denying his worldly lusts;
which may rather have a freer liberty under such a brave and splendid Master as
stands not upon Punctilio's of honesty and equity between one man and another.
But (Fourthly) if we turn our eyes the other way, we shall find that justice
and mercy, pity and compassion, forgiveness and doing good to others
(especially to those who have wronged us) will fall out sometimes with a man's
worldly interest and carnal desires, and will put him to learn that hard lesson
of self-denial; and besides, they make no such great noise in the world, but
must be content to pass with many men for a piece of dull morality. It was most
truly said by a wise and a great Master, Ren. Des Carts.
Nulli facilius ad magnam pietatis famam perveniunt, quam superstitiosi and
hypocritae. None sooner obtain a great fame for piety, then superstitious
persons and hypocrites. One reason I conceive of it may be, that men who have
nothing else to show for their sanctity but their religious performances, will
be most nice, exact, and even ceremonious about them; and do them with a
greater pang of zeal then many cordial Christians. And this easily obtains for
them the name of holy and devout persons among men; when honesty, mercy, and a
sober religion and piety cannot prevail for so much credit, because they make
not such a buzzle in the world.

Now you all know how ready men are to stickle for that which draws the eyes of
all men to it, and if you do not, the Apostle will tell you how soon this
disease began in the Christian Church. For that which St. Paul reproves in the
Corinthians, was this, that they made most stir about that which brought them
the greatest glory and most credit; preferring gifts of tongues before
prophecy; and prophecy before love and charity.

4. And besides you must consider further how fair an occasion men have to be
dishonest when others rely so much upon their credit, that they will thank them
even when they deceive them; and think they have used them very kindly (because
they say so) when they have dealt very hardly with them. This makes many dress
themselves up religiously, because it is a more cleanly way of catching the
prey, when the Wolf puts on the Sheeps skin. He may devour a silly Lamb in a
corner, and wipe his mouth, and none can say that he has done any harm. The
well minded people flock very innocently and simply to a man who is famed for
piety; and now if he be a beast of prey, there is no such opportunity as this
to devour and raven, because he is taken for one of the sheep of Christ. And
therefore it was anciently observed, that no man could so securely commit all
wicked actions as he who had gained the repute of an honest man. Which made the
Poet in Plutarch advise this as a piece of craft, Plut. De and. Poetis.


(...),
(...).
Do all thou can to be accounted just, and spare to do nothing whereby thou
may be a gainer. But then (that I may come nearer to our discourse) what may
not, what will not he do that has secured not only other men's opinion but his
own also of his honesty and piety, though he has none, and yet has very
gainful opportunities! This man may spoil and devour with a good conscience,
because he takes himself to be a sheep. And having arived to a conceit of his
godliness without these paultry virtues of justice and mercy, he cannot take it
to be any part of his godliness to maintain them. If it be a great piece of
that policy whereby the Devil rules the world for a man so notably to
counterfeit piety, that even when he does most destroy it, he shall be counted
pious (as it was said of Tereus, -- Ipso sceleris molimine Tereus
Creditur esse pius; --


He was cried up for a Saint even when he was committing the greatest villainy)
What a notable piece then it is of the Devils craft, so to persuade and inflame
a zealous man in religious duties, that he shall pass in his own judgment for
a Saint? How certainly will he ruin both himself and others? in what a ready
way is he to commit all injustice when he is out of all danger of having his
own conscience secretly reprove him of hypocrisy and simulation, which the
other had not so secured? When out of Conscience perhaps he is forward in some
things, which make such a noise that they quite drown the voice of conscience
in other matters; how easy is it for him to commit all other wickedness with
safety, though it be no less dangerous then that which he avoids?

5. But there is an higher secret in this hypocritical godliness then has been
yet named; and that is, when even injustice it self is accounted but a piece of
zeal for God. When men are so hot that they will even sin against their
conscience for Gods sake, they take themselves you must needs think to have
highly merited at his hands. Thus some Greek Christians in Creet did once
handle the poor Jews; getting their riches from them by false and slanderous
accusations of them before the Magistrate, and thinking that they did God good
service in so doing: In so much that their Patriarch Metrophanes was fain to
write to them to forbear such violence and injustice, under pain of being
excommunicated and cast out of the Church. C^^s. Turcograec. L. 4.
In which letter he has this remarkable passage worthy of the consideration of
all fiery Zealots, Let no man think he is excused of his injustice by saying
(...), that he did not wrong the godly, but a fellow that was not Orthodox. For
our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel said, Luke 3.14. Do violence to no man.
Where he makes no difference of persons, nor permits any man for any cause
(...), to do wrong to those that are of a wrong belief, or not of our opinion.
You see with what absurd fancies a false godliness inspires men's hearts. When
they are once intoxicated with an high conceit that their religious affections
have made them Gods darlings, they think that all the world should be theirs,
and that nothing is too good for them, but that others deserve to be turned out
of all. It easily swells them into this fierce belief, that it is no wrong to
take from those that love not Jesus Christ, especially seeing it is to be given
to themselves. Yea it lifts them up even to a throne it self, and makes them
think it no injustice to thrust another out, that one of Gods beloved children
may sit in the place. And though you shall hear nothing more in such peoples
mouths, then Justice, Justice, yet by that they mean nothing else but to have
that done which is agreeable to their own desires which are the only rule of
right and justice.

6. For the Lords sake therefore, for your own, and the Nations sake, mind
these things that have been said more seriously. And do not look upon these as
matters of a less moment and inconsiderable nature, which need not be so much
pressed upon men's practice, nor the Pulpits so much sound of; lest by this
means the Priest and the People should both perish together. Hear the Prophet
Isaiah speak once more, and if you lissen well to what he says, it may make
you fear lest the tongues of the Prophets among us have been too silent and
sparing in calling for these things: Note it in a book, that it may be for the
time to come for ever and ever; that this is a rebellious people, lying
children, children that will not hear the Law of the Lord, which say to the
Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things: Speak
unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits; Get ye out of the way, turn aside out
of the path, cause the holy One of Israel to cease from before us, etc. Isa.
30.8, 9, 10, etc. They would not have the Prophets speak to them of things that
were right and honest, which had too much of severity and rigidness in them,
for such dainty darlings as they took themselves to be, but desired some soft
and sleek, some flattering and delicate, though deceitful doctrines to be
preached to their tender ears. They wished that they would cry Peace, Peace,
(...) (as Kimchi there notes) do according to your hearts desire, and it shall
be well with you; and when they thus lulled them asleep and abused them, then
they applauded them for good men and excellent Preachers. They could not endure
that they should run in the old beaten way, and preach so much strictness of
righteousness to them: No, they say find some new smooth path wherein we may go
without out any rub to our own lusts; Cause the Holy one of Israel to cease
from before us; i. e. Let us hear nothing of the holy one any more; or do not
press holiness so earnestly and frequently upon us. But what will God do with
such a people, or what is his judgment of them? Can he be content to let them
go whither they will, and follow after them still with his love? The 12, 13.
and 14. verses will give you an answer to this. Thus says the HOLY ONE,
because you despise this word ( i.e. because you like not to hear of the HOLY
ONE) and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon ( i.e. hoping to
fare well enough, and by your money to hire the Egyptians to help. you)
Therefore (and mark good Reader what the Holy one the righteous God that hates
iniquity says) This iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall,
swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant,
etc. i.e. Though you have built high confidences to your selves, yet they will
all deceive you: And just as you see a lofty wall does swell sometime and burst
on a sudden; and besides that it falls down upon those that are under it, who
dream of no such thing, it also crumbles into dust or little bits that can be
put to no use at all; Such shall your ruin be. First total, because you shall
be all broken in pieces and nothing of your City remaining; and Secondly
inevitable, because unexpected and not believed through the deceit of your
hearts and your false confidences in other things, while you remained guilty of
oppression and such like sins.

7. And then you shall find in the 17th verse of the same chapter, that he
says, they shall be left as a beacon on the top of a mountain, and as an
ensign on an hill. The Vulgar Latin renders it, as the Mast of a Ship on the
top of a mountain, and some give this sense of it; They should be as a Sea-mark
to them that sail, that they may hold a right course, and not split themselves
on those rocks that others have done. I pray God that Judah and Israel may be
so to England, and that all men would look upon them, and beware how they touch
upon their sins, which will dash us in pieces, and make this Island to become
the like sign to all the Nations round about us. And the Lord open every man's
eyes that he may see how far he is concerned in any of these Truths, that he
may pass sentence on himself, if he love not Holy Sermons, and prevent the
condemnatition of the Lord: Who has set his throne for judgment, who will
judge the world in righteousness, and minister judgment to the people in
uprightness. His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of men. The Lord
tries the righteous; but the wicked and him that loves violence, his soul
hates.

CAP. XVII.
1. An entrance to a more particular discourse about False Religions.
Hypocrisy double. 2. Atheistical Hypocrisy. 3. It is threefold: First out of
a design to be great. 4. Secondly, To serve the pleasures of the flesh. 5.
Thirdly, to hide some dangerous opinions. 6 Pharisaical Hypocrasie what it is.
7. How men come to get such a good conceit of themselves while they are
vicious. 8. They may deceive themselves but not God: the danger of it.

1. HAving thus passed through the Jewish Story in the Old Testament, and made
it as serviceable as I could to the present Age; I begin to consider that it
will be very profitable for to give a more particular description of that False
Religion that domineers so much in the world; whereby men cozen their souls,
without undertaking an Universal piety toward God, together with Justice and
Charity toward their Neighbors. And for an introduction to that discourse, D.
Jachson.
I think fit to distinguish with a very great Divine (one of whose Sermons put
me into the foregoing meditations) concerning a double Hypocrisy. The one of
the Atheist, the other of the Pharisee.

2. The former is very gross and palpable, whereby a man labors to cozen the
world with a Mask of Religion which he puts on as he sees occasion, for the
serving of some worldly ends that he knows not how better to advance, then by
such a disguise. The men of this sort have a perfect resemblance to the
Gentleman in Aelian, who being to go into the presence of the Persian King,
before whom he was to make such adoration as he had not mind to give him, He
let fall his ring at his entrance in the Presence Chamber, and so his stooping
to take it up passed for a worship of that great Majesty. These Atheistical
Spirits seem to worship God, and make very lowly addresses unto him, when
indeed they do but stoop to their own interest, and are but taking up some
worldly thing, to which they have more mind then to be Godly. Mr. Greg. Annot.
p. 144.
Religion (as a learned man of our own speaks) is but a politic Engine of
State in some men's hands; but of such power, that it is useful for the battery
as well as the defense of the State; and as serviceable to the ruin as the
conservation of a Commonwealth. A very necessary thing it is as they handle it
to the turning of affairs here below, but of no concernment at all to the other
world.

3. And of these that put on a face of Religion out of design, there are three
sorts which I will unmask before you. The first is he that designs his profit
and utility, when he sees that Religion is a fair means whereby he may rise to
Greatness, a ladder whereby he may climb to high preferments. When he discerns
the times are of that temper, that Religion will make a good mask to hide his
covetous, ambitious and perfidious intendments from the eyes of well meaning
and charitable men; when he perceives that it will make him to be more trusted,
and that a greater confidence shall thereby be reposed in him; there is no man
shall have a more Saint-like garb, a more reformed tongue, and devout
behavior. Many petty chapmen in the world that trade but for little things,
have learnt this Art, to gain credit and repute with others that so they may
suffer themselves to be cheated by them with more faith and confidence. We may
be sure then that the Great ones of the world, who design higher matters, and
aim at more lofty ends, are well versed in these religious tricks of deceiving.
Herod pretended religious devotion and worship which he would fain give to
Christ, when he intended that this Lamb of God should be the sacrifice. Numa
among the Ancient Romans, pretended Revelations and familiarity with a Goddess,
but it was to make himself a God among the people, and his Laws held for
sacred. And so the Grand imposter Mahomet (as is in every ones mouth) held his
neck away, as if he looked for a whisper from heaven, when his head hung toward
the world, and he meant only to get his doctrine to be more devoutly devoured
by the people. The Masters of policy know that their talk of God, their praying
to him, and their solemn attendance on all religious offices, together with a
sanctimonious carriage and seeming squeamishness of Conscience, will make them
more reverenced by the multitude, and less suspected to have any but good and
simple designs. They know that these things will make the world gape upon them,
and swallow all their proposals without any chewing; or else they willmake them
cast all the odium of their wicked actions upon other men, and hold them
excused as men whose integrity would not suffer them to do so badly: or at the
worst pass them by for religious weaknesses and infirmities, unto which all are
incident. It is not to be told what the name of a Saint will do to hallow those
actions which in other men would seem as black as the Devil; to cast a varnish
and a most handsome gloss upon the most hellish and foulest enterprises. And
therefore the Politician had been much defective if he had left this Rule out
from among the rest, That a man who would be great in the world, must be
externally religious. And the greater grace and comeliness he is able to act
Religion withal, the more eyes he shall have upon him, and the more will fall
down and worship him.

4. A Second sort there is that design their own ease, pleasure and brutish
delights, whom I may call the Fleshly Politians. Men that are cunning in this
art of Religion, that thereby they may enjoy the foul delights of the flesh
with more security, and with the favorable opinion of the multitude. By a
great show of something that is extraordinary in devotion, they hope to draw
the eyes of the world from their beastly life, and make them gaze at the
strange appearances that they say is of God in them. They hope by making a
blaze on high, to make men take no notice of what is done here below, just as
they see while the vulgar stare at some comets that appear in the heavens, they
neglect what is under their feet more apparent upon the earth. And therefore
they resolve to talk of wonderful manifestations, discoveries and appearances
of God to them, they rise presently into the clouds in their expressions, and
discourse of divine things in a mystical strain; they speak of revelations and
high illuminations from heaven, and use perhaps some very fiery devotions which
dazzle the vulgars eyes and amaze their underderstanding, so that they cannot
see their wicked and abominable practices. But if men will needs be prying into
their secrets, and when they see them, will not in charity excuse men of such
high seize, then they begin to rant more confidently, and boldly to
affirm that all things are lawful to men of such a growth, and in such special
favor with God, and lead so certainly by his Spirit. Or if they do not go thus
high, yet they take up the Religion that is in fashion, on purpose that they
may avoid all sufferings and persecution, and that they may never receive any
molestation in their beloved flesh. They are resolved to do any thing that they
may never feel any pain, and if Religion be the way to preserve them from it,
they will make it their pleasure sure to counterfeit it as exactly as they can.
Such are the Leviathans of this Age, who love to tumble up and down in the
flood of worldly delights, and would rather imitate all Religions then be of
any. The great pillar of their Religion is self-preservation, though our
Savior has expressly said. That he who will save his life shall lose it, and
he who will lose it shall find it.

5. A third sort may have it in their design to spread some dangerous notions
and traitorous opinions against God, for the hiding of which it is but
necessary that they seem very strictly pious. All men are very shy of a
professed Atheist, or of one that denies the Bible to be Gods word; and
therefore they that would disseminate any thing to the prejudice of that belief
we have of a Deity and of the holy Scriptures; must look as if they were of all
men the furthest off from such profaneness. And though they laugh in corners
at the ridiculous simplicity (as they deem it) of those that fear before God
and tremble at his word; yet before others they can put on a sour face, and
seem to do more then stand in awe of him. But these Players and Actors in
Religion it is not my design to set forth in all their colors, both because
they are not so numerous as the other, and because they cannot stand long upon
the stage before they go off and every one know what they are.

6. The Pharasaical Hypocrisy is a more fine and subtle poison, whereby a man
Cosens himself and puts a cheat upon his own soul; and therefore about the
discovery of it I shall bestow all my pains, as most latent, and standing in
greatest need of a cure. This is it also which the Scripture speaks of, in
whose phrase hypocrisy, flattering of God, and lying to him with ones lips do
not signify the professing of one thing and meaning another, but a present
profession of love to God and Religion, without a cordial renouncing of every
thing that is contrary to him and it: or a great heat and forwardness to some
things that God commands which are easy and more suitable to a man's gust and
humor, with a coldness to other things that are more difficult and contrary to
his nature and interest. There is an extraordinary measure of Zeal for some
matters required to its constitution, else they in whom it is would not be so
confident as they are that they are good Christians; but then this zeal is not
equally distributed through the whole man, and does not animate and quicken him
to all his duty; and that is it which makes it to be Hypocrisy, and not true
Religion. As for example, if a man have this partial zeal in hearing of Gods
word and diligent attending upon Sermons, this may make him take himself for a
Saint; whereas his frozenness to meditation and secret converse with God, and
diligent examination of all his actions, renders him a mere hypocrite. So if he
be partially zealous for the purging of himself from superstitious conceits and
Popish tenants, but yet remain a Mammonist, a Lucifer, a murderer of his
Brethren by hatred and uncharitable censuring of others that differ from him;
this is the same disease, though he take himself for a man excellently pious.
And on the contrary, if a man be just in his dealing, and careful not to
cheat, but yet be all bedaubed with the world, and laden with thick clay, and
stick fast in covetousness, or neglect many religious duties to Godward, he is
but an hypocritical Religionist, though he keep his Church, and pay the
Mininister his dues as well as others.

7. And if you should ask me why this good conceit that men have of their Piety
may not be easily beaten down, when it is so visible that they live in great
sins, and have not denied abundance of their earthly affections: I answer, that
their first resolutions to undertake some duties of Religion are commonly very
warm, if not hot and fiery, which inspires them presently with a persuasion
that they are dearly beloved of God, because they feel such a difference in
themselves from what they were before in their total coldness. Now though they
continue to live in many sins, yet this persuasion does not abate, (1.) Because
this zeal does continue and hold on afterward through the concurrence of their
particular Temper with it, which inclines them to that sort of actions, or does
not make them averse from them. And (2) Then they may think it to be a
Temptation of the Devil, to doubt of their good estate after they have had such
great assurance (as they imagine) from God. And (3) They find a desire to do
those things that they do not, which they take to be a great sign of grace:
Especially seeing (4) That they are troubled for the not doing of them, and
they have now and then some sad thoughts about it. Yea (5) Their Conscience
perhaps is much against it when they do it, and they commit such sins not
without great reluctance and difficulty: Which indeed renders their condition
the worse because they can sin even against conscience; but they take it to be
a sign of their tenderness, not of their sins strength. And (6) Perhaps they
have learnt to call such sins their Infirmities, and hearing that all have
their failings, these they think are theirs. And (7) By their Confessions and
Prayers, and outward humiliations, they hope to gain pardon for all: or (8)
Perhaps they think there is no need: but by a device beyond all these, they
imagine Jesus Christ has done all for them long ago. And so the less they do,
the more they shall be beholden to him, and the more honor they do him by
putting more upon his account then others dare do, who will be doing more
themselves.

8. Thus I say do they ratify that Decree, which they have passed for
themselves in heaven: They having so certainly foreordained that they shall
inherit eternal joys, none of those foul blemishes that are in their actions
can blot out their names which they have written in the Book of life. But
though they think that nothing can hinder their admission to that blessed place
which they have designed for themselves: yet God I am sure has chosen no such
persons to salvation. If the holy Apostle be not less infallible then they, you
had better believe him, 2 These. 2.13.
when he says that God has chosen us to salvation, through sanctification of
the Spirit and belief of the truth; and when he prays that the whole Spirit, 1
These. 5.23.
Soul and Body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus.

These men may mount up while they are in some holy exercise as high as the
third heavens, and think verily that they are in Gods embraces; But they will
find shortly that all their hopes will fall to the ground, as that Turk did
from the top of the Mosque, who persuaded the people that he could fly. And
therefore let us be sure to lay the foundations of a solid and entire Religion
in our souls, and take heed we do not deceive our selves with some flashy
devotions, and a lame, halting obedience. To mortify all our carnal
affections, to put off the body of sin, is the work of a Christian, and because
of the multitude of our enemies, and the infirmities of our flesh, we shall
find it a matter hard and difficult. How insuperable then will this work be, if
our Religion it self do conspire with the Flesh, and if that which should serve
for the destroying of sin, do by a great many false Principles exceedingly
promote it? That it may not do so, but that our Religion may be in us a Divine
nature, I shall now proceed to show you what the counterfeits of it are, and
how small a matter, if we be not serious, will tickle us with a belief that we
are good Christians, without a total change of our hearts and lives.

CAP. XVIII.
1. The story of the Jews in the New Testament to be minded as well as in the
Old: and we find them great Professors. 2. But their Religion was only talk. 3.
And with such windy Religion still men deceive themselves. Good words may move
a man's affections, and so cozen him. 4. Others delight only in high-flown and
obscure language. 5. An high proficiency they take themselves to have made if
they dare leap into a Pulpit. 6. The sins of such men. A short description of
True Religion in reference to this matter.

1. NOW for the more full discovery of the several kinds of this Hypocrisy, I
think it will be best to examine the New Testament story as I have done the
Old, and see what the temper of the Jews was in our Saviors and the Apostles
time: who will give us as perfect a character of this false spirit, as their
forefathers did in their example. And the Apostle tells us in Tit. 1 ^ 6. that
they of the circumcision (for of them he speaks, ver. 10.) did profess to know
God, though in their works they did deny him. By their very name [they of the
circumoision] we may learn that their Religion consisted in outward, not in
inward things, and that it was in the flesh and letter, not in the heart and
spirit. But yet for all this they were great professors of the most excellent
skill in divine matters, and of the highest sanctity and purity above all other
men. For the word know signifies an insight into the deepest mysteries, and
also a piety beyond the common strain: According as Clemens Alexanarinus often
uses the word (...) or knowers, for the most spiritual and holy persons, in
opposition to fleshly and brutish men, and for persons of more recondite and
abstruse learning in sacred writ, in opposition to those that are but of a
vulgar apprehension. In short, they are in his language men of a perfect virtue
and knowledge. Now this great and illustrious name many vile men arrogated to
themselves, taking upon them to be the most pure and refined of all other,
whilst they lived in a sensual manner. And some of the Jews it seems were of
this party, who though they were like other of the people of Crete, lying, lazy
and gutling sots, Crete.
( ver. 11.) yet they gave out that they above all others were acquainted with
God, and had his secrets committed to them. Yea, so zealous they were, that
they made a considerable party in the world, and by their clamor and noise
decrying all others, they made many weak Christians doubt whether they were not
in the right way and maintained the best religion. For they were a very
confident sort of men, and those that looked with a kind of disdain and scorn
upon the rest of the world; so that the humble and meek servants of Jesus
Christ, lest they should be outbraved by impudence and taken for a company of
silly sneaks, were fain to rebuke them sharply, ( ver. 13.) and to use some
severity toward them. You may see this more plainly, if you read but Romans 2.17,
18, 19, 20. where the Apostle tells us what the boasts and braggs of the Jews
were concerning their knowledge, and how they looked upon all others as children
and fools that must be taught by them.

2. But the best of these men's Religion was only big words and loud talk
concerning God, as the Apostle tells us in the same Tit. 1.10. where he calls
them Vain talkers. Though some of them knew much, yet they did nothing but tell
others of it, with a mixture of their own idle dotages. And a great many of
them knew the meaning of nothing they said, but right or wrong, poured out
Texts of Scripture as fast as they could, 1 Timothy 1.7. and others amused the
vulgar minds with a great deal of mystical stuff, and Cabalistical conceits,
which the Apostle calls Jewish fables, Tit. 1.14. Men of large imaginations and
wide mouths, of quick fancies and nimble tongues; to the former of which their
Religion owed its procreation and begetting, to the latter its birth and
exclusion to the sight of the world.

3. Such a Wordy religion there is still in the world, and it makes the
greatest noise of all others, because it is a Sound. The men who profess it
hold no gift greater then that of talking, and they had need be thankful that
they are not dumb; for if they were, there would appear no more of Religion in
them then in an old Statue of some ancient Saint. But though their religion be
but wind, yet they are blown up with their own breath into a conceit of
Sanctity. And though they have not so much as some Jews, viz. a (...), a form
of knowledge, ( Romans 2.20.) an exact draught of the Bible in their minds, yet
these smatterers in Christian Doctrine can make a shift to babble others and
themselves into a belief of their great seize. It is ordinary to hear men
talk so long of the beauty, and glory, and sweetness, and preciousness of
Christ, that they beget in themselves as well as their hearers a persuasion
that they are mightily in love with him. There is nothing but glory, and
luster, and splendour, and such shining language, when they speak of God; they
gild him with beams and rays, and have none but golden and silver, and other
rich expressions concerning him; which makes them think that they are rapt in
admiration of his excellencies. If they speak of Christ, they paint him in
Solomon's language White and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousands, with a
head of fine gold, Cant. 5.10, 11.
locks bushy and black as a raven, etc. If of the Church, you shall have a
discourse set with all the gemms, and pearls, and precious stones that can be
found in the twenty first chapter of the Revelation. If of communion with God,
then you may hear of the bed of Solomon that is paved with love, Cant. 3.10.
and covered with purple, and sustained with pillars of silver for the
daughters of Jerusalem. Who would not be ravished that hears of all these
delicate fine things? what heart can choose but be taken with all this beauty
and bravery? And how can we think that it is not enough to transport the man
himself into heaven, to see others so moved and drawn by him? And yet all the
while this goodly do is made, the man may not know himself what he means by all
these expressions. They make a fine noise, and run smoothly off the tongue, but
they are little better, as they handle the matter, then nonsignificant
expressions to themselves and others. I shall not now add how many new words
are minted and huddled together to supply the want of solid matter: Nor how
many men's tongues are tipped with good words which they have heard from the
discourses of others: but shall only say this, that these men talk of God
either in such words as have no fullness of sense in them, but are devoid and
empty of all true life, or else in such words whose sense and life they have no
feeling of in their souls.

4. And yet I have told you of the best that can be found of this sort of
religion. There are others that mind not so much this fluency and abundant
language, but their greatest care is to speak so, that they may not be
understood, but admired by the rabble as great Sophi's, and men of a more then
ordinary elevation. I wish this had been the religion only of some in the first
times, who made a great deal of stir about the (...) or the fullness, the (...)
or the depth, and as Irenaeus says, scraped up many Scripture phrases, many
holy words, (...), that were scattered here and there, and made up a body of
nonsense out of them. Alas! this is one of the diseases of our Age also,
wherein many men have affected unintelligible language, and believed they were
Eagles that were courted to look upon the Sun, because they could soar aloft
into a cloud of words. When they had taken abundance of Prophetical
expressions, and carelessly jumbled them into a confusion, they seemed to
themselves like men inspired and that spoke oracles, when they did but slaver
out their own transcendent nonsense.

5. And if these men can but arrive to the confidence of prating saucily to
their betters, this is reputed a singular gift, and they take themselves to be
endued with an extraordinary measure of zeal for God and his cause. But if they
can perk. up into the Pulpit, and take the boldness to be Preachers and
Instructers to others; this is an infallible mark, and now they cannot doubt
but they are full of the Spirit of God. This is the thing that tickles them
more then all the rest; and their forefathers, the Scribes and Pharisees never
loved more to sit in Moses his chair, ( Mat. 23.2.) then their fingers itch to
be laying the Law before the Ignorant people.

6. But let such men who delight to hear themselves talk, consider (if they
have not lost that Faculty whereby we are men) that there may be twenty times
more Religion in humble learning, then in this bold teaching of others; and
that there is a thousand times more in hearty doing of what men learn. To that
let them bend their studies, and observe how greedy they are of riches, how
they scramble for high places, how worthy they think themselves of what others
enjoy, how they love to rule and command over them, how impatient they are of
contradiction, how ambitious to be thought some body in the world, how
censorious of their neighbors; how fiery and hot against dissenters, how
fierce and violent for their Opinion more then for Godliness: And then if they
believe the Scriptures, let them judge whether the leaven of Hypocrisy have
not sowred them. And let us all remember, That true Religion is a transforming
sense of God; that which changes and alters the temper of men's souls; that
which seasons and leavens the whole man with Goodness: It is not a new Tongue,
but a new nature: It consists not in reformed language, but in a reformed life;
Not in talking concerning God, but in an imitation of him, and being conformed
to him. And then a well-seasoned Heart will make all the words savoury and
without affectation, though with good affection.

CAP. XIX.
1. Of the love the Jews bare to Moses. 2. When as they hated that which Moses
chiefly aimed at, and had only a fancy to him as a gallant person. 3. The same
love now men think they have to Jesus Christ. 4. But no better then the love
men have to persons of desert, and that do them kindnesses. 5. Such men
therefore like the Pharisees. They love Christ now he is dead and never saw
him, better then if they had lived with him.

1. BUT some may say to me; Can you think that such people as you have
described, have no love to Jesus Christ, of whom they speak so much? I will
give an Answer to this, by describing another piece of Jewish Hypocrisy, and
that was their extraordinary love to Moses. Moses! What a great and sacred name
was that, and never out of their mouths! It was a wonder the Egyptian charmers
did not put it into their forms of incantation, as they did the name of Abraham
and others, Epiphan. Haer. Melchisid.
seeing they boasted no less of it. The Arabians who held him for a God, could
not give him a greater veneration then his Countrymen did. They professed
themselves Moses his Disciples, and say that they are sure God spoke by him;
but esteem our Savior a sorry fellow in compare with this great Master, John
9.28, 29. In Moses they trusted, John 5.45. and blasphemy against him they
would prosecute with the same revenge that they did blasphemy against God. Nay
Moses was first in their mouths when they accused St. Steven, and they said
that he had spoken blasphemous words against Moses and against God, Act. 6.11.
There is no Question to be made but that they would have spit in that man's face
who should have told them that they did not love Moses. They would have defied
his words, and given him the lie a thousand times, and you might have as soon
persuaded them that there was never such a man, as that they did not bear an
affection to him. And for this very cause it was that they killed our Savior,
because they thought he contradicted this grand Teacher of their Religion, and
imagined they did God high service in so doing.

2. And yet if you make a little farther search into the business, you shall
find that they loved Moses no otherwise then as vulgar people love Queen
Elizabeth; as a brave man, and one who did great things for that Nation, and in
whose days there was a good world. If Moses had lived in our Saviors time,
and told them of their sins as he did; they would have loved Moses no more then
thieves and traitors loved the Queen, who would not let them steal or betray
their country. If Moses should have risen from the dead, and told them that he
allowed divorces only because of the hardness of their hearts; they would have
given him a bill of divorce, though so much wedded to him. If he had said the
Gentiles should be fellow-heirs of their promises, they would have looked upon
him as an heathen and a publicane: And he should not have escaped to have been
ranked among the sinners, if he had dropped a word against their legal
righteousness. Nay, if he had said to them but one of the Ten commandments,
Thou shall not covet, those Pharisees would have been ready to cast stones at
him for not receiving their glosses whereby that command was evacuated. They
had an high esteem of him, and affection to him, as he had been a great
Benefactor to their Nation; but the best of his Laws, his Spirit and qualities
they perfectly hated. And therefore our Savior tells them, that though they
did beautify the Sepulchers of such righteous persons as their Fathers had
slain, and thought they should not have done such a thing for all the world;
yet they had the same murderous affections against those holy men and would
have dipped their hands as soon in their blood, had they lived in those times.
For they hated such men then, as their Fathers hated heretofore; and so all the
blood that had been shed in former ages did light upon them, because they
inherited their Ancestors sins as well as their lands.

3. Even so it is now with many in the Christian world. The name of Jesus is so
dear unto them, that they have it in their mouths as much as the Jews had the
name of Moses. It is so full of honey and sweetness, and they are so fond of
it, that it is on their tongues end before the name of God himself. This name
makes up one quarter of their prayers, and fills up all the gaps and breaches
that are in their discourses: And if there be any expressions of love and
court-ship wherewith to caress him, he shall not want them. They commend him
for the primest beauty; extol his pedigree; admire the riches of grace; and if
one could tell how to believe them, they would willingly dye for the love of
their beloved Jesus. No Sermon pleases them that extolls not him; all
discourses are unprofitable in which his name is not often repeated, and the
very sound of it does them more good then many wise sentences.

4. But you must not think for all this that they are such vowed servants of
his as they seem. For they love him only as a Beggar does his good Master, or
as a soldier does Alexander, Caesar, or some such famous Captains, of whose
great worth and valor he has heard. As the Spartans honored Lycurgus, and
the Romans Romulus, and all Countries and Cities love those that have been
their founders, or procurers of great immunities and benefits unto them; so do
these persons love the Lord Jesus. They look upon him as a noble Hero, a brave
man that has done great wonders, and deserved highly of man kind: and
Especially they are affected toward him as one that is gone to make room for
them in a goodly Paradise, and will there entertain them with all dainty
delights. Which is no more but what may proceed from education and breeding,
from Pulpitdiscourses and good books, from a fancy of those joys that he has
promised, which are enough to make a sensual man love him as well as a Turk
does Mahomet: Especially considering that some dispositions are amorous, and
others are apt to admire gallant acts and great exploits; and others are
wonderfully taken with the kindnesses that are done them, and the honors that
are put upon them. If they should have lived in our Saviors days, and he
should have told them, Not every one that says Lord Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father; they would have said
as the Pharisees in another case, Are we blind also? do not we know who shall
go to heaven? If he had said, You are of your Father the Devil, for his works
you do; they would have answered as the Jews did sometimes: Thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil. If he had told them that he had no blessings but
for the humble, the meek, the merciful, the peacemakers, and those that took
up their cross patiently (of which number they were not,) they would have
joined with the high Priests to bring him to his execution.

5. What though they condemn the Pharisees for killing of our Savior? It is no
more then those men said of their forefathers that murdered the Prophets. And
they are as full of hatred, malice and black zeal against Christ's most
faithful Servants, as the Scribes and Pharisees were against Christ himself.
They verily think that they have a love to Christ above all the world: but did
not the Jews dream of as great an affection to Moses? Either they do not love
the world therefore, and their own lusts and desires better then Christ's words:
or they are no better then those Jews were who loved no more but the name of
their Master Moses.

They have a great zeal for the Worship of the Lord Jesus: but who knows not
that the persons whom they judge as hypocrites, were very fierce for the
Ceremonial Law, and loved to be at the Temple? We must see therefore a great
care, diligence and curiosity used in all obedience, or else we cannot afford
them any better language, notwithstanding all their flattering addresses to our
Savior. And you must consider what a vast difference there is between the
opinion men are apt to have of those who are dead, and of those that are like
them, but alive. All men love naturally (...) speak well of the dead,
especially if they did no harm but good. And those that they never saw, but
hear of their excellent deeds, they have in greater admiration then those that
are before their eyes. And those very persons that they could not affect if
they were with them, they commend at a distance, as they hear them commended by
others. For they commonly hear of nothing but what pleases them when they are
afar off: but they would see many actions, and hear many sayings, if they
conversed with them, that they could not brook. And just so it is in this case:
our Savior is dead, and he likewise died as they hear for them: and therefore
they cannot but have many good words for him. He is one that they never saw,
and so they admire him for the good they are told of him: while they despise
his live images and those that are like him. They read of his actions and his
words at a distance; but they are not spoken from his mouth to their particular
persons: and therefore they are not so offended at him as they would have been,
if they had received his reproofs in such sort as they did who then lived.

CAP. XX.
1. Of false pretenses to Inspiration. 2. Whence these swellings in the head do
arise, and how you may know them. 3. Concerning the Kingdom of Christ so much
talked of. 4. How loath they are to submit to Christ's government, who think they
wait for his Kingdom. 5. Opposition to Antichrist, a false token of men's being
on Christ's side. 6. For they may have the very spirit of Antichrist in them.

1. BUT there are a company of more glorions professors then these, who pretend
such love to Jesus Christ, and take themselves to be so beloved of him, that
they are lifted up into an imagination of receiving Revelations from him. Their
Religion is to look after news from heaven, to raise themselves into raptures,
and dreams of Prophetical inspiration. They talk of extraordinary light:
Glorious discoveries, manifestations, illumination of the Holy Ghost, are the
words that adorn their discourses. And so St. Peter tells the Jewish
Christians, (for to them he wrote, being the Apostle of the circumcision) that
there should false Teachers arise among them, 2 Pet. 2.1.
as false Prophets had done anciently among their forefathers. By these I
nothing doubt he means some that boasted of Inspirations, and further
Revelations from God, which the Jews might be most forward of all others to
pretend unto, because they took themselves to be beloved of God beyond all the
people of the earth. And St. Jude calls them expressly (...), ( v. 8.) which we
render filthy dreamers; but it signifies such as were carried with dreams.
There were you know several ways of Gods revealing himself of old to his
Prophets, whereof Dreams and Visions were most usual; Now these persons had a
strong fancy that they received some impressions from God, and were divinely
moved in their dreams; when they were but the vapors and reeks of their own
flesh which their aspiring minds agitated them withal. And Epiphanius applies
the place to the Gnostics, whose fables and dotages the Apostle (he says)
reproves, which were more like the talk of a man in a dream, then well awake.

2. Cap. 17. n. 7.
And it is likely that both the Jewish and Christian dreamers have fallen into
this spiritual frenzy by that same heat which I before spoke of, whereby they
persuaded themselves too early that they were Saints; When this meets with a
melancholy temper and a selfish disposition, it is no hard matter to beget in
them an opinion of near converse with God or Angels. For when that fierce
humor works and boils up, all experience tells us that it puts men into high
and big conceits, if they be of a proud nature: And then their religious
inclinations and affections determine the workings of this melancholy fancy to
matters concerning God, and his Son, and Holy Spirit. These motions they may
take to be from a divine power, because they are so great, and because they are
so much different from what they feel when in their ordinary temper. And this
self-love may make them conceit likewise that none are like to receive from God
such inspirations sooner then themselves; who have such a love to him, and
presuppose that they are so much in his affections. Now I hope there are not
many at this time of this conplexion in Religion; but when there are, you have
two remarkable characters given of them by Saint Jude in that verse; They are
given to the grossest sensualities, and are likewise turbulent and seditious
persons. By which they make it plainly appear, that Christ is not in them, who
was holy, meek and peaceable, and makes all those to be so on whom his Spirit
breaths.

3. But there are others of a lower form, who confidently talk of the mind of
God likewise made known to them, and are altogether busied in their fancies
about the glorious times that are ensuing. The Jews do not more expect their
Messiah, and think to be made great men by him, then these wait to see Christ
come to reign, or at least themselves advanced to sit upon thrones to govern
the Nations. They take themselves to be the candles that are to enlighten all
the darker places of Holy Writ. They are as familiarly acquainted with Daniel,
as others are with the Proverbs of Solomon. They understand St. John's
Revelation as well as they do his three Epistles. And I shall not much
disbelieve them in this particular; for their Religion has nothing to do with
that love and sweetness, that charity and humility which he commends. While
they fancy themselves Kings with Christ, they neglect his government in their
souls, which should keep under all their headstrong passions, quell their
rebellious affections, tame their wild natures, and restrain their brutish
desires, which would indeed make that new world of things which all good
Christians pray for. They conceit a gorgeous pompous scene of things, a secular
and worldly greatness, an overflowing tide of prosperous events, while they
neglect that poverty of spirit, that lowliness of mind, that meekness,
patience, long-suffering, and such like Royal graces as make Christians
conquerours over the world, and victors of all their enemies. And therefore
they are to be accounted among those whose religion is only words, and great
brags arising from an high conceit of favor with God; who loves those that
will be guided by his will, and ruled by his Laws; better then those that would
fain fulfill prophecies, and pour out some of his vials upon the earth.

4. This religion is indeed Filia vocis (as the Jews called their last kind of
Revelation) the daughter of a voice; yet not of Gods, but of their own. They
thunder and rattle in the world, as if they would bring the heavens about our
ears, and pour down the clouds upon us; but it is a tempest of their own
raising, and a storm which their blustering passions and boisterous affections
make in themselves. No whisper, nor thunder neither, from heaven, nakes men
irreligious, proud, contemptuous, disobedient, bitter, cruel and full of black
zeal. These are the breathings of the evil spirit, the belches of the
bottomless pit. These inspirations smell of Sulphur, they stink of fire and
brimstome. The true Religion leads a man to a solicitous enquiry after that
which God has revealed for the reforming of himself, and erecting the
Government of Christ in his soul: And the ruling over himself, keeping dominion
over his lusts, is more desirable to him, then reigning in pomp and state a
thousand years upon the earth. The power of Religion makes a man to know the
certainty of those words of truth which lead him to the life of God but never
makes men talk like infallible Prophets, what scene of things must next take
its turn, and what piece of the Revelation must next come upon the stage. All
these pretenses to expounding Revelations, and Prophesies, and Secrets of
Providence may be but a fancy, and the licourish desire that is in men to be
meddling with them, may be but such a thing as Eves appetite to the Tree, viz
the fruit of Pride and curiosity. But the Doctrine of Christ, is plain full and
certain; and the desire in a man's soul after the knowledge of it, and being
acquainted with it, must be the fruit of the good spirit of God, which leads a
man to the life and power of godliness, giving him a great command over
himself, and all worldly affections, making him to be good, not in word and
notion, but in deed and truth.

5. But it is time to leave this sort of men who are mere talkers of God, and
who only give him their good word (as we ordinarily speak) commend him, and
speak well of him, but care not to be so well acquainted with him, as to be
made like him: who complement with him and speak him fair to his face, who
pretend to friendship with him, and to be of his secrets, and will be as near
him as he pleases, so be it that he will do them no good, nor make any
alteration in their souls. Let me only annex to this, another False Religion
very near of kin to it, which consists in a great outcry against Antichrist
and all his adherents. This word Antichrist is of that nature, that it may be
pressed to serve any design, and it is become such a Mormo to vulgar people, that
their hairs stand up an end, and they run away from the face of it as if they
were out of their little wits. The more too blame they, who upon every occasion
fright them with it, as unadvised people do their children with bugbears; which
makes them of such a timorous nature, that they fear all things which they
never saw before, though never so good and necessary for them. But in the
ordinary sense of the word, people understand by it the Pope of Rome, and
imagine they are the friends of Christ, because they hate his enemies; and that
they are good Protestants, because they are against the Papal encroachments.
But many are beholden to their education for the planting this enmity in them,
and it is too apt to degenerate into a poisonous and venomous Weed of rancour
and cruelty against the persons of those whose vices only we should hate. And
others are taught by invective Sermons against Antichrist which they happen to
hear, to bear a great spleen against him, though they know not who he is: The
natural seeds of piety which are in us toward a Deity, growing into this or
that shape according to the soil in which they are, the natural temper which
men are of: and according to the manuring and husbandry that is used about
them, the discourses which they ordinarily hear for the cherishing of piety.

6. And though all men of this spirit think they hate Antichrist as they do the
Devil, and therefore judge themselves good Christians; yet if you look narrowly
into them, you shall find that they have the very character of Antichrist upon
them, and the mark of the Beast in their forehead, whereby we may know how far
they are from true Religion. For if you look into 2 These. 2. you shall find
that the spirit of Apostasy did not consist so much in Ignorance, or merely in
holding this or that Speculative Opinion, as in Wickedness, Pride,
Self-exaltation and Tyranny. He that the Apostle speaks of, is called the man
of sin, v. 3. the wicked one, v. 6. he that has the mystery of iniquity, v.
7. and comes with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, i. e. with all fine
devices to allure men to a fleshly life, ver. 10.

Let it be considered therefore how they brand themselves with the name of
Antichrist, who fiercely declaim against him, but live in sin, do unjustly,
exalt themselves above all that are called Gods in this world, love to domineer
over others, are full of hatred and contempt of their betters; and in short,
let them remember that it is no small note of him, that they count all
Antichristian but themselves. I shall conclude this with those words of the
beloved Apostle who wrote against such conceited people as justified
themselves, though unrighteous, and condemned all others that were good. Little
children, Let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness, is righteous,
even as he is righteous. In this the children of God are manifest, and the
children of the Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither
he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 3.7, 10.

CAP. XXI.
1. The Pharisees were much given to Prayer. 2. Four instances of their zeal
herein. 3. Notoriously wicked while thus devout. 4. Such there have been among
Christians that much delighted in praying, though men very far from God. 5.
Such there are nill. 6. Yea some that are but bablers and senseless Zealots. 7.
Some men's prayers are but an Imitation of others. 8. An active fancy
contributes much to their Gift as they call it. 9. Natural conscience has much
to do in it. 10. A whining Religion there is in the world, that does nothing
but complain of its defects.

1. AS there are some that please themselves with good speeches and warm
discourses about God and holy things, so they are exalted to an higher degree
of faith concerning his love to them, if they can but speak as confidently unto
God as they can of him. In their prayers I mean they tell him such stories of
their love to him, that they think he cannot but believe them. And they grow
hereby into such a familiarity (as they take it) with him, that they doubt not
but to have what they please of him though they a k nothing less then Heaven.
Of this sort were the Pharisees; who were such great professors of Religion
among the Jews, Constant. L' Emper. not. in Benj. Itin. p. 147.
that in the Talmudick language the word Pharisee signifies a pious and devout
person. And so St. Paul seems to have used it when he says that according to
the Law he was a Pharisee, i. e. one that gave himself to the strictest and
nicest observation of what the Law commanded. This was no small part of their
holiness, whereby they begat an opinion in themselves of their Saintship, that
they were much given to pray, and often repaired to Gods house, as if they had
been most intimate friends of his. And when they were not there, they had other
times of testifying their devotion to him, which they would not let slip,
though they were in great crowds of people, or in the very streets: Yea, to
give a better example of piety (as possibly they might think) they would choose
the very corners where more might behold how careful they were to worship him.

2. And you may observe that (1) They did not only extend their prayers to a
great length, which is some argument that they were pleased in this duty, Mat.
23.14. Luke 20.47. But (2) Some of them were Asceticks, V. Haeres. 16.
and for eight or ten years did nothing but pray, using (as Epiphanius tells)
many sharp and rigorous courses to keep them from sleeping if they did but nod
in the night, that so as much as was possible they might always be awake at
their prayers. And (3) It should seem by our Saviors speech that they imitated
the heathenish custom (as an expression of their vehemence and lothness to be
denied) of repeating the same words over and over again after a clamorous
manner. For it is very likely that their voice did rise and grow louder every
time that the word was reiterated, as if by their importunate crying they would
force heaven to hear them. Or (4) They used to draw out their words, Montac. in
Apparat.
and delighted in a dreaming kind of speaking: whereby they prolonged the sound
unto an affected tone. For so some interpret those words Matthew. 6.7. of such a
drawling way of delivering their words, as if their tongue did not hang well,
or had some clog upon it. And Theophylact notes that there is another word very
near to that (...) which signifies such a noise as children make who cannot
speak, but only skream and squeek, (...).
which may be also there intended.

3. But if you consider these demure and whining Pharisees a little better, you
shall find that these good words were but to hallow and bless the next meals
meat that they intended to make of a widows house. All this cry unto God was
but their gapings for a poor Orphan whom they meant to swallow. God they
thought could not but give leave to such good men as they to please themselves
a little, seeing they labored to please him so much. They doubted not but he
would say Amen to all their desires, as they did to their prayers. He could not
but be glad (they might think), that such good friends of his grew rich on any
fashion, seeing he was not like to lose, but to get by it. For if you look into
Matthew. 23. you cannot but observe that they were monstrous extortioners, and as
full of covetous desires as a drunkards cup is full of drink. Besides they were
abominably proud, undervaluing all men in compare with themselves. And so many
ways also they had of disanulling all Gods commands, as if by their prayers
they had obtained a power from God to wipe and cross what they pleased out of
his Law. They took God to be so much beholden to them for their pains and sweat
in praying to him, that they thought he was bound to let them make themselves
an amends some other ways. And because it cost them much to be so devout, they
thought their labor was as precious with him, and that he put the same value
upon it. In short, so little there was in all this devotion, that if a man had
had a mind to deny himself in little or nothing, his best way had been to have
put himself into the garb of a Pharisee, and buy a grant of God to do what he
list by many prayers. Which was just as if a man should think by giving his
neighbor many good morrows, to make him overlook the breaking of his hedges,
and the stealing of his goods; or as if a man should beseech another not to be
offended with him, though he beat his children, and took upon him to do what he
listed in his house.

4. And such there have been in the Christian world, who have delighted in
praying and offering up continual petitions to heaven, whom the earth could not
bear, because of their vile and wicked lives. As John Basilides Duke of
Muscovy, whom Dr. Casaubon instances in, who loved to be continually upon his
knees and lifting up his hands to God when they were not employed in some
butcherous and bloody action or other. And Hacket here in England in the days
of Queen Elizabeth, of whom Saravia says that he seemed to have a divine heat
in him when he prayed, though it is known to all the world with what wild fires
he was acted. For there is a natural ardor may do much this way (as that Doctor
speaks) or rather a Religious melancholy as Mr. More has shown in his
excellent Treatise of Enthusiasm. For that humor will work and boil up even to
an Exstasie, and where it meets with some spice of Religion, it may do strange
feats by way of devotion. Ignatius, the Jesuits tell us, was sometimes lifted
up four cubits above the ground when he was at prayer; and he might possibly
seem to himself so to be, if that be true which Eunapius reports of Jamblicus,
how that when he was a praying, Eunap. in vita Jambl. V. etiam in vita Aedesii.
he was heaved up from the earth (...) above ten cubits, and his raiment seemed
to shine with a brightness like to gold. But above all I desire the Reader to
take notice of what Theodoret says of the Mossaliani or Prayers, that they
used to do nothing else, and would not follow any calling, but when they did
not pray, they fell asleep. L. 4. Eccles. hist. cap. 10. and L. 4. haeret. fab.
cap. 11.
And then they thought that they beheld Visions, and could prophecy, and saw
the sacred Trinity with their eyes. They said that there was an evil spirit in
all men which must be cast out by prayers, and then the holy Spirit of God
comes in: after which there was no need of fasting for to humble the body, nor
of any doctrine or teaching which bridles and guides the motion of the body,
but the Spirit does all. One egg is not more like another then those men were
like them among us who say they are above all Ordinances. They feel some heat
in their hearts when they pray, and they are lifted up in some kind of pious
thoughts by the strong workings of their own melancholy fancies; and then they
think that this is to them instead of all other things, so that the Lords
Supper is but a carnal Feast, and the Scriptures themselves are but dead
letters; and Ministers are but Schoolmasters for children and fools.

5. So much of the Pharisee is still among us, that it would make any godly
soul blush to see what foul things are done by those that make very fair
pretenses to God in their prayers. The measure of which many times is length
and loudness, many words and much heat, whilst there is no true spiritual life
and sense of God which breaths forth their souls unto him. Men care not to be
as long in confessing of their sins as they intend to be in leaving of them, if
it will but pass current for Religion. They will pray for forgiveness of their
sins as often as God pleases, so they may but have leave when they see occasion
to commit them. They will call for that strength and power which they never
mean to use, for that Spirit of holiness which they would not have so kind as
to come and trouble them in their enjoyments. They pray for that light which
they would not have to look too broad in their faces, for that purity and
sanctity which they will bestow no more upon then a prayer to obtain; and if
they knew what they prayed for, they would be loath to have an Answer. They beg
that comfort, the spring of which they would be loath should dwell within them;
that righteousness of Christ which they would have to cover all their
filthiness and keep them warm in their sins; that blood of Jesus which should
quench the fiery indignation which they say, but think not, that their sins do
deserve.

6. And yet I have told you the best of this sort of Religionists; for there
are that think they shall be heard for their much babbling, and are little
better then heathenish worshippers. They are rude and senseless in their
Tautologies without any real and unforc't affection. Their prayers are a
confused, indigested heap of words, rash and bold expressions; irreverent and
unbecoming addresses to the glorious majesty of heaven; fulsome and nauseating
language, savouring of an unprepared though hasty; careless, though confident
mind. They are measured by the glass, and must be stretched, though by
heathenish repetitions, i. e. without any order or handsome zeal, to such a
certain length. And if a childish tone, like that when they say their lessons,
can help out these devotions, it is accounted a great token of good affection
and a sign that a man is more then ordinarily moved. If the voice likewise be
loud and sonorous, most people are apt to think the heavens will hear those
prayers sooner then others, as coming from the greatest zeal and fervency of
Spirit. But all good Christians, whose hearts are in their prayers, feel that
the sense of Gods Glory, as well as his Goodness, fills their souls. Which
makes them modest and humble, blushing and bashful before his face; reverent
and composed, solemn and sedate in their speech unto him: Serious in their zeal
and zealous in their repetitions: understand in what they ask, and earnestly
desirous to receive it. And above all, they know that an holy life is most
pleasing unto God, whereby they do continually bespeak his favor, and are
always sending up Orators to the throne of grace to bring down more blessings
upon them.

7. And if any one have a list to enquire into the bottom of this deceit, I
believe he will find that many men's prayers are but a piece of Art which they
have learnt by imitation of others, whose language and affection they most
admired; from whom they have borrowed such feeling expressions as won their
souls to some endeavors to be like them. I have sometimes thought that an
hypocrite is rather a counterfeit of a Christian, then of Christ, for he does
not so much shape himself according to what he reads of him, as what he sees in
them. He is but their Ape, and never more discovers himself then when he
labors to imitate their zeal, and to come up to the height of their piety. As
Apes are never more like themselves then when they do (...) (as Lucian
somewhere speaks) put on the face and garb of Noble men; so the higher strains
of devotion they endeavor to personate, the more their affectation and fulsome
forcedness appears. Or as the deeper any women paint, the more plainly is their
dissembled complexion seen; so the more colors these men lay on, and the
greater ruddiness of zeal they would attain unto, the more is their ugliness
revealed, and the false beauty of their holiness laid open to the world. As it
is in those Meteors which they call parelia, when two Suns appear together
besides the great light of heaven; Cap. 13. not. quaest.
the one says Seneca is simulacrum Solis, the picture or image of the Sun; the
other is simulacrum imaginis, the picture or image of the eimage: so it is in
this case; a good man is the image of Christ the Sun of righteousness; but an
hypocrite is only the image. of the good man, not of Christ, having only a
picture of his righteousness. And yet these pictures and images of Christians
may seem to some to excel the copy, and be more admired then good and
religious people. As a picture in a room is by Art so drawn, that it seems to
look upon every one in it on whatsoever side you stand; whereas a living man
does look but one way: so these artificial pieces have a more notable way of
looking graciously upon the multitude then real Christians have, who appear
most lovely to those that have the spirit of life ruling in them.

8. And if these Artists have an active fancy and a natural heat, it will much
promote their good opinion of themselves, because their devotions will be
beyond the vulgar strain. For a quick fancy can administer very apt words and
fluent expressions that shall not justle one against another, but run off very
smoothly; and there is a kind of charm in dainty words well put together, which
roll off the tongue without any rub in their way. The natural heat also when it
makes the animal spirits boil and leap up to a great height, can produce some
affections and passions answerable to that sreedom of language which will have
still more of ravishment and transportation in it. By the power of Imagination
likewise being thus heated and chafed, unusual thoughts may be raised up, and
the mind may be filled with new notions, which men may take to be an argument
of their being under the power of the Spirit; and their praying without a form
may seem to them to be a token of the power of godliness. But when this heat
abates, and they cease to be tickled with such affections, then these men grow
pitiful creatures, and have no religion at all, unless they can comfort
themselves with what they hear others also talk of, that they are under
desertion, and make this as much a sign of grace, as they did their former
enlargements.

9. It must likewise be considered that the beginning and continuance of this
devotion is to be imputed to the natural conscience which men have of some duty
owing unto God, and of some recompense that they stand bound to make him for
their neglects of it. Though this conscience when it is once awakned, cannot be
satisfied, unless they do something to please him; yet it rests commonly in
that which is easy, and agrees best with their natural dispositions, and least
contradicts their inbred lusts and desires. Now where there is that nimble
fancy which I spoke of, and that voluble tongue, and spirits that can soon take
fire by any motion; there is nothing more accommodated to the end of giving
them satisfaction then prayer: because such people are naturally forward to
talk, and can both with ease and pleasure make long speeches unto God. And when
they have prayed themselves into a good opinion of their holiness and favor
with God, then as soon as their morning devotions are past, they may securely
lie all day long in hatred, malice, covetousness, injustice, and such like
sins, as though they had consecrated and craved a blessing upon all their
Actions. Lib. 1. Essays, chap. 56.
And so Mount aigne tells us that there was a young Prince, who when he went
about any lewd and unchaste design, would always go into that Church which was
in his way both as he went and as he returned from his filthiness; and this was
told him by a great person as an instance of special and singular devotion. But
let any impartial man tell me (says he) to what purpose he invoked and called
on God for his divine favor, having his mind wholly bent to sin, and his
thoughts set on lasciviousness. And yet thus it is, every man calls upon God,
it matters not for what; the covetous, the ambitious, the thief, all pray God
to succeed their enterprises; which is just as if a Cutpurse should call in
justice for his aid, and as if we should call God to witness to a lie. And
there he adds this golden saying; Verily it seems that we make no other use
of our prayers, then of a company of gibberish phrases; or as those that employ
holy and sacred words about witchcraft and magical effects; and that we magine
their effect depends on the contexture, or sound, or succession of words, or
on our countenance. For man's soul being full fraught with lusts, and nothing
touched with repentance; they headlong present unto him those heedless words
that memory affords their tongue, by which they hope to obtain an expiation
of all their offenses.

10. I shall hereunto annex briefly another way of deceiving men's selves, which
is by a whining, puling kind of religion, that many have taken up (I must
desire the Reader to bear with such expressions, because I know not how to
discribe this form of cozenage better) who are always complaining of their
corruptions, their deadness in duties, that they cannot profit by Sermons, nor
find themselves enlarged in prayer, and such like things. I speak not now of
the sober complaints which a good soul may make upon some occasion, but of a
constant way and life of same people, who for many years, are in the some
doleful and querulous tone; exercising a continual peddling trade of going
from house to house to tell their stories. And as you may observe that it is an
ease to some melancholy people to be relating their griefs and aches, and to
shed tears when their neighbors come in, for every little thing that troubles
them; So I believe that these persons take some pleasure in their whining, and
it is apt to stir in them some passion, which they look upon as a sign of
grace, and a mark at least of that humility which the Scripture so much calls
for: Especially if they bemoan their hypocrisy and falseness of heart, they
are ready to think that they have a great deal of sincerity: Whereas it is too
true that they are as rotten as they say, because they do not grow better, nor
make any progress from this whimpering childish condition to a State of
man-like piety. It is not sufficient to make us good, to tell God and man that
we are bad: And to sigh over our selves makes our case worse: if it do not make
us better.

CAP. XXII.
1. Pharisee signifies separated. 2. A great deal of deceit lies in separating
of men's selves from others. 3. Zeal to promote an opinion is often taken for
Religion. 4. This is a thing very delightful to the Flesh. 5. Opposition to
the bad party was a thing that puffed up the Pharisee. 6. And deludes still many
carnal Protestants. 7. Fasting and many little austerities they took for Piety.
8. Such little strictnesses still pass among us under a great name. 9. Of
commending good men, and discommending all those vanities. 10. We must judge of
men by what they do contray to themselves.

1. FROM this piece of false Religion which I have noted in the Pharisee, I
shall come to some other which our Savior observes in the same chapter ( Mat.
23.) where he speaks of this. And the first that we meet withal is their
separating of themselves from all others, which is the very import of the word
Pharisee (as the most learned conclude) which signifies one separated. And this
they did, not only by taking upon them more ceremonious observances then
others, and by abhorring common company, but also by their garments, their
outward garb and deportment. They wore long robes, they made broad their
phylacteries, and enlarged the fringes of their garments, which were
characterical notes to distinguish them from others. But there was a strange
pride and love to be esteemed by others, and impatience of being despised and
undervalued, that discovered it self in all their actions. For they affected
the chief place at feasts, and would not endure a profane man to take the wall
of them, and loved to be adored as great Rabbis, and received all the honor
that was put upon them as their due deserts.

2. It is to be feared that many at this day take themselves upon no better
account to be good, but because they are not among the bad: And that others
think themselves the most excellent Christians, because they are separated and
divided from those that do not take themselves so to be. When men are once
imbodied in distinct societies, and are, though not cloystered, yet, gathered
from the rest of the world, they take this small strictness to be the
separation (which the Apostle speaks of) from the unclean, and the coming out
from among the wicked. Whereas the heart of many such (for I speak not of all)
is still among the crowd of the ungodly, their affections are as dirty, their
passions as dark and black, as theirs that lie still in the open streets, and
are not thus enclosed from others. For whence else is it that they take
themselves to deserve all places of preferment, and to be employed in the
greatest affairs, and resent it very ill if their Piety be not most made of by
those that are in place of power and authority? Do they not scramble for the
world as well as their neighbors? are they not proud and supercilious? Do they
not look down from their perch with a disdain of their Brethren? If not, then
are they happily separated by these good qualities from the world; but if they
do, it is not their association with the good, nor the living in a Fraternity,
that will impale them from the herd of brutish men. If these fruits of the
flesh be found in any company of men, high contempt and scorn of others, a
spirit of contradiction, rebellion and sedition; unnatural affection, injustice
and cruelty, hatred and envy, unmercifulness and hardheartedness to the poor,
rigor and sternness to those that dissent from them and are of another mind,
they must be content to be told that their Religion is but vain and will vanish
away: Its root shall be rottenness, and its blossom shall go up as the dust.

3. A Second thing that we meet with all as notorious among those Pharisees,
was a zeal to promote and spread their own opinion, which no question many take
to be an argument of great love to God, who is more they think concerned in it
then themselves. And this discovered it self in two things, 1. In their
wonderful diligence that they used to make but one proselyte, v. 15. They
would go a whole country over, yea and take ship also to fish but for one
disciple to their belief. Theirs I say, for they did not make them religious,
but only brought them over to their party; they did not labor so much their
conversion, as to maintain and support their own faction. And if he was not a
hater of others before, they made him twofold more the child of the Devil then
themselves, full of all hatred, spite and cruelty against those that were not
of their gang. And that indeed was the Second thing wherein their false zeal
appeared; a strange fierceness against all of a different sense, so that they
would not endure there should be any other persuasion, but anathematized all
those that were not of their way, v. 13. If any man spoke well of our Savior,
and confessed him to be the Christ, they cast him out of the Synagogue; and if
he were a noted man, they sought to destroy him, and cast him out of the world,
as they thought to do Lazarus. And especially take notice of what was said a
little before, that the Proselytes who were converted by them, and received the
Jewish spirit, were the most bitter fellows of all: as they commonly among us
who are Scholars to a deluder, are far more violent (for a proof I think
either of their sincerity or proficiency) then the Master of whom they learn
their lessons.

4. So easy a thing it is to endeavor to destroy others, when we think that
will save our selves; and so glad is hatred of such an opportunity to vent all
its fury without any fear a reproof, but with great commendations for its
pains. And so well content likewise will men's false hearts be to labor rather
to make others of their mind, then to make them good; to make their neighbors
like to themselves, then to make themselves like to God. There is some labor
and difficulty in destroying the old man, and in graving the face of God upon
our souls in righteousness and true holiness: but to stamp our own image upon
other men's minds, and to beget children to our selves, is a thing to which
nature is prone, and wenderfully tickled in the doing of it. To walk with God
undefiled in the way requires great caution, watchfulness and circumspection:
but it is no such hard thing as men imagine, to walk over a whole country and
tell them that they are damned: that they must be baptized again, that they
must forsake the Church, and bid defiance to all Priests, with things of the
like nature. There is as much carnality and sensual pleasure in these things,
as there is in the most lascivious actions of fleshlymen. They are inflamed
with their Opinions, as Judah was with Idols: they have an itching desire to be
pouring out their conceits into the womb of every soul that will receive them.
Let all men therefore take heed how they judge themselves godly because they
are hot and ardent in their desires to have all of their way: for this may be
but self-love, or a tyrannous desire to have all wills humbled and bowed down
to theirs.

5. To this we will subjoyn a third thing, because very nearly allied with the
former, and that was their opposition to the bad party. This discourse of our
Saviors in Mat. 23. is occasioned by the flocking of the Pharisees to him, who
were mighty glad that he had put the dull Saduces to silence, chap. 22.34, 41.
A great abhorrence they had of those Epicurean principles which the Saduces
held, and did strenuously maintain a future state and the resurrection of the
dead, from whence they did conclude their zeal for God was as great as it was
against the ungodly. And indeed in this did consist a great part of the Jewish
Hypocrisy; they had been soundly plagued for their Idolatry and
Sabbath-breaking: and therefore they studied at last to get as far off from the
Gentiles as they could, which they took for a mark of great reformation. So you
may observe throughout the whole new Testament, that they would not eat with a
Gentile, and they abhorred Idols; they were ready to kill our Savior because
he did works of mercy on their Sabbath. And it is held unlawful by their
Doctors but to stoop down to drink of the water that flows from a Statue, lest
they should fall into the suspicion of worshipping before an Idol. And so for
the Sabbath they were so exact, that they tell us the Lamb of the Passover
which used at other times to be hung upon a staff or bar which lay on two men's
shoulders, and so flead as it hung between them (there being more at that time
offered then could be flead in the court) if the Passover fell on the Sabbath,
then a man laid his hand upon his fellows shoulder, and his fellow laid his
hand on his, and upon their arms the Lamb was hanged and flead by another
neighbor, because it was not lawful that day to carry a burden. Jeremiah you
know threatens them ( chap. 17.) for carrying burdens on the Sabbath day; and
therefore they were so fearful of it, that they would not venture so much as
to lay a staff upon their shoulders which would have weighed no more then
their hands.

6. Would not you have taken these men for very pious and tender souls who were
so wary lest they should offend God, and bare such an hatred to all parties
that were irreligious? Yes sure, they would have passed for men of singular
devotion in these days; and if they were alive among us, men would take up the
old saying, that if but two persons should go to heaven, the one should be a
Scribe, and the other a Pharisee. And yet alas! these men who abhorred Idols so
much, had a great abominable image of the world in their hearts, and Mammon
they daily adored. They hated the Saduces more then they did their Opinion: and
they remembered the keeping of the Sabbath so well, that they broke the very
next command to it, and honored their Father and Mother no more then they
pleased. The carnal worldly Protestant is just their Ape; He cannot endure the
sight of a Cross, he is ready to tear the picture of a Saint in pieces; but he
himself is only a picture of real Saints: a mere Statue, and as cold as a stone
to all Christian virtues. He loves the sin of domineering over his Brethren: of
dictating from an infallible Spirit: of heaping up riches, and enlarging his
possessions as much as his life; which perhaps he is ready to sacrifice for the
subduing of Gods enemies. For so it sometimes is, that this opposition to a bad
party is accompanied with such a notable hot zeal, that makes men willing to
die in the quarrel; but this zeal is very black and sooty, and it sends up such
a reek as miserably fouls the Soul.

7. Before I come to that thing which I shall chiefly mark in Mat. 23. You may
note some colder formalities, and more beggarly ceremonies then these I have
mentioned, which are spoken of in other places, and made a shift to creep under
the name of Religion in the world. They fasted very often, and made it known to
all the neighborhood by covering and hooding of their faces, as they used to
do in time of mourning, Mat. 6.10. They thought themselves defiled by the
vulgar, the people of the earth, and would marvel (as the Evang. tells us,
Mark. 7.) if a man did not wash when he came to eat, or when he came from the
market. They might wear peahaps rough garments, as the Prophets did (such hairy
cloths as Elias and John Baptist used,) in token of a course, hard and severe
life, as a sign of great mortification; but it was only to deceive (as the
Prophet Zachary speaks chap. 13.4.) and that they might make a prey of simple
and well-meaning people. Abundance of vilany lurked under their hoods, and
their hands which they washed, were full of blood and covetousness.

8. I will not say what knavery lies under a Friars frock, nor what wickedness
is cloystered from the eye of the world, under pretense of Religion, because I
am not acquainted with their practices, but only by report; but let us look at
home, and see if we can find none of this course, barden religion, which
consists altogether in corporal austeries. Some we have seen making as much ado
about such a cut of their hair, as those Friars about a shaven crown, and as
fierce for the cuting off their ribbons, as if it was the cutting off our right
hand, which our Savior speaks of. And others we have seen to fast, and punish
their bodies, and make them do penance by an hard life, who notwithstanding
have been hard to the poor, and harsh and sour to to others as well as to
themselves. They look upon these things as great marks of humility; but as
David Chytraeus well says (with whose words none will be offended, though they
may with mine) Forma humilitatis est, non dejectio capitis in alterum latus,
non vestis sordida, etc. Reg. Vitae.
Humility does not consist in holding ones head awry, in wearing of poor
clothes, or any other external gesture; but in the hearty casting down of our
selves before God, and subjecting our wills to his, to do and suffer what he
pleases.

9. They commended likewise good men, but especially those that were dead and
gone, garnishing the very sepulchers of the Prophets. And not a small piece of
Religion is it now adays, to commend the Preacher, as the woman did our
Savior, saying, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, etc. Luke 11.27. O he is a
precious man, a sweet teacher, I could hang on his lips all day long; though
they are no wiser nor better by all the Sermons they hear, then they were many
years ago. To throng to the Church, to use devout carriage there, demure looks,
sad sighs and groans, a sour face, a studied tone, a deliberate gate, will go a
great way in many men's Religion. And on the contrary, There are some who pride
themselves in decrying all these poor formalities which we have named, in
scufling and fighting with these shadows of Religion; dealing more blows at
these airy appearances, then at foul and deadly sins. Both of these men are of
the same Genius, accommodating themselves to the mode and fashion of the times:
imitating, as far as they dare with safety to their sins, those who are taken
to be truly Religious. They would wear the clothes, but not be the men: they
would fain have these things, to be putting on of Jesus Christ, but like not a
religion that will lie near the heart, and make them put off themselves. And
indeed when I have considered all things, I find that there is nothing so poor
and mean about which men may not spend their zeal so excessively, that it may
pass with them for a religion. They would have the kissing of the Son, spoken
of Psalm. 2.12. to be but such a ceremony as the kissing of the hand was among
the heathen when they worshipped: bowing and kneeling unto the Lord our maker,
Psalm. 95. they can easily think to be no more but bending their hams, bowing
their bodies before him. Praying and lifting up the soul to God, to be but
turning up the eyes, and lifting up the hands; purifying and cleansing to be
nothing else but outward Baptism: and receiving of Christ to be eating and
drinking of the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper. And all the great duties of
a Christian to be fulfilled in a good will to them, which God will accept
instead of the deed.

10. We must learn therefore not to Judge of men by their talk and brave
expressions, by their little strictnesses and trifling zeal, or any thing that
is cheap and easy, but by their self-denial and abasing of themselves, and by
all real acts of righteousness which are chargeable and cost them something. As
they say, that at Venice they will give you the title of Magnifico, and
solemnly invite you to their houses to dinner, but if you accept of the
invitation, and expect what they profess, it is a piece of the greatest
rudeness, incivility and ill breeding: Even so it is here: there are many men
that speak honorably of God, and seem to be very desirous of his company, and
invite him to their souls by many prayers and earnest petitions, that promise
him fair, and profess great respect to him; but he is ignorant and rude in the
world who expects they will be as good as their word, and they themselves take
it very ill that God should require all that at their hand. They love to talk
of Remission and reconciliation; the flowing forth of Christ's blood; the
bleeding his heart to sinners; the freeness of his grace; and twenty such good
words, and phrases. They will chat all day long of fullness and freeness, of
riches and kindness, communion and communication; and such like things, but you
must not think that they mean any thing more then Christ's casting a covering
over their sins, and hiding their iniquities. Christ must speak as much of
their kindness and love also, if they be holy, for they see no obligation to
such exactness. And therefore all they bestow on God is large promises, and
some petty inconsiderable actions of obedience. If he will have more, he must
take it of Christ, and not of them, for he is best able to pay what is owing.
Though they are engaged and stand bound to God in many duties, yet they
intended in conclusion to cast the whole debt upon Christ, and to discharge
little or none of it themselves.

11. And I cannot but admire at the strange impudence of the world, who
ordinarily brand the Ministers with the name of Scribes and Pharisees, because
they wear long cloaks, or have respect and honor from the people which they do
not seek; though they be men of upright lives, and whose hands were never
fouled with any dishonest gain; but stretched out many times to relieve those
that are in need: And yet never consider how like they themselves are to those
persons in their covetouseness, hard-heartedness, hatred, desperate malice,
implacableness against all that oppose them; and other things of this high
nature. All that bear any similitude to their outward garb, must be hypocrites;
and they that resemble them in their diabolical nature, must be Saints. Who can
help it if men will be mad and consider nothing? They themselves perhaps make
long prayers, as the Pharisees did, and yet they would be loath (and so would I
also,) that therefore they should be esteemed hypocrites; if all things else
were correspondent, and their lives were holy. They might learn then one would
think (if they be not quite frantic) that the hypocrisy of the pharisees did
not consist in wearing long robes, or any such outward thing, but in placing
their religion in them, and living under that shadow in all covetousness,
pride, Lordliness over their Brethren, spite, anger and desire to destroy all
contrary minded, and such like wickedness. If men be guilty of these things,
then they are Pharisees in grain, though they wear short cloaks, and are not
called Masters.

CAP. XXIII.
1. The Pharisees great zealots for some things, but neglecters of others; and
for their own Traditions more then Gods commands. 2. They loved acts of Piety
better then acts of Mercy and Justice; and those acts of Piety that were
outward, more then the inward. 3. That which agreed with their humor better
then that which was against it. 4. More scrupulous of a little sin then a
great. 5. Just in one case, that they might be unjust in many; and sometimes
charitable that they might be constant extortioners. 6. They would do more then
was commanded in one thing, rather then what was commanded in all things. 7.
Great need therefore we should examine our selves. Observe well what moves you
when extraordinary zealous for one thing. 8. Observe what your zeal in one case
is apt to make you neglect in others.

1. AND this will lead me to the great mark of the Pharasaick spirit, which
comprehends all the rest; and that is a fierce zeal for some things, with a
plain neglect of all the rest. As it is easier to talk then to do, so some
things are easier to be done then others. And if you read the Gospel, you will
see that they picked out those things that were of easy digestion, and would
nourish their diseases; but rejected every thing that might make them sick, and
vomit up all their filthiness. To make this more apparent, I will instance in
some particulars which clearly discover their partial and unequal zeal in
performance of their duty. And First, you may observe that they loved their own
Traditions better then they did Gods express commands. There are many learned
men (and St. Hierom among the rest) that think God did not command them to make
Phylacteries, but only carefully to remember the Law, Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9. And yet
they were more careful to have these scripts of parchment about them, then to
have the Law of God written on their hearts, which was contained in them. But
though that be not certain, yet it is most indubitable that God commanded them
to honor their Father and Mother, but no where bids them offer and consecrate
all their estates to him: And yet notwithstanding they took themselves to be
excused from all obligations to relieve their poor Parents, So Theophylact
interprets it.
if they could but say, that they had devoted all that as a gift to God,
whereby they might do them any good, Mat. 15.5. which was a most lensless
thing, and as if what was given to the poor, especially to our parents, were
not given to Gods uses. And yet now at this day, men are wont to swagger more
in a new fashion, and late invention in Religion of their own contriving, then
to contend earnestly for the manifest precepts of our Lord Jesus. They are all
on a fire for a doubtful opinion, for a mode of Government which relies on no
clear Scripture: but have scarce any sensible heat for that love and charity
which Christ has undeniably commended over and over again to his disciples.

2. A Second thing which you may observe in the Pharisees, is this, that they
loved actions of Devotion to God better then actions of Mercy and Equity to
men. That you may see by their long prayers, Mat. 23.14. and their Corbans, or
gifts they offered to God, just now mentioned. There was more of Pomp and fame,
but less of Selfdenyall in the one then in the other; and they would always
choose that which was most easy, especially if it conduced to their credit and
glory. And therefore thirdly, you may observe that of all actions of Piety they
chose those that were most outward, and done with least trouble. As to praying
they were much addicted; but with meditation, inward admirations of God, and
adorations of his excellencies we may be sure they were little acquainted. And
just so now it is; men think that actions of piety merit more of God then
others do; and that he is so pleased with them, that he can be content if they
overlook others, while they are so very kind to him: and therefore Mercy and
Kindness to others are mere strangers to them. And you may observe, that men
had rather pray with others then alone by themselves; and they account it a
greater attainment to be a speaker in a congregation, then to be humble and
lowly-hearted. They are strangers to inward and deep thoughts of God; for if
they were acquainted with his holiness and goodness, they would mind nothing
more then to purge themselves from all their filthy passions and affections,
and to do good to all as he does.

3. And indeed fourthly, it was generally true of them, that they loved that
which was outward, more then that which was inward, Mat. 23.25, 28. And they
loved that which agreed with their own humor, better then that which was
against it, v. 15. They scoured the outside, that it might shine and glister,
and dazzle all men's eyes with its brightness: but they cared not how black or
cankered they were within, and how vile they appeared in Gods eyes, so that all
their neighbors would suspect no foulness. And they endeavored the conversion
of others to their Religion, which did but feed their own vain humor and
popular desire of being accounted great and glorious Saints; while they took no
care to turn their own hearts to God and true righteousness, from which they
had so monstrously degenerated. Of this sort are all they who are highly
zealous against all carnal sins, but live in those that are spiritual. They
hate all riot and drunkenness (as we all ought to do) but are drunken
themselves with rage, anger and pride. They reprove others sharply, but cannot
endure a fair reproof from others. They cry out perhaps against injustice, but
think it no robbery to take away a man's good name. They detest unclean
embraces, but yet have an unchaste complacency in themselves and their own
Opinions. They would have no wicked men govern us, but they think themselves
fit for their places, and are desirous of pre-eminence.

4. A fifth token of their hypocrisy was, that they were more scrupulous in
committing of a little sin, then of a great. They would take false witness
against Christ, though they would not enter in the Governors hall for fear of
being defiled: Which was as if one should strain his liquor if there were a
gnat in it, but make nothing of swallowing a Camel, Mat. 23.24. The heat and
sap of their souls spent themselves in such broad leaves and fruitless suckers,
as you see in a Vine undressed: and he that should but pluck off one leaf,
strike off one ceremony or uncommanded duty that they imposed, was a greater
enemy to God in their account then he that broke most of Gods Laws. He that
knows the world, cannot but see that this leaven is not yet cast out of men's
hearts. We have many that are Christians, just as Domitian was a Soldier; that
are enemies to flies, and flies to their enemies: Very braving and daring they
are against that which is called Superstition, but easily yielding to
temptations to covetousness, deceit and unlawful gain: or on the contrary,
very fearful to fail in a ceremony, but worshipping the flesh and living
loosely. An Hypocrite is much employed in little things, and busied about the
shadow and bark of religion, be it what it will. If religion be pompously and
gloriously clothed, then he will strive to be most ceremonious, costly and
chargeable in his devotion: so that we may say of him as the Philopher said of
a finical but empty Lawyer, homo in causis agendis been vestitus, a neat man in
his Religion; one that pleads with God in gorgeous apparel. But on the
contrary, if men take to a side that loves to be sordid and slovenly, and as
careless as they can in all outward decencies, none shall more fiercely decry
all ceremonies, nor more profane all that was before accounted holy. And so in
all other matters, the most inconsiderable among them exercise their zeal: and
the weightiest exercise only their fancies and tongues.

5. A Sixth thing to be noted in them is, that they would be just in one thing,
that they might be unjust in another. v. 23. They would pay their tithes to the
Priests, that this might cover all their acts of rapine and covetousness among
the people. And they did not only pay them, but were very scrupulous to pay
them exactly, as if they would not wrong one of a Cummin seed, or a Speer of
mint, or as we say, of the hair of one head; when as they neglected judgment,
if any causes came before them; they showed no mercy to the poor; and kept no
faith in their Covenants and promises. It concerns a man to be very punctual
with some persons, and in his ordinary intercourse to keep to rules of justice;
else he would be hissed out of the world, and he would have no opportunity to
deceive a simple or unwary soul. Much less would he be able when he stretches
his conscience to do a base action, to take himself still for a godly man, if
he did not at other times deal fairly. And therefore he is fain also to imitate
the Pharisee in a Seventh quality, and that is, to do some great act of
Charity, to excuse himself from a constant exercise of it. It is like that
these hypocrites which our Savior speaks of, paid the tithe which was due
every third year for the use of them that were in need ( Deuteronomy. 14.28.) as well
as the yearly dues to the Ministers of God in the Temple. And this great and
expensive charity they thought perhaps so highly of, that they never reproved
themselves for their miserable and wretched covetousness at all other times: As
many men now whose fingers are very stiff, may chance to draw their
purse-strings at some solemn time, or when they are much moved with a good
Sermon of Alms-doing; who at other seasons have hearts as hard as flints to the
crying necessities of their Brethren. Much of the Religion of men and their
charity also knows its times and days; if they be observed, God lends them
(they think) the rest of their lives to dispose of as they please themselves.

6. And lastly, they would not stick to do more then they were commanded; that
they might neglect Gods express Commands. For many think that the tithe of
every herb (which they paid, Luke. 11.42.) was not due by the Law: but they
could be content to over-do in this case, that they might do nothing in others;
to give these free will offerings, that they might have their own wills in
greater matters; so false is the heart of men, that they think an excess in
what pleases them, will satisfy for all their defects in that which is most
pleasing unto God. As to keep whole days of prayer is far more grateful to
some, then to keep a continual watch over themselves in all their dealings and
converses with others, and in all their own inward thoughts and desires. They
will leave no stone unturned to find out an Art or device to save themselves
from the trouble of Mortification and self-denial. They will wriggle every way
rather then be strait and upright as God made them. Any labor or pains they
will take to shift off the great Commandments of loving God with all their
hearts, and souls, and strength, and loving their neighbors as themselves.

7. The more need there is that men should be earnestly urged to search into
their hearts, and examine them well about these things, lest there lie hid any
of this leaven under many seeming actions of Godliness. Take heed lest you wink
at some evil affection which you bear a particular respect unto, and let it
escape untouched when you profess to cleanse your selves. Beware lest you cast
only a favorable look upon some duties of Religion, and look asquint upon the
rest, or take no notice of them. Labor to remove all obstructions, that Zeal
may have a free passage through the whole frame of your souls, and that you may
be equally spirited to every duty of Religion. And I shall commend these two
things as of singular use and advantage to keep our hearts from self deceit.
First, Let men suspect themselves when they are moved with an extraordinary
heat, and feel a great zeal agitating of them in some one thing which they
undertake upon the account of Religion. Let them presently begin to ask
themselves how they stand affected to all the rest, and to feell how their
pulse beats in all things, especially in the most spiritual actions. Or else it
is a thousand to one, that this zeal will betray them into hypocrisy, and they
will place all their religion in it. And therefore search well, if there be not
some external inducement which thou do not observe, some corrupt end at the
bottom, some willingness to spare a foul and nasty desire, which makes thee so
zealous in that particular thing, which may be as a covering for thy coldness
in other matters. Be not cheated by thy self, into a belief that thou art
religious, when thou bear not a love to all Gods Commandments; but labor
impartially and conscienciously to carry thy self to every duty alike, and then
thou may be well persuaded of thy sincerity in Religion.

8. And Secondly, Let every man observe what it is that he is most in danger to
neglect, when his Spirit is forwardly carried toward one thing. There is
always some one duty more then others, that a partial zeal is apt to devour.
Be sure therefore to take heed, and beware of covetousness, while you cry out
against profaneness. Be as careful to maintain love in your heart to your
Brethren, as you are to observe them, reprove them, or to make them of your
mind. Be as humble, lowly, and poor in spirit, as you are ready to distribute,
to relieve the poor, or despise the world. Labor to be in as great charity
with your enemies, to love them, pray for them, and bless them, as you are
willing and perhaps forward to hazard your selves in a good cause. Be as
conscientious in following the Ministers Doctrine as in paying of him his
tithes, and speaking well of him: As zealous in doing as you are in hearing; as
careful to use Gods grace as to beg it; to live to God, as to pray to him. And
Saint James gives us the reason, Jam. 1.22. That we shall otherwise deceive our
own souls. We shall have only so much religion as will serve to cozen our
selves: as many a man does who hears Gods word, and prays, and is much
affected; but makes no conscience of laying it to his heart by serious
consideration, and working of it into the frame of his spririt, that he may
live according to it.

CAP. XXIV.
1. The distinctions which the Pharisees had to elude Gods commands. 2. One
more notable then the rest, that if they kept one precept well, they need not
keep all others. 3. The fleshly Christian has his juggling tricks. He
distinguishes between the letter and the Spirit of a duty. 4. Or says he
follows Providence. 5. Or that he has an Impulse. 6. Or he pleads Necessity.
7. Or that he does it for Gods glory. 8. Or has liberty from Free Grace. 9. Or
from the Examples of good men. 10. We must not believe every pretender. 11.
Observe how they change and turn about. 12. Especially how loath they are to
suffer, and how impatient under it.

1. BUT you may well wonder how men so knowing as they were, should overlook
the most necessary things which are so legible in the Book of God, and persuade
themselves that they were pious, notwithstanding such palpable neglects. Sure
these men had a most notable wit, which could invent such cunning distinctions
as should allow them to break all Gods Commandments while they seemed to keep
them. And so they had, as our Savior tells, Mat 23, 16, 17, etc. where you may
see that they did absolve men even from their oaths that were made by holy
things, ( viz the Temple and the Altar) if they were not made by that which
they most loved, the Gold and the Gift. It is so senseless a distinction
whereby they freed men who had solemny sworn (as our Savior plainly proves to
them) that we cannot but think it was invented by gross covetousness, and yet
with a show of devotion to God in preferring the Gold that was brought to his
treasury, and the gifts to his Altar above all other things in sacredness. And
so they defeated another command concerning the giving of honor to our
Parents, by making a vow that all they got should be as a Sacred thing to their
parents, i. e. it should be as unlawful for them to have any of their goods,
as to enjoy that which was devoted to God. For so they that are best skilled in
the Jewish learning do expound that place, V. J.r Coch. in duns Tit. Talmud.
cap. 7. Sanhedr.
Mat. 15.5. though some of the Fathers (as I have already said) think that it
speaks of consecrating their goods to the treasury of God. This was a rare way
to be rich, by vowing not so much as to give their parents a mite of their
goods; and a great piece of religion no question they thought it to keep such a
vow when they had made it. This was a subtle Art to be covetous, and under a
religious tie both together.

2. But these are no more then trifles in compare with that transcendent trick,
which absolves a man at once from as many duties as he pleases. That rare
device was this, That if a man observed but one command well, it was not
absolutely necessary that he should keep the rest. Vid Tit. Maccoth. cap. 3.
So R. Chanania says, that God would have Israel increase in merits, and
therefore it was that he multiplied so many precepts. It was not absolutely
necessary that they should observe them all; but they should merit exceedingly
if they did. For so Maimon observes in his Comment upon that place cited in the
margin, If any of Israel keep one of the six hundred and thirteen precepts as
he ought, out of love, and without a mixture of worldly designs, he shall have
a portion in the world to come. Many evasions will men's own lusts and desires
suggest to them for the casting off the weight of any duty that lies upon them;
but this is such a notorious gloss, that by it they might slip their necks from
the yoke of every command, but that which they could be content to practice.

3. And you must not think the fleshly Christian is at a loss for the like
distinctions, interpretations and glosses, for to serve the dear interest of
his sins. Loath he is to break a Law, unless he seem to himself to keep it; and
therefore here his wit steps in, and offers its help to salve his conscience,
and his profit or pleasure both together. I shall take the liberty to instance
in a few, which are easy to observe, because I doubt men will make a shift to
understand nothing that concerns them by all that I say, unless I descend to
particulars. First therefore, if a man have use for a sin, as suppose the
breaking of an oath, he can distinguish between the Letter and the Spirit of
it. He can easily persuade himself that he keeps the prime meaning (which is
according as he pleases to have it) though he go contrary to the sound of the
words, and the sense in which men commonly understand it. And thus those
persons in New England who made so great a disturbance, See Mr. Welds relation.
An. 1636. evacuated and blotted out the whole body of Christian precepts, and
did not leave so much as the Pharisees (who thought obedience to one precept at
least to be necessary) saying, That the letter of all the Scriptures were for a
Covenant of works; but the Spirit of them held forth a Covenant of free grace.
This was a rare answer when they were urged with several places of Holy Writ
that proved the necessity of Sanctification and inward righteousness; which
they turned out of doors under the pretense of letting in Christ. If it were
said that we must become new creatures, the Answer was ready, that by the new
creature is meant Christ, and therefore we must only get into Christ. If it
were said, we must be holy as God is holy; this was the return, that Christ is
our sanctification, and that there is no inherent righteousness in us, but only
in him. And whereas the Scripture says, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, etc.
they said, a man might have all grace, and yet want Christ. This was the secret
sense, the Spirit of the Scriptures, That we need do nothing, and Christ has
done all. This was holding forth naked Christ, as they called it: so naked
indeed, that it is a shame to speak of it.

4. If men cannot attain to this height of secret intelligence (which the old
Gnostics likewise boasted of) but they must acknowledge that sense which we
receive of Gods precepts; then they have another little device to save them the
labor of yielding obedience; and that is called Providence, which is able to
justify any action against the Authority of Gods word. If they have something
to accomplish which is contrary to Law and Justice, and their conscience
boggles at it; then because they have a mind to keep friends with God, if he be
content upon fair terms, they will entitle him some way or other to it, and
they will not do it except his Providence lead them to it. And this has been
swallowed for very sweet doctrine by some Grandees (as I am well assured) That
a man may follow providence against a precept. And so a thief (I have often
times thought) who going by an house sees the door open, and a fair plate
inviting of him, no body within to deter him, may stand and admire at this
strange providence, that he should come in that nick of time when all things
concur together to justify his theft, to which he has so loud a call. And if
he should at that time be thinking of another thing, and this plate likewise
should happen to have his name upon it, how should he choose but hold up his
hands and say, that he was lead to it by the hand of heaven. I would have any
one to tell himself how his case differs from this, who when a great many
things usually meet together to make up a temptation (for it is nothing else)
to draw him to do an unlawful action, he says, that Providence has so
ordered it, he did not intend it, but that he has a call. And truly I believe
he has a call from his own importune and bawling defires; and Providence I
know disposes of all things, and often sets us in such circumstances as we
shall be tried how we will behave our selves, and prove us how we will do our
known duty.

5. But if this fail, there is a third thing so powerful that nothing can
resist it, and that is a secret impulse and inward motion mistaken for
inspiration. There is no act so guilty which this is not able to set a good
face upon; no cause so foul which this cannot justify with a goodly pretense.
The Zealots among the Jews covered abundance of murders and other insolences
under the name of such a divine spirit as moved Phineas. All the Jews had a
tang of this fiery zeal, and therefore rush like madmen with their stones upon
St. Paul and others, to vindicate their Law from the contempt which they
imagined was cast upon it. And so all men that are pricked forward, and spurred
on by their own ambitious covetous desires, or their revengefull and angry
passions; may easily think that they feel some foreign impulse, because they
are thrust on by no small violence. Their own longings are wings large enough
to mount up their soul, and carry them like an Eagle to his prey. Their own
desires can inspire them, and impregnate their sails, without any other spirit
to breath upon them. There is so much fire naturally within them, that none
need descend, nor ascend to stimulate their souls to any beloved enterprise.

6. But if men be not of so high spirits as to have a touch of Enthusiasm;
there is a fourth thing called necessity which has no Law. In Apolog.
Tertullian indeed was so simple as to say in the name of the old soldiers of
Jesus Christ, that Nulla est necessitas peccandi, quibus una est necessitas non
peccandi; there can be no necessity of sinning, to them who have one necessity
lying upon them of not sinning. But there are blades now of a purer make and a
sharper edge, who cut asunder those Iron chains of necessity it self wherein
those grosser souls were fettered. Though it be necessary for such as us (who
follow the old steps) not to sin; yet it is necessary to them to sin, but they
think it not to be a sin, because it is necessary. But they had best look to
it, and consider who is the author of that necessity, and not when they have
run themselves into a strait, think that God gives them leave to break an
hedge. Let them not think to escape better with all these pitiful shifts,
then a thief does, who when he has robbed a man of his money, thinks it
necessary for to make all sure to cut his throat. It is a necessity which he
himself creates, and he must either make it good against the other of not
sinning, which is of Gods creating, or else it is necessary that he suffer
soundly both for sinning, and for making it necessary to sin.

7. And if it be said (as it must,) That there is no necessity that they or any
other men should be great, or rich, or live in the world, and therefore they
should not do an illegal action for the saving of life it self; They have
another distinction ready at hand, which is, That all is done for Gods Glory,
and we are not always to tread in the ordinary path to accomplish that. A man
may step out of his way for Christ's sake; and he is mightily beholden (you may
think) unto him, that he will sin even against his conscience for his honor.
What can he do more for Christ then sacrifice his very soul, and damn himself
to make him glorious? Sure Christ will catch hold on such loving friends of
his: and not suffer them to fall into that damnation which they ventured at,
seeing it was for him. Just as Politicians, when they do unwarrantable actions,
think to excuse them with the Reason of State, and pretense of common Good: So
do other men think to shelter all their evil doings under the wings of Christ,
and drown the voice of their impieties, with loud cries for the Glory of God,
for the Glory of God. As those Statesmen will break their faith and their
oaths, and at the rate of their honesty purchase the common welfare; so do
these men transgress all Gods Laws, and will pawn their very souls upon it,
that all is done for the Divine honor. As if God had need of men's sin, or we
could tell what is his interest better then himself. I am something angry at
this vile abuse of his holy name; for I can make no better sense of men's
actions then this; That though God has told us what is his m^^d and pleasure;
yet they will instruct him and teach him what is more for his benefit, and show
him a way that he thought not on for the advancement of his glory.

8. But perhaps there is no such thing as sin in them; and we poor creatures
know not the mystery of that great phrase Free Grace. There is a singular
privilege (that we know not of) contained in those words to do evil. As if it
was called Free Grace, because it made them free from all Law: or by an
Antiphrasis, because it makes them slaves to all their own lusts and worldly
affections. And indeed it is very strange if God should be so free and liberal
as to give a way all his own rights, and let his creatures do even as they
list. If men swallow once this conceit, they will not be so kind as to give him
any thing back again. Witness the Manichees and the Borborites of old, who
thought that sin did not hurt Gods elect; but as gold thrust into the dirt
still retained its nature and luster: so they, thought they rolled (...) in any
kind of filthy and fleshly actions, Irenaeus.
yet were not hurt at all, nor did (...), lose their spiritual nature or
subsistence. And witness the ranting crew among us, whom we may call, as the
Jews do us sometimes in spite, not Kedoshim but Kedishim not Sancti, but
Cinaedi; not Saints, but Sinners in the worst use of the word. I cannot tell
how true it is, but I have read it as a speech of some amongst us, That God
oftimes saves his people even contrary to his own rules. I am sure the actions
of many are so conformable to it, as if they fed upon nothing but such
poisonous doctrine. And either God must act contrary to himself as they do, and
break his word in favor of base pretenders, or else such unrighteous, covetous
persons, such extortioners, liars, etc. shall never enter into heaven.

9. But yet as if heaven were full of none but such as they: I have known some
have the impudence to justify bad actions by the Examples of the Saints
miscarriages which are recorded in Holy Writ. Who methinks are just like to bad
painters, who (as Plutarch observes) because they are not able by their skill
to represent in their colors a beautiful face, De discrim. Adul. and am.
(...), they draw the likeness of things in wrinkles, and scars, and wounds.
When men cannot imitate the good that is in those Examples, they will pick out
all the bad, and draw the copy of it in their lives. It is the fault of the
world, that they carp at the failings of good men when they are alive, and take
no notice of their piety and holiness: and yet they will imitate those failings
when they are dead, and think to crust over all their sins by those Examples
which they would have railed at before. If Vice be ugly, then it is most ill
favored in those who are good: and if these men were good, they would be of
that judgment. And as the Lacedaemonians brought their children to behold their
slaves when they were drunk, not that they might learn of them, but that they
might abhor that dirty and sottish sin: so would these men look upon the sins
of others, not to be like them and do the same, but the more to abominate and
detest them which leave such a foul blemish upon them that commit them. And at
the day of judgment, they will be condemned, not only for sinning, but for
falling into those sins which they had fair warning to watch against by the
Examples of others before them.

10. You must come near therefore to those that make a fair show, and examine
their actions, before you believe all their excellent speeches and pious
discourses about some matters in Religion. If you stand at a distance from
them, you would take them to be very glorious Saints: they do so glitter in an
outward profession, and perform such splendid works of devotion: but if you
come near to them and handle them, you will find them hot without, and cold
within: full of fierceness and violence in their external motions, but void of
all true love and goodness in their hearts. I have sometimes compared them in
my own thoughts unto those Indian Calicoes, which when we behold afarr off seem
to be a rare needlework of all sorts of silk: but when we come close to them
are only thin painted stuff that has neitheir substance, nor cost in it. These
men look like the Kings daughter, whose garments were of needle work, and
wrought gold, whereby you would imagine that they were all glorious within
also: but if you come to deal with them, you shall see by many of their
actions, that this outward bravery is a mere varnish and gloss that they set
upon themselves: some painted raiment to hide their nakedness, but which an
observant eye may easily look thorough, it is so thin and beggarly.

11. Especially observe how many of them change with times and occasions, and
say that they must follow Providence. If you follow them close, you will soon
find that as their profit leads them, so they cry up particular pieces of
godliness. Just like Alcibiades, who (as Plutarch says of a flatterer) at
Athens was a gallant, De discrim. adul. and amic.
and at Sparta wore a threadbare cloak; in Thracia was a warrier, and at
Tissapherne gave himself to pride and luxury; So do these men vary according as
several humors stir within them. Sometimes they would have all Gods people be
no less then Kings; and at other times they must be as poor as beggars.
Sometimes they pine and macerate themselves with fasting, and again they think
that none but they may make a free use of the creature. Many of them there are
that will sail with every wind if it blow them any profit; and all of them are
carried as the fierce gusts of their various passions do make a zealous bluster
in them. But a good man who directs his life, not by his worldly interest, or
mutable fancies, but by the word of God, he always steers the same course, and
remains constantly the same man, as that word does, whose righteousness is
everlasting. We may say of him, as the same Plutarch does of those brave men
Epimanondas and Agesilaus, (...), They had every where a becoming deportment;
and as he says of Plato, who was the same at Syracuse that he was in his
Academy; and before Dionysius such an one as he was before Dion. He changes not
his behavior with places and persons, for he walks before God, who is always
the same and changes not.

12. And if any of these men we have been treating of, be so hardy as to suffer
for their Opinion (for I can call it nothing else) and not always cast to be on
the thriving side, yet it is with a full bad will. And they are so far from
bearing it meekly and patiently, that they struggle by all means to throw the
cross from off their shoulders. If there be any way to ease themselves, they
inquire not much whether it be good or bad, but are easily inclined to think
that Providence makes an offer to them for their deliverance, though it be by
unlawful means. Such as they would not have spared Saul, if they had been in
David's case when he had him at his mercy, but they would have applauded Abishai
for a Saint, who said, God has delivered thine enemy into thy hand, and bidden
him smite him to the ground. And observe them also when they are uppermost
again, whether they be not as zealous to lay the cross on other men's shoulders,
as they were to cast it from off their own. As far as I can observe, it is the
temper of this false zeal wheresoever it is, to endure no oppression quietly,
to endeavor always to be above, to trample upon others, to be proud and
disobedient, to contemn all authoriy which is not on their side, and to speak
evil of dignities, if they do not speak well of them.

CAP. XXV.
1. The design of God is to make men thoroughly good. 2. Though men now think
otherwise; yet the Ancient Christians prove the Divinity of their Religion from
the excellent lives of them that professed it. 3. They proved Christ's Divinity
likewise from the goodness of his followers. 4. They upbraid false Christians,
that they could not confute heathens by their lives. 5. The definition of a
Christian according to Phavorinus, who speaks the Ancients sense. 6. Religion
reforms men in every thing. 7. A Summary of our Religion out of Erasmus. 8.
Christ represented it unto us in his life, and taught us to deny not only
sinful, but mere natural desires. 9. This is so clear in the Scriptures, that
every one may see it, that had not rather talk and dispute, then live well. 10.
With what minds we must study the Scripture.

1. BUT let it be remembered by all those that intend to go to heaven, that Gods
design is to banish all wickedness out of the world; and by inhabiting of our
nature to expel all sin and baseness out of it, (...). Homil. 7. in Iad
Corinth.
and to bring in his own image. It is an excellent saying of Chrysostom, That
God has so disposed matters in the Gospel, as if he intended that there should
not be a relic of wickedness left among us. The whole dispensation looks as
if he designed to root it out from the face of the earth. And this only can
bring the world into obedience to Christ; this only can set up his Kingdom, and
make all his enemies fall at his feet. Let us advance this in our hearts and
lives, and it will set Christ upon his throne, and make him victorious among
men. And therefore that excellent man gives this as a reason why Idolatry did
still remain in some places: because Christians were no better, and did not
destroy all the works of the Devil. And what is it I beseech you that still
upholds all humane inventions in such honor, but because there is so little
true Goodness appears in the lives of most that oppose them? Men look upon the
Gospel as if it served for nothing but to form their opinions, but had no
design of making them like to God. They are enemies to their own salvation,
(...), mutining and seditiously rising against their own eternal welfare. They
oppose him that comes to bring them the glad tidings of Salvation, or whosoever
shall press them in Christ's name to be very good. They dispute many times
against too high a degree of holiness. They spend more time in excusing their
faults, then striving to amend them. They are wilfully bent not to be
over-happy while they are here in the world; and will not believe that God
intends to advance them so high in a heavenly life. And so it is no wonder that
things are so bad among others, when even they that profess the name of Christ
(many of them) are no more in love with the Doctrine that is according to
Godliness.

2. And indeed why should they be in love with a thing that incroaches so much
upon their liberty, if they can go to heaven by some neat device that leaves
them room to do as they list? why should men be at the trouble to die to the
world, if it be the design of Christ to make them great men in it? As Cato
counted it one of his oversights (of his (...) as Simplicius relates it) that
he took a journey by water when he might have gone by land; so men may well
count it foolishness to go through the tears of repentance, to wash off all
their dirt and filth, when they hope they may go to heaven through the earth,
though they be all besmeared with the mire of the world. But it is not great
boasts of the purity of Religion, of the holiness of Ordinances, and such like
things, that will always carry the name from purity of heart, and holiness of
life. There was a time when it was the greatest glory of Christians that they
were holy themselves, as well as that they had an holy Religion; and so I hope
it will one day be again. Then the Gospel flourishes, when men can argue for
the Divinity of it, from the great reformation that it works in those that
profess it, whom it makes truly Divine. And so in the days of Origin they were
able to do; Lib. 1. contr. cells.
for he challenges Celsus the heathen to tell him how it should happen (...),
without a special hand of God, that such a multitude of sick persons should be
recovered of most desperate diseases whereof they had long labored, by
preaching of the Gospel only. When we see so many rid of their intemperance,
injustice, neglect of God, and such like things; we must needs see that that
word is from God, which is (...), able to free them from such evils, too
stubborn for all the Philosophy in the world to deal withal.

3. Lib. 3.
In the next Book but one, the same Origin adventures to bring the excellent
lives of Christians for an argument of the Divinity of Christ, whom they
worshipped. And he says, that the very worst of them, even they who were most
slothful in their religion, did make greater progress in virtue, then the very
best of the heathen. Which was a plain argument he thought (...). that there
was no ordinary divinity in that person who did such great things in his
followers. And when in the next book Celsus by way of scorn calls the
Christians and Jews, bats, and frogs, and worms, and such like insects, who
flock together and contend with each other which are the greatest sinners, he
tells him what noble lives the Christians did lead: And asks him whether he was
not ashamed to call him a crawling worm who ascends up to heaven, to live with
God, and sends up pure prayers unto him; that does all things as if God saw
him, and speaks all thing as if he heard him, and cannot be persuaded from
Godliness by any dangers, any labor, any fair words and language. Will not all
this (says he) be sufficient to save a man from being compared to a worm,
whatsoever he might be called before so great a godliness! What, must they, who
repel the sharpest stings to wanton pleasures, that are pure and chaste,
knowing that there is no other way to be made familiar with God, be but Cozens
to worms and neighbors to frogs? cannot the brightness of righteousness, that
makes a man sociable, friendly, full of justice, humanity and benignity, do
nothing to vindicate a man from the condition of a bat or an owl? What then
must they be who live in the filth and dirt of the world, and wallow in all
beastly lusts? Thus those gallant spirits durst outbrave the heathens, and dare
them to show any such men as the Christians were.

4. And I wish that we could do so at this day, and did not justly deserve the
name of Bats, that see not what the Gospel designs; of worms that out of
covetousness, not humility, crawl upon the earth; of Frogs that love a moist
and sensual life. It is a good saying of Chrysostom, Homil. 18. in Epist. ad
Romans
That God is not so much wondered at from the clearness of the heavens, (...),
as from a pure and heavenly life. And therefore says he, when we dispute with
the Gentiles, (...), We do not allege the heavens, but men for a proof; who
lying in a condition worse then beasts, are persuaded by the Gospel to aemulate
the Angels. And when we speak of this change, we stop their mouths, and they
have no more to say. But alas! now Religion is a thing described in Books, and
we cannot say to opposers, Behold the men that transcribe it into their lives.
It lies in Paper, and is the work of the Printer; but of no body else. Where
shall we find the men who lead such a life as is delineated by our Lord, and
studies to conform himself to his will? There are scrace enough of these men to
make an argument; but most that are called Christians, are the confutation of
the Religion of Christ. I cannot forbear to speak to such in the words of the
same sweet Father to the false Christians in his days. Suppose a Gentile come
to thee and say, If thou look for a Kingdom, why do thou mind this world
so much? Sure thou do but talk: Homil 26. in Epist. ad Romans
for if thou did expect the terrible tribunal of Christ hereafter, why do
thou not despise the terrible things of this world now? If thou expect est
immortality, why do thou notaugh at death? What can thou now say for thy
self and religion, who tremblest at the loss of thy riches for the Kingdom of
Heavens sake, and rejoycest at the gain of a farthing? This is that which
scandalizeth the Gentiles; and therefore, do not any longer make apologies for
thy Religion (...), by words but by deeds, that it may be manifested there is
such a religion in being, alive in the world, and not dead in Books. And that
they may see the Gospel commands things that may be done, and does not draw a
Platoes Idea; ( or as we say, an Utopian Commonwealth, which can never be put
in practice.) Suppose a Gentile should say to thee, How shall I know (...),
that your God has commanded things possible? They look like things that cannot
be done which you speak of, and I never saw any Christian such a man. Behold
thou wast brought up from thy childhood in this Religion, and yet thou do no
such thing. What will they now say? perhaps thou will show him some other body,
and bid him look upon the Monks that live in the wilderness, What holy lives
they lead. O most shameful apology! For he will say, What then, must I turn a
Monk? must I live in the mountains and deserts? must I forsake all company to
be a Christian? This is a strange Religion, which a man cannot be of, unless he
leave the society of men; a religion, that cannot dwell in Towns and Cities.
This truly is a great disgrace to Christian piety, to make as though it could
not inhabit in any place, and be performed by any men. (...) (says he) (...).
Show me a man that has an house, wife and children, and yet is a Christian;
for Christ does not say, Let your light shine in Mountains and deserts, but
before men. This I do not speak (says he) to disgrace those that live so
retired, but to bemoan our Cities which have driven virtue out of them into the
Wilderness.

5. Some Christians it seems were so good as to be able by their lives to
defend the Christian cause, and others again were so bad, that they they had
nothing to say for their Religion, but that there were better then themselves
in the world. But our case at this day is far sadder: for many that live in
sin, will take upon them to be the most excellent Christians, the standard and
measure of all others, because they can talk; and account all them but Moral
men, who are not cast into the same mould of opinion with themselves. They
would be taken for the Examples of piety, who have not yet mortified the flesh,
especially the subtiler part of it, Pride, Vainglory, Hatred and Strife. But
let the Scripture determine who are the godly persons; they, or those men who
frame their opinions and lives by the Scripture, and not by any other Books.
And Phavorinus methinks has done our Religion a great deal of right and credit
too, who in his Lexicon, where he explains the Greek language, thus defines a
Christian and Christianity. A Christian (says he) is (...) etc. who has by
Christ crucified the body with the affections and lusts, and keeps all the
commands of Christ. And the property of a Christian is Faith working by Love:
and afterward, It is the property of a Christian to purify himself from all
filthiness by the blood of Christ, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God,
and the love of our Lord. So he a little in-larges those words of the Apostle,
2 Cor. 7.1. And again he defines Christianism to be a despising of things here
below for the profession of Christ; (...).
And an acknowledgement of Godliness leading to eternal life. Whatsoever false
Christianity there is among men, which falls short of this, and yet passes with
great credit in the world, it will at last discover it self by some carnal
action or other, which will betray its partiality. As the Cat in the Fable
could play the woman no longer, when the Mouse came in her way; so these men
can no longer Act the part of Christians, when some pleasure, or credit or gain
to which they are addicted, gives them a fair occasion to serve themselves.
Cedrenus reports that this was one thing wherewith the Queen of Sheba posed
Solomon, viz, that she apparelled a great many boys and girls in the very same
clothes, so that by their gesture, and habit, and carriage they could not be
distinguished; and she bid him tell her of which Sex every one of them was. He
called for some water and bid every one of them wash; and the Boys rubbing
their faces pretty hard as they used to do, but the girls only gently sleeking
them over, or scrarce touching them with their fingers, he easily knew the
difference. Even so, howsoever men may dissemble their natures, and put
themselves into such a dress of Religion as if they were no less masculine and
strong Christians then others, yet you will find them to be so tender to
themselves in the washing and purifying of themselves from some filthiness or
other, that they will soon discover their effeminate constitution.

6. For, Religion consists not only in acts of worship, whereby men may smooth
their faces and give them a superficial gloss: but in the through scowring of
their souls from all evil habits which stick so fast unto them. It makes us not
only to bow our bodies, and study the neater and more complementall
performances: but to undertake the rougher and severer duties, to bow our souls
before God, and to purge our hearts from all that is offensive to his eyes, and
hinders him from embracing of us. Where the Gospel comes in truth (says
Erasmus very well,) it makes people more obedient to their Magistrates, In
praefat. ad suum Ecclesiast.
more observant of the Laws: Lovers of Peace, and haters of War: Husbands and
wives agree better, children are more obedient to parents, and servants to
Masters: no workman but performs his task with greater fidelity, nor tradesman
but does as he would be done by: and to speak in a word, all men will become
more kind, and slow to revenge: less greedy of the world, and more sober in the
enjoyment of it.

7. And give me leave from that excellent man to present you with a sum of
Christian Doctrine which he would have a learner of Religion to keep always in
his eye. He must think that Christ was an heavenly teacher, De ratione verae
Theol.
that came to purchase a people that should depend on heaven, and not trust in
this world, as those that were in another manner rich, wise, noble, potent and
happy, then the world is. A people that should by contempt of the world attain
a felicity that others seek after by enjoying of it. A people of a single eye,
ignorant of all envy, malice and spite. That should be void of all lust, and
meditating an Angelical life in this flesh. Not making divorces, as being a
people that could either mend any thing, or else bear it. That should not
swear, as not distrusting nor deceiving any: That should not seek after money,
as having their treasures in heaven. That should not be tickled with vain
glory, as referring all to the glory of Christ their Savior. That should not
be ambitious, as knowing the greater they were, the more they should do for
Christ; and the lower, they should submit to all for his sake. That should not
be angry when provoked, or give ill language, much less take revenge, as being
men that must return good for evil. That must be of such an innocent life, that
heathens themselves should approve of them. That must be of a childlike purity,
as being born again. That should live like the birds and Lillies from day to
day. That should perfectly agree among themselves, as members one of another.
That should do all Christian offices one for another, helping others in need,
bearing of their burdens, or making them lighter by their officious love. That
should be so taught by the Spirit, so live after the example of Christ, that
they should be the salt of the earth, the light of the world, a city set upon
an hill. To whom this life seems vile, and immortality most desirable. That
should fear neither tyranny, nor Death, nor the Devil himself, trusting in
Christ only. That should always be ready to die, and give an account. This is
the scope of Christ's doctrine, and such men we are to labor more and more that
we may grow. Haec sunt authoris nostri dogmata nova, quae nulla Philosophorum
familia tradidit. These are the new principles of the Author of our Faith,
which no sect of the Philosophers has delivered; This is the new wine to be
committed only to new bottles.

8. All this Christ expressed in his life, and does but desire us to follow his
Example. He was so innocent, that the false witnesses who were suborned for the
purpose, could not tell how handsomely to accuse him. He was so meek, that he
was led like a sheep to the slaughter. So free he was from covetousness, that
he had nothing, nor affected any thing that we can hear of. He was so humble,
that he washed his disciples feet. So free from ambition, that he would not be
made a King when the people would have crowned him. He stuck not to die the
death of the Cross. When they buffeted him, he returned not their strokes; when
he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to the righteous judgment of God. And hereunto are we
called, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.
because Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow
his steps; Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

All this that I have said from him, may be thus reduced into some order, by
considering that our Religion teaches us to cross all our own desires, and to
be wholly at the will of our Lord and master. To believe what he reveals, and
to obey what he commands; to fear only what he threatens, and to hope for
nothing but what he promises. And our Desires being either sinful or only
natural, it teaches us to deny our selves in both. To fast as well as to be
sober; to be content with poverty as well as not to be covetous: to bear
disgrace as well as not to hunt after vain glory; to endure pain patiently as
well as to despise unlawful pleasures; to suffer oppressiion as well as to
forbear to oppress and domineer over others; to put up wrongs as well as not to
do wrong to our neighbor: to lie quietly on a sick bed, as well as not to
abuse health; to submit to persecution, as well as to be innocent.

9. The Devil has no way to hinder those that read the Scripture seriously,
from minding these things; but by making them look upon it as a Book that
teaches them to be knowing rather then good, to dispute rather then to live.
And thus the Pharisees cozened themselves, who studied this Holy Writ to make
them subtle and wise, very curious and nice about several cases that might be
argued in the ceremonial Law: but they did not look upon it as a Book that
should make them like to him that made it. There they learnt to oppose the
Sadduces who denied another life; more then they did to attain that life by
opposing and subduing all their lusts. And so at this day men read the
Scriptures to defend their opinions, to uphold their cause, to see if they will
be on their side, and to make them able to oppose all adversaries. And then
imagining that it sounds altogether that way that they would have it, they come
to be as zealous and fierce for their opinion as other men are for holy living:
and no man can urge a divine command more peremptorily, then they will do their
doubtful Opinions. This they make their religion, and to cry up these
particular persuasions, is taken to be earnestness for God and his cause. But
while they dispute of God, they do not know him; and while they wrangle about
Justification, they remain unsanctified; and while they contend about the
extent of Christ's redemption, they take care that themselves shall have no
great benefit by it. Just as the Philosophers disputed about the nature of
Honesty, while they should have lived honestly; and spent their time in
debating what the Form of Virtue was, while they should have done virtuously:
So do men now dispute about the nature of Faith, Hope and Charity, till they
leave themselves no time to exercise and put in practice any of them. Nay, as
for Charity, citius hanc reperias inter Idiotas quam inter hos qui sine fine
disputant, as Erasmus well says: you shall sooner find this among vulgar
people, then among those who dispute without end.

10. All those therefore who are subject to this disease (which I doubt is too
common) must mind the true end for which God gave us this Holy Book, which was
not to fill our heads with curious Notions, but our hearts with holy and devout
affections: not to teach us nice and subtle distinctions, but to tell us
plainly how to distinguish beeween good and evil: not to make us able
combatants against all opinions that swarm in the world: but to arm us against
all the lusts of the flesh which most abound, and war most against the soul.
And we must have no other end in studying of this divinity, but ut mutemur, ut
rapiamur, ut afflemur, ut transformemur in ea quae discimus, that we may be
changed, that we may be rapt and snatched away from our selves, that we may
receive the breath of heaven, that we may be transformed into the things that
we learn. And then we have profited much, not when we can dispute more sharply,
but when we can live more exactly; not when our wits are more acute, but when
our hearts are more dull to all earthly things: not when we are more confident
of our knowledge, but when we are less proud, angry, covetous, voluptuous, and
subject to any other vice. This kind of Philosophy (as the same Erasmus speaks)
is in affectibus situm verius quam in syllogismis; In Paraclesi.
vita est magis qaam disputatio, etc. Seated in the Affections rather then in
syllogisms; it is a life rather then a disputation; an inspiration, rather then
learning; a transformation rather then a subtle reason. Come therefore whoever
thou art that read the word of God, with some pious dispositions, Orans
magis quam argumentans, and transformari studens potius quam armari, praying
rather then arguing, and with a mind to be transfigured rather then to be
armed; Then shall thou find that true felicity which is desired by all: and the
true way to attain it which is known but by a few. Thou shall find both
Doctrines and Examples giving thee an absolute form of life, and instructing
thee how to be as good as thou can desire. But if thou read the Scripture
only to fight against others, not thy self; to satisfy thy mind in disputable
points rather then to know the unquestionable ways of holiness: and intendest
to express what thou know rather in syllogisms then in thy life; and good
talk rather then good deeds; thou art not like to be a Christian. The divine
spirit loves not to dwell in contentious souls: Truth uses not to be found in
the midst of a scuffle; nor loves she to lie in a mind that is set round only
with thorny notions and perplexed distinctions. Study therefore how to live the
life of God; become a Babe, and bring a lowly mind: or else a worse thing will
come of it then thy being deceived. For the world will be filled with a noise
of Religion without any substance of it, and it will be embroiled with a
factious zeal under the name of spending men's selves for Jesus Christ. And what
though others may account thee but a pitiful wretch who art not of their way,
nor well able perhaps to fight for any opinion! Thou art a conqueror glorious
enough, if thou fallest under no vice, nor submittest thy self to the will of
any lust, though thou art inferior to others and art overcome in craft and
confidence.

Conclusion.
1. All this has been said only to warn us lest we be Hypocrites, and do not
know it. 2. Let none take occasion hereby to call Piety by the name of
Hypocrisy. 3. Though it is common with profane men so to do. 4. Who are too
bad to be mended by discourses. 5. And some of them as hypocritical as the
Pharisees. 6. For there are several sorts of Hypocrites. 7. Some of which are
profane. 8. And others take no more then a natural pleasure in reading of
these Truths.

1. YOU have seen what whited sepulchers the Pharisees were, and what a goodly
appearance they made in the outside, when they were no better then charnel
houses or rather stinking graves within. And now for a Conclusion of this
Discourse you may observe, That those Sepulchers to which our Savior compares
them were Whited on purpose, Mat. 23.27.
that the people might see them before they came near to them, and so take heed
of being defiled and polluted by them. For the Jews (as a very learned man
observes) thought themselves to be made unclean by touching of a grave as well
as of a dead carkase; V. Pocock. Not. Miscell. in Port. Mos.
and therefore because the tombs were hidden sometimes by the long grass,
(which he makes the meaning of that place, Luke 11.44.) they brusht them over
with lime, so that strangers who passed that way, might not unawares stumble
upon them and contract a le-gall defilement. And just so does our Savior point
out the Pharisees in their colors; both that men might take heed how they
dealt with them, and that they might avoid their hypocritical temper, not
taking that for godliness which had so much secret wickedness lurking under it.

And for the same reason it is that I have treated thus particularly of the
false Religion that is among us: that so all men seeing wherein Hypocrisy does
consist, may fly away from it, as the Jews did from a dead body or a grave; and
may walk in the plain old path of all real and unfeigned holiness.

2. And considering that this was my end, I hope none that reads me will be so
profane as to make use of all that has been said to the dishonor of
Religion, and the defaming of pious people. It would grieve me very much if any
should take occasion from hence to call all those Precisians, dissembling
fellows, and larved Saints, who pray in their families, hear Sermons, and
perform other pious duties: for unless they have a mind to abuse themselves and
others, they cannot but see clearly, That it is not less then the Pharisees
did, but a great deal more, that God requires of us. These things men ought to
do, and not to leave the rest undone. And except our righteousness shall exceed
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23 23.
we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Mat. 5.20.


3. It must be confessed, that there always have been men of corrupt hearts
that use to suck poison out of these discourses, and to spit their venom at all
godliness; but it is because they have an hatred both to the shadow and to the
truth and substance of it. There was never any name given to a bad party of
professors, but the most holy and severe persons have by such men been branded
and stigmatized with it. A Pharisee in their mouths shall extend so far as to
be a nickname for all that are strictly pious; and an hypocrite is in their
language a man who will not be so profane as themselves. And it will be very
well if the name of Fanatique become not ere long of as large a signification;
and that all those be not included in it, who believe that there is an Hell,
and dare not run with others to the same excess of riot.

4. These profane spirits do not at this time fall under my pen. Whom I need
not decipher, they being blacker then my ink, and fouler then that any man of
reason should be warned not to approach unto them. I look upon them as fitter
to be corrected and amended by whips and stocks then by sober and pious books.
Their whole life is one continued debauch, and they have no leisure to be
seriously considerate. Their minds are so sopt in drink, that they have left no
room to suck in any of these instructions. They are so slavishly resigned to
other bestial desires, that one may as well read a lecture to a goat, as exhort
them to be chaste or sober. We must leave them to some sickness or other
infliction of God upon them for their chastisement: and then perhaps some good
book (whereof the world has good store) may help the operation of the physic,
though alone it will work nothing at all upon them.

5. But some of these there are, who have not yet sinned away all tenderness,
that let devotion take its turn, and hope by such good moods and fits to make
an excuse to God for all their looseness and profaneness. These men though they
do not observe it, have the very dregs of this Pharisaical humor in them, and
would have some pious action, some little strictnesses, to satisfy for their
drunkenness and other filthiness, as the other would have them to cover their
injustice and uncharitableness. All their prayers and fastings are as weak and
ineffectual to the rendering of them sober, as the same things are in others to
the making of them righteous. And yet they perhaps take themselves to be no
less pious, and that with a contempt, if not violent hatred, of all others,
then the most ceremonious Pharisee that ever breathed. Let them therefore
either reform and become new men, or else not take it ill if we call them
profane hypocrites, as they call others Pharisaicall. The Apostle puts them
together with the other into one catalogue, and bids them not be deceived; for
neither fornicators nor idolators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, 1 Cor. 6.9.
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
And besides it is too frequently seen that when these men have wasted their
estates, they take no less unjust courses to repair them, then they did
prodigally to spend them. Shirking and cheating tricks are then no such crimes
when they have need of them; and they are now against injustice, because they
have no temptation to be unjust.

6. Let these publicans and sinners therefore observe once for all, that the
hypocritical temper is not of one kind, but as various and diverse as the
inclinations of men are. Only injustice and covetousness being more cleanly and
secret vices, then the foul and noted crimes of drunkenness, fornication,
swearing and such like, they can be more bold to join themselves with a
religious profession then the other can. Ex Lib. cui tit. (...).
It is a pretty fancy which Crusius observes out of a book of a modern Greek,
how that the Devil taking a wife call (...) Unrighteousness, he begat Seven
daughters, and thus bestowed them. The first whose name was (...) arrogance and
loftiness, he gave in marriage to the great ones of the world: And the second
called (...) sordidness or covetise, he gave to the common people. The third
who was named (...) (so they now speak) fraud and falsity, he matched to the
husbandmen, who it seems in that country had a great deal of it, under a garb
of simplicity. And for his fourth called (...) envy and emulaton, he found a
fit husband among the handycraftsmen and tradesmen, who look with an evil eye
upon their neighbors. (...) or dissimulation which was his fifth he disposed
of to the Clergy who knew better how to hide their vices then others. And then
his sixth daughter named (...) pride and self exaltation, he gave to be a
waiting gentlewoman to the women kind. But as for the seventh called (...)
fornication or adultery, he would give her in marriage to none, nor let her
stir from his own house, (...) (as their language now is) that whosoever has a
mind to her, may come thither and find her.

7. By this conceit he sets forth how all sorts of men have their vices to
which they are most inclinable; and I mention it for these two purposes. First,
that all men should take heed of that sin which has or may easily have most of
their love; for though they hate all other never so much, and live in the
exercise of some devotion, yet they will be but false and hypocritical
Christians. And Secondly that all incontinent persons should consider whether
they go to satisfy their base desires: and what a fast hold the Devil has of
them above all others. I doubt that most of those that jeer at Religion are of
this sort: and have such a familiarity with this unclean Devil, that unless
they seek for help betime, he will never be cast out. For as that Greek says,
that he must go to the Devils lodgings who would have a whore: so says Solomon
also, that the dead are there, and her guests aree in the depths of hell, Prove.
9.18.

8. But there are others who lead a civil life, in nothing transgressing the
Laws of the Land, that in reading of these things may find themselves well
pleased with me, and may take themselves to be truly religious because they
cannot but disgust this false religion that rules in the world. But they also
must consider that truth has a natural congruity in it to a rational mind: and
that there is a certain pleasure which a mere earthly man may percieve from the
apt representations which are made of things to his understanding faculty. As
the eye is pleased with well mixed colors: and the ear is gratified with sounds
of a sweet composure: So is the mind of man delicately touched with wise
discourses, which report truths in any handsome order unto it. If these things
therefore fall in with the sense and apprehension of any man's soul, they cannot
but tickle him with some delight; This picture of the Jewish hypocrite which I
have drawn, if it be but true though not exact, will present him that looks
upon it with some pleasure. But let not any man think that therefore he is
pious, because he delights in pious Treatises: for this may be but a natural
satisfaction: and it is also one of the deceits which I have given a touch of,
to be warm against a party which is contrary to our selves, and to be excited
unto some indignation on against that which is plainly false.

I shall add no more but my earnest prayers to God, and my request to the
Reader, that these things may be understood and improved to the end for which
they were written: The advancement of an impartial respect to all Gods
Commandments, and the hating of every false way. Unto which also the following
Sermon is purposely addressed.

FINIS.

