QUESTIONS OF Common Right, Proper and Necessary to be considered by all
Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and Commoners of England, and especially
those of the Honorable Profession of the Law.
THE true English Government, excellently composed of the three Simple Species,
Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, I have long thought, and still think, to
be in its Constitution, one of the Best Governments in the World; and not more
excellent in it self, than well Accommodated to the Genius of the People; and
which is but the consequence of these, most Easy to be Exercised. This I think
very true, though it has already within our Memory, suffered such dismal
Concussions and Confusions, and, in my apprehension, is in in so great Danger
of more, as if there was nothing of Truth in it. But this does not proceed from
the Constitution; but from other Causes: Whereof one is Secret, The Judgment of
God, for a secret Root of Bitterness, little regarded by those, who ought to be
most Skilful in discerning, and most Active in amending such Matters. But there
are others manifest enough: One is a General Corruption of the Manners of the
People: Another notorious Corruption of their Deputies and Representatives,
both in Manners in general, and in respect of Justice and the Trust reposed in
them; in which respect, I have known some of themselves laugh, and say, that
they are the true Representatives of the Nation indeed. And though this of it
self has a Tendence to the Dissolution of the Government, yet there is another
more dangerous than this, if it be not looked to in time: and that is by
Popular Factions. For as Monarchies are apt to degenerate into Tyranny, so
Democracies are as apt to be dissolved by Factions: And though in the English
Constitution there is as good Provision against both these, as Humane Affairs
are capable of, yet are the Parts of which it is constituted, subject in some
sort, to the Corruptions of those simple Species, from which they are derived.
What was it but a secret Faction in the Long Parliament, which first cast out
the Bishops as Popishly affected, then the Lords as Useless and Dangerous, then
the greatest part of the Commons, except themselves, commonly called, The Rump;
then cut off the King's Head; and brought all into such Confusions as could
never be settled, until the old Form was restored again? What was it but a
Faction, which by no less than three several Acts of Parliament engaged the
Clergy, the Corporations, the Militia, and all the great Officers and
Magistrate; of the Nation, in such Declarations, as justify or excuse the
Adversaries of the late Revolution and make the Severities against them and
Pretense of Forfeitures, inexcusable, unjust, and unreasonable? What is it but
a Faction, which has presumed with so much Insolence to offer such Indignities
to a Prince of so Great Courage and Conduct, as has been commonly believed and
talked to have been on purpose to affront him? How near have such Factions gone
to inslave the Nation, and set up the Monarchy to be Absolute and Arbitrary?
And how fairly have they begun to pull down that, and the Aristrocratical part,
and set up the Democracy, or themselves and they know not what; or rather to
introduce an Anarchy, and turn all into the like Confusions again. What such
things may come to in time, if neglected, no man knows; but what may be done to
prevent the Mischief, is fit to be considered. Miscarriages of Juries may be
inquired into: And what is done amiss in one Parliament may be rectified in
another. And where there is manifestly a Trust reposed, and so great a Trust,
it would be such a Fault in this Constitution as I never suspected, if it might
be falsified in such Matters as these, and without Remedy. I have therefore
thought fit to propose the following QUESTIONS to the Consideration of all
Persons concerned, who think fit to concern themselves with them. But into so
great Degeneracy, Corruption of Manners and Audacious Impiety, is this Nation
Sunk, Thar it is rare to meet with Men, who dare to do their Duty, or so much
as assert their Common Rights, or the very Religion they Profess,
notwithstanding the Laws both of God and Man on their side, and even where they
have not only the greatest Obligation, but the greatest Privilege to do it
that can be. This is manifest beyond all Contradiction by some late Actions of
great Insolence, and no less Impiety: So that unless another Parliament, and a
Convocation of the Clergy take the Matter into good Consideration, and provide
a speedy Remedy, there is great Danger that the whole Nation will speedily fall
into great Confusion.

The QUESTIONS are these: I. Whether the several Members of the House of
Commons be not Authorized to Sit and Act there, by their respective Counties,
Cities, and Buroughs, by Indenture under the Hands and Seals of the Principal
Electors for themselves and the rest, as Deputies and Trustees for them all?
II. Whether they ought not to receive Instructions from, and in all Matters of
moment consult and advise with their Principals? III. Whether it be not the
Right and Duty of every Knight, Gentleman, Freehold, and Commoner of England,
to represent to the House of Commons by their proper Representatives, or any
other Member of the House, all such matters of Public Concern as are proper to
be inquired of and considered there? IV. Whether any Commoner of England may
not require his proper Representative to represent any such Matter to the
House? V. Whether it be not a Breach of Trust in any such Deputy or
Representative not to perform what is so required honestly and faithfully? VI.
Whether they be not accountable for their Behavior in Parliament to their
Principals, by and for whom they are deputed and entrusted; that is,
questionable by those of the Counties in their County Court (to which all owe
Suit and Service, but many neglect it to their common Prejudice) and those of
the Cities and Buroughs in their respective proper Courts and Assemblies, and
Punishable for any notorious Breach of their Trust upon Complaint in
Parliament? VII. Whether Matters touching the Honor of Religion, the Honor of
the King, the common Right of all the Commoners of England, and the
Encouragement, or Discouragement of the Execution of the Laws, be not proper
Matters to be represented, enquired and considered there? VIII Whether it be
not Vnparliamentary, a Breach of Trust, and great Violation of a Fundamental
Right of all the Commoners of England, for a small number of the Members with
their Speaker before the House be full, to Vote that a Petition Exhibited for
any such Matter, as aforesaid, should not be read? IX. Whether it be
Parliamentary or agreeable to the usual Course of Parliaments, to Vote a
Petition or Letter of Complaint for any Contempt of Religion, or Dishonor or
Indignity to the King, or Factious, or Seditious Practices, to be a false and
scandalous Libel, and the Complainant to be prosecuted before he has been
heard at the Bar, or had notice to appear and prove his Complaint? X. Whether
the Fundamental and Common Rights of all the Commons of England be not of
greater Importance to be Preserved and Maintained Inviolably than any of the
Privileges of their Deputies, which they have only in Respect of their
Deputation and Trust reposed in them (of which some are often Complained of by
their Principals as Abused to their Prejudice?) XI. Whether it be not the
Common Interest of the Government of England, and of all the Commons, and the
Duty of every Subject to maintain and defend the Honor and Dignity of the
King, when there is occasion, as well as the Rights and Liberties of
themselves, and their Fellow-Commoners, by the Common Law of Loyalty and
Allegiance, and of all Members of Parliament, Magistrates and Officers, etc. by
special Obligation of their Solemn Oath? XII. Whether all Conspiracies and
Practices which have a natural Tendency to dissolve, interrupt, or abate the
mutual Confidence that ought to be preserved and maintained between the King
and the People, and to draw the Affections of the People from the King to the
Conspirators; especially when on the one side there is no special Occasion for
them more than ordinary; and on the other, there are such Popular Matters in
agitation as give great Advantage to such a Design, may not justly be suspected
to be Treasonable, and by Consequence ought to be stoutly and resolutely
opposed by all Faithful and Loyal Subjects?



