THE INTEREST OF Creditors AND Debtors, OR The Duty that is Incumbent on both,
By the Laws Moral, Civil, and Divine.

With their Respective Interest Stated.

Published, for their Mutual Benefit, by an Impartial Observer of the often
Severity of the Former, and Defection of the Latter

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by William Rawlins over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil 1673.

TO THE READER.
Reader.
Mr Sympathy with poor Prisoners has incited me to offer the following
Discourse in their behalf; that it might provoke the Charity of Men, or at
least the Clemency and forbearance of their Creditors toward them in this, or
that I hope it may meet with some success, although it be a flinty Age. And if
the reason thereof prevail with any, to administer their superfluities, and
improve their Respective Capacities, for the alleviation of Prisoners Burdens;
not despairing of thy self for one; then my design herein will not be
frustrated, who am.

Thine, P. P.

The INTEREST OF Creditors AND Debtors.
THat it is a Duty incumbent upon Humanity to Promote the Good of its
Individuals; and reciprocally every individual one the others good; or they
violate the Harmony of their being, seems to be the intent of that Maxim, Nemo
sibi nascitur, that no man is born to himself. And because such Impressions
remain in Nature, notwithstanding the inundation of Ignorance by the Apostasy:
a greater improvement is expected from us, under those many advantages, since
offered for our Restoration. The first Branch of self-hood (the root of all
Strife, Debate, Contentions, Injuries, Homicides, etc.) appeared in the
Fratricide of Cain, who perpetrated that Act upon his Brother, upon the single
Emulation of his Offering being respected; but has since, Spawned a multitude
of Iniquities in the World. As men has given liberty to their Extravagant
Appetites, and might be traced to be the Mother of most (if not all) Enormities
committed, whereof the cruelty and violence of Creditors exercised toward
their Debtors, by Arrests, Imprisonments, and other Depredations made upon
their Persons and Estates, is none of the smallest Bratts: And that the
deformity thereof may appear, is the designed appropriate Subject of this
Discourse.

Now therefore all such as are, or may be concerned; let them consider, that a
rigorous proceeding of Creditors against their Debtors, is not encouraged or
countenanced, by any Laws Moral, Civil, or Divine; no rule of Manners, dictates
of Humanity, or divine Precept, does favor, but rather frown upon so
degenerate an Act. A Bay of the uncontaminated Nature, was illustrated by
Abram, who might have challenged Lot in right of Ancestry: A priority of
Election, as may particularly be seen in the Story, Genesis 13.
and was before the Moral Law was Exhibited; so great a Patriarch and Potentate
being indisputably a pattern of Patience, self-denial and Brotherhood, for the
imitation of all his Survivors. The good that Joseph returned his Brethren for
their Evil, with many the like Presidents in Holy Writ that might be instanced,
sufficiently commend to men the Exercise of Patience, Goodness and Charity one
toward another.

If we respect the Decalogue, which was added for the Restitution of the
Original Nature, the severity of a Creditor to his Debtor, is far from being
justified thereby; And without doubt, is implicitly forbid in the Sixth
Commandment: Thou shall do no Murder, which comprehends a great deal more then
barely violence to a man's life, there being many ways to render that
insupportable or very miserable: Among which, the Creditor pursuing his Debtor
to Prison, may well be reputed one, where he is made useless to his Generation,
in all his Capacities; he cannot there serve himself, less his Family, and
least of all his King and Country, to whom the greater Obligation lies. I
appeal to all sober men, whether such a condition be not Equivolent to death it
self, to any man that yet retains judgment, to ascribe it its proper merit.
The Scriptures in diverse places, give testimony and rebuke to the secret
practices of men, one against another; and most of all, being shrouded under a
Cloak of Justice: And here it may be a digression easily pardonable, to inspect
those Employments and Professions of men, that in some measure do participate
of the Nature (and are subservient to the ends) of such a murdering Spirit.

It will not be improper to begin with those that are the Agents and Factors
for Creditors, in the Rigor and Violence they use toward their Debtors; and
the first sort of them, are some persons appending to the Law, who take
pleasure to act to the undoing a man, because they are hired to it, and it is
very comely and honorable, they think, to be the ministers of Malice and
Revenge, because they are paid for it; a sort of mercinary people like
Packhorses to any design for Money, as the late Rebellious Age too woefully
exemplified.

The blood of the Degenerate nature, is highly vitiated in them, who help the
Devil at a dead lift, doing that for him which he cannot do for himself: being
Restrained from doing men that Evil he wills, he incites a Civil War in their
Species, whereby to hurt one another, not unlike that Proverb, Homo homini
Demon, the Exaction, Infidelity, and Corruption of some of them, the ignorance
and negligence of others toward their Clyents, are manifest Characters of a
Murdering quality, and unworthy management of a Profession, in it self
sufficiently necessary and justifiable.

These doubtless, if the lifeblood were Money, and they could come as easily
to the Purse, as now they do, would make no scruple to cut the strings, to
gratify their unsatiable desire; when poor men are thus subjected and
prostrate to the Revenge of their Blood-thirsty Creditors, being cast into
Prison, and made Tributary to the Drones of the Earth, Viz. their respective
Keepers, Waiters, Turn-keys, Porters, cum multis aliis quos nunc prescribere
lougum est, their bones are there to be picked, while fit for little, else but
to make Dice of; a Phrase too frequently used and tantamount effected, by some
implacable Spirits upon their Debtors. Now not to stray too remotely from the
intended Subject; if we consider the respective condition and capacity of
Creditors, with that of their Debtors, their violent and rigorous Prosecution
of them to Prison, pursuing that also to the extremity of restraint, envying
their least Liberty, affording more favor and benefit to their Dogs, then to
such men, whose misfortune has been to incurr their debt; such procedure is
altogether inconsistent with Reason, and prejudicial to their own Interest. The
condition of the one is abounding, the other necessitous and wanting, thus it
stands with the Major part of Creditors and Debtors, the disproportion of their
subsistence being sufficiently evident, the one flourishing the other indigent;
the Creditor making use of his plenty, to enfeeble and render his Debtor more
insolvent: this they do (though perhaps will or may be ashamed to own it) to
that end. What reason then has Plenty to prosecute Poverty, when we consider
that one and the same hand dispenses both, Prove. 22.3.
as is attested by the Prayer of Agur. Some are inevitably made insolvent by
Providence, Proverbs, 30.8.
either by adjacent or remote means, whose Calamity is aggravated to be then in
Debt, and this condition which requires the more compassion, is made the
opportunity of cruel Creditors to add to their misery: without doubt such
persons would be as ready to affront their Creator (if within their reach) upon
many cross occurrences of their interest, who so readily lay load upon his
Creatures, their brethren, Prove. 14.31.
for the Trifles of this world, wherein at the same time themselves abound. The
reason of all Actions is manifest by their end, by which it will appear, that
the murdering proceedings of Creditors against their Debtors, are to gratify
some domineering Lust or other; to which all other Licentious desires of men,
are mostly subservient and tributary; some are precipitated thereunto, by Pride
and insolence, some by Passion, and Revenge, others by Policy, (who would show
themselves wiser than theirs fellows, aiming to be first served) and most if
not all of them, are set on work by that General of the Infernal Field,
Covetousness; men being thus acted by one Devil or another, whose proper names
are more obscure; the Reason that guides them to such inhumane practices, is
not that which was first given, but has been since infected, and is become
Earthly, sensual and Devilish. They flatter themselves, stifling the rebukes
of Conscience, and hardening their hearts with the pretense of Justice, that a
man may innocently seek his own, by such ways and means as the Law provides
him: to remove which stone, there was a Maxim long since provided, viz. Omne
nimium vertitur in vitium, Justice may be exacted with intolerable
circumstances, which is so often forbidden in the Levitical Law under the
denomination of Oppression; 19. Levit. 18 33, 34. ver.
and seems to be chiefly, if not only meant, that for which a man may have
some pretense, or color of Justice, to act against his Brother. Whatsoever is
rigorously required of disabled correspondence, is of near kin to Oppression,
and greatly deviating from that Royal Law implanted in Nature, and so
frequently reinforced both in the Old and New Testament, of loving our Neighbor
as our self, and doing as we would be done unto; men that are willing to
indulge themselves in the practice of cruelty, have the impudence to assert,
that they do nothing but what they should willingly submit unto and justify in
their Creditors: willingly ravishing their own souls of all mercy, sweetness
and humanity that should adorn them, and cheating themselves with a lie at the
same time, being in a condition greatly above the sufferer: they choose to be
ignorant, that he that does not espouse the condition of the passive, can never
charitably or justly measure out unto him. Such indeed who have made their
minds the mansion of all Bestial qualities, may repute it seasonable to set
upon a man already under affliction: David complains of such in the 10.17. and
35. Psalms. There needs no pains to describe the uncomeliness thereof, the
actions of Boys in the Street one toward another, sufficiently explode it,
prohibiting in their Coversation, the striking of one that is down. Its
impossible to derive suitable goodness, without a compassionate soul. There are
another sort of men, that have a little more tincture of Lenity, but yet are
persuaded to smother it, under pretense that Charity should begin at home, they
have a Family to maintain, and Children to raise Portions for, therefore they
are obliged to be severe with their Debtors. This Cloak has a plausible
Aspect, but upon examination 'twill be found as deformed as the former; for
were such excuse to be admitted as reasonable, it would be a bar to all manner
of Charity amongst men, that a man should suspend all acts of Goodness and
Bounty, to preseny and worthy objects thereof, because his children may have
need of the same ten or twenty years afterward, is too great a spark of
Infidely, a presumption upon providence and a Monopolizing of all benefits to
his own Loins, destructive to humane Society, inverting the design of the
Creation, which by mutual help was to abound in the common Good. That grand
root Covetousness before spoken off, does also produce this branch, according
to what is hinted in the Wisdom of Solomon, that the wandering of Concupiscence,
Wisd. 4.12.
does undermine the simple mind. Having thus far endeavored the discovery of
the unresonableness of the cruel Creditors: here is opportunity also to induce
the demonstration, that such his proceedings are against the reason of his own
intrest; to demonstrate which, we are to consider the Debtor under a double
qualification, either honest or dishonest: in both which denominations, the
violent dealing of the Creditor with his Debtor, is against the requiring of
his own interest, which is, to be sati^fied, if his Debtor be honest? greater
security cannot be given him, then such principles as will certainly perform,
when ever Ability concurs: and to use force against such an one whose power is
absent, may irritate and incense the Divine anger, that is jealous to revenge
the cause of the innocent; and may render him Culpable of that Judgment
denounced in the Psalms: His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate. Psalm. 7.16.
If the Debtor be dishonest, conceales his strength, can, but will not pay,
although it can hardly be presumed, that men should choose a Prison, and
therewith a superfluous expense that does accompany it, which in some
reasonable time, and their liberty might be saved, and conduce at least toward
satisfaction of the Creditors: yet admitting that such there be, as many others
that do things as inconsistant with reason, however it is the Creditors
interest to forbear the pursuit; a Prison generally debaucheth men's parts, and
impoverisheth their Purse, which needs must disappoint the hopes any man may
have of payment from such a Condition: A poor and unworthy revenge to be
continued, unbefitting any that are Prudent or Pious, wherein their ends are
frustrated in their life, and in their death must be worse disturbed, it being
doubtless a great obstruction of Rest and Peace, to be the irrevocable cause of
another misery. The Scripture advises not to let the Sun go down upon our
wrath, which implicitly forbids our dying in the paths of revenge, of the least
uncharitableness.

There are a third sort, and they will plead necessity for their excuse, their
own wants are so pressing, that they must needs be severe with their Debtors:
These of all others are least pardonable, that will aggravate their own misery,
to make another like them and past hopes to help them; whereas there is no
necessity to evil Actions, and all that deviate from charity, are such, Solomon
gives you a character of them Proverbs. 28.3. A poor man that oppresses the
poor, is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food.

there is a Reciprocal and Correlate duty between Creditors and Debtors, as it
is incumbent upon one to exercise Forbearance and Patience, it is also upon the
other, to be just and to pay as he is able; If men would think themselves (as
indeed they are) as accountable to God Almighty, for the omission of these
Duties, as for the breach of other his Commandments: Truly the Lawyers would
have no such cause to laugh at their Clyents follies, and wallow in the wealth
of their Ruins.

It remains now to Evidence, that the whole current of divine Precepts, is in
the Pentateuch or Five books of Moses, so the days of the Prophets were full of
their Declamations, the Doctrine of Christ himself and his Appostles, more
abundantly is against, so unnatural, ungodly, and unchristain-like dealing of
Creditors with their Debtors. Thou shall not avenge, nor bare any grudge
against the children of thy People, Levit. 19.18.
but thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy Self, etc. This Text presupposes men
to be offenders one against the other, either in their natural, or civil
capacities, or both: And therefore commands them not to seek revenge, yea more,
not to harbor the least Animosity each to other, with an affirmative Precept
adjoined, as the reason of the former; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self: there is no man that has yet a spark of Goodness remaining, but in any
trespass he commits, or may commit, either against God or man, but he would
willingly be forgiven, or at least forborne, till he can make a just
Reconciliation; And he that thus loves himself, Luke 6.31.
ought so to love his Neighbor. If any should object that this brotherly
kindness, was only to be exercised amongst those of Affinity or Consanguinity,
the 33 and 34 Verses of the same Chapter, remove that restraint, saying: And if
a Stranger sojourn with thee in your Land, ye shall not vex him, but the
stranger that dwells with you, shall be unto you as one born amongst you, And
thou shall love him as thy self, etc. here is a door of Fraternity opened in
the manhood, removing all manner of pretense for Partiality, in the
distribution of Charity and Justice one toward another: And this is attested
by the Simile our Savior put forth of the Samaritan, Luke 10.36.37.
that did good to him that was fallen among Thieves, and therefore was his
neighbor, not respecting Allenation of people, but the necessity of the Object.
Now that men are not such strangers in nature as (by their cruelty and
mercilesness to each other) they make themselves. Let them take that account
St. Paul gives of their extract, in the Acts chapter 17. verse 26. And has
made of one Blood, all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the
Barth, etc. We count it unnatural among Beasts, that individuals of the same
species should prey one upon another: yet with them its less practiced then
with men. With what conscience then can a Creditor (if his light be not become
darkness) pursue his Debtor to a Prison? at once devesting him of all the
benefit of the Creation, ravishing all his hopes of improvement in his
Generation, damnifying all his natural or acquired parts to that end, and
certainly plunging his Vital and Animal Being into a decay and miserable
languishment, which produces his Exit to the World, his debt satisfied, and
very probably his Creditor to answer for his blood: Let all disinteressed men
judge, if this be not the worst way of murdering a man.

By the Law of Charity, no man ought to have such thoughts of another, that
being able, he will choose a Prison to avoid paying his Debts; and if in matter
of Fact, there be here and there a Monster in their kind, what may be
justifiable against such an one, the severity of Law being intended for such,
ought not to extend to all, that in some other fence may see culpable in the
eye of it; the same measure may be excusable to one, that may be criminal,
being meeted to another, from the different merit in the recipient. There are
doubtless many men, to whom the apprehensions of a Prison may be more terrible,
then of Death, who therefore being rigorously prosecuted by their Creditors may
(out of just ends, foreseeing an impossibility of ever making satisfaction
there) struggle hard, making what defense they can, to prevent such approaching
Mischief and Ruin, (hoping still there may be some life in that Proverb, Multa
cadunt inter poculum and labra, many things fall between the Cup and the Lips,
and give a diversion to so violent a tempest; which procrastination feeds only
the instruments of the Law, lessens the sustenance and solvenry of the Debtors;
aggravates the Creditors Account, leaves him to learn by his inconsiderate
rashness.

There are some men yet more inveterately tinged with their blood-thirsty and
revengful Spirit, then any before spoken off, who not content with their full
blow at their Debtors liberty, and the consumption of their lives: being
envious at the least support they may have in so miserable an estate, provide
to intercept that also, by a Statute of Bankrupt against them; thereby not only
damning their present subsistence, but extending to that which has no visible
being, (but may be, in the womb of Providence, and future manifestation:) and
has no better aspect, then a presumption to affront God Almighty in his
goodness, for the releif or restoration of those that are so distressed and
oppressed. One of the greatest enemies to mankind, was doubtless in the
contrivance of so great a mischief to the humane Race: for not one in ten that
have been prosecuted, ever answered the end of the Creditors, and irrevocably
ruined the Debtors; This and many the like oppressions between the Subjects
(through many foul practisers at Law, Fomenters of their Feuds, and Leeches of
their labors, has been no small cause of such a tempest of Judgments, of late
years precipitated upon this Nation. That they have Law to encourage them, is
the complaint of the Preacher Ecclesiastes 4.1 So I returned and considered all
the oppressions that are done under the Sun: and behold, the tears of such as
were oppressed and they had no Comforter; and on the side of their Oppressors
there was power, but they had no Comforter.

There are some that boast themselves in the success they have had in this fort
of Murder: they no less then Cain, deserve a mark that all men may know them
by, and avoid. Then penalty for Theft, under the Old Law, was not be exacted,
if committed merely to satisfy hunger; and the whole Law is tributary and
reducible to that of Charity; but these men (for a small trespass, and
whereunto themselves are in some sense accessory, there being a reciprocation,
between buyer and seller, borrower and lender, and are the mutual cause of
those denominations) under the countenance of a Law, do greedily strip their
Debtors of all manner of sustenance, both for present and in future, flattering
themselves like the Whore in the Proverbs, Proverbs. 7.
that they are all the while doing a Sacrafice to Justice, when it is only to
their own Abominable and insatiable Lusts, and justly fall under the
description of that Text, Proverbs 14.12. There is a way which seems right
unto a man, but the end thereof if the way of Death.

The several Statutes which mainly (if not only,) give motion to so barbarous a
Process of Creditors with their Debtors: are the 13. Eliza. 7. the 1. Jacob.
15. and 21. Jacob. 19. which no doubt proceeded then from good intent, to make
men Just, which all humane Laws can never do, if Justice be not first written
in the heart; no more then the avenge of Murder by cruel circumstances to
Death, can deterr the blood-thirsty from Homicide; what then might be thought
convenient and reasonable, may be now unprofitable and burdensome; different
ages, produce different interests, ways and means of living; what might be
reputed culpable then, may now, by a different end, be honest and just. And if
the constitutive qualifications of a Bankrupt by those Statutes, be well
considered, and compared with the various alteration of Trade, and general
occurrences to men's Estates since there will be more need for the Abolition or
at least the mitigation of them, then their continuance. As for instance in
that of the 21. Jac. 19. there is this Qualification of a Bankrupt Or being
indebted to any person or persons in the sum of 100 l. or more, shall not pay,
or otherwise compound for the same, within six Months, next after the same
shall grow due;) When in my knowledge and experience of Trade, the habit
thereof has been so much altered for some years before and since the Dreadful
Fire of London, that by that qualification, most of the Traders in England, may
be made Bankrupts, a custom being introduced, of buying at three or six
months, and paying at six, nine, twelve eighteen Months, or more. Besides,
the excess of severity in these Statutes, is very evident, as also their
inequality: other Laws enough, giving the Creditors leave to pursue and force
his Debtor to Prison: and these, to cut his throat for being there; too hard to
be allowed, that the Creditor shall occasion the matter of Fact, which shall
render his Debtor the more criminal, and then punish him for it; it is like
being Judge and Executioner also, in his own Cause. Moreover, if the end of
those Statutes be deliberated, we shall find the Prosecutors much abusing them;
the distinguishing character of a Bankrupt, guilty of the Matters then expressed,
is, to the intent or purpose to defraud or hinder any of his or her Creditors,
of the just debt or duty of such Creditors or Creditors, shall be reputed,
deemed and taken for a Bankrupt. Which implies that others may do the same
Facts, but not to the same intent or purpose: else that supplement of words,
would be altogether unnecessary. But without regard to the said distinction the
Executioners of these Statutes, make use of them indifferently upon all persons
within cognizance of either of the qualifications, to render them a Prey to the
gulf of their own particular gain; at once undoing the Debtor, and spunging the
Creditors malicious excrements. The Scripture, in a more general way, yet
applicable enough to this, gives Testimony against it, by Obediah the Prophet,
verse. 13. Thou should not have entered into the Gate of my People in the day
of their calamity; yea thou should not have looked on their Affliction in the
day of their Calamity; nor have laid hanas on their substance in the day of
their calamity. The many general Calamities that of late years and times have
befallen this Nation, may very well Apologize, that the inevitable disability,
not the designed dishonesty of men, may have rendered them liable to the lash of
those Statutes; and so much the more worth the notice of the Great Council of
this Nation to redress, in whose power it is.

The Premises considered, the Prisoner is in no better capacity then as dead to
his Creditor, and in no probability, while so, ever to satisfy him; I would
then propound to the Creditor, whether he can be in worse condition, if he set
the Debtor free: in so doing, he will certainly be better, upon the account of
charity; and it is possible, the Debtor by his liberty, may attain to make him
plenary satisfaction here; every age abounding with such examples. Admitting
these have the aspects of two Evils exposed to a man, most prudent men agree,
it is safest to choose the least. Waving the innumeration of a cloud of
Scriptures, in the Old Testament, that speak in the commendation and
approbation of mercifulness and the fruits of it, thus applied in particular; I
shall proceed to instance how suitable it is to Christianity, and how
vigorously recommended and enjoined in the Doctrine of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. Now for our full conviction: that Article in the Lords Prayer, may be
most proper lead the Van, viz. Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them,
that trespass against us: some Translations have it, Forgive us our Debts, as
we forgive our Debtors: as in Matthew 6.12. reinforcing it, verses the 14. and
15. For if ye forgive men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if you forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses. Most Theologists consent in this, that men
ought to pardon the pecuniary Debts of their disabled Debtors. And so far will
vindicate the purport of what is premised: and without controversy so to remit,
is a duty incumbent on all Christians, from the precited Texts: with what
impudence then, can men, especially such as would be reputed Christians, ask
God Almighty remission of their own Sins and at the same time, detain their
Debtor in Gaol, either by suit or Action. The consideration of the more
freedom of access to Heaven by petition, has so far operated upon some, in a
tumultuous Trade in the World, as to occasion their forbearance of men, and
thereupon considerable losses to themselves: but very probably may be remotely
comprehended in number with those that suffer for Christ's sake, being done in
obedience to his Doctrine and Spirit; such Loss will certainly be Crowned with
infinite Gain. The worst Epithet that can be ascribed to a Debt in trespass,
is injury and wrong to his Neighbor, and the more voluntary it is, the more
aggravated and criminal, viz. in those that can pay and will not; Yet, even to
those, I find no exceptions provided in our Saviors Precepts of Pardon, but
rather the more vehemently urged, as the offense is more provoking; thereby
commending to us, the attainment of the best Degrees of a Christian Estate; to
this end, those Scriptures seem directed, viz. Luke 6.35, 36, 37, and 38. But
love ye your Enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again: and your
reward shall be great, and ye shall be the Children of the Highest: for he is
kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil. Be ye therefore merciful, as your
Father also is merciful. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall
be given unto you. Good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye meet
withal, it shaell be measured to you again. The like in Matthew the 5.44, 45,
verses and to the end. The more inconsistant this Doctrine seems to men's
Temporal Intrest: it is with the greater difficulty received, but is
comprehended under self-denial, wherewith the Christian life so much abounds.
There is a remarkable Emphasis put upon that Creditor mentioned by Our Savior
Christ. Luke 7.41, 42. that had two Debtors, and when they had no pay, he
(frankly) forgave both. That in the l8th. Matthew verse 21. unto the end, runs
parallel in kind; reproaching him that had received forgiveness, and afterward
used violence to his fellow Servant, for a much more inconsiderable matter: and
what became of him is obvious, Verse 34. And his Lord was wroth, and delivered
him to the Tormentors, etc. The use of instruction our Savior makes of it, is
in Verse 35. So likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from
your hearts forgive not everyone his Brother their Trespasses. These Scriptures
do plainly press and enjoin us to the exercise of forbearance, compassion and
forgiveness toward Debtors, without respect of Persons, honest or dishonest,
able or disable, asking it, or not asking it; Much more doubtless, do they
operate to those that would be Just, but are disabled, and become Petitioners
for it, and whose condition indeed may scarcely merit the Inscription of a
trespass upon it. St. Paul is very positive and particular in his reproof of
litigiousness, 1 Cor. 6.7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you,
because ye go to Law one with another, why do ye not rather take wrong? why do
you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? as if he were equally
sensible of the Havoc they would make of their worldly Interest, in their
going to Law: as the violation of Divine Precepts would in their eternal. It is
enough notorious that Clyents do merely maintain and enrich their various
Agents at Law, besides the several officers appending the Courts of Judicature;
all which excise a cause equivalently to the matter in controversy, called by
them the merit of the Cause; so that the Clyents like a criminal Soldier, may
only be said to be run the Gantelope amongst them: I mean the dishonest and
unfaithful practisers and agents in the Law. Without excep ion, the Laws given
to the Hebrews, were Free and full enough for the distribution and support of
Property: but the Labyrinth since erected by men upon them, savours more of
Arrogance, as if God the fountain of Wisdom, were deficient in his Laws,
Government or bridle upon the evil nature, and needed men's supplements (a
tincture of the lapsed Angels, that would pretend to mend the ways and Council
of God) then any zeal, goodness or Piety to the Creation.

Let us leave off therefore our Cruelty, Oppression, Violence, Covetousness and
Revenge one toward another, and follow the advice given us by Holy men, and
Jesus Christ himself.

The Preacher in Ecclesiastes the 11.1, and 2. verses; Cast thy bread upon the
waters, for thou shall find it after many days. Give a Portion to seven, and
also to eight; for thou know not what evil shall be upon the Earth; making
that an argument for improving the present time to do good in, and to
distribute: namely, the revolution of time and providence, that does remove
extremes to one and the same Subject; making him poor and needy, that was
wealthy and did abound, and so, e contra: the greater reason, Galat. 6.10
we should do good with it, whilst it may be called Ours.

Let us avoid also that character, which is given them who show no favor:
Proverbs. 2.10. The soul of the wicked desires evil: his neighbor finds no
favor in his eyes. And Proverbs 22.22, and 23 verses. Rob not the poor because
they are poor: neither oppress the afflicted in the Gate: for the Lord will
plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. It is a
usual thing for many to fall upon a man already in Prison; which I believe is
reprehended in the foregoing Text: Neither oppress the afflicted in the Gate:
that is such upon whom the Law has already passed; the seat of Judicature,
being often in Scripture represented under the denomination of the Gate. Prove.
21.13. Whosoever stopeth his Ears at the cry of the Poor, he also shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard. Prove. 19.17. He that has pity upon the Poor,
lends unto the Lord: and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him
again. Let us also escape the Judgment that is denounced against the
merciless. James 2.13. For he shall have Judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy etc. Now that I may not seem partial in my discourse, only to
demonstrate the Creditor his duty; I shall endeavor also to leave the Debtor
inexcusable, and show him his duty, which is incumbent upon him, by the Moral
and Divine Laws: as that upon the Creditor.

Let not the Debtor think ever a whit the better of himself, by what is
forespoken to the Creditor: for he is no less guilty of the breach of divine
Laws, and contempt of the like admonitions: if he fail in one title of Justice,
that is within his power or contrivance to perform; Therefore the 8th.
Commandment says, Thou shall not steal, and thereunder Collects all the diverse
ways and modes of injustice, whereby a man may prejudise or lessen the estate
of his neighbor, or therewith benefit himself. This exceedingly digresseth from
that Royal rule, Matthew 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the
Prophets.

The Debtor ought to deal with his Creditor, as himself would be dealt with, if
he were a Creditor? and men are to behave themselves toward others, no
otherwise, then supposing themselves to be the subject of their own Actions: It
this Rule were observed, there would be but little cruelty, tearing or
devouring one another: and as little injustice to provoke it. Solomon in
Proverbs 3.27, 28. gives suitable Advice: Withhold not good from them to whom
it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Say not unto thy
neighbor, go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou have it by
thee. This council complicates the mutual duty of Creditor and Debtor: and if
men did not idolize the things of this world, they would never exchange their
birthright to virtue and eternal Happiness; for the pottage of this life. Let
the Debtor therefore, consider the hazard that he runs, to deceive or injure
his Creditor: it is at the least a great Eclipse (if not total extinction,) of
his Portion in everlasting Glory, if not timely repented of, and restitution
made, if within his power: the divine Law being as a devouring fire, that
cease not, until the sin be consumed; The Story of Zacheus, Luke 19.8. is
very exemplary herein, viz. Zacheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, behold
Lord! the half of my goods I give to the Poor, and if I have done any wrong to
any man, I restore fourfold. St. Paul Corinth. 1.6.8, and 9. verses, is very
express in his reproof herein, urging the ill consequence thereof, viz. Nay,
you do wrong and defraud, and that your Brethren, Know you not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, etc. It is an Argument of the
greatest force, to diswade men from doing injustice, when the inheritance of
the Kingdom of God is forfeited thereby; although it should produce never so
great gain here, yet our Savior says, Matthew 16.26. For what is a man
profitted, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
Farthermore, it savoureth greatly of Ingratitude, which is hardly pardonable
with men: for a man to requite any trust with infidelity; it invades humane
Society, and is attended with numerous aggravations, whereby to render it
odious and abominable.

Finally I shall conclude with impartial Advice, both to Creditor and Debtor:
Let not the first flatter themselves that all is well, when they have used
their will upon their Debtors, according to the scope that humane Laws give
them; and have paid themselves, perhaps with the ruin of their Debtors, or
without; it is much alike in Scriptural consideration, they have attained it
uncharitably, unmercifully, and violently, and are responsible for it unto God
Almighty: and may perad venture go wilfully ignorant to Hell, with such a Crime
unrepented of.

There is no Creditor, but in his prosecution, is hurried therein by some
devilish lust or other, as Covetousness, Extortion, Pride or Envy, and such
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: 1 Cor. 6.10. Neither let the Debtor think
himself secure, if he can do injustice or defraud his Creditor undiscovered: or
abuse his patience, or forbearance exercised toward him, in sense of his duty
required by God; for without Repentance and satisfaction, he shall not escape
the Judgment of God.

Let us all therefore consider our ways, in either of the said capacities, as
Creditor or Debtor, or both: that we are accomptable to the Laws of Heaven, for
our good or ill behavior therein one toward another, as most certainly
comprehended in his Commandments; And we shall incline our selves more to
follow the Apostles advice, to study and follow peace with all men, and
persuade thereunto, so we shall be entitled to that blessedness, pronounced by
Christ, Mat. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God. Neither shall our livelyhoods be any longer a prey to those
that have sold themselves to this World, and live by men's litigious Contests.

FINIS.

