The Copy of a LETTER Sent from an unknown hand to that reverend man, now with
God, Mr. Herbert Palmer, a Member of the Assembly concerning the great abuse of
OATHS.

The substance whereof was published to the Parliament by the said Mr. P. the
30. of September, 1646. viz.

Concerning those oaths which are used in Corporations, and many other
Societies. The customary irreligious taking of them making it become a
National sin, and call's aloud for Redress, specially at this time now that
the Parliament is upon a general REFORMATION.

Published for a general good, that men may take notice of this common abuse
of Oaths as of a NATIONAL SIN.

Because of swearing the Land mournes,

Jer. 13.10. June 23. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1648.

A copy of a Letter sent to Mr. Palmer concerning the abuse of Oaths for form,
custom, etc. in most Societies in this KINGDOM.
Reverend Sir,
I Beseech you be pleased to take notice, (from the pen of a stranger to you,)
of a way wherein you may do a good service, as is conceived, to Christ and his
Church in this Kingdom, by being a means to represent unto Authority a burden
which lies sadly and heavily upon many men of tender consciences in this
Kingdom. And for that the Parliament is now upon a general Reformation, it is
not to be doubted but that they will hearken to them that shall show them what
particulars according to the word of God do need it. Therefore you being so
near them and so often among them, and having many opportunities put into your
hands by preaching before them, and otherwise, to promote it. Accept I beseech
you this information, and take it as it is intended for the public good and
benefit of the faithful, especially of the weaker.

Sir, This pressure complained of is the great multitude of needless oaths
commanded and enjoined, some by custom, and some by the laws of the Land,
upon most sort of men in this Kingdom.

There is scarce any society that any man can be admitted into in this
Kingdom, but presently an oath is tendered him.

1. Boys that are admitted into the University many times before they know what
an oath is. There is tendered the oath of matriculation, they swear at their
admittance to keep Statutes which it is questionable whether or no they have
seen before the oath taken. And whether then they swear in judgment,
righteousness and truth, is no hard matter to determine.

2. As soon as a young man has served out his Apprent ship in almost any
C^rporation; when he comes to be made free, presently an oath is tendered him
to maintain customs and privileges of that Corporation (and enwraps him in a
snare the same day that he enters into the world to set up for himself) which
customs how well they can be observed, the practice many times shows. So that
the taking of an oath which is so solemn a part of Gods worship, is made a mere
formality, a ceremony, a toy, to remember such a day of admittance by. In these
kind of people the abuse of on oath may be called a snare.

Then there are others, to whom it is a great burden, a stumbling block, as to
all that enter into Offices, in the ordering the Commonwealth, as Majors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Parish-officers. There is sc^rce any way for a man to be
never so little public, but presently this snare is thrown over his neck.

If I should enter upon particulars they would swell above the dimensions of a
letter, for they are very many, I shall therefore only touch some of them.

1. The Churchwardens oath is removed (blessed be God) with the Canons: But
still the Constables oath is continued. Every year at the entrance into his
office he takes an oath, which he is as likely to observe as the young lads at
Cambridge are to keep their matriculation-oath, or as the former oath was kept
by Churchwardens. If the conscience scruple at it, presently they are in
danger of the Law for refusing, or else in danger of a troubled conscience for
acting against that scruple, by taking an oath with a doubting conscience.

For examples hereof, take one for all, in a County wherein you have been a
Pastor* viz. in Hartfordshire, at a Town called Hunsden, where the Constable
chosen for this year 1646. being tender of taking the oath at his entrance on
that office; was therefore upon his refusal bound over to answer it at the
County Sessions. And how he escaped, I have not yet heard; for I know not
whither they have had a Sessions since.

If it be objected that it is useful that all which enter into office should
have some Ty upon them to mind them of their office. I answer. 1. Can their be
no tie found out but what must ensnare the conscience? I doubt not but that
there may be many ways found out to engage them which are in office to a care
of the performance far better and freer from this ensnaring the conscience.

2. Those that are conscientious will be careful without this ty; those which
are not, have only so much the more sin bound upon their shoulders; for it is
not like that an oath will do it, when conscience of their duty moves them not.

Yet I pray conceive not that with the Anabaptists I speak against all oaths,
(for I know that an oath for testimony of a truth in question is so useful
that a Christian Commonwealth cannot well be without it.) But the remedy which
we desire, is,

First, and principally against those oaths which are promissory, and contain
so large promises, and so many, that they are very seldom performed, and
scarce indeed possible to observe.

2. Against those which are tendered to those of so young years, that they are
ready to swear to any thing, not heeding.

3. Against oaths given to them that understand not the nature of an oath.

4. Against oaths pressed on those that scruple at matter or words ^n an oath.

I need not mention to you (who understand these things so well) the great
dishonor done to the name of God by this manifold abuse of an oath, only I
shall mind you that this sin is conceived to be in the number of them that are
called National sins, (and therefore most-proper at this time of a general
Reformation to be considered of) which is clear, if the observation of some be
true who make that a National sin, not which is most frequent in a Nation, but
which has most authority and countenance from the laws and government of the
Nation. And I humbly submit to your consideration whither that Scripture,
Because of Oaths the Land mourns, may not as well (if not more pr^perly) be
understood of these kind of oaths, as of those that are rashly uttered by
profane ones in their ordinary disc^urse. Sure I am, some of these oaths being
prested upon some good Christians, have been unto them a ground of mourn^^g,
while they durst not swear through tenderness of co^^c^^nce: and by refusal,
have been debarred of those comforts they have sought, which they have been
judged incapable of, and unfit for, because of their r^fusall.

I acknowledge that there are many these licentious times which cry our for
liber^y of conscience in matters not fit to be allowed them, when as it is
indeed liberty to the flesh and licentiousness, which is intended and desired
by them. Yet Sir, there are again that are indeed tender consciences, that out
of such tenderness fear an oath: and to whom these ways of imposing an oath,
are a burden, a snare, specially in a promissory oath, wherein (in regard of
the multiplicity of particulars promised) the performance is of such
transcendent d fficulty, that it comes near an impossibility. And these upon
my knowledge (upon their refusal) have been made mourners, and that even in
these times, which have promised otherwise rejoicing to the hearts of the
Saints,

Ever since the beginning of our troubles, both sides have acknowledged that a
special regard ought to be had to tender consciences; such as are truly so
indeed, and not pretended, I wish it were as much considered when it comes to
practice, as it has in words been freely acknowledged. I am sure those that
have needed a respect to their tenderness, have not found it so. But I shall
not hold you any longer upon this subject.

In the last place to add something concerning my self who have moved you to
endeavor a redress this way. The searcher of hearts knows that my conscience
has urged me hereto, as having no rest in my self if I should not endeavor
so far as I lawfully may a Reformation of a National sin, and to be silent in
Gods cause may enwrap in the guilt of the crime; whereas by laboring the
removal I shall at least deliver my own soul, which I beseech you Sir, as
God shall give you opportunity seriously to consider and apply to your self:
And though you prevail not, yet you need not question but your very endeavor
is acceptable with God. And that no other end has moved me to write unto you,
saving only the glory of God, and the good of his Church. I beseech him to
judge (and reward me accordingly if it be otherwise) before whose judgment seat
we must one day all stand; wherein also I have concealed my name, and entreat
you not to enquire it.

And secondly, why I have made so bold with your self in particular, of all
the Assembly to address my self unto, I shall give you this reason, that I
had strong encouragements to persuade me that I should prevail with you to be
the man to break the ice in this business by promoting it to the
consideration of Authority, for that I find you have laid to heart matters of
far l^sse concernement than this, in your book of making Religion ones
business, Part 1. sect. 5. As in our ordinary discourse to say [with all my
heart] or to use such a word as Infinite, because it is proper only to God,
which is a fault so ordinary in our speech, that had not you hinted it, had
been I suppose by sew observed. How much more in a solemn Ordinance to call
upon the name of God, and ipso facto to profane it, by making it a mere
formality.

That solid judicious man Mr. Reynolds of the Assembly, in his Sermons on Hosea
14.1. Sermon. 1. Sect. 10. has this observation, That one sin generally
unreformed, unrepented of, may undo a Kingdom. The Lord put it into the
hearts of them in Authority to consider of it now, in this general Reformation
which they are about, that they may not leave that one unreformed to the
blasting of their other endeavors.

And though I might have been taxed of too much boldness if I had written to
some other, thus to put them upon such a work; yet I have good hope of you,
that that humble Spirit wherewith the Lord has endued you, will not take
amiss what is done by your weak brother.

The Lord bless your pains in the Ministry, and make you isntrumental of
much good to his Church, which is the prayer of

Your unknown friend, a servant of the same Mr. P. P.

Christian Reader,
THis Letteer being sent, and delivered to that godly man Mr. Palmer, he was
very sensible of the great dishonor daily done the name of God by this abuse
of an Oath: and therefore the very next time that he preached before the
Parliament (which was at the Fast, Sept. 30. 1646.) he earnestly urged the
removal of these oaths, and that specially on these grounds. 1. Because Gods
name is hereby from time to time fearfully taken in vain. 2. The parties
conscience often wounded. 3. Men are hereby inured to wretched profaneness,
and not to fear an oath at any time in the most serious matters of Justice*
Truth, or Righteousness. 4. Because it is no hard matter to find out other
ways to effect that good, for which these oaths were first introduced, as you
may see at large in his Sermon upon Isa. 58 12. at page 37. Printed for T.
Underhill.

The Lord put it in the heart of our Parliament seriously to think of the
removal of these oaths. I^ were to be wished that men truly conscientious,
would, before they take an oath, first seriously weigh and consider the
particulars of what they swear un^o. There are many godly young men every year
made free in the City of London, who I dare say if they were aware of the
danger in taking that oath which is given them with their freedom, would
rather abide the penally than take it. Let them but get a copy of their oath,
and then see if it have these qualifications which ought to be in every Oath.

1. Whether or no it be made in Judgment, that is, Do they well and thoroughly
understand all the particulars which they then swear to perform. They swear to
m^intain the Franchises and Customs of the City, those are the words. Does
every young man that comes out of his time well understand how many these be,
and what.

2. Every oath ought to be made in Righteousness. Let him be sure all the
customs of the City which he swears to maintain, be righteous.

3. An oath ought to be made in truth, that is, of such things as we will
perform: and then let him also look that they be such things as he can
perform; besides, an oath should not be of things frivol^us or impertinent, or
not belonging to his place and calling who takes the Oath: and let every
Freeman consider whether the oath has these qualifications.

Lastly, there are other things in that oath that imply a difficulty in
keeping, as contribution to all charges; the word [all] is of large extent, and
will quickly stumble a man of tender conscience. Let us pray to God to guide
us so that we may use religious ordinances* with that solempnity which is due
to them, and not perform them for a fashion, custom, formality or the like, as
is the manner of the profane world.

FINIS.

