A PASTORAL LETTER FROM A MINISTER TO HIS Parishioners, Being an Earnest
EXHORTATION To them to take Care of their SOULS; AND A Preparative in order to
render all his Future Methods of Instruction more effectual to their
Edification.

DVBLIN: Printed by John Brocas in School-House-Lane, for J. Millner,
Bookseller in Essex-street, 1700.

Price stitcht 1d..

The Earnest Exhortation of a Minister to his Parishioners to take Care of
their Souls.
Most Dearly Beloved Neighbors.
MY Hearts desire and Prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved; and my
most sincere Endeavors shall ever be, by all Christian Me^^ods I can think of,
to promote your Salvation. And ^^ing I cannot hope, either by Doctrine, or by
Reproof, (...) by Instruction in Righteousness, to prevail upon those, (...)
comply with any Methods I can devise for the good (...) their Souls, who are
not thoroughly sensible of the (...) of them; I think it requisite, in order to
make (...) future Labors more effectual with you, to lay ^^fore you such
Considerations, as may make you sensi^^e of the inestimable Value of your
Immortal Souls. (...) I take it for granted, that you believe you have ^ouls.
My business is to awaken you to a serious Con^^^n for their everlasting
Welfare; a Concern the ^ost necessary of all others, and yet, I fear, very
lit^^e laid to Heart; for otherwise, the generality of Men ^ould not possibly
live as they do: They would not ^^ploy all their Care and Pains in providing a
Main^^nance for these perishing Bodies, and leave the most ^^luable part of
themselves, their Souls, altogether ^eglected. Were we to die as the brute
Beasts, and* ^^at when our dead Bodies are laid in the Grave, there ^ere an end
of us; if this determined all our Hopes ^^d Fears, and we returned to our
native Dust therein ^o remain for ever; then might we Eat, and Drink, ^^d take
our fill of Pleasure in this World, as too ma^y do: But if the Soul, when it
leaves the Body, does immediately enter into a state of Happiness, or Misery;
if there be a Resurrection both of the Just and the Unjust, as most certainly
there is; if a future Account must be given of every thing done in the Body,
Whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil; and if our Eternal State shall be
appointed us, either in Bliss or Torment, according as we have behaved our
selve^ in this life, as undoubtedly if shall; methinks it behooves every one of
us, to look well about us, to enquire seriously what we have been doing all
thi^ while; whither the Path we are in leads us, and wha^ will our future State
be.

In order to persuade you to apply your thought to these most important
Considerations, I know no Method which (through God's Blessing) seems more
likely, than to lay before you the inestimable Valu^ of your Souls; the
infinite Concern you have in their Welfare; how liable they are to be lost and
undon^ for ever; what excellent Provision our most Graciou^ God has made for
their Security; and how just i^ will be in him to condemn them to the extremity
o^ Misery, if you wilfully neglect the Care of them.

First, therefore, I entreat you to consider the great Worth and Value of the
Soul. Remember, that it i^ the immediate Offspring of God; that it came from
Heaven, from the Father of Spirits; God breathed into Man the Breath of Life,
and Man became a livin^ Soul, Genesis 2. 7. God made Man in his own Image, (no^
according to the likeness of any of the rest of the Creatures) a little lower
than the Angels, and crowned hi^ with Glory and Immortality. This is our
peculiar Pr^vilege, beyond all the Beings of this lower World that we resemble
our Maker, who is the most excelle^^ Being. This is the Prerogative of that
Spiritual an^ Immortal part of us, our Soul; and consequently the Soul of Man
must needs be exceeding Precious an^ Valuable.

Our Bodies are Houses of Clay, whose Foundations are in the Dust; and though
as the Psalmist says, ^hey are curiously wrought and fashioned, yet all the
Workmanship bestowed on them, is, that they may be ^erviceable to our Souls,
fit Tabernacles for that Immortal part to dwell in. The Worth whereof will
^urther appear from that wonderful Esteem those have ^f it, who may be supposed
to be best acquainted with ^^e true Value of Souls.

Thus God the Father takes great Delight in being ^^lled, and esteemed, a Lover
of Souls; and accord^^gly has laid out his Thoughts from everlasting, for ^^e
bringing in of them to himself. The Councils and ^ontrivances of Heaven have
been spent on them. The ^^ther thought nothing too dear to secure and save
^^em; and therefore when he foresaw we would not ^ontinue in that state of
Innocence, and Happiness, ^herein we were at first created, he contrived to
^^ke us capable of another Happiness, and that at no (...) Expense than the
B^ood of his own Beloved Son. and certainly God would not have thus concerned
^^^self about things of little value; no assuredly, our ^^^ls are exceeding
Precious in his Eyes, who has ^oard the greatest Happiness for them, and
thought ^^thing too much to secure it.

Again. When the Son of God undertook to rescue ^^em from the Slavery of Sin,
and Dominion of the Devil, he thought it sufficiently worth his while to
^escend from Heaven, and put on the Form of a Ser^^nt, and make himself of no
Reputation, to live a ^iserable Life, and die a painful and an accursed ^eath.
And surely he had not so mean an Esteem of (...) own heavenly Glory, ( Joh. 1.
18.) as to part with ^^^or Trifles: And then certainly neither can you think
our Souls of little worth, when the Son of God ^^ought them worth his dying
for. He would not have thought sit to pay so vast a Ransom, as his pr^cious
Life, for a thing of small value; yea, Himse^^ has assured us, beyond all
contradiction, that the Gain of the whole World, is not sufficient Recompense
for the Loss of ones Soul.

Again. The Holy Ghost is still carrying on that gre^^ Work of God's Mercy in
the Salvation of our Soul^ For their sakes it is that he has made so many
Rev^lations of God's Will to the World, and confirm^ them by so many Miracles:
Therefore he still follo^ us with his preventing and assisting Graces; He
i^spires us with good Thoughts, and kindles pious D^sires in us; He warmeth our
cold Affections, and e^flameth our Hearts with Devotion; He checks and
r^strains us from Sin, and upbraids us when we (...) it; He still importuneth,
woeth and entreats, tha^ if possible, he may awaken us into a Sense of o^
danger, and excite and quicken us to pursue the M^thods of our own Safety and
Happiness. What the^ are not our Souls worth, about which the Blessed Spirit
takes so much care to save and make them happy*

The Good Angels are Ministering Spirits for the go^ of Souls; they pitch their
Tents about them, and thi^^ it no Disparagement for such glorious Beings as
they are to guard them, and converse with them: The^ still wait to receive the
Souls of good Men, when they depart out of the Body: They rejoice at t^^
Conversation of Souls; a certain Sign that they ha^^ an entire Value for them.

Yea, the Devils themselves do know that, in God Esteem, nothing is so valuable
under the whole He^ven, as the Souls of Men; and therefore, as the grea^est
Instance of Spite and Malice they can do to Go^ they make it their utmost
endeavor to seduce and d^stroy them: They envy the Happiness Men are cap^ble
of, and accordingly labor in their Destruction and triumph when they have
accomplished it.

Thus you see the Soul is of the greatest Value. How ^uch then does it behove
you to take Care of it? What ^adness it to suffer theBody to engross all
yourCare ^^d Thoughts, your Labor and Time; and to per^it that precious and
immortal part of you, your Soul, ^^ be overlooked as a thing not worth any
serious no^^ce or regard? Especially if you will consider, Secondly, That the
Loss of the Soul is the most intole^able of all other Losses. For indeed the
Soul may be ^^st; not that it shall cease to be, (it were well for ^icked Men
if it could) but it may be undone and miserable, and in that sense lost to all
Eternity. -- Deprived it may be of that Heaven of Happiness which God has
provided for it, of the Enjoyment of ^im in whose Presence is fullness of Joy,
and at whose ^ight-hand there are Pleasures for evermore. Nor is ^is all; the
Soul is not only capable of being deprived ^f infinite Bliss, but of being
plunged too in the extre^ity of Despair and Misery; it is liable to be given
over to the violence and fury of Devils, and Devilish ^pirits; to be committed
to the hateful Society of those miserable Beings, where Wrath and Envy, (...)
and Ill Nature, only are to be found; where no ^oy, no Peace, no Love, ever
enter.

The Misery of which dreadful State, the Holy Spirit has represented by
Expressions, denoting the ^reatest Horror and Torment; by a Lake of Fire and
^rimstone, everlasting Flame, a never-dying Worm, un^uenchable Firc, etc.

This is the dismal State the Souls and Bodies of the wicked will be condemned
unto for ever; wherein they must suffer Day and Night, without rest or
in^ermission. O dreadful State! with this Addition to the Extremity of
Torments, that they will never have an end! Some Comfort it might be to those
miserable Souls, had they hopes of any Deliverance; but it must needs
exceedingly imbitter every Torment to them, to think of that never-ending
Duration of Torment to come: that, after they have been in a consuming
condition for Millions of Millions of Ages in Hell, they have still an eternal
Hell behind, and are as far distant from the end of their Miseries, as they
were when they first begun. This must needs plunge the wretched Soul into
extreme Desperation.

This State we are liable to be betrayed unto, we are in great danger of it,
and how we came to be so, is what I entreat you in the next Place to consider,
and to behave your selves accordingly.

Thirdly, Consider the great danger your Souls are in, by reason of Sin. God
created the first Man Adam without Sin, and endued his Soul with the full
knowledge of his Duty; and with such a Strength, that he might, if he would,
perform all that was required of him. Having thus created the first Man, he
made a Covenant or Agreement with him to this purpose; that if he continued in
obedience to God without committing Sin; then, first, that strength of Soul,
which he then had, should still be continued to him; and secondly, that he
should never die, but continue in a State of Happiness for ever. But on the
other side, if he committed Sin and disobeyed God, then both he and all his
Children after him should lose that Knowledge and that perfect Strength, which
enabled him to do all that God required of him: And secondly, should be subject
to Death, and not only so, but to Eternal Damnation in Hell.

This was the Agreement made with Adam, and all Mankind in him (which we
usually call the first Covenant) upon which God gave Adam a particular
Commandment, which was no more but this, that he should not presume to eat of
one only Tree of that Garden wherein he had placed him; which God called, The
Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil. But Adam, by the persuasion of the Devil,
eats of that Tree, disobeys God, and so brings that first Curse upon himself
and all his Posterity: And so by that one Sin of his, he lost both those
together; I say, the full knowledge of his Duty, and the power of performing
it. And we being born after his Image, lost them likewise; and so are become
both ignorant in discerning what we ought to do, and weak and unable to the
doing of it; having a backwardness to all good, and an aptness and readiness to
all Evil; like a sick Stomach, which loathes all wholesome Food, and longs after
such Trash as may nourish the Disease. This is the Source and Original of all
Misery. The Consequence hereof is, that we are now exposed to an infinite
Number of Temptations from the World, the Devil, and our own corrupt Nature;
that we are ready and inclined to hearken to them, and sin against our Maker;
and thereby are in continual danger of being betrayed to that miserable State
before described: And this, I hope, may be sufficient at present to assure you,
that your Souls are in Danger. And yet that you may not neglect them as past
hopes, but may be encouraged to set your selves in good earnest totake care of
them. Consider,

Fourthly, What an excellent provision it has pleased God, in his wonderful
Mercy, to make in order to rescue and deliver them from these dangers; and what
is required of us in compliance with this great Mercy. This God has done by
giving us his Son, and in him making a New Covenant with us, after we had
broken the first.

He has given us his Son, as the great Captain of our Salvation, to redeem and
Rescue us from the Power and Dominion of the Devil or Satan, that great Rebel
against God; from whom the Devil having caused us to Revolt, he carries us
captive at his Will, causing us to fight against our Maker, as many as he can
detain in his Servitude: But God, I say, has given us his Son to Rescue and
Recover us out of such a fearful State of Sin, Rebellion, and Misery.

And this he has done by making in him a New Covenant with us, after we had
broken the First, that is, by proposing the most gracious Terms of
Reconciliation, through him our great Mediator and Redeemer; And, by making
Satisfaction, as for our Breach of the first Covenant, so for the Sins of as
many of us as truly repent of our Transgressions under the Second.

This second Covenant was made with Adam, and us in him, presently after his
Fall, and is briefly contained in these Words, Genesis 3. 15. where God declares,
that, The Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head; and this Second
Covenant is made up, as the first was, of some Mercies to be offered by God,
and some Duties to be performed by us.

God herein promised to send on Earth, his only Son, who is God equal with
himself, to become Man like unto us in all things; Sin only excepted, and he to
do for us these several things.

1. To make known to us the whole will of his Father in the performance whereof
we shall be sure to be accepted and rewarded by him. And this was one part of
his business, which he performed in those many Sermons, Doctrines and Precepts
we find set down in the Gospel. And herein he is our Prophet, for it was the
work of a Prophet of old, not only to foretell, but to teach. Our duty in this
particular is to hearken diligently to him, to be most ready and desirous to
learn that Will of God which he came from Heaven to reveal to us.

2. The second thing he was to do for us, was to satisfy God for our sins, not
only that one of Adam, but all the Sins of Mankind that truly repent and amend,
and by this means to obtain for us forgiveness of Sins, and the favor of God;
and to redeem us from Hell and Eternal Damnation, which was the punishment due
to our Sin. All this he did for us by his Death: He offered up himself a
sacrifice for the Sins of all those who heartily bewail and forsake them. And
in this he is our Priest, it being anciently the Priest's Office to offer
sacrifice for the sins of the People. Our duty in this particular is first,
truly and heartily to repent of our sins, and to forsake them, without which
they will never be forgiven us, though that is the thing for which Christ died.
Secondly, steadfastly to believe, that if we give our selves up to Christ, we
shall have the benefits of that Sacrifice of his; that all our sins, how many
and great soever, shall be forgiven us, and we shall be saved from those
Eternal Punishments which were due unto us for them. Another part of the
Priest's Office was Blessing and Praying for the People; and this also Christ
performs for us. It was his special Commission from his Father to Bless us, as
St. Peter tells us, Acts 3. 26. God sent his Son Jesus to bless you; and the
following Words show wherein that Blessing consists, in turning away every one
of you from your Iniquity: Those means which he has used for the turning of us
from our sins, are to be reckoned of all other, the greatest Blessings; and for
the other part, that of Praying, that he not only performed on Earth, but
continues still to do it in Heaven, He sits on the right hand of God, and makes
request for us, Romans 8. 34. Our duty herein is, not to resist this unspeakable
Blessing of his, but to be willing to be thus blessed in being turned from our
sins; and not to make void and fruitless all his Prayers and Intercessions for
us, which will never prevail for us, whilst we continue in our Sins.

3. The third thing that Christ was to do for us, was to enable us, or to give
us strength to do what God requires of us. This he does, First, By taking off
from the hardness of the Law given to Adam, which bound us never to commit the
least sin, upon the pain of Damration. So that now God requires of us only an
honest and hearty endeavor to do what we are able, and where we fail of that
through weakness, heaccepts of our sincere Repentance. Secondly, By sending his
Holy Spirit into our Hearts to govern and rule us, to give us strength to
overcome Temptations to Sin, and to do all that he now under the Gospel
requires of us. And in this Christ is our King, it being the Office of a King
to Govern and Rule, and to subdue our Enemies. Our duty in this particular is
to give up our selves, to be obedient Subjects of his; to be governed and ruled
by him, to obey all his Laws, not to take part with any Rebel, that is, not to
cherish any one sin, but diligently to pray for his Grace to enable us to
subdue them all, and then carefully to make use of it to that purpose.

Lastly, He has purchased for all that faithfully obey him, an eternal glorious
inheritance, the Kingdom of Heaven, whether he is gone before to take
possession for us. Our duty herein is to be exceeding careful that we forfeit
not our parts in it: which we shall certainly do, if we continue impenitent in
any sin. Secondly, Not to fasten our Affections on this World, but to raise
them up to Heaven and Heavenly Things, according to the Precept of the Apostle,
Col. 3. 2. Set your Affections on things above, and not on things on the Earth,
continually longing to come to the possession of that blessed Inheritance of
ours, in comparison whereof all things here below should seem vile and mean to
us.

This is the sum of that second Covenant we are now under, wherein you see what
Christ has done, how he executes those three great Offices of King, Priest and
Prophet; as also what is required of us, without our faithful performance of
which, all that he has done shall never stand us in any stead; for he will
never be a Priest to save any, who take him not also for their Prophet to
teach, and their King to rule them; nay if we neglect our part of this
Covenant, our condition will be yet worse than if it had never been made; for
we shall be to answer not for the breach of Law only, as in the first Covenant,
but for the abuse of Mercy, which is of all sins the most provoking. On the
other side, if we faithfully perform it, that is, set our selves heartily to
the obeying of every Precept of Christ; not going on wilfully in any one sin,
but bewailing and forsaking what ever we have formerly been guilty of, it is
then most certain that all the forementioned Benefits of Christ belong to us.

And now you see how little reason you have to cast off the care of your Souls,
upon a conceit that they are past cure; for that it is plain they are not; nay
certainly they are in that very condition, which of all others makes them
fittest for our care. If they had not been thus Redeemed by Christ, they had
been then so hopeless, that care would have been in vain: On the other side, if
his Redemption had been such that all Men should be saved by it, though they
live as they list, we should have thought it needless to take care for them,
because they were safe without it. But it has pleased God so to order it, that
our care must be the means by which they must receive the good, even of all
that Christ has done for them.

And now if you will but lay these things to Heart, your Reason and your
Interest will both direct you how to behave your selves. Methinks I hear some
of you, as Men deeply affected with the sense of these things, with a serious
and compassionate regard to their Souls, crying out with St. Peter's hearers,
Men and Brethren, what must we do to be saved? I would to God, that every Man
would make this application to himself; and if they do not, it is too certain a
sign, that either they believethat they have no immortal Souls, or that it is
impossible they should for ever miscarry.

Give me leave a little to reason the case with you, my dear Neighbors, to
persuade you to take care of your Souls. Are they made after the Image and
Similitude of God? Why then will ye suffer them to be transformed to the Image
of Satan? Has God provided a Heaven of Happiness for them? Why will ye be so
cruel and unjust to them as to expose them to the intolerable Flames of Hell?
Since God the Father has rated them at the highest value, and expressed his
chief concern for them: Why will ye neglect and undervalue them as things of no
price? since God the Son thought not his own Blood too great a price for them,
Why do ye choose to sell them for the trifling Vanities of this World? since the
Holy Ghost is continually at work to preserve them. Whence comes it to pass
that ye hardly think them worthy the slenderest part of your care? since the
blessed Angels are employed in ministering unto them: Why do ye defeat all their
endeavors for your good? since they rejoice at the Conversion of Souls? Why
will ye refuse to afford them this matter of rejoicing, where the greatest
advantage will be your own? Wherefore do you seek to gratify our common
Adversary the Devil so far, as to permit him to disappoint the gracious
purposes of God toward us? Oh that Men can be so senseless as to see their
Souls perishing before their Eyes, without Remorse or Compassion! that they can
pass day after day without making any offer or attempt to recover them.

Consider you have not only the sin of your first Parents to be forgiven you,
but also innumerable Actual sins of your own; and those perhaps committed
against the light of your own Consciences, against the express command of God,
against the dictates of the Holy Spirit, against frequent Warnings and
Admonitions from others, and contrary to many repeated Vows and Resolutions.
These are aggravations suffistill there is hope, there is a remedy even for
such Sinners, if they repent and return from their Sins, and become sincerely
obedient to the Laws of God, and accept the Lord Jesus as their King, their
Priest, and their Prophet, God will for his sake accept them. Remember that ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with the
precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish, and without Spot, 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. This was the ransom of Souls which God required; and if you
reject this he will accept no other, and you do reject it (and God so
interprets it) if you do not accept him upon his own terms; if you do not give
up your selves unto Christ, to be guided and governed, as well as saved by him;
otherwise you renounce all your part and interest in his Blood, and do as it
were, declare you will not be beholding to him: and then surely you cannot
complain that God is unmerciful, it he take the Forfeiture, and condemn those
who would not be saved by him. The promises and Threatenings of the Gospel, and
all other the Methods which God has used to reform and reclaim Sinners, are
all Instances of his great goodness to us, of his zeal and concern for our
Happiness; and if we still continue to reject and set them atnought, how just,
as well as severe, will be our Condemnation. Has he taken all imaginable care
to oblige you to be king to yourselves, and faithful to your truest interest,
and will ye still forsake your own Mercies? If you thus wilfully seek your own
ruin, how righteous will it be in God to plague you to the utmost extremity.

Let me therefore beseech you, even by all that is Sacred and Serious, by every
thing that is Dear and precious to you, by your best hopes, and the most
important concern of your everlasting Being, to take pity upon your poor Souls,
to consider the dangers whereto they are exposed, to consult and comply with
the means of their Preservation.

Learn I pray you to affect your Hearts with a serious sense of your danger, to
repent earnestly of your past sins, sincerely resolve to be more Holy, Watchful
and Circumspect for the time to come; pray earnestly for the Graces of God's
Holy Spirit; cherish in your Souls a lively Faith in the Mercies of God through
Christ; and in all respects, as God shall enable you, and you shall be
hereafter from time to time instructed, let your Prayers and your Endeavors be
that you may be wise unto Salvation. And that you may abound in all spiritual
Wisdom and Understanding, and may be accepted as faithful Servants of God and
our Lord Jesus Christ in the great day of Accounts, as it is the earnest
Prayer, so it shall be the constant endeavor of

Your affectionate Servant in Christ Jesus.
FINIS.

